A Collection Of the Several BOOKS AND WRITINGS, Given forth by that FAITHFUL
SERVANT OF GOD and his PEOPLE, GEORGE FOX, the Younger.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1662.

The EPISTLE to all true friendly READERS.
LEt the Works and Words of the Lord, wrought in, and spoken by and through his
holy Servants, be of everlasting Memory to all Ages and Generations to come,
that the Lord God which formed all Mankind, may have glory in all the Works of
his Hands, even for ever and ever.

Surely Friends, for sundry righteous Causes, my Spirit could desire a
Recordance of the ensuing Writings.

One, in that they are the Fruits of the Labors of a Valiant Soldier, yet
Meek Follower of the Lamb of God; who through Travels, Trials, and Exercises,
in diverse manners, in Faithfulness, Boldness, Courage, and Undantedness,
Persevered in the Power of God, Kept the Faith to the End, and Finished his
Course in that which the Lord Almighty accepts of, and now Rests in Glory with
the Lamb and his Troops of Angels, which I signify unto you as is sealed unto
me by the Spirit of Life and Immortality.

Another is, in that the Work it self (to every true understanding Heart) may
plainly appear to be of God. In one respect by his Prophesies, certain of which
became fulfilled, whilst yet he bore the Body about him; in another respect, by
his plain, pure, clear, candid, and righteous dealing with all sorts, without
respect of persons, to whom he directed his Sayings, viz. Thunders to the Rocks
and Mountains, and Streams of sweet milk, wine and honey, to the Blessed Living
Babes of the Blessed living God.

Yet not by this do I appear before any clear Eye, as a person promoting a
person in the seat of the hearts of People; for alas the dust is already
returned to earth again, and the Spirit to God who gave it: but though the
Creature is fallen, flatted and converted to its proper center, I cannot but in
remembrance of that Spirit which once bore it as its Tabernacle, in that
Vessel, to walk and wade through many trials, afflictions and sorrows, for the
seeds sake of its own Father, since its now entered into the Bosom of the
Father, as a Life lept out of a lump of clay. I say, I cannot but in a
Recordance of it, and in a Concordance with it, even in the self same substance
say, though the Name of the Wicked shall rot, yet let the Memory of the
Righteous live, let his day be as a blessedness in every eye, and the testimony
of his Life a rejoicing in the hearts of the upright. Surely I need not study a
Motto, nor dive into Invention to fetch up an Inscription to be engraven on the
Tomb, since the Names of the Faithful are in the Book of God, and their glory
is in him for ever.

But this I may say to the livers, and (as yet) remainers in the Power of the
same testimony, which he with others have held as a Pattern and Example (to
those which follow after) to the end. He that has finished his Course in
faithfulness, has this advantage of him that yet remains and has his
Testimony to finish, viz. In that he is redeemed from all causualties which
might happen by temptation or otherwise, yea and from all possibilities of
losing the Crown of immortal Life, and Reward of the Kingdom of everlasting
Glory and Joy, being already possessed of the unchangable Inheritance, even
where causualties and temptations reach not; the which causualties and
temptations are incident in some respect or other, to the pure, upright and
faithful, whilst yet in the body of flesh or tabernacle of clay, where it can
be felt and senced.

And therefore to all such I say, fear and dread the living God, to the end of
your days, that in the same life you may all finish a testimony for God, as he
that is gone before you. Yea again I say, fear the same God whilst yet you bear
a Testimony for him, lest by any means you should fall from the Life of the
Testimony, and the last of your day become the least glorious unto you.

And I in the fear of my Father, do live in the love to you, which often
breaths forth my heart in the Spirit of supplication and prayer, constraining
me to put up requests to the Throne for you, the which (as the Spirit breaths)
is desired may also by you be done in the behalf of your Brother in the
innocence of the Lamb,

J. P.

A TABLE Of the Principles Heads contained in this Book.
1. COmpassions to the Captives; wherein is showed that the Way of God is but
one. page 3. 2. Something in plainness to the Officers and Soldiers. p. 13. 3.
A strong and Terrible Alarm to the Inhabitants of the Earth. page 21. 4. A
Visitation of Love unto all People. p. 26. 5. An Exhortation to all Families.
p. 42. 6. The words of the Everlasting true Light. p. 47. 7. A word to the
People of the World, who hate the Light; with a few Queries to such Professors
as stumble at the Light. p. 57. 8. Honest, Upright, Faithful and plain dealing
with thee O Army of the Commonwealth of England, (so called) p. 73. 9. A few
plain words to the Army and others, about the choice of a Parliament by the
voices of the People. p. 92. 10. His Message predicting the downfall of the
Parliament, directed to the Parliament and their Army (so called) p. 101. 11. A
Noble Salutation and faithful greeting unto Thee Charles Stuart, etc. Wherein
is contained; First, several wholesome sound Exhortations (and weighty things
opened) unto thee O King. p. 105. 2. Concerning the Overturning of thy Father,
etc. Page 108. 3. Concerning thy coming so far into Power again, etc. p. 113.
4. Concerning the great danger thou art in. p. 115. 5. Concerning Religion and
the Spirit of Persecution. p. 121. 6. Concerning what Government and
Governors, the People of the Lord (called Quakers) stand for, and what they
stand against. p. 124. 7. How we resolve in the strength of the Lord to stand
for that which is Righteous, and against that which is Unrighteous. p. 125. 8.
Concerning a Government and Governors, wherein there may be something seen to
be good, and something bad. p. 126. 9. Concerning Plotting, or using a Carnal
Weapon, and from whom we expect deliverance. p. 227. 10. Concerning Revenge. p.
129. 12. Honest plain downright dealing with the People called Episcopal men
and Presbyterians. p. 135. 13. A Few Queries to the Teachers of the Espiscopal
Society. p. 140. 14. The Testimony of God, To those Rulers, Teachers and People
of this Present Age, where the Headship of the Church is given to man. p. 143.
15. The Dread of God's Power uttering its voice through man unto the heads of
the Nation. p. 155. 16. A Message of Tender Love unto such Professors as have
retained any true Sincerity, Simplicity, and Zeal for God in their Professions.
p. 163. 17. A True Relation of the cause of his Imprisonment by the Magistrates
at Harwich. p. 193. 18. His Faith touching 4. Particulars Demonstrated. 1.
Concerning Jesus Christ the Savior of the World. 2. Concerning Justification.
3. Concerning the Resurrection. 4. Concerning Everlasting Glory and Eternal
Misery.
p. 208. 19. Englands sad Estate and condition lamented. p. 212.
Several Epistles to Friends, who are gathered into the Light of Life.
1. A General Epistle and tender Greeting sent unto the Flock of Christ. Page
230. 2. An Epistle to all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. p. 241.
3. To the Called of God, who believe in the Light of the Lamb. p. 245. 4. The
Breathings of true Love from the Immortal Seed, in the Prisoner for the Lord,
unto his People. p. 250. 5. To the Tribulated Fock of Christ in Bonds, or
elsewhere; Salutation. p. 263. 6. Touching compelling of Engagements. p. 267.
7. That none can hinder the Determined Will of God. p. 269. 8. Concerning his
laying down the Body. p. 270. 9. For the Commonwealths men, both in the
Parliament and Army. p. 272.
COMPASSION TO THE CAPTIVES: WHEREIN Is shown unto them, the Way of God, Which
is but one, which is not known in the many Sects and Opinions that are in the
dark World, but in the Light, which comes from Christ, which condemns the
World, with its deeds: So they that live in the many Sects and Opinions, their
ways are seen and denied by the Children of Light, who dwell in Him, who is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

With something in plainness to the Officers and Soldiers of the Armies (in
General) in England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Also a strong and terrible Alarm, sounded out of the Holy Mountain, against
the Inhabitants of the Earth.

Given forth for the Innocent Seeds sake, which is scattered abroad in the dark
World.

By me who suffers for the Testimony of Jesus, and keeps the word of his
Patience, (in the common Goal of Edmonds Bury, in the County of Suffolk) where
I have suffered above forty nine weeks, through the envy and cruelty of Sions
Oppressors. I am known to the world by the name, George Fox, the Younger.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and VVind-Mill,
in Martins le Grand, 1662.

Compassion to the Captives. Wherein is shown unto them the Way of God, which
is but one, which is not known in the many Sects and Opinions which are in the
dark World: But in the Light which comes from Christ, etc.
THerefore this is unto you, in whom there is any desires to know the way of
the pure God, who are scattered abroad in the dark World, and are yet groping
in the dark, in the many Sects and Opinions. Jam. 4.3. You ask and receive not,
because you ask amiss, you have been wandering from Mountain to Mountain and
from Hill to Hill, but yet you have found no resting place; for you have sought
in your own wills, and have run in your own imaginations, and have not at all
considered what it was that guided you, but in darkness ye have walked, and ye
know not whither, 1 John 2.11. and ye have joined, some with one Sect, and some
with another, and in your own wills have contended each of you for your
Opinions; and yet ye have not been satisfied in your minds (many of you)
whither that was the Truth that ye contended for, or not; for doubtings have
oftentimes arose in your minds, and you have been many times struck with fear,
and then you have sometimes in tenderness desired that you might know the way
of God aright; and ye have been some of you brought somewhat down, and then you
have been afraid to run into those evil Practices which formerly you have acted
and delighted in: Yet this has been but for a time; for ye knew not what that
was that struck you, but in your Imaginations you have consulted, and then in
your own wills you have sat down and said within your selves, that you would
never act such wickedness again; but this being in your wills, you have not
found Power to resist the Temptations of the wicked one: Neither have you found
any Power over your lusts, for by them you have been drawn away, Jam. 1.14. and
so have run into the same wickedness again, and then some of you have been
ready to despair; and other times you have accounted God an hard Master, as the
slothful servant did, Mat. 25.18, 24, 25. for you are yet in the same Nature
and Practice that he was in; for your Talent also is hid in the Earth, and your
earthly minds are above, and rule, and you are subjected by the Powers of the
Earth; so that those weak desires that yet remain in you toward ^he l^^ing
God, are greatly oppressed by the Earth, and kept in Bondage and Captivity by
the Powers thereof, and Leanness and Barrenness is in your Souls: now while you
continue thus, striving in your own wills or imaginations, profess what you
will, you cannot have any true Peace, nor rest in your minds, neither can you
receive any satisfaction to those desires which are real after God (I say while
you thus act) Therefore consider your ways speedily, and hate not the Covenant
of God, nor contemn his Promise any longer.

Now this is the Promise of the Lord, speaking of his servant whom he has
chosen, even the Son of his Love, saying, I will give him for a Covenant to the
People, and for a Light to the Gentiles, that he may be my Salvation to the
ends of the Earth; Isa. 42.6. and 49.6. And Christ Jesus the Son of God says,
I am the Light of the World: John 8.12. And John, who was a true Minister of
Christ (and bore witness of him) says, He lights every man that comes into
the world, John 1. chap. 9.v. So you have all received a Light from Christ, and
this Light shines in Darkness, but the Darkness cannot comprehend it: And this
is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come into the World, and men
loved Darkness rather than Light, because their deeds were Evil: And he that
does Evil hates the Light; neither will he bring his Deeds to the Light, lest
it should reprove them: John 3.19. Therefore you that desire to know the Way of
the Pure God, be not high-minded, but repent, and come down to the Light of
Christ in your Consciences; that is the Light which shows you Sin and Evil, and
this the Way, Christ Jesus the Light, he is the Way to the Father, and no man
comes to the Father but by him, Joh. 14.6. Therefore as the Light appears in
you, to show you the Evil of your doings, take heed to the Light, and wait in
it, that you may see Condemnation pass upon that which has led you into the
Evil of the World, and that you may come to be sensible of a guide to your
minds, to guide you out of the Evil; that so the Cross of Christ may be known
and submitted unto by you; and that through the Cross, Righteousness may be
learned and obedience brought forth unto the living God; For as you wait in the
Light, ye will see what that is, that has oppressed your Souls; and as you
come to own that which appears in you to cross your own wills, and wait in it,
you will come to see Death, pass upon that which has kept your Souls in Death,
and your Souls will be refreshed, and your desires which are real and simple
after God, will be strengthened; but you must wait in the Light, which makes
all things manifest, Ephesians. 5.13. and it will let you see, that your way to Peace
is through the War, and through the Judgment; and Christ's words you will
witness to be true, who said, I come not to send send Peace on the Earth; for
as you come to wait in the Light, ye will see the Earth disturbed, and the
Thunders of the Lord ye will come to know, and the Earthquakes, and the Famine,
and the War, and the Pestilence, and these are the beginnings of sorrow, Mat.
24.7, 8. but all these things must come to pass, and blessed are they that are
not offended in him; Mat. 11.6. for the Fire and the Sword you must all know,
and come through, before you come to know the Peace which is in the Lamb of
God; for by Fire and Sword will the Lord plead with all Flesh, and what cannot
stand there, must be consumed: But at these things be not troubled, but wait in
the Light, which makes them manifest, and in it believe, and the Power of the
Lord you shall find present with you (as in patience you wait upon him) to
carry you through whatsoever he calls you unto. And this I declare unto you
all, The way is strait that leads to Life, and few there be that find it:
Mat. 7.14. For except you stand in that Power which God has given you, and in
it deny your selves, and take up the Cross, ye cannot be Christ's Disciples: Now
your Power is in the Light which comes from Christ, who has enlightened you;
and waiting in the Light, with it you will come to see the emptiness of all the
Profession that is in the world: And you that have followed the Priests, as you
come to own the Light, and wait in it, with it you will see them to be the
Deceivers; and to be in the steps of those that the true Prophets, Christ
Jesus, and the Apostles cried against; and you will see them to be such as
commit the horrible and filthy thing in the Land, and so in the steps of those
which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against; Jer. 5.30, 31. and they are such
as Preach for hire, and Devine for money, Mic. 3.11. and feed with the fat, and
Cloth with the Wool, and make a prey upon the People, Ezekiel. 34.3, 8. and they
seek for their gain from their quarters, Isa. 56.11. and while you put into
their mouths, they cry Peace unto you; but put not into their mouths, and they
will prepare War against you, Mic. 3.5. (for if you give them not Tithes, they
will sue you at the Law) and such as were in these Practices, Micah, Ezekiel,
and Isaiah cried against; and such stand praying in the Synagogues, and have
the chiefest Places in the Assembles, and Greetings in the Markets, and are
called of men Master, and such Christ cried woe against, Mat. 23. 6, 7. And they
are such as go in Cain's way (in envy) and run greedily after the way of
Balaam, and such Peter and Jude cried woe against, 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15. Jude 11.
they having hearts exercised with covetous practices, being proud, boasters,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, having eyes
full of adultery, which cannot cease to sin; and for Doctrine they teach, that
their Hearers cannot be free from sin in this Life, and so plead to uphold the
Devil's Kingdom, and through their subtilty beguile unstable souls, leading
silly women captive, laden with sins, and carried away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.2, 4,
5, 6, 7. and through covetousness and feigned words, they make merchandise of
the People, having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, 2 Pet.
2.3. and of such the Apostle bad beware, and from them turn away: And you that
have left the Priests, and are got in your own wills and carnal imaginations
somewhat nearer the Saints practice, (imitating what they did, who were in the
Life of what they professed) as you come to own the Light, and wait in it, with
it you will see that which you have acted, that it was but the self-separation,
and that you took it from the Letter, and never received a Command from God for
it, but what ye did, it was as ye imagined, to imitate those who had a Command
once from God for what they practiced; But they knew when those things which
stood in the figure were to have an end, and to pass away; and they knew the
end of all things to be at hand, and they grew into him who is the fullness of
all things, Ephesians. 4.13. but these things you never knew (who have been acting in
your own wills and imaginations) for you never yet came to know the Life of
Truth; and so that Joy and Delight which you had at any time in the hight of
your Profession, it withered; and your practices in your Profession (which
stood in the beggarly Elements, and carnal Washings and Observations, wherein
some of you have been exercised) they have waxen-old and wearisom unto you:
These things, as you come to Believe, and wait in the Light, you will see to be
true, and that yet you are ignorant of him, who has established the Law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances; and you will see that you have been the
Thieves and Robbers, who have been climbing up another way than by the Door
CHRIST JESUS, and you will see in his Light, as you wait in it, that you must
come to loose what you have gathered in your own Wisdom and Imaginations; and
that your Building must fall, because it was not builded upon the Rock; and you
will see how you have been daubed with untempered Mortar; and that your Labor
has been in vain, because ye were not builded by the Lord; and that your
Wisdom must be turned into Foolishness; and so to the Beginning you must all
come, to the Light of Christ in all your Consciences, and to learn to wait in
it, that a true and a sure entrance into the way of God you may find, thaye
henceforth be no more tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, by the slight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive you; but that you may now come to know the Teachings of God, and to
be subject to his Teachings, and to obey his Voice, and to know it from the
voice of Strangers, and no more to follow Strangers, but to return unto the
Lord with all your Hearts, and to submit your selves unto him in all humbleness
and lowliness, as the Light teaches; and that you may all come to know your
own measures and abilities which God has given you; for he gives to every one
according to their abilities; and that you may all keep down to your own
measures, and none of you to be exalted above his measure, but all there to
wait, to see the Wisdom of God revealed in you, that so you may grow in Wisdom,
and Power, and Strength, and Might, in the knowledge of God, who renews their
strength that wait upon him.

So here is your Power and Strength to resist Temptations; All to wait in the
Light which comes from Christ, unto whom all Power is given; For in the Light
you will see Temptations as they arise, and waiting in the Light, ye will
receive Power from him, from whom the Light comes, to withstand the
Temptations, and to overcome the Tempter, as he overcame who is gone before,
even Christ Jesus the Word of God, who was before the World was, who overcame
the World; he is the same that ever he was, he changes not; and they that
believe in him, and wait in his Light, they receive Power to overcome the
World, and them he redeems out of the World; and they are not conformable to
the Fashions, and Customs, and Ways of the World; but they are transformed by
the renewing of their minds, and their minds and affections are set upon
Heavenly things, so as you wait in the Light, you will see the worlds Words,
and Fashions, and VVayes, all to be burdensome to the seed of God; and if you
love the Light you will know and find that Power present, by which you will be
made able and willing to cast off every weight and burden as they are seen with
the Light; and giving up in obedience to the Light, keeping in the Cross, you
will find peace in your measures; and you will see the Lord present to water
and refresh that of himself in you, and to cut off and purge out what^oever
oppresses and hinders the growth of his own Plant in you; and so you will
become fruitful in your places and measures unto the Lord, and he will take
delight in you, and feed you with food convenient according to your growth and
necessities; and he will be your God, and you shall be his People and Sheep of
his Pasture; and you shall grow into the Covenant; and he will take away you
stony hearts and give you new hearts, and write his Law therein, and you shall
know his Teachings, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. and he will be merciful unto you, and
forgive all your iniquities, and you shall know the Blood of the Covenant which
shall cleanse you from all sin, 1 John 1.7. and you shall know the Son, and he
shall make you free, Joh. 8.32, 36. and he will reveal the Father unto you, and
you shall be no more barren nor unfruitful, but the Wilderness shall become a
fruitful Place, and the barren Land a fruitful Field, and the parched ground
shall become a place of pleasant Springs, Isa. 35. and the Lord God and the
Lamb will take delight in your Feasts, and make their abode with you: These
things will the Lord in his time accomplish, and ye shall know them, and be
witnesses of them, if you will indeed hearken unto his Voice and obey it, and
keep his Covenant, and return unto him with all your Hearts, and submit your
selves to the Light of his Son in all your Consciences, and then you shall be
hid in the Day of the fierce Wrath of the Almighty, which he is bringing upon
the heads of the ungodly; for although he has long forborne them, yet the cry
of his Elect is not forgotten, Luke 18.7. for now his long sufferings toward
them, shall be turned unto their everlasting contempt; for even now is he
arising to take vengeance upon the Oppressors of his righteous Seed; and woe
unto all those that are found in the Army of the Dragon; for he shall be taken
with the false Prophet, and all those that have received the mark of the Beast,
and they all shall be cast into the Lake that burns for ever; this is the
second Death, Rev. 20.14, 15. and this is the Portion and Reward of all those
that are found fighting against the Lamb; therefore you that are warned of the
destruction, which is speedily to come upon those that have cast the Law of God
behind their backs, and crucified the Son of God (and are yet fighting against
his Kingdom) the Light in their Consciences condemns them eternally: Stay not,
but come out from among them, lest partaking of their sins, ye also partake of
their plagues, Rev. 18.4. which are their due, and now to be brought upon them;
take heed that you delay not, for the Judgment hastes greatly; but if you
refuse to hearken unto the Counsel of the Lord, and resolve to go on in your
own wills and imaginations, and reject the Light of his Son in your
Consciences, which he has given you to lead you out of your own wills and
imaginations, and so give your strength unto Strangers; then will those desires
which are yet in you toward the living God soon dye; and you will grow more
dark, and wax stronger, in your imaginations, and you will become enemies even
to the very appearance of Truth; and your hearts will become hard, and you will
be found guilty of the blood of the Son of God; and you will wax worse and
worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. and so you will grow fit for the Plagues and Judgments of
the righteous God; and the blood of his Son will cry for vengeance against you
(as Abels did against Cain, Genesis 4.10.) and the Lord will hear the cry thereof,
and will pour forth his Judgments upon you; and then shall the Light in all
your Consciences arise and witness to the Judgments of God that they are just;
and it shall let you see that you were warned of your destruction often times
by it, and that ^ou had a time given you to repent in, Rev. 2.21. and then you
shall be made to confess that your destruction is of your selves.

So in love to your souls I have written this, in which your present condition
(which is miserable) is plainly declared unto you, and the way to come out of
it by Christ Jesus the Light; and the Priests (who have long deceived many of
you) are here laid open in plainness; and such as act in their own imaginations
(by imitating those who dwelt in the Life of what they professed) also, what
you have gathered and gained all this time; you have been making a Profession
of God (is here declared) and the end thereof, and what you shall attain unto
if you will diligently hearken unto the Voice of God, and obey the Light of his
Son in all your Consciences; and where your Power is to obey, is here showed
unto you: So here is Life and Death set before you, Deuteronomy. 30.19. now if you yet
refuse to hear, you shall not be able to plead ignorance in the day when God
calls you to an account, for I have cleared my Conscience unto you in the sight
of God, and am clear of your Blood, Ezekiel. 33.9. and am witnessed by the Light
of Christ in all your Consciences, which Light is your Teacher if you love it,
but your condemnation eternally if you hate and reject it. Therefore whilst you
have time prize it, and despise not the day of your visitation; but to day if
you will hear the Voice of the Son of God, come down to the Light in all your
Consciences (which reproves you for sin, and shows you the loss that ye are yet
in) and wait in it, and harden not your hearts, nor despise the long sufferings
of God, neither linger through sloathfulness any longer, lest he give you up
wholly to your own wills and vile affections and lusts, Psalm. 81.11, 12. which
lead you into wickedness and perverseness, and so God overtake you there, and
bring his Judgments upon you, and you perish with the wicked in your
stubbornness and Rebellion. So hear, fear, and do no more presumptuously.

From me, who am a sufferer for the innocent Seeds sake, who labors and waits
in the power of the living God, for its deliverance out of Bondage and
Captivity. G. F.

Unto you the Officers and Soldiers of the Armies, in England, Scotland, and
Ireland.
REmember, how at the beginning of the late Wars in these Nations, that many of
you were of the lowest of the People, according to the account of men: and you
were poor and contemptible in the eyes of your Enemies, who disdained and
scorned you, and thought soon to have made a prey upon you: But I bear you
Record, that then many of you had a zeal for God, and against his Enemies; and
according to your knowledge some of you acted faithfully for a time; and then
some of you had a desire to grow in the knowledge of God, and to act for him;
and some of you were come so far as to see the Priests to be Enemies to the
Truth, and such as deceived the People; and your Zeal waxed hot against them
and their Idolatry, so that you robbed them of their abominable Attire which
they had caused the deceived People to provide them (to wear in the time of
their Idolatrous Worship) and some of you did help to break down their Images
and Altars which were in the high places where they worshipped: And thus far
^ou did that which was right in the sight of God; and you saw that the Priests
laid heavy burdens upon the People, Mat. 2.3, 4. and oppressed them greatly, in
forcing them by an unjust Law to give them the tenth of their Labors, and you
saw several Laws which were made and upheld by the wills of ( Tyrants in these
Nations) to be contrary to the Law of God: And then you Promised and Vowed unto
God, if he would deliver your Enemies (which then were many and great) into
your hands, that then you would take off that great Oppression, which by unjust
Laws were laid and continued upon the People; and that those Laws concerning
Oppression and constraining men to Worship contrary to their Consciences,
should be regulated or disannulled, and made of none effect; and that all men
should have their Liberty to Worship according to what they knew; and that none
should Tyrannize over the Consciences of their Brethren, to compel them
otherwise; but that all should have their Freedom and Liberty therein: These
things you Promised and Engaged to do; and you caused many People to Engage to
be True unto you, and to stand firm with you, that so you might recover their
Liberties and outward Rights, and bring them out of Bondage in which they were
(then) held Captives by their Enemies; and upon this Account the People
furnished you with Money and Weapons, to War against their Oppressors; and you
cried then unto the Lord in your Distresses, and he was pleased to hear you,
and he smote your Enemies with Terror and Fear, and overthrew all their wicked
devices, and frustrated all their designs, and brought to naught all their
mischievous plottings against you; neither suffered he them to stand in the day
of Battle before you (because they trusted in their own strength) but he gave
them into your hands for a Prey, and whom ye would ye slew, and whom ye would
ye preserved alive; and you spoiled them, and they became Servants and Bondmen
unto you, and you ruled over them as it is at this day: Thus God by his own
Power delivered them into your hands, and preserved you in the day of Battle,
and was seen mightily amongst you, and wonderfully delivered you out of their
hands, and gave you outward rest and ease from your outward Enemies; and your
Name became a Terror and an Astonishment unto the Nations about, when they
heard of those Acts, which God had wrought by you. But now the love of the Lord
unto you, and the day of your Distress by you is forgotten; and your Vows and
Promises which you then made unto God and Man, are neglected and slighted by
you; for as great or greater Oppression and Burdens yet remain upon the People,
as were then, and now many of you are possessed of your Enemies Houses, and
Lands, and Goods, and some of you are waxen rich through the spoil of your
Enemies, and the greatness of your Pay, and some by doing Violence; and so
through your Riches and abundance, many of you are grown high-minded and proud;
and many of you through idleness and fullness of the Creature are grown
exceeding wanton and lustful, and now run on in the common pollutions of the
world, and some of you are grown exceeding covetous, and are become grinders of
the faces of the Poor, Isa. 3.15. and defrauders one of another; and many of
you now are seeking and contriving (in your own Wisdom) how to grow greater,
and to excel others in earthly Riches and Honor; and to establish your selves
there by the strength of the arm of flesh; and some of you are boasting of you
strength, and valor, and stoutness, Jer. 9.23, 24. and are oftentimes telling
how you killed, and wounded, and took, and destroyed your Enemies; and this is
often done by you, when you are devouring the Creation upon your ungodly lusts,
and when you are gaming and spending away your precious time in vanity; and
here you remember not how God by his own Power delivered them into your hands,
neither give you him the Glory; but ascribe it to your own strength and wisdom,
and boast in the Creature, and so forget the Creator; and so that simplicity
and tenderness that was once in some of you, is destroyed and murdered by the
lusts of the flesh, which are highly exalted in you; and that Zeal (that was
once in some of you for God, and against his Enemies, and those unjust Laws
which by them were made and upheld) is now lost, and your ears are not open
unto the cry of the Oppressed, whom once you promised to set free from their
Oppressions; but now some of you are become upholders of, and pleaders for
those Laws and Customs which formerly you cried against, and strengthners and
upholders of such as oppress tender Consciences, though once you pretended that
you fought for the Liberty of Conscience, and now by those unjust Laws (which
you saw to be contrary to the Law of God) do many suffer in these Nations, some
Imprisonment, and some the spoiling of their Goods, some because they cannot
pay the Priests Tithes, for if they should, they must deny the unchangeable
Priest, which took not Tithes, but abolished the first Priesthood, and
disannulled the Commandment that gave Tithes unto them that were of the first
Priesthood, which was a figure of him that was to come; but now is he come who
is the substance and sum of all Types and Figures, even the everlasting
High Priest which changes not; so the first Priesthood is changed, and the Law
is changed also: Heb. 7.12. Therefore they that witness the unchangeable
Priest, they deny the changeable Priests, and for Conscience sake cannot uphold
them; and some suffer Imprisonment for Declaring and Publishing the everlasting
Truth (as they are moved of the Lord) in the Markets, and Assemblies, and
Congregations of the People, and some of late time have been Stocked and
Whipped, and some wounded and despitefully used for the same; and some, when
they have been peaceably met together (in the fear of the Lord to wait upon
him) in their own houses, or upon their own ground, or some of their Brethrens,
not being troublesome outwardly to any man, they have been then and there
abused, and some have been violently haled away to the Magistrates, who without
showing them any Law which they had transgressed, has forth with sent them to
Prison, and some have been stoned, and kicked, and buffeted, and spitted upon,
and mocked; and some have had their doors and windows broken, and they scarce
permitted to abide in their own houses: And these things have been acted, some
of them by the Priests, and some by the Rulers and Soldiers, and rude
multtude, who are strengthened in such actions, and suffered so to act by the
other; and some of the servants and chosen ones of the Lord have lately been
cast some into Prisons, and holes, and dungeons, and there have lain until the
outward man has perished; and many of the Children of the most high God, are
yet in Prisons in this Nation, for witnessing forth the pure Truth of God, and
not for the breach of any just Law: neither could our Persecutors, when we have
been brought before them, show any Law which we had transgressed; (when some of
us have demanded this of them, that if they had any Law against what we had
acted, that they should read it to us) not withstanding this they have sent us
to Prison again, and there caused us to be kept and some of late time, as they
have been going peaceably to visit and relieve the servants of the Lord who are
imprisoned in this Nation, they have not been permitted, but have been stopped
by the way; and some of them have had their money taken from them, and then
forthwith they have been sent to Prison, and there are kept; and some have been
Fined and Imprisoned, for entertaining or lodging of the Servants and Children
of the Lord, who have come peaceably and for peace to their houses; and some
lately has been presented, and money has been demanded of them, because for
Conscience sake they could not go to the Steeple Houses, to hear the hireling
Priests and Deceivers on the first days of the weeks.

Now consider these Practices, how contrary they are to the Vows and
Engagements which you have made and taken, and contrary to the Liberty which
once you pretended unto: I have not written these things unto you because I am
a sufferer; for I neither look for help or expect deliverance from you; neither
are my sufferings wearisome or grievous unto me (because I know I suffer in
innocence) neither do I look for any help; or have I any helps in the Earth;
but these things was I moved to write unto you that you may consider how you
have neglected and slighted that which you Promised to do, when you were in
your distress and trouble, if God delivered you out of them (who now has
delivered you) and that you may see how you have rewarded evil for the good
that the Lord has done for you; and how you have not only lied unto Man, but
unto God.

So come down to the Light of Christ in all your Consciences (unto which Light
all the Powers of the Earth must bow) and with it search your hearts, and try
your ways, and it will show you your backslidings and the evil of your
doings; and repent speedily, and do your first works, and return to your first
Integrity, and do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content
with your Wages, and submit your selves unto the true Light, which lights
every man that comes into the World, that with the Light you may see the
violent and false Accuser judged and cast out of you; that so with the Light
which makes manifest your present estate, you may be brought out of the Fall,
and out of the Loss which you are yet in: But if you refuse to return unto the
Lord (who has so marvelously delivered you out of the hands of your Enemies)
and to pay your Vows to him: Verily the living God will arise and set free the
oppressed, and destroy their oppressors, by his own Power and outstretched Arm,
and not by you, neither shall you have the honor of it; and he will cast you
off, and by his own Power will he bring you down, and destroy you, and root you
out. Remember how he lately by his Mighty Power brought down and destroyed
those that Rebelled against him; and even as he cast out them because they
oppressed his Righteous Seed, so also will he cast out you (if you repent not
speedily) because you have not wholly followed his Counsel, to destroy, and
break down, and root out whatsoever did oppress his People; but now he has
given you deliverance, and ease from your Enemies, you have forgotten the day
of your Calamity (wherein you cried unto the Lord for help) in which day you
were oppressed by your Enemies also; and now ye are set down in ease and
fullness, and regard not the cry of the oppressed, but you your selves are
become oppressors also; so what you did act for God in the time of your trouble
shall not be once named or mentioned unto you, because you continued not
faithful unto the end; but in your backslidings and unrighteousness (wherein
you have delighted) you shall perish, and you shall receive your reward with
the unrighteous. And so remember you are warned of the destruction that is to
come upon back-sliders and ungodly men; if you perish your blood be upon your
heads, I am clear of it, having cleared my Conscience unto you; and verily my
desire is (God is my witness) that you might return unto the Lord with your
hearts, and break off from your iniquities by true Repen^ance, that so he might
heal your backslidings, and that you might come to know the Salvation of your
Souls; now your Power to act righteously is in the Light which comes from
Christ (who is the Wisdom, and Power, and Righteousness of God) unto whom all
Power is given, and he has given unto every one of you a measure of his Light,
which if you love, and believe, and wait in it, as it arises in you, that is
your Teacher to teach you the Truth, and to guide you to God, who is Light, and
if you walk in the Light, then shall you have fellowship with the Children of
Light; but if you hate and reject the Light which shows you Sin and Evil, that
is your Condemnation from God, John 3.19. and from the Saints in Light
Eternally.

This from the motion of the Lord in me, who for several years was amongst you
and had a great zeal (as some of you once had) against Tyrants and unjust Laws,
by which the people were and are greatly oppressed; and in that time I suffered
much hardship (as to the outward man) and was often in jeopardy of my life, as
many of you have been: which I was willing then to endure and to pass through,
for the suppressing of Tyrants and unjust Laws, which by them were made and
upheld: But the Lord, has called me out from among you, and has made me a
Soldier in the Army of the Lamb, who shall overcome all his Enemies; although
for a time he suffer like a Lamb, yet he will arise like a Lion upon his
Enemies at unawares, and he will tear, and tread down, and consume, and destroy
them, and none shall be able to deliver out of his hand. I am now a sufferer
also for the everlasting Truth, and not for the breach of any known Law; and
thus the Rulers in this Nation (who persecute the Innocent) reward me evil for
good: but in the Power of the living God, I stand a witness against all
Persecutors and Tyrants, who seek to make a prey upon the lives of the
Righteous, by which Power I am preserved out of their hands, and kept above all
sufferings (and time, and place) which they are permitted to inflict upon me
for a time for the trial of my faith; but my cause is the Lords, and he will
plead and revenge it. Remember from whence you are fallen.

G. F.

A Strong and terrible Alarm sounded out of the holy Mountain against the
Inhabitants of the Earth, etc.
WOe, woe, unto you Rulers, Priests and People, who live without the fear of
God, and do hide your abominations in hypocrisy and dissimulations; you are
got into several Sects and Opinions, and there some of you have long made a
Profession of God with your tongues and lips, but your hearts are removed far
from him, so that your Profession stinks in the Nostrils of the Almighty; and
he loathes and abhors your Preaching and Praying; for you are weighed, and you
are found too light, your coverings are too narrow, they will no longer hide
you; for now you are searched with the true Light, which makes you manifest,
and rips off your coverings, so that your nakedness appears, the day has made
you manifest; and now is the Light risen, and with it you are seen to be out of
the Life of Truth; yea, you are found to be the greatest Enemies to the life
that be upon the earth; for you Murder it in the particular, and you hate and
persecute it wheresoever it is brought forth; yea, and in all its appearances
you seek to suppress and murder it. Remember your forefathers cried, Not this
man but Barrabbas, and your cry and Practice is seen to be the same in nature
now; for the Robber and Murderer is set free, and has his Liberty in and among
you; and in you and by you, is the Son of God cried against and murdered; yea,
ye are the betrayers and murderers of him, and his blood you are guilty of, and
it cries for vengeance against you unto the Lord, who has long forborne you;
and because his Judgments were not speedily executed upon you, you have
strengthened you selves in your wickedness and imaginations, and have provoked
the Almighty to wrath, and have not considered that his long-suffering toward
you was to have drawn you to Repentance; but the day of your Visitation you
have despised, and have hated the Light of his Son in your Consciences, which
has often showed you your Evil Deeds, and so have trampled, the blood of the
Covenant under your feet, and have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and
has chosen to follow the vain imaginations of your own hearts, and have
contemned the Counsel of the Lord, and would not that he should reign over you;
for which cause his Judgments linger not against you, but are ready to be
poured forth upon your heads, even upon you, who have sold your selves to work
abomination in the sight of the Lord, and are worshipping in the house of your
Imagery, and have joined, and are become one with the great Whore of Babylon,
who has made her self drunken with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus; but now is she come in remembrance before the dreadful and terrible God,
and now shall both she and her Lovers be Plagued and tormented together.

Therefore you Nobles and Rulers, Captains and Mighty men, Priests and People,
High and Low, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, who has committed Fornication with
her, awake to the Judgment, and behold your King, the old Dragon, which is the
Devil and Satan; for he is come forth and deceives you, and he is come to
gather you to the Battle of the great Day, which is at hand; for the Harvest is
ripe, and the Winepress is full, and your Fats overflow, and the measure of
your Iniquities is great, and now will God be avenged on you, who will bring
you all down unto the valley of Discision, even there shall the Day of the Lord
be upon you, which will be a day of pain and anguish, a day of blackness and
gloominess, and of thick darkness unto you that have slain the Witness of God,
and have made merry over him; your mirth is almost at an end, and instead
thereof shall be mourning and bitter Lamentation, which shall come upon you in
one day; and now is the day of Vengeance proclaimed, now is the Trumpet sounded
forth, behold the LION roareth: Therefore, Oh! all ye Inhabitants of the Earth,
fear and tremble before the living dreadful God, and dread ye his Name, for now
is he arising in his Glory and Majesty, to shake terribly the Earth; the noise
of a Trumpet goes before him, which sounds an Alarm: Strong and Mighty is
he; there goes a Sword out of his mouth, and a Threshing instrument is in his
hand, wherewith he will cut down the tall Cedars, and thresh the Mountains to
dust: A fire proceeds out of his mouth also, which shall devour and burn
before him, and none shall be able to quench it: And the breath that comes
forth of his Nostrils shall scatter the Earth, as the VVhirl-wind scatters
the dust; yea, terrible and dreadful will he be unto you wicked, who live in
the Earth, you shall not be able to behold nor stand in his presence: Therefore
weep, and howl, and lament for the misery that is coming upon you; for a total
destruction is at hand; yea, the Lord has decreed an utter overthrow of the
Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof; for now shall his overflowing Scourge pass
through the Earth, and the Besom of his destruction shall sweep you away, for
your VVhoredoms, and Murders, and Idolatry, and Drunkenness, and Swearing, and
Lying, and VVantonness, and Profaneness, is come in remembrance before the
dreadful and terrible God, who will be avenged on you at once.

Rejoice ye Saints who are clad with Zeal, and shout for joy you Sons of the
most high God, and sing ye Heavens, and you that dwell therein; for the Lord is
risen, ye are Witnesses thereof; behold he comes with ten thousands of his
Saints to Judge the Earth in Righteousness, and to execute his Judgments upon
his and our Enemies: The Vials of his Wrath are made ready to be poured out
upon them, and his Indignation is waxen hot against them, which shall burn, and
slay, and consume them unto the end; Glory, Glory, Honor and Dominion, and
Praise be given unto our King, who lives for ever; for he is worthy to reign
over all, who was dead, but now is he alive, and lives for evermore: And he
has redeemed us from the Earth, and has brought us above the Earth, to reign
with him up- the Earth: Eternal Praises to our King for evermore, who is above
all, and over all; who was before the World was, and has brought us to be
before the World, to reign with him eternally above the World, and our
Enemies are to be plagued and tormented in our presence, and we shall rejoice
over the smoke of their torment, which ascends for ever: Now here is the joy
and cause of our rejoicing, who have followed the Lamb through great
Tribulation, and are brought above the Tribulations, to dwell in the presence
of the living God; this is joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, which shall
never have an end: Hallelujah to our King for evermore.

Edmonds-Bury Common Goal, the 22. day of the 7th. Month, 1656. By me George
Fox, whose natural Birth, and outward being was at Charsfield, in the said
County of Suffolk.

A Visitation of Love unto all People, (in whose hearts there are any true
honest tender desires, begotten toward God and his Righteousness) In what
Sect, or Opinion, or Profession soever they be, who are not in the Light;
especially unto such who have felt something of the workings of the Life and
Power of God in them, and yet notwithstanding have been led by the subtilty of
the Serpent, from the Life and Power of God, into many Sects, and Opinions, and
Forms, which are without the Life and Power of God; and herein the subtle
workings and devices of the Serpent, whereby he deceives the hearts of the
simple, is clearly made manifest.
Friends,
GOd, the higher Power, unto whom the soul is to be subject, he only has
immortality, and dwells in the Light; and he is Light: And he has freely
given his Son into the world, (by whom the world was made) for a Covenant of
Light; and he is the true Light, which lights every one that comes into the
world, that all men through him might believe; who is the Word of God, in whom
is Life, and that Life (mark) is the Light of men; and the pure Grace of God,
which brings Salvation (by which the Saints are freely justified) has
appeared unto all men; yea, the the Eternal God of Truth has appeared unto you
in his Son Jesus Christ, the true Light, and with this Light has God made
manifest unto you your sin and evil deeds, and with the measure of the Light of
his Son ( in you) sometimes has he appeared in his mighty Power, whereby he
has smitten you for your sins and evil deeds, and he by his Power has broken
you into tenderness, and brought you down into lowliness for a time, and then
by his unresistible Power thus working ( in you) did beget a holy Seed, from
whence pure desires and breathings after God has often arose ( in you) which
seed could not, nor cannot be satisfied without Gods living presence; Now ye,
not standing in the Power which convinced you, and smote you, and broke you
into tenderness, and brought you down, and then begot a holy Seed in you; from
whence a pure unfeigned love to God has often sprung (mark) you not minding the
workings and movings of this Power in you, nor waiting in it for to receive
counsel, you entered into reasonings and thoughts, which the subtilty (which is
the Devil) presented in you; and so ye hearkened not to Gods voice (the power
which had wrought so in you) but you entered into reasonings with the subtilty
(which abode not in the power) and this begot a questioning in you what that
should be, which had so appeared in you, and broken you into such a tenderness,
and had wrought such a sudden change in you, which you were not able to resist;
And ye going into the reasonings in your minds; thus you turned from the pure
Power of God, and then sin (which separateth from Gods presence, which he by
his Power works in you, had in measure smitten and brought down in you) arose
again, and got the Dominion in you, and so you going thus from the Power
wherein ye should have waited to have been preserved in the tenderness, ye soon
lost the tenderness and fear, which the Power had wrought in you; and then
hardness of heart soon grew in you again, and then the Seed which God had
begotten in you (which cannot be satisfied without his presence) that began to
be sorely oppressed in you, by the sin (which separates from Gods presence)
which got up more and more in you, through your turning from the Power which ye
once felt manifested and working in you against sin: And then a grievous weight
or burden came upon the Righteous Seed in you; and then it began to groan and
cry to God from under the burden and weight of iniquity that was upon it, and
then the Light appeared more brighter in you again, (for the Seeds sake which
suffered in you) and showed you that you were wrong; then the Light judged you
for the wrong, and then trouble came upon you, and increased in your minds; and
then the Serpent, the Subtilty, the Devil (which abode not in the Truth) he
appeared likewise in you, and begot a hurrying and a confused noise in your
minds, and then presented many things unto you, and stirred you up to do them,
that so he might draw ye from hearkening unto the Light (wherein you should
have waited to have heard and known God's Voice and Counsel, and to have seen
and heard what God had required at your hands) and thus the Subtilty, which is
the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth,
sought to draw you from the Light (which is the Truth) that so he might murder
the Righteous Seed, which God had begotten in you, (unto which Seed the
Promises are) Now your minds being drawn from the Light, which convinced you of
sin, you entered further into sin, and then you could not find any power for to
resist sin, because you went from the Light which showed you your sin, wherein
ye should have waited to have received power against sin, and then the Seed
suffered in you, by the sin which ye were entered into exceedingly; and trouble
increased more and more in your minds, (this has been the condition of some of
you) and then the Subtilty drew you into reasonings and consultings what to do,
that so the burden which you felt, and the trouble in your minds might be
removed: So ye harkening unto the Subtilty, he then presented several things
unto you to be done, some of which once were commanded by God to be done by
them unto whom the Command came; and so the Subtilty persuaded you, that you
must do those things likewise, before ye could have peace, and witness the
burden and trouble removed, which ye felt; So he haing drawn you out of the
sensibleness and feeling of the Light and Power of God, your understandings
became wholly darkened, as unto the Counsel of God, and then these things which
the subtle enemy presented, exceedingly pleased the affectionate part in you,
and some of you he persuaded to act such things as God never commanded any to
act; and so ye going from the Light (which never changes) and harkening unto
the Subtilty (which leads into changeableness) here ye began to run into Sects
and Opinions, and Heaps, and Parties, and Divisions; yea, here is the ground
and rise, and beginning of all Sects and Opinions in the world, peoples going
from the Light and Power of God, which leads into the Substance, and into
oneness of mind, and harkening unto the Subtilty, which leads but into the
likewise of Truth, and into self-separation and Divisions, and changeableness
of mind; and when the Serpent had drawn you into several Opinions and Practices
in your Worship, then he fed you with knowledge, that so each of you might be
able to plead and contend for your Opinions and Practices; and then he begot a
strong, hot, hasty will in you (which has been called Zeal for God, whereby he
drew you into hot contentions one with another, and so by little and little he
raised up a secret envy and prejudice in you, one against each other, till at
length some of you brake forth into rage, and scorn, giving one another
scornful Names.

And thus the Mystery of Iniquity wrought in many of you, until the Seed grew
weak in you, (as to your feeling) and became as a dead thing unto you, being
thus strangled in you, by your going from the Power, into those things that the
Power of God never moved, or drew you to act, (but the Serpent, which abode not
in the Power) So then you were not sensible of such a burden indeed, as ye were
once sensible of, when the Seed which God had begotten in you, was more quick
and lively, and then the Subtilty persuaded you, that now you were right,
because you felt not such a burden and trouble in your minds as you once did;
and then a joy sprung in you for a time, and then the Subtilty persuaded you,
that you were now entered into the Work, and Service, and Worship of God; and
that he had given you some reward, because you were not sensible of such a
burden, and trouble in your minds as ye were before you acted those things in
your Worship; and thus the Subtility beguiled some of you: But this condition
continued not long with you, for God's eternal VVitness (which ye had as it
were slain, and made merry over it) that arose and appeared in you again, for
the Seeds sake, and disturbed and broke that false peace, and joy, and
persuasion, that you were got into, (through transgressing [ and going from]
that which is pure of God in you, and acting those things in the Transgression,
which God never required at your hands) and then with God's witness, the Light,
you saw your selves wrong again, and the Light judged you for your forwardness,
and then you begun to loath those Practices in your worship, which before you
delighted in, and then something you came to feel stirring in you again, which
was not satisfied, but breathed, and groaned, and cried unto the Lord; and then
you were in a fine tender condition again; But then the Subtilty soon appeared
in you again, and presented some other new things unto you, and called those
which he had formerly led you into, old, empty, weak and beggarly things, and
thus he wrought in the subtilty, to draw you from harkening unto that which
made manifest your Condition unto you; and thus he has drawn some of you into
most of the Sects and Opinions that be in the World, and through them, and thus
in the subtilty has he wrought in you to save his head, (or life) for he knew
that if you had hearkened unto the truth of God as it appeared in you, and had
obeyed it, that then God's Power would mightily have been made manifest in you,
whereas the Seed immortal would have been raised up in you, which would have
bruised his head.

So take notice how the Lord's love, the Light, has followed you, and checked,
and reproved you for your hastiness and forwardness, and has showed unto you
the emptiness and deadness of all the profession and worship that ever you have
run into.

And sometimes when you have been brought into lowliness and tenderness; by the
Power of the Lord which has smitten you, then the Lord has opened mighty
things in you unto his Seed, which breathed and thirsted after his
Righteousness, and could not be satisfied without it, and then the Serpent has
wrought in you again in the subtilty, to lead you from that which opened, and
from the pure, and so lead you up in the boasting Nature, to hold forth those
things in the fleshly Principle which the Lord opened unto his own Seed; and
thus he has kept you out of the Life and Power of Truth, and he has filled
some of you with strange imagimations, and expectations concerning God and
Christ, and his appearance without you; and so all along he has strove to keep
you from minding Gods appearance within you, by drawing your minds into the
visible changeable things, and yet the Lord in love to his own Seed has spared
you; so mind the Lords long patience, and forbearance which has been great
toward you, for his Seeds sake in you, which breathes and thirsts after his
Righteousness, and cannot be satisfied without his life and presence.

And truly friends my love is exceeding tender and large toward you in whom
there is such a pure tender Seed stirring, and my desire is (who have seen the
emptiness of all Profession without the life) that you might come to witness
the Seed satisfied in you (with the Pure Power, and Life, and Virtue of the
Living God) which has suffered long in you, and has not been satisfied by
reason of your disobedience unto the Light.

Therefore in Tender Bowels of Love and Compassion unto you, I do freely
declare unto you all, The New and Living way which has been from the
beginning, which is CHRIST JESUS, the true Light which lights every one which
comes into the World, whereby every one of you believing in the Light, may
come to receive a particular satisfaction from Christ, from whence the Light
does come.

Friends, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, but you have transgressed and gone from the manifestation of Gods
Spirit in your own particulars, and so it is impossible for you ever to profit
in the things of God, or come to receive a particular satisfaction, until you
come to own that, and believe in that, which you have transgressed and gone
from, which was given you to profit withal, and to lead you into the
substance, which gives satisfaction.

Now the manifestation of the Spirit does show unto you your runings, and
willings, and actings, and strivings that ye have been in, whereby ye could
never obtain satisfaction unto that in you which breathes to do the Will of
God; now you must mind that which makes manifest these things unto you, and as
you take notice of that (which is the Light) and wait in it, you will come to
feel it drawing you into stilness, and coolness, and quietness of spirit; and
then with the Light you will come to discern the subtilty, and the motions
thereof, which have often beguiled you, by drawing you from quietness and
stilness, into the Airy imaginations, whereby he has tossed and unsettled your
minds; and as you wait in that which does make manifest, (which is the Light)
and believe in it, you will come to feel something arising in you, in Power to
Judge and condemn the subtilty, as that stirs in you to draw you from waiting
upon God, and then you will come to know and feel, the spirit of Judgment and
burning, placed in you to purge you, and as you wait in the Judgment in
patience and stilness, you will come to hear the still voice that is spoken of
in the Scriptures, saying, This is the way (and showing it unto you) and when
you see the way, as you wait in that which shows it unto you, then you will
come to hear the Command in Power, saying unto you, walk in it, and then you
will come to know your Teacher which cannot be removed into a corner; and so
here the path of the just ye will all come to know and witness in your selves,
which is the shining Light which shines more and more, until the perfect day;
for as you all wait in that which calls for stilness and silence to the flesh
and the motions thereof, ye will come then to see more Light, and so ye will
come to witness what David spoke to be true, who said to God, In thy Light
shall we see Light, and then the just (which has been long oppressed and
burdened in you) will begin to spring, and as you believe and wait in the
Light, your minds being staid in it, you will come to feel God's Living Power
working and opperating in you, condemning and removing that in you, which has
oppressed and burdened the just, and so by God's pure Power, (as you wait and
continue in it,) you will come to feel and witness the just holy Seed raised up
in you, from under that which did oppress and burden it; and here you will
feel the captive come out of captivity by the Gospel, which is the Power of
God, and the Prison door set open, and the Prisoners set at Liberty; And then
as you wait in the Light you will come to feel God's pure Powerful Presence,
and Life and Virtue running through you, which will refresh the Seed, which is
tender, and give satisfaction unto it; and so as you all wait low in the fear
of God, watching in the Light, that nothing may get up in you to boast and
glory which is not of God, you will then feel your love exceedingly increased
toward the Pure Living Truth of God, and your whole delight will be to walk in
the Truth, in Righteousness and Holiness, (without which no man shall see the
Living God) and as you all walk in the Light obeying it, you will come into the
Pure Fellowship, and Communion and Unity of the Saints, and then you will feel
the Life, which is the Blood of Jesus Christ cleansing you, purging and
purifying you from all Sin: and so as every one of you abide in the Faith,
feeling it, and standing in the Power of God that will purify your hearts, and
give you victory over the World, and then you will come to receive a particular
satisfaction from Christ the Power, which is the Author and ground of the
Saints Faith, and you will feel God's Spirit, and Power, and Life as you dwell
in it, drawing and leading you into whatsoever he requires you to do; and as
you all wait and are still in that which does discern the thoughts and the
intents of your hearts, and makes them manifest unto you, you will clearly come
to discern the Subtilty and the motions thereof, which would draw you to act
such things as the Lord does not require you to act.

So all take heed to that which discerns the thoughts and intents of your
hearts; for this is a measure of the Word of Life, which is quick and powerful,
and as you all wait in it, you will feel it to be so: for you will feel it
dividing the precious in you from the vile; and this is the Ingrafted Word
which is able to save your Souls.

So this is not written to feed the carnal mind in any; but it is written for
your sakes, who are truly breathing and thirsting after God's Righteousness,
and cannot be satisfied without it; that so you may all come into the true
Light wherewith you are enlightened, and that you with it may come to see how
you have been tossed and tumbled up and down by the Subtilty of the Serpent, in
those things which could never give you true peace nor satisfaction; and that
now through believing in the Truth and Obedience of the Spirit, you may all
come to witness a particular satisfaction, and that you may come to feel the
pure Image of the Holy God restored in you, even his everlasting Righteousness,
his Power, his Wisdom, his Life and Glory raised up in you, to have Dominion,
and to rule over all the earth, and to subdue it; that so the pure God of Life
and Virtue might be glorified in your mortal Bodies, and that you might all
come to feel and witness an everlasting habitation of Rest, and Peace in him;
who is worthy of all Honor, and Praise, and Thanksgiving, and Dominion for
evermore, Amen.

Now some of you who have been ancient Professors, will say to us, If we should
join to you, we must lay down all then that ever we have professed; and what,
have we been Professors so many years, and yet have to begin all aagain? Have
we known nothing of God all this time? this is hard.

To this I answer, Friends, if you come to join to the Truth, you must then lay
down, and leave, and forsake all that, which you have held up and practiced in
your own wills, which you were never led or required to hold up or practice by
the Spirit of Truth; but I do know and own, that there was a pure living
Principle of God, often stirring in you, in your Professions; by which Principle
of God, you often saw that you were wrong, and that you did that which was not
well-pleasing the sight of God in your Profession; for that Principle of God in
you, the Light, judged and condemned you for many of your actions which you
acted; and sometimes the Lord's Witness brought you into a tender low
condition; and then opened things unto the Seed in you, but you not taking heed
to the Light, to be the guide and stay of your minds, you continued not long in
that condition, but you consulted with the Subtilty (which drew you from God's
Witness) what you should do, and so waited not in that, which brought you into
tenderness to receive God's Counsel in that; but you took Counsel of the
Serpent, and your own Hearts, and so ran into things which God never required
at your hands, and therefore God had no regard unto your Worship, because it
was not in the Spirit, and in the Truth, you not being guided therein by the
Spirit of Truth; So unto that which was in the Beginning you must all come,
which is Christ the true Light, who has enlightened you; and you must learn of
Him, who is the Light of Life, the Word, and the Power, by which all things
were made, and are upheld, and you must be subject unto the measure of Him in
you; and this his Measure, if you submit to it, that will bring you to cease
from your own wills and works, and to wait in silence and patience, to see and
feel Christ the Power of God, to work all your works in you, and for you; and
if you own the Light, that will plainly show unto you how God formerly appeared
unto you, and how you went from his appearance; so the Light will own that
which God opened unto you at any time, but it will deny and condemn your own
imaginations, which you mixed with that which God opened unto you; and so unto
this Witness of the Lord you must all come, and believe, and wait in that,
which will separate the precious from the vile, before that can be satisfied in
you which breaths after God.

So my tender love and compassion is unto that in you which is not yet
satisfied, but does truly hunger and thirst after the Life and Power of Truth;
and my Soul does travel for freedom and satisfaction of that Seed, and I suffer
with it, and bear many things for its sake, for I have true Unity and
Fellowship with that in you, and I know it, and am known of it; but I cannot
have Unity with many of your Practices, which ye have been in, because they
have caused the Seed in you, (with which I have Unity) exceedingly to suffer;
you not being guided and led into them by the Spirit of Truth; and so against
all such Practices I do bear witness in the Spirit of Meekness, and I labor in
the Spirit of Love, to turn Peoples minds unto the manifestation of the Spirit
of Truth, which is given to every man wherewith to profit.

So all People, feel that, and mind that, and hearken unto that which often
rises in your hearts, against Lust, against Covetousness, against Pride,
against vain and needless words and thoughts, and against all evil in its
appearance; and as you all mind this Principle which moves and stirs in you,
against all evil, you will feel it divide your good words from your bad words,
and good thoughts from bad thoughts, and good deeds from bad deeds; and that
which divides betwixt these, and shows you the difference of them, this is the
Word which Moses and Paul wrote of, which is nigh in the mouth, and in the
heart; Yea, this is the Word of Reconciliation, which reconciles to God; this
is the ingrafted Word, which is able to save the Soul.

Now you being turned to this Word, even to that which discerns the thoughts
and intents of your hearts, as ye wait in this, let the Subtilty appear never
so subtly to draw your hearts after any thing, or into any Practice, which
the Lord requires not of you, then this Word, which is the Power, it will make
it manifest unto you, and it will stop you from entering into any such
Practices, if you wilfully resist it not; and believing and waiting in this
Word, it will not suffer you to speak any hasty unsavory words, or word, and
then ye will come to be truly sensible of a bridle to the tongue, without which
all Religion is vain; and this Word, ye taking it to be your guide, it will
bring you into savoury sound words, seasoned with the Grace of God; and so as
your words, and actions, and lives, come to be ordered by this Word (Christ the
Power of God) they will reach unto the Witness of God in every one where ye
come; and if ye will hear this Word, and regard it, and not resist it, it will
work true Faith in you, by which you will feel your hearts purified from sin,
and ye will feel it giving you Victory over the World, within and without; and
if ye keep in this Faith, ye will not make haste, for ye will feel the Eternal
Light (which is the Life of the Word) calling and drawing you out of the hasty
nature, into soberness, stilness, and quietness, and meekness of Spirit, and so
ye will feel your strength renewed in the Lord, as ye all wait upon him in his
Light; and all believing in the Light, ye will not come into condemnation; and
as ye all wait in that which discerns and reveals the thoughts and the intents
of your hearts (which is the Word of Power) this also will divide between your
good thoughts and your bad thoughts, and the good motions and the bad motions,
which you will see stirring in your minds; and if you hold fast the Word of
Truth, it will preserve and keep you out of the bad thoughts and motions, and
it will join you unto the good, and ye will come to feel the operation of the
Spirit, and Life, and Power of God in you, to shake, and overturn, and work out
that ground (which has been in you) from whence the bad words, and bad
thoughts, and bad motions have arose, which have burdened the oppressed and
tender Seed in you, which you never could witness satisfied with all that ever
you have performed; but as ye all believe, and wait in this unchangable measure
of God, you will come to feel the burden taken off the Seed; and ye will come
to feel and witness more true durable peace and satisfaction in one hours
waiting upon God, than ever you felt and witnessed in all the words that ever
you have heard from any man or woman in all your lives, or in all your
Practices, that ever you have practiced (before you were brought to wait upon
God in his Gifts, which he has given you to profit withal) although in those
things which we have practiced, I know ye have had a great joy appearing in you
for a time, but it was not durable nor lasting; for when God's true and
faithful Witness, (the Light) appeared and showed you how that God never
required those things at your hands, which you had practiced, then your joy and
peace withered and came to an end, which you appeared sometime to have in those
Practices; and if at any time ye came to feel some little peace, and joy, and
refreshment, through what God opened to the Seed in you, when by his Power ye
were brought into some tenderness, ye soon lost this also, by going from that
which brought you into the tenderness; But as you all come into the Obedience
of the Spirit, and abide in it, this will bring you into the seasoned Life, and
then ye will come to feel and witness pure peace, and joy, and refreshment, and
satisfaction, which will last and abide for ever with you, if ye abide in the
Spirit; and then ye will be made willing to lay down and deny all that which ye
have been acting, which ye never were led and guided to act by God's Pure Holy
Spirit; and to deny all such also, as would draw you to act that which God
requires not at your hands.

So take heed of such as daub with untempered mortar, and heal deceitfully, who
will speak peace, when there is no true peace, (but the pure Witness of God
condemns) for such, with good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of
the simple, keeping them ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge
of the Truth; and these through covetousness and feigned words, make
merchandise of poor People, for they have a Form of Godliness, but they deny
and resist the Power, and therefore from such turn away.

And all mind that, and feel that, and be subject unto that, which for sin
condemns sin in the flesh, and then you will feel the Spirit of Judgment, and
Burning, and Righteousness, through which the Seed is redeemed, which Seed is
Heir of the Kingdom of God; So all wait in the meek, lowly, quiet Spirit, that
ye may come to witness this Holy Seed, which delights to do the Will of God,
(by the power and Life of God) raised up in you, satisfied, and brought forth
out of captivity.

And look not out, nor strive after great and high things beyond your measures
(for that puffs up, and leads into confusion and dark imaginations) but all
wait and be still in the measure of God's Light manifested in you, that so you
may come to feel him revealing his secrets and mysteries unto the Babes, which
cannot live or be satisfied without him.

God is making known that, and stirring that in the hearts of People
(throughout the World) which does and shall confound and overturn all the
Wisdom of this World, and the subtilty of the Serpent (from whence all the
Worlds Wisdom arose) and therefore the hand of the Lord will be terrible and
heavy upon the disobedient, who disobey and transgress that which he has put
into their Hearts, (whereby he is opening a mighty understanding in the People)
But the everlasting Blessing, and Peace, and Joy, and Glory of the Lord over
all shall arise, and rest upon all those that join to, and believe in, and obey
that Word which is nigh, in the mouth, and in the heart.

By a Labourer in the Power of Truth (which does make free) for the Deliverance
and Freedom of the Righteous Seed. George Fox, the younger.

An Exhortation to Families, who have desires to serve the Lord God in their
several places, that they may all learn in the Light of Christ Jesus, the
Wisdom and Power of God, who is the true Teacher.
O Ye Fathers and Mothers, stand in the pure fear of the Lord, and wait in his
Light, that ye may receive his living Wisdom, and live in it, that so ye may be
ordered by it, and with it order all things to God's glory, and bring up your
Children in the fear of the Lord, watching over them in the seasoned savoury
Life of God, not suffering them to live in wildness, nor idleness, nor vain
talking (unreproved;) but in the sober, meek Spirit, and in the Authority of
God's Lamb, reprove them, and that will reach the Witness of God in them, and
correct them in the Fear, and Wisdom, and Freedom of God, in the Patience; and
follow not their foolish wills, neither correct them in your own wills, nor in
hastiness, rashness, or passion; for if ye do, then that will use the Rod,
which is to be beaten with the Rod of God, and that will make your Children
more stubborn and wicked, and this will offend God; but stand ye in God's
Counsel, and discourage nothing in your Children, but evil, and let them have
that which is meet, just, and reasonable, and no more, that none of God's
Creatures be wasted; and be ye patterns and good examples (in all holiness,
gravity and uprightness) unto them, and let them have sufficient liberty to go
to godly Meetings, and rather stir them up and encourage them to go to such,
than hinder or discourage them; and keep your minds out of them unto the Lord,
and let your love to them be in the Lord, that so ye may feel his Blessing
coming upon you and them.

And all ye Children, who have Parents, honor (and be obedient unto) them, in
the Lord, and mind the Light of Christ (in you) and that will not suffer ye to
be wild, nor wilful, stubborn, nor vain, but it will check and reprove ye for
all evil, and if ye will own its reproof, and believe and wait in it, it will
lead ye out of all evil, and it will bring ye into soberness and meekness,
tenderness and innocence, and preserve ye in it, and it will bring ye to know
and remember your Creator in the days of your youth, and it will reveal God's
Power and Wisdom in ye, whereby ye will be kept in true order: So suffer not
your minds to follow vanity, neither walk in stubbornness toward your Parents,
(nor others;) I warn ye in God's fear, lest he shorten your days, and cut ye
off by his righteous Judgments; but mind his fear, and wait therein, that ye
may feel his Grace, and be taught by it, and be obedient unto it, and then ye
will feel the Mercy and Blessing of the Lord.

And all ye that are Masters and Dames, wait in the true Light, that ye may
feel Christ the Power and Wisdom of God, to be your Master, that so ye may rule
in your Places, in his Fear and Wisdom; and lay no more upon your Servants,
than ye would be willing should be laid upon you, if ye were in their places
and conditions: (Mark that) and forbear threatening them, and be not hasty to
turn them away, if they be willing to abide with you; but in Patience and
Meekness show them their Place and Service, and therein teach them, if they
know it not, and let them have for their Service, that which is convenient,
just and reasonable, that they may have no just cause to murmur or complain;
and keep out of covetousness, lest that hinder you from giving them sufficient
liberty (who desire it) for going to the Meetings of the People of the Lord;
and if in the Wisdom of God ye see freedom to turn any away, give them
sufficient warning, that they may provide themselves other ways, for this is
just and reasonable; and be not hasty nor rash with them, nor run into jangling
with them, but if ye have cause to reprove them, let it be in the Fear and
Wisdom of God, in the Freedom and Authority of the Truth, and that will reach
unto the Witness of God in them; so be not High-minded, but fear, and be
patterns unto them in the lowly, meek and quiet spirit and bear with the weak,
and forgive them that trespass against you, and render not evil for evil to
any, but overcome evil with that which is good, and live in that which
overcomes evil, that so the Truth of God may be exalted over all.

And all ye that are Servants, live in the Fear of the Lord, and wait in his
Light, and be obedient thereunto, and also be obedient (in your places) unto
those that are your Masters and Dames (according to the Flesh) not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward, serving them in Faithfulness and
Uprightness of Heart, doing what ye do for them, as diligently, faithfully and
willingly, as ye should do any thing to the Lord, for this right in the sight
of God; and take heed that none of God's Creatures be lost, or wasted under
your hands, through your neglecting them, or slothfulness in your places; and
do not falsely accuse any, or speak evil behind any one's back, thereby thinking
to get the favor or love of any, or upon any other account, for that is evil;
and be as diligent in your places, when your Masters or Dames are absent, as
when they are present, for this is just and right; and be not stubborn nor
wilful, neither use many words to your Masters or Dames, and if you know not
well how to perform your service aright, then in true humility be willing to
learn, and take heed of High-mindedness and Pride, or of being wise in your own
eyes; and when you have any spare time allowed ye, (being free from outward
employment) see that ye spend it in the fear of the Lord, in waiting upon him
in his Light, that so all vain talking; corrupt Communication, foolish
jeasting, and all vanity may be kept out of; and give ye not way to that mind
which is unstable, which would be often shifting, and going from place to place,
for this is not right in the sight of God; but wait in the Light, that ye may
be staid, and settled in your minds; and if ye see freedom in the fear of God
(mark that) to go to another place, then give your Masters or Dames sufficient
notice of it; and if any of you, who know the Truth, come to be moved of the
Lord to go to any place in his service, be faithful to the Lord, and when your
service which he required of you is done, then return to your places again
(except it be otherwise ordered in the Fear and Wisdom of God) and be diligent
in your places, doing the same that ye would others should do unto you in the
like condition; and mind the Lord in all things, and above all things, and be
faithful unto him, and he will be your reward.

And all ye Fathers, and Mothers, and Children, and Masters, and Dames, and
Servants, who have the Creatures of God to buy or sell, or to Exchange, live in
the fear of the Lord, that ye may feel his Wisdom to guide you in your trading,
and do not speak better or worse of the Creatures then you know them to be,
thereby to get the greater gain, for that is Idolatry, it arising from
Covetousness; but wait to feel God's Spirit to bridle your tongues, and use but
few words in your trading; and if ye ask a question therein, do it in
simplicity, and keep in the Light which is equal, that when ye offer or ask a
price for the Creatures, it may be in equality; and let that be your rule, and
not the price of the Market, except that be equal, that so ye may reach the
equal principle one in another; and then stand to your word, and here your yea
will be yea, and your nay will be nay, and so you will be kept in the Doctrine
of Christ, with his Light, out of all Evil; and ye abiding in the Light, it
will bring ye to do to every one, as ye would be done unto; and take heed that
ye stir not up the impatient, crooked, disorderly Nature, one in another, with
your words or actions; but bear one with another, and forgive one another, and
when ye tell each other of a fault, do it in the Fear and Wisdom, and Meek
Spirit of God's Lamb, that so ye may restore each other therein; and when ye
have any convenient time, assemble your selves together in the Name and Fear of
the Lord, and wait every particular in the Measure and Gift of God in you,
which is given ye to profit withal; and all wait together in the Light, and
believe in it, that ye may be Children of the Light, and therein watch unto
Prayer, and one over another, and this will beget ye into unfeigned love; and
walking in the Light ye will have true unity, and fellowship one with another,
and the blood (which is the Life) of Jesus Christ you will feel cleansing you
from all Sin, and so ye will come into the unity with God. Also, to feel his
Word, his Power, and Wisdom (in you) by which all things were created and made,
and are upheld, that therein ye may be ordered in the particular, and that
therein ye may use and order all God's Creatures, to his Glory; and then all
false Weights, and Measures, and Ways, and Worships will be destroyed, and
then shall Truth, Equity, Righteousness, and true Order and Mercy prosper, and
run down as a River: So let your Faith stand in Christ Jesus the Light, and
Wisdom, and Power of God, and then true Worship, true Weight, true Measure
shall be set up and established, and then shall the Lord be exalted over all
the works of his hands, and so ye will feel his blessing; unto him belongs
the Dominion and Honor, for he is worthy of it for evermore, Amen.

By George Fox, the Younger

The Words of the Everlasting and True Light, Who is the Eternal Living God,
and the King of Saints, which he gave unto me his servant, to declare unto the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and unto all such as have any true tender desires in
them after Righteousness, and Truth.
HEarken, O ye Nations! and give ear ye Inhabitants of the Earth: Thus says
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whose Name is the Light, I am the Lord, and
there is no other that can save; I the Light Created all things, and formed and
made you all of the dust, and I breathed into you my Light, my Life, that ye
with it should have been guided, and led in my Wisdom, to have ordered all
things which I have Created, and to have ruled over them all, that I in you
might have been honored and exalted over all the works of my hands, which I
the Light Created; But from me the Light ye have departed, and ye have hearkened
unto the Subtle Serpent, which is the Devil, (who abode not in me the Light,
the Life, the Truth, which Created all things) whom I have cursed above all the
Beasts of the Earth, who is the Seed of Enmity; and ye hearkening unto him, he
has begotten you into Enmity against me the Light; and so has begotten and
led you into the Curse, and so he is become your Father and Leader, whom I have
cursed, and all that ye bring forth and act in him. I have cursed, because it
stands in the Enmity against me the Light; yet I the Light have looked upon
you, and pitied you, because of the loss that ye are come into, and the
darkness that is come upon you all, through your departing from me the Light.

And I the Eternal God have sent him, who was glorified with me before the
World was, by whom I made the World, who is not without me, nor I without him,
but he is in me, and I in him, and He and I, and the Spirit that proceed's from
Us, are one Being and Substance. (Mark) I the Eternal God have sent him into
the World, who was glorified with me before the World began, and he is called
my Son, because he is the Express Image of my Glory, and bears my Name, the
Light, the Life, the Truth, which is but one, and he is my Love unto you the
World; and that is he that lets you see the Enmity and darkness that ye are in,
and how years departed and gone from Me the Life; and for this end I have sent
him a Light, that ye all through him the Light might believe, that so he who
shows you your Sins, your Enmity, your Darkness, ye believing in him, might
receive power to come out of it, and that he might save you from the curse
which ye went into, when ye hearkened to the Serpent, whom I have cursed, who is
become your Leader.

But I have sent you the Light to be your Leader, to lead you from the Serpent,
and out of all that which he has led you into. (Mark) out of Enmity against
me, out of Darkness, and so out of all unrighteous words, and deeds, and
thoughts: And I the Eternal God have given my Son, the Light, power to plague,
and to judge, to condem, and to destroy all those that will not hear him (the
Light) who makes manifest unto you your unrighteous words, deeds, and thoughts,
which the Serpent has led you into; and because ye live in these, I cannot
have fellowship with you, nor reveal my secrets unto you, but my anger is
kindled against you; but if ye would hearken unto my Love, the Light, which
lets you see all that ever you have done, and own him to be your Leader, and
receive him, and give up your selves to be guided by him, then you shall feel
his Power in you, (which I have given him) to lead you out of Enmity, and
Darkness, and the curse, and out of all Sin, which was the cause of the curse,
and so to destroy that Nature in you, which the Serpent has begotten ye into,
and to beget you again into the Nature of himself; the Light, in whom I am well
pleased, and then my anger would be turned away from you, and I should have
fellowship with you again, as I had in the beginning, and the Serpent's head ye
should come to witness bruised (who drew and led you out of me the Life) and
the Tree of Life, which I shut you from (because of your disobedience, ye
should come to know it) and to feel it, and to feed upon it again, and I should
delight to do you good.

But (O ye disobedient) ye are from this, because ye despise Me, my Son, my
Spirit, who are one, who are Light and Life, which is not far from you; for I
the Light give unto every one of you Life, and Breath, and you and all things
are upheld by me, the Light, whose presence fills Heaven and Earth; and I
have long spared you, and my patience and long-suffering toward you has been
exceeding large; but you in your imaginations have put me a far off, and ye
will not own me, the Light, the Life in you, because my appearance in you has
been, and yet is to make manifest Sin and Evil in you, and to check and reprove
you for it, and to call you out of it; and therefore you are offended at me;
and you whom the Serpent, the Prince of the Power of the Air has led out of
me, into airy imaginations, you scorn me, the Light in you, and count me a low,
poor, weak thing, not worth the taking notice of, because I have been patient
toward you, and have tenderly, meekly, and lovingly made manifest unto you
Sin, and Evil, in its appearance, and has reproved you for Evil gently;
therefore you have disobeyed me, and dishonored me, and called me a Natural
Light; and ye have said, I the Light am not able to save those that believe in
me; and many of you have got my words, which I the Light spoke in my servants
of old, and ye in the Enmity, give other meanings to my words, and so with my
words mixed with your own meanings and imaginations, ye fight against me the
Light and Life within you, and so against my Children, which bear Testimony of
me, the Light, who lights every one that comes into the World; and these
your iniquities I have long born, and you have grieved my Spirit, which haah
long strove with you, and I the Life have been oppressed in you, and by you:
But verily, my Spirit shall not always strive with you, neither will I the
Light, always bear your iniquities; for verily, I the Lord God Almighty, (who
am the Light, which have made manifest your iniquities unto you, which some of
you call Natural, and say, that those who are led and guided by me the Light
within, which makes manifest Sin, that they are guided by a spirit of Error and
Delusion.) [Mark] I will make you know your blasphemy, and you shall know and
feel to your Everlasting destruction, (if you speedily repent not) that I the
Light [which lets you see Sin, and reproves you for it] am Spiritual, and am
the Spirit of Truth, who leads all those that receive me out of all Error and
Delusion, into all Truth: and i will make you know, that I the Light am a
consuming fire, which none can quench; for now will I the Light and Life arise,
who have so gently reproved you for sin, and called you out of it, and have so
long suffered in you, and by you, as a Lamb, yea, I will arise, and ease my
self of my adversaries; I will not spare any that will not own me, the Light,
but I will overturn you all, without respect of Persons, and I will give to
every one according to the fruits of their doings. I matter not what name ye
are called by, whether it be King, Protector, Prince, Duke, Lord, Judge,
Justice, Parliament, Priest, Lawyer, gathered Churches, Army, Gentry, mean Men,
or Beggars, (Mark) I the Light made you all of one blood, I formed you all of
the dust, I breathed into you the breath of Life, I gave you the Light to lead
you, and to order you, and that ye in it should have walked and ordered all
things to my Glory; but many of you have slighted me, the Light in you, and
would not take Counsel of me, nor be ordered by me, but have chosen to follow
your own hearts lusts, and have taken counsel of the Serpent, and have chosen
him to be your Leader, and in his Wisdom ye have walked, and by him ye have
been ordered, and by him ye have ordered things to the dishonor of me, the
Light, whom many of ye call Natural. Mark, I the true Light will arise, and
will plague and torment all you that disobey me, and will not turn at my
reproof; I will bring such heavy judgments upon you, as have not been felt; I
will be a swift witness against all the wicked; I the Light will stop the
mouths of vain talkers, I will confound the wisdom of wise men, I will make
diviners mad, I will bring down the high lofty spirits of men, I will make ye
bow unto my Name, the Light; you shall feel it is not Natural nor weak (as some
of you have said of it) for it shall break you to pieces, and all your
Profession and Wisdom, which is out of the Light, I the Light (in you) will
confound it all, i will break all Sects and Opinions, and gathered Churches (so
called) which are not in me; I the Light in you, will take away all Peace from
the Earth, yea, i will bring you to your wits ends, i will burn your Heavens, all
your Joy, your Peace, your Righteousness, which stand in the Power of Darkness;
I the Light in you will consume it all; i will burn Heaven and Earth, i will burn
within in and without, i will strike with astonishment, with fear and amazement,
with madness and destruction; i will bring Plagues within, and Plagues without,
until I have consumed all you mine Enemies, who will not own me, the Light
within: I the Light will overturn Kingdoms and Nations, and Rulers of all
sorts, and Armies, and gathered Churches, which will not own me, the Light in
them, to guide and lead them.

Woe unto the Murderers, Whoremongers, Thieves, Cheaters, Swearers, Liars,
Hunters, Gamesters, Vain-talkers, and all workers of iniquity, who hate me, the
Light, who have made manifest your abominations, and reproved you for them: I
have been pressed with your iniquities, but I the Light will arise upon you,
and if ye will not hear and return speedily, i will fall upon you, and grind you
to Powder; and all, both high and low, rich and poor, Professors, or not
Professors, and all time-servers, who will not own me, the Light in you, and
return to me the Light, I will make no difference of you, because of your names
or places, but I will break you to pieces like a potters vessel, i will tread you
like mire and clay in the streets, and i will make you know, that I the Light (
which lights every man which comes into the World, that all through me
should believe) am the true Eternal God, which Created all things, and that by
me, the Light, all things are upheld, and that there is not another beside me
that can save; for I will famish all the Gods of the Heathen, and destroy them,
and those that worship them, and will not repent and turn unto me the true
Light, i will make a short work, I will cut it short in Righteousness, and I the
Light will be exalted over all the Earth, and i will prove my self to be stronger
than all in this Generation.

And all you who are scoffers and scorners, who scoff and scorn at my children,
who in this the day of my Power, have trembled at my Word: Mark, i will make you
assuredly to tremble and quake; yea, you who have despised me, the Light, and
have scoffed at my workings in my People, I the Light in you will make you to
drink the cup of Trembling, and ye shall not be able to resist it, and then ye
shall know that I the Light am he that will work, and none shall be able to
stop me, yea, I the everlasting light will wound, and none be able to heal; I
will kill, and none shall be able to make alive: Therefore consider what I say,
before the day of your visitation be wholly past, and return unto me, the light
in you, and repent, lest my long patience come to an end, and so I destroy you
utterly.

Now all people, in whom there are any true tender desires after Truth and
Righteousness, I the true Light in you did beget them, and if ye will hearken
unto me, the Light in you, I will let you see all that which does oppress those
desires in you; and I will not only show you that which does oppress those
desires in you, but I the Light (if ye will receive me, and learn of me) will
teach you to deny, and to resist all that which is contrary unto me, which does
oppress that which I have begotten in you; and if ye will believe, and wait in
me, the Light, I will give you Power to resist all that which is contrary unto
me, and I will destroy all the works of the Serpent in you, and bruise his
head, and I will purge out all your iniquities, and forgive all your
trespasses, and I will change your nature, and I will make you new Creatures,
if ye will hearken unto me, and obey me the Light in you; and I will make you
partakers of my Divine Nature; and I will judge, and condemn, and consume all
that in you, which is contrary to my Nature, if ye will abide in the Light; and
I will take away all Darkness, and earthly-mindedness; and I will reveal my
secrets and mysteries unto my Seed in you, and I will cause you to delight
alone in me the Light of Life, and I will feed you with the Bread of Life, and
ye shall drink of my Life, and ye shall be satisfied; and I will manifest my
Power more and more in you; and if ye will be faithful unto me, and obey my
voice, and wait upon me, the Light, then I will make the crooked ways strait
before you, and the rough ways smooth, and I will destroy the Power of
Darkness within and without you; and if ye will follow me, I will lead you out
of the World, and Worldly cares, into patience, into meekness, and into
stilness and quietness of spirit, and whatsoever you suffer for my Names sake,
I will be your exceeding great reward, and I will be your dread, and ye shall
be the dread of Nations, and I will be your Glory, and ye shall be the Glory of
Nations, and I will reign over you, and ye shall reign over all the World, in
my Light, and Life, and Power; and if ye continue in me the Light, I will give
you Dominion over all your Enemies, within and without you, and I will make
them all bow before you; and I the Lord God of Light and Life, will be your
Redeemer and Savior, your Rock, your Shield, and your Defense; and if ye will
wait in my Life, it shall be your Life, and I the Life will destroy the
destroyer, within and without you, and I will bring you out of all trouble, and
restlesness, and dissatisfaction, and I will be your peace, and your rest, and
your satisfaction, and ye shall lie down in me the Light of Life, and none
shall make you afraid. These things shall you come to witness in the work of
your regeneration, and much more than is here expressed, if ye be faithful unto
me, the true Light in you, who have no fellowship with any thing that is Evil;
and then I will purge all Evil out of you, and even as I am, so shall ye be
also; yea, I will work this work, and perfect it in you, if ye continue and
abide in me, the Light.

Now if any should say, that here is nothing spoken of Christ, in what I have
here written; I answer, what I have here written, is the words which the
Father, who is one with Christ the Son, gave unto me to write, in which words
the true Christ is owned, and a Testimony given of him, and no other.

But further, in the Fear and Wisdom of God, for the satisfaction of the
simple, I do declare in plain words; That I do believe in the true Christ, the
Lord of Life, who was glorified with the Father before the World began; and I
do believe that he was in due time made manifest in that body of flesh, who was
called Jesus, and that in him the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, who was
supposed to be the Carpenter's Son, whom the Jews Crucified without the gates
of Jerusalem; and I have remission of Sins through his blood, who is the Lord
of Life, and he was buried, but he is risen, and Ascended, and sits on the
right hand of the Majesty on high: This is the Christ I own, who also was, and
is Crucified in Sodom and Egypt by the rebellious; yea, he is Crucified
afresh, and put to open shame now, by those that trample the blood of the
Covenant, the Light of Life under their feet, and count it an unholy or a
natural thing, and such act despightfully against the Spirit of Grace; and such
Murder the Seed which keeps the commands of God; and such will God the Light
overthrow and burn to ashes, as he did Sodom and Gomorrah; but all that love
and obey the true Light (which is the fire) shall be saved and preserved by it,
and shall remain unhurt; but all that hate and disobey the Light in them, that
is their condemnation, the Light.

These are faithful and true sayings, and things also that must shortly come to
pass, and he witnessed.

Postscript.
READER,
WHo ever thou art, be moderate, and take heed of disobeying, and despising the
true Light; for if thou do, thou disobeyest and dispisest the True and
Eternal God, who is Light, and that is his Name, whereby he is and will be
known in this Age and Generation.

Therefore stumble not at the Light which lighteneth every one which comes
into the World; for if thou do, thou stumblest at God, his Name, at Christ
the Word, (by which all things were made, and are upheld) at the Door, the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, at the Rock, at the Elect Stone, and these all are but
one, and if thou stumble at these, what ever thou art, thou shall be broken.

But they that obey and believe the true Light, they shall be made Children of
the Light, and shall be taught of God and shall walk in his Light.

G. F.

A Word to the People of the World, who hate the Light, to be witnessed by the
Light in them all; Wherein is showed unto them, what the Light is, which is
the condemnation of the World with its deeds; and what the Spirit of Truth is,
and what it leads them into, who are led by it; and what the Spirit of Error
is, and what it leads them into, who are led by it: And also they are here
exhorted to repent whilst they have the Light, to believe and walk in the
Light, lest darkness come upon them, and they into it be cast, where there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Also a few Queries to such Professors
as stumble at the Light, the Word, the Kingdom, and Spirit of God within, and
tell People that none can be free from sin in this Life, and yet say, that they
own the Scriptures.
LIght is come into the World, and the World hates it, Joh. 8.12. and the
whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. And this is the Condemnation of
the World, that Light is come into the World, and men loved the Darkness
rather than the Light, because their deeds were evil (says Christ) Joh. 3.19,
20. And every one that does evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the
Light, lest his deeds should be reproved; But all things that are reproved are
made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ephesians.
5.13. and Christ Jesus he is the true Light, which lights every man that
comes into the World, Joh. 1.9. Drunkard, thou have a Light given thee which
comes from Christ; and that is the Light which lets thee see that thou should
not be drunk; so here thou have learned thy Condemnation (which is the Light)
Swearer, and Liar, and Fighter, and Quarreler, thou have a Light given thee
which comes from Christ (who says, Swear not at all) and with this Light, thou
see thou should not swear, nor lie, nor fight, nor quarrel, for the Light
in thee witnesses against these things; so here thou have learned thy
Condemnation (the Light) Scoffer, Scorner, Mocker, Railer, cursed Speaker,
foolish Iester, vain Talker, Couzener and Cheater, the Light that shines in thy
Conscience, though thou can not comprehend it ( Joh. 1.5.) because thou art
darkness, it is pure and eternal, and never consented unto evil, but stood and
stands a VVitness for God, against all evil; (Mark) this Light, this pure
VVitness oftentimes has appeared and does appear unto thee, and in thee, and
lets thee plainly see that thou should not act any of these evils before
mentioned, and it often checks and reproves in secret, when thou do so act;
so here thou have learned what Condemns thee, (which is the the Light) Ephesians.
5.5, 13. Proud one, Wanton one, Lustful one, Covetous one (who art an Idolater)
Backbiter, Whoremonger, Gamster, Sporter, and Profane one, who walk on in
laciviousness and excess of the Creatures, in Revellings, Banquetings, and
abominable Idolatries, and whoever thou art that acts any manner of
unrighteousness whatsoever, it is sin, and it is of the Devil; but the Light
that lights every man that comes into the World, that is the Son of God,
who is made manifest for this very end, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8. and He (mark) the Son of God, has given thee a measure of
his Light, and that is the measure of his Light in thee, which lets thee see
that thou should not act any of these abominations beforementioned, but it often
appears in thee to convince thee of thy evil deeds, and reproves thee, and
judges thee for thy wickedness; so here thou have learned thy Condemnation,
which is the Light, which makes manifest unto thee thy abominations.

And thou who make a Profession of the Saints words, but art found to be out
of their Life, and in thy dark carnal mind and imaginations run'st into their
words (the Scriptures) and calls them the Word of God, and thy Rule, and the
way to know God (and yet thou live contrary to the Scriptures, and art out of
the knowledge of God, whom to know, is life eternal) Mark, the Light wherewith
thou art enlightened withal, it comes from Christ (who lights every man that
comes into the World, and his Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19.13.
and he is the way to God, and no man knows the Father save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him) Mat. 11.27. and this Light which comes from
the Son of God, oftentimes appears in thee, and shows thee that thou art out of
the Saints Life (though thou profess their Words) and the Light lets thee see
that thou art a Thief and a Robber, and art climbing up another way (in thy
imaginations) than by the Door, ( Joh. 10.1.) which is Christ (from whence the
Light does come) and this Light in thee, which makes manifest to thee thy
condition, it oftentimes confounds thee and thy imaginations (which thou have
raised out of thy dark mind, concerning the Scriptures, which were given forth
in the true Light) and the Light oftentimes convinces, reproves, and judges
thee, of and for thy hypocrisy, and dissimulation, and feigned love, and
humility, and will worship; and lets thee see that thy worship is not that
Worship which the Lord requires; for that is in the Spirit, and in the Truth
which God requires, Joh. 4.22, 23, 24. and thou being out of the Light (not
being guided by it) art out of the Spirit, for the Spirit is Light, and the
Light is the Truth, and so out of the true Worship in the false, worshipping
thou know not what; so here with the true Light thou art condemned, and so
have learned but thy Condemnation.

Therefore all People, both young and old, high and low, rich and poor, bond
and free, who yet live in any of these evil deeds beforementioned; mind that
which makes manifest your evil deeds unto you, which is the measure of the pure
God, which he has given you to profit withal, and this measure in you
convinces you of sin, and reproves you for it; now mind to stand in that which
does convince; for that is the Power: and as you stand and believe in that
which does convince you, it will lead you into true Repentance never to be
repented of; for it will bring you to repent of, and to forsake all your evil
deeds and hard speeches (Jud. 15.) which you will see in the Light (which never
consented unto sin) that you have acted and spoken against the living God; so
believe in the Light, which shows you sin and evil, and wait in the Light as it
arises and appears in you, to show you your estates and conditions; now if you
believe in the Light, and wait in it, you will come to receive Power from
Christ (from whence the Light does come) to overcome evil, and to withstand the
Tempter, when he appears to tempt you to evil; and the Light (believing in it)
will preserve you out of the evil, and lead you out of the death and loss that
ye are in, unto Christ the life and Savior of the Soul.

But if you hate the Light (which shows you sin and evil) you hate Christ; for
I am the Light, says Christ, John 8.12. and if you hate the Light, you hate
the way to the Father, for I am the way to the Father, says Christ, who is the
Light, Joh. 14.6. and if you hate the Light, you hate the Truth, and you hate
the Life, for I am the Truth and the Life, says Christ, the true Light, who
lights every man that comes into the World, Joh. 1.9. and 12.46. and if you
hate the Light, you hate the Covenant of God; for I will give him for a
Covenant to the People, and for a Light to the Gentiles, says God, Isa. 42.6.
and 49.6. and if you hate the Light, you hate the Power, for all Power is given
unto me both in Heaven and in Earth, says Christ the Light, Mat. 28.18. and if
you hate the Light, you hate the Word of God, and so you hate God and Christ
(who are One, John 10.30.) Mark, for in the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God; all things were made by it, and
without it nothing was made that was made, in it was Life: (Mark, in the Word
was Life) and the life (of the Word) was the Light of men; and John, a man sent
of God, bare witness of the Light, that all men through Him might believe
(Mark) through Him, who lights every man that comes into the World, John
1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and God is Light, 1 John 1.5. and God and Christ
are One, Joh. 10.30. 1 John 5.7.

So you that be turned from the Light (which shows you sin and evil, mark what
you are turned from) you are turned from the Way, and from the Truth, and from
the Life, and from the Covenant of God, and from the Power of God, and from the
Word of God, and so from God and Christ, from whence the Light does come, and
into the Darkness you are turned and gone, and the Prince of Darkness rules in
you (Ephesians. 2.2.) that so you cannot find any power over your own perverse Wills,
nor over your Lusts, nor over any Sin there, being gone from the Light in your
own particulars; in which Light, if you believed and waited in it, you would
receive power to overcome sin; but you not believing in the Light, you believe
in him who leads you from the Power of God into sin, and there he persuades you
that you must live (in sin) so long as you live upon the Earth; and you have
believed and received this Doctrine of him, and you teach it to others, and so
are become the Devils Ministers, and so you deny the end for which the Son of
God was made manifest, which was to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to take
away sin, 1 John 3.8. Mat. 1.21. and yet many of you feed your selves with
hopes of Life and Salvation, but your hopes are vain and will perish; be not
deceived, God will not be mocked, for such as you sow, such shall you reap,
Gal. 6.7, 8. Ye that live after the flesh, fulfilling the lusts thereof, you
shall surely dye (if ye repent not speedily) Romans 8.13. and you that sow to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption; The day of the Lord hastes greatly,
wherein you must give an account unto him, who will judge you righteously, and
reward you according to your deeds done in the Body; and all you who have been
slothful, and have hid that in the Earth which the Lord gave you to profit
withal, you will be turned into utter darkness, Mat. 25.30. John 12.35.
Therefore while you have the Light, believe and walk in it, lest thick darkness
come upon you, even such darkness as may be felt; the day of your Visitation
prize, lest the things that belong to your peace, be wholly hid from your eyes:
Consider there is a time when the Candle is lighted, and when you may see (if
you search with it) what is in the house; but mark, this time will not always
continue with the wicked, for the Candle of the wicked shall be put out, Prove.
24.20. Yea, the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3.
Therefore cease from your dark imaginations, which several of you have got
into; for whosoever follows the imaginations and thoughts of his own heart
(which all who believe not in the Light do) they run on in darkness, and know
not whether they go; and such are under the woe, putting darkness for Light, and
Light for darkness, calling the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of Error, and the
Spirit of Error, the Spirit of Truth, Isa. 5.20. as all the world do, who lie
in wickedness, and hate the true Light, which lights every man that comes
into the Word; which Light reproves you for your wickedness; and this Light you
call a Spirit of Delusion and Error; and you say, that those who are guided by
it, are deluded and led into Error: Oh! take heed of Blasphemy against the pure
God, who is Light; Mark, the Spirit of Error, what it is, and what it leads
into; it is that which abode not in the Truth, and it is a Murderer, and was so
from the Beginning; and they who walk not in the true Light, they walk and are
guided by this Spirit, and some by it are led to murder, some to steal, some to
be drunk, to swear, to lie, to cheat and cozen one another, to fight, to game,
and some it leads into vain laughter, foolish jesting, corrupt communication,
cursed speaking, wantonness, lust, whoredom, fornication, and into
covetousness, [which is Idolatry] into pride, variance, strife, railing,
backbiting, envy, wrath and malice, false accusing the Innocent, and into all
manner of ungodliness, into feigned love, self-seeking, dissimulation,
hypocrisy and feigned flattery, and to hate the very appearance of Truth, Ephesians.
4.29. and 5. Gal. 5.19, 20. Now examine with that which reproves you for sin in
secret, and it will let you see that you bring forth many of these cursed
Fruits beforementioned, and so are deluded and guided by the Spirit of Error;
now the true Light [which lights every man that comes into the World] comes
from the Spirit of Truth, and that is the Truth, and it witnesses against all
these evil deeds beforementioned, [which are out of the Truth] and they who
believe in the Light [which makes manifest sin and evil] and wait in it, they
receive power from him from whence the Light came, John 1.12. to abstain from
evil, and to overcome sin and evil, [and this I witness] and that Spirit which
tempts the Creature to evil, is the Spirit of Error: So we who believe in the
true Light, which is the manifestation of the Spirit of Truth, which is given
to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. we by it are led out of Error and
Delusion, into the perfect Truth of God, and to act those things which are
well-pleasing in his sight, Mat. 11.29. they being learned and wrought in the
Light which comes from the Son, in whom the Father is well pleased, Joh. 3.21.
and this true Light in us is our Guide and Teacher, and this brings us who wait
in it, to understand the Scriptures of Truth; which was given forth from the
Spirit of Truth, and it brings us into that which the Scriptures speaks of,
into the Life and Power of God and to witness that which the World talks of;
for they will talk of Faith in Christ Jesus, though they witness not what they
speak: but we who believe in the Light, are made (by the power of God) Children
of the Light; and we witness Faith in Christ, which Faith purifies our hearts,
and gives us victory over the World, Act. 15.9. 1 John 5.4. and the Light leads
us into meekness, into soberness and love unfeigned, into holiness and
uprightness, into sound and pure Judgment, into Mercy, into Patience, when we
are reviled and persecuted (and at all times) into long-suffering and Truth in
the inward parts, to do unto all men, as we would they should do unto us; yea,
it leads us who abide in it, into all Truth, Joh. 16.13. and this is not of our
selves, for it is the free Gift of God, who freely gave his Son for a Covenant
of Light, which ligheth every man that comes into the World; and we who have
received the Gift of God (the Light) by the Gift we are brought to bring forth
these fruits, which are contrary to those which the Spirit of Error leads the
Children of disobedience to bring forth, Gal. 5.22, 23. For although we the
Children of Light, are accounted to be in Delusion and Error, Gal. 5.22.23.
yet it is but by you who bring forth the Cursed fruits, which the Spirit of
Error leads you to bring forth; so in the Light, Life and Power of God we
stand over all false Accusations and Reproaches, and Persecutions, and in the
patience of Gods Lamb we bear them all, and our love goes forth to your Souls,
who wilfully oppose your selves, and we declare unto you that the
long-sufferings of the Lord toward you, is to draw you to Repentance, Romans
2.4. and I have directed you to that which will show you, what you ought to
repent of.

Therefore consider your ways speedily, all you that forget God, lest he tear
you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22. for verily, this
I declare unto you in the presence of the Lord, that if you go on and continue
in stubbornness and Rebellion against the Pure God, and despise his love, and
reject his counsel, and still refuse to hearken to the Light of his Son in your
Consciences (which reproves you for Sin, and is freely given to you, to lead
you out of Sin unto God, if you wilfully do not resist it) Mark, when the
measure of your iniquity is filled up, then will he arise upon you at unawares
in his fury, and Wrath, and Indignation, Mat. 24.50.51. and his eye shall not
at all pity you, but he will bring his Plagues and Righteous Judgments upon
you, which shall consume you both root and branch, if you will not be gathered
in the day of his long patience and forbearance, which is the day of your
Visitation, wherein you may come to know the things belonging to your peace, if
you do not wilfully resist the Power that is offered and committed unto you;
But if you resist the Power, then the Lords righteous Judgments will assuredly
come upon you, and you will receive to your selves Condemnation; and if you
continue in your wickedness until the day of your visitation be past, then
shall the Light in all your Consciences (which has oftentimes showed unto you
your evil deeds) arise and witness to the Judgments of God that they are just,
Zek. 2.7. so whether you will hear or forbear, Remember you are warned in your
Life time.

By a Friend to your Souls, and a Lover of the Creation of God, GEORGE FOX, the
Younger.

A few Queries to such Professors as stumble at the Light, the Word, the
Kingdom and Spirit of God within, and tell People that none can be free from
Sin in this Life, and yet say that they own the Scriptures.
1. Qu. ARE not all by Nature Darkness, and does not the Light shine in
Darkness, yea or nay?

2. Qu. Can any come to see themselves to be Darkness, but with the Light which
shines in the Darkness, yea or nay.

3. Qu. Is there any way to come out of Darkness and Death, and to receive
Life, and to be made Children of the Light, but by believing in and following
of Jesus Christ the true Light (which lights every man that comes into the
World) yea or nay?

4. Qu. Must not all be turned from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power
to the Power of God, before they can receive remission of sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified, yea or nay?

5. Qu. Can any come into the true Faith (which purifies the heart, and gives
victory over the world, without which none can please God) but by hearing the
Word of God, yea or nay?

6. Qu. And is not Christ the Light, the Word of God; and is not Christ the
Light, the Author and Finisher of the true Faith (which saves and justifies)
yea or nay?

7. Qu. And is not the Word nigh in the Mouth and in the Heart, that men may
obey it and do it, and is not Christ the Light, the Word, that Prophet, which
all that hear him not are to be cut off, yea or nay?

8. Qu. And is it not Christ the Word, which discerns and reveals the thoughts
and intents of the heart; and is not he the ingrafted Word which is able to
save the Soul; and is not he the Grace of God which brings Salvation, and is
sufficient (which has appeared unto all men) and is not he the Word of God's
Grace (which is able to build up and keep from falling) which People are to be
commended unto, yea or nay?

9. Qu. And is not God Light, and is not the shining of him in the hearts of
People, which gives them the knowledge of himself in the face of Jesus Christ,
yea or nay?

10. Qu. And is not Christ the Light, the hope which purifies as God is pure
(which Anchors and stays the Soul) to be known within; and are not People
tossed like a Ship (in a tempest) without an Anchor, till Christ the Hope be
felt within, to stay and Anchor them; and is not Christ within the Hope, a
Mystery which has been hid from Ages and Generations, and are not all they in
the reprobate state, who know not Christ within them, yea or nay?

11. Qu. And is not God's Kingdom Light; and is it not like a little leaven
that is hid in Meal, and as a grain of Mustard Seed that is sown in the Earth,
and like a Pearl hid in the Field, or like good Seed sown in the Field, both on
stony, thorny, highway, and good ground; and is not the world the Field, where
the Seed of the Kingdom is sown; and is not the world in man's heart; so, is not
Gods Kingdom within men, yea or nay?

12. Qu. And is not the manifestation of the Spirit given to every man to
profit withal; and do any worship the Father of Truth aright, but those that
worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, and is not the Light the Truth, yea
or nay?

13. Qu. And is not Christ the Light, that Word which reconciles to God; and is
it not he that must open the understandings of men, before they can understand
the Scriptures, and are not People in Error, and in jangling and strife about
the Scriptures, till Christ the Light, the Spirit of Truth, the Power of God
(from whence Scriptures were spoken) be known and owned to guide and lead them,
yea or nay?

14. Qu. And is not this the Cause of so many Sects and Opinions, and Divisions
as are, and of such strivings as are about Scriptures and Religions, because
People know not, or own not the Spirit of Truth, (from whence Scriputures were
spoken forth) to lead and guide them; and is it not like that People should run
into Sects and Opinions, and Divisions and Strife, if they know not, or own not
the Spirit of Truth to guide and lead them; and if the Spirit of Truth were
known and owned to guide and lead them, would it not lead and guide them out of
Sects and Opinions, and Divisions, and Strife, and would it not bring People to
be of one heart, and of one mind, and into Unity with God, and one with
another, and with the Scriptures, yea or nay?

15. Qu. And does not Christ the Light, the Spirit of Truth, for Sin, Condemn
Sin in the flesh; and must not that be owned which makes manifest, reproves and
Condemns Sin in the flesh, before the Ministration of Life and Peace can be
witnessed, yea or nay?

16. Qu. Is not the Unity of the Spirit the bond of Peace; and must not People
come into Unity with the Spirit, before they can come into true Peace; and does
not the Spirit of Truth reprove men for Sin who live in it; so must not People
come out of Sin, before they can come into Unity with the Spirit, and so into
true Peace; or has the Spirit any Unity with Sin, or is there any true Peace
to the wicked, who live in Sin, yea or nay.

17. Qu. And is not Christ the Light, the Word, the Rock of Offense, and the
stone of stumbling unto the disobedient, in whom the Prince of the Power of the
Air rules; but is he not Elect and precious to them that believe and obey him;
and is it not he that rules in them, and leads and guides them in the way of
Peace, yea or nay?

18. Qu. Do not as many as believe in the Light receive Power to become the
Sons of God; and are not those the Sons of God who are led by the Spirit of
Truth, and are not those that do not believe in Christ the Light, nor are
guided by the Spirit, bastards and not sons; and are they not condemned
already, who do not believe, and is not the Light their Condemnation, yea or
nay?

19. Qu. And shall not Darkness (yea, great Darkness) come upon them, who do
not believe and walk in the Light, and shall not they stumble and fall, and be
broken, yea or nay?

20. Qu. And shall not they who believe and walk in the Light, be made Children
of the Light, and be kept from stumbling and falling, and shall not they have
fellowship with the Father and the Son (from whence the Light comes) and one
with another; and does not the blood of Christ cleanse them from all Sin, yea
or nay?

21. Qu. Can any have fellowship with the Father and the Son, and the Saints in
Light, but those that walk in (and are guided and led by) the Light of Christ
Jesus, which he has enlightened them withal, yea or nay?

22. Qu. Can any deny themselves before they see themselves; and can any man
see himself but with the Light which Christ has enlightened him withal, which
makes manifest Self; and can any be Christ's Disciple, but he that denies
himself, and takes up the Cross, and comes after Christ the true Light; and
are not all they thieves and robbers which come before Christ the Light, and
are not such enemies to the Cross of Christ; and is not the Cross of Christ
the Power of God; and is not the Cross (and the Preaching of it) foolishness
to the wise of this World; and is it not a stumbling block to such as in words
profess they know God, but in works deny him yea or nay?

23. Qu. And they that commit Sin, and cannot cease from Sin, are not they of
the Devil, and are not they the Servants of Sin, and so free from
Righteousness, and have they not eyes full of Adultery who cannot cease from
Sin, are they not adulterated and whored from the Life of God, and though they
promise liberty to themselves and others, yet are not they servants to
corruption, and do not they live in the flesh, and are they not dead while they
live, and so out of the true Faith, and can such please God, yea or nay?

24. Qu. And they that believe in, and obey Christ Jesus the true light, does
not their faith stand in the Power of God, and does it not purify their
hearts, and give them victory over the World, and do not they who witness (in
the Life) the manifestation of the Son of God, also witness that he destroys
the works of the Devil, and takes away their Sin, and makes an end of
transgression, and changes their Nature which was subject to Sin, and makes
them partakers of his Divine Nature, and thoroughly purges and sanctifies them
with his Living Truth, and does not that make them free from Sin, and so make
them servants of Righteousness, and does not that make vessels of honor fitted
for the Masters use, and are not such dead unto Sin and alive unto God, and can
such live any longer in Sin, and having mortified the deeds of the Body through
the Spirit, shall not they live (but not to themselves, but to God) and are not
these Christ's; and have they not crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof, yea or nay?

25. Qu. Shall any man see the Lord without Holiness; and ought any to name the
Name of Christ, but those that depart from Iniquity; and is that the Faith of
God's Elect which does not purify the heart, nor give victory over the world
(but is without the works) or is not this dead Faith, and but the Faith of
Devils, and shall any be saved or justified by this Faith, yea or nay?

Consider of these things ye Professors, who stumble at the Light, and tell
People, that none shall be free from sin in this Life.

26. Qu. And when is the time, and where is the place, and what is the name of
it (if not in this Life) that men shall be made free from sin? (answer plainly,
that I may see how much ye differ from the Papists in this particular) or do ye
believe that corruption (and that which is imperfect) shall enter into Heaven,
and inherit in corruption, yea or nay?

Answer, these Queries in plainness, according to the Scriptures (if ye be
able) if not, then submit unto the true Light, which will let you see your
thoughts, your darkness, your unstableness and ignorance of the Scriptures, and
repent and believe, and wait in the true Light, that you may come out of your
thoughts and darkness, and unstableness and ignorance, into that which the
Scriptures declare of, to feel Christ the Savior (from whence the Light does
come) to redeem and save ye from sin, and to keep ye out of your own thoughts,
inventions and imaginations; that so your minds may come to be stayed and
settled in the Power of the Lord, which moves against sin.

By one who witnesses God, Christ, the Light, the Word, the Spirit of Truth
(and these are one) and the Kingdom of God within me; and so am come to the
thing that the Scriptures testify of, which was before Scripture was, in whom
the Scriptures ends, and the Tabernacle of God is witnessed with men, and his
presence is felt, which fills Heaven and Earth, and the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain him; Glory to him in the Highest. GEORGE FOX, the younger.

Honest, Upright, Faithful, and plain dealing with Thee, O Army of the
Commonwealth of England (so called) without flattery, in true unfeigned Love
to Thee; with something more particularly unto the Officers of the Army, and
those that join with them in the outward Government of this Nation: Wherein
Truth, Uprightness, and Equity is declared for; and Deceit, Wickedness,
Oppression, and Tyranny, is declared against.
AT your first going forth, there was a true honest Principle, which stirred in
the hearts of many of you, which convinced you of sin in the particular; and it
also showed you the desperate Wickedness, Cruelty, Tyranny, and Oppression,
which was upheld by unjust and unrighteous Laws and Rulers, whereby the honest
People were much Oppressed; and in several of you there arose a true Zeal
against this Abomination, and then I know your lives, and what you had, were
not dear to some of you, but were freely given up to do your Nation service, in
breaking down that Oppression and Tyranny which was brought upon it by the
Enemies of God, and it; and then a mighty courage and boldness arose in many of
you, against Oppression and Oppressors, and the Lord appeared with you against
them, because they were his Enemies, and sought to destroy the very appearance
of Truth; and then many of you were low and tender, and the hearts of such
People as had honest desires in them, and breathed for Liberty, they were much
affected with you, and the Cause you declared for, and vowed and engaged to be
true and faithful unto; and then the Lord appeared with you in the field,
giving you mighty Victories over your Enemies, that so he might make way for
his living Truth to be spread, which was then stirring in his People; and the
Lord weakened his Enemies before you, and ye saw his mighty hand therein, and
his mighty Work (in overturning those his Enemies) prospered in your hands (for
he made you instruments therein) until he had scattered his Enemies, and then
he gave you power and opportunity to accomplish that you had vowed and engaged
to do, and which his Light in your hearts had showed you, that you ought to
have done.

But you not keeping to that which first appeared in you, and made you sensible
of the Oppression that was upheld by the unrighteous Laws, Lawyers, and Rulers;
an earthly selfish Spirit, got up in many of you, which exceedingly increased
Covetousness and Pride in you; and then the greatness of your Pay, and the
spoil of your Enemies, and idleness, and the fullness of the Creatures, began to
be more delightful to many of you, than the Liberty you once declared for; and
then some among you began to see how deceit and hypocrisy crept in amongst
you, and appeared against it; but you whose hearts went after your covetousness
and self-seeking, soon stopped them, either by threatening them, or by advancing
them into greater places, or by turning them out of the Army; and thus you
began to back-slide, and then deceit began to wax strong among you, and several
of you began to settle your selves in the Earth, and in your Enemies Estates,
and then you little regarded the Oppression that others suffered under, you
being at ease your selves; and thus the Enemy beguiled you, and deceit wrought
in you, even as it did amongst some of the Sects and Opinions; for in many of
them there was a true Principle of God stirring once, which convinced them of
their own sins, and also showed the cruelty, wickedness, and deceit of the
Bishops and Prelates, and others, and caused them to witness against such; but
they not keeping to the measure of God in them, a worldly, carnal, deceitful
Spirit increased in them, and then they soon began to settle themselves in
another form, (without the Life and Power of God) which was as bad in the
nature and ground of it, as that they had witnessed against, only it had
another Name.

And in the same manner have ye acted; for ye going from the measure of God in
you, which showed you the cruelty of the Oppressors, which ye had fought
against; ye soon began to settle the same thing in the nature and ground of it,
among your selves, which you had sought against in others, only (in deceit and
hypocrisy) you gave it another Name.

And then truly great Wickedness increased among you, (which made the hearts of
the righteous sad) even the same as abounded among your Enemies (whom God
overthrew for their Wickedness) yea, for then many of you ran into Hunting,
Hawking, Bowling, Horse-racing, Drinking, and other vain Games, and Sports, and
Lusts, and Excess, and Pride, both in your Diet and Apparel; and your behavior
was grown so lofty, (many of you) that you became a burden to all
honest-hearted People, who once had an honest love going forth toward you; but
this your Wickedness caused their love to wax cold toward you, and many who
were true Friends, became ashamed of you, because of your backslidings.

And you raised up the spirit of enmity and bitterness in your Enemies more and
more against you, by these things which you ran into; yea, you gave them great
advantage by your backslidings, and some of you saw these things many times
with God's Witness; but ye not keeping to God's Witness in you, deceitful fears
arose in you, which stopped the mouth of Truth in you, when you should have
witnessed against the Wickedness that was amongst you; and your fears were,
lest you should have been turned out of your Places, and upon this account,
deceit was grown so strong among you, and treachery, that ye durst not speak
your minds one to another, for fear ye should be betrayed one by another, and
so turned out of your places: And thus deceit and a slavish spirit possessed ye,
even until you had lost your Dominion and Authority over your Enemies; and then
many of you became afraid to do that which was just (many times) lest your
Enemies should be more displeased with you; and in deceit ye bowed, (many of
you) even to your Enemies, and sought more to please them, than to do that you
had engaged to do; and then you turned out many of your Friends, and took in
many of your Enemies, and mixed your selves with them; yea, you turned out many
of your faithful Friends, only for coming into the Life and Obedience of that
which many of you professed in words, and pretended once that you fought for
the Liberty of.

O Army! this is plain Truth to thee, without flattery; and thus falsehood
overspread you, until the honest Principle that once stirred in you, was almost
destroyed, and then ye little regarded the sufferings of the Innocent, nor the
Oppression that was in the Land, but ye rather sought to establish your selves
in the honor and fullness of this World; but (poor creatures!) ye could not
settle your selves in a peace there, for your Enemies daily plotted against
you; and had it not been just with the Lord to have suffered your Enemies to
have destroyed you, because of your grievous backslidings and wickedness? O
consider it, consider it while ye have time, and prize the Lord's loving
kindness, that he should yet spare you, and yet give you time to repent.

And seeing the Lord has showed you your backslidings, with his eternal
Witness in you, and has begun to frustrate the designs of those that would
have cut you off in your backslidings; and ye confess (some of you) that you
are willing to take shame also to your selves wherein you have back-slidden;
therefore seeing it is thus, all mind that of God in you, which shows you
your backslidings, and believe, and wait in that, to feel that nature judged
and destroyed in you, wherein all this Wickedness and Deceit has lodged; and
keep in the fear and dread of the Lord God, that so ye may receive his pure
Wisdom, whereby ye may be ordered in the particular, and that ye in God's
Wisdom and Fear may come to Rule (in your places) for God, to be a terror to
evildoers, and an encouragement to them that do well.

And take heed of a selfish, earthly spirit in the particular, and of the
Honor, and Glory, and Gain of the World, (for that the Lord is against;) Oh!
there is a strong, deep root of it in many of you, which the Spirit of
Judgment and burning, and the Ax of God is to destroy; therefore wait to feel
its Work in you.

O Army! in thee was I several years together, in which time I saw the mighty
appearance of God with thee, even in the time of the outward War; and when the
War was ended, I left thee, in obedience to the appearance of the living God
unto me; who called me out of thee by his Powerful Word in my heart, through
which he has sanctified me, and has brought me into the life of that Truth,
which I, and many of you in the Army professed in Words.

And I can truly say in the Fear of the Lord, That my love has been, and yet
is tender toward you, for the good of your souls; and I have seen your
conditions, and have considered them in the Spirit of the Lord, and I cannot
flatter any of you, but must deal plainly and truly with you and all People.

Truly in many of you there is an exceeding lofty, proud, covetous, deceitful
nature; and in others of you, there is a lofty, proud, lustful, devouring,
wanton, vain nature; though many of you I know have felt a measure of the Power
of God; yet verily ye have so back-slidden, that iniquity has gotten a strong
hold and root in most of you; therefore ye must keep down to the Witness of God
in you, which searches your hearts, and will let you see what is there, that
so the Lord's righteous Judgment ye may all feel, and own it upon that nature
in you, which is contrary to the living God; for if ye keep not to the Spirit
of Judgment, I know whatever you have declared in words, that a selfish Spirit
will get up more and more to act in you: And verily Friends, if you keep not
your minds to the measure of the pure God in you, a secret boasting will be
ready to get up in you, of what you have done, and then you will soon forget
where you are, and your minds will run further and further into your
Commissions, and into your great Houses and Lands, which many of you have got;
and others minds will run into your Soldiers places, and ease, and idleness,
and these things will beguile you if take not heed, and you will soon forget
the Oppressions then, that others suffer under; and if ye should do thus,
verily the Lord God would soon overturn you, and break you to pieces.

Therefore all wait in the Light which shows you sin and evil, that so by it ye
may be brought to deny your selves, and to come out of the loftiness that ye
have been in, into the true humility, (which goes before the true honor) and
come into moderation, both in your Diet and Apparel, and in all things, and
this would answer the Witness of God in all People; and that being answered, it
would beget again a love in them toward you, which you lost when you went into
the excess. Therefore be sober, and watch in the Light of the Lord Jesus
Christ, which he has enlightened you withal, and believe in it, that so ye may
be preserved by it, out of the deceitfulness of this World, and that ye may be
kept faithful in your places, for the preserving of the outward Peace and
Liberty of the Nation, while ye feel a Freedom in that which convinces you of
evil, for the bearing a carnal Weapon; and know the manifestation of God's
Spirit in you, and wait to feel the motions of it, and be obedient thereto, and
this will bring you to do violence to no man, nor to accuse any falsely; but it
will bring you out of all such things, if you keep to it, and it will make you
to be content with such wages as may find you Food and Raiment, and things
necessary and convenient for your Places; and this you would then be worthy of.

So know the Lord has a mighty Work to do, therefore wait in his Light, that
ye may be kept truly sensible of your Places, and go not beyond them, but keep
in the Fear of the Lord, and wait to know what God requires of you in your
places, lest the Lord cast you out. So remember you are warned, and it is in
tender love to your Souls.

This following, more particularly concerns the Officers of the Army, and
Rulers of this Nation, than the Army in general.
Take heed of raising or continuing War with other Nations (in your own wills)
for to get your selves a Name, and to get their earthly Treasures, as some of
you have been instruments to do; for the Lord's hand has been, and yet is
against that, and he will not prosper you therein; therefore be you warned, and
know that this is a warning unto you from the Lord God; and seek peace, and
eschew evil, and learn to do well, that the Blessing of the Lord ye may come to
feel, and that this destroying of Creatures about Religion, and the Honor and
Gain of this World may cease.

And take heed how ye meddle with Religion, for that has split and broken many
Rulers before you; therefore set not up one S^ct, and throw not down another by
an outward Law and force, for that is wrong, and the Lord is against that; but
wait in his Light to receive his Counsel, that so ye may be kept in God's
Wisdom, and that therein ye may be instruments in the hand of the Lord, for the
keeping of the outward Peace of these Nations which are under your Command.

And take heed of harkening unto such, who in the King's time cried him up, and
ran to him to give them a Law to settle them in their Worship; and then again
in the Parliaments time ran to them, and cried them up, begging a Law to settle
Church Government, (as they called it) and then in the late Protector's time
cried them up, and Petitioned unto them with many feigned flattering words, and
begged a Law of them to settle them in their Worship; now these are the
deceitful workers, who teach for filthy Lucre, and are time Observers, who
through covetousness and feigned words, makes merchandise of the People; and
these quench the Spirit, and despise Prophesying, and change with the Times and
Governments, let them be never so contrary; and these are neither true to God
nor man, but are men-pleasers, and such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own
bellies; and these wanting the Power of God, run to the Rulers for an outward
Power to uphold them; these are whored from the Life of God in their own
particulars, and these seek to stop the Life of God where ever it appears;
therefore take heed of upholding or setting them up by an outward Law, lest you
become the Beast [mark that] which carries the Whore, which is to be taken
with the false Prophet and the old Dragon, (the Father of all unrighteousness)
and cast alive into the Lake.

Now the true Worship and Religion which stands in the Spirit, and in the
Truth, must be set up, and established, and upheld by the Power immortal, and
not by an outward Law.

But let your Law stop that in ( all wherever it appears) which wrestles with
flesh and blood, and fights with the creature about Religion; for this Spirit
could never make manifest the true Worship and Religion, neither would it
suffer others to do it, who had the Spirit of God, if it could stop them by an
outward Law or force; so that which fights, wrestles, and strives with the
Creatures about Religion, is not for Christ, but is ante against Christ and the
Apostles, who wrestled not with flesh and blood, but with the Power of
Darkness, and with the Spiritual Wickedness in high places; that so Wickedness
and Deceit might be destroyed in the Creatures, and that the Creatures might be
preserved; and their Weapons were not Carnal, but Spiritual.

But they that cry out to the Rulers for an outward Law to uphold their Worship
and Religion, they War not with the Spiritual Weapons, but with the Carnal, and
these destroy the Creatures, but cannot destroy the Wickedness; and these have
quenched the Spirit in their own particulars, and these would quench it in
others, and will not suffer him that has something revealed unto him, to
speak, but cry to the Magistrates, or to the rude multitude, for help, and so
flee to their Carnal Weapons; and those being stirred up by their Teacher, some
of them oft-times beat those that have the Truth to declare in their
Synagogues, and hale them out, and rail on them, and spit upon them, and
sometimes Buffet, Stock, Whip, Imprison, and mangle the Creatures, and so mar
and deface the Workmanship of God; and this has been the work of Antichrist in
all Ages when Truth has appeared against Deceit; and such cannot truly say,
Truth has prevailed on their parts, when they have thus Beaten, and Haled, and
Stocked, and Whipped,, and Imprisoned the Creatures; but Violence there at that
time has prevailed, by which they that have had the Truth to declare,
oft-times have been stopped from speaking it.

So let none do Violence to one another Persons or Estates, but let your law
take hold on them that would do so; but let them alone in their Profession, and
then it will soon appear who is in the Truth, and who are Ministers of Christ,
and of the Spirit; for those that are in tht Spirit of Truth, will assuredly
prevail over them that be in the Spirit of Deceit; and this will be manifested
soon, if there be no Violence done to them who be in the Spirit of Truth,
thereby to stop them from speaking the Truth, and then the Truth will reach
unto the Witness of God in Peoples Consciences; and then many who could nor
discern the Truth while there were such strivings and fightings with the
Creatures, will come to see and feel it; and then Truth shall prevail, and
deceit shall fall wherever it be, and what covering soever it has got, it
shall be ripped off; and he that is in the Spirit of Truth, and abides in it,
shall overcome all false spirits.

Now I know ye are not altogether ignorant, how that the lives and goods of
several in this Nation have been made a prey upon by the Priests, who have
robbed and spoiled both the Fatherless, Widows, and others; and have ^mprisoned
several unto Death, by a Law made by the Popish Kings, and since strengthened
by those that are called Protestants, concerning Tithes, and these before
mentioned have suffered thus for not paying Tithes. Now Tithes in the Law given
by the Command of God unto Levi, the changeable Priesthood, (who was to have no
inheritance among his Brethren) was for the maintenance of that Tribe, and also
for the Fatherless, the Widows, and the Strangers: but Christ being come after
the order of Melchisedech, he is the everlasting unchangeable High Priest, (not
made by a carnal Commandment, but by the power of an endless life; he offering
himself up once for all, put an end to the changeable Priesthood, which was
made by a Law which gave them Tithes; so this Priesthood and this Law was
changeable, this Priesthood could not continue by reason of Death; so this
Priesthood being changed and ended by Christ the unchangeable Priest, made by
the power of an endless life, there was a necessity also of a change and end of
that Law, by which the changeable Priests (who could not continue by reason of
Death) were made, which gave them Tithes; then Christ the everlasting
High Priest, made by the power of an endless Life, by the same Power he made
Ministers, and freely gave them gifts for the work of the Ministry, which was
for the perfecting of the Saints; and in the power of an endless life sent he
them forth, saying, Freely ye have received, freely give; and into what house
soever ye enter, and they receive you, ye may eat such things as are set before
you, for the workman is worthy of his meat. These were Workmen, and they
first planted a Vineyard, and then ate of the Fruit thereof; first gathered a
Flock, and then did Eat of the Milk thereof; sowed Spiritual things, and
reaped of their carnal things, unto whom they had sown Spirituals; Preached the
Gospel, and lived of the Gospel; these were not made Ministers by the will of
man, nor by an outward Law, neither received they their maintenance by an
outward Law, nor compelled or forced any to pay them; neither robbed, or
spoiled, or imprisoned they any that would not give them Maintenance; but they
had a necessity laid on them to Preach the Gospel, and they did so, and coveted
no man's gold, or silver, or apparel; and these sought not Peoples goods, but
them; and their diligence and care was not to make the Gospel chargeable, for
having food and raiment, they were therewith all content; and they received it
of such also (mark that) as did receive them and their Testimony, and so
oppressed no man.

But Paul foresaw that after his departure grievous and ravenous Wolves should
enter, that would not spare Flock; and Christ prophesied of them also; and
these entered before John's departure; and he warned the little Children (who
had the anointing abiding in them) to take heed of them, for they were the
Antichrists, and and went from the anointing in the particular, and so from
those that were in it; and then the murdering spirit got up in these, and the
World went after these who spared not the Flock, but killed those that had the
Testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of Prophecy; and these Antichrists
having lost the spirit, being ravened from it in their own particulars, and
having killed those that were made Ministers by the Spirit, who had freely
received, and freely gave; then they set up their Schools and Colleges, there
to make Ministers by the will of man, and then made a carnal Law, whereby they
had Tithes given them; for these had not freely received, neither would they
freely give; so Tithes among the Gentiles were set up by the devouring,
murdering spirit by a Law, by which Law they are yet upheld, (and not by God)
and they that yet receive the Tithes, are found in the devouring, murdering
spirit, (many of them) who have devoured many Peoples goods in this Nation, who
could not for Conscience sake pay Tithes, and have caused several others to be
kept in Prison until Death for the same. And this has been the work of
Antichrist, who has the sheeps clothing, the good words, but inwardly is the
ravening Wolf.

And in this Work many of the Priests of England have been found of late, as is
manifest by their Fruits; and they have the same unjust Law to oppress and
destroy the innocent still; notwithstanding some of you have pretended and
declared much to the contrary long.

Now many of the Priests, when we tell them of this their cruelty and
oppression, they will say, They are Ministers of the Gospel, and he that
Preaches the Gospel, God has ordained that he should live of the Gospel.
Well, we say so too, That we are Ministers of the Gospel, and he that Preaches
the Gospel, ought to live of the Gospel (which is the Power of God) and ought
not to have any outward Law to compel any to give him whereon to live. So this
is that which we (who have learned to do unto all men, as we would they should
do unto us) would have, That he that Preaches the Gospel should live of the
Gospel, and not on that which comes by the force of an outward Law; but the
Priests Maintenance is contrary to the Maintenance of the Ministers of the Law
or Gospel.

Therefore, first let there be no outward Law to hinder or restrain any People
from hearing any whom they believe is a Minister of the Gospel; nor yer to
compel any to hear any one whom they believe is not a Minister of the Gospel;
for an outward Law can but restain or compel the outward man, but the heart
none can restrain from Evil, nor compel to the good, but the Law and Power of
God only in the heart; therefore let there be a free Liberty for all people to
meet concerning their Worship, provided that under pretense of meeting to
worship, they meet not to Plot for the overthrowing of the outward Governors
by an outward Power; for if that can be proved and made manifest, truly, then
let such suffer by an outward Law.

And likewise, let there be no Law to compel any one to maintain any Teacher,
neither let there be any Law to restrain any one from giving any thing to their
Teacher, (for this is but equal) so let the People have Liberty herein, that so
this oppression about the Maintenance of Teachers may cease; And then it will
soon appear whether these Priests be Ministers of the Gospel, and whether their
Gospel will maintain them; yea, or nay.

But many of the Rulers have said, If we should not provide Maintenance for our
Ministers, then Preaching would soon fall, and then many People would become
Heathens.

I answer, He that is a Minister of Christ, the Power of God, which is the
everlasting Gospel, a necessity is laid upon him to Preach the Gospel, and woe
be unto him if he Preach not the Gospel: And he that is sent forth by Christ,
is not to take thought what he shall eat, or what he shall drink, or
wherewithal he shall be clothed; for his heavenly Father knows that he has
need of all these things, and provides them for those that he sends forth,
(without an outward Law to compel it) that so they lack not any thing.

Now that Ministry which the forcing an outward Maintenance for it, will cause
it to cease, [mark] this Ministry never did any good or service for God, nor
ever can (that is God's Truth unto you) at the furthest; this Ministry has but
brought People to draw near unto God with their mouths, and to appear to honor
him with their lips, when their hearts have been afar off, but this Ministry
could never bring any into the true knowledge of God, and Christ, whom God has
sent and freely given for a Covenant of Light; and without this knowledge, all
People upon the Earth are without the Life Eternal, and so are Heathens,
whatever they profess in words, though they may make long Prayers, and think to
be heard in their much speaking, as the Pharisees and Hypocrites did, whom
Christ called Heathens; therefore consider what a Ministry you have upheld, and
do uphold.

So let that Ministry fall which cannot stand without an outward Law for to
compel an outward Maintenance for it; for the Lord regards it not, but his hand
is against it, and against that which would uphold it, and both must fall
together.

So what is here declared concerning Religion, and the Maintenance of Teachers,
and the like, it is in the Equal Royal Law of Liberty, which is, To love thy
neighbor as thy self, and to do unto all as we would be done unto.

And so if the spirit which we are led and guided by (who are called in scorn
Quakers) be not able to prevail over that which we oppose in others as Error,
then let us be manifested to be in the Error, and let us fall; only let there
be a fair Trial, and let there not be such beating, and haling, and tearing,
and mangling, and stocking, and imprisoning of the Creatures as has been; for
where such things have been acted, many have been stopped at that time for
speaking the Truth, yet notwithstanding the Truth has prevailed over all, and
shall prevail. And if that can be proved against us truly, that we plot at our
Meetings, or at any other time against the outward Governors, to overturn them
by an outward power or force; then let us also suffer (as I said before) by a
just Law.

And if he that sends us forth, will not provide Food and Raiment for us, then
let us want; and if we cannot live of our Gospel which we Preach, without an
outward Law to compel us an outward Maintenance; and if our Ministry will not
stand without it, then let us want whereon to live, and let our Ministry fall.

And let none be compelled to uphold another's Meeting Place (concerning their
Worship) for that is Oppression; but let every one uphold their own; and that
sort of Professors that will not uphold the Place where they meet to Worship,
let their House fall, and then it will appear where the earthly Spirit lodges;
for they that compel others to uphold another's place of Worship, do but cover
and strengthen the earthly Spirit; therefore let there not be such havoc made
of Peoples Goods, as has been of late upon many, who could not give to the
upholding another's Meeting House; for that is out of the equality, in the
Oppression and Tyranny.

So come into that which is equal, and keep in that, and that will bring you to
act that which is equal and just unto all, and to break all outward Laws that
are not equal and just, but tend to Tyranny and Oppression; and truly there are
many Laws and Customs in this Nation, whereby the Innocent are oppressed; so wait
to feel the Power of God, that ye may Rule and Govern in that, (for the Lord;)
and feeling the Power of God, and keeping to that, it will bring you out of all
deceit and transgression in the particular, and so to stand over all deceit and
transgression in the general, and it will also bring you to judge righteously,
without respect to persons; and this will reach to the Witness of God in all
Consciences.

So wait to feel the higher Power to rule over the evil doer in the particular,
and to know and feel the Authority of God there, and then ye will come to rule
over all evil doers in the higher Power, even in the Authority of God, and then
that of God in all Consciences where ye come to Rule, shall answer to your
Government.

But if ye give way to the evil doer in the particular, and let him have the
Liberty there, [mark that] then that will cause the Just to suffer in the
particular, and then the same will give way and liberty to evil doers without,
whereby the Just without will come to suffer also.

Therefore keep to the Power of the Lord in your particulars, (you who have
felt it) and that will bring ye to do Justice unto all, without partiality; and
this will make you honorable in the hearts of the People, and then shall
Righteousness, Truth, Equity, Mercy and Justice, prosper over all, and be
exalted; and all deceit, unrighteousness, and unrighteous ways shall be
confounded. So remember, He that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the
Fear of God.

Something after.
ANd all ye that are Officers and Rulers now, who have tasted of the pure Power
of the Lord God, and have felt it stirring in you, against all Oppression and
Tyranny, whereby also ye were made to witness against the backsliding of
others, even to the losing of your Places, (some of you) some being turned out,
and others that could not stay for Conscience sake.

Well, keep to the Power of the Lord which ye have felt, and do not abuse it;
but wait in it, that ye may be kept low in his fear, that so those who are come
to see their backslidings, and do repent them, may come to have unity with
you, and you with them, in that, which kept you in any measure out of the
backslidings, and which has also brought them to see theirs, and to repent of
it; for that is but one in you both; it is even the measure of the pure God
which is given you to profit withal; therefore in that all wait to receive the
Wisdom which is from above, that in it ye may all be preserved and kept in
unity together, and that therein ye may be instruments for the settling and
preserving the outward Peace and just Liberties of the People of these Nations,
which are under your charge.

But verily, much of the Wars which have lately been entered into, have not been
for the Peace, Safety, and Well-being of these Nations, (for the Power being
lost, Pride and Lust was the ground of them;) Therefore all mind the Lord's
Wisdom and Counsel, that peradventure ye may find, and see a way how to stop
them, lest ye bring Enemies upon heaps, both upon your selves and these
Nations; for yet verily, breaking, breaking, overturning, and yet overturning
will be among all those that will not submit to the Counsel of the Lord, and
wait in his Light, to be led and guided in his Wisdom; for he will be known to
Rule in the Kingdoms of men, and he will exalt his own Name over all.

Many are your Enemies within and without, therefore be not high-minded, but
fear, lest they prevail over you.

The Lord is near unto all those that fear him, and trust in his Name, to
deliver them; but those that go out of his Fear, and trust in the wisdom or arm
of flesh, they shall be broken; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Given forth in the former part of the 3d. Month, 1659. By one who loves the
prosperity of the Truth, and the good and well-being of all Creatures, GEORGE
FOX, the younger.

A few plain Words to be considered by those of the Army, or others, who would
have a Parliament that is chosen by the voices of the People, to Govern the
three Nations: Wherein is showed unto them, according to the Scriptures of
Truth, that a Parliament so chosen, are not like to Govern for God, and the
good of his People. Also something to the other part of the Army, and the New
Committee, who turned out, or own the turning out of the late Parliament.
GReat are the cryings out of some of you of the Army, and the People of these
Nations, concerning the dissolving of the late Parliament, and it appears with
a pretense of a very great Zeal, that you have for Liberty, Equity, and
Justice, and the general good of the three Nations; and you appear in a great
fear, that if the People lose the enjoying of Parliaments, that then they shall
lose their Birthright and their Liberty, both as Men, and as Christians; and
that Equity shall be laid aside, and that the People must be Ruled over by a
Tyrannical Power of rebellious men, whose Wills must be the Laws that the
People must obey. But you say, if the Parliaments be chosen by the People, then
in effect, the People make their own Laws to be Governed by, because they chose
their Lawmakers themselves; and this is England's Birthright you say, and it
is just and equal that the People should en^oy it; and if they do not, then the
preservation of the People of God you say is lost, and all good Government will
cease, and the People will be made a Prey upon, and so the three Nations will
be ruined at once; and therefore seeing such things are like to come to pass,
if a Parliament chosen by the People be not upheld, some of you have said, you
will assert their Cause to the last drop of your blood.

Answ. Friends, It Is good to be zealously affected in a good Cause; and it is
good that the zeal be according to knowledge; and it is precious to have the
zeal moderated with the Wisdom of God; Therefore I exhort you in that Life and
Wisdom which is of Christ, my Master, (who came not to destroy men's lives, but
to save them) that you would mind the Dread and Fear of the Lord God, which is
the beginning of Wisdom; therefore be moderate, and in coolness consider these
things which I shall declare unto you, which in waiting upon the Lord, he by
his Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding opened in me, concerning the choosing of
Parliaments by the Voices of the People, and I know that you who truly desire
the good of God's People, and that Mercy and Justice might be established by
righteous Laws, (whereby Equity and Justice might b^ done unto all, without
respect of persons) may clearly see with God's Witness in you (which will
answer to my words) That you are not like to see your desires fulfilled, by a
Parliament that is chosen by the Voices of the People; mark the reasons; Because
the greater part of the People that are admitted to choose Parliament men, are
such as do not truly desire the good of God's People, whatever they may profess
in words; therefore it being in their Power to choose whom they will among
themselves (as it is) because most Voices carry it; they will choose such men,
as are like minded with themselves; that is plain, and according to the
Scriptures, for the World love their own, as says John; and now for proof,
that the greater part are not such as desire the good of the Lord's People, I
would have you consider, how that the Scripture says, That the flock of Christ
is a little flock; and Christ says, Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way
that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it; but broad is the way
that leads unto destruction, and many there be that walk therein; and though
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved: Now if ye
believe these Scriptures, then may you see that a Parliament that is chosen by
most voices, are not like to act for God, and the good of his People; and it
has been the complaint of the soberest and honestest men in several Counties,
when they should have chosen Parliament men, that they could not choose such a
man as they judged would act singly for the good of the People of God and the
Country, because they were over-voted by the wild disaffected People, who
sometimes have been stirred up by their Priests, to vote for such a man as the
Priests knew would act for their covetous, oppressing self-interest; and in
some places some great proud men, who desired to be in Authority, have feasted
the People, and sent Gifts to them with flatteries, thereby striving to get the
People to vote for them, promising them to stand for their Liberties, when it
has been but to serve their own self ends, and thus the People have been
deceived; and if at any time in some Counties and Places, the honest sober
People have chosen some honest-men to serve in Parliament, yet there being so
many in the Parliament that have sought their own Honor and Gain, that such
men as were honest, and would have made just Laws, and have acted for Equity
and Liberty, they have been hindered; because what is done in Parliament, is
done by most voices also, and the honest party in the Parliament having been
the lesser party, have been over-voted also: The Light in your Consciences will
witness that these things are true.

And whereas it is said, That it is England's Birthright, that the People
should choose their own Lawmakers.

I answer, Then many thousands of men in England have been wronged of, and kept
long from their Birthright; for such as are not Freemen of some Corporations,
or have not Free-land of their own, are not permitted to choose Parliament men,
(mark that) though they be far more honest and understanding men than many that
are Free of such Corporations, and have such Land; so that it is but a part of
the People that must choose Lawmakers: And further, he that has Free-land
worth forty shillings by the year in several Counties, he may give his Voice in
several Counties where his Land lies, for several Parliament men, when as he
that has Land but in one County, cannot have the same privilege, though he be
a far more honest man; and he that is a Freeman of that Corporation, that finds
a Parliament man, or men, and has Free-lands in the Country also, he may choose
both in the one, and other; but he that is not Free of such a Place, he may not
have the like privilege, though he be more honester than the other: And this
arose from the same ground, that negative Voices arose from; and it has been
the Manner and Custom of England, to call and choose many wise men, after the
flesh, and many mighty and Noble men (so called) to be Parliament men, that so
we see the calling and choosing of Parliaments in England, has been exactly
contrary to God's calling and choosing: Read 1 Cor. 1.26. (and therefore such
Parliaments are not like to act for God, and the good of his People, but
against them) But that which God has called and chosen, shall confound and
bring to naught the Wise, and the Mighty, and the Noble things (so called of
the World) (and this the Lord will bring to pass) that so no flesh may glory in
his presence: Read 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. And likewise the choosing of Parliament
men, according to the Custom of England (which is called its Birthright)
stands in respect of persons, and not in equality; for the rich, covetous,
oppressing men, who oppress the Poor, they have the only power to choose
Lawmakers, and they will choose to be sure, such as will uphold them in their
Oppression; and the poor man that is oppressed, though he have no power allowed
him to choose, yet he must be subject to the Laws which they make who are his
Oppressors, or else he is accounted a Rebel; so what right think ye is the
Oppressed like to have, when his Oppressors choose the men that are to be Judges
of his Cause: and thus the rich men oppress the poor, and draw them before
their Judgment seats, as they did in Jam^s his days, Jam. 2.6. These things
being considered, ye may see the unequalness and partiality that has been in
choosing of Parliaments, according to England's Custom, and how unlike it is
that a Parliament so chosen should make England a free Nation, seeing the great
Oppressors of the Land ( viz.) Priests and Lawyers, and the great wicked,
covetous, persecuting men, are so much concerned in the choosing them; so that
if Parliaments so chosen should continue, the People of the Lord are not like
to be set free from their Oppression, (though Parliaments and Rulers have been
made to do many good things by a Power which many of them scarce knew) but the
Lord has a further thing yet to do in the Nations, than either Protectors or
Parliaments would submit unto; therefore the Lord has thrown them by, but they
had first a day of trial given them, and now is the Lord trying others: and if
they will not do his Work, in breaking every yoke, and letting the oppressed go
free, God will assuredly break them with a greater destruction than came upon
those before them. Therefore let your moderation be known unto all men, for the
Lord is at hand; and thirst not after blood, lest the Lord give ye blood to
drink; and we know that Kings, and Protectors, and Parliaments have made fair
pretenses, and have given themselves fine Titles, and have pleaded that they
had a just right to, and a necessity for their Authority, and sought to get
into the affections of the People by smooth words and large promises, to carry
on their own design, but their hearts were not right before the Lord; and
therefore he broke them, and their Titles; and know that the People that fear
God, they matter not Titles and high Names, but they look for righteous actions
to be brought forth; and many see that a Parliament that was chose by the most
voices of the outwardly rich People, were not like to act righteously; and
therefore they are willing to wait to see what the Lord will do by others; and
we see that People have been in great Blindness, in contending for Parliaments
so chosen; so let this Wisdom be learned and lived in, which is better than the
strength of fools, who often perish in their passion and folly.

And now Friends in the Army and Committee, that have turned out the
Parliament, Dread ye the Lord God, and mind the equal, just, noble Principle of
God in you, which has stirred against Tyranny and Oppression, and make it not
your business to declare only for Freedom, as some before you did, and did not
the thing they declared for; but in the Fear and Wisdom of the Lord, go ye on
to act for the good of all his Creatures; and seek not your own Honors, but
singly do the same, both for your Friends and Enemies, that you would have them
do for you, if they were in Authority as ye are; and until ye come to this, ye
are not like to prosper; the Lord abhors the lying, flattering, double,
deceitful tongue and heart; and the People also have been wearied with fair
words, because the actions have been wanting that should have accompanied the
said words.

Remember how you have cried out against the Oppression of a forced Maintenance
for Teachers, and now ye are tried, and have Power given you to break that
Oppression down, which some of you I say have desired others to do; therefore
abuse not your Power, but leave the People free to maintain their own Teachers;
(mark) The Ministers that Christ sends forth, they have no need of you in this
particular, as to provide Food and Raiment for them, for their Heavenly Father
knows that they have need of those things, and provides it for them without an
outward Law to compel it, that so they lack not any thing; and that Teacher
that will not consent to this, he serves not the Lord Jesus, but his own
Belly, and that is his God; and such a one can never profit the People, and
(mark) if ye should take away Tithes, and Command by a Law any other
Maintenance from us for Teachers, that would be the same Tyranny and Oppression
in the nature and ground of it, that Tithes were, and we must bear our
Testimony against it also, and our Lives, or Estates, or both, must yet suffer;
therefore if ye do thus, you leave Us in the same Bondage as before: And let
Laws be provided, that are righteous, just, and equal, according to that of God
in the Conscience; and let such be empowered to execute them that will hear and
determine Causes freely, according to righteousness; and let causes of
difference between man and man be heard in every County, and when by plain
proof of two or three witnesses (without transgressing Christ's doctrine) it
come to be manifested who have done the wrong, then let the Executioners of the
Law be empowered to cause the party or parties, to restore for the wrong that
is done according to Equity, that so this abominable Oppression about the Law
and Lawyers may be broken down; and thunder down all ungodly gamings, and
shows, whereby the foolish wild People are cheated of their moneys, and spend
away their precious time to the dishonor of the pure God.

And let the People of the Lord have their Liberty, to speak his Word freely,
where and when his Spirit leads them and gives them utterance; and let the Law
take hold on such as would wrong any man's Person or Estate.

And let the dread of the Lord be upon your Spirits; and wait in his Light, to
receive his Wisdom, that therein you may be ordered in the particular, and in
it order all things to his Glory, that ye may remove all that which is
standing, which is contrary to the Will of God.

And meddle not to establish Religion and Teachers by an outward Law, for
verily if ye do, ye will be broken; let that alone to Christ, whose work it is:
Consider all that went before you of late years, that would be meddling with
such things, the Lord broke them to pieces, and they were warned in their day,
as ye are now. And let not your many Victories which ye have obtained, nor your
being preserved in so many overturnings (wherein ye have been made
instrumental) nor your strength, courage, nor wisdom, puff ye up; for thus
says the Lord God, even as earthen vessels are in the hands of a Potter, (who
has power to dash them one against another, until they be broken, or to break
them in pieces with another thing, that appears more weak than they) even so
are you in my hand, says the Lord, and I can confound your Wisdom, and take
away your Courage, and smite you with faintness, and dauntedness of Spirit, in
the twinkling of an eye; therefore seek not your selves, for if you do, your
day shall be but short.

Remember you of the Army had Power once before to have acted for the good of
your Nation; but the subtilty in some who sought themselves (whom God has
since blasted) beguiled you, and (mark) some of you sold your power for
Commissions, and others for nothing but flattering words, and so betrayed your
own integrity, and the Cause of your Country; and now you have power again, do
not abuse it; serve not the lusts nor the self-interest of any man or men
whatsoever, but serve the Lord and your Generation faithfully: Mark, if you
consent to deceit, and make an agreement with death, through fear or any
self-end whatsoever, God will break that agreement, and bring shame upon you
for it. And Friends, there is a lofty, proud, self-seeking Spirit yet amongst
many of you, which if you cease not from, it will be the cause of your
destruction; and truly, if you provoke the Lord to break you, it will be more
heavy and terrible, than the breaking of those that were before you; therefore
let the Lord be minded, and linger not about things, but be valiant, and act
faithfully for the just Liberty of all, without respect of persons; and let
revenge be forgotten, and this will overcome your Enemies, and make you truly
honorable in the hearts of all People. This is your day, prize it, and let
your deeds make it manifest to the People, that you have not sought your
selves, (in this which you have done) but the general good of all, and then you
will need the fewer words to prove your Enemies liars, who have accused you to
be self-seekers. And now woe is coming, both upon Teachers, Rulers and People
that are in the good words, but out of the good deeds and Life; and the Eternal
God, who is the Light, will break, shatter, confound and overturn, until the
good Life come up and be set on the top of all; and now the name of Truth only,
will be too narrow a covering, for it is the nature of Truth it self that will
be able to cover, and to be a sure hiding place in this the day of the Wrath of
the Lamb.

From a lover of the Truth of God, and all his Creatures, GEORGE FOX, the
Younger.

For the PARLIAMENT of England and their ARMY (so Called.)
YOur day into darkness is turned; the Sun is gone down over you; you have had
a large day, and Power given unto you, to have done the Will of God; but you
have abused the Power, and slighted your day; and you have refused to do the
Lord's work, and have sought to serve your selves, and not the Lord; Therefore
in Justice and Righteousness, is the day wherein you might have wrought for God
taken from you; and the thick dark night of confusion is come upon you, wherein
you are groping and stumbling, and cannot work; the Decree is gone out, and
sealed against you, and it cannot be recalled; you are not the men (as ye
stand) in whom God will appear to work Deliverance for his People, and
Creatures; (and yet deliverance shall come, but nor according to man's
expectation) But as for you, ye have rejected the Counsel of the Lord, and
grieved his Spirit, and he has long born you; yea, you are departed from the
Lord, and his presence is departed from you; indeed he has hewed with you (and
if you had been faithful to the End, he would have honored and prospered you,
and would have been your sufficient reward) ye were his Ax, but you have
boasted your selves against him; therefore as you have Beaten and Hewed, and
Broken others, Even so must you be Beaten, Hewed, and Broken; for you have
grievously provoked the Lord; And if he should now suffer that Tree, which ye
have cut to fall upon you, and to break part of you it were just.

O ye Treacherous, Wilful, Proud, Self-seeking People, who have despised the
Counsel of the Lord, and would not take warning though he has sent his
Prophets and Servants early and late among you, some of whom you have
imprisoned and despitefully used; what will ye do now? whom will ye now flee
unto for help? seeing ye are departed from the Lord, and are now rending and
tearing, biting and devouring one another, for proud ambitious self ends;
(Mark) if ye would now build again, the thing that you once destroyed, That
shall not be able to hide, or shelter you from the wrath of the Lamb; that way
whereby you think to strengthen your selves, thereby shall you make your selves
much weaker, and help forward your own destruction; you are now, but a rod,
remember your end, which hastens greatly; now breach upon breach, insurrection
upon insurrection, overturning upon overturning, heaps upon heaps, division
upon division shall there be, until he come to Reign, whose right it is; and
all Nations must bow before him, else he will break them with his Iron Rod.

They that trust in, or lean upon you for help, it is as if they leaned upon a
broken Reed which is not able to help it self, nor others; indeed you have been
made to do many good things, but you would not go through with the work which
God will have accomplished; and therefore are these things come upon you;
Therefore tremble and dread before the Lord, ye who have been as strong Oaks,
and tall Cedars; for now shall your strength fail you and you shall be weak,
even as the weakest of men; but if you would yet believe in the Light, and
truly submit to God's Righteous Judgments, many of you might come to witness
your Souls saved, in the day of the Lord; though many of your bodies are to be
thrown by (because of your grievous backslidings) as not counted worthy to be
the Lord's workmen.

There is a small remnant yet among you (for whom my Soul breaths) who may be
winnowed out; and if they will own the Judgments of the Lord, and truly and
thoroughly deny themselves, and follow his leadings, he will heal their
backslidings, and purge them; that so they may be instruments in his hand: But
they that will continue with you, in your sins, shall partake with you, of your
Judgments.

The Rod of the wicked, shall not always rest upon the back of the Righteous;
yet even as gold is tried, so shall they be, that they may be White and without
Spot, before the Lamb: but God will avenge their cause, and woe then will be to
their Oppressors, and then shall the Majesty, and Glory of the Lord fill his
People (who have long been trodden under) and they shall be the dread of all
Nations, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.

A Copy of this in Print was given to each Parliament Man, before General Monck
came into London, with his Army from Scotland: And it is now reprinted that
People may see that the Lord has fulfilled already, many of the words which he
gave unto his Servant and Prophet, to declare unto them, and that they may see,
that there has been a true Prophet's Message among them, and that People may
take heed that they slight not the Lord's Prophets as they did, whom he has
now broken.

11th Month (59) From one, who am made willing both to suffer, and to Reign
with Christ; even to follow him whithersoever he goes, George Fox the Younger.

A Noble Salutation, And a Faithful GREETING Unto THEE Charles Stuart, Who art
now PROCLAIMED KING OF England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.
I. Several wholesome, sound Exhortations, etc.
LET thy Moderation be known unto all men, for the Lord is at hand, whose
presence fills Heaven and Earth; and let such a Nobility appear in Thee, as
to try all things, and to hold fast that which is good; and either to read, or
to hear with patience before thou judge; for Wisdom becomes a King, and true
Reason, Solidness, and Patience, him that is a Ruler of the People. [Mark] The
God of Heaven has put into my heart to write unto Thee, and in tender love
both to thy Soul and Body, to lay before Thee several things, whereby thou
may come to see and consider, how the mighty Hand and Justice of the
Invisible God has been in these overturnings and changes, which have happened
in these Nations of late years, therefore consider these things; The Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, He is the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords,
and the whole Earth is his, and the fullness thereof, and he Rules over the
Kingdoms of men, and gives them unto whomsoever he pleases: Yea, he pulls
down one, and sets up another, and there is no overturning or changing the
Kingdoms, but it is either by his Commission or Permission; and the Lord does
not do any thing, neither suffers he any thing to be done, unto persons or
Kingdoms without a Cause (though he may do whatsoever he pleases) and who
shall call him to an account? Yet all his doings are righteous, and his ways
are just and equal altogether: And it is for the unrighteousness sometimes of a
King or Kings, and sometimes of a People, and other times of both, that the
Lord does break, or suffer a Nation or Nations to be broken; and when he
determines to break a People, or to change Governments (or to suffer such to be
done) in vain do men strive to preserve or uphold them? and the Lord may, and
does make whomsoever he pleases his Instruments, for to do his determined
Work; and when they have done his Work, then he may do whatsoever he pleases
with them; and many times his Instruments, when they begin his determined Work,
appear very contemptible unto many: Yet such speak foolishly, and without
understanding, who say, That such Instruments are too weak and cannot prevail,
seeing all power is in the hand of God, who can give Wisdom, and Strength, and
Courage, unto whomsoever he pleases; Yea, so much as may accomplish his Work;
and he very oft-times, by that which appears foolish, weak, and contemptible,
confounds and brings to naught that which appears to be Mighty and wise,
that no flesh should glory in his presence. And when his Instruments have done
his Work (and he determines to break, or suffer them to be broken again) let
them appear never so Wise, Bold and Mighty, yet vainly do they speak, who say,
Such a Wise, Bold and Mighty People cannot be broken, seeing the Lord can do
whatsoever he pleases; who suddenly can turn man's Wisdom into folly, his
strength into weakness, and his boldness into dauntedness of Spirit. Now such
things as these O King, come often to pass, and none of them without a Cause; and
they that are truly Wise, learn further, and get understanding through all
these things: Therefore is true Wisdom better than Strength, and a right
Understanding is better than an earthly Crown: Therefore O King, wait to feel
the noble Principle of Wisdom, which God has inspired Thee withal; for there
is a measure of it in Thee, though it has been hid, and that measure is the
Light, which Christ the Wisdom of God has enlightened Thee withal, which Light
in Thee is that which never had fellowship with darkness in Thee, or its deeds,
nor concord with the Devil or his Works; but makes manifest and reproves all
such things; which Light, being received in the love of it, and believed and
waited in, man becomes a child of it, and so it gives him a good understanding,
and opens an eye in him, whereby he comes to see the hand, and workings, and
appearances of the invisible God; and this Light is the free Gift of God, which
is come upon all men; which being rejected, and a man not liking to retain it
in his knowledge, he profesing himself then to be wise, becomes a fool, and
brings condemnation upon himself for rejecting that, which should minister all
things unto him pertaining unto Life and Godliness. Therefore O King, give all
diligence to receive the Gift which God has placed in thy heart, that so thou
may be acquainted with Wisdom, and that thou may be filled with
moderation, gravity, and patience, and come to a right understanding and
discerning, that so thou may rightly look upon things past, present, and to
come, and see them as they were, are, and shall be.

II. Concerning the overturning of thy Father, etc.
COncerning thy Father, and those that took his Part, There was an eminent hand
of God in breaking them down, and bringing them under; and God did it not
without a Cause; for the Iniquity in them provoked the holy God to anger, and
the hight and pride of their spirits grieved and pressed the Spirit of the Just
God; and after he had a long time born with them, and warned them with his
Eternal Light in their Consciences, yet they repented not, but still grieved
his good Spirit by many provocations, and waxed higher and higher against him
in disobedience; his anger then was kindled against them, and his indignation
waxed hot; and he arose in the fiery spirit of his jealousy, to ease himself
of his Adversaries, and avenge himself of his Enemies; and because the Living,
Wise, Eternal God (who made all the Nations of the earth of one blood, and is
no respecter of persons) saw that those that took part with thy Father, were
generally (according to outward appearance) accounted the wisest, richest,
noblest, and stoutest men (mark) and that they did glory in their Wisdom,
Riches, Nobility, Stoutness, and Strength, and vaunted themselves over those
that were made of the same Blood; He (the living God) did then appear in
contemptible Instruments, (as to outward appearance) as in Tradesmen,
Plough-men, Servants, and the like, with some others, whom I know thy Father's
Party made a mock at, and even scorned them as it were, and thought it too low
and too base a thing, to engage War with such a contemptible People; yet in
such, I say, did the Lord appear to carry on that Work which he had determined,
even to bring down the loftiness of man, and to stain the pride and glory of
flesh, and that thy Father's Party might have come to see that they were but
men, made of the same earth and blood that others were: And the Lord God
appeared mightily in those his Instruments, giving them Wisdom, Courage, and
Strength to manage a War against a far more Mighty and Wise People (as to
outward appearance) than themselves, and they prevailed daily against their
Enemies: And the affections of the People run forth and inclined toward them:
And God struck thy Father's Party with dauntedness of Spirit, and turned their
wisdom backwards, and prospered them not in the Field; but sometimes caused
them to Flee before their Enemies, and other times gave them into their hands;
and yet they repented not, neither did they humble themselves before the Lord;
and some fretted and strove, and some Blasphemed and Cursed, even for madness,
to see how they were Defeated; yet they strove in vain, for God was against
them, and they grew weaker and weaker, until they were even wholly subdued, and
brought under their Enemies, and given into their hands for a Prey; That so
they durst not scarce act, or speak any thing against their Enemies: And God
suffered Thy Father to be delivered into their Hands: And thus the Lord stained
the glory and pride of that People, which took part with Thy Father and Thee,
by a low and contemptible means, as to outward appearance; Though I do verily
believe, that those in whom God did appear against thy Father, thy Self, and
those that took that part, did act several things against you, beyond their
Commission they had from God, yet he did permit them: And in several of them,
who did engage against Thy Father and his Party, there was once a tender,
honest, good Principle, in the day wherein they were low; and there were true
desires in some of them, after a just Liberty, both as appeartaining to
Conscience, and in things betwixt man and man; and they were truly sensible of
many Oppressions that were in the Nations, both in matters of Religion, and in
the Laws and Customs of the Land; and they cried unto God when they were low,
and Vowed unto him (and engaged unto man) That if he would deliver their
Enemies into their hands, that then they would remove all Oppressions, and make
the People of these Nations a Free People, and that they should have their Just
Rights and Liberties, both as Men, and as Christians. Now after Thou had also
stroven against them (with a perfidious People, to wit, the Scots) and ye were
defeated; the Lord gave their Enemies so into their hands, that they had as
much outward Power in these three Nations, as they could desire; and they also
became a Dread and a Terror to some Nations about them: And they had Power and
Opportunity to have removed all Oppressions out of the Land; but alas,
Covetousness and self-seeking Lusts sprang up in most of them, and leavened
them; And when they had Rest and Fullness; they forgot the Lord, who had raised
them from a low degree; and they forgot the Oppression of their Brethren also,
and regarded not to pay their Vows to God and Man: But after a time the Chief
of them got into thy Father's Houses and Lands, and into Thine, and into some
of those that took your parts, and others they sold, and so thereby became
great in the Earth: And then their Lusts increased, and they grew wanton
against the Lord also, and boasted themselves over those whom they had
conquered; And some of them began to creep into those Places and Things
themselves, which they had cried out against in others; And so built and set up
the same Thing in, and among themselves, which they had thrown down, and
destroyed in another; only in Deceit and Hypocrisy, they got other Names for
them. Then several of the Army that were amongst them, when they saw their
Deceit and Wickedness; and that they did not intend the thing which they did
pretend, durst not for Conscience sake continue any longer amongst them; but
left them several years ago, and declared against them: And others since, that
feared the Lord, were turned out by them; so that in a short time many of them
became greater Oppressors and Persecutors, than those whom they conquered, and
so provoked the Lord to anger. Then the Lord raised up many Prophets and
Servants, and sent them amongst those who had acted thus treacherously; and
some also wrote unto them, and laid their Abominations plainly before them, and
showed them wherein they had erred, and exhorted them to Repentance; and
plainly showed unto them what the Lord required at their hands: And sometimes
were made to Reprove them sharply and plainly, and prophesied unto them, That
the Lord would confound and break them to pieces one against another, and
suffer them to be destroyed, if they repented not speedily: but they would not
hearken, but grew stiff-necked against the Lord and his People, and suffered
many of them to be Oppressed, and their Goods spoiled, and some of them to be
Imprisoned unto death in their Names: And thus they Rebelled against the Lord
more and more, and boasted of their Strength, and Wisdom, and Valor, and so
forgot how that it was the Lord that raised them up from a low degree, and gave
them Power over their Enemies: And thus they wrought grievous provocations in
his sight, so that then the anger of the Lord was kindled against them; and as
they forsook him, so he forsook them; and at length he gave them up to the
Counsels of their own Hearts, because they had rejected his Counsel: And then
they began to divide and split amongst themselves, and to betray one another
for self ends; and their courage began to fail, and faintness and deadness of
Spirit seized upon them; And having plunged themselves so far in Covetousness
and Lusts, the Cloud of Error grew so thick upon them, that they could not see
the Cause that they once were so zealous for: And when Confusion fell upon
them, and they groped like blind men, and knew not at what they stumbled;
neither knew they for whom, nor for what to stand; but sometimes cried up, and
engaged for one Thing, and shortly after cried against it, and threw it down
again; and some of them cried for one thing, and others brought forth another
thing; and so like Babel's builders (whom God determined to scatter) they
acted; and their Eye being blinded, they wrought their own Destruction; and few
of them saw it until it was come upon them; and them that did, were as men
amazed, and knew not how to help themselves. And thus the just hand of the Lord
came upon an Hypocritical, Deceitful, professing People, who in Words have made
a great professing that they knew God, but in Works they have denied him; and
therefore has the Lord taken away their strength for the present, and turned
their wisdom backwards, and stained their glory, that they also might come to
see what they were, and what the Lord did for them, and what they are fallen
from, that so happily some of them may come to find repentance, and to be humbled
under the Mighty Hand of God, and the Lord may heal their backslidings, and may
raise up his own Eternal Witness in them (the Tabernacle of David) which has
been fallen down.

III. Concerning Thy coming so far into Power again, etc.
NOw observe the hand of the Lord in thy coming so far into Power again, and
those who took part with thy Father and Thee. First, consider the cause of it
(in the fear of the Lord) and thou will find that it is because they unto whom
God gave such Power over you, were not faithful unto God, as has been said
before, but grieved the Spirit of the Lord with their hypocrisy from day to
day, talking for Liberty, but behold they brought forth Oppression, and so
became worser than you that went before them, who did not Profess so much for
Liberty in words: And this I know, that if they had been faithful unto the
Lord, thou and those called thy Friends, could not have come over them thus as
ye have done; Therefore let no man deceive thee, by persuading thee that these
things are thus brought to pass, because the Kingdom was thy own proper right,
and because it was withheld from thee contrary to all right; or, because that
those called Royallists are much more righteous than those who are now fallen
under thee; For I plainly declare unto thee, that this Kingdom, and all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, are properly the Lords, and that he may and does give
them unto whomsoever he pleases; and whenever he please, he may take them
away again, and give them unto others; and when he does thus, it is not
contrary to right: And this know, that it was the just hand of God in taking
away the Kingdom from thy Father and Thee, and giving it unto others; and that
also, it is now the just hand of the Lord to take it again from them, and bring
them under Thee; though I shall not say, but that some of them went beyond
their Commission against thy Father, when they were brought as a rod over you,
and well will it be for thee, if thou becom'st not guilty of the same
transgression now thou art brought over them; and this consider, that those who
are called thy Friends, who were conquered, have humbled themselves but little
under the hand of the Lord, but are still found to be in great transgressions;
and also consider the manner how this thing has been wrought, and carried on,
concerning the bringing in of thee again, that so there may be no fleshly
boasting; for the thing is plainly discerned by them whose eye is single, and I
shall declare it unto thee: Mark; The Army having acted so deceitfully, the
lusts and gain of the world blinded their eye, and they having so far provoked
the Lord, until his Decree was sealed against them, and he had determined that
they should be broken; after they had split among themselves, and turned from
one thing to another, and knew not where to rest, and the Lord suffered some of
them to rise up from among themselves to deceive the rest, and so they through
dissimulation (in professing to stand for those who had so eminently stood
against thy Father and Thee) got Power to weaken and turn out those that were
really against thee, (as disturbers of the Good Old Cause, as they termed it)
and so by little and little strengthened those that stood for thee; and thus
the deceived blind men provided a Rod for themselves, and so by little and
little wrought themselves under it, and it is just upon them; For the rod is
for the fools back. So let this be considered, that this was not carried on by
the stoutness of those that stood for thee, nor yet by a visible plain
downright dealing, but rather through the hidden mystery of deceit, which was
suffered to work against those whom God had determined should be broken, that
so by the same way whereby they had deceived others, which was by pretending to
stand for that which they did not intend: I say, even by the same way, they in
the end should be deceived themselves: So let none glory in what is done
concerning this thing, as if it were done by their Valor or Wisdom, though I
can truly say, the hand of the Lord has permitteed these things, and that for
the Cause before mentioned, and he will be glorified in all these Overturnings.

IV. Concerning the great danger thou art in, in thy coming in, etc.
ANd also, consider the danger that thou art in, in thy coming in as King of
these Nations, for it is exceeding great as things stand; and this has been
much upon me to lay before thee, and it is in tender love both to thy Soul and
Body; for I plainly see that if thou should come in upon the account of the
People called Presbyterians, if thou should refuse to bow to what they would
set up, or if thou should not satisfy the ungodly covetousness of their
Priests, there is several of them would be ready to serve Thee as they did thy
Father, if they were permitted. And if thou do come in upon the account of
those People called Old Royallists, (Mark) truly, though I do believe they
would abhor such a thing as to sell Thee, yet the iniquity of many of them is
so great, and there is so much Swearing, lusts and vanity amongst them, that
except they repent, they are not like long to prosper, but the hand of the Lord
will assuredly break them also. And furthermore consider, there are a deceitful
People in these Nations, for there are many thousands that now appear highly
for Thee in words, that if they could see a likelihood of a change, they would
appear as much or more against Thee: Therefore consider thy standing, and be
not high-minded, but fear, and take heed lest thou fall; and never go about to
Engage the People unto thee by Oaths, lest thou cause many to forswear
themselves; for truly this People, a great part of them are a perfidious
People, as they have manifested themselves, who one while have sworn for a King
and Parliament, and shortly after, they have sworn against a King, single
Person, or House of Lords; and shortly after they have sworn or Engaged for a
single Person again, and called one another Lords; and a little after they have
turned against that Government, and cried up a Parliament again; and now the
same People are generally crying up a King again; And truly those Rulers who
have imposed so many several Engagements upon the People, they have done
exceeding evilly therein: And how abominably have these dirty, deceitful,
covetous Priests acted in all these changes? O it is hard to utter their
deceit! who one while they have prayed for a King and Parliament, and when they
saw the King was likely to fall, and that he was no ways likely to maintain
them, then they turned against him, and prayed only for the Parliament, and
asserted their Authority, and cursed them that would not go out to help against
the Mighty. And shortly after when Oliver Cromwell had turned out the
Parliament, and set up himself, then they cried up (and prayed for) him, and
many of them began to assert his Authority to be just; and when he died, many
of these Priests began to address themselves to his Son, and fawned upon him,
that he might provide for their god, which is their belly, and they appeared to
be sorrowful for his Fathers death, and blasphemously termed him the light of
their eyes, and the breath of their Nostrils; and they told Richard that God
had left him to carry on that glorious Work which his Father had begun; And
some of these Priests compared Oliver to be like unto Moses, and Richard to be
like unto Joshua, who shall carry them into the promised Land; But surely these
blind Priests are yet in Egypt, the land of Darkness, and there are like to
die except they repent. And surely those that made Oliver, Chancellor of one of
their Universities, they hoped he should have continued longer in his place
than he did; But it is manifest that they are such as the Prophet said, Night
should come upon them, and they should have no Vision. And how soon did some of
them turn for a Parliament again, when the Army turned out Richard? And when
George Booth made a Rising, and they thought there would be a turn, then some
of them cried out against the Parliament, and began to curse such as would not
go out against them; And when George Booth was taken, then many of them began
to Petition to the Parliament, and to excuse themselves, that they had no hand
in that rising; And now they are generally crying up, and praying for thee, and
all this is for their bellies; therefore if thou will believe them, and trust
to their prayers, thou art worthy to be deceived by them; And all that will
uphold them in that state they are in, and compel others to maintain them, they
are not like to prosper, for the hand of the Lord is against them, and that
Scripture is fulfilled upon a great part of these Nations, like Priests like
People, who are given to covetousness and deceit, and will turn and appear for
any thing that is for their gain; Yet this I testify in the Lord, that such
Ministers as the Scriptures of Truth own, I own; And such a Maintenance as
Christ allowed his Ministers to take, I have unity with; And I know, that such
as are his Ministers, will be there-withal content, but such Ministers as will
not, they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and such I
cannot but declare against. Therefore now O King be Wise, and cleave unto the
Lord with thy whole heart, and he will teach thee to love thy Enemies, and to
do unto all men as thou would they should do unto thee, if they were in thy
Condition, and thou in theirs; and this is the Way for to prosper; and this
will Engage the Lord for to stand for thee; and also it will reach the witness
of God in all People, and thou would become honorable in their hearts; and
hereby they would be engaged and drawn unto thee more than by Oaths or force of
Arms; But if thou will not hear, and do the thing that is just and right in the
sight of the Lord, then will the Lord appear against thee; and when thou have
filled up thy measure, thou shall be assuredly broken; and then shall thou know
that God has spoken unto me. Since the writing of this before it could be
delivered, we have seen a Declaration put forth by Thee, by which in part this
is answered, which as this and the rest comes to be fulfilled, the Lord will
bless and prosper Thee.
And if thou do not speedily seek to stop this abounding ungodliness which
flows in this Nation (and which has much increased since there was a
likelihood of thy being brought in) verily an evident hand of God shall come
upon thee, which thou shall not in any ways be able to escape. Therefore
consider it speedily, for verily, the Mighty God is greatly displeased by
reason of the great wasting and spoil that is made of his Creatures, in a way
of rejoicing and triumphing concerning thee; O how is the Devil, the destroyer,
let loose in this Nation! and the streets thereof become like unto Sodom; and
Peoples mouths are filled with Oaths, and bitter Cursings; And they go
stammering and staggering because of Drunkenness, and sober People that fear
the Lord can scarce pass in the streets without being scoffed at, threatened, or
having violence done unto them, by those that appear for thee, who bitterly
will curse, and wish that which they call the Pox and Plague upon us, and the
next words cry out and say, God save King Charles: Oh consider these things,
and seek to stop them, least they become thy burden! And also when we have
been peaceably met together to wait on the Lord, and to hear and declare the
everlasting Truth, we have been abused, and part of our Houses and Windows
broken, and some of us knocked down and torn, as though they would have pulled
us limb from limb, and our blood drawn, knocking us down without respect had to
Age or Sex, and this they say thou will bear them out in, and they expect an
order, they say shortly from thee, either to banish or hang us all; and in thy
Name was I commanded and fetched out of a Meeting at Harwich, upon the first day
of this week, and haled to prison without being examined, and without a
Mittimus; and this was, because I was made in the Dread and Power of the Living
God, to cry aloud against the Cursing and Rudeness, which I then heard and
beheld amongst the People in the streets; and I was made to utter these words
and say, Woe, woe unto the Rulers and Teachers of this Nation, who suffer such
ungodliness as this, and do not seek to suppress it: And for this was I put in
Prison, O King, for these things will the Lord God visit, and if thou seek
not to stop them, thou will feel God's hand for it; Verily I declare unto Thee
in the fear of the Lord, I never heard of, nor beheld so great profaneness, as
I have done within these few weeks past: Oh! it is hard to utter how much Wine
and strong Drink has been devoured in waste, by Peoples drinking of healths
unto Thee! some upon their knees, and some otherwise, even until some have been
so drunk, they could neither speak or go right; and what abundance of Wood has
been wasted and devoured in making of great Bon-fires (as they call them) which
they have done as they say to rejoice because of Thy coming; Yea even such
great Fires have been made upon this account, that they have been dangerous
both unto Cities and Towns; and such noises have been heard of late in Cities
and Towns, as scarce ever have been the like, by shooting of Guns both great
and small, and by ringing of Bells, and by People singing and laughing, and
shouting like riotous mad men, and the Streets in several places strown with
flowers, and the like; and this is done in rejoicing concerning Thee: And what
abundance has been devoured in Feasting, and Banqueting, and abominable
rejoycings? And also, consider in what great need poor People are of such
Creatures as have been thus devoured, and consider what can be the end of all
these things; now the Lord is my witness, when I have seen and felt this
ungodliness, a tender pity has arose in me toward Thee, because I have beheld
the danger that Thou art in, which is exceeding great: Let no man deceive Thee
by persuading thee, that Thou art in a safe Condition, because the outward
strength of the Nation appears to be at thy Command; For consider this, Oliver
Cromwell, and his party had as much of that strength, (or more once) as Thou
have now, and those called thy party, were fallen as much under them, as they are
now under Thine; And yet consider how their strength was taken from them, and
how it vanished away like smoke: Yea, the Lord is righteous and powerful, and
if he speaks but the Word, it must be fulfilled, and there is no People too
strong for Him; for all Nations in comparison of Him, are but as the drop of a
Bucket, and as the small dust, which his breath scatters as he pleases; and
truly, God is highly provoked, therefore take heed what thou do.

V. Concerning Religion, and the spirit of Persecution.
ANd as concerning Religion, I exhort and warn Thee, in the Name and Fear of
the Lord, to take heed that thou bind not the Consciences of any, and that thou
suffer no other means to be used about Religion, but what the Apostles used;
for all this killing, and imprisoning, and persecuting about Religion, the Lord
abhors it; Yea, the Papists killing, and imprisoning, and persecuting of the
Protestants, and the Protestants killing, and imprisoning, and persecuting of
the Papists, and others about a Form of Religion, these things are of the
Devil, the destroyer, in them both, and not of Christ, who came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them: And consider, Cain was the first Murderer about
Religion, who slew Righteous Abel, and Cain was for it a Vagabond: And the
Vagabond Jews persecuted Christ and the Saints; and the Saints, since Christ
suffered without the gate by him and for sinners, used no persecution about
Religion, but Christ said, that inwardly ravening Wolves should come: And Paul
prophesied, that after his departure, grievous and ravening Wolves should come,
who would not spare the Flock; and before John dyed he saw them come, and said
to the Saints, Little Children, ye have heard in the last times, that
Antichrist shall come, (mark) even now (said he) are there many Antichrists
already come, whereby we know that it is the last time: So mark, these
Antichrists killed those that held the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit
of Prophecy: And here the Whore adulterated from God, got up, and she drank
the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, and the Kings of the Earth
committed fornication with her, and drank her Cup; And she sat upon Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues, and People; So all this imprisoning, and killing, and
whipping, and stocking, and stoning, and mangling of the Creatures about
Religion, is practiced among the Heathens, and the Antichrists, the Apostatized
Christians, who are gone out from Christ, and the Apostles Spirit and Doctrine;
for they wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with Principalities and Powers,
and Spiritual wickednesses in high places: So they fought against Spiritual
wickedness, and not against Creatures, and the Weapons of their warfare were
not Carnal but Spiritual, (mark) they used no imprisoning, stocking, whipping,
stoning, hanging, burning, banishing, or mangling of the Creatures, to persuade
or turn them to their Religion; neither did they use any other force (to turn
people to the pure Religion) than that which proceeded from the Invisible Power
of God's Eternal Spirit in them, which struck at the Spiritual wickednesses,
and the evil thoughts and imaginations which were exalted in People above the
knowledge of Christ; and so they sought to bring the wickedness into Captivity,
and not the Creatures; but to bring them into Liberty, by turning them from
Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power, into the Power of God; and them that
had known the Truth, and turned from it, and became Heretics, after the first
and second admonition (if they would not hear) they rejected, knowing that such
were condemned in themselves. But they did not give order to kill such, for
that had been the way to have sent them headlong (as one might say) unto Hell:
And as for such as withstood the Apostles, and would not receive the Gospel,
but opposed the Truth and themselves, after they had gently and patiently dealt
with some, and taught and instructed them concerning the Kingdom of God; and
reproved and warned others, and they would not receive them and their
Testimony, they turned from them unto others, and left them unto the righteous
judgment of the Lord, which was to be revealed in flames of fire upon those
that would not obey the Gospel; but they did not persecute any, nor use any
outward force with any about Religion; neither did they give any command for
such a thing; and to preserve in the Truth such as were come to it, they used
patience, meekness, long-suffering, and sound Doctrine; and kept them, and
commended them unto the ingrafted Word (which was nigh in their hearts and in
their mouths) the which was able to save their souls; and did not threaten to
persecute them if they did not turn out of the Truth: Therefore, they that
persecute about Religion, are not for Christ, but Antichrists, that is, against
Christ. So take heed, that Thou do not set up persecution about Religion,
upon any pretense whatsoever, nor tolerate it; For the Lord God has brought
forth a People in these Nations, and will bring forth more, that cannot, nor
may not bow unto any other thing in their Worship, than unto the Name of Jesus,
whose Name is called the Word of God: And if Thou oppressest this People, the
Lord will assuredly take away Thy Power, and avenge their Cause; (mark that) for
he cares for them; And verily, we have not another to trust in, than the Name
of the Lord, and we know that to be a strong Tower, which is able to preserve
us; and we know, That he will not suffer any thing to come upon us, but what
shall work for his glory and our good. But these things are spoken unto Thee,
that Thou might fear the Lord, and might not pull judgment upon thy own
Head.

VI. Concerning what Government and Governors the People of the Lord (called
Quakers) stand for, and what they stand against, etc.
THis I declare in the Truth and Presence of the Lord, and I know, there are
many thousands in these Nations, that are of the same mind with me, that it is
not for the Name, that may be put upon a Government, that we either stand for,
or against; but it is a righteous Government (according to the higher Power,
which is according to that of God in every man's Conscience) which we stand
for, and earnestly desire after, both in things appertaining to God and man;
And we, for our selves desire no greater Liberty, either in things Religious,
or in things Civil betwixt man and man, than we desire all others might enjoy:
And if such a Government as this be set up, then if he that is Chief, in taking
care and seeing that Justice may be done to all without respect of persons, if
he be called a King, a Judge, a Protector, or a General, we shall not be
against either or any of the Names; Or if the care and trust be laid upon more,
if they be called by the Name of a Parliament, or a Council, or a Committee, or
King and Parliament, or any, we are content, and shall willingly submit unto
Righteousness from them, or any of them as our duty. And it is that which is
unrighteous (which is called a Government, wherein Oppression, Partiality, and
Cruelty is exercised, either in things relating unto conscience in matter of
Worship, or in things civil betwixt man and man) that we stand against; and if
such a thing be set up and called a Government, and if the chief in it be
called a King, or a Judge, or a Protector, or a General, or a Parliament, or a
Council, or a Committee, or King and Parliament, we cannot stand for any of the
Names, nor submit unto the unjust things commanded by them, any other ways,
than through a patient suffering under it; And this according to the strength
of the Lord, we shall be willing to do.

VII. How we resolve in the strength of the Lord, to stand for that which is
righteous, and against that which is unrighteous, etc.
THe way how we shall stand for the Righteous Government and Governors, is, by
yielding all due lawful obedience unto them and their Commands; and by
laboring in the Power of the Lord, to bring down, and to keep under the evil
lust in People, which is the cause of all Wars, and Rebellions, and
Transgression: And, as much as in us lies, we shall endeavor to live peaceably
with all men, and persuade others unto the same; And so, by a Godly
Conversation, we shall be patterns unto others: And this will be an adorning of
good Government, and Governors, and a help unto them; And this we resolve in
the strength of the Lord to do.

Also, the manner how we shall stand through the Power of the Lord against that
which is unrighteous (though it be called a Government, and against unrighteous
Governors) is, by bearing our Testimony against them in the Power of the Lord;
and by yielding no other obedience to them, than in submitting patiently to
suffer and endure, whatsoever punishment the Lord shall suffer them to lay upon
us: And this shall turn against them daily, and weaken them, and bring shame
upon them; For Persecution, is to them that persecute us, a token of Perdition;
but unto Us of Salvation, and that from the Lord.

VIII. Concerning a Government and Governors, wherein there may be something
seen to be good, and something bad, etc.
ANd as concerning a Government or Governors, wherein there may be something
good, and something bad; This I say in such a case, whatsoever is good in
either, we shall be ready through the Lord's strength to submit unto, and own,
and we shall labor to preserve and cherish that: And as the Lord shall move
us, we shall be willing to show the Governors in plainness what is wrong in
them, and in the Government; and if they refuse to hear us, and afflict us, we
shall in patience yield our Bodies to suffer under that which is bad in either;
however, we shall discountenance it, and labor through the Power of the Lord
in a Spiritual Warfare to destroy it, that so it may further appear, that we
are not against Magistracy, but for it, (it being God's Ordinance) and that we
are only against that in Magistrates and People, which would, and which does
defile and pollute the place of Magistracy.

IX. Concerning Plotting, or using a Carnal Weapon, and from whom we expect
Deliverance, etc.
ANd I further testify in the Lord, that I do not intend, neither have I any
such thought in my heart, either to plot for, or against Thee, or any other
upon the Earth; for I do not expect deliverance by a carnal Sword; and yet I
know, deliverance shall come with, or without the help of man; and in vain have
been, and shall be, all the strivings, compellings and murderings about
Religion, Church and Worship; for man may as well say to the Sun in the
Firmament, Stand thou still; Or to the Sea, Be thou dried up, as hinder one jot
of the Lord's mighty workings in this his day; for, his Work, yea, his strange
work shall be brought to pass, and mine eye sees it, and not any mortal shall
be able to hinder it. And into the belief of this, I know that the Lord has
gathered several thousands into the same mind with me, that are called by the
name of Quakers; and we could desire, (if it were the Will of God) even that
all men were of the same mind: And those that are otherwise minded, we shall
leave them unto the Lord, to do what he pleases with them: And we are freely
given up unto the Will of God, and we have committed our Cause unto Him, and He
shall bring it to pass, that so it may plainly be made manifest, that we are a
People saved by our God, from whom we expect deliverance: And he has made us
willing to wait, until he bring it to pass: And this we are confident of, that
the Everlasting Gospel; which is the Power of God, shall again be Preached unto
all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People; and that the Whore of Babylon, the
Beast and his Horns, and his Names, which have prevailed against the Bodies of
the Holy People in the night of Apostasy, shall cease to prevail against the
Saints; and that Babylon and her Merchants shall be thrown down and confounded;
and then shall the Saints of the most High possess the Kingdom. And we do
believe, that God will overturn, and overturn, until he has brought to pass
the thing that he has decreed, which is, to establish Righteousness in the
earth, and then shall there be Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at
the beginning; and Kings shall become Nursing-Fathers, and Queens shall become
Nursing-Mothers, and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of
the Lord and of his Christ; and hereof we have an assurance in the Spirit of
Truth, and yet we never expect to know Christ after the flesh to reign, but he
shall reign over all the Earth, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
all Powers shall serve and obey him, who is King of Saints.

X. Concerning Revenge, and what may follow if it be sought, and what if not,
etc.
TAke heed of seeking Revenge; O let not the Enemy of thy Soul, within or
without, get Thee into Blood: Vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it:
Therefore wherein thy Enemies went beyond their Commission against thy Father,
or any that took his Part, leave that unto the Lord, who will reward every one
in Righteousness, according to their deeds done in their Bodies; And consider
how far Christ was from seeking or desiring Revenge, when they murdered him as
concerning the flesh, who said, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. Oh mind that Spirit, and consider he was greater than thy Father, and
he was free from all Transgression; and wherein thy Enemies did evil in any
thing against thy Father or Thee, and those that took your Part, freely forgive
them, and render not evil for evil unto any man, but overcome evil with that
which is good. O King, this were the way for Thee to be established in peace,
and so to end thy days: Oh that thy Heart were thus inclined! that Mercy, and
Righteousness, and Peace might be found to reign in Thee, and that Mercy might
Triumph over severity; then might thou prosper, and many of thy Enemies, and
also of those that are called thy Friends, might be converted unto God, and so
ye might be united in true love one unto another, and this were better than
conquering by force. And consider this, there are many that acted against thy
Father and Thee, whom the Lord intends good toward, though I know, that
several of them through Covetousness and Envy, have done exceedingly wrong in
many things: Yet consider, how Christ taught his to pray, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; And I do verily
believe, that if they turn unto the Lord, and truly humble themselves under his
hand, and believe in the Light of his Son, and obey him, that he will freely
forgive them all their Transgressions. But if thou resolvest to avenge thy
self, and those called thy Friends which have suffered, and to keep under those
which are now fallen under Thee, by a heavy yoke, either in matters of Worship,
or otherwise, I know it will exasperate the spirits of many against Thee, and
it will raise up the desperate aggravating part in man, and so the thing may
kindle again in the murdering Spirit; And the Lord may suffer it to break forth
into blood, which if it should, it may be the sadest time that ever thou yet
saw; for this I know, and do steadfastly believe, that after God has tried
his People, he will assuredly bring an overflowing scourge upon this Nation,
and many shall fall and perish by an eminent hand and judgment of the Lord,
except they repent speedily: And verily, there is but a little space given to
prevent this great Judgment and Destruction; because the Lord has already
born long, and his patience has been exceeding great, and he has sent many of
his Servants and Prophets to warn this Nation and others, and many thousands
have believed us, and are gathered into Peace with us, notwithstanding they see
a great Judgment to come upon the Earth; and though many have believed us, yet
alas, the far greater part has either beaten, or imprisoned, or scoffed at, or
slighted and rejected us, or the Testimony which we hold; and some have spoiled
our goods, and imprisoned some of us to death, and some of us have been killed
for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God; And so, many in the Nations
are waxed worse and worse; And when the Lord has smitten some, they have
revolted more and more; and when he has raised up others, and given them
prosperity, they have then fed themselves without fear, and forgot the Lord,
and waxed wanton against him. Therefore seeing people will neither hear the
Prophets of the Lord, nor regard the Light of his Son in their Consciences,
which checks and reproves for sin and evil in secret, nor turn to the Lord when
he smites them, nor regard his Truth when they have prosperity, the Lord will
leave striving with such a People, and bring sudden destruction upon them, and
deliver his chosen as he did just Lot. So, we are given up to the Will of the
Lord, and do patiently wait for his mighty appearance to deliver us, who have
long been a suffering People, who have suffered both by Parliaments, Army,
Protectors, and by those called thy Friends also; yea, we have suffered, and
been most cruelly entreated, even by Rulers, Priests, and People, Professors
and Profane, because we could not join unto the evil in either, but we have
been made to reprove them for it, and to exhort them unto that which is good;
and so we must yet do, so long as we find the Lord requiring it at our hands,
though for it we be hated and persecuted unto death; yet knowing that it is
without cause on our part when we suffer, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, in all our sufferings; and our lives are not dear unto us,
that we may finish our course with joy, and our Testimony for the Lord, which
he has given to bear, though it be sealed with our blood; for we certainly
know, that the Lord is our reward in whatsoever we do or suffer for his Names
sake.

And now O King, as thou expects the Blessing and Presence of the Lord with
Thee in thy Government, Fear and Dread his Presence, by standing in awe of his
living Witness, the Light, which he has placed in thy Conscience to guide and
direct Thee in all thy ways, that his wrath may be turned away from Thee, that
so this Scripture might not be fulfilled upon the People of this Nation, God
gave them a King in his anger, and he took him away in his sore displeasure.
But if it should prove so, I shall have peace, for I am clear of thy blood, in
as much as in plainness I have let Thee see how things have been, and how they
may or shall be, and wherein thy danger stands, and how that Righteousness only
establishes the Throne. And my desire is, if it be the Will of God, that thou
might consider them in the Principle of Life and Wisdom, and thereby come to
be preserved and saved from that Destruction, which in God's Eternal Light I
see Thee in great danger of.

Thus in Innocence and Truth, and in Uprightness and Sincerity of heart, I have
freely declared unto Thee what was laid upon me, and it is in true, tender, and
unfeigned love, both to thy Soul and Body: And that this is true, God is my
Witness, and the Witness of himself in thy Conscience shall answer unto it;
unto which I leave and commend Thee, from which thou can not hide thy
thoughts: So to the Lord God of Life be Glory, and Dominion, and everlasting
Praises over all, to whom it does belong, Amen.

Given forth in Harwich Goal in Essex, the 16. day of the 3d. Month, called
May, 1660. Where I suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, through the envy of the
Devil, who is the false accuser of the Brethren.

POSTSCRIPT.
THough this Treatise was more especially laid upon me, to write it unto the
KING, and therefore to him was it directed; yet I could not but publish it,
because its service reaches so far in several Particulars, unto those also,
that have been engaged in the late Wars on both sides; as in declaring the
Mighty Hand, and working of the Invisible God therein, and for what cause these
things have been suffered, and how they have been effected; which being truly
considered, may cause many to bow before the Lord, and henceforward cease
rejoicing, in the destroying one of another, and rather admire the Lord's
mighty and strange workings, whereby he has taken away the cause of boasting
(in the Arm and Wisdom of flesh) on both Sides; that so, none might glory, but
in the Lord: And many other things are declared in this Book, as a Testimony,
both against Hypocrisy and Profaneness; and what God will do, if Repentance
be not come unto speedily; and also, the Innocence, and Just, and Equalness of
the Way, and Order of the Truth, and such as live in the Life of it, both in
many things appertaining to Religion, and in things Civil, is here
Demonstrated; with many wholesome Exhortations tending to Righteousness and
Peace, and the safety both of King and Nation; and the contrary witnessed
against, which may be of great service to many, if they in the Fear of God will
read it, and receive his Witness in them, the Light of Christ, which will
answer to the Truth; and for no other ause do I Publish it, but that (if it be
the Will of the Lord) Truth and Peace may be increased (which this directs
unto) and that Violence, and Wars (which this bears witness against) might
cease, and that so God may have the honor of all, unto whom it does belong.

From the Counsel and Nobility of the Royal Seed, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, the Everlasting King of Righteousness, who reigns in George Fox, the
Younger.
A Copy of this was delivered in Writing by Richard Hubberthorn, into the
Kings hand at White Hall, the 4th. day of the 4th. Month, 1660. And this may be
of service to any of those called Royallists (or others) if they in Moderation
will Read it, and for that Cause it is upon me to send it abroad in Print.



Honest, Plain, Down-right-Dealing WITH THE PEOPLE CALLED Episcopal-Men, and
Presbyterians. In this Seasonable ADVICE given unto them, and their TEACHERS.
FRIENDS,
YOu both pretend in Words to be Friends to the KING, now let your actions show
forth the same, lest ye (in this Cause concerning the King) be found like those
who in words professed to know or love another King, but in Works denied him,
Tit. 1.16. Therefore, labor not to persuade the King to set up either of your
Forms of Worship in this manner, (mark) as to compel by outward Force all
others to conform thereunto, or else to persecute them; for if you do thus, and
if the King should hearken unto either of you, and fulfill either of your wills
in this particular, (mark) you to whom he so consents unto, would shortly be
made manifest to be the greatest Enemies to the King in the Nations: And not
only the Kings Enemies, but Enemies to your selves also, even to the
endangering of the destruction both of the King and Your selves; for if the
King shall set up either of your Forms, and compel all others thereunto, or
else Persecute them; (mark) you two are so inverate one against another, and
have acted already so cruelly one against another, that thus it will be with
you, (mark) you that the King so sets up, will seek to avenge your selves, and
to Lord it over the other, Mat. 5.44, 46. and neither of you are able to suffer
in patience, (and to forgive your Enemies) as the Ministers of Christ were to
do, Mat. 6.15. that so which-soever of you were put under the other, you will
be watching to Plot both against the King and them that are set over you; and
if you that are put under, can but get an advantage against the other,
which-soever of you it be, (mark) even the Mercies of you would be cruelty
toward those that kept you under. And if either of your Forms should be set
up, as before mentioned, you who be set up in that manner will be in great
danger of being destroyed, and that for these reasons.

First, Because it is not owned by the Lord, that any should set up a Worship,
and compel others to it by outward force or Persecution; and this is the way in
which either of you would proceed, if ye had Power, and thereby you would
Engage the Lord against you and your Worship; for the worship which he owns, is
in the Spirit and in the Truth, John 4.23, 24. and nothing but the Power of his
Spirit can compel thereunto; and they that rebel against this Power in matter
of Worship, are for it to be punished thereby.

Secondly, Because the Lord has decreed to remove Oppression and Persecution,
and to judge and blast that spirit which has exercised cruelty against the
Saints, and to set up Righteousness, and to give his People their just Liberty
to worship him according to the leadings, and requirings of his Eternal Spirit
in them; (mark) and if either of your Forms should be set up (as before
mentioned) it would strongly oppose this Decree of God which cannnt be broken,
and therefore it would engage the Lord to destroy you.

Thirdly, If one of you be set up, and ye be empowered by the King to compel by
outward force all others to your Worship, or else to Persecute them; (mark)
this will exasperate the spirits of most of the other Sects against the King,
and you that shall be so set up; and it will engage all them of the Sects that
are in the fighting nature, and can use a carnal Weapon for their own defense,
to join together as one man against the King, and either of you that he should
so set up. Therefore if you would be true Friends either to the King, or your
selves and your Nation, labor not with the King to establish either of your
Forms (or any other) as beforementioned; but if ye own CHARLES STUART to be
King; be content that HE may Rule over all as one, keeping the outward Peace
among you all, by providing just Laws to punish any that would hurt any man's
Person or Estate upon any unjust account whatsoever, or any that shall run into
open profaneness, Mat, 7.12. and be content that others may have as much
Liberty to Worship their God in that way they are persuaded to be right, as ye
desire to have in that ye think is right; and lay by all these Carnal Weapons,
as Prisons, Fires, Gallows, Stocks, Whips, and all outward violence, and use
none of them (mark) about compelling to a Worship,: 2 Cor. 10.4. But you that
are Teachers, come forth with your Spiritual Weapons (if you have them) and
smite at the Spiritual Wickedness that is Exalted in the Creatures, if ye be
able, wrestle with that, and not with the Creatures; and if without using
outward force and compulsion, ye can plant a Vineyard (as the Apostle did) then
eat of the fruit thereof, Ephesians. 6.12. and if ye can thus gather a Flock and keep
them, then Eat of the Milk thereof; and if ye can sow Spirituals then reap of
their Carnals that receive you and your Testimony; and if you be sent forth by
Christ, then you will not lack any thing, Luke 22.35. but if you dare not come
to this trial, then it will plainly appear that you are such as serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but your own bellies; and that you are not sent of God, but
run, and he has not sent you; and speak, but he has not spoken unto you, and
therefore you cannot profit the People, Jer. 23.32. (mark) And if the outward
Peace be kept by the Kings Law, that so none may do violence to any man's
Person or Estate, then you need not fear if you be in the Spirit of Truth, 1 John 4.4. but that ye shall overcome them that are in the Spirit of Error, and
make them manifest when they do oppose you, Acts 6.9.10. but if you dare not
come to this Trial, then it will plainly appear that you are in the Spirit of
Error, and such as cannot stand except they be upheld by the Powers of the
Earth.

Again, and if God should suffer this, that either of you could prevail thus
far with the King, as that he should set up either of your Forms, and give you
a Law to compel or Persecute outwardly, (mark) thereby you might make many
hypocrites, who might pretend to join unto you, (to save their (...) or
Estates) until they could find an opportunity to destroy you; but by all your
outward force, you can never convert any unto God; for it is Christ, the
Immortal, ingrafted Word, which is only able to convert unto God; and it is
the work of the true Ministers to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from
Satan's Power unto the Power of God, Acts 26.18. and to direct them to the Word
which is nigh, in the mouth, and in the heart, Romans 10.8. and to commend and
keep them to that; and to exhort them in meekness to receive the ingrafted
Word, which is able to save their Souls, Acts. 20.23. Jam. 1.21. 2 Cor. 10.4.
and they must not use any Carnal Weapons to do their work withal, but
Spiritual: Therefore if you would be counted Christ's Ministers, lay by your
Carnal Weapons, and use them no longer about Religion; neither press the King
to set up or uphold either of your Forms of Worship by outward force (as before
mentioned) lest thereby you become Instruments to destroy the King, your
selves, or the Nation.

So though King CHARLES be accounted and suffered to be Head in things between
man and man, yet let CHRIST JESUS the everlasting King, be accounted and
suffered to be Head of his Church, that so He may have that which is due unto
him, Ephesians. 5.23. and 4.13. Col. 1.18. and this were the way for the true Church
and the King, and these Nations to prosper; and the way for the false Church,
the false Prophets, and all Plotting, Usurping self-interested men to be
confounded.

And this is the desire of me, who am a sufferer for Righteousness sake,
contrary to any Law of God, or known Law of the Nation. GEORGE FOX, the Younger.
From my Chamber (the place of my confinement) in Lambeth-House, (the 14th. of
the 4th. Month, 1660)
where I have perfect Peace with God through Jesus Christ, in whom I have true
Liberty as a Son, according to the appointment of the Father.

I cannot flatter any, but must speak the naked truth unto all; and I seek the
Peace of my Nation, and the good of all men; and I cannot fight with any
Creature, but I can fight with the Spiritual Wickedness, though it be in the
High Places.



A Few Queries to the Teachers of the Episcopal Society, (so Called.)
Qu. 1. WHo was the first Institutor, (of a man to be Supreme Head of the
Church next and Immediate under Christ, and) of Arth-Bishops, and Lord Bishops,
and from whence had they their Original? Did not these things arise since the
Apostasy? and have they not been Practiced by the Apostatised Christians, since
the Antichrists went out from the true Apostles? Or were these things Practiced
by the true Apostles? Or did they confess any more than one Head of the
Church? Or that to them there was any more than one Lord? And was not that Head
and Lord Jesus Christ? Col. 1.18. And whether they that make, or confess other
Lords, or another Head of the Church than Christ, do not walk according to the
course of the Gentiles, which know not God, and contrary to the Command of
Christ, and the Practice of the true Apostles? 1 Cor. 8, 5, 6. seeing Christ
said to his Disciples, the Gentiles exercise Lordship one over another, but it
shall not be so with you (mark that) for he that will be greatest amongst you,
let him be servant unto all, Mat. 20* 25, 26, 27. And where was any of the true
Apostles or Ministers of Christ, called Lord-Bishops or Archbishops? Or where
was there any King in their time, called the Supreme Head of the Church next
unto Christ? Or where did they prophecy that it should afterward be so among
the Saints? Or is not this rather a part of the Cup of Fornication, which the
Whore of Babylon, has caused the Kings of the Earth to drink in the night of
Apostasy, yea or nay?

Qu. 2. And who was the first Inventer of Surplices and Tippits (as they are
called) did the true Apostles and Ministers of Christ use any of them in their
Worship? Or had they Organs and Singing Boys dressed in White, going, and
Singing in their Worship? From whom had all things their Original? And are any
of these things required of the true Worshippers, which the Father seeks, who
Worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, John 4.23.24. (if they be, prove it
by Scripture) Or are they not come up since the Apostasy? and are they not
Practiced amongst the Will-Worshippers, yea or nay?

Qu. 3. And who first invented this for a Baptism, (viz.) that a Teacher
should Sprinkle a little water on a Child's face, and make a Cross on its
forehead, with his finger; and that there should be Godfathers, and
Godmothers (as they are called) to name the Child; from whom had all these
things their Original? Did the true Apostles Practice these things? Or are they
not come up in the night of Apostasy? And why do you call those that name the
Children, Godfathers, and Godmothers? Has God any Fathers or Mothers? Answer
to every particular in plain English according to the Scriptures, that poor
People may see your Ground, and Foundation, and Rule for all these things; And
do you believe that any can be free from sin in this life, and keep Gods's holy
Will and Commandments? If not, then how dare you enjoin those that you call
Godfathers, and Godmothers, to Promise and Vow these things in the Child's
name, (mark) that it shall forsake the Devil and all his works, (mark that) the
pomps and vanities of this World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh, and
that it should keep God's holy Will and Commandments? now if you say, they may
forsake all these things, and keep God's Holy Will and Commandments; then will
it not overthrow what you Teach your selves at other times? and if People do
not or cannot forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps, and vanities of
this wicked World, and the sinful lusts of the flesh, and keep God's Holy Will
and Commandments; then do you not cause them you call Godfathers, and
Godmothers, to Promise and Vow lies and impossibilities in Childrens Names?

Now Answer these things in Plainness and Moderation, without fleeing to your
Carnal Weapons; and be not like those, that instead of answering, have raged,
and persecuted those that have Queried them. There are many things more
appertaining to your Worship which I cannot own to be Right; but I would see,
how you will get through these things, and what satisfaction you are able to
give concerning these few, and then as the Lord moves, you may hear of many
things more which are to be Queried.

The 22 d. of the 4th. Month, 1660. From a Faithful Soldier of the Army of the
Lamb (which must get the Victory,) for whose Testimony I suffer in
Lambeth-House. George Fox, the Younger.

THE Testimony of God To those Rulers, Teachers, and People of this present
Age, where the Headship of the Church is given to Man, and to such as strive to
have it so, and to those that set themselves in the seat of God, by taking upon
them, that which properly belongs to God and Christ, who are one.
Wherein God's Controversy with them is plainly Demonstrated, Opened, and
given by the Spirit of Truth, which is made manifest in that earthen vessel,
which is called George Fox, the younger.

HEarken O ye Kings, and Give ear ye Rulers, Teachers, and People of all sorts
(who are striving against the Spirit of God in its workings:) The Lord's
Controversy is great this day, and few there be that rightly understand it;
Therefore are ye confounded, broken, and breaking one of another, and cannot be
healed, until you return to, and receive and obey that which will show you with
what God's Controversy is: Therefore consider this, The inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding, Job 32.8. Yea, the life of the Immortal Word,
which is the Light of men, John 1.4. gives to understand the mind of the
Eternal God; Therefore to the Light which the Word has enlightened you withal;
Take heed, John 1.9. for that is the faithful Witness of God, and to that in
you all (who shall hear the Testimony which God has given me to bear) shall I
be made manifest; for that shall answer to the words of the most High, which I
have to utter; Therefore let all flesh be silent, that Truth may take place,
and that the words of the Holy One may be heard and received.

Thus says the Lord God, My Controversy has not been, nor is not with man,
any further than as he is departed from me, and joined to, and become one with
the man of sin, that wicked one, the Son of Perdition, who is exalted in man,
above me the Eternal God, and opposes me, and sits in my Temple, showing
himself to be God, in taking upon him that which properly belongs unto me,
for he commands and leads them with whom my Controversy is, into whatsoever
and whithersoever he pleases, and they are become subjects unto his Kingdom,
so that they will not that I should Reign over them: but they have taken
Counsel of my Adversary, who has taught them also to take (as it were) my
Honor ( which I will not give to another) unto themselves; and so they are
become one with my Adversary: And by his Power they also (in many things) have
set themselves in my stead, in taking upon them to do things which did properly
belong unto me, and they in thus doing, have slighted and rejected the thing
that I have done; and thus the Abomination which makes desolate, stands in
the place where it ought not; For which cause I will visit, says the Lord God.

And now You with whom God's Controversy is, (who have given the headship of
the Church to man) that you may further see your Error. (Mark) and consider
these things, It did properly belong to the Mighty Eternal God, to Ordain a
Head for his Church, and he unalterably Ordained one Head thereof, which is
Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the quickening Spirit: Yea, he
gave him to be Head of the Body, which is the Church, the fullness of him that
fills all in all, that he in all things might have the pre-eminence, in whom
all fullness dwells, Col, 1.18, 19. Ephesians. 5.23. and 1.22, 23.

And by the appointment of the Father, he gives forth all the Laws and
Ordinances which his Church (that is the Congregation of the Righteous) are now
to observe; and whosoever will not hear him in all things, and follow his
leadings, and obey his voice, are to be cut off; For all Judgment is committed
unto him, John 5.22, 27.

But many of you who (in several Nations) are called Christians (with whom the
Lord's Controversy is great, unto the dishonor of God) You have taken upon
you to Ordain other Heads of the Church then Christ, and they shall give forth
Laws and Ordinances for the Church to observe, and they that will not hear your
Heads, and observe their Laws and Ordinances, you will cut them off, or
Persecute them; and in thus doing you have slighted and rejected the thing that
God has done, and ye have set your selves in his stead; And this is a great
Cause of God's Controversy with this Age, and until this abomination be
removed and broken down, God will remove and break down all in whomsoever it
does reside, and all such as would uphold it, whatsoever their names be called;
For whosoever will strive to uphold that Authority in themselves or others,
which properly belongs to God and Christ (who are one) shall not be able to
stand in this the day of God's Controversy; neither can the Nations be settled
in true Peace, until that be given up to Christ, which properly unto him
belongs, and is his Right; for though the Lord has long born with great
patience, yet now the time hastes, that the Heir must be Possessed of that which
the Father has given unto him, and they that will not freely give up to him
his due, must be broken.

And now, O England, to Thee I speak (mark) this did not serve to end the
Controversy of God with Thee, when thou did take the Headship of the Church
from the Pope, and gave it to the (outward) King; Neither did that end God's
Controversy with Thee, when thou did take it from thy King again, and gave
the Nature or Power of the Headship (though not the Name) unto an Assembly of
Priests called the Synod, whom thou Authorizedst to give forth directions and
Ordinances for the Church to observe; and if after thy long Changing of it
thus, one from another, Thou now give it to thy (outward) King again, (as many
in thee strive to do) this will not end God's Controversy with thee neither;
For these things do not at all answer the intent of God; for the Lord will not
own, that a King should be called the Supreme Head of a Church, no more then he
will own that a Pope should be so called; Neither will he own any to exercise
the Office of Headship in his Church, but Christ only, Whom he has given
unalterably to be the Head thereof; Therefore whether it be Pope, King,
Priests, or any others, that will not submit to Christ, and own Him alone to be
the Head of the Church, must be slain by the Sword of his Justice; Therefore O
England, Take heed what thou do, and provoke not the Lord yet further against
thee in this particular; for, until the Headship be wholly given up to Christ,
God's Controversy cannot cease.

And furthermore, it does properly belong unto God and Christ (who are one) to
make and Ordain whomsoever they Please to be Ministers; and those Ministers are
to follow those orders and directions, and to declare those words unto the
People (and not what they will themselves) which the most High gives unto them;
and they are to go to such places as He sends them unto, to declare His Will;
and they are to receive that for their Labor which He allows them, and they
are to abide in those places, observing those orders and directions which he
gives unto them; and they are not to remove, but at His pleasure, and as He
gives them freedom, or by His order, which they must observe.

But in these things also, Man has set himself in the stead of God; For men in
these Nations have made, and some yet do make and Ordain whomsoever they please
to be Ministers, and those Minsters are to follow those orders and directions,
and to speak those words to the People which Man gives unto them, (and also
they may in some things speak more if they will) and they are to go to such
places as man sends them unto, and there to declare that which man in his will
has prescribed and set down; And they are to receive for this their Labor
that which man allows them (with what more they can get to satisfy their
greedy minds) and they are to abide in those places, observing those orders and
directions which man gives unto them, and they are not to remove but at man's
pleasure, by his order, or as he gives them Freedom.

And thus has man, even the man of Sin, set himself in the stead of God, and
would force all to bow unto him; and so man in this state has rejected the
Will of God, and his Work; for such a one whom God makes a Minister, and sends
unto places to declare his Will (unto the People, as he has received it from
God) such a one is counted a Vagabond and a disturber of the Peace, and
Persecuted by such as are exalted in their fleshly minds, above the witness of
God; And for this cause also is God's Con^roversie with Nations, and they
cannot be established in true Peace, until they give unto God and Christ, that
which to them belongs, (which they have held from God by usurpation) therefore
whether it be Popes, or Kings, or Parliaments, or any other men that will
assume this to themselves which alone belongs to God and Christ, they must and
shall be broken, let their strength be never so great: For the Lord (who is
Mighty) will take to himself this his proper Right in making Ministers which
shall observe his Will, and he will provide for them, and such as are made by
man he will Confound; Therefore O Nations, take heed what you do, and run not
your selves any more into these things, lest you further increase God's anger
against you.

And as Christ is the Au^hor of the true Faith and not man, so he is the
Defender of it, and not man; Therefore that Title must be given unto Him, and
not unto man, or else God's Controversy cannot cease.

Again, it is God's proper Right to give Laws unto man, Isa. 33.22. For there
is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, Jam. 4.12. And the Law is
not made for the Righteous, but for the unrighteous, 1 Timothy 1.9. And the Law is
to go forth of Zion, Mica. 4.2. Isa. 2.3. Now in this particular also, man has
set himself in the Seat of God, and so has dishonored the one Lawgiver, by
setting up many Lawgivers, who not being guided by the pure Spirit of the
Lord, have made Laws contrary to the Will of God, whereby the Righteous have
been Punished and Oppressed. Now in this particular, man has exceedingly
corrupted his ways; for which cause God's Controversy is exceeding great; And
until man submit to the one Lawgiver in this particular also, (who is able,
both to save and to destroy) God's Controversy cannot cease; for the Law which
God gives, is not against the Righteous, but against the unrighteous.

But how are the Laws of these Nations like to be such, (let the witness of God
in all you answer) seeing by man it is given into the hands of man in such a
manner as it is to make Laws? (Mark) Have you not read in the Scriptures of
Truth, that the Flock of Christ is a little Flock, Luke 12.32. And that, though
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved, Isa. 10.22.
Romans 9.27. And again, strait is the way, and narrow is the Gate that leads
unto Life, and few there be that find it; (mark that) because broad is the way
and wide is the Gate that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat, Mat. 7.13, 14. Now mark and consider these things, seeing that the
Righteous are fewer in number then the unrighteous, and that the Lawmakers are
chosen by the most voices; (and that of the richest People outwardly) how are
the Righteous like to be preserved in outward freedom by the Laws that are so
made? Does not the World love his own, John 15.19. And will it not provide for
its own Life and Liberty? And is the life and Liberty of the Righteous one with
the world, ( Read Wisdom, the 2. Chap.) Will not that which is for the freedom
of the one, be for the bondage of the other? Oh! the Lord has beheld this
abomination, and his Soul abhors it, and his Controversy is with the Nations,
because of the grievous Oppression, Oaths, and Violence, which fills the Earth
partly by this means; Oh! how do the rich oppress the poor, and draw them
before the Judgment seats? Jam. 2.6. And how do the haughty vaunt themselves
over the meek? And how is Judgment turned backward? For he that departs from
iniquity makes himself a prey to this Generation, Isa. 59.14, 15. And though
several overturnings have been, yet is iniquity still at a great height, and
increases exceedingly; And what will it advantage a Child to flee from a Bear
and join to a Lion? Verily the day is come, wherein there is no hiding place of
safety for the Righteous, but purely in the Name of the Lord, and blessed are
they that alone trust therein. For the help of the meek stands in the Name of
the Lord, ( Psalm. 124.8. Hos. 13.9.) And happy are they that abide in it, for
the day will be terrible and dreadful unto all that have not a habitation in
the Name of the Lord the King of Saints; For Violence and Oppression shall come
to the full, and then shall the Lord Roar out of his Habitation, and he shall
strike the Inhabitants of the Earth with Astonishment, and Faintness, and
Deadness of Spirit, shall seize upon the mighty men, and weakness and fear upon
the strong and bold of the Earth; for the Lord will appear in his mighty Power
to take the Kingdom, and to relieve the oppressed, and to help the needy, and
they shall be strong in him.

Be wise therefore O ye Kings, and learn Wisdom ye Judges and Rulers of the
Earth, Return unto the Lord and serve him with fear, Tremble before the Glory
of his Presence, and Kiss the Son, lest he be angry and you perish by the way;
For his wroth shall suddenly burn, and then, blessed are all they that trust in
Him, (Read Psalm. 2.) Therefore strive not with the Lord any longer, by
withholding his Right from Him, but give unto him his due, and resign up to him
and his anointed the things that he does require, for the Lamb must get the
victory, and he must have the Pre-eminence in all things, yea, he must be the
Supreme Head in all Spiritual things, and the only Lawgiver to his People;
yea, he with the Higher Power must ordain and send forth Ministers and
Laborers into his Church, Vineyard, and Harvest, for he only can fit them for
the work, and not man; and he will take care that they shall not lack any
thing, ( Luke 22.35.) For the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof,
(Psalm. 24.1.) And he will constrain People with his love (which is better than
outward force) to give his Ministers Food and Raiment when they have need
thereof, and they will be contented there-withal, 1 Timothy 6.8. Therefore meddle
not with these things any more, I warn and exhort you in the Love of God: For
it belongs not unto you, but unto God and Christ, who are one, and let Christ
only be acknowledged to be the defender of the Faith, who is able to perform
that Office to the full, which man is not.

And let the one Lawgiver be minded and owned in man, to give forth Laws to
punish Transgressors, that so the Judgment may be the Lord's and not man's,
for so it ought to be; and he that Rules over men, must be Just, ruling in the
Fear of God, (2 Samuel 23.3.) And they that Fear the Lord and hate Covetousness,
ought to be Judges and Rulers (Exodus 18.21.) to see and take care that the Law
of God be put in due execution, judging righteously, without respect to
persons, (Prove. 24.23.) doing to all men, as they would they should do unto
them, keeping out of Bribes and Gifts, that the eye may not be blinded, (Exodus
23.6, 7, 8. And such Rulers as these, will the Lord set up and Honor, unto
whom he will plainly show his Righteous just Law, which he will have executed
upon Transgressors, and men shall be subject unto them for Conscience sake, and
they only shall be a terror to evil doers, and encouragers of them that do
well, and they shall be guarded with Righteousness, and the Lord shall bless
them with the dew of Heaven, and they shall send forth a good savor into the
Earth, and then shall the Inhabitants of the Earth learn Righteousness; For
Judgment shall run down as Water, and Righteousness as a mighty stream; for
the Judgments of the Lord shall be rightly executed, and self ends shall be
denied; and then shall Praises, Dominion, Honor, and Obedience, and all that
is the Lord's, be yielded unto him the King of Saints; And until this come to
pass, God's Controversy shall not cease: But there will be Breaking, and
Overturning, Oppressing, and Spoiling, and Insnaring one of another, and they
that come uppermost, and will not give unto the Lord his due, but set
themselves in his Seat, whatsoever words they profess, or let them appear never
so strong in the arm of flesh, yet they shall be broken down with dishonor;
and Plagues and Torments shall be the Portion of the Hypocrite that bows to
deceit; and Babylon must fall and perish; for strong is the Lord which judges
her, (Rev. 18.8.) And in vain do men seek to establish themselves in that which
the Lord is against, and woe will be unto them that are found in the State of
Capernaum and Edom, (Read Obediah 3.4. Mat. 11.23.)

And now ye Rulers, Teachers, and People, remember you are warned, and it is in
true love to your Souls and Bodies, therefore Repent whilst you have time left
you, that you may be saved, though it be so as by fire; and speedily resign up
to the Lord, that which properly belongs unto Him; for verily, the day
dawneth apace, which shall reveal that man of sin more and more, who has set
himself in the Seat and stead of God, whom the Lord shall consume with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and abolish and destroy with the Brightness of his coming,
(2 These. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.) And the day of the Lord shall even so come as a
Thief in the night; And when the wicked shall say Peace and safety, then shall
come upon them sudden destruction, even as the travel of a woman with Child,
which by no means can be escaped, (1 These. 5.2, 3.)

Be still O ye Saints of the most High God, keep clear of Babylon, take heed of
being ensnared die her, cleave not to her flatteries in any wise, but follow the
Lamb whithersoever he leads you; and hold fast the Word of his Patience in
the true Integrity of your hearts, that so ye may stand and endure the Trial to
the end; and whatsoever you suffer for the Testimony of God, you shall have a
full reward for it, if you faint not: This in the Word of the Lord, is unto you.

Lambeth-House, the 28th. of the 4th. Month, 1660. POSTSCRIPT.
ANd if I could write no more, yet this is the Testimony of Truth, to the
Rulers, Teachers, and People of this present Age (in what Nation soever this
may come) Mark, you must all come to the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ (the
Lamb of God) who has enlightened you, that with the Light you may come to see
what is contrary to the mind and will of God, both in your Laws, and
Governments, and in the constitutions thereof, and in your Ministry, and
Worship, and in the constitutions thereof, and in all your Conversations; And
that which you see with the Light, to be contrary to the mind and will of God,
(in any of these things before-mention) you must deny, and give it up to be
consumed by the Spirit of Judgment and burning; and you must give your full
consent that the Lamb of God (the Light of the World, the second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, the quickening Spirit, who is one with the Eternal Father) may have
the pre-eminence in all things; And that he may Rule in you all, over you all,
and lead and guide you all, in all things, before you can witness that God's
Controversy with you is fully come to an end; And all them of the Nations that
are saved, must walk in the Light of the Lamb: Therefore let every particular
in their several stations, come to a true honest search speedily, and cast off,
and deny that which the Light will let you see that God is against, that so
happily God may stay the mighty Judgment (which otherwise must come) which is
nigh at the door, which will sweep away the ungodly.

These are faithful and true sayings, and things which must shortly be
fulfilled; therefore, blessed will every one be, that will hear and obey the
Counsel of the most High; for the day of the Lord draws nigh.

And now ye Rulers, if ye resolve to build up that which God has thrown down
by an outstretched Arm; and if you strive to establish your selves in that
which God's Controversy has been, and yet is against, you will undo your
selves for ever; for you will engage the Lord against you, who assuredly will
be too strong for you, and break and confound you, as opposers of his mighty
work; therefore take heed what you do, the Lords decree shall stand.

George Fox, the younger.



THE DREAD Of Gods Power, UTTERING ITS VOICE Through MAN, unto the HEADS of the
NATION.
OH! ye Mighty men, who sit upon the THRONE, that are Exalted into Power, and
brought into great Authority. Do you indeed know the Hand that brought you up
thither? And do you rightly understand the End of your coming into Power again?
And do you certainly know the Work which God requires at your hands? And do you
indeed see the true Leader, which is to lead in the Way and Work of the Lord?
And do you Feel and Witness that your Hearts are truly Inclined and Prepared
toward the Work of the Lord? Or are you not ignorant of these Things? And do
you not rather feel your Hearts inclined toward REVENGE, and to make your
selves Great, and to get your selves a Name, and to follow that which is
pleasing to your own Eyes, and to Condemn that which God has Justified, and to
Justify that which God has Condemned, and does Condemn?

Let there be an honest search made with the Witness of God in your own hearts,
which will show you the thoughts, and the intents thereof; and think not to
flatter your selves, as others have done before you, by conceiving that you are
safe enough, because the Arm of Flesh is with you, and at your Command: For
verily, verily, Thus says the Lord God, I will yet make the Powers of the
Earth to know, that I am God, and there is no other; and that I can do
whatsoever I please, and my Purpose and Decree shall stand unalterable; And I
will bring to pass the thing that is in my Heart, and none shall let it; for in
its season it shall be accomplished.

Oh! Hear ye Rebellious and live; be not so stiffnecked and wilful, like those
that went before you ( who would not hear Reproof) lest I make you a hissing,
and scatter you with more dishonor that any that went before you; for my Anger
is kindled, and my Jealousy is waxed hot against the Man of Sin. My Decree is
to Dis-throne him, and to take the Kingdom my self, and to slay his Subjects
that will not turn at my Reproof, and be subject to my Government; Therefore
seek not your selves, neither follow the Devices and Iniquity of your own
hearts any longer; for I the LORD am coming to plead with all flesh, and I will
make mine Enemies know, that I have Power to accomplish my own Work, though I
should find all the Armed men, and the men in Authority, against me.

Now this is my Decree; I will set up Righteousness in the Earth, and I will
establish Equity and Mercy amongst the People; I will remove Oppression from
off the Earth, and I will Search out, and overthrow the Ground and Foundation
thereof, in whomsoever, or in whatsoever it stands; even, as I overthrew Sodom
in the days of old; and they that will not haste out of it, shall certainly be
destroyed, says the Holy One; who will break the Potsherds of the Earth that
withstand him, and consume the Stubble, the Thorns, and the Briars, that set
themselves in Ba^tel against him, who is a consuming Fire.

Therefore, Oh ye Heads of the People! Consider your Ways, and weigh your
Actions in that equal balance ( the Word of God) which will show you the
thoughts and the intents of your hearts: for verily, the Lord God is highly
displeased, and your hearts are seen not to be right before him; Therefore
consider your Foundation upon which you build, lest your building fall with
great dishonor and loss, when the Storm comes, which shall come to try it.

Mark, Were You, or your Fathers and Friends, able to keep your selves in
Power, when the Lord formerly appeared against you, to cast you out before your
Enemies, because of your Rebellion against him? Or were your Enemies able to
keep you out of Power, and themselves in, when the Lord appeared against them,
to Split and Confound them, and to turn their day into darkness, and to bring
you in as a Flood over them, because of their treacherous dealing with the
Lord, and because they perverted the Cause and Power that was put into their
hands, serving themselves and their Lusts, and not the Lord? Verily, as they
were not able to stand, no more will you be able to stand and keep your Places
( except you repent) and own, that your Enemies had a a just Cause put into
their hands against you: And so, put a difference betwixt the Cause, and That
which perverted it, and not judge and condemn both together; for if you do,
verily I say unto you, when you have filled up your measures, you will
assuredly fall without recovery, though you were ten thousand times stronger
than you are, and although not one man appeared against you with a Carnal
Weapon.

Consider, Was it a Carnal Weapon that brought you in? Were you not brought in
without a stroke outward? And is not the Lord the same? Is his hand shortened?
Has not he the hearts of all Flesh in his Power? And can he not turn them as
he pleases? Can he not root out, and overthrow whomsoever he will? And if he
will do it without outward means* can any resist his Will? Or if he will do it
by outward means, cannot he provide it himself, contrary to man's expectation?
Therefore, Dread ye the Majesty and Power of the Lord, and fear before his
Dreadful Name.

Friends, I must deal plainly with you in the sight of God, who has made me a
Prophet to the Nation, I may not flatter any of you: My Life is in the hand of
my Maker, and not one hair of my Head can fall to the ground without his
Providence. He has redeemed my Soul from Hell, and my Mind from the Earth; and
he has given me his good Spirit to lead me: I am henceforth no more my own,
but I am the Lord's, who has formed me for his Praise, and has brought me
forth, that I may sound forth his powerful Truth amongst the People. Therefore
must I not fear Man, neither must I be afraid of the Sons of Men.

Verily, your Spirits are seen to be too high for the Work, which God will have
to be wrought in the Earth; and you are found in that your selves, which the
Lord will work against. And he is loaded with the pride and excess that ye (and
many in the Nation) are in; and his Soul abhors the Vanity, Music, and
Pleasures which ye delight in.

Oh how has Iniquity abounded since ye came into place! and how is Oppression
and Cruelty increased and continued, upon them that seek the good of all! Now
consider this, That which the Lord was wroth with you for, and threw you and
your friends out for before, he will not own that now, nor that you should
revive and establish that again: For the Lord's Controversy is yet against
those things, (though he has thrown out a treacherous People, who perverted
his Cause) Therefore, try your Foundation, before you build and settle; for
verily, whatsoever is not founded upon CHRIST JESUS, the Rock of Ages, (whether
it be in things Religious, or in things Civil) the higher it is built, the
greater will its fall be; and every ones work must be tried by fire, what
Foundation soever they build upon; and great will be the Destruction and
Consumation; for nothing but what can abide the fire shall remain: And verily,
there is exceeding much, both in Governors and Governments, Laws, Ministry,
Profession, Trades, and in the Constitution of them, as they now stand ( and in
the Conversations of the People) which is to be utterly destroyed by the fire
of the Lord's Jealousy, and the day hastens which will try every man's work of
what sort it is; and that which is for the fire, neither high words, nor
outward strength shall be able to save it.

Oh! The Spirit of the Lord is grieved, and pressed, with the Iniquities and
Whoredoms of this Generation. Oh! the Waste and the Spoil, that is made of the
Lord's Creatures, excess in Apparel, excess in Diet, and deceitful Feastings,
and Banquetings; and each strive to exceed one another, not scarce knowing what
to invent, to eat and to drink, or to put on; or what Music, or Images and
Vanities to invent to please the Carnal Eye and Ear; and in the mean time, your
own flesh, or them of the same blood, lie, go, sit, or stand in your streets,
crying for a piece of Bread; and many of your Lame, and Blind, and Sick, and
others, both in Prisons and other places are ready to Famish.

Oh! Consider these things speedily, and mock not at the Lord's Menssengers (as
some before you have done, when they have been warned, as you now are) lest
your bonds be made strong also, and lest the Lord smite you with a Curse, and
send you Famine or Want, in the room of your Abundance and Superfluity; and
Rags instead of Ribbons, Feathers, Gold, and Silver Lace, and Gorgious Attire;
and howling and mourning instead of your Music; Songs, and Oaths.

Oh! It Is hard to utter the abomination that flows and swells in this Nation;
it is a shame to the Rulers, to suffer these Stage Plays, Mount-banks, and
vain Sports and Shows, whereby the Lord is greatly dishonored, and foolish
People are cheated of their money, and the Creation is devoured and wasted, and
Men's lives sometimes endangered.

Oh! How have men invented mischief and vanity, to stir up lightness and vanity
one in another. Oh ye Rulers! is not this a horrible wickedness, that a man who
has his right natural senses, should be suffered to feign himself to be a
Natural Fool? and that he should be suffered to speak any light vain words he
pleases, even what he can invent, to stir up lightness and vain laughter among
you? Have you not manifested your selves to be slighters of the Apostles
Doctrine? (read Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.4.)

This Abomination have I beheld several times out of my Prison Window.
And is this an honor for the Chief of you, to have a company of Men and Boys,
dressed up with Ribbons and Bells about their legs, and one acting like a Fool
with a Ladle in in his hand, dancing before you, even like a company of mad
distracted men, making a noise like a company of Carriers Horses?

Oh! the Life of God is grieved with these things, and all that fear his Name
loath them, and it is a shame that ever such things should be suffered in a
Land.

Therefore, O ye Rulers, let all this ungodliness, and superfluity of
naughtiness be laid aside, and receive with meekness the ingrafted Word, which
is able to save your souls, Jam. 1.21. and that will teach you to love even
your Enemies, and to forgive them; and to put a difference between the precious
and the vile: And it will keep your hands from blood, and your hearts from
desiring after it, if you will obey it; and it will show you with what God's
Controversy is, both in your Government, and Worship, and Conversations; and
it will teach you to deny it; Yea, if you will own its Teachings, it will teach
you to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly, righteously,
and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. But if you will not return to
the Word, which is nigh in your mouths, and in your hearts, that you may obey
it, and do it, (Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8.) verily this know, that neither your
Strength nor Wisdom, shall be able to deliver you, from the just hand of the
Lord, which shall find out all his Enemies.

Therefore, if you would escape the overturning hand of the Lord, Repent
speedily, and humble your selves before the Lord, and forgive your Enemies;
love Mercy, Compel none to your Worship, nor to uphold your Teachers; and be
willing that the Lord alone should send forth Laborers into his Harvest, and
that he may lead them by his own Spirit, that they may speak as that gives them
utterance, and limit or quench it not, but let all have their Freedom to
Worship God in the Spirit (who know it) according to the manifestation of it,
which is given to every man to profit withal, ( Joh. 4.23, 24. 1 Cor 12.7.) for
such a Worship the Lord owns.

And take away that grievous Oppression of Tithes, and forced Maintenance,
which has cost some their lives, and many a great part of their Estates, who
for Conscience sake have been made to witness against it. Undo every Heavy
Burden, and break every Yoke, and let the Oppressed go free; And let Christ
Jesus, the everlasting King, have the pre-eminence in all things, Col. 1.18.
for these things the Lord will have to be accomplished and brought to pass; and
if you will not submit to him in this his work, he must and will remove you.

And this further consider, Oh! take heed that none of you, upon your Beds or
elsewhere, devise Cruelty and Oppression, and how to avenge your selves upon
your Enemies; and then, when you are assembled together, confirm it by a Law,
because you have power so to do; for the Lord abhors that, who is appearing to
give to all men according to the fruits of their doing, and he will not respect
any man's person.

Now if by your Strength you can hinder the Sun from rising and setting in its
season, and if you be able to stop the Thunder and Lightning from having its
operation, or to hinder the Wind from blowing, and the Rain from descending,
then may you hinder the Decree of the Lord, and by your Strength you may stand
in Power and Peace, and flourish for a long Season, though you serve and avenge
your selves to the full, and though you rebel against the Lord, and oppress his
Heritage.

Lambeth-House, the 28th. of the 5th Month 1660. Written (as moved and given by
that eternal Power, which only can preserve and deliver the righteous) by a
Prisoner for the Lord, who am given up to his Will in all things. G. F. the
younger.

A MESSAGE OF Tender Love Unto such Professors as have attained any true
sincerity, simplicity, and Zeal for God in their Professions; Or who (after
their Backslidings and Apostasy from the former appearances of God unto them)
are now in this the day of Trial (which is begun) brought to feel any fresh
Desires, and living breathings, and thirstings renewed in them toward the Lord.
OH ye Professors! who have tasted of the Word of God's Grace, (in any measure)
and who have formerly had any true Tenderness in you, and Zeal for God; Oh
friends! in Bowels of much Tenderness and Love, am I drawn forth to write unto
you; yea my soul breaths mightily to the Lord for you, who have now any true
hungrings and thirstings renewed in you after his Righteousness, and in whose
hearts there are any true simple desires retained, to know the Will of God, and
to do it.

Friends, The Eternal Being, which gives being to all his Creatures, has
largely manifested his love unto the World, in giving his only begotten to be
the Light of the World, (who does enlighten every one that comes into the
World, that all through him might believe) and inasmuch as he in the fullness of
time sent forth his only begotten ( full of Grace and Truth) into the World,
in a body which he had prepared him, therein to do his will, which body the
only begotten of the Father freely gave, and offered up for a Sacrifice for
Sin, and so according to his Grace he tasted Death for every man, and by his
offering himself once for all, he has put an end to all the Sacrifices and
Offerings mentioned in the Law, which could not make the Comets thereunto
perfect, (nor those that offered them) as appertaining to the Conscience: So
Christ the one Offering is become the Propitiation for the sins of the whole
World, So that none shall be able in the day of the Lord to plead, or say, Lord
because our first Parents fell from thee, and became dead unto thee, and so
were driven out from thy presence, and we being brought forth in this
unreconciled state, there was no way left unto us to approach or come near unto
thee, to lay hold of the Grace, that thou offerest unto all, by reason of thine
Anger; I say none shall be able thus to plead: For Christ the Fathers Love has
consecrated a way, by his freely giving up himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice
which appeaseth God, and therefore it is said, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing sin unto them. So he that
perishes it shall be for his own sins, not for his parents* but because he
believed not in Christ, who has freely made a way for him to come unto God,
and by the power of his life visiting him, puts him in a capacity to receive
the free grace, which brings salvation, which to all men has appeared.
who wrought Eternal Salvation for all them that obey him: And here is the one
Offering which perfects for ever them that are sanctified. And he having
accomplished the Will of the Father, in that body which was prepared him of the
Father (in which he came into the World) he again left the World (he not being
of the World) and ascended unto the Father (from whence he proceeded) and sat
down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, and is now Glorified with the
same Glory that he had with the Father before the world began; yea the same
that descended into the lower parts of the Earth, is also the same that
ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things; and being one
with the Father, and in the Father, and the Father in him, his presence fills
Heaven and Earth; and being the Son in the Father, he has Power as the Father,
to quicken whomsoever he will, that all men might honor the Son as the Father,
by whom all things were made, that were made, in whom we live, move, and have a
being; and he has a Name given him above every name (to which all things must
bow) which is called The Word of God, or Jesus, because he is a Savior, and
saves his People from their Sins. This is he that is given to be the Head of
the Body, which is the Congregation of the Righteous, the fullness of him that
fills All in all; that he in all things ( in whom all fullness dwells) might
have the Pre-eminence, being the express substance of the Father's Glory, and
the very virtue of his Being, one with him in Nature, and one in Name; for as
the Father is Divine, so the Son is also Divine; and as the Father is called
the Light, so the Son is also called the Light; the Father is called The Mighty
God, so is the Son also: Yea the Son's Name is called (Wonderful) The mighty
God, the everlasting Father (mark that) the Prince of Peace, of whose
Government there shall be no End.

Now in the Father there is Life, and in the Word the Son, there is Life, and
this is one; and this Life proceeding from the Father and the Son, is that one
Eternal Spirit, which is not to be limited: Yea God is a Spirit, and Christ is
the Lord that spirit; yea he is the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the
quickening Spirit, by whom the free gift is come upon all men, to justify them
that believe in the Life, and he that believes not, he is condemned by the
Life, which is the Light that does enlighten every one that comes into the
World; so the gift that is come upon the unbeliever, that condemns him, because
he believes not in the Light, but loves the Darkness better.

Now Friends, This is he (the Light) who gives you a Being, and upholdeth all
things by the word of his Power, and has been near unto you ever since ye have
had a Being, and he has beheld all your actions; yea he has discerned all
your thoughts, none of them could be hid from him, for he knew them long
before. This is he that tells unto man what his thought is, and The Lord of
Hosts is his Name. This is he who has reproved you, and set your sins in order
before your eyes. Oh! How often has he brought you into a sensibleness of your
Conditions? How often has he smitten you for Sin, and broken you into Tenderness
by his Power, when you have seen your loathsome state? Oh! how often has he
begotten true Tender desires, and breathings in you, after the Knowledge of his
Will? And how has he appeared unto you, and showed you the Darkness,
Ignorance, and Idolatry that many of you were formerly in? And how often has he
begotten loathings in you against those things that you saw (with his Light) to
be evil? And how often has he kindled a zeal in many of you against the works of
the Devil? And how have you felt his Tender Love sometimes opening your
understandings, and drawing you into that which is good? Oh! How has he
sometimes brought some of you into lowliness of mind, and given you to see the
vanity of this world? And how has he opened a door of hope unto you, and given
you a measure of faith (sometimes) concerning your Eternal Salvation?

And how have some of you then felt a willingness begotten in you to deny your
selves, and the glory and vanity of this world, and to take up that, and to
bear that, which appeared to cross your carnal minds, and to do unto others as
ye would they should do unto you? And how did the Pride, and Glory, and vanity
of this World become a burden to many of you in that day? Oh! How have some of
you cried out and said, you had rather cease to live, than not cease to Sin? Oh
Friends! This was a good beginning, and some of you came further than others in
the way that was good; yea surely a good sweet Presence of God was among many
of you in the day when you were low and tender, and several of you were
sensible of his love in that day, while sincerity and simplicity abode in your
hearts. Oh! How did the Lord hear your cries in that day, when many of you
cried unto him for deliverance? Oh! How did he overturn your Enemies before you
which oppressed your consciences? And how did he give you outward rest, and
peace, and Liberty to worship him, according as he had made himself manifest
unto you.

But Oh Friends! there has been a sad day of Apostasy among many of you, and
many of your Teachers have caused you to err; for as they went from the
simplicity and Tender Life in themselves, that once had stirred in some of them
against the worship of the Beast, they then ran into many words, out of the
Power and Life that had stirred in them, and so lost the simplicity and true
zeal they once had for God. And then they also drew you from that Tender Life
and Power that had visited you, into many words of other men's Conditions, and
so the true simplicity that had been in you soon decayed. And as you were drawn
from the Life and Power, and Spirit of God in your selves, the subtilty within
and without drew your minds after the Tree of Knowledge, and as you reached
forth to that, and received and fed of that, you dyed as to God, and became
more and more alive unto sin, and grew rich in knowledge, and that puffed many
of you up, and so poorness in Spirit, and the hungerings and thirstings after
the Life of God, which sometimes in you had been felt, you lost. And such of
you were often sent empty away from your Worships; mark, empty of the virtue, and
refreshments, and sweetness which the Lord fills such with, as are poor in
Spirit, and lowly in mind, and hunger and thirst after his Righteousness. But
others among you, I know, went often from your Worship full, though it were but
of the declaration of others conditions, and their own conceivings, and a false
joy. And several of you who had seen the Lords mighty hand, and had been
witnesses of his Power, both within and without, when you got into outward
ease, and peace, you soon forgot his goodness; and some of you growing great in
the Earth, were lifted up in your minds, you then turned back, and licked up
that which you had formerly vomited out, and then hardness and dryness came
upon many of you; and then that which the Lord had wounded in many of you, (to
wit, the lustful nature which should have been crucified by the immortal Power)
revived and became healed again: And then a false liberty you run into, and so
into excess, and then several of you become Oppressors and Despisers, even of
such as the Lord by his mighty Power had gathered from your dead Forms and
Ways: And many of you provoked the Lord unto anger several ways, for which
cause he has now sent a rod to scourge the back-sliders; and them that were
more faithful, must also be proved by the same. Oh friends! much might truly be
said unto many of you, concerning your great Apostasy, and your bringing of
this Day of Trial, or causing it to be brought upon you: But although I may
hint something unto you concerning those things, yet that is not the thing
which is chiefly upon me at this time: But this is that which lay much upon me;
to wit, to bring to your remembrance something of the former loving kindness of
the Lord unto you, and to exhort you who have back-slided, to return to the
first love that was begotten in you toward the Lord, and to keep to that
Principle of Life, which did begin a good work in you, and to strengthen and
encourage you to go on in the work of the Lord. For as concerning your
Apostasy, I hope many of you are convinced of that in a great measure, by the
witness of God in your own Consciences; and it is not my desire to upbraid you
with that, which I hope in some measure is already become loathsome unto your
selves; neither would I add to your sufferings (in whom there is now a true
tenderness toward the Lord) in this the Day of Trial; for I believe many of
you have, or will have, as much of them as you can well bear; but my tender
desire is, that you may be brought to feel so much of the Power of God in your
selves as may support you, (and keep you in patience) in all your Trials, until
such time as the Lord shall make you fit for deliverance.

Now I do believe, that some of you have retained a greater integrity and
simplicity in your Profession than others, and have not so deeply Apostatized
from that which God made known unto you of himself, as others have done; and
some of you I know have long been burdened with the Apostasy that others among
you have fallen into. And I know several of you also, have long gone under a
burden, even concerning your own deadness, barrenness, and unprofitableness,
you being made sensible thereof by the VVitness of God in your own Consciences.
And when ye have heard others rejoicing, and telling forth their experiences,
as they called them, (which was much of it the Saints experiences of old, which
these had not attained unto, any otherwise but by gathering their words out of
the Letter, or from man) then has sorrow, doubtings, and fears filled your
hearts.

Now as there are several conditions among you, so also here are several things
spoken unto each condition; therefore you must mind the VVitness of God in your
selves, which makes manifest unto you your several conditions, and that will
let you see what of these things that are here written, properly belongs to
each of you, which is my desire that you may receive; for my tender love in the
Lord Jesus Christ is unto all your souls, who truly breath after the Lord,
desiring your eternal good; and that you may be brought into the enjoyment of
that Life, and Power, and Presence, which only can give satisfaction unto your
immortal Souls.

Therefore as you tender the good of your own souls, and eternal Peace, Cease
hunting abroad (in your imaginations) and leave off wandering from Mountain to
Hill, and from Hill to Mountain, (where several of you have even wearied your
selves for very vanity, and have not found a resting place) and return Home.
Retire your minds inward unto that which often springs in you, giving you the
sensible knowledge and feeling of your particular conditions, and putting you
in remembrance of the dealings of God with you in times past; for that which
thus springs in you, is the Gift of God, which is given you to profit withal.
Oh Friends! turn not from this Gift in your selves, as you have done; for by
your turning from this pure Life, when it has visited you (by its often putting
you in remembrance wherein you went wrong) you have come to loose the
sensibleness of your condition, and the enemy of your Souls thereby has gotten
great advantage against you, and then you have been drawn and led by him into
that which could not profit you: Therefore all mind that Gift of God in your
selves, which makes you sensible of your present conditions, and which often
begets true desires in you, to do the Will of God, and which has brought
some of you into lowliness of mind, and to walk humbly with the Lord, in his
pure Fear, for some time. For if ever you come to witness the true desires of
your souls satisfied, and you established in true Peace, you must receive the
living Principle of God in your own particular Vessels; which Principle, I call
the Light, it being a proper name for it; because it makes manifest all things
that are justly reproved, and whatsoever does make manifest, the same is Light.
But I shall not desire to tie up any of you to give this Principle of Truth
only the name of Light; for if you come to believe in it, and receive it in the
love of it, and walk in obedience to its drawings, leadings, and requirings, I
shall not matter if you call it the Truth, or the Gift of God, or the
manifestation of the Spirit of God, or the Grace of God, or the ingrafted Word,
or the manifestation of God, or Christ, or a measure of the Eternal Being, or
Fullness, or Divine Nature, or any other name which may truly be given unto it.
But this is that which I desire, That you all may receive the thing it self,
which has so often made manifest your conditions unto you, and sometimes brought
you into brokenness of Spirit.

Object. But some may say, When we have had our conditions made manifest unto
us, and when we have been brought into brokenness of spirit, and have had
tender desires begotten in us toward God, to do his Will, it has often been,
either when we have been reading the Scriptures, or hearing them Preached, or
read by others; and therefore we believe the Scriptures have done these things
to us, rather than any thing within us.

Answ. Friends, I shall not deny but that your conditions have been made
manifest unto you, and that you have been brought into brokenness of Spirit,
and have had true desires begotten in you, to do the Will of God, sometimes
when you have read, or heard the Scriptures read, or Preached unto you: But
this I say unto you, It was not the Scriptures that did these things, but it
was the Gift of God in your own hearts at that time; as I shall plainly declare
unto you. (Mark) Thus it was; when you have read, or heard others read or speak
such words of the Scriptures of Truth, as were suitable to that condition you
were then in, or which did declare against such things as you were guilty of,
(mark) then has the Witness of God arose in you (sometimes) and plainly spoke
to your understanding part, and convinced you that you were guilty of such
things as were spoken against, in such a Scripture as you read or heard; yea,
it was the measure of God's Truth in your own Vessels, that has so made
manifest your particular conditions unto you, and has persuaded and
overpowered you, and made you believe, and sometimes confess particularly, that
thou were the man, or woman, or child, that was guilty of that, or had need
of that which thou then did read or hear, that the Scripture declared
against, or of. And when the Power of God has thus wrought in you at that
time, when you have heard or read the Scriptures, you have sometimes indeed
been brought into brokenness of Spirit, and render desires have been begotten
in you toward the Lord: And the Lord has also appeared unto some of you,
sometimes in the Night season, or as you have been about your labor, or
otherwise; and some of you have felt his pure Power working in you, whereby
your understandings in some measure have been opened, and your conditions
plainly made manifest unto you, and much tenderness has been begotten in you,
even when you have neither heard nor read any thing outwardly, but the pure
operation of the Spirit and Power of Truth in some of you has done these
things, and wrought your minds into lowliness, meekness, and quietness. And
then has the pure love of God been felt (in some measure) whereby your souls
have been refreshed.

So Friends, the Holy One is neither by you to be limited to the Scriptures,
nor yet from the Scriptures, in any wise, as to his appearance to his
Creatures; but you are to learn to wait in the measure of his Grace, which has
appeared unto you, and you are to watch in the Light for his further appearance
unto you: And as you come to wait upon the Lord in his pure Fear and Dread, you
will feel your minds wrought into stilness, and so you will come to hear the
pure Voice of God and Christ (who are one) and become acquainted therewithal;
and his love you will feel arising in you, whereby you will be constrained to
obey it, when or wherever you come to hear it; and then you will see the Lord
is not to be limited, either to time, or place, or means outward; but you will
see that he manifests himself to his Creatures, even when, and where, and
howsoever he pleases.

And truly Friends, As concerning these things which the Lord has suffered to
come to pass of late, it is exceeding righteous and just with him to suffer
those things to be effected; for truly (as you know) he was much provoked
thereunto, and his patience toward many of you was very great; yea, he spared
you long, and yet many of you (whom I now hope are brought to see your
brck-slidings) regarded not his goodness, but walked very carelessly, and some
of you wantonly before him; yea, many of your minds ran into the earth, and its
pomps and vanities again (after a tenderness had been begotten in you toward
the Lord, and a loathing of such things) and Covetousness and Pride increased
among you, and so lusts, and fullness, and ease was then delighted in, and the
honor of this World sought, and received one of another ( and not that which
comes of God only) and those that could not give you that honor that
perishes, such by some of you were hated and mocked at, and yet you professed
much of Religion in words. But alas! the hearts of many of you were removed far
from the Life of Truth, in which the Lord is worshipped, and so the Sincerity
and Zeal which once appeared in some of you for God, and the love which had
sprung in you to him, and one to another (in the day when you were low and
tender) grew cold and died in you, as you departed from the measure of the Life
of God. And thus the Lord became grieved, and pressed with your backslidings,
and his Soul loathed your Sacrifices; and he then saw that a day of Trial would
be better for you than a day of Prosperity. So in Righteousness as from the
Lord, is this day brought upon you, and also in love to your Souls, and so it
shall prove unto you, if ye will now turn unto the Lord with all your hearts,
and humble your selves under his Mighty Hand. Yea some of you who lately have
had the enjoyment of great Estates, and outward Liberty, and Honor, and
Companions, and have now lost them, or part of them, I do believe that you will
be made to confess ( to the Glory of God) that it is his love to you in
suffering them to be taken from you; yea some of you will come to see that the
Lord is just and merciful unto you in suffering your Idols to be stripped off,
and taken away. For you will see how some of you have Idolized men, the World,
and its honor and glory, and Forms without the Power of an endless Life. Oh
Friends! I have a secret hope for a Remnant of you, that the Lord by this kind
of dealing with you, will bring you near unto himself, and that a day shall
come wherein you shall be made to say, that It was good for us that we were
Afflicted.

But Friends, you that come this to witness, you must mind the free Grace of
God that brings Salvation, which to all men has appeared; yea, ye must own
and receive it in its pure Teachings, and wait in the Virtue of it, to receive
Power to deny and forsake the Ungodliness and Worldly lusts, (which it will
make manifest unto you) that you have been addicted unto; and must wait to feel
it drawing you into Godliness, Righteousness, and Soberness, and into Patience
and Contentedness with the Will of God, which is a precious thing. Truly they
they that do not wait to come into, and to be kept in Patience in this day of
Trial, their sufferings will be great. And if the fretting impatient, murmuring
Nature be given way and leaned unto, that will aggravate the Sufferings
exceedingly, and beget Torment in the mind.

Therefore you who desire to come into, and to be kept in true Obedience unto
the Lord, in this the day of Trial, be watchful in the Light, and abide in the
pure Fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom; and take heed of the
subtilry of the Serpent, who will seek more and more to beguile you, and to
lead you aside from the way of God. Verily Friends, if you do not retire your
minds inwards, unto the Life of Jesus, (which is the light of men) you will be
deceived, yea if you do not receive the spirit of Truth to be your guide, and
Leader, and obey the same, you will still run into those things which cannot
profit you, and the renewed desires in you toward the Lord will be strangled.

Now I know some of you have formerly found the Lord's Leadings and Teachings,
in some measure, in the day when he drew you out of Episcopacy (so called) and
raised up a zeal in you against the Lording spirits in the Bishops, and against
the dark way of their imaginary Worship, and if you had kept low in the pure
Fear of the Lord, I know he would have further appeared unto you. But here was
the loss of many of those that the Lord, had appeared unto, (Mark) they did not
abide in his Tender Fear, neither did they continue waiting upon him (for
Teaching) in the measure of Life, in which he had appeared unto them; but many
of them going from his Witness in themselves, they soon began to imagine another
Form of Worship which is called Presbitery, and many sat down and settled in
that, and did not mind the Leadings of the Life which had appeared, and in some
measure quickened them; and so much Deadness and Barrenness came upon such as
would not be subject to the drawings of the pure Life of God. But those that
kept their integrity in any measure, and waited upon the Lord, the pure Life
opened things further unto them, as they were able to bear; and they were drawn
a little further, and a fine Freshness and Tenderness and Love appeared in them
for a time: But so soon as they had settled themselves in another Form, which
is called Independency, then many of them not willing to follow the Leadings of
the Life, any further then the Articles which they had drawn up, and agreed
upon, would admit of, whereby the freshness that had appeared in some of them,
began to wither. Yet some who still desired to go on, according to the Leadings
of the Life, the Life opened things further unto them, and they left the other;
but they not continuing in the true waiting upon the Lord to be led by him,
several of them also ran into another Form, called Anabaptism, wherein many
began to settle. But some of them I do believe took up that, far more simply
than others; for they being pressed outwardly to it by their Teachers, and also
finding in the Scriptures, that the Saints of Old Practiced such things, they
letting in reasonings, and not waiting in the pure Life that had stirred in
them, to be led by that in all things, their eye became veiled, whereby they
could see no further, but looked upon that to be their duty, to wit, to go in
the water, and so durst not omit it. But the pure Life which had visited them
sprang up afresh, and wrought mightily in some of them, and showed them the
emptiness of the water outward; and let them see, that it is the Baptism inward
(with the holy Spirit and with Fire) which saves, and brings to the answer of a
good Conscience; And that no Form is to be minded any further then the Power is
felt to lead into it, or then the presence of the Lord is witnessed in it. And
thus the Lord by his pure Life has gathered Thousands out of the Forms before
mentioned; and I do believe that he will yet daily gather more and more into
the Power which is endless.

Therefore all you who are yet left in any of those forms before mentioned, or
any other, or out of Forms, who have retained any thing of the former
Tenderness and Smiplicity which was begotten in you by the appearance of the
Lord; And all you who are brought to see your backslidings, and are now brought
to feel any true desires, and thirsting after God renewed in you, my tender
love reaches forth unto you all, in the Life, Power and love of God, wherewith
I am loved, and in which I am preserved. Oh! that I could feel you bound up and
established with me in the unchangable Truth of God, where satisfaction and
Peace is received, and where nothing can make afraid. Oh! that ye would freely
yield your selves obedient servants unto the Righteousness of God, which is
revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of men, (Mark) that is the
thing which you must become obedient unto, God's Righteousness which appears
in you against all unrighteousness. And all wait in that which moves against
Sin, for that is the Power of God, which you must be turned unto, and receive,
before you can receive the remission of Sins, and an inheritance among them
that are sanctified, by the Faith which Christ Jesus, the Righteousness of God
is the Author and finisher of.

And Friends, you must all mind the present manifestation of the Power of God,
and what it now draws and leads unto; For if you should now run into those
things wherein you have formerly enjoyed something of the presence and Life of
God, yet if you feel not the pure Power of the Lord God, now drawing you into
them, deadness will come upon you more and more, and the tender desires that
are renewed in you toward the Lord will be destroyed. Oh! consider this, the
day of the Lord is far broke forth in Light and Knowledge, and he is yet making
it brighter and brighter, unto them that truly wait upon him: yea he is leading
them by the hand of his love from one degree of Grace, and Faith, and
Knowledge, unto another, and changing them from glory to glory. And he is
pouring from vessel to vessel, that the dregs may be left by themselves. Yea he
is sifting, and winowing, that the Chaff, and the dross may be taken away, and
so the Seed which stands approved may be made manifest. And he is bringing
through the fire, and through the fire, because the day hasteneth, and draws
nigh, in which he will make up his Jewels, and consume the chaff and the dross.
Therefore look not back, neither be afraid of the rage of man; seek not to save
your selves by bowing to his Will, but look to the Lord who declares unto you
what your thoughts are, and gird up the loins oF your minds, and watch and be
sober, and hope to the end, all you who through patience, and experience, are
come to know any thing of the true hope, which makes not ashamed.

And Friends, concerning Faith and the Promises of God, there has been much
Profession and talk of those things amongst you: But now the day is appearing
which will try all Professions, and every one's work must come to Trial.
Therefore consider your Faith, and the Ground, Author, and effects of it: For
there is a dead Faith, and a living Faith, and a ground for both; Now the
living Faith has Jesus for its Author, and the power of God for its Ground;
and its effects declare it to be the living Faith, for it works in them that
have it by love, unto the purifying of their hearts, and it is their victory
over the world. These were the effects of the living Faith in the Saints of
old, and it has the same now, as they can witness who have received it. Now
there is a Faith which stands but in Words, not in the Power, and this is a
dead Faith, it cannot work, it purifies not the heart, it gives not victory
over the world, nor access to God, as the living Faith does.

Oh Friends! Labor not to content your selves with a dead Faith, but wait that
you may hear the leaving Word by which the living Faith comes. Now a man may
declare of the Word of Life, as the Scriptures do, and many may believe the
words to be true, and profess the same; and yet if they receive not the living
Word, or VVitness in their own hearts, their Faith will prove but a dead Faith,
and they will have but words for its ground; but they that hear the Words of
Truth declared, or read them, and then feel the living Word arising in
themselves, witnessing to the words that they have read or heard, that they are
true, over-powering them to believe the same; or if the Word of Life speaks
to any ones understanding, when words outwardly are not spoken, and they be
overpowered by the Word to believe the same, such come indeed to feel and know
how the living Faith comes, and is wrought.

And they come also to see that this Faith stands in the Power of God, and not
in words, and that Jesus (who saves from sin) is the Author of it. And all
that come into this state, if they wilfully turn not from the Power, they will
feel their Faith increased in and by the Power, and the effects of it will
daily come to be manifest, which will be an evidence unto them to prove that it
is the living Faith, for they will feel it giving them access to God.

Oh ye Professors! I speak what I know and witness, and without this Faith you
cannot please God.

And concerning the Promises of God, this know:

The Promises are unto the Seed, Not unto Seeds as of many, but unto the Seed,
which is One, which is Christ. So all that come to have right unto the Promises
of God, they must come to be of the Seed unto which the Promises are. Now it is
the Word of Life which begets unto God, and brings to be of the Seed which
is the Heir of the Promises of God. Therefore wait in the appearance of the
Word of Life, that by it you may be begotten into the nature of the
incorruptible Seed, and become born of it, that so you may be made meet to be
partakers of the precious Promises. Oh that ye would hearken diligently and
obey, and your Souls should live. The Lord's hand of tender love and pity is
stretched forth toward you. Oh! be not rebellious any longer, lest he cease
striving with you. Truly many of you have mightily provoked the Lord unto
anger, and grieved his Spirit in this particular, (Mark) in your applying
Promises, as you have termed it; for many of you have stolen the words which
declare of the Promises which are to the Seed of Life, and you have applied
them unto the wrong Seed or Birth; yea, you have gathered the good words (out
of the Scriptures) that were written unto them who were born again of the
incorruptible Seed, and you have applied them unto your selves, in the
corruptible unregenerate state; and when you have done thus, the Witness of God
in your own Consciences has often arose and condemned you, and broke the false
peace and joy which you had created to your selves, by stealing the Saints
conditions and experiences, and applying them to your selves, calling them
yours, and saying, it was so with you, when it was not; yea, many of you have
said, your sins were washed away in the Blood of Christ, and that you were
freely justified in the sight of God by his Grace, and your Teachers also have
told you it was so; yea, they have Preached peace unto you (because you put
into their mouths) even while you lived in your sins: But the pure Grace of God
has appeared in your hearts and condemned you. And when you have been thus
judged by the Witness of God, your false peace has been broken, and then some
of you have run to your Teachers (who had cried peace unto you, and daubed you
up with untempered Mortar) and told them your conditions, how you were
condemned in your selves, and how you had lost the peace and joy that you
formerly had, and how judgment was felt in the room of it. Then some of your
blind Guides have told you, that that was the Devil that condemned you, and
brake your Peace, (and thus they have brought themselves under the Woe, Putting
Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness) and then they have told you, you
must apply the Promises, and act Faith (as they call it) upon the Promises in
the Scriptures, and keep unto them. And thus they have sought to daub you up
again, and to draw you from the pure Spirit of Judgment; and some of you who
have received their words, have then strove against the pure Witness (which
condemned you) and counted it the Tempter, and have labored in your wills to
get from under its pure Judgment, and to force your selves into a belief and
persuasion again, that those things, to wit, the Promises belonged unto you.
And thus have you fought against the Witness of God, and denied its Testimony,
and strangled it, and so got into a false peace again; but others of you have
been kept more sensible of its judgment, and have not dared to deny it,
because you have seen that ye were not fit for the Promises; for you have seen
with the Light, that you were out of the condition which is required of such as
come to be partakers of the Promises. Now it has been a great saying among
many of you, That you must act Faith upon a bare Promise in the Scriptures, as
your Teachers have taught you; and they have told you, That Abraham believed
God upon a bare Promise, and so must you. Oh consider this well! The Word of
the Lord came unto Abraham, saying unto him, Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield,
and thy exceeding great reward. And again the Lord spoke unto him, saying, I
will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing; and
Abraham believed God in these Promises, and others, and he obeyed him: So
Abraham's Faith was reckoned unto him for Righteousness, and he was called the
Friend of God, because he believed and obeyed him. Now if you were come to hear
the Lord speak unto you as Abraham did, then you ought to believe whatever the
Lord promised unto you, that he would perform the same; But if you only get
these Promises or others, out of the Scriptures, and then apply them unto your
selves, and say you believe it is, or shall be so with you, as it is expressed
in those Promises, and yet you never heard the Lord say any such thing unto
you, (Mark) you do but deceive your selves; for such a belief (or acting of
Faith upon the Promises as you call it) will never be accounted unto you for
Righteousness; Neither will you come to find such Promises so gotten fulfilled
unto you by the Lord. And you are also to consider this, That many of the
Promises in the Scriptures were given forth upon Conditions, and except you
come to witness the conditions fulfilled in you by the Power, you are not like
to witness such Promises made good unto you. And also there are some Promises
spoken of in the Scriptures, which naturally belong to the Immortal Seed, that
were by the Lord given forth unto it, without expressing any conditions,
because the Seed is free, and does the Will of God naturally: Now all that come
to have right to such Promises, and to witness them fulfilled unto them by the
Lord, they first must be converted into the nature of the Seed, by the working
of the Immortal Word in them. Therefore you that have true desires after the
Lord, wait to feel the work of the Word of Life in your own hearts, that so by
it you may be made meet (as I said before) to be partakers of the Promises.

Verily Friends! Many of you have much to pass through, before you can come to
feel and witness the Lord ministering his precious Promises of Life and Peace
freely unto you. Oh! He waits to be gracious unto you; yea, he has long
waited. Oh! That you would now turn unto him in the drawings of his Power and
Life, and cease willing, and running, and striving in your own wills and ways,
and wait to be guided and led by his Spirit, into those things which he
requires at your hands.

Oh Friends! It is the inside, it is the inside that must be cleansed; for
whilst that is polluted and unclean, the Lord regards not the Worship: It is
he that searches the heart, and tries the inward parts; you cannot hide any
thing from him; For he beholds all your goings, and actings, and thoughts.

Now I know many of you will often make large confessions of your sins; but
Friends, there is a further thing to be minded, (Mark) you must also come to
forsake them, or else you cannot find the mercy. Therefore hearken diligently
unto the call of the Lord, and believe and wait in that which makes manifest
sin, and calls you out of the same, for this is holy, and consents not unto
sin, it has no fellowship with darkness, nor concord with the Devil. Now this
is the living Truth; by this you may know it, (mark) it is contrary to
whatsoever is not of the Truth, and it opposes evil in the very appearance
thereof. Oh that you would hearken unto this! and receive this in the love of
it, when it appears in you, that so by the Life, and Power, and Virtue of it,
you might be saved and cleansed from your sins. Oh Friends! if you ever come
truly to be made free, it must be by the Truth; if ever you come to be
sanctified, it must be with the Truth: Now the Word is the Truth, and the Word
is very nigh you, even in your mouths, to show you your evil words, and also in
your hearts, to show you the deceit and thoughts thereof; yea, its Virtue goes
through all things, and its Power upholdeth all things, in it is Life, and that
Life is the Light of men. Oh that you would believe in it! that you might be
made the children of it: This Word is Immortal, and it is able to destroy the
Devil and his Works, and to save your Immortal Souls. Oh Friends! though its
appearance in you be in judgment, yet resist it not, neither turn from it in
any wise; but when it convinces you of any evil, and begets any love in you
toward its judgment. Oh then abide in that love, and then you will see how
Christ comes for judgment into the World to judge the Prince of the World, and
to cast him out, and to make blind that eye which has been open, and has seen
in the worldly carnal Spirit, and to open that eye which has been kept blind
by the God or Prince of the World. Yea, as you wait in the righteous Judgments
of Christ, you will feel him opening the eye of the understanding part, with
his Invisible Light, whereby you will come to see into the Invisible things of
God. Oh Friends! you must own Christ the Word of God, in the way and
ministration of his Judgments; yea, you must own him in the Spirit of
Judgment and Burning, before you can truly witness that you are reconciled
unto God. Oh! wait to hear the Voice of Christ in your inward man, and be
content to bear his yoke, and wait in stilness, that patience in you may have
its perfect work; and if any of you see with the Life of the Word, that your
hearts are hard and rocky, keep but in patience, and wait in that Life which
makes you sensible of your condition, and you will feel the pure operation of
the Word, smiting as a hammer, which will break your hard hearts into
tenderness; Yea, you will feel them dissolved, melted, and changed, by the
Power of the Word, as ye believe and wait in the same; and then you will know
experimentally, that the Word of the Lord is as a Hammer, and as a Sword, and
as a fire, and as Fuller's soap; for you will feel it breaking and cutting
down, burning up, and washing out all the hard, fruitless, defiling nature; and
then you will come to know Christ's Fan in his hand, for you will feel him
Purging the Floor, by separating the Chaffy dirty nature from the tender Seed,
which delights to do the will of God: Now as you come to feel this within,
you come to witness his Baptism, with the Holy Spirit, and with Fire; yea, here
the washing in the Regeneration, and the renewing in the Holy Spirit, comes to
be witnessed: And here Christ's work comes truly to be felt and known, which is
to destroy the Devil and his Works, to blot out Transgression, to take away
Sin, to cause the old things to pass away, and to make all things new. Oh
Friends! wait to feel and witness this work, and think not that your saying,
Christ has done all for you will profit you, while you live in the old fleshly
Birth; for verily, verily, I say unto you, That except you be born again, you
can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. Therefore wait to feel this
inward work, that so you may know Christ formed in you, his Mind, his Spirit,
his Disposition, his Nature, and then you will come to the new Creature, and to
witness the Election which avails and obtains. And here the Circumcision
without hands you will come to know, which is the putting off of the body of
the sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ; And this brings to be the
Jew inward, whose praise is not of man, but of God; and here is the true Israel
of God, upon which the mercy comes; and here is the true Elect Seed, unto which
the Promise is; and they that come to this, are born from above, and are
Members of Christ's Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; and they are come to
the Riches of the Mystery which has been hid from Ages and Generations, which
is Christ in them the hope of Glory.

Oh Friends! These things are not written unto you, that you should feed upon
the words, and seek to get a Rest there; but these things are written in tender
bowels of Love, unto such of you as truly hunger and thirst after the new Life;
That so as the Lord's witness arises in any of you to witness unto the Truth
of them, and to give you any understanding in the same, you may join to his
witness, and believe and wait in the same, to feel these things fulfilled in
you. So as you wait in the Invisible measure of God, you will come to be
sensible how far you are changed, in which Birth you live, in which Birth your
minds are centered, and so of which Birth you are; for as it is written, even
so will you see it to be that, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; And they that are after (or of) the
flesh do mind the things of the flesh; But they that are after the spirit do
mind the things of the Spirit; And that they that live in the flesh cannot
please God. And as you mind that Life which oft-times arises in you, and makes
you sensible of your Conditions, you will plainly come to know it in your
selves, that to be carnally minded, it is death, but to be Spiritually minded
it is Life and Peace; For you will see if the enemy of your Souls can get your
minds into Carnal things at any time, that then deadness and death comes over
you, and you become dead as unto God; until his witness arises in you to
quicken you again; But as your minds are kept in obedience to the Spirit of
God, and you minding the things of it, which it opens unto you, ye will feel
Life and Peace springing in your Souls, and that from the presence of the Lord.

Therefore be diligent in this the day of your Visitation, (which yet in mercy
is continued unto you) and as the Lord makes manifest unto you, that any of
the Forms, that you have been, or are yet in, are empty and dead, and then
appear in spirit to draw and lead you out of them; O be not like stubborn,
Rebellious, wilful Children, that will not follow their father any further then
may please their own wills, but hang back and murmr; I say take heed of
giving way to such a spirit, least the Lord leave striving with you, and give
you up wholly to follow the deceit of your own hearts, for the Lord will not
always strive with man; But the day shall come, wherein the Lord will withdraw
himself from the Rebellious, and he that is filthy let him be filthy still.

Oh Friends! I see a day which will be terrible unto the Disobedient; For when
the Lord has tried his People, and gathered the sincere hearted out of all
Forms unto himself, he will then sweep away the refuge (that will not be
gathered in the day of their Visitation) with a mighty Destruction; And the day
hastens in which this shall be accomplished by the mighty Arm and Power of the
Lord, which is now working in secret. Therefore wait to be led and taught of
him, and heed not the Rage and Cruelty of man, neither bow to his Perverse
will, but know that the Lord has given bounds to the Sea, that although it
roar, Rage and swell, and cast up mire and dirt, yet it cannot go beyond its
bounds.

Therefore be Patient and commit your Cause unto the Lord, and seek not to
avenge your selves, but leave it unto him, who will avenge the Cause of his
People. And wait in the feeling of the Truth in your selves, that so you may
feel the pure Life of Christ to be a stay to your minds, in all your Trials and
Temptations. Oh poor hearts! this is a precious thing to come to be sensible of
the true stay and guide to the mind. O keep to that which makes your
Temptations and thoughts manifest, and believe and wait in that, and then you
will feel that to be a stay to your minds, and you will feel the Lord's secret
strength revealed in you, enabling you to stand in whatsoever Trial or
Temptation he shall suffer to come upon you, or to be presented unto you; yea,
as you are faithful to the Power that he commits unto you, you shall not be
tried beyond your strength, but you shall feel the Lord supporting you; and by
his Power he will work your minds into contentedness with his will in all
things; And if you will follow the Power of the Lamb, which is that which moves
against Sin, and takes it away, you will come to feel your hearts and minds
drawn, and Redeemed out of the Earth thereby; and you will be made willing to
give up, and to part with all, and to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

Now if your spirits come to be brought into this frame, then whatsoever man
can do unto you, it will not be able to move you. Oh! that you would wholly
give up your selves to wait upon the Lord, in the pure manifestation of his
Spirit, and cease contending and pleading for those things which the Spirit of
the Lord requires not at your hands. Oh! that you would now mind to obey the
pure requirings of the Life of Jesus in your selves, and that would bring you
into lowliness of mind and meekness of spirit, and into true love to God, and
one toward another; and not only to love your friends, but even to love your
enemies also, and to forgive and pray for them that despightfuly use you; and
then you would indeed bear the Image of the Lamb, and witness his Kingdom set
up in you; and this would bring you in patience to wait, until he arise to
plead the cause of his People, and to avenge himself on his and their enemies,
and to make the Kingdoms of this world his, and the People subject to his
Government; which shall certainly be aceomplished in its Season, and the day
draws nigh.

So the Lord God Almighty manifest himself more and more unto you all, in whose
hearts there are any true, sincere, honest desires to know and do his Will; and
who are willing to follow him as he appears to lead and draw you, and the Lord
of Life manifest his strength unto you, and gather you by the Power of his
Christ into the everlasting Covenant of Life, Rest, and Peace.

This is the sincere desire of my Soul, whose bowels yearn toward you, whose
souls are breathing and thirsting after the endless Life of Righteousness. And
this is Message of true love unto you, in which it is sent forth among you
according to the instructions of the Almighty; yea for your sakes is this
written, whose Souls are panting after the Lord, in what form or society soever
you be in, who are willing to follow the leadings of his Life, and to submit to
his will, as it comes to be made manifest unto you; and many of you, in whom
there be such honest desires, I see are now in a bewildred condition, in this
cloudy and dark day which seems to approach, not knowing well what to do, or
which way to take, or where to find rest or safety, by reason of the want of
the knowledge of a true guide to your minds; I say, for the informing of your
understandings, and for the strengthening of those desires in you, which are
sincere toward the Lord, was I drawn forth in much tenderness and bowels of
unfeigned love to write unto you, that you might be brought to be sensible of
the gift of God in your selves, and to know what that is, that is to guide your
minds, and in what you are to wait to receive the true Teachings, that so your
minds may come to be stayed upon the Lord, and that may be gathered into his
Name, wherein the true help and safety is; and that you may avoid whatsoever
would be a hinderance unto your growth in the simplicity of the Truth.
Therefore I exhort and warn you to take heed of following your own thoughts and
imaginations any longer, but freely give up to be led by that Principle of
Life, which cannot consent to Sin, but appears to call, and draw you out of the
same; You need not fear that that will deceive you, but whatsoever would draw
you from that Life, that is the Deceiver.

And hearken not any longer to such Teachers, as are greedy of filthy lucre;
for such make a prey of you, and cannot profit you at all. And take heed of
hearkening, or joining to such Teachers or People as will turn to, and comply
with any worship or thing, that may be for their advantage, as they account;
and that they may save themselves from sufferings; for such are Lukewarm, and
the Lord will spue them out, and their shame and filthiness shall appear, and
they shall become loathsome both in the sight of God and man; Therefore avoid
them.

And as there are few Teachers amongst the Professors, whom I believe for
Conscience sake dare not turn back and lick up that, which they formerly were
made to vomit out and deny; so also there are many that would willingly turn to
any thing for their bellies, if they might be received, that will not now be
accepted of; and these that see they cannot keep their places by their turning,
they will appear zealous (especially in secret) against those things that they
find some tenderhearted ones cannot bow unto; and so with good words and fair
speeches, they will thus seek to deceive the hearts of the simple, and all this
is but for their Bellies; Therefore take heed of such.

And take heed of joining any longer to such as are settled upon their Lees,
who as one might say, are even glued to a Form which is void of the Power; For
seeing they were to be turned from who had the Form of godliness, because they
denied the Power; much more are they to be turned from, who stick in a Form,
which cannot he truly called a Form of godliness, and therein contend, and
fight, and strive against the Light, which is the Power; And of this sort there
are many in several of the Sects, whose searedness, dryness and hardness is
exceeding great, though they profess much of godliness in words, yet in much
perverseness, wilfulness, and crookedness they oppose the Life and Power of the
same, and will neither enter the Kingdom themselves, nor suffer those that
gladly would, but in a ridgid austere manner, seek to keep the People subject
to them, that they may be Lords over their Consciences. Oh Friends! you that
are tenderhearted come out from among such, for the Lord's hand will be
stretched out against them in a terrible manner; And all wait in the tender
Principle of the Fathers Love and Life which has visited you, and begotten
sincere desires in you after himself, and the Knowledge of his ways, that so
you may be strengthened in the inner man; and feel your Faith, Hope, and
Patience increased, that so you may be able to stand in the Trial without
fainting, feeling the Lord to be your strength, and continual Preserver.

This is the sincere and hearty desire of him who is a sufferer with the true
Seed where ever it suffers, and yet I am gathered in the Spirit, into the
everlasting Kingdom and Covenant of Peace, rest and quietness, where nothing
can make me afraid.

By a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, who am freely given up to his Will,
and in patience do wait to see his Kingdom set up over all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, that he over all may Reign, whose Right it is. GEORGE FOX, the Younger.

A TRUE RELATION Of the unlawful and unreasonable Proceedings of the
Magistrates of HARWICH in ESSEX, against the People of the Lord (called
QUAKERS) Also the manner of their Imprisoning of GEORGE FOX the younger, whom
they with ROBERT GRASSINGHAM accused to the PARLIAMENT; And also the manner of
the PARLIAMENTS Proceedings against them.
IN the Year 1656, it was so ordered of the Lord, that there came unto the Town
of HARWICH some of the People called Quakers, and one of them spoke a few words
to the People as they were coming from the Steeple-house, and so they passed
into an Inn; but the then MAYOR hearing thereof sent unto them, commanding that
they should depart the Town, which they had not freedom in the Lord presently
to do, but after a short space they went out; And it being upon them to return
again, they did so and lodged at that Inn all night, and the next day they
peaceably passed away; so not long after, the Woman that kept the Inn, was
commanded to come before the Magistrates of the Town, who appeared to be
offended with her for lodging of those People, and made her to promise them,
that she would lodge no more such Persons, by threatening to take away her
License, if she did; so great was their envy at the appearance of the Truth in
that Town: But it pleased the Lord, that shortly after, some of the Inhabitants
thereof were convinced of the Truth; and so a way was made for Meetings there,
and several received the Truth in the Love of it, in and about that Town; so
that they could not for Conscience sake pay to the repairing of the
Steeple-house any longer; and therefore had not freedom to Bury their dead in
the ground belonging thereunto; but they joined together, and bought a parcel
of ground to Bury their dead in ( as did Abraham, the Father of the Faithful.)
So in the Year, 1659. it was so ordered of the Lord, that one who lived a
little out of that Town died, and several People were accompanying the dead
Body to bury it in the place purchased for that end; but one of the Magistrates
hearing of it, sent the Constables with a Guard, commanding them not to suffer
the dead Body to be laid in that place ( though the grave was made) and by the
command of that Magistrate, the dead Body was taken away by force, and buried
in the Steeple-house Yard.

Also in the eleventh Month of the same Year, there dyed another Friend near
the same Town, and several Friends came along with the dead Body, to have
buried it in the place aforementioned; a Grave also being made, but Miles
Hubburd, the now MAYOR, and the other Rulers, would not suffer the dead Body to
be laid therein, but caused it to be taken away by force, and so they carried
it and set it by the Seaside, where it lay above ground, part of two days and
one night, and then it was covered over with small stones; but by whom I know
not: Of these things a Record is kept, by Friends in Harwich.

Also in the 3d. Month, in the Year, 1660. I being in Essex, in the work and
service of the Lord, whereunto he has called me by his mighty Power, and
therein sent me forth, to publish his Everlasting Truth, which he is spreading
abroad in this the day of his Power, by which he is gathering those that breath
and thirst after his Rightcousness, out of the dark Ways and Worships of this
World, into the true and living Way and Worship, which Christ Jesus, the true
Light, in the days of his flesh spoke of; which is in the Spirit and in the
Truth: I say, as I was laboring in the Work of the Gospel in that County, I
had much drawings in the Spirit of Truth, to appoint a Meeting in the Town of
Harwich; and that such thereabout who had desires to hear the Truth of God
declared, might have notice given them, that in the Will of the Lord I purposed
to be there on the 13th day of the Month aforesaid, it being the first day of
the Week; so notice was given of the Meeting some days before; and upon the
first Day in the Morning, there were about forty peaceable People, (as Men,
Women, and Children) coming in a Boat over a River which runs by the Town unto
the Meeting; but the Magistrates of the Town hearing thereof, sent some
Officers to the waterside to hinder them from coming on shore ( who were
peaceably come to wait on the Lord, and to hear the Truth declared) so these
Officers, with a great number of rude People, did hinder those peaceable People
from coming on shore, and forced them back again; also the same Morning Robert
Grassingham sent two of his Servants with a Boat, to have fetched over some of
our Friends to the Meeting, but the Officers would not suffer them to go over,
but charged them in the King's Name to come back, and carried them before the
Magistrates; who commanded that they should forthwith be set in the Stocks, and
they were so; and there were kept for some hours.

And thus the Magistrates of that Town encouraged the rude People against Us,
by their unjust proceedings: Now it is usual with the Magistrates of that Town,
to suffer such as come to their Steeple-house-worship, to come or go over the
water upon the first Day of the Week.

And about a Month before, on the first Day of the Week, the MAYOR being
informed that some of our Friends were coming over, he with some other Officers
of the Town, went down to the waterside, being bent against the Innocent; but
when the Boat came on shore, it appeared that they were other People, who were
going about their occasions; and when they saw the Mayor, they said unto him,
We made bold to come over; he answered them, -- It was well enough, I thought
(said he) you had been QUAKERS; -- and thus did he manifest his partiality in
the sight of many in that Town; so notwithstanding the Rulers cruelty, in
causing about forty of our Friends to be forced back, and setting two in the
Stocks, as aforementioned; we that were in the Town peaceably assembled our
selves together in the fear of the Lord, to wait upon him; and for near about
the space of two hours I had liberty to Preach the Gospel to the People, being
filled with the Power of the Lord; but within a short time after the space
aforementioned, there came a great company of rude Seamen, with others of the
Town, and the house being filled before with peaceable People, these rude ones
could not easily get in; but when they saw that they could not get well to me,
because of the press of People, some of them then cursed me bitterly, biding
that they call the Pox and Plague upon me; others crying out -- hang him Rogue,
hang him; -- and another conspiringly said, -- Let us get a Halter (which is a
long Rope) and therewith pull down the House upon the Rogues; -- others cried
out, -- The King is coming now, who will hang or banish you all, -- (it being a
little before his coming.) Now when I heard and saw this great ungodliness, the
Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon me, and I was filled with his
unresistable Power, in which I was made to utter these words, saying, Woe, woe,
unto the Rulers and Teachers of this Nation, who suffer such ungodliness as
this, and do not seek to suppress it; then went some of the multitude and
accused me to the Magistrates, who presently came and commanded the chief
Constable (and some others) to fetch me out, who forthwith pressed in, and in
the King's Name commanded me to go with him; and so he brought me out of the
House into the Street, where the Rulers stood amongst the rude multitude, then
he that was MAYOR said hastily, -- Which is he, which is he? -- some answered,
-- This is he, -- (pointing toward me) then said the MAYOR to the Constables,
-- Take him and put him into Prison; -- then said I to him, if I have done any
thing worthy of death or bonds, I shall not refuse either, but I desire Thee to
show me what Law I have transgressed ( if thou be able) which thou ought to
do before thou sendest me to Prison, that I may know for what thou sendest me
thither; he said, I should know that afterward; but he would neither let me
know my Accusers, nor could he show me any Law I had broken; neither would he
tell me for what cause he sent me to Prison, nor did he at all examine me, but
commanded the Constables to take me away; so I was forthwith haled to Prison,
without a Mittimus.

And Robert Grassingham, whose outward being was at Harwich, being at the
Meeting out of which I was haled, he innocently in tender love went along with
me to Prison; and as he went in the street, he seeing the rude multitude
thronging me, said to the Constables, You ought to see the Peace kept, and not
to suffer the rude People to abuse the Prisoner (or words to this effect.)

So some time after I was imprisoned, there was a Mittimus sent to the Goalor,
signed by Miles Hubburd Mayor, Anthony Woolward, and Daniel Smith; wherein I
was falsely charged, with causing a tumult in that Borough, and disturbing the
Peace thereof; and thus they sought to cover their Persecution, by false
accusing of the Innocent, whom the Lord acquits; but the rude, cursing,
tumultuous, Peace-breaking People ( whom they had let up and strengthened by
their unlawful proceedings) had nothing done unto them, but were let go free;
yet all this did not satisfy their persecuting Spirit, but they further
proceeded in their cruelty, and accused both me and Robert Grassingham to the
PARLIAMENT; Now as for R. G. I know nothing that they could pretend against
him, except they were displeased with his going with me to the Prison, as
aforementioned; nor did they in the least charge him to his face with any
thing; but the MAYOR some time before that, did say unto him, in the hearing of
several Friends; -- If I could but get you out of the Town, then could I deal
well enough with the rest of the QUAKERS; -- but the Lord has a Seed in that
Town, which fears not the rage of man, though one of their Brethren, (through
the cruelty and unlawful proceedings of those Rulers) be taken. From them at
present: So the PARLIAMENT upon the receiving of their false Information,
issued forth an Order for the bringing up of R.G. and Me: A true Copy thereof,
is as follows.

Monday, May the 21th, 1660.
The House being informed, that two QUAKERS, that is to say, George Fox, and
Robert Grassingham, have lately made a disturbance at Harwich, and that the
said George Fox, who pretends to be a Preacher, did lately in his Preaching
there, speak words, much reflecting on the Government and Ministry, to the near
causing of a a Mutiny As for the Government and Ministry of the Town of
Harwich, their streets like Sodom, have shown its effects: And the Angels and
Lot might as justly have been charged with making a disturbance in Sodom, when
the ungodly thronged Lot's Door, as RG. and I in Harwich, as the sober Reader
may see: Also, when I was in Prison there, I have seen out at the Window, many
go staggering with Drunkenness in the street, and both in the day and in the
night, they have come to the Gate and cursed me bitterly, and stammered our
Oaths by reason of Drunkenness, and then cried, -- God save KING CHARLES, --
saying, -- He would hang the Quakers, and the Anabaptists; and these have gone
unpunished: But when sober People have come to the Gate to hear the Truth
declared, them the Goalors Company has thrown water upon, and the MAYOR has
come and commanded them to depart from the Window, and the Goalor has come and
shut it up, and threatened me.
, and is now committed by the Mayor and Magistrates there.

Ordered, That the said George Fox, and Robert Grassingham, be forthwith
brought up in Custody, and that the Sheriff of the County of Essex do receive
them, and give his assistance for the conveying of them up accordingly, and
delivering them into the charge of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House.

Ordered, That the thanks of this House be given to the Mayor and Magistrates
of Harwich, for their care in this business.

William Jessop, Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament.


So after they had kept me ten nights in Harwich Prison, the Sheriff of Essex,
with several armed men, came for me with the Order aforementioned; so a great
company of men with Halbards fetched me out of the hole wherein I was put (
which was not four Yards long, nor so broad as long) and these men would not
suffer me to speak with the MAYOR (though I much desired it) but they guarded
me through the streets, and delivered me to the SHERIFF and his men, who were
to bring me up to LONDON; so as we were coming upon the Road, we met with
Robert Grassingham, who was coming from London toward Harwich, in pursuance of
an Order which he had received from the Commissioners for the Admiralty and
Navy, for the refitting of one of the King's Frigots, which then lay in that
Port, whereof he was then Ship-wright; but notwithstanding R. G. showed his
Order to the Sheriff, yet he brought him back to London with me, and delivered
us into the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the House, who the same
night committed us to Lambeth-House, and gave Order (as the Goalor said) That
but few of our Friends should be suffered to come at us; and when any were
suffered, that then some should stand by and hear what was said; and if any
Letter went from us, or came to us, that the Goalor or some of his Family
should hear them, which was observed for some time: Also we were confined to
our Chamber, for the space of six weeks and upward, and had not that Liberty
allowed us to walk in the Yard, which all the other Prisoners had; and another
time the Goalor said, that the Sergeant had given him an Order, -- That no
person should come at me, no not so much as to bring me Food; but indeed the
Goalor suffered my Food to be brought in; but as for others which came to visit
me, they were kept back for some time: so near about three weeks after we were
committed to Lambeth, we wrote to the PARLIAMENT, and sent the Writing enclosed
in a few lines to the Speaker; but he doing nothing in the thing, we caused it
to be Printed, and several hundreds of the Papers were given to the PARLIAMENT
Men: A true Copy is as follows.

For the HOUSE of COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT, at Westminster.
Friends,
BY your Order touching us, Dated the 21st. of the Third Month, called May, we
understand you have been falsely informed concerning us, by some who have
falsely accused us; Therefore this is our just and reasonable request; that we,
together with our Accusers, may face to face be brought before you; and if any
thing can be justly proved against us worthy of Death, or Bonds, we shall not
refuse either; But if there can be nothing justly proved against us, then ought
our Accusers to be ashamed, and we to be acquitted.

Now we do believe it to be unjust and unreasonable, that a man should be
halled out of a peaceable Meeting, as one of us was at Harwich in Essex, and
sent to Prison without being Examined, or a Mittimus (only for declaring
against the Cursing and the Wickedness of the Rude People, and against such as
suffer such Ungodliness, and do not seek to suppress it) and there to be kept
ten nights, and from thence to be transported unto this place; and that we both
should be here confined to our Chambers, as we have been, for about three weeks
last past, seeing nothing is proved against Us, nor we yet brought to
Examination; neither did your Order express any such Confinement: so these
things are laid before you in plainness, that justice herein may be done by you.

By us who are Sufferers for Righteousness sake, and we have and shall have
Peace in our Suffering, and in writing our selves thus, except we were
convinced by the Law of God, or any just Law of our Nation to the contrary.
Geo. Fox, the Younger. Robert Grassingham.

Lambeth House, the 15th. of the 4th. Month, called June, 1660.

A Copy hereof was delivered to the Speaker of the House, of Commons, enclosed
in a Letter to himself, in these words following; For the Speaker of the House
of Commons,
Friend,
WE desire thee to Communicate this enclosed to the House of Commons, it being
a few Innocent, Just and Reasonable words to them, though not in the Eloquent
Language of Man's Wisdom, yet it is in the Truth which is Honorable.

We are friends to Righteousness and Truth, and to all that are Found therein.
R. G. G. F.




And being informed that as yet nothing is done in Answer to those Reasonable
and just desires, which are above mentioned; It is therefore thought meet to
have it Printed, that so each Member of Parliament, as well as Others in
outward Authority, may be acquainted with our Innocence, who (with many others)
unjustly suffer Bonds and other Cruelties.

This in tender Love, is a Warning and Visitation to you all, that in this your
day of Trial, you continue not Oppression upon the Righteous, nor Afflict the
Meek, whom the Lord regards, lest you fall as those whom God cast out before
you.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the PARLIAMENT would do nothing in our business;
Then some who desired that we together with our Accusers might be brought to a
hearing, went to some of the Members, and desired that it might be moved in the
House; but they would not; then a Reason was desired, Why not? Their Answer
was, Because our Paper was not a Petition, nor directed with this Title ( To
the Right Honorable the House of Commons, etc.) and except we would Petition
and give them that Title aforementioned, we might lie where we did if we would;
and yet they confessed, that there was little of Fact charged against us, and
that our Paper was Rational, and our request therein Reasonable.

So because we have learned to speak truth in plainness to every man, and could
not for Conscience sake give flattering Titles to any, least our Maker should
take us away; nor Petition any but him; therefore were we denied Justice, and
are made a prey upon by those who seek honor one of another, and not that,
which comes from God only.

So after we had lain about fournteen weeks in Lambeth Gate House, without
being examined; then one of the Members of PARLIAMENT moved our business in the
House, whereupon an Order was made; a true Copy whereof follows; Thursday the
30th of August, 1660.
Ordered, That George Fox and Robert Grassingham, who by virtue of a former
Order of this House, were taken into custody by the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House, for some disturbance at Harwich, be forthwith Released, and set at
Liberty, upon Bail first given to Render themselves, when they shall be in that
behalf Required.

William Jessop Clerk of the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.




Then shortly after this Order was issued forth, the Sergeant at Arms sent his
Clerk, to demand Fees, and Chamber Rent of us; then I asked him before several
Witnesses, if we were detained only for that? he then said, He knew not but
that we were Freed, and that we might go, if we would pay his Master, who had
sent him to demand fifty pounds of us for Fees, besides Chamber Rent; for which
the Chamberlain of the Prison told us, That the Sergeant demanded ten shillings
a week; So we denied to uphold such wicked oppression, and could not for
Conscience sake satisfy his covetous and unrighteous desire, but chose rather
to suffer, than to come forth by yielding to such a horrid oppression; yet were
we willing to have given him to the full value of all the things we made use of
in the Chamber, and it being the highest room in a lofty Tower, and all the
Windows open, it was not fit for men to Lodge in, by reason of the Wind and
Rain beating in, until we had gotten them Glassed, without any charge to the
Sergeant; and we had so little of his in our Chamber, that we offered this (to
wit) that if two reasonable men would prise the things, we would pay him for
them, and give him the Things also; or if he would not stand to that, then we
would give him two shillings and six pence a week, for the time we had been
there; We also told our Keepers, that if we denied to give them any thing, that
they could recover by Law, the Law was open, but they ought not according to
their own Law to keep us upon that account, but to tutn us out, and then take
their course at Law; And so we demanded our Liberty several times; but
notwithstanding all this, the Sergeant detained us still.

And the day before the PARLIAMENT Adjourned, our Names in a List with other
Prisoners in his Custody, was given in to the Parliament, who notwithstanding
their Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, and their former Order, for our being
forthwith Released and set at Liberty; they made another Order, That it should
be Referred to the Kings Privy Counsel, to consider of us, and to give such
Order touching us, as to our Liberty, or to continue under constraint, as they
should find Consistent with the Public Peace, and the mean time we are to
remain in the Sergeants Custody; so by this Order we are still detained, and
nothing is yet done by the Privy Council touching us.

Now let the Reader consider, how unreasonably and contrary to Law we have been
used, who have been kept seventeen Weeks in this Prison, and never brought to
any examination, Besides the time that I was kept in Harwich.

Now if the PARLIAMENT had rightly weighed and considered the matter, when they
Ordered the thanks of the House to be given to the Mayor and Magistrate of
Harwich, for their care in that business touching us; truly, they might have
found more cause to have reproved them for their folly, than to have given them
thanks.

For if it had been true, that we had made some Disturbance at Harwich (as it
is said in the Order for our Release) yet if the Magistrates of Harwich had
rightly understood their duty, and if they had not been blinded with the mad
zeal of Persecution, they might have seen that it belonged to their place to
have ended the matter of a disturbance, and not to have troubled a Parliament
with such a frivilous thing; But it is certain, that Persecutors in all Ages
were blind: And what a thing is this, cannot three Justices of the Peace (so
called) nor a Parliament determine in the matter of a Disturbance (if it had
been so that we had made one, which we did not) but that such a thing ^s that,
must be turned over to the Kings Privy Council to be considered of? or is it
because they would keep the innocent in Prison, and are ashamed to bring them
to an examination, having nothing justly to charge them withal? I leave this to
be answered, by that of God in all who shall read this.

And seeing there have been many false Reports touching the cause of our
imprisonment, and also that some of our enemies have reported, that we may come
out of Prison if we will; it was upon me to publish the manner of our
Imprisonment, and of our being kept, and by whom, that the truth of the matter
may plainly be seen; which being truly considered, People may see that it is
even now as it was in the Prophets days of old, For Judgment is now turned
backward, and Justice stands afar off; Truth is fallen into the Streets, and
Equity cannot enter; yea, Truth fails, and he that departs from Evil makes
himself a prey, and the Lord has seen it, and it displeases him, because
there is no true Judgment, Isaiah 59.14, 15. and as they did in the days of
Amos, even so do this Generation; yea, They now turn Judgment into Wormwood,
and leave off Righteousness in the Earth, they hate him that rebukes in the
Gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly; Therefore will the Lord break
forth like fire, Amos 5.

Lambeth-house the 21st of the 7th Month, 1660. G. F.

HIS FAITH Touching Four Particulars DEMONSTRATED. I. Concerning Jesus Christ
the Savior of the World. II. Concerning Justification. III. Concerning the
Resurrection. IV. Concerning Everlasting Glory, and Eternal Misery.
Written for the satisfaction of some tender conscientious Persons, who had
heard false Reports of Him, and others of his Judgment, touching the things
above Written.
First, AS concerning Jesus Christ, that was supposed to be Joseph the
Carpenter's Son, who as concerning the Flesh was Crucified, and put to Death at
Jerusalem, between two Thieves, upon the Cross at Mount Calvary, I do believe
he was the Son of God; and that that very Body that the Soldier pierced, was
the very Body that was prepared by the Father for Christ the true Savior to
come in, to do the Will of the Father that sent Him: And I do believe that by
the Grace of God he tasted Death for every man, that as many as believe in (and
obey) him, whose Soul was made an Offering for sin, might have Eternal Life
through him, who gave his precious Life a Ransom for many.

Secondly, I do believe that no man can be Justified by the Works of the Law,
nor by any Work of his own; but He or She that is Justified in the sight of
God, it is freely by his Grace, through Faith in Christ Jesus, who creates such
unto Good Works, which God has ordained, that they that are justified should
walk in.

Now God through his Free Love has made Me a Witness of true Justification;
And I testify in the Lord, That it is not my Works that Justify me; but it is
the LORD alone, who works my Works in me, and for me, according to his own
good pleasure; who loved me, before I loved him, and manifested his Love to me
in the Covenant of Light, whereby he drew me after himself, and gave me
strength to obey and follow him in the manifestation and drawings of his Love;
which whilst I did reject, I was justly condemned of the Lord, and could not
witness Justification in that State, although I sought it, and talked much of
it, as many Professors now do: but GOD, who is rich in Mercy and Love, showed
me how he had given me Power and Ability to receive his Truth in the Love of
it, through which I am now Saved and Justified.

Thirdly, Touching the Resurrection; It is a Mystery, which the carnal mind can
never comprehend; but they that come to Witness a part in the first
Resurrection, which is Christ Jesus the Light of Life; they in his Light may
come to perceive the Mystery of the Resurrection; but if Truth can be received
and understood, then it will appear and be manifested to such, that I do not
deny the Resurrection: For I do verily believe, that the hour is coming, in
which all that are in the Graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
shall come forth; They that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Condemnation: But to fools
that say, That this Body of natural flesh and bones shall be raised; I say,
That Body which is sown, is not that Body that shall be; but God gives a Body
as it pleases him, yet to every Seed its own Body: Now there is the Seed of
the Serpent, and the Seed of Christ; and they that can discern the Body of each
Seed, are not the Fools which are questioning how the dead shall be raised? and
with what Bodies they shall come? for they know all mankind will be found to be
one of these Seeds, and that every Seed shall have its own Body.

Fourthly, Truly, if I did not believe that there was a Glory to come, more
than what is here, surely although the good Presence, Peace and Consolation of
God is in me, and his Glory rests richly upon me, yet I should think my self to
be in a more miserable condition than very many; but for the Glory that is set
before me, which Christ [ in me] is the hope of, (which anchors and stays my
soul) I am content to endure the Cross, and patiently to bear the affliction
and sufferings of this present Life, not counting them worthy (though ever so
great) to be compared to that Eternal Weight of Glory, which I do believe shall
be revealed and given unto me, in the World to come.

And as I do steadfastly believe, That there is a Glorious State to be entered
into after this Life, by all them that shall be found in the Immortal Seed,
wherein they shall be swallowed up of Life, Glory, and Immortality; so I
certainly believe, that there is a Woeful, Dreadful, Horrible State to be entered
into after this Life, by all them that shall be found in the Seed of the
Serpent, wherein they shall be swallowed up of Perpetual torment and Misery,
where the Worm dies not, but shall gnaw everlastingly, and the Fire goes not
out.

Westminster Pallace-yard Gate House, the 12th of the 1st. Month, 1661. A
Prisoner for the Word of God, yet a Freeman in the Lord Jesus Christ; Glory to
him in the highest. George Fox, the Younger.

ENGLANDS SAD Estate and Condition lamented, IN THIS Just Complaint, Taken up
against the greatest part of her Inhabitants, because of their great
Abominanations, and Treacherous Dealings, both with God and Man; for which
Cause, the Terrible and Righteous Judgments of the Lord are coming upon them
and the Land.
Wherein is also contained some PROPHECIES and EXHORTATIONS.
OH England, England! The Abominations of the greatest part of thy Inhabitants,
who can declare them! They have reached Heaven, so as they are come up before
the Lord, the Jealous God; and Woe unto that part of thy Inhabitants, who have
sinned out the Day of their Visitation, and have wholly slighted the Day of
God's Patience, and long Forbearance, and would have none of his Reproof, but
have altogether rejected the same, and have made a mock at Sin, and have
sported themselves with their own Deceivings and Lusts, and have gone a Whoring
from under the God of their Lives: Wherefore thus says the Lord, the only God;
I will make such become a Hissing and Reproach, and my Anger they shall not be
able to Escape, because of their provoking Abominations, and Treacherous
Dealings, both with Me and Man.

Oh England, England! How have, and yet do, a great part of thy Inhabitants
rush into Idolatry, and all manner of Profaneness and grievous Abominations,
even as the Horse and Mighty rush into the Battle! How do they drink in
Iniquity, even as the Ox, or Parched Ground, drinks in Water! Oh! What manner
of Lamentation shall I make for thee, my Native Country! Or, What manner of
Complaint may I take up against a great part of thine Inhabitants, who have
long sought, and yet seek thy Ruin and Destruction! Verily, their Actions have
declared them to be like the Inhabitants of Sodom; Yea, their sins have rendered
them to be as bad as those of Gomorrah. O they have Vexed the Righteous Soul;
Yea, and they have grieved the Spirit of the Lord from Day to Day, with their
Unjust Conversations. They have multiplied their Transgressions, and heaped up
their Iniquities, till they are become as the Sand on the Seashore, without
Number. Oh! The Lord has long striven with them; yea, he has also long born
their Iniquities, he would have gathered them to himself out of their
Abominations; yea, he would often have healed them, but they would not; but they
have stiffned their Necks, and hardened their Hearts against the Lord and his
Counsel, day after day; and have chosen their own ways and works, even to
their own hurt, and would by no means be reclaimed; for when the Lord has
reproved them (by the Light of his Son in their own Consciences) and set their
sins in order before their eyes, they have stopped their Ears, and closed their
Eyes, and wilfully Rebelled against the Power of God, and trampled upon his
Witness [ the Light in them] as a thing of naught, counting it not worth the
taking notice of. And when the Lord has raised up Prophets, Children and
Servants, and sent them out, commanding them to lift up their Voices like
Trumpets, and to show the People their Transgressions, and to Preach Repentance
and Amendment of Life: Yea, to warn and exhort them to turn from their Sins to
God, and to lay before them their great Abominations, and to Prophecy what
should come upon them, if they would not turn from the evil of their Doings,
Oh! how have a great part of thy Inhabitants Scorned, and Derided these! Yea,
how have many of thine Inhabitants Beaten, Whipped, Stockt, Stoned, and
Imprisoned some of these till Death, for bearing their Testimony for the Lord,
against a crooked and perverse Generation, who hate such as speak uprightly,
and abhor such as reprove Sin in the Gate; that so it is even thus come to pass
in thee, O England, That he that departs from Iniquity, makes himself a Prey
to this Generation of Evil doers, whose hearts are set upon their Lusts,
Idolatry, and grievous Abominations! and the Lord has beheld it, and it
displeases him, because there is no true Judgment; for these Evil doers are
all gone out of the way; yea, there is none of them that regard to do the thing
that is Just and Good, any further than it may be advantageous to their own
Corrupt Designs.

Oh England England! How often has the Lord God smote thy Rulers, and Mighty,
and Proud men! how often has he laid their Honor in the Dust! Yea, how often has
he Overturned and Confounded thy Mighty men, even thy Men of War, with thy
Princes, Nobles, and Captains of Thousands, Hundreds, and Fifties! O how often
has he Overturned thy Governments. and Changed thy Governors! But how few of
them have so regarded the Outgoings of the Lord in all these things, as they
ought to have done? And how few of them have rightly Weighed and Considered the
Causes for which the Lord has brought or suffered so many Changes in the Land?
Or, have those who saw the Causes that provoked the Lord of Hosts thus to Act,
lalaboured so to remove them as they ought to do (or might) have done? Nay,
assuredly they have not; for the Lusts of this World, and the Pride of Life,
has blinded the minds of most; and such who have seen what their Duty was, the
honor of this World, and that cursed Self-interest, has stopped and hindered
most of them from doing those things which they saw they ought (and which they
had opportunity also) to have done. Oh! how have the new Governors, in almost
every Change of late, cried out of the Tyranny and great Oppression of those
whom they did Succeed? And how have most of them Vowed unto God, Declared to,
and Promised the People, That they would remove the Burdens and Oppressions
that the foregoing Rulers had Laid and Continued upon them: But alas! very few
of them have regarded their Vows, Declarations, and Promises, either to God or
Man; but in Treachery and Deceit have they gone on, serving themselves and
their own Lusts, and not the Lord, nor their Generation fai^hfully: For,
although many of them have been very large in Promises and Good Words, (whereby
they have long sought to Deceive the hearts of the People) yet it is but very
Little that has been done for their true Liberty; because that wicked Spirit,
which seeks to make it self great by the Ruin of others, has Ruled, and
does yet Rule, in the hearts of many Rulers; and this is of the Devourer and
Destroyer, who cannot forgive Enemies, but cries out of Rebellion and Treason,
laboring to exasperate the Spirits of others, that so occasions may be gotten,
if possible, against them, thereby to bring them under, and keep them in
Bondage.

Oh England, England! Such is thy Sad Estate and Condition, that several of thy
Rulers are, and have been, as roaring Lions, even greedy to Devour; and many of
thy Teachers have been, and yet are, like Troops of Robbers, robbing and
spoiling of many of thine Inhabitants. Oh! How have most of thy Priests
Temporized, and Daubed with every Power, as they have come up in the many
Changes! How have they increased Envy, Wars, and Destructions, amongst thy
Rulers and People! How have they one time Cried up, and Prayed for the same
Thing, which at another time, they have Cried down, and Prayed against! Oh! Who
shall ever believe them? Their god is their Belly; and who is it that many of
them would not join unto, if thereby they might be upheld in Pride, Idleness
and Fullness? How often would they Change again, and again? And what Idolatry is
there, that many of them would not run into for their Bellies sake? Ah poor
Nation! Are they not yet striving to kindle a Flame within thy Bowels? Has not
the Lord divided them? And are they not laboring with all their might to
Divide and Rend thy Inhabitants yet more and more? Yea, surely and it is just
with the Lord to suffer it to be so; because of the greatness of their
Abominations, which are daily increased.

Ah poor Land! How art thou overspread with Wasters and Spoylers! who like
Caterpillars devour thy Pleasant Fruit. Oh! the Whoredoms and Idolatries that
are daily committed and acted in thee; Who can Declare them! Oh! thy Chief
City, thy Chief City, that Bloody City! Can its Abominations be Paralleled in
the Earth! Surely it has exceeded Sodom in Wickedness. The Lord is very Angry
with a great part of its Inhabitants, and his Vengeance is nigh to come upon
them. Woe unto you Whoremongers, Drunkards, Gluttons, Swearers, Cursers,
Blasphemers, Cheaters, and Idolaters! Woe unto you, Proud, Wanton, and Profane,
Vain Persons! Woe unto you, Mountebanks, Stage Players, Bear-Baiters, Gamesters,
and all manner of Abominable Workers, and you that Build up Towers, Scaffolds,
and vain Heathenish Representations, and such like; and make and garnish
Images, to draw Peoples minds after Idolatry, and for your cursed Gain and
Lusts, in pretense of Honoring your King. Oh! How are People drawn into Gazing
and Wondering after these Abominations! It grieveth the Righteous Soul to behold
such great Wickedness! Oh! You Wicked and abominable Workers, and Devourers of
the Creation! The Lord God will meet with you in a time when ye are little
aware of Him; He Will Stain your Pride, Vain Glory, and Idolatry, and give you
your Portion amongst Devourers (except you speedily Repent) and your Abettors,
Strengthners, and Helpers forward of such Ungodliness (that do it knowingly)
and Delighters therein, The Lord will not acquit you, He Will smite you for these
things, and that right soon. Oh! Ye Idolatrous People, Do you think, that the
Lord God of Pity and Patience, suffered your King to hide himself from his
Enemies in an Oak, for that end, that ye might Devour his Creatures in making
an Idol of it? Is this the use you make of that which you say was God's Mercy
toward you? Is not this the way to turn those things, that might have been
Mercies to you, into Plagues and Judgments? Oh! How do you Daily provoke the
Lord against Your selves, and your King? Oh! You Wicked Workers, How dare you
make Representations of Destruction and Ruin? How dare you make a Sport of
such things? Verily, your Provocations are great, wherewith you provoke the
Just God; And it will be Just with him to bring Ruin, Desolation, and
Destruction upon you and your City; Verily, great is the Judgment that is nigh
you, and your sins draw it on you apace. Do you think that the Lord cast out
Back-sliders, Hypocrites, and Unfaithful men, to set up and establish Idolaters
and open Profane Persons? Nay surely: Therefore Tremble ye Wicked Workers, and
Howl ye Profane Idolaters, for the Mighty and Terrible day of the Lord is near
to break out upon you. Thus says the Lord God, I Will Scatter, I Will Scatter,
I Will Split, Divide, and Separate: I Will Break and Dash to pieces, and none shall
be able to Gather, Bind up, or Ioyn together: For mine Anger is kindled, and my
Jealousy shall burn till I have devoured mine Enemies, says the Lord.

Therefore ye People of Enland (that yet live in wickedness) who have not
wholly sinned out the day of your Visitation, To you I now speak; You that feel
the Lord yet striving with you; O Return, Return speedily unto the
Manifestation of his Spirit, whereby he strives with you, to show you your
abominations, and to draw and lead you out of the same; O be not still
Stiff-necked, but hearken to the Word of the Lord, which shows you the
thoughts and Intents of your Hearts, and hearken and be obedient to the Call
thereof, that so by its Power you may Hasten out of Babylon, both Young and
Old, Rich and Poor, High and Low, Noble or Ignoble, Professor or Profane, who
yet are there; For the Lord's Controversy is great with Babylon her Merchants,
and Inhabitants, and he will not much longer spare, but he will suddenly smite,
and none shall be able to hinder his stroke; Yea, yea, he will wound and none
shall be able to heal; For the measure of her Iniquities, Idolatries, and
Whoredoms are nigh full, and the Wine of her Fornications, has caused the
Fatts to overflow, and she is come up into remembrance before the Lord, the
Just God, who will Plague her and all her Merchants and Inhabitants according
to their Abominations, whereby they have grievously provoked Him. Therefore,
come out of her, whilst Mercy and Time is offered, lest you perish with her in
her Judgments, which the Lord is Strongly and Swiftly bringing upon her.

Oh England, England! A day of Sorrow and Calamity is coming upon many of thy
Inhabitants, I have long been sensible of it; even a day of such Breaking,
Confusion and Judgment, as has not been for a long space; For thy People have
wearied out the Lord with their Iniquities, and grieved his holy Spirit with
their Abominations, days without number.

Oh England, England! The Lord has a Precious and Holy Seed in thee; Yea, He
has a Remnant, which he has Raised by his Power to, and for himself, which
are exceeding precious in his sight; and these a great part of thine
Inhabitants have Shamefully entreated, and grievously Oppressed, and
Persecuted; And they have Patiently born the same, and have labored in the
Life of Innocence, and Spirit of Emanuel, to Inform thy Rulers and People in
the Things that are Just and True, and have shown them the Ways which have,
and do Displease the Lord, and have Exhorted and Warned thy Inhabitants, Time
after Time: But notwithstanding their Doctrine, Lives, and Conversations have
manifested their Innocence and Uprightness of Heart before God and Man; Yet
have many of thy Rulers, Priests, and People, Oppressed them more and more;
Some Spoiling their Goods, others Imprisoning their Bodies, in filthy Holes and
Dungeons, till several of them have Sealed their Testimony for the Lord with
their Blood, which cries for Vengeance in the Ears of the Almighty, and the
Lord has heard the Cry thereof, and has looked down and beheld the Actings of
the sons of men, and he is near to Visit; Yea, the Lord has beheld, and does
behold, the Snares that have been, and are laid for the Innocent, who have no
other Helper but him alone; and therefore they have Committed their Cause unto
Him who shall bring it to pass: Yea, he has taken Notice, how several of thy
Rulers have combined together, and endeavored to Force His Babes to Violate
his Royal Law, and to Break his Command (who says, Swear not at all) to Uphold
and Obey theirs, which is Contrary to his; Yea, He has taken Notice of the
Cruel Sufferings, and great Temptations of his People, who, many of them, are
yet Imprisoned, and both their Bodies and Estates threatened to be Destroyed (by
some evil men) if they will not break the Royal Law and Commandment of Christ,
which he has placed in their hearts to Obey and Do. Oh! The Lord has seen the
Partiality and Evil Intents of several of the Judges and Rulers of this Land,
who have had Power to let the Innocent go free, and yet keep many of his
Ministers and Servants (many of which have outward Estates) Prisoners in many
places; although they have no more against them, than against those whom they
have turned forth, which is nothing else but for their Obeying the Command of
Christ in them, (who this day says unto his People, Swear not at all, as he
said to his Disciples formerly) and for meeting together, and Speaking and
Praying in his Name, for the Edifying, Comforting and Building up one another
in their most holy Faith. The Lord has also taken notice, that when some of
the Rulers might Relieve the Innocent, and let the Oppressed go free, they will
not; and then to cover themselves, they will say, They cannot act contrary to
the Law: But when a Ruler will act that which he has no Law for, he can then
plead a Prerogative Royal for that: and thus are the Innocent Lambs of Christ
made a Prey upon.

Oh! the Oppressions of his People, and others, are great this day in thee, O
Land; and the Crying of the Fatherless, the Widows and the Needy is come up
before the Lord God of Compassion, who will thoroughly plead the Cause of his
People, and the Poor and Needy of the Land.

Oh England, England! I have often heard and treasured up what the Lord has said
in me, concerning thy Inhabitants; but now must I declare it in the Appointed
Season: Thus has the Lord spoken in me for a long time, concerning thy
Inhabitants, saying, The People are too many, the People are too many; I will
thin them, I will thin them: [Mark] that is, He will make them fewer, for they
cumber the Ground. And the Spirit of the Lord has often signified unto me, for a
long time, That an Overflowing Scourge, yea, even an exceeding great and
terrible Judgment is to come upon thee, O Land! and that many in thee shall
fall and be taken away in the Judgment; and the Spirit of the Lord signifies
unto me, that the time draws nigh, and that the Decree of the Lord is so
firm, that though some of the Lords Children and Prophets could appear so, as
to stand in the Gap, yet should not that alter his Decree, only in the
Righteousness of the Lamb they shall be hid and saved from his Wrath, whatever
may be done to any of their Bodies; but his fierce Wrath and Indignation shall
be poured forth upon the Ungodly, and a great Desolation and Destruction shall
there be; for he will overturn and overturn, till he has dis-throned and
thrown down the Man of Sin, and exalted and established the Kingdom of his Dear
Son, over all the Kingdoms of the World; and the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the Holy
People, the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, who is King of Saints.

Behold, ye Despisers, and Wonder! This is the Work which the Lord will
accomplish by his own Power, though you will in no wise believe it; but you
shall feel, even both Hypocrites and Profane, that the Lord is able to bring
to pass the thing that is in his heart.

And you now think to set up and establish your Idolatry, and to live in
Profaneness without control; and you who appear so hot against some of these
things, and labor to stop and pull them down (mark) that you might set up and
establish your own Hypocritical Will Worship in another dark dead Form; I will
frustrate you both, says the Lord God, and you shall grind and waste one
against another, as the upper and nether Millstone; And I will pluck out from
you, and preserve a holy Seed, beyond expectation; and I will be avenged on you
for that which you have already bruised, or shall yet bruise, [mark] And I will
hurry and hurl you round with a mighty Stream; for the Waters shall roar and
swell: And after I have executed my vengeance upon the Rebellious and
Treacherous Dealers, I will then bring forth the Remnant of my Holy Seed, which
shall be preserved from their Fury, and they shall spread over all, in my Life,
Power, Knowledge and Wisdom, wherein they shall stand in Dominion; Yea, and
they shall rule the Earth in Mercy, Justice, and true Judgment; and they shall
forgive and love their Enemies (as they do at this day) and do the thing that
is just and good unto all, without respect of Persons; yea, they shall seek the
good of the whole Creation in the true love and self-denial; for the Spirit of
Love, Meekness, Healing and Restoring shall mightily fill their tender Bowels,
and my Blessings shall fill their Dewlling Place, and the Earth, for their
sakes: these things will I accomplish by my own Power, and in my own time,
says the Lord God.

But although these things, touching the holy Remnant, shall certainly be
fulfilled in their Season? Yet before they be fully accomplished, great will be
the Trials of many of the Righteous, and there will be great Judgments
executed in thee, O Land, by him who oft-times makes a fruitful Land barren,
because of the Wickedness of them that dwell therein; and Just will it be with
Him to deal so with thee, because of the great wickedness of the greatest part
of thy Inhabitants, who are departed and separated from the Spirit of Mercy,
Love, Compassion and Healing, and are laboring to Devour, Oppress, and Destroy
one another, and the whole Creation.

Oh England, England! There is also a People in thee who are come to see the
Great Idolatry and Superstition, which many are now striving to revive and set
up in thee; yea, there is a People in thee, which see and believe that the
Worship which is now a setting up, with the Vain Music, Altars, Mass in
English, and the foolish needless Garments of the Priests, and such like Popist
stuff, that these things are Idolatry, Folly and Vanity, and but a mocking of
God, and yet some of these People will run after this Vain Worship, for
self ends, flavish-fear, and to keep themselves in esteem with, or amongst
those who plead for it: And others there are in thee, who instead of being
sorrowful for such Abomination and Superstition, or reproving the Practicers
thereof in the solid, seasoned, savoury Life and holy Dread of the Lord God,
they write and speak scossingly of those things, even to the stirring up one of
another into Vain Laughter, and so make a Sport of others Idolatry; and this
grieveth the Spirit of the Lord also, and does not convince, but exasperate and
harden those that are zealous for their blind Worship and Superstition.

There are also a great number of brittle, fiery, rash, unsatisfied People, in
thee, O Land, who are as unstable as water; and these rebelling against the
Light, not knowing the way of it, because they abide not in the Path thereof,
they are restless, rouling, and raging oft-times like the Sea; One time they
will have a Parliament, and cry out, They shall govern and heal them; and when
they have gotten them, in a short time they grow weary of them; And then
another time, they will cry out for a King, and say, He shall heal them, and
make up their Breaches: But these people are not long of one mind, for they are
much like the Athenians, who spent their time in little else but either to tell
or to hear of some New things These People also are like mighty Tides in thy
Channels, O England, which one while run with Violence, driving all unsettled,
light, unfixed things one way, and shortly after run with as much violence the
contrary way: Therefore in a miserable condition are those Rulers whose
strength is in such a People! And until Rulers come to be settled, and fixed in
Him who is the Rock of Ages, and singly to rule in, and for Him, whom the Winds
and the Seas obey; who makes the Waters to stand on heaps, and divides them
hither and thither, and alters the natural course of Tides as he pleases (as
he has done thine of late, to show thee the Figure of the People) they can
never be safe, neither will the People be stilled long together; but there will
be Swellings, Ragings, Overflowings, sore Breakings, and Ruins.

Oh! that the foregoings Rulers would have been persuaded to have Received him
for their Teacher, who rules in the Kingdoms of Men, then should they not
only have seen, what the Lord cast out others before them for, but they should
have been taught how to have denied all those things which the Lord was angry
with others for, and they should have received Power to have abstained from the
same; but they would not hear and obey the Lord, nor his Prophets, and
therefore were they cast out also.

And therefore, Oh! that the Rulers that now are, would be persuaded (whilst
they have their Day) by the Lord and his Servants, to receive the Lord Jesus
Christ, to be their King and Teacher, and then they should not only see for
what cause the Lord cast them out, and others in their Age, but they should be
taught to deny and forsake all those things which God was angry with them, and
others for, and they should receive Power to do those things, which they and
others before them left undone: But alas! How few are there that will Hear,
Regard, and Obey the Prince of Life and his Followers, and therefore is
Desolation coming as a mighty Flood, which none shall be able to stop.

Now all People, in what Sect or Opinion soever, in whom there are any true
Breathings and Desires after the Lord, and the way of his Holiness, Fear not,
neither be Dismayed, because of the Rage, that you may yet see the waters of the
Land in, and because of the Confusion and Cruelty of the People; But stand
still in that Life which begets Breathings and Thirstings in you after the
Lord, that you may come to see and feel his Salvation, and that you may be
gathered into that Patience, Meekness, Contentedness, Rest, Peace, and
Satisfaction, which many of the dear Lambs and Children of my Father are
gathered into; wherein they ly down, and none can make them afraid, though
Bodies and Estates be oppressed and abused. Oh! Stick not, Stick not in your
Forms without Power, neither Flee the Cross, any longer; but wait in the True
Simplicity, to feel God's hand of Tender Love, which he reaches sorth to, and
manifests in you, to lead and guide your minds into his Pure Worship, which
is in the Spirit and in the Truth. Oh People! This is the Worship that he will
set up. He will be LORD and LAWGIVER in the Consciences of his People, and
those that will not be content that EMANUEL should Reign over them, he will
Slay them with the Sword of the Spirit, The words of his Mouth.

Oh! Hearken, hearken a little, and stand still, that you may hear the voice of
the True Shepherd in your own hearts, who calls for Truth in the Inward
Parts; and he will discover what lodges Within, and He will show you the Way
wherein you should walk, and he will let you see what the Cross is unto, and He
will teach you when you are alone in your Beds, or wherever you are; if you
will receive Him who gives you Life and Breath, whose gentle Reproofs and
Instructions are the Way of Life.

Therefore you in whom the Breathings and Desires after the Lord are, Consult
not with Flesh and Blood, neither reason against the Cross, but submit to every
Appearance of God's Power in you, which appears to Crucify the Fleshly Birth
and Nature; which has stood, and does stand in Rebellion and Emnity against
the Pure and Precious Life, and Requirings of the Lamb of God; that so that
Mind which is at enmity against God, and that Nature in you, which is
Disobedient to his Commands in Spirit, may come to be Crucified; that so there
may be a Change Inwardly felt and witnessed, by the working of the might Power
of Christ in your Inward Parts; and then the Desires and Breathings which are
Begotten in you after Righteousness, they will be strengthened, and the
Teachings of the Almighty will be truly known; and you believing in the Power,
you will receive Power to obey and Practice whatsoever the Lord shall make
known unto you by his Spirit, to be his Will and Requirings.

Oh People! Let the Dread of the Lord Seize upon your Spirits, in this the Day
of his Power, wherein he is Trying, Sifting and Winnowing the Nations; and wait
to feel that Life arise within you, which bears Testimony against all evil,
within and without; that so ye may become more and more acquainted with the
Teachings, Drawings, and Leadings thereof; that thereby you may be drawn and
led out of those things which have kept your Souls in the Death, and hindered
you from enjoying the Pure Peace of God. And this know and consider, that all
that come to witness their Souls raised out of Death, and brought to enjoy the
Peace of God, they must Believe in the Life of the Quickening Spirit, which is
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who for Sin, Condemns Sin in the
Flesh, and appears in the Inward Parts of man, to work out Sin and
Transgression, (which has Separated from God) and so to make clean the heart
and inside of Male and Female.

Oh People! This is the Work of Christ the Son of God, even to make manifest
and destroy the Works of the Devil, and so to reconcile man unto God, by the
Virtue of his own Life, which he gave a Ransom for many; and blessed are all
those that believe in the Life of the Son of God, and feel and know it
manifested in their mortal flesh; for they shall witness the Power of it to
make all things new, and so their Souls will come up in the hand of God, and
his Peace will be Received and Enjoyed.

Oh People! Wait to know, and feel this Work of Christ within you; that so you
may be made able to Stand in the Judgment, and to Endure the Trial, and that
you may be Hid from the Wrath of the Lamb, which is nigh to come upon the
Rebellious. Oh! Consider this, Those that are his Followers, they come through
many Tribulations, and their overcoming their Enemies is by His Blood, not by a
talk of it, but by the Virtue and Power of it, sprinkled in their Hearts, which
washes and makes them White, Clean, and without Fault before God. Oh People
my Bowels yearn! my Bowels yearn toward you! whose Desires in any measure, are
after the Lord: O that you would now Return with all your hearts unto Him, and
obey the Voice of his Power in you; then should you be made able to stand, and
endure the fiery Trial which is come and coming. Oh! the Day hastens wherein
all Profession that is not grounded in the Life and Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ (whatever the show of it be) it will be so shaken, that an utter
Blasting and withering shall come upon it; and for that cause the Lord does,
and will yet suffer great Trials to come, both upon the Professors, and
Possessors of his Name; that so his Children [the Possessors] may be manifested
unto all, and discerned from all that are but Professors, though never so fair
and seemingly Covered; For all Coverings but what is of the Power and Spirit it
self, shall be too Narrow; and all that are not Covered with the Spirit and
Power of Emanuel, their Shame and Nakedness shall appear more and more. This is
the Testimony which the Spirit and Word of Truth gives; therefore, He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear, before the day of his Visitation be wholly
past, and the things belonging to his Peace he hid from his Eyes: For yet a
little while and the Voice shall be, He that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; For the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with Flesh, but his
Plagues and Indignation shall be poured out upon such as will be gathered in
the Day of his Patience, long Forbearance, and Free-Love; and He or She that
Loves Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, House, or Land, Liberty,
Honor, or any Thing more than the Life of the Lamb, shall be counted not
worthy of him, and plainly manifested so to be: Read this who can; and he that
can receive it, let him: For the Time draws nigh, that these Sayings must be
fulfilled.

Printed the 13th. of the Second Month, 1661. GEORGE FOX, the Younger.

SEVERAL EPISTLES To FRIENDS Who are GATHERED into the Light of Life.
A General EPISTLE and a tender Greeting, sent unto the Flock of Christ, who
meet together to Worship the Father and the Son, in the Spirit of Truth; to be
read in the Fear and Wisdom of God amongst them.
DEAR and tenderly beloved Friends, and ^hildren of the most High God, who have
felt and tasted of his eternal Word of Life, and have been acquainted with the
workings and operations thereof, whereby you are begotten again unto a lively
Hope, and are brought to know that Life, which you were alienated from, and
that Covenant of Promise, which ye were strangers unto. Oh Friends! unto you is
my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ exceeding great, and for you do I often Pray to
the Father of Life, that ye may be kept steadfast in that Life, which ye have
felt and tasted of, and that nothing may move you from that hope and
confidence, which God has begotten in you by the working of his mighty Power:
Oh dear Babes! let the Love of our God break and melt you into the meek tender
Spirit of the Lamb; and let the consideration of his Mercy and Grace, which to
you he has shown, overcome you, and make you sick of Love: Oh how can I
express his Goodness, for it is beyond utterance! yea, his loving kindness to
you-ward, has been exceeding large, who in an acceptable time has appeared
and visited you with his tender Love, the Light of the World; and by his
unresistable Power has he caused you to feel the day spring from on High, even
the breaking forth of Light in your hearts and inward parts; yea, this did he
do for you, who were as Sheep without a Shepherd, scattered upon the Mountains,
in the cloudy and dark day: Oh Friends! how did his Love reach unto you, when
ye were Enemies unto him? how plainly did he show unto you the evil of your
ways, which had separated you from his presence? and how tenderly did he hold
forth his hand of Love, to lead you out of that which had made you miserable?
and how did he give you strength to walk when ye were lame, and inclined your
hearts after that which he showed unto you to be Good? and how did he manifest
his eternal Power and Righteous Judgment in you, against the body of sin? and
how did he beget and quicken a Righteous Seed in you, which cannot live but in
his presence? and how mightily has he opened the eye of your understandings by
his eternal Spirit, that ye are brought to see the false Ways and Worships of
the World, wherein ye were once entangled? and he has also given you to see
the Way to himself, and the Worship which he regards, in the Spirit of Truth,
wherein you are come to know that which only can give satisfaction, and make
you eternally free. Oh let the unexpressable Love of the Father never be
forgotten by you, my dear Friends! but all keep to, and dwell in, that eternal
Immortal Power of an endless Life, which ye have felt and tasted or* and let
your minds be kept to the workings and operations of the same, that so none of
you may be daunted by the enemy within or without; but all wait in the eternal
Light, the Foundation of God, which can never be shaken, that so your minds may
be girded up, and you kept upon your watch, and your ear kept open to the Lord,
that so when he calls ye may answer, and when he teaches, ye may observe and
obey, that so your souls may live; and that ye may see his eternal Will in all
conditions, and be contented therewithal, then will you feel the peace which
none can take away. And Friends, give all diligence to obey the Word of Wisdom,
that ye may be known to be its Children, and that ye may feel and witness your
growth into the nature of the Immortal Seed, whose Kingdom is not of this
World; that so your Redemption from the earth, and all earthly things, you may
know, through the blood of the unspotted Lamb of God; which blood, is the Life
which he gave a Ransom for many, which Life is manifested in your mortal
bodies, that through Faith in it ye may be saved.

And know this my Friends, henceforth you are not your own, for you are bought
with a price, and you are called with an holy calling, that you might glorify
the Lord in your Bodies and Spirits, which are the Lord's. Oh my Friends! let
not your delight be placed in the things of this World, for then will you be
entangled; but wait in the feeling of the pure Power of the Lord God, that ye
may be kept and preserved thereby, that so ye that marry, may be as if you
married not, and that ye that have of this world, as if ye possessed not, and
that ye may be kept in the living Wisdom of God, in the ordering of all things
that are given unto you, that so the Glory of God, and the honor of his
Eternal Truth may be minded in all things; and that your minds and hearts may
be drawn out of all created things, and ye kept single and chaste unto the Lord,
that so, if it were his Will, that ye should be separated, either from Wife, or
Husband (outwardly) or Children, or Houses, or Lands, or any outward thing, for
his Name sake, that ye may be kept in that temper and frame of mind and Spirit,
that ye may resign up all freely without murmuring, that so ye may be known to
be followers of the Lamb, whithersoever he goes; for my Babes, it is given
unto you, as well to suffer for his Names sake, as to believe; and hereby shall
the World know that ye are redeemed from the earth, if ye in patience and
innocence give up to the Will of God in all things: Therefore dear hearts, wait
in the Power and Life of God, that ye may feel your strength, and courage, and
boldness for the Lord increased, that when you are tried, ye may stand in that
Spirit of Life and Meekness, which will give you eternal Peace in all your
sufferings and Trials; for the Lord will try you, that ye may see, and know him
alone to be your strength, and that the world may know, that ye are a People
saved by the Almighty God; And this know, that ye that are faithful, shall not
be proved beyond your strength, for the Lord will be with you in all your
Trials; and the more that you are persecuted for his Name, the greater shall
his power be felt in you, and the more your Enemies afflict you, the greater
shall be your joy, and this shall torment your Enemies: So Friends, let
patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing; for the Lord will make up his Jewels, and he will take away all the
dross, and nothing shall remain, but that which will abide the Trial in the
fire; for the Lord has been loaded with the sacrifices of many, who have
professed his Name, but have not been subject to the leadings of his Spirit,
but have grieved it from day to day; Therefore will the Lord God try all
Professions, and the chaff shall be blown away, and all false coverings shall
be stripped off, and men shall appear as they are; yea, the chaff which some time
seemed to join to the Wheat, shall be driven to and fro, until the fire consume
it, or until it mix it self with the mire where the Swine wallow; but God will
have regard unto his Seed, which is weighty: And Friends, a day of Calamity
will come upon them, who have worshipped, and do Worship, (...) ^^known God at
a distance, and pretend the Worship of the (...) God; for they shall call, but
their God shall not answer, and they shall fret themselves, and fear and terror
shall sieze upon them, and many shall join to, and fall under that, which they
have called and esteemed Babylonish: But there is a remnant yet to be gathered,
both from among the Professors and Profane; Therefore dear hearts, let your
circumspect walking in the Life of Righteousness, reach the Witness of God in
all Consciences, and let your soberness and patience smite your Enemies. And
you that are strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, are Able to
endure much, bear ye with the weak, and encourage and strengthen the feeble,
and let your tender love and care be over such, as ye feel have true breathings
after the Lord, though they have had little of a knowledge of the Declaration
of Truth; and let your words to, and before them, and all men, be seasoned with
Grace, that ye may minister unto the Grace in the Hearers.

And ye that are weak, and yet have a true Love begotten in you toward the
Lord, all wait in the feeling of the Truth in your inward parts, that your
minds may be wrought into subjection to the Lord, through the working of his
eternal Power in you; and when you are tempted, heed not the temptation, but
heed the Light that makes manifest the temptation, and believe in the Light,
and keep to it, and ye will feel the Lord's presence and strength breaking
forth to deliver you, and to make a way for you to escape the temptation, and
if at at any time ye be overcome by the subtilty of the Devil, and then the
Light arise in you, to make manifest the Transgression, and to judge you for
it, then join to the Light, and love the Judgment, and Will not, but be still,
until it works through, and breaks forth into Victory; and if ye see Iniquity
abound, then take heed that your Love wax not cold; and if ye see some fall
from the Truth, and turn back with the Dog to the Vomit, and with the Swine
that was washed, to the wallowing again in the mire; and if ye see some for
fear of persecution start aside, or for the love of this World depart from the
Faith, or turn from the holy Commandment, which was delivered unto them, upon
any account whatsoever, let none of these things move or trouble you, for such
things will come to pass; but blessed are they that are not offended with the
Light, but suffer and endure all things unto the end, for they shall be saved.
But this know Friends, that the Lord God will try you, and you must pass
through Perils and Trials, not only among the open profane ones, but also
among such as have known the Truth, and turn from it; yet know my Friends, that
God will not try you further than he will give you strength to endure the
Trial, if ye be faithful unto him. Therefore watch and be sober, and wait in
the Life, that ye may have salt in your selves to savor withal; and be not
weary, neither faint in your minds, nor let not in distrust, but hope to the
end, and be confident that God will appear and work deliverance for his People;
but if it be his Will that ye must yet be further tried, and that he will yet
suffer the wicked to flourish, and spread forth themselves as a green Bay Tree,
and that ye must yet bear your Testimony for the Lord by greater sufferings: Oh
Friends murmur not! but hold fast your integrity, and know certainly, that
whatsoever any suffer for the Lord, they shall not lose their reward: Therefore
all Friends, be valiant and strong, and bold for the Truth upon earth; and walk
humbly with the Lord, and wisely before your Enemies, that so, ye by doing the
thing that is right in the sight of God, may put to silence the foolish and
ignorant, for this is the Will of God. And Friends, walk patiently toward all
men, knowing that ye sometimes were ignorant, and foolish, and disobedient;
therefore let your pity and patience toward them (that be disobedient) be
known; and wait that ye may be ready to show them the thing that is Good, and
to instruct them concerning the way of Righteousness; or if you have not words
given you, then let your Conversation Preach forth Righteousness, that so happily
God may give some of them Repentance, and that ye may be made instruments for
the bringing them unto the acknowledgement and knowledge of the Truth; and live
in the Wisdom and Power of God, that so your Enemies may have nothing against
you justly, but if they will persecute you for any thing appertaining to a good
Conscience, be not dismayed; or if they falsely accuse you, and falsely swear
against you, and so ye become reckoned among the Transgressors by them, be not
troubled, but be patient, and keep to the VVitness of God; for thus the wicked
served your Master, who gave his back to the smiter, and his cheecks unto them
that plucked off the Hair, and the Servant is not greater than his Lord: So let
nothing be too dear to be given up for the Lord; and bow not to any thing, but
to the Name of Jesus, whose Name is called the Word of God, by which we must
overcome and break through all this ungodliness: Oh the Lord keep you faithful
and patient in your Trials, for much have we to pass through and to overcome,
through the patience and long-suffering of the Lamb. So let none be exalted
above their measures, nor cast down by letting in of fears, but all dwell in
the living Nobility of the Immortal King of Righteousness, and keep in
subjection to his Government, and meet together often in his Name, though the Sea
and the Heathen Rage, and the People imagine vain things, and though the Kings
of the Earth, and the Rulers rise up together, and take Counsel against the
Lamb, and his followers; and though the rude multitude may persecute you, and
the Whore may drink some of your Blood, yet be not dismayed, neither fear ye at
all, for in vain do they strive, for the Lamb shall get the victory; glory to
him in the Highest.

And so Friends, keep your garments unspotted, ye, who have washed them in the
Blood of the Lamb, and be exceeding tender toward such Professors as have a
tenderness in them toward God, in what Sect soever they be in; for poor
Creatures, they are to be pitied, and the Way of Truth is to be shown unto
them, and this day will bring some of them unto the Principle of God in
themselves, and they must come unto that, before they can find a true stay to
their minds; and them that come not to that, and keep not to that, will wither
as the grass upon the house top. Oh Friends! I can even rejoice and sing for
joy, notwithstanding the rage and strength of the Enemies; for I see the day
that approaches will be exceeding good for Truth, and for Friends that dwell
in it; for they that stand approved shall be made manifest, and the upright
shall not lose, but gain through all these things; and certainly, when our God
has tried us to the full, he will appear for us; and though our Enemies were
as the sand of the Sea, and as strong as Giants, yet shall they fall as
untimely fruit, and our GOD shall consume and weaken them by the Majesty of his
Power, and an exceeding desolation shall come upon the Earth, and a Besom of
destruction shall sweep away many.

Therefore dear Hearts, be steadfast in the Lord, and keep the Word of his
Patience, and know, that not one hair of your Heads shall perish, nor any thing
shall be done unto any of you, but what the Lord will be glorified by, and you
shall receive a full and a sufficient reward for it, if ye continue faithful:
So live in the Power and Seed of God, that ye may possess the Kingdom, the
eternal Peace, Joy and Righteousness, which stands in the Power: And love
fervently; Oh Friends, let that abound more and more one toward another, and
by this shall men also know, that ye are taught of Christ, if ye love one
another; and wait that ye may feel the springs of Life in your selves, and feed
upon that which proceeds from God, that ye may grow up in the Power and Life,
and Wisdom of God, and therein be established: So the Almighty Power, Life, and
Wisdom of God, keep and preserve your for ever, Amen. The Lord God Almighty
keep you fresh and lively, meek, tender, and innocent, and fill you with every
good word and work, which accompanies Peace and Godliness; if any Decree
unrighteous Decrees, heed them not, for the Decree of God shall stand, which
is, to establish Righteousness in the Earth; and in the Power of the Lord, we
shall break the bonds of the ungodly, and cast their cords from us: So the
Spiritual Weapon war withal, and stand in the Faith, and hold fast the Word of
Truth, that through it you may feel and witness your sanctification, and the
Birth Immortal raised up over all, which is the Heir of the Kingdom without
end, and assuredly God will do mighty things for his Poples; therefore be ye
comforted and strengthened in the Lord, and dwell in and keep his Covenant, and
answer his requirings in the Light of Life, and live in the retiredness, and in
the Wisdom of God, that your Enemies may have no just occasion against you, and
that ye may be preserved out of their snares; and if they Imprison you, and
falsely accuse you, or spoil your Goods, or Persecute you any manner of ways,
keep in Patience, and freely forgive them, and suffer as Lambs in the true
Innocence, that so your Peace with the Lord may be preserved in all conditions.

And Friends, let the Dread and Majesty of God fill you; And as concerning the
changing of Times and Governments, let not that trouble any of you, for God
has a mighty work and hand therein; and he will yet change again, until that
come up which must Reign; and in vain shall Powers and Armies withstand the
Lord, for his determined work shall come to pass; but what is now come up, it is
just with the Lord that it should be so, and he will be served by it: Therefore
let none murmur, nor distrust God, for God will provoke many to zeal against
unrighteousness, and for Righteousness, through things which are suffered now
to work for a season; yea, many whose zeal was even dead, shall revive again,
and they shall see their backslidings, and bewail them bitterly, and God shall
thunder down from Heaven, and break forth in a mighty noise, and his Enemies
shall be astonished, and the workers of Iniquity confounded, and all that have
not on the Garment of Righteousness, shall be amazed at the mighty and strange
work of the Lord, which shall be certainly brought to pass; but my Babes, look
ye not out, but be still in the Light of the Lamb, and he shall fight for you:
So the Almighty hand which must Break, and Split, and Divide your Enemies, and
take away Peace from them, preserve and keep you whole, and in Unity, and in
Peace with it self, and one with another.

Lambeth-House. the 3 d. day of the 4 th. Month 1660. I am your Dear Friend and
Brother in the Kingdom and Patience of Christ, who am a Prisoner for his
Testimony, and keep his Word, and am made as willing to suffer bonds, or to dye
for his Name, as to declare and publish it amongst men: Eternal living Praises,
and Hallelujahs over all, be unto him for evermore, Amen. George Fox, the
Younger.

AN EPISTLE UNTO All who love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, who are made
partakers of the riches of his Grace, and meet together to wait upon him
therein, to be read in their Meetings, in the Fear of the Lord.
DEAR Friends, whom the eternal God has visited with his own Life and Power,
and thereby has called you out of the Darkness of the World, into his
Mavelous Light, and has begotten and quickened a Seed in you, unto which
pertains the Promises of Life and Peace, and also has opened a good
understanding in you, by the measure of his Eternal Spirit, and has brought
you into a feeling, and a sensibleness, and a savor of that which ministers
and reaches to (and refreshes) his own Seed. Oh Friends, great is the Love of
the Lord God unto you, and large is his Eternal Riches; let not his everlasting
Love be forgotten by any of you, neither slight nor neglect his rich Mercy; but
dear Friends, dwell in the living measure of his Grace, and hearken diligently
unto the Voice of the Lamb; so shall you be refreshed with the living Presence
of the Father, and the Fountain of Life shall be enlarged unto you, whereby the
Babe of God shall be strengthened, and grow up in stature. And when you are met
together to wait upon the Lord, Oh! feel his living Gift in your selves, and be
obedient to the motions and operations thereof, that so the Presence and Power
of the Eternal God may be felt and enjoyed in your Meetings, (and at other
times) for the bringing down, and working out, of all that which is contrary to
himself in you, and for the working you into the express Image of his own
Glory, and for the bringing you into the perfect Obedience of his own Life and
Power, that the Nature of the Lamb (which takes away the sins) ye may all grow
into, that so the Patience of Christ may be felt and witnessed in you all, and
that it may have its perfect Work in you, that therein you may possess your
Souls; then shall the Lord enlarge your understandings, and ye shall grow into
the meek quiet Spirit, wherein your savor and discerning shall be increased,
and ye shall feel the gentle leadings of the invisible Life, whereby
satisfaction and refreshment shall be received unto the Seed Immortal.

So dear hearts, let the living Measure of the Eternal Father of Life, and
Power, and Wisdom, be your continual Stay and Habitation, that so, if any shall
come among you, that are out of the true savor and feeling of the Life in
themselves, and shall act or speak any thing among you, that is out of the
Life, that ye then may not be drawn out of the savor and feeling thereby, but
wait ye singly in the innocent, patient, long-suffering Spirit of Christ, and
that will preserve you out of the fretting, and murmuring, and thoughts, and
reasoning, and out of the enmity, and it will keep you settled and quiet, and
in Unity with God, and with all who abide in his Life; and this will reach the
Witness in them, who are turned from it, into the rambling unsettled state; and
if ye feel the Seed burdened, then wait in the true Patience, in the fervent
Love to the Truth, and then the Lord's Counsel you will know, and his Wisdom
you will receive, and his Power you will feel, whereby (as you are obedient
thereto) the burden will be removed, and the evil will be judged, (that caused
the burden) and the Seed will be refreshed, and the Unity of the Faith will be
known, and the weak there will be preserved, and so the Peace will be
Witnessed, and the Truth will be adorned, and its Enemies shall be ashamed.

Oh my Friends, dear is the everlasting unchangeable Truth of God unto me,
which he has made known in and among us in this his Day; and dear and precious
are all ye unto me, who abide in it, for therein is no Schisms, nor Parties,
nor Rents, nor Envy; for who go into those, first goes from the simplicity of
the naked Truth, in which (they that abide in it) the Patience, and
Forbearance, and Unity is felt by them; and such as go out of it, must feel the
Judgment; but all who abides in the Faith, shall not come into Condemnation.

So the LORD GOD Almighty of Heaven and Earth, preserve and keep you all in
Patience, in Innocence, in Uprightness, and in Obedience, unto the living
measure of his Power manifested in you, Amen.

Now Friends, that which ministers unto the Seed Immortal, know that
Ministration in your selves, for that is profitable, and that is durable, and
fades not away; and let the exercise of your minds be in that which is living
of God, when you are met together (and at other times) that so ye may be kept
out of that which comes to an end, in the feeling of the Power of an endless
Life; that so the Seed of Life may be raised up in you all, and ye established
in it, to live in it for ever; in which Seed, the end of words is witnessed. Oh
Friends, there cannot be another Truth, or Power, or Savior, Preached unto
you, that you are to mind, than that ye have already heard and felt, but the
same you are to wait to feel an enlargement in; Therefore be valiant for the
Lord, and prize the worth of his unchangeable Truth, and watch and be diligent,
that his Spirit of Life and Power may quicken you, and that his Virtue and
Nourishment may be felt and lived in, whereby Fruits of Eternal Righteousness
and Praises over all, may be given unto him, and that ye may be preserved
fervent unto your first Love in him, whose Eternal Day is dawned (and broke
forth) of Salvation, of Life, of Power, of Immortality; Glory, Eternal Praises
everlastingly, be rendered unto Him, from the meek, lowly, quiet, peaceable
Spirit, which is risen, and arising in his Babes, and tender Plants, whereby he
stays, and settles, and satisfies them, even in the day of Trial, and in the
day of Prosperity.

I am your Dear and tender Friend and Brother in the Power of God, in which I
labor, for the gathering of the Seed, for the bringing into, and keeping in
the Unity of the Spirit, which is the bond of Peace. George Fox, the younger.

TO THE Called of God, Who Believe in the Light of the LAMB, To be read in
their Assemblies in the Pure Dread of the Lord.
DEar Children and People of the Eternal God, who have known the working of his
Mighty Power, and have been exercised in the Operations of his Eternal Spirit,
whereby he has begotten your minds out of the world, in a great measure, and
has brought you into a feeling of his Eternal Presence, which fills Heaven
and Earth, wherein is the Joy unspeakable unto them that are reconciled to God
by the Lord Jesus Christ, the Immortal Word: Friends, you unto me are exceeding
precious, and my Desires and Breathings to the Lord for you, are exceeding
strong, that ye may be preserved in the sense and feeling of the Power of an
endless life, and that you may be all kept in the true Faith and obedience of
the truth, which lives for ever; all minding to answer its requirings in every
particular, and waiting to feel its Springings arising in you, whereby you may
feel it quickening you up to God, that so your Faith, and trust, and Confidence
may only stand in him, who is able to deliver: For Friends this know, the Lord
will assuredly try you to the uttermost, and you must come through the fire
which will consume your enemies: Therefore dear Babes be steadfast in the Lord
according as he has made manifest himself unto you, and wait and watch in that
measure of his Life in you, which only is able to keep your minds and hearts
out of the Earth, and the things thereof, and as ye singly wait upon the Lord,
you will feel the growth of that Birth in you, which is not of this world,
which can endure the fire; Oh my Friends, wait to feel your growth and
Translation into this Birth, which does the will of the Father naturally; this
is the Seed unto which the Promises are; this is the Elect which obtains, and
cannot be deceivid; this is the Heir of the Kingdom without end; this will God
Crown with Victory, when the measure of it is Sufferings is fulfilled; this Seed
must work through all it is Enemies, and work them under it is feet; Oh! wait in
the Eternal Power to feel and witness it in the particular, and be patient till
God bring forth his Work outwardly; Look not out, neither be dismayed at the
strange transactions of the times, but look to the Lord, who only can save by
what means he pleases, and let the Lord alone to appear as he pleases; only
be you watchful, that when he appears, you may be ready for his appearance, and
watch in the Light which will give you clearly to see his appearance, and what
he requires of you; that so living obedience unto him may be yielded: Oh
Friends, Take heed that the things of this World draw not away any of your
hearts: Remember it is them that are redeemed from the Earth, that must Reign
in, and with the Lamb upon the Earth: Take heed that your love stands not in
any thing, or things, that is of this world; for the Trial will be great unto
such: Dear hearts, I know that some of you have suffered the loss of much for
his Name sake already; oh faint not, neither be weary, for all your Sufferings
are known unto the Lord; and he will not always so try you; but he will
sufficiently recompense you, if ye abide to the end: Therefore watch unto
Prayer, and Pray in the Spirit, as it moves you thereunto, that you may be kept
through Faith unto the end of the Trial, that you may be prepared and made fit
for the deliverance, which must come by an outstretched Arm; and when you are
tried deeply, either in Prisons or otherwise, (oh Friends) murmur not, but feel
the Lord's strength to support you, that you may not bow to the Enemy, in any
wise, whose day is but short, and therefore he is wroth and rages; for such as
bow to any thing, but the Name of our King, verily their torment and perplextty
will be exceeding miserable, when the Lord shall deliver his chosen, who kept
their integrity, and loved not their estates, nor lives, but gave up all for
his Name sake: Therefore dear Friends, hearken you to the voice of the Lord,
and keep you to the leadings of his Eternal Spirit, and let his Dread fill you
hearts.

And you that feel but little Sufferings and Trials, take heed of a wrong
security, and of a false ease and Liberty, least the day of the Lord come upon
you at unawares, and a violent storm unlookt for; and you that are in deep
Sufferings and Trials, be not you cast down, but know that the Trial of your
Faith is exceeding precious, and if you keep your minds stayed upon the Lord,
then will you learn much in such a time, and you will feel the presence of God,
and the virtue of his Power, inwardly refreshing you; and you will feel the
Power of his Majesty giving you Authority suitable to the Condition you are in:
So as all Friends are kept in that which gives you the sense and feeling of
your conditions, that Principle of Life will work your minds and hearts into
contendedness with the Will of God, which is your Sanctification; So let the
bond of Peace be minded in all things, for it is comely amongst Brethren.

And now the God of Life and endless Virtue and Power watch over you, and
Minister unto every one of you, that which is suitable to your present
conditions; and the Lord God Almighty preserve and keep you Low, Humble, Meek,
Tender, Innocent, upright, Faithful and valiant, (out of the Snares of the
Enemy) and give you Peace in all your Trials; and let the Patience of his Lamb
be increased in you, that you may stand unmovable upon the Rock of Ages, and
retain the Life which quickens in your understandings: And the Lord God open
and keep open your discernings, that by no means the subtilty may beguile the
similicity in this the day of Trial: Eternal Father unto thee I commend all thy
Flock, that thou Father may fill them with Wisdom, Strength and Courage, that
to thy Glory they may be preserved in their several places and measures; to
whom be Dominion and Glory everlasting for thy endless riches, for thou Lord
art worthy to Reign over all; Even so come Lord God and take thy Kingdom.

I the Prisoner for the Lord salutes all you, who loves the appearance of
Christ, in that love which abides for ever. GEORGE FOX, the Younger.
Lambeth House the 14th of the 5th Month, 1660.
SUrely it was thee O Lord, that gave bounds unto the Sea, that the floods
thereof could not overwhelm thy chosen; thou can let forth the winds and
suffer a storm, and thou can make a Calm when thou please, have thou the
Glory of all, Thou King of Saints, thou Savior of Israel, thou can do
whatsoever thou please; therefore will we trust in thy Name, neither will we
fear what man can do unto us, because thou will not forsake us, but thou will
plead our Cause in the sight of our adversaries, and they shall know that thou
art our God, who art able to save to the uttermost; O Lord our Righteousness,
we will praise thy Name, for thy Mercies endure for ever; our eyes O God are
unto thee, for we have no other helper; our Faith O Lord stands in thee, who
can not forget thy People; Thou have revealed and brought up Jacob, who
wrestleth with thee, and prevails as a Prince, therefore must the Blessing
come; O Lord the Birth, the Birth cries unto thee, thine own Elect, which long
has been Oppresse^; ^hou can not deny thy self, therefore have we Faith and
Hope which makes not ashamed; Oh, Lord (...) unsearchable are thy ways; Thou
have even amazed (...), with the depth of thy Wisdom, thou only will have the
Glory of their deliverance; and therefore (...) thou suffered these things to
come to pass: (...) Righteous in all thy Judgments, only preser^e thy People
(which thou have gathered and will gather unto thy self) in the day of Trial,
that so they may sing of thy Power, and Magnify thy Name in the Land of the
Living.

George Fox, the Younger.

The Breathings of true Love, from the Immortal Seed, in the Prisoner for the
Lord, unto his People.
DEear Friends, Brethren and Sisters in the Light, called to be a People, loved
of God the Father in the Lord Jesus Christ, Grace, Love, and Peace be
multiplied amongst you, through the abundant manifestation of the Spirit of
Life, proceeding from the Father and the Son.

My Children, and beloved Friends, the God of all Truth has appeared unto you
in the Everlasting Covenant of Light, and Life, visiting you in an acceptable
Day, and Time; making known unto you his Eternal Truth, by the Revelation of
his Mighty Power in your Mortal Bodies; whereby he brought you indeed to feel
and know the miserable Estate and Condition that ye were in; and he has also
given you to see him upon whom help is laid, and you have received him (who is
the Salvation of God) through the drawings of his Mighty Power; and you are
brought to know and believe, That Salvation is not to be had in another; yea
many of you have received the Covenant of God, and do indeed know that your
sins are washed away in the blood thereof; for you have the witness in your
selves, and the word of reconciliation is felt and known in your hearts,
whereby abundance of Peace and Joy unspeakable is witnessed, and the Kingdom is
come, of which there is no end; and some of you are placed together therein, in
Christ Jesus; and many others of you, the called of the Lord, are traveling
thitherwards through the Righteous Judgments of the Lord, in the Spiritual
Warfare, and in the Faith and Patience of the Lamb.

Now my Friends, Be you steadfast in the Truth of God received; you have been a
suffering People most of the time since the Lord has brought you in any
measure into the obedience of his Glorious Truth and Gospel, (which is the
Power of God) and you have abode in his fear, and singly given up to his will;
you have mightily been preserved, and you have felt the hand of a tender Father
upholding you, and giving you Peace and content, when you have lost much of
this world, and the honor and pleasures thereof for his Name sake: Oh Friends!
He has not been wanting unto you, he has seen your sufferings, and has
looked upon your afflictions, and has ministered strength proportionable
thereunto, that you might not faint, nor be weary; Oh! let not his Mercies and
Fatherly care and loving kindness be forgotten by any of you; but let them for
ever be had in remembrance; so shall the reward be witnessed.

Now Friends, the Lord has suffered a Cloud and a Mist as it were, to spread
it self in these Nations, whereby an evil savor is gone forth, which by fire
must be taken away, in which he will yet further try his People, that they may
be as gold, separated clearly from the dross, and that they may indeed be truly
gathered and redeemed from the Earth, and all earthly things; and that they may
wholly look unto him for deliverance, and know that he indeed is the alone
refuge and hiding place in the day of distress: Therefore let all, who know the
Power of God, retire inward, and watch in the Light of the Lamb, that you may
feel the movings of the Life in your own Vessels, and be kept in obedience to
its drawings and leadings, in this day of Trial, Temptation and Darkness, which
is spreading it self, for a Moment (mark that) lest any of you be scattered;
for the Enemies work is, an^ will be, to seek to draw you from your strength
and true guide, which, where he attains it, great will be the sorrow and loss
of such.

Therefore my dearly beloved Friends, who have tasted how good the Lord is, in
the tender bowels of Christ, I beseech you, be fervent in love to God, and one
toward another; and be watchful in the Light, and therein watch one over
another, and strengthen, and comfort, and encourage, and build up one another,
in the work and service of the Lord: And if any (through the temptation of the
Enemy) has at any time spoken or done any wrong to another, even as God in
Christ, forgave you, so freely forgive ye one another; and be ye plain-hearted
one to another, and ^e ye reconcil^d in that which destroys all prejudice, and
purges out all hard thoughts, that so the Unity may be witnessed in that Love,
which thinks no evil, and the one Head and Master over all submitted unto; and
let the gathering be unto him alone, that so the blessing may be multiplied in
and amongst you, unto the Glory and Praise of him that gives the increase. And
be diligent in Meeting together (whilst you may) in the Name and Power of the
Lord, and be watchful in the measure of the Life of God, that you may feel your
strength renewed and increased in the inward man: For Friends, this is a day
which will try every one's strength; therefore dwell in the Power, in which the
true gathering is, that ye may not scatter abroad; for he that gathers not,
scatters abroad; and he that goes from the drawings of the Power, gathers not.
Now Friends, as ye keep in the drawings and springings of the Invisible Life,
ye will be knit together in one Life, and there will be no striving who shall
be greatest; but every one will be serving the Lord in their several places and
measures, and one another in Love; and as this is abode in, the weak in
somethings, and at sometimes, may help the strong, and the stronger in other
things, may help the weak: Oh Friends! be as Children of one Father, dwelling
in Innocence and Love together, helping one another; Be ye indeed as Members of
one Body, knowing that the nourishment to the several Members thereof comes
from one Head; and considering that every Member has not the same Office, yet
of exceeding Service, as each moves and acts in true Love to the Body, and
therefore ought to be born and owned in their respective places; and if any
Member would act any thing, that might hurt the Body, or any part of it, either
through being out of the sense, what is of Service to the Body, or otherwise,
then if another Member or Members be made sensible of the same, it, or they,
are bound in Love to the Body, to seek to hinder the same, and in tender love
to restore the erring Member, that so the Body may be kept in true Order, and
every Member seeking the good one of another. Oh Friends! consider how the
Members, even of the true natural Body, serve one another in Love; how does one
cover another? how does one bear, and strain, and labor for the good of each
other, to help one another! and how much more ought these things to abound in
the Spiritual Body, of which Christ is the Head?

And now, that which chiefly lies upon me at present to you is this; That ye
all, in the feeling of the pure Life and Power of God, may keep; and that where
there has been any watching for advantage by any (among you) against one
another, or strife of words, or prejudice, or striving to Lord it one over
another, or strangeness one toward each other, that these things be utterly
laid aside and resisted (for where these things, or any of them, take place,
they eat as does a canker, and devour the Babe which should inherit the
Promises, and receive the Blessing) and that in tender Bowels of Love ye
receive and embrace one another; and that all whatsoever has tended to the
contrary in any, may dye and be forgotten, as if it had never been; that so the
Birth Immortal (which has been quenched in some) may spring and grow in the
Virtue of the Father, that its strong cries, both in the Male and in the
Female, may pierce through the Clouds, and reach unto the Father of Life and
Power, and wrestle with him, until the Blessing be given abundantly; yea until
he make bare his Arm in the sight of his Enemies, that the Oppressor may cease,
and the Land may be swept of evil doers, that so a way may be made for the
further spreading of his everlasting Name and Truth, and for the exalting of
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus over all the Kingdoms of the World.

Ah Friends! the Unity, the Unity (in the Spirit) the Love, the Love (from a
pure heart) is exceeding precious; the yearning of Bowels one toward each other
(in the Lord) the Faith, the Patience, the Watching, and Breathing, and
Groaning, and Sighing, and Praying, and Crying in the Spirit and Power of
Emanuel, is able to astonish the Heathen, and to confound Armies, and Powers,
that withstand the Kingdom of the Lord Christ, and to cause Vengeance to come
upon such as will not Repent and turn to the Lord, in the day of their
Visitation, even in the day of God's long Patience and Forbearance, but set and
bend themselves against the Lord and his Anointed.

Now Friends, here is our strength, and these are the Weapons which we must war
withal, against all this ungodliness that is come, and coming up: Therefore
every particular, hearken diligently unto the Call of God, in the inward parts,
and wait in the meek Principle of Life, that each may know and feel their own
proper Gift or Gifts, Weapon or Weapons, and that every one may be kept
sensible of the Teachings of the Captain of our Salvation, that so ye may be
expert in handling and using of it, or them, to the glory of him, who has
called you to War against Babylon: And dear Friends, if any who love the Truth,
be yet further oppressed, and their Goods spoiled by the false Prophet or
Beast, as many will be; Oh! be ye tenderhearted toward such, and know that
the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof, and they that follow the
Lamb, are redeemed from the Earth: Therefore ye, who know the Life, dwell in
it, that your Redemption from all earthly things may be witnessed, and that
your Bodies and Estates may freely be given up to serve the Lord, and one
another, whilst you are suffered to enjoy them. Friends, I know many of your
Bodies and Estates have been, and yet are so given up; but these things I speak
by way of remembrance, to stir up the pure mind in all, who breath after the
Truth, that love unfeigned may be maintained and increased among you, that ye
may be all as Children of one Family, dwelling together in Unity and Peace,
contented with the Will of the Father; and be not at all discouraged or
daunted, because of the strength, and malice, and cruelty that is in the
Adversary, but be still and Patient in the Faith, and stand out of all mortals,
in the sense of the Invisible, Immortal Power of God; and in that, Meet often
together, and visit one another [whilst you may] and be as Lambs amongst
Wolves, and the LORD our God shall appear for us, and fight against our
Enemies, as he fought in the days of old against the Enemies of his Seed; yea,
he shall confound our Enemies, and bring them to naught, and bring Liberty to
his People, when he has tried them to the full; be Patient, and doubt not,
though the Day must be hot, yet it shall be but short, for the Elects sake;
Watch and look not out, He that will save his Life shall lose it, but he that
is willing to part with it, shall find it eternally. So the endless, eternal
Father of Life, of Power, of Wisdom, of Peace, of Love, of Salvation, gather,
and knit, and unite you together, and preserve and keep you in the melting
Power and Love of the Lamb, that ye may be as a Garden of Spices, that your
savor may be pleasant unto the Lord, and unto all that breath after him, in
this the day of Trial, Amen.

Ah my dear Friends! you have had a large and glorious day allowed you, for the
begetting and gathering of you into the precious Faith, and the Unity thereof;
and many precious opportunities have you had, for the assembling your selves
together in the Name of the Lord; and plenteously has his eternal sweet Power
and Life been manifested in and among you; and as you have waited therein. Oh!
how have you felt the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, the Life of Jesus
purging and purifying your Consciences, that therein you might hold the Mystery
of that Faith, which is your Victory over the World. And now my Friends, the
Lord our God has seen it good, that ye may yet be tried; yea, you must further
be tried, your Faith, your Strength, your Patience, must all be tried, and that
by fire (as I said before) that a pure People you may be (who stand and endure
the Trial) unto the Lord; yea, a glorious People shall ye be, whose beauty and
splendour shall fill the Earth.

Therefore my dearly beloved in the Lord, be watchful I beseech you, and turn
in, and keep low, in the feeling of the eternal Power in your own Vessels, and
know that every particulars strength lies there, and ever particular will be
tried. Therefore keep to your particular strength, and be obedient to the Power
in all its movings, that so by it your minds may be drawn off all things that
can or may change, and come to an end, and become wholly centered in the
unchangeable endless Life of God: Then my Friends, nothing can harm you. But
verily, if any of your affections be centered in Husbands, Wives, Children, or
any earthen Vessel, or visible thing whatsoever, so as that you cannot be
willing to part with all, if it be required at your hands, then may your
sufferings be great and dangerous unto you. Therefore I beseech you be
followers of the invisible Life of Jesus, in all its appearances anddrawings,
that so by it you may be taught how to use all visible changeable things unto
the Glory of the Lord, whilst you are permitted to enjoy them. And that you may
be made willing to give up, and to part with all; ye^, even with your lives
also, if you be called thereunto, for the Trial of your Faith (or that your
Enemies thereby may fill up the measure of their Iniquity, and that Judgment
may come upon them to the full.) And whilst you have outward liberty, for the
keeping your Meetings together, be diligent therein (as I said before) and when
any of you come to be hindered from such opportunities as you have enjoyed, Oh!
then be patient, and wait upon the Lord for strength; and if in any place it
should come to pass, that but two or three of you could come together, neglect
not that; for if in the pure fear and love of God you be kept, it will be
profitable and comfortable unto you. And dear Friends, you who are but weak in
the Truth, to you I now speak; Take heed of looking out at any of us, whom the
Lord God has drawn forth by his own Power and Love, to declare his living
eternal Truth, unto you; I say, look not out at us (as for strength or
teaching) but look to the endless Life in your selves, which we have directed
you unto, in which your strength and satisfactory Teaching is; for we may be
removed far from you (as to the outward) but the Life and Power, by which you
and we stand, abides with and in you; and we (as to the outward) may be
bruised, broken, and slain, for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God,
which we hold; But the Life and Spirit of God and the Lamb, dwells for ever
with you that believe in it; and if ye crucify it not to your selves, there is
none that can slay it. And while you have Us, or any of Us, among you, I exhort
and warn you all, and that in the Name and Authority of the Lord, that ye look
not upon, or think of any of Us, above what we are, lest thereby you should
hurt your selves (or any of us,) but according as God has distributed unto us
of his Heavenly Treasure, even so know us, and feel us, and receive us in the
Lord, and know no man after the flesh, neither admire any thing but the pure
Life of God, and the Birth born of him; and know, that what of God's treasure
we have in our earthen Vessels, we have received it from the Lord, that none
might glory or boast (in what they have) over another. And what we have
received, it is partly for your sakes, that we might impart of the same unto
you, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, and although we are become
the Lord's Freemen, through the work of his eternal Power and Spirit, yet are
we your Servants in Christ, and so let us be accounted among you, for that is
our place and duty, even to serve you in the Lord, and to stand given up, to
spend and be spent for you; and if we should not so walk among you in all
humility of mind, I know the Lord would soon withdraw his glorious Power and
Presence from us, and then what should we be more than others, nay, how much
less and weaker?

So dear Friends, keep in the pure Fear, and live in the true favor, that ye
may have a true sensible feeling one of another in your present conditions; and
that ye may be able to strengthen one another in the Lord. And if at any time,
any be felt not to be in so clear and living a condition as they formerly have
been in; Oh! take heed how you judge of those things, and beware of prejudice,
or of a Spirit that would rejoice, because advantages at such a time may easily
be taken, for that is accursed in the sight of God; But keep ye in the dread
and Wisdom of the Lord: And they that reprove, or exhort, such as are come to
loss in their conditions, let it be in that Spirit which can bear and suffer
all things (that are to be born) for the Seeds sake, in the true patience and
meekness. Oh Friends! this is the restoring, healing, strengthening,
consolating Spirit, which is of great price with the Lord, and in this live,
and you will feel the Blessing, the Peace, and Mercy upon the Israel of God,
and you will be meet helps one to another.

And now dear Friends and Babes, you who watch for Peace and Unity in
Righteousness, and can bear and endure all things (that may be born) for the
Elects sake, my Life is bound up with you in the overcomings of God's Love; and
I am refreshed in you, and I partake of your Peace and Joy, and meet and kiss
you in the meek Spirit, and rejoice with you in the work of the Lord: my
Friends, go on in the power of God, and build up one another in the living
Faith, and wait therein together, that in the eternal Power ye may feel
Dominion over all the cruelty of the Enemy; for it is the Faith in the power
that must break through all this wickedness, and bring down all this
ungodliness, that is spreading it self as if there were no end of it: But
Friends, as in the dread of the Lord ye keep, you will see the power of
Darkness vanish away, and they that act in it shall be chained under, though
for a moment they have liberty, for the Trial of our Faith: But verily in the
Power of the Lord God, I can truly rejoice over all these things, because I see
the Lord's presence and loving kindness in a wonderful manner amongst those
that truly wait upon him, and trust alone in him for deliverance, even in the
time of their Trials; and because he has given me steadfastly to believe, That
he will bring deliverance for his People, and set them over all the Powers of
the Earth by his own arm: Therefore let none murmur, not think that the Lord is
slack concerning his appearing for his People, but let every one that knows the
Truth, in that patiently wait, and endure whatsoever the Lord suffers the
wicked to do unto you in the day of his long Patience and Forbearance, which he
in compassion grants unto them, that they might come to repentance and
amendment of Life, which if they wholly slight, and will not be gathered in
their day, he has power enough (and will execute it) to destroy them, and to
deliver his People, that trust in him.

So in the pure Life, and Power, and Virtue of the Father be ye stayed, and
quiet in your minds, and wait to receive your daily Bread and Water of Life
from him, that ye may grow up in the eternal, and be established for ever, in
the Power of an endless Life: Oh Friends, if any look out in this day, they
will let in weakness; and whosoever feels weakness, let them abide and believe
in that which makes them sensible of their weakness, and they will gather
strength, and be able to stand.

And as for you, my dearly beloved Friends, who are come to witness your
Redemption from the earth by the Blood of the Covenant, and are now following
of the Lamb whithersoever he goes, leads, draws, or commands you; I know you
are come to the Anointing, and have received it, and that abides in you, and
you into it are comprehended; so that you need not any man to teach you, but as
the same anointing that abides in you does teach you, for that is true, and
there is no lie of it; and that teaches you of all things (which are suitable
to your conditions) and it shows you things to come, and with it you are able
to try Spirits and Doctrines, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him, the Lord, that Spirit. And where this is felt and witnessed, there is
liberty; and sitting and waiting in this, you are fed with the Bread from above
(which gives life) and refreshed with the springs from beneath (which makes
its way through the Rocks and Mountains to the pleasant Valleys) and you that
are come to this seat, you are able to judge of things within and without; and
although you have not need to be taught by letters, yet I know, you that are
come to this state, can bear the Word of Exhortation to be sounded among you,
that so it may reach unto them to whom it is of service, for the stirring up of
their pure minds, that so the Life and Power immortal, may in the freshness and
purity of it be felt in and amongst all the Flock, and that in the sweetness
and virtue thereof you all may be kept and preserved, in pure Unity and Peace
with God, and one with another. So the Blessing and Mercy of the Almighty, rest
and abide for ever upon you all, who delight in the Truth which is eternal.

And Friends, take heed how you receive reports, and report them again, for
there is a great danger in those things, and there is and has been very much
wrong among people upon that account, for many thereby are begotten into
strange lying wonders, and some into questionings and fears in their minds, and
some into false joys and foolish expectations, and some into prejudice one
against another, because false reports have been received and reported again.
Therefore that you may be clear of these things, be you very mindful, watchful,
and careful, that you report not any thing but as you have a certain ground for
the Truth of it; and as you may see a service in speaking thereof, or else you
had better be silent to those things, and let them dye, that so Truth, Unity,
and Peace may be lived in, and abound amongst you in all things.

London, the 8th of the 8th Month. 1660. I am your endeared Friend and Brother,
in the Bowels of Christ, whose Life is freely given up to answer the Will and
requirings of the Father; traveling for Unity, and Peace, and Righteousness
amongst men, where its wanting; and greatly rejoicing with all those in whom it
abounds, and is felt and witnessed. George Fox, the Younger.

Behold! how good and how pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in unity.
TO THE TRIBULATED Flock of Crhist, In BONDS or elsewhere, SALUTATION.
AH! my indeared Tribulated Brethren, Sisters and Friends, both in Prison and
out of Prison, Sufferers in Body, Estates or otherwise, for the holy powerful
Eternal Truth as it is in Jesus; O blessed are you ye Lambs of my Father's
Fold, who are faithful to him in the Testimony he has given you to bear; your
Reward is great, which in no wise shall fail: Dear Babes drink in the Life
abundantly which Emanuel has placed in you, and feed at the Table that my
Father has Richly spread for you with food, suitable for you, in your several
growths. Oh! the Word, the Word of Eternal Life is appointed for your food,
feel it in your selves and go no more out; Oh! how strong are the drawings
thereof, and how pleasant is the Virtue of it? How are they overcome with the
love of it, that abide therein, Oh! my Brethren and Friends; our strength, our
safety, our Peace and Satisfaction is this, therefore let it for ever be the
Habitation of your delight. O this day is Glorious to all that stand given up
in the Fathers will, whose heatts and minds are drawn and Redeemed out of all
those things that perish with the using. Oh! ye Babes, how strongly do I feel
you in the Power of love, who are Retired out of all fading, changeable, ending
things, into the Eternal, Invisible, unchangeable endless Life of
Righteousness; verily when I think upon you, and behold you in your Habitation,
I am even Raised with Joy and Love; Oh you that keep your Garments pure and
clean in the Life of the unspotted undefiled Lamb, how are my tender Bowels
refreshed in you? verily I cannot Express the Love that is in me to you ye
Lambs of my Maker; hold fast, hold fast the word of his Patience, it shall
Crown you, it shall Crown you in the End, by it shall you overcome through
Faith, yea by it your Enemies shall be brought under you, and in it shall you
be Exalted over your Oppressors. Oh! who can declare the Glory of the Lord, as
it shall be manifested in this Age? for verily he will work wonders in the
Earth, and in the Heavens, till he has brought to pass the thing that is in
his heart; in vain do all the Potsheards of the Earth strive against the Former
and Upholder of all things, for he will Exalt his Son and his Righteous
Kingdom, and establish it in Righteousness over all the Kingdoms of the World,
and they must bow thereunto.

Therefore my Indeared ones, be still in the Light and Life of the Lamb, that
you may behold the going forth of the Lord in his Glorious Power in this Day,
wherein he is Sifting, Winowing, Purging, and trying, that nothing but the
Wheat, and the Gold may be left: Oh Babes, dwell in love and Peace together, in
the powerful anointing which the Father has poured forth upon you as a full
gift, and placed in you as a true Teacher and a Leader, and let all keep to the
holy drawings thereof, and Answer the Requiring of the same. O! blessed are you
that bear the Testimony therein; and quench not the Springs and arising of it,
neither go without it, but simply and innocently obey its pure leadings; and as
you are kept in this, if any are not able to bear you, you will be able to bear
them, for you will have nothing in your Precious Eye and Mind, but nakedly and
simply the Honor and Glory of your Tender Father, who will cause Bowels of
Love to open in you one toward another, in the merciful, forgiving,
forbearing, healing Spirit, which will fill your Precious immortal Souls,
whereby you will be able to gather and allure others into the same.

Oh! my Friends dwell out of all mortals, in the Immortal Power and Love of the
Father, and know the Birth that inherits the blessing, and abides in Covenant
with God, which breaks and disanuls death's Covenant and brings over death and
its Power into the Trial and Dominion of the Lamb.

O ye Innocent Babes and Plants, who in Prisons, holes and Dungeons are cast,
because you dare not grieve the Spirit of the Lord your God in obeying man's
unrighteous Decrees, my Father's love is exceeding great to you; your Righteous
Just Cause he will fully Plead, therefore leave it wholly to him, and in the
overcomings of his Power and Tender Love solace your selves, and quietly lie
down in his will, till he bring you forth in his own Dominion: Oh! you are
Precious unto me, who cannot defile your Testimony for any outward enjoyment;
my Bowels, my Bowels are filled with the streams of Love, and Life, and
Compassion, which flow forth to you; O my Prayers, groanings, Breathings, Reach
unto the God of Life both day and night for you; Oh my beloved ones, watch,
watch one over another in tender Bowels, and bear the weak and feeble in your
Arms and Bosom of love, and let Mercy and Peace fill your Habitations, and God
shall work your Deliverance for you in his appointed time. O Friends you are
witnesses of that Truth, which must spread over all the world, and never be
extinguished more; but to the brightness of its rising many shall come: And all
of what degree soever that set themselves against it shall fall before it, yea,
they shall not prosper, the Lord has spoken it: only Remember he will
thoroughly try his gold that it may be manifested unto all; So the Precious Life,
Power, Peace and Virtue of my Fathers', be multiplied in and among you, till
you all come to the Stature of the fullness of Christ in God Eternal. Amen.

From Westminster Palace Yard, Gate House, the 2d of the 1st. Month, 1661. Your
dear, tender, and loving Brother, in the humble melted broken contrite Spirit
of Christ, who am filled with his streaming consolating Virtue, Joy, Peace,
Love, and everlasting Refreshment. George Fox, the Younger.

Touching compelling Engagements; this in the Truth I say.
A Fearful, hard, unbelieving heart in man, was the ground from whence those
Engagements arose* They that stand and live in that ground, cannot trust in the
Lord but make flesh their Arm; and therefore where such have Power, they seek
to force and compel men to Swear, Vow, and Promise, and Engage to be true to
them, and to seek to preserve them; But whosoever do Righteousness, and Rule
therein, God is their trust, and his Arm is their strength; and such are a
Dread and a Terror to Evil Doers, and a praise to them that do well, and their
hearts are inclined by the Lord to such Rulers. Now he that desires to turn a
fearful hard unbelieving heart, out of that state, he must seek to turn it from
the false refuge, strength and security of it, made to preserve it self in that
state; and so direct it to that which must break it, and its confidence in its
false refuge: Also if a man puts trust and confidence in Bulwarks of Earth,
that cannot preserve him, and labor to fortify himself therein by building
them higher, and believes that if he gets them higher, he shall be safe (Mark)
he that stands by, and knows certainly that such a one is deceived, and does
see that he cannot be safe in that place, and yet for self ends upon any
account whatsoever, shall help the deceived man to build his Bulwark higher,
that man does not do well in so doing, he does not as he would be done unto.

Are not the Children of Light Engaged, and bound to God in the bond of love,
to resist every thing that is Evil, and to do unto all men as they would they
should do to them, yea to serve and obey the Lord in all things; is not this
our Covenant with God; therefore can we consent to any Evil Custom of man
without breaking Covenant with God; and have we not seen, counted, and declared
this to be an Evil Custom that has been upheld among the Sons of Men, (Mark)
for them that get upper most in the many changings, still to force and compel
others to Engage to them; Oh! consider this seriously.

But what if the Ruler will take that for an Engagement to him that my
Principles leads me unto, whether he command me to it or not, may not I
lawfully give him that, if that will save me from suffering, and if it be so,
that he will Persecute me, if I do not so Engage to him?

It is not lawful for thee to do evil that good may come thereof (Mark) the
Persecuter is not of God, but of the wicked One, and he is not to be bowed
unto; whatever thou suffer, thou ought not to be compelled to Engage to any;
that compelling custom is Evil, and is to be resisted in the Lambs Power (Mark)
Although I dare not but serve the Lord God according to the Principle of his
Truth in me, yet if any man should come and say thus unto me, If thou will not
Promise and Engage unto me, that thou will serve and obey the Lord thy God, I
will Persecute thee, but if thou will, I will not; I say, though I knew he had
Power to Persecute, and execute the same, yet I dare not Engage or make such a
Promise to him, whatever he were.

First, Because I know the Lord requires no such thing at my hand.

Secondly, Because if I did, I should in so doing, bow and yield to the
compelling Power of a Persecuting Spirit, which is not of Christ, but against
him; and this will dishonor and offend the holy God, and bring me into sore
bondage also: therefore I dare not for Conscience sake, yield to that Evil
Custom of Engaging to man, which has been upheld in the compelling Persecuting
Power, among the Sons of Men.

From one that truly seeks the good of the whole Creation, and can freely give
unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's, but I must give unto God the things
that are Gods; who also desires that the Authority and honor of Truth, may be
preserved, whatever become of me. George Fox, the Younger.

None can hinder the DETERMINED WILL of GOD.
WHat my Father has Determined for these men to do, no man can stopped it; Oh!
that Patienec might be abode in by all that know his Name, and his Will
submitted unto by them that he has called. O be still, strive not, but Drink
the Cup which my Father suffers to be given; I know it will be bitter to
some: but whosoever striveth against it shall come to loss and shame; for the
Lord will yet further Try his People, till it be fully and clearly manifest who
are the Approved in his sight: This he will certainly do; Therefore let not the
present Calm beget a wrong security in any, for lo the Day hastens, and comes
swiftly, that another storm must arise; and in Vain will it be to fly to the
Tall Cedars and strong Oaks for shelter; for nothing but the Name of the Lord
can preserve in that Day.

Written the beginning of the 4th. Month, (61) GEORGE FOX, the Younger.

Concerning the departure of Dear GEORGE FOX, the Younger; or words spoken by
him a little before he was taken out of the Body.
THis may inform Friends, that as formerly he was a man full of the Power of
the Lord, whose living presence daily did accompany him; so also in the last
Visitation of his outward man, even till the laying down thereof, it was
largely continued to and with him; for he lay (although weak in body) as a man
daily renewing his strength in the Lord even to the last, whose living powerful
presence was seen and felt to be very powerfully present with him; yea he was
so filled with the Power and presence of the Lord of Life, That he said
(although very weak as aforesaid) That he would even shout and sing for Joy of
heart; and so did Exhort Friends to keep in that Unity which he had so long
travailed for: And then with much fervency of Spirit he Prayed, and exhorted
all Friends, To keep their Garments unspotted of the World, because great was
the Day of Trial that was at hand; Recommending all Friends to the Lord, with
his Dear love to all the Faithful Lambs and Babes of the Lord, and taking his
leave of Friends fell a sleep in perfect Peace with the Lord, being in perfect
memory to the last.

This Testimony was Received from a Friend, who was with him in the time of the
weakness of his outward man, even until the laying down thereof.

This is for you who are called Commonwealths men, both in the Army and
Parliament, to read*
Wherein are many plain and true things declared unto you (which are suitable
to your present Estate and Condition) that ye may consider them in the same,
that they are sent unto you, in which is in Truth and in sincerity and
singleness and uprightness of heart, in that love which thinks no Evil; even in
obedienae unto the Spirit of the Lord which also says, Try all things, and
hold fast that which is good.
Friends,
IN several of you, I know there has stirred, and does often stir a pure true
living Principle of God, which has begot (and does beget) true honest and
upright Desires and Breathings in you after Righteousness, true Liberty and
Freedom (and loathings of Oppression and Tyranny) and it has been in the
hearts of some of you, and much upon you to break down Oppression and Tyranny,
and to remove Oppressors, and to make void all such Laws, as make provision for
Tyranny and Oppression, whereby the Oppressors have long been strengthened in
their Oppressing the People of this Nation; and some of you have felt the
weight and burden of Oppression and Tyranny (under which the Innocent suffer)
and it has been much in your hearts to set up Righteous Laws, whereby all
People might have Equity and Justice done to them and for them, by such as you
have had thoughts to put in Authority, which would do just and equal things
between Man and Man without respect to persons.

These things the Lords witness (in you) has showed unto you, that they ought
to be done by you, and some of you have breathed and desired much to do these
things, when ye have owned the pure movings and stirrings of the measure of the
Life and Power God (in you) which has stirred and moved (in you) toward
Righteousness, Equity, Mercy and Justice; But hitherto ye have been much
hindered in this work.

And truly Friends, there are many things yet remaining in and among you (mark
that) which hinder and stop you in this work of true Reformation, and they will
stop you therein (mark that) so long as they bear rule in and among you, and
are consented to (and regarded) by you; many of those things are as follows.

First, There are many that pretend that they are of you (mark that) which have
joined unto you in some outward appearance, but it is more for fear of loosing
their places, and the riches and honor of this world, than for to the Cause of
Equity, Justice and true Liberty; And these are in the Priests nature, who for
covetousness and self ends, can change with the times and Governments, and
pretend they are for them (so long as they will hold them up) and such are
neither true to God nor their Country, for they can lay down their Religion
which they have pretended to stand for, and deny the Cause of their Country, if
it will make most for their own Gain, and then say it was the Lords doing, and
they are satisfied in it, though it be quite contrary to that, which they have
formerly contended for: and of this sort there are many among you, which stop
the work you ought to do.

And several of you also, in whom the Truth of God has stirred against
Oppression and Tyranny, verily your minds are yet so much in your Commissions
and Places, and in the love and honor and Wisdom of this World, that this
stops you in the work ye ought to do. And some of you have so many relations
(mark that) that have such a great gain in those very things, which greatly
Oppress the People of this Nation; and also some of your selves are concerned
in these things; that so ye cannot tell how to take away Oppression wholly,
without taking away their and your own gain; and these things being looked at
by you, they exceedingly stop you in the work you ought to do, because herein
private self ends, and respect to Persons by you are preferred before the
general good of all.

Now Friends, whilst your minds, and thoughts, and hearts run into or after any
of these things; They (with the Enemy of your Souls) will not suffer you to do
that which is equal, no further (to be sure) then it will stand safe for the
upholding and preferring of yout relations, and your own private particular
self ends.

Therefore all wait in that which is pure and living of God in you, which will
show you all Deceit, if ye keep to it, that so by it your minds may be redeemed
out of all self and respect to Persons, that so all particular private self
ends and respects to Persons, may be denied and utterly trampled upon by you,
and that the general good and freedom of all, without respect of Persons may be
minded and acted for by you, that so ye may serve the Lord God and your
Generation in singleness and uprightness of heart, and then the Lord will
honor you, and he will be your sufficient reward.

Verily it is a mighty thing, and it is highly to be prized by you, especially
ye of the Army, that ever the Lord God should make use of you again, and again
put an opportunity into your hands to do that which you formerly promised and
vowed unto the Lord (and your Nation) to do, seeing ye so slighted (mark that)
the former opportunities, which the Lord God gave you, and acted so
Treacherously and Deceitfully as ye did in your backslidings; and if ye should
slight this opportunity also, do not expect another (be not deceived God will
not be mocked) therefore consider these things and mind to answer the Lords
love yet continued unto you.

But if ye look out at or suffer your minds to run into (mark) the greatness of
your Places, or after your gain, or the honor of the World, or if ye look out
at love or hatred of your Friends or known Enemies, or at any particular self
end whatsoever; These things will strangle the Principle of God in you, which
moves to do that which is equal and just unto all, and then the tender Seed in
you, which feels the weight and burden of Oppression, that will be murdered,
and then the deadness and hardness of heart will come upon you more and more,
and ye will settle deeper and deeper in the death; and verily if ye should do
thus, ye would become even as Sodom and Gomorah unto the Lord, and he would
overturn you with a great and mighty destruction (as he did them) therefore
remember you have been warned.

So look at none of these things, but look ye to the Lord God, and mind the
movings of his Life (in you) and be obedient thereto, and as Oppression and
Tyranny and Injustice is made manifest unto you (by the Light of the Lord in
you) in the Power of the Lord committed unto you, break it down and overturn
it, and set up and establish Righteous Laws, Equity, Mercy, and Justice and
true Liberty in its Place, and then you nee^ not fear what Man can do unto you,
for the Lord will then be your preserver.

So the Lord God has once more tried you; Now if you love Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Houses, Lands, Commissions, Honors of the World, or any
particular self end whatsoever, more then the work of the Lord; or if ye prefer
any of them so as thereby to stop the Lords work, or if you do the Lords work
negligently (which he has once more put into your hands) verily ye shall not
be counted worthy to be the Lords workmen.

So remember Saul (who was made an example that others might take warning) who
slew but part (of that which was to be distroyed) and saved a part alive, and
therein he was stubborn and disobedient; Now if ye should destroy but part of
the Trranny and Oppression, which is utterly to be distroyed (mark that) and
preserve part of it, take heed lest the Lord rent you from your places for your
stubborness and disobedience, as he rent Saul from his Kingdom for his.

Therefore Awake, Awake, and wait in the Light, to feel the Lord's strength,
that therein your zeal and courage for him may be renewed and linger not in
things as ye have done, but dwell in the Power of the Lord (ye who have felt
it, and do not abuse it or resist it any longer) and in his Power act for the
Freedom and just Liberty of all his Creatures, and this will bring honor unto
the Lord, that so ye in whose hearts there is a singleness, an honesty, an
uprightness unto the Lord, (may keep your selves from being defiled with the
corruptness of others) and so be preserved in his Wisdom and Power, in the
Breakings, Overturnings, or Purging, and Separating, that yet must be in the
Nation,

And Friends in the Army, when will the Spirit of ^^^hteousness and Equity be
clearly manifested among you, to rule you thus, that so long as ye bear an
outward Sword it might be only turned against Evil Doers, and not for the
upholding any Oppression whatsoever, but for the breaking down of all
Oppression, and Tyranny wheresoever it is found, and for keeping the outward
Peace, whilst equal and Just Laws be established, whereby the Just Liberties,
and outward Freedom of the Nation, might be enjoyed; and not to make a trade of
using your Swords, to enrich your selves by them, by heaping up outward riches,
and to feed your lusts; But whilst ye use your Swords, to be content with such
wages as might but even find you things necessary, and convenient for your
Places.

Now if this Spirit lead you, then self denial will be manifested in you
indeed, and they that called you a mercenary Army, then should be ashamed; for
if Tyranny and Oppression were destroyed, and Equity, true outward Liberty and
Freedom were established, and the Enemies of it so brought to naught, that so
there were no need of you, this Spirit if it ruled you would make you as freely
willing then, to lay down your Places and Swords, as ever any of you were made
free to take them up, and then to fall upon improveing the Creation in the fear
and Wisdom of the Lord, and to be content to enjoy an equal proportion and
share of the Liberty (with your fellow Creatures) which you have fought for;
and if it were thus, then ye might truly be called the Commonwealths Men, or
servants.

But if ye carry a Sword and expect and desire still to carry or uphold a sword
to make a Trade of (mark that) then I know you will not utterly bring down
Oppressors and Oppression, and firmly establish outward Liberty though ye
could, lest your Trade should fall: Now if you do not act singly for your
Nations good (stand out of all self ends whatsoever) but still continue making
a Trade of using your Swords, then you cannot truly be called the
Commonwealths servants, but such as serve your selves, and such as are their
Masters, though you receive wages of them.

And Friends, there are many things done lately in the name of the Keepers of
the Liberty of England; Now (mark) ye should first make England a free Nation,
and set it at Liberty from all its Oppression and bondage that it is in (before
ye take such a name upon you) and then in the fear and Wisdom of the Lord, see
to preserve and keep its Liberty, and then ye might truly be called the Keepers
of the Liberty of England. But if ye do not first set it at Liberty and then
keep it, and ye be called the Keepers of the Liberty of it, ye will be but like
unto those which had a name that they lived, and yet were dead; and like the
false Christians who are puffed up with a name, but are out of the nature which
belongs to the name.

This from me who have a tender love going forth unto all, both in Parliament,
Army, and others, who have any true Breathings or Desires (in them) after
Righteousness, Truth, Equity, Mercy, Justice, and true Judgment (which I wait
to see set up and Establi^hed;) And I honor the higher Power, and am subject
thereunto, where ever, or in whomsoever it does appear; which Power has made
me a watchman unto you to warn you to watch for your Souls and for Peace; And
in obeying this Power, I am clear of, and free from the blood of all men. Given
forth by Geo. Fox, the Younger.

The Ear that hears the reproof of life abides among the Wise.

He that refuses instruction despises his own Soul: But he that hears
reproof gets understanding.


Friends, the reason why this comes last, is, because a Copy of it could not be
obtained till such time as the foregoing writings were Printed; otherwise it
had come in order with the Rest of his Books.



THE END.

