OF Free Justification BY CHRIST.

Written First in Latin By John Fox, Author of the Book of Martyrs, AGAINST
OSORIUS, etc.

And now Translated into English, for the Benefit of those who love their own
Souls, and would not be mistaken in so great a point.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurstat at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside. 1694.

THE EPISTLE OF THE AUTHOR, To all Afflicted and Troubled Consciences of
Believers in Christ.
BEing to write this Apology concerning Free Justification by Christ; the more
that I consider the Cause, that I have undertaken, the more I am inclined to
proceed. And again, when I call to mind these Times, and how the Manners of Men
are corrupted, there arifeth in my mind a doubtful wavering, distracting me
several ways, not without some fear joined therewith, That which causes me to
(...) is this, lest the greatest part of our People (as the minds of Men are
apt to catch at the smailest occasious) Should contract Some (...) from this
mild and peaceable Doctrine of Evangelical Justification, to grow the more bold
in Sinning. From whence I do therefore partly apprehend, what the Silent
Thoughts of Some Men may object against me; who, though they will not deny the
things which we say of Christ to be true, yet they will judge them unseasonable
for the Times and Manners of Men nowa-days, being so corrupted and infected.
Nay, that they are rather hurtful, and open a door to greater boldness and
security in sinning. Therefore, that I may answer those Men, and give some
account of my undertaking, I thought sit to speak a few things by way of (...)

(...) That I am not at all ignorant (...) of prodigious Uncleanness do abound
every where at this day; and also (...) do no less (...) the things that I see.
And I wish it were as much in my power (...) procure the healing of these
Evils, as I am (...) grieved at so great a Torrent of all Wickedness prevailing
daily more and more.

(...) some will say, Then dram forth and thunder out something from the severe
Law of God, which may terrify the minds of the People with the healthful Fear
of God, and the dreadfulness of Divine Vengeance, which maytake away the
furious Lusts of Life, and restrain unbridled Boldness, and reduce Men into a
course of more severe discipline, and reclaim them from Wickedness to serious
Repentance, and drive all Men forward by all means to endeavor the best
things. But what other thing do I drive at in these Treatises throughout,
though not with the same dexterity of Speech, and excellency of Wit as many
Men, yet aiming altogether at the same (...). For if we look at the End of
things with a right Judgment, what is the Design of all the Doctrine of the
Sacred Gospel, concerning Faith, Christ the (...) and Free Justification by
him, but that by setting before Men the great (...) bestowed upon us by Christ,
and by considering his Special Favor, the winds of Believers being so much
more easily inflamed with the admiration of heavenly things, may be won over to
a contempt of this World? Though in the mean time I am not unsensible, that
there be some perhaps of a contrary Opinion: to wit, that no other way or
Medicine for rooting out of Vices, and reforming Manners should be used, but to
stupifie the Ears of simple Men with perpetual inculcating of Laws and
Precepts, and dreadful Threatenings to stir up Terror. Unto whose Opinion, as I
would not oppose my self, so also I cannot but greatly commend their Labor.

But again, neither should they be blamed, who teach Christ, nor the
promulgation of the Gospel neglected, because many abuse it. Before the Father
sent his son into the World, he was not ignorant that the World would not
receive him, and yet he sent him nevertheless. Though he knew there were many
that loved Darkness more than Light, notwithstanding the true Light shined from
Heaven, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into this World.

There has never been so happy a Generation, but the worser part has exceeded
in number, and always the fewest were pleased with the best things. But I doubt
whether ever such abominable Impudence in sinning came to so great a height in
any Age. Wherefore I confess, that so much the more their Endeavors should be
encouraged, who give all diligence for this purpose, and rebuke with sharpness,
that wickedness may be purged away out of the Christian Commonwealth. For what
can they do more agreeably? But yet Christ Should not therefore be expelled
from the Church. Yea, if I may be allowed to speak freely, I know not whereunto
this so great depravation and overflowing of all most abominable iniquities
should be imputed, but that Christ the best Instructor of Life, does not so
reign in the minds of Men, as in right he ought. This World has its Adorers.
But Christ also has his own miserable and afflicted Elect in the World, the
care of whom should not be neglected. Therefore they that are angry at the
filthy Manners of this Life, do well therein; but yet they do not ill, that are
angry at the corrupt Errors of Doctrine, about which, according to my Opinion,
no less care should be taken then about Manners. The Prophet is commanded to
declare unto his People their sins. True indeed.

But again, the same Prophet is commanded to comfort his People. Also the Voice
of the Prophet is commanded to Prophecy with a loud Cry to the Cities of Judah
concerning the Savior their King, and his Reward, and the Saving Grace and
Glory of God, which was to be revealed in that People: So then, the Church has
her Prophets, I know and acknowledge it.

And again, the Divine Bounty so dispenses its Gifts, that the same has also
its Evangelists. But now, where is there one of all the Prophets that came
before Christ's Time, but he is found frequently to Evangelize something of
Christ very sweetly with joyful Proclamations? We bear the same testified by
Peter; Acts 10.
To him, faith he, all the Prophets bear witness, That as many as believe in
him shall receive remisfion of sins: Wherefore as those are not to be defrauded
of their own praise, who do all they can to bring the brutish minds of the
People to a deteflation of their own evil deeds: So again it should be inquired
into, Whether this is all that must be done? Thou call them back to
Repentance, who are running on headlong into their sins, and thou do well,
for it is a great thing. But what will this so much avail, unless Christ also
being received by Faith, come together with thy Repentance: For thou art not
pardoned only upon the account of thy remorse at the remembrance of thy bypast
Life, but because Christ, who never sinned, died for thee.

Though again, neither does he forgive any, but him that repents truly, and
from his Heart. Therefore these two must be joined together, and always
retained in the Church: But so that Salvation and Justification should be
understood to consist principally, not in the Life of Men, if it were never so
Holy, but in the Doctrine of Faith rightly taught.

In which Matter, this whole Generation of Papists, seems to me not a little
deceived, who look upon this our Christian Religion, to be nothing else, but a
Moral Doctrine of framing the Life, according to the right Rules of Living;
which when a Man has strictly observed, and thereby gained the Reputation of
Virtue, and external Honesty, they think nothing further is wanting to the
complete Perfection of Christian Philosophy; which if it be true, I scarcely
discern what difference there is between us and the Ancient Philosophers. For
what Sect of Philosophers was ever so grossly absurd, but that they esteemed it
honorable to contemn those things, with the Admiration and Desire whereof we
Christians are so much transported, that we are in the next degree to Madness?
That Money never makes any Man Happy. That the end of good, should by no means
be placed in Honors or Pleasures. The Stoics were not ignorant, that no Man
is wise, but a good Man. They saw that nothing was good and honorable, but
true Virtue, and nothing should be accounted Evil but only Filthiness. Socrates
in Plato Disputes, that Injury should not be revenged by an Injury: And that
the Soul should by all means be drawn away from the Affections of the Body.
Moreover that, the Soul being Immortal, they are not in a deplorable Condition,
who after having passed their Life honestly, depart hence into more blessed
Habitations. What shall I say of Plato, or of Aristotle, who in his Politics,
denies that any thing can be pleasant unto Men in Life, except Virtue, in which
only Pleasure consists. How holily does M. Cicero write of Offices? Yea those
Men did not only teach such things, but not a few of them, did also perform
great part of their Doctrine, both amongst the Greeks and the Latins,
especially Socrates, Aristides, Diogenes, Epictetus, the Curij, the Fabij, the
Fabricij, and the Scipio's. Whose Life, Virtues, and famous Acts, if we look
into, and compare them with the Catacatholicks in our Days, O how ashamed may
they be at so great a difference as is between them! And yet as all these
things, so very excellent, profited them nothing to Salvation without Christ,
so also we should suppose, that in all our Virtue, and good Deeds there is
nothing, that distinguishes us before God from their Paganism, unless besides
the Condition of Life, there be added another Doctrine, and Profession of
Religion, which does not, as the Philosophers of old, Dispute about Virtues
only and Moral Duties, or about placing the chief Good in the Excellency of
Virtue or Charity, nor makes enquiry about legal Righteousness, and civil
Judgments: But calls us forth unto deeper Mysteries, and instructs the Minds of
Believers soundly and solidly, concerning the Heavenly Judgment of God, his
Will, his Engagement by Covenant, concerning the Son of God, and our Eternal
Redemption by Christ, Peace, Justification, Faith, the Hope of our Calling, the
largeness of the Mercy and Grace of God, Salvation and the Crown of Immortality.

These seem to me to be the Principal Heads, in which all the Strength and
Nature of our Religion, all our Peace and Tranquillity, and all the way of our
Salvation and Doctrine is contained: Which manner of Doctrine, I think all
means should be used, that it may be retained in the Church sound and entire.

And this was the chiefest Cause, that stirred me up to undertake this Defense,
wherein I am now engaged, not that I might open a Door of Licentiousness to Men
of unclean Dispositions: But that I might lay open unto all Godly Brethren, and
especially to those that are afflicted, the boundless and eternal Riches of the
Grace of God in Christ purchased for us, the Glory of the Kingdom, the Stable
and undoubted good Pleasure of his reconciled favor.

What if some are of such a perverse Mind, that they design to abuse this our
peaceable and healthful debate, about Faith and the Grace of Justification, for
a Defense of their own Uurighteouness, and carnal Licentiousness, I give them
notice now before hand, that these things were neither written, nor thought
upon by me for them, but only for the Godly, whose Consciences in this World
are burdened and afflicted, (to whom I would peculiarly Dedicate this Work,
such as it is) that I might ease and refresh them in Christ, in the great
straits of their Agonies with some Lenitive of Evangelical Doctrine, against
the ensnaring assaults of Satan.

And likewise, that I might strengthen and preserve them, as with an Antidote
against the Malignity of the Pseudocatholick Adversaries, and the subtle
deceits of Sophisters: Who by an infinite number of Books already published,
and by hurrying new ones daily into public view, keep no measure, and make no
end of Writing, that they may subvert the right ways of the Lord.

In the mean time, I have nothing at present that I can say of that our goodby
Stapleton, but that it troubles me much, his Book so prolixely Talkative, came
no sooner to my Hands. Now because this so tumultuous a noise of twelve Books,
which he seems to have armed against Christ, and his twelve Apostles, to
conquer the simplicity of Evangelical Doctrine, requires more leisure to
examine his so many, and so great Authorities heaped together out of Augustine;
I must beg a Truce of Him, until I can bestow requisite Pains on so great a
Doctor, if so be God will furnish me with Strength, that I may be able to
perform it.

Now I pray the Lord Jesus, who was crucified for our Sins, that according to
the unspeakable greatness of his Power, whereby he can do all things with his
Father in Heaven and in Earth, and according to his great loving Kindness
toward us, that he would fructify our Minds daily more and more, by the
Spirit of his Grace, nourish them by his Presence, confirm them by his Power,
that he would defend the afflicted cause of the Gospel, against the Plagues of
Error, disappoint the attempts of malicious Persons, endeavoring our
Destruction, still disorderly Tumults and vain Ianglings in the Church, grant
Peace to our Times, Pardon to our Sins, Strength and Victory to our Faith,
Skilful Workmen to the Church, and Dexterity in working and teaching to the
workmen; and especially that he would refresh and Comfort with the Gracious
Favor of his Divine Majesty, the pious and perplexed Consciences of Believers,
combating with Death and Satan, or exercised with sharp Affliction, for the
Glory of his own Name, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit all Glory
is due for ever and ever. Amen.

John Fox.

Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel.
A Practical Exposition on the 130. Psalm, wherein the Nature of the
forgiveness of Sin is declared, the Truth and Reality of it asserted, and the
Case of a Soul Distressed with the guilt of Sin, and relieved by a discovery of
forgiveness with God, is at large Discoursed.

The Grace and Duty of being Spiritually Minded, declared and practically
improved.

A Declaration of the glorious Mystery of the Person of Christ, God and Man.

Of Temptation, the Nature, Power, the danger of entering into it, means of
preventing that Danger.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, these five by Dr. John Owen.

A Body of practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the lesser
Catechism, composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, with a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture, by Tho. Watson
formerly Minister of St. Stephens Walbrook Printed from his own handwriting,
recommended by several Ministers to Masters of Families and others.

The Confirming Work of Religion: Or its Great Things made plain, by their
Primary Evidences and Demonstrations. Whereby the meanest in the Church, may
soon be made able to render a Rational account of their Faith Written by R.
Fleming, Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures.

The Gospel Mystery of Sanctification in sundry practical Directions, suited to
the Case of those who labor under the guilt and power of indwelling Sin. To
which is added a Sermon of Justification. By Mr. Walter Marshal late Preacher
of the Gospel.

The Confession of Faith, together with the larger and smaller Catechisms, by
the Reverend Assembly of Divines then sitting at Westminster, presented to both
Houses of Parliament. Again published with Scriptures at large, and the
Emphasis of the Scriptures in a different, Character.

An Earnest Call to Family-Religion, or a Discourse concerning Family Worship,
being the substance of eighteen Sermons, preached by Samuel Slater, M. A.
Minister of the Gospel.

The Sure Mercies of David: Or a Second Part of Heart-treasure. Wherein is
contained the sum and substance of Gospel-mercies purchased by Christ, and
Promised in the Covenant of Grace, together with the several ways how they are
made sure to all the Heirs of Promise, and how they are to be improved for the
Saints Fort and Defense, Settlement and Encouragement in shaking and
backsliding times. By O. Heywood.

OF Free Justification by Christ.
In Reading your Books, Hierom Osorius, concerning Righteousness, though I had
not leisure accurately to trace every particular, on which you have enlarged,
yet by what I have here and there collected, I think I do well enough perceive
whereat you drive, what you design, and what you endeavor: For, according to
my apprehension, you are endeavoring, not to strike at some part of Christian
Doctrine of smaller concernment, but to cut the very Throat, and extinguish the
Breath and Spirit of the Gospel, and to besiege the whole state of our
Felicity, and the Castle and chief City of Christian Liberty, and to pluck up
from the very Foundation all the Munitions of The necessity of this Defense
against Osorius.
Peace and Life: For what other thing do thou in all these ten Books, whereby
thou snatchest away out of the Hands, Studies, Minds and Consciences of Men,
and out of the Earth. as the Sun out of the World, that most glorious Light of
our Free Justification, purchased by the great bounty of Christ, and confirmed
by the Eternal Covenant of God: Which being taken away, I see not what thou
leavest remaining to us, but Cimmerian and Osorian Darkness, in which we may
grope like blind Moles: Which endeavors of thine, though of themselves being
vain and frivolous, there is no great cause, why they should be feared in their
opposition against the invincible force of Divine Truth; yet because they
strive to withold from us that which is most excellent in all Religion;
therefore I thought it was necessary to write these things unto thee, not being
provoked by any Enmity or Hatred against thy Person, that I might vex thee, but
that I might admonish thee both friendly and freely; and so much the more
freely, in how much greater danger I see thou art entangled, unless thou return
back, and endeavor to walk more uprightly according to the Gospel of Christ.
For what think you, Sir? That by your deeds performed as well as can be
imagined, and by the steps of your virtues, you can lay for your self a passage
into the Kingdom of God? Or think you that any man living in this slippery
condition of Nature, can root out all his Lusts, and utterly cut off all their
enticements, and so contain himself within the bounds of his duty, that he can
equalize those habitations of Eternal Glory, with a proportionable dignity of
Righteousness, or dare promise them to himself upon such an account, unless the
bounty of God had freely put this honor upon us? O be not of such an opinion!
This is not the way to Heaven. Either you must change your mind, or lay down
this hope.

Howbeit this opinion seems not to be yours only, but common to you with many,
to wit, the late School-Divines, especially those, who have a greater
veneration for the authority of the Pope, than the Writings of the Apostles,
who being all infected The Enemies of the Grace of God under the Title of
righteousness.
with the same contagion of error, do boldly profess the same, that you affirm.
But yet all of them do not proceed in the same manner and method. Those do so
frame their notions, that all men may understand, they are the professed
Enemies of Divine Grace, and our Free Justification in Christ, which they hiss
out of the Schools, and openly anathamatize. Your arguings are somewhat
different, though you have undertaken, obstinately to maintain the same thing,
that they do, but you hide the same venom with a more subtle artifice, so that
it insinuates more easily, and lies less open to rebuke. For I see you The
Books of Osorius concerning righteousness.
write Books concerning Righteousness, and those not a few, nor unpolished.
When I look on the argument, I see it is honorable and plausible. When I look
into your manner of Speech, your painted eloquence, and laudatory
amplifications, wherewith you adorn the Glory, Loveliness and Beauty of
Righteousness with a Tragedian-like sublimity of style, I confess this is not
unworthy of praise; For who should not deservedly praise him, whom he sees so
inflamed with the praises of Righteousness? But if any man look more inwardly,
and consider with himself according to right reason, with what mind, for what
end, for what pretense, and with what arguments you maintain those parts of
righteousness so much praised, and compare them with the Gospel of Christ, he
will be forced to acknowledge that you are defective in many things. If you
will permit me briefly to give my opinion of the whole frame of this work,
(though you have little regard to what my censure is) yet if you will allow me
to speak freely to you as becomes me, I will do it according to my duty, and I
will so do it, that you your self may perceive that there was nothing less in
my design in writing to you, than a perverse inclination to find fault with
other men's writings. And thus I judge, you have so handled this subject matter,
that you appear to be a Philosopher Platonic enough, and no bad Ciceronian
Orator, but not a very Evangelical Divine, I can assure you nor skilful enough
to plead the cause of Christian Righteousness. The Title of the Books
concerning righteousness.
First, As touching the Title of the Book, concerning Righteousness, I find
nothing blameworthy. Though the frailty of our Nature might persuade you rather
to discourse some thing to us of Mercy. Yet seeing you choose rather to
discourse Philosophically of righteousness, you are not therein The image of
righteousness described by Osori us.
unworthy of your own praise; For being about to treat of righteousness, you
have undertaken a very honorable subject, and I doubt too weighty for your
Shoulders to bear: and a work indeed very difficult and excellent. For what is
more excellent than righteousness in the whole nature of Divine and Humane
things? Which seeing it comprehends within its circumference all kinds of
virtues, the whole praise of Piety, and not only the highest perfection of the
Law, but also the perfect Image of God: indeed it may be found in Heaven, but
on Earth it cannot be found, when you have said all you can. Wherefore I am
ready the more to wonder The praise of righteousness.
and consider with my self, what secret design you had in your mind. that you
have composed Books so accurately exquisite concerning righteousness. If it was
that by the Trumpet of your commendation, you might make it more acceptable to
us, you have therein lighted on a matter, suitable to your wit, and large
enough for setting forth the riches of your Eloquence, that I may confess the
truth to you. But I wonder for what purpose or end you did that, will you say,
that men may the more evidently behold the beauty of righteousness, and admire
it the more? But this has been formerly attempted by Plato, and many
Academicks and Peripateticks, and that with no bad success. And who is so void
of all natural sense, but, though he is not himself endued with the excellency
of righteousness, yet he apprehends in his mind the Divine brightness thereof,
and greatly admires it, and wishes for it with all his heart? If wishes in this
case could do any good.

Inherent Righteousness unto that perfection which Osorius describes, can no
where be found in this Nature.
AND I could wish that the Integrity of Nature, wherein we were of old Created,
had continued unto the complete exactness The Platonic Catholic righteousness.
of all righteousness: But now in this ruinated and disabled nature, why do you
seek after that which we have lost? rather bring forth something, if you can,
whereby we may make up the loss: What can it profit a man already dead to know
the danger, whereby he perished? Verily there is more need of a medicine, if
you have any, by which you may either comfort him being destroyed, or restore
him to the Life that was lost: Yea, this is the thing, say you, which I
endeavor in these Books disputing of righteousness. For righteousness, as you
say, is the only remedy for restoring Life, and regaining Health; Yea, this is
the very thing, Osorius, that I chiefly find fault with in these Books; not
because you write of righteousness, for I commend the argument in which you are
exercised; I commend also your praises of righteousness, which are high and
copious: righteousness cannot be praised enough by any Man-But there is another
thing for which all good Men should be angry with you: What that is, if you
please, I will tell you freely and openly; for in these Books you represent
unto us a spectacle, not very much differing from that, which Origenes relates
of Celsus and Antipho; who though they did write very contrary to truth, yet
they recommended those very Books, that were against the Osorius in Writing of
Righteousness does greatly oppose Christian Righteousness.
Truth, with the title of (a true saying.) After which manner you do in a case
not very unlike it, whilst you write indeed concerning righteousness, but at
such a rate, that nothing can be said more maliciously against true
righteousness.

A twofold and different Account of Doctrine; one of the Law, and another of
the Gospel.
FOR as there is a twofold manner of Covenant, so also there is, of
righteousness proposed in the Scriptures: The one consists in precepts and
works, under the weight whereof we all of necessity fall down to destruction.
The other is that of the Gospel, which is safe-guarded, not by works, not A
twofold manner of righteousness.
by observance of the Law, not by any peformance of duties on our side, but by
the sure and only Faith of Christ the Son of God. Verily whosoever rejecting
the righteousness of Christ, whereof I speak, leads us aside unto any other
manner of righteousness, I say, that he pleads not for righteousness, but
against it, and does not undertake the defense of the Law of God, but is a
professed Enemy of the Grace of Christ, and his Cross, and therefore does not
open, but wholly shuts up all passages to true Salvation, and all Gates and
Doors of Divine Grace: For I beseech you, if we are willing to confess the
truth with the Sacred Scripture, what is it else, in The righteousness of the
Law.
which all the fountains and causes of our destruction are contained, unto
which, as the principal head and spring, we may attribute all our calamity, but
this very manner of righteousness placed in God and his Law; by whose infinite
immensity not only our faults, but also all the Poizes of our righteousness are
weighed down to the destruction of damnation. If there is nothing but the
righteousness of Works, that may help our too scanty and short Obedience.

But perhaps these things, that have been said hitherto are enough concerning
the Title of the Book. By which your prudence may lead you easily to suppose,
what should be judged of the rest of the Work, In which, when I contemplate the
external form and countenance of the Workmanship, verily I see that it is not
without beauty, nor unworthy to be looked upon; when I number the Books
themselves, I take notice they are both many and large enough. When I look on
the Words and Pages, I see whole Rivers and Sands that cannot be numbered; but
when I turn to the things themselves, when I consider the Reasons and force of
Arguments, when I compare the Words and Sayings of the Scriptures, at a strange
rate quoted, with the true sense of Scriptures not rightly understood by you;
and also when I take notice of the end and scope of the whole disputation, I am
not willing at present to discover to you what I find here, lest in what I say,
I should seem to exceed the bounds of that modesty, which here I profess.

But yet that I may say something for the sake of Truth, to which I am more
obliged. because of necessity something must be said, I will speak, but in a
few words; If any other Man had Published these Books concerning Righteousness
amongst the common People, except your self, I should say to him openly, and to
his face, that no Man could ever have brought in a greater plague into the
Doctrine of the general Salvation of Christians, nor a filthier blot upon
Religion, nor have done a greater injury to St. Paul, the Scriptures, and the
Prophets, than is manifest in these Books. But in writing these things to you,
I restrain my self for your sake, lest I pass the bounds of modesty, which I
have set to my self: What then, should the cause of Truth therefore be
deserted? You your self do not require that of me, as I suppose. Wherefore that
I may, as much as I can, observe that which is my duty in both respects, I have
laid hold on this way of prosecuting this design, which you see, and which
necessity has laid upon me, whereby I might both less offend you, and likewise
perhaps more benefit the cause I have undertaken to defend.

Therefore, seeing I judged it necessary to oppose your attempts in this
matter, so I thought it most convenient, not that I should in this Book answer
to all the small scraps of Reasons in the order that you observe (which indeed
is none at all) in a tumultuary confusion in those Ten Books; but that I may by
choice touch upon, and confute the chief of them.

How easy it is to err in the Doctrine of Justification.
SEeing these things and others like unto them, contain the principal Heads, of
all Christian Doctrine; therefore Divines should take a special care lest they
err in these; which care, unless they take, there will follow a most grievous
ruin and perturbation of all things, the foundations Human Reason understands
not the Doctrine of Free Justification.
being as it were put out of their places. And yet I know not how it comes to
pass that error is no where more easily committed than in these Points. Neither
is it so strange; for so it comes to pass, that this animal nature we call
Human Reason, when consulted with about the things of God, is most blind, and
sees nothing, unless it be Illuminated with the better Light of Divine
Knowledge shining in upon it: For the right understanding of Divine things
comes by the Spirit of God, and not by Human Capacity; and though the Law, and
the things of the Law, were in some sense born with us, and cleave unto our
Nature; Yet the Mysteries of the Doctrine of the Gospel are not apprehended so
easily, because the Nature of both is very different. Moreover, you may see
many, who following the guidance of Nature, and her precepts more than is meet,
do teach and dispute of things belonging to the Gospel; just as if a
Philosopher should discourse of the Principles of Nature, or a Moralist of the
perfection of Virtues, in which they place their chiefest good; or as if a
Pharisee sitting in the Chair of Moses, should dispute about the Righteousness
of the Law.

But there will be another occasion of treating of these things, (if
opportunity be granted.)

In the mean while, that I may speak ingenuously of thee, O Osorius; with how
much the greater natural parts God in his bounty has adorned thee, and heaped
upon thee, it is the more grievous to me that thou art violently drawn aside
with others into that blindness of error:- That though you teach us many things
in your reasoning about Righteousness, yet you scarcely teach any thing that
makes much to the purpose, and nothing at all that is profitable for Salvation,
but rather on the contrary that which is very hurtful. For, I beseech you, What
assurance can there be of Salvation, if you shut out Mercy, and send us to our
own Righteousness as the only way, which conveys us to Heaven? for all your
Doctrine of Divinity looks that way. To wit, when discoursing of the hope of
remedy, you affirm there is no other way, but that only, of becoming like unto
God, and being united unto him; and that this is the only way of a Blessed
Life, which consists wholly in Righteousness; which whosoever do observe, those you
affirm do abound with Divine Riches, and Eternal Glory.

As if there were no hope remaining Osorius de justit. lib. 1. page 3.
for him, that turns a little aside from these footsteps. Than which what could
be said or invented more repugnant to the Gospel? yea also elsewhere, repeating
again the same thing, though in different Words: How should a Man be saved, say
you? Is there any other Lib. 10. de Iustit. page 232.
paved way to Salvation, but what is contained in the Law of God? None at all,
etc.

And again in another Book, as in all your Books reasoning about the Works of
the Law; you assert, that Righteousness is purchased by these, that Men go up
to Heaven by these as by steps, that eternal Lib. 2. p. 44.
rewards are appointed for these; and you plead that this is the only way we
have to Heaven, which is paved with renowned Works, etc. Moreover you proclaim
Lib. 6. page 148.
yet with more open Mouth. Wherefore, say you, it must be attested with greater
freedom of Speech, that the ascent into Heaven is given to the Merits of the
greatest Virtues, and that the Mansions of the Everlasting Kingdom are given
justly and deservedly to Holy and Chaste Men, etc.

It would take up a long time, and be much more troublesome to rake together
out of every one of your Books, every one of those wonderful sayings, which are
more than Paradoxes, whereby you plead that all the safeguard of our Salvation,
should be placed in nothing else but in the observance and care of
Righteousness: which if you could as well perform in effect and reality, as you
set them forth in Words magnificently; I should esteem that none were more
happy, none more worthy of Heaven than you. But now let us suppose that, which
I see you would so fain have granted, that Heaven is only due to perfect Men no
other ways, but upon the account of Righteousness, and that there is no other
way of coming to those blessed mansions, but that which is trodden by the most
pure footsteps of good men, and settled in the perfect integrity of Works. Now
we are not against the deserved praises of righteousness, neither do we
withold from it its rewards: Be it so indeed. But where shall we find this
Righteousness? Dic quibus in terris, and erit mihi magnus Apollo. Tell me in
what Country (and I All have finned and come short of the glory of God.
shall esteem you to be a great Oracle,) This man of righteous life dwells, who
will so direct the course of his Life according to this Idea of Virtue proposed
by you, that he fails no where, who Roots out all manner of wickedness, who
refrains himself from railing with his Tongue, Suppresses the Haughtiness,
Insolency, and madness of an Ambitious Spirit, and the rashness of a Headstrong
Mind; who Crucifies the Flesh with its Lusts, who suppressing ungodly lustings,
by frequent meditation upon Death, brings himself over from all Impurity and
Impiety to the resemblance of Christ; who separating his mind from the
Contagion of the Body, applies it wholly to the Imitation of Christ, who
resembles the humility and meekness of Christ, his bounty and benevolence; and
his excellent Holiness in all respects, and also cuts off all defilements of
the mind, and all the roots of filthiness and impurity. I say, where will that
man be found, who performs these and all other duties of true Piety, and so
performs them, that nothing in his Life seems superfiuous, nothing is unequal
in his duties, nor defective in his manners? I think he may be found in the
Books of Osorius: but not in the The Idea of the Osorian righteousness, can be
more easily found in his Books, than in his Mauners.
Life, in the daily Confessions, or in the Holy Absolutions of Osorius. There
was of Old, I confess the Image of this most perfect righteousness seen and
known upon the Earth: But that Phoenix has long since left the Earth, and
departed hence to Heaven, and now sits at the right hand of Majesty, drawing
all to himself: and I wish that at length he may draw Osorius The Son of God
only was perfectly Holly. Pals. 14.
also to himself. What if the Lord himself looking down from Heaven upon the
Sons of Men, is affirmed in the Prophetical Psalm, to have found all their ways
corrupted and depraved: if the Mystical and Royal Holy Psalmist durst not in
confidence of his own righteousness enter into judgment with his God, or
present himself to be tried by him, and condemns Romans 3. 1 Io. 1. Jacob. 3.
all other mortal men of unrighteousness, without excepting so much as one. If
Paul writing to the Romans in a very serious debate confirms the same, and
stops the mouths of all men, that he may bring men over, having called them
away from a vain trust in their own works, and convinced them of the vanity
thereof, to the help of the Son of God only, which is placed Oso. 1. 5. p. 21.
in the faith of him: If John the Apostle, yea and if that powerful proclaimer
and defender of humane righteousness could not himself deny but that in many
things we offend all, I pray you, O Osorius! Will you now rise up after them,
not the eighth but the ninth Proclaimer of Righteousness, being a mortal and
sinful man, who dare affirm to others, that which you cannot perform your self
after this manner: That it is either righteousness or nothing, which obtains us
the favor of God, and makes us acceptable and like unto him?

Qu. What do I hear? is there nothing else, I beseech you? What then? Is Faith
nothing? Is Grace nothing? Is the Mercy and Promise of God nothing? Do the
Merits of Christ profit nothing to Salvation? So that now there is nothing
which reconciles us to God, but the righteousness of works? What? Do you so
place all righteousness in works, that you think there is no righteousness of
Faith?

Then you think perhaps that the Osorius confounds the righteousness of faith
and works without any distinction.
righteousness of faith and works is one and the same, and you make no
difference between the Law and the Gospel. whereas Paul teaches you far
otherwise, who openly and with great fervency of Spirit deprecates that other
righteousness, which is of works, that he may be found in him, not having the
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is of the Faith of Christ,
which is of God, righteousness by Faith. Do you not perceive here Phil. 3. It
is one thing to be justified by faith, and another thing to be justified by the
Law.
a manifest opposition between these two: To be justified by the Law, and to be
justified by Faith, yea and those very things which Paul removed far away from
him as Dung in respect of obtaining Salvation, Will you pave that only way for
us to Heaven? And in the mean while disputing about works, I discourse of these
things with you, as if there were any such strength of so great virtues, in
this life, as could deserve not only the reward of righteousness, but also the
name thereof. What will you say, if the most holy performances There are no
performances of the most perfect men, that are without some imperfection in the
sight of God.
and endeavors, undertaken in whatsoever manner by the most perfect men, in
this corrupted nature, are so unprofitable to the immortality of Life, that
they are rejected by Christ as things without profit, yea that they are
despised and utterly We are all as unclean, and all our righteousness as a
menstruous cloth. Isa. 64.
contemned in the sight of God, like a menstruous cloth, as the Prophet Isaiah
witnesses, unless they be underproped with better Grace, and the commendation
of Faith? What if in Isaiah we are all said, and that truly, to have gone
astray like Sheep every one in his own way, from whom so great a Prophet does
not separate himself: What do you suppose should be judged of our virtues and
righteousness? But you will say, this complaint of the Prophet belongs All we
like Sheep have gone astray. Isa. 5. 3. A frivolous exception of Osorius.
not to all in the general, but only to the Jews who in those times wickedly
forsook their duty: but by the same reason you may affirm, that all the
diseases of all men and times were not healed by the Death of Christ, but
theirs only, who in those times had gone astray out of the way as lost Sheep.
But how frivolous this cavilling is, it appears evident by the context of this
Prophetical Prediction.

Whereby you see, ( Osorius,) being convinced by Sacred Testimonies, that those
merits of our greatest virtues, if they be looked upon in themselves, are far
from the perfection of that righteousness, which your Philology Clothes with
very beautiful Colors; Which yet I would not have to be so said by me, nor
underslood by you, as if those that live vertuosly, did nothing aright and
praise worthy in this life: Or as if the Godly Works of the Saints were not
acceptable to God, which God himself has commanded to The Papists do not
clearly enough explain why Works are called good.
be done; for thus you reason concerning Works, that they come not indeed
without Faith, and the Grace of God, but yet so, that when they come, you
affirm, that the Kingdom of Eternal Salvation is due to them by the best right,
not only as a recompense and reward, but also as a lawful Patrimony: as if the
promise of Salvation depended not on Evangelical Faith, but on the
Righteousness of the Law, and not on Christ's merits only, unless a Covenant of
Works be joined together with it: or as if faith it self profited nothing for
the obtaining of Life upon any other What good works do essect according to the
opinion of Papists.
account, but that it may procure Grace, which may stir us up to the
praiseworthy performances of works, by which works we attain unto eternal Life.

Faith Iustifies no otherways, but upon the account of good works, according to
the opinion of Osorius.
For so your words do manifestly signify, where treating of Faith, and
enquiring why we are said to be saved by it, you presently add a cause:
because, say you, we obtain the Divine protection only by faith, and so very
easily observe the precepts of the law, and obey Divine Institutions; and again
concluding to the same purpose.

No man that is in his right wits shall obtain Salvation, except he keep the
Law, or, which is equivalent thereunto, except he be ready and prepared in his
mind te keept it.

And again in the same place discoursing Lib. 9. 233. What sort of
righteousuess is that of Osorius. Lib. 9. p. 232. Lib. 9. p. 232.
of the Salvation of Christians: Do you ask how a man is Saved? Is there
another way prepared for Salvation, but what is eontained in the Law of God?
none at all; Therefore we, miserable mortals, have a way to the Immortal
Kingdom laid out and showed unto us, and that a very easy one, you Osorius,
being our guide and teacher, which is contained in the Law of God: So that
besides this there is no other way laid open, neither in the Gospel, nor the
what way men come to Heaven according to the opinion of Osorius.
Writings of the Apostles, whereby we may be brought to the Heavenly Country,
and its immortality, but that which is described only in the Law of God.

Suppose these things were granted you, which you affirm, though they be in
themselves absurd, and wholly Iudaical, but let me grant, or at least feign
that this way which you show, is the only way, and the most firmly founded, and
also that the same is the most easy, and likewise that there is no other way
by which we can come to Heaven, but that only which is proposed by the
description of the Divine Law: Suppose we grant this, yet in the mean while see
thou teach me this: how thou can know that thou do as many good works as
are sufficient for a complete obedience to the Law. Of old our first Adam.
Father Adam received but one command, and failed in the performance, and that
in Paradise, being placed in the highest degree of Innocence. What? and thou a
miserable mortal man, banished out of Paradise, compassed about with so much
infirmity of the flesh, having received the Law of God, in which so many and so
great things are imposed to be performed, and they are so imposed, that he is
liable to a Curse, whosoever does not most constantly continue in them all;
do thou stand so firmly, that no storm of temptation can throw thee down at
any time?

But what if having observed all other commands of God exactly, so much as one
tittle of the Law is neglected by thee? What will thy Righteousness say to us
in this Case? Do you not see, that the Sentence of the Law being pronounced,
you are as much in the fault, as if you were guilty of all (...)? And yet you
talk to us of no other way to the Kingdom of Life, but that which is defined by
the Ministry of the Law, and the Exercise of Charity.

But now how will you teach that? by what Scriptures, by what Masters shall
this appear evident to us which you assert? by Paul, I trow. What then, says he
he? To wit, this is the mind and opinion of Paul, say you, that he asserts that
all manner of destroying and suppressing of Lust is placed in the Grace of God,
which must be obtained by Faith, and teaches that there is De justit. lib. 4.
page 90.
no other way of extinguishing and destroying it. And a gain elsewhere Lib. 3.
p. 68. The right way to Heaven consists in the Exercise ofChuity according to
the Opinion of Osorius.
Paul was never the Man that disapproved the Offices of Bounty, as if they were
little profitable for Salvation, but taught that the only right way to Heaven
was that, which was Fixed in the continual Exercise of Charity, etc.

I know indeed, and confess that all proceeds from the Grace of God alone,
whatsoever is done by us aright, and An answer to things alleged. Paul a great
(...) of Charity.
commendably, whether in suppressing the Allurements of Vices, or in observing
the Discipline of Virtue. Moreover that should not be denied, which you do well
assume according to the mind of Paul, that we obtain this Grace from God by
Faith. Likewise that is not ill said, which you add concerning Paul, that he
was never the Man that disapproved Pious endeavors of Exercising Charity;
seeing he every where extols those very things with wonderful praises For who
knows not, that the excellent Sermons of Paul are exceeding full of very
serious Precepts Paul a great Preacher of Charity.
and Instructions for governing the Life: and that they are not in any matter
more affectionate, than in this, that all every where, who profess the name of
Christ, should, together with a sincere profession of Faith, join a
proportionable Holiness of Life (...)for necessary uses.

Suppose this to be most true, as it is indeed; yet that was never the meaning
of the Apostle, to place our Salvation principally in the Law, as if he thought
that the Kindom of God, and the Righteousness thereof should be measured by our
worthy Deeds and Charity; or proposed Heaven to us as fit to be paid for, or
sold for the commodities of our Works, as by a kind of Auction. Yea, when I
read Paul's Epistles of a far different sense, this seems to me to be the only
scope and mind of the Apostle, that he transfers all this Not Charity, but
Faith opens a way to the Kingdom of Heaven. Romans 3. 4.
Righteousness, which you attribute to the Law, unto Faith, and so transfers
it, that he shuts out all mixture of Works; and leaves only Faith in the Son of
God, which lays open for us a way into the Kingdom of Heaven.

For I beseech you, he that affirms, that we are justified by Faith, without
Works, and who again says, but now without the Law the Righteousness of God is
made manifest, being testified by the Law and the Prophets? with what Words
could he more evidently shut out the endeavors and merits of all our Virtues
from the Divine gift of Justification?

These things being thus agreed upon, and concluded by the weighty authority of
Paul, of necessity from thence follows, That there is a twofold manner, or A
twofold manner of Righteousness of the Law: and of the Gospel, or Faith.
way of being righteous to be distinguished, as I said, according to the
different conditions of both Covenants; of which the one belongs to the Law,
the other is peculiar to Christ. Then both the Law and Christ (...)have their
own righteousness; for as the Law, which is wholly exercised in works of
righteousness, endures no unrighteousness, and renders the fruits of
righteousness plentifully to those, who persevering in that which is good, have
filled up all the parts of perfect Innocence. Likewise Christ also has his own
righteousness, both much more powerful, and also not a little differing from
the other; though not so much differing in respect of the matter, yet exceeding
much in the manner of dispensing; for the Law communicates only to them that
Work, but Christ communicates to them that believe, perfect righteousness, and
often also to the unworthy and underserving, by a The Righteousness of Faith.
singular grace of dispensation. Therefore this Righteousness, is properly
called the Righteousness of Faith; Which is necessarily to be distinguished by
us from the other, which is called the Righteousness of the Law: Which they who
do not, verily they do a great injury to the Scriptures, and quench all light
of Doctrine, confounding both their own Consciences, and the Consciences of
their hearers, with a wonderful The necessary distinction of Legal and
Evangelical Righteousness.
kind of disturbance, so that scarcely any Man can certainly know what should
be hoped or feared; for they who dispute thus concerning the Righteousness of
the Law, and draw all things to that alone, as if there remained no other way
to hope for Salvation, but that which the strict and severe observation of the
Law brings: I beseech you, what else do those Men do, but leave the Souls of
Men in a doubtful wavering? And by what way those Men encourage us to hope, by
the same they compel us to fear and utterly to despair of Salvation: seeing
there is no Man in the World, to whom the daily offenses of his Life gives not
much more cause to fear, than his virtues give him to hope.

And what remedy then shall remain for the perplexed consciences of Men, if the
Righteousness of Christ being hid from their Eyes, you leave nothing for hope
or consolation, but the righteousness of the Law? Or with what comfort will you
raise up the Spirit of a fallen and afflicted Sinner, when the Law uses to
show what every Man should do aright, but can pardon no Man what is done amiss?
must you not here of necessity The Office of the Law.
be compelled to leave the Righteousness of the Law, and presently to appeal to
the Righteousness of Christ? And, I think, you will not at all deny that, but,
say you, seeing this righteousness of Christ is no other, but that which is the
righteousness of the Law, yea and the very perfection of the Law, therefore it
is not necessary that we should make a twofold Righteousness, but one only both
of Christ and of the How the Righteousness of the Law and Christ is one, and
not one.
Law. But it is not a difficult thing, to answer to this objection. Indeed it
must be confessed, if you consider the things by themselves, and compare the
one with the other by a mutual relation, there seems not to be any difference
between the Righteousness of Christ, and of the Law. Because there is nothing
in the Law so Holy and perfect; but it appears as evident in the Life of
Christ: But if you consider the efficacy and manner of working; which the
Righteousness of Christ and of the Law exercises in others; if you consider the
effect and end of both, there is a great difference: For though Christ is no
otherwise just in himself, than the Law it self is Holy and Just: But yet this
which is called the Righteousness of Christ, acts in us much otherwise, than
that which is called the Righteousness of the Law, so that nothing seems more
unlike or more contrary.

The difference between the Righteousness of the Law and the Gospel.
FIRST, as touching the Law, what the Nature, Virtue, and The strength and
operation of the Law.
Efficacy thereof is, it is unknown to no Man: To wit, that it is of it self a
Holy and Perfect Rule, and Mistress to teach how to lead the Life; made for
this purpose by the most Holy God, that Creatures might certainly know, what
they should fly, and what they should follow, as it contains in it self the
very Rule of all perfection in all respects complete; so it requires perfect
obedience in all respects and upon all accounts: upon this condition, that he
that does these things, shall live in them. But on the contrary, he that does
otherwise, and abides not in all, the Law pronounces a Curse against him, and
inflicts the vengeance of Death, and heaps up anger and indignation upon him.
For by the Law the Wrath of God is declared from Heaven, being justly kindled
against all Men that are wicked and unjust upon any account.

Whereby it comes to pass, that the Law indeed, being it self Holy and Good,
was not given for this, that it should bring Destruction, but Salvation; but
yet the same being hindered by the infirmity of our flesh, it cannot but kill
us, but cannot at all save us by its own means; not for any default, or tyranny
of its own; but by taking just occasion from the refractory rebellion of our
flesh, which as it naturally has an enmity against God, so it cannot avoid
being contrary to his Sacred Will, and Divine Institutions. And hence break
forth so many, and so great calamities, that fall upon this sinful Nature of
ours; hence so many proofs of the Divine Indignation and Anger; hence also that
dreadful and unavoidable necessity of dying, which when it passes promiscuously
through all ages and kindreds, which none of the most Holy Men could ever drive
away from themselves, verily that one thing proves us all to be guilty of
unrighteousness, and that there is not any perfection of righteousness in our
most righteous works; for The Law as out of Christ is confidered what it does.
if the Wages of Sin be Death, it cannot be that there should be any extinction
of Life there, where no unrighteousness is seen. Therefore, O Osorius! if the
Law cannot defend thee in this Life with all thy works from Death, will the
same save thee after Death, and restore thee to Life, when thou art Dead?

Concerning Evangelical Righteousness.
AND hitherto these things have been explained by us concerning the
Righteousness of the Law, as it is considered out of Christ. Now let us again
turn our eyes unto Christ, and consider, what his Righteousness without the Law
works in us. And here first of all a wonderful and most manifest difference
between the The difference between the Law and Christ.
Law and Christ presents it self unto us. For seeing the Law, as has been
said, can give no Life according to the rigor of its Justice, but only to
perfect Men: Therefore it comes to pass, that because it finds nothing perfect
in us, it being hindered through the infirmity of our flesh, can give no help,
nor work any thing in us but wrath: Therefore being repulsed by the Law, and
destitute of the help of Works, let us seek another Patron Christ the only
Antidote against the Stings of the Law.
of Salvation, whosoever he be, who may help us: But there is none who doubts,
that He is no other but Christ the only Son of God; whom we all alike profess
through all Churches. There is therefore no Controversy remaining between us
and our Adversaries concerning the Author of Salvation. Nevertheless there
remains here another ambiguity or question, perhaps not yet cleared enough by
all Divines. For whereas there is no man but confesses that Righteousness is in
Christ in its highest perfection: And we have already heard from the Law, that
there is no fellowship of Righteousness with Unrighteousness; A question by
what righteousness can Christ deliver the unrighteous.
here some difficulty comes in, how it comes to pass, that the Lord Christ, all
whose Judgments are most just, can or ought against Righteousness favor those,
who having forsaken their duty, have turned aside to Unrighteousness? For if
the Law of God according to the nature of Righteousness, cannot avoid
condemning of those that are guilty of wickedness, some perhaps may ask, What
way Christ, who does not any thing, but what is most righteous, can procure
Salvation to those without the violation of his Righteousness, whom the Law of
Righteousness justly condemns? Or if he do it, how, for what cause, and in what
manner he does it, by Faith, or by Works? If by Faith, whether by Faith only,
or by the What way, and in what manner the benefits of Christ are derived to us.
help of Works joined with it; if upon the account of Works, whether before
Works, or after Works, or in the very Works? But if by Faith only without
Works, hence arises a threefold question; 1. What then do good Works avail? 2.
What Faith that is, and of what sort it is, which is said to justify? 3. Whom
this Faith justifies? for they must be either sinners or righteous; if A
threefold question.
sinners, they are either penitent or stubborn; if you say both, you will speak
against Righteousness, which cannot be well called Righteousness, unless it
reward according to every man's deeds and merits. But if they are righteous and
not sinners, whom Christ helps: What need have the Righteous of a Redeemer?
What need have the whole of a Physician? Moreover, how will that saying of Paul
hold true; whereby Christ being made Man, is said to have come into the World,
not to save the Righteous 1 Timothy 1. 1.
but Sinners.

I beseech you now, O ingenuous Man! according to your Modesty, that I may deal
very modestly with you: If any Man treat with you on this manner, in disputing
about the Doctrine of Justification, what would you answer him, if he should
ask these things of you? If any such Man should come to you, who being
affrighted in his mind, and astonished at the greatness of his sins, and
burdened with horror of Conscience, and almost dead with the fear of the
Judgment of God, should ask the help of counsel and comfort from you? of which
sort there are found not a few Examples in the Folds of the Lord's Flock; what
Remedy would you reach forth unto him? Perhaps you will send him to those Books
of yours concerning Righteousness; and what will he find there, whereby his
afflicted and cast down Mind may be refreshed and recover it self? what? will
you send him to the Law? but what will he draw from thence fit for healing his
wounds? especially seeing that Law of Righteousness can only bring us in
guilty, because we have not kept the Law, and oblige us thereunto, as by bond;
at least it cannot by any means restore Righteousness that was once lost, or
satisfy the Judge. It remains then, that you should bring over the miserable
Soul of a Sinner from the Law, in which there appears no hope of defense, unto
Christ, seeing it is He only by whose Wounds and Stripes we are healed; and In
a desperate condition Christ only can help.
who has taken upon himself all the Impieties of us all, that he might
communicate unto us his own Righteousness. That is very true indeed, and upon
that account I think you and yours are to be commended, who, though you seem
not to have a clear enough sight of the genuine Office of Christ, and his
Divine Greatness in procuring our Salvation; yet ye refuse not to profess his
Name, and a certain external reverence of Faith. But because at present you
have to do with men that are troubled, and to whom it is not sufficient to
retain only the Name of a Savior, unless we have also a right understanding of
the Efficacy of his Death which he suffered for us, and It is not sufficient to
retain the (...) of Christ only, unless also we learn the Greatness of his
office and his Power to save.
of the Power that he has to save, and the great benefits he has bestowed
upon us, and his exceeding great Love and Goodwill toward us, and the infinite
Riches that are promised to us in him.

Therefore you must proceed further, and help the afflicted Minds of the Godly,
as much as may be, that they may know and believe not only that there is
eternal and durable Life in Christ, but also that they may be taught the way,
and means, and manner how that Life comes to us, and to whom it belongs, and
what we must observe in attaining unto it.

What the power and efficacy of Faith is; whom it justifies, and how.
IN which matter there is great variety of Sentiments and Opinions amongst
Divines. For, whereas Paul proclaims with a very audible Voice, That Man is
justified by Faith without the Works of the Law: Romans 3.
Those Men by the additions of their Comments, do not explain the most evident
meaning of the Apostle, but render it obscure; they do not expound, but cavil:
So that some take the word Faith, not as Paul, for that Faith only which is in
Christ Jesus, but which is formed by Charity and Works. Others interpret that,
which Paul The various Interpretation of the Papists concerning Justifying
Faith.
says of Faith without Works, to be understood concerning Ceremonial Works.
Some interpret it of the Works of the Law in this sense, that those works are
undertaken not by Faith, but by the command of the Law without Grace. Others
expound it otherwise; without antecedent works only: Some think it should be
understood of the first Justification only, which they attribute to Faith
alone, as in little Children that Roffen. contra lut. Articul. 31.
are Baptized, but the second in men come to years, they attribute to Faith
indeed, but not without Works.

The scope of all which dispute is, that Faith being adorned with Works, may do
something; and on the contrary, that, if Works are not joined with it, it may
seem a kind of rude matter, void of life and form, not only unprofitable to
purchase Righteousness, but a certain dead and destructive thing. Which if it be
true, I would know this of them, and chiefly I would ask of you, Osorius, in
what Commonwealth, in what Church, in whose Kingdom, do you coin this new
piece of Divinity? If it is the Church of Christ, that is not yours, It is his
Kingdom, in which you are only a servant. What? Shall not Christ have a free
power permitted to him of administering his own affairs, as in his own lawful
Commonwealth?

And whence is this your great boldness in another Dominion, in a Church that
ye never founded, to alter and change as you list, the appointments and
institutions of your Prince, contrary to Law and Right? Or by what authority do
you oppose your selves, but that every man may act in his own possession
according to his own right, and freedom of command? What if it seems good in
the Eyes of Christ to communicate freely the glory of his Kingdom, to whom he
will? Will ye forbid him? What if the most Gracious Lord will pay a full reward
to those that come to work at the last hour of the day, and make all equal by
making the like agreement with them all, should your Eye therefore be evil
because he is good?

But now the Lord himself, the Prince and Author of the Church professes in
very evident words, that eternal life shall be given to them that believe in
his name. What can be said more evident in signification, or more clear to be
understood? He that believes in me, says he, has eternal life. And again
repeating the same, in the same words. He that believes in the Son has
everlasting Ioh. 6. Ioh. 3. Ioh. 11.
life. And chap. 11. He that believes in me, though he were dead yet he shall
live. And lest he should seem to testify this of himself without the consent
of his Father, he Only Faith in Christ is proved to jastisie by example,
adds, This is, says he, the will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son and believes in him should have life eternal. Who does no less
most evidently confirm these things by performances, which he expresses in
word, adding also miracles thereunto. For how great a multitude do ye meet with
every where through all the Evangelists, whom you see saved and healed by no
other thing but faith only, which relied on Christ. How often do we hear from
the mouth of the Lord in the Gospel: thy Faith has made thee whole, without
hearing any Mat. 11. Isa. 55. Proof by examples.
mention of works? And what Christ performed to faith, will Osorius attribute
that to Works: Christ invites unto himself Consciences that are afflicted and
burdened with sin: Isaiab calls all that are athirst to come without price or
any exchange to the Fountains of Christ, that they may be refreshed. Osorius
will bestow the Kingdom, which God has promised, upon none but righteous men,
and eminent good works. I beseech you, Sir, according to your righteousness,
what excellent good work brought that sinful Woman with her in the Gospel, out
of whom seven Devils were cast? What righteousness appeared in the Thief on the
Right Hand of Christ except faith only, why he should after the commiting so
many evil deeds enter in together with Christ on the same day into Paradise?
what other thing did the Woman of Canaan, that was a stranger, bring to Christ,
but an importunate cry of faith, so that she carried home, not Crumbs, but
whole Loaves of Divine Grace? What deserved the miserable Woman with the bloody
Issue, or Iairus the Governor of the Synagogue, Mat. 15. Mat. 9.
or Zacchaeus of Matthew, or other Publicans with them? why they being
perferred before the Pharisees, who seemed so much more righteous, should
obtain the benefit of free favor, being so obvious and exposed unto them?
There is almost an infinite number of others of the like condition that may be
discoursed of after the same manner, in whom you can find nothing worthy of so
great bounty of Divine Grace, but faith only: Blind Bartimeus cried, the Lepers
cried, Jesus, Master, thou Son of David have mercy on us, and they were heard.
For nothing cries louder than faith, nothing is more effectual to prevail. Let
Osorius also cry, and let us all cry with the like noise of Faith, and we shall
be heard alike. I speak of that faith, which is in Christ Jesus, besides which,
there is not any passage into Heaven, nor access unto God, nor way of
prevailing with God. Therefore that we may be heard, let us come, and knock,
but let us do it aright, to wit, by Faith and in the name of only begotten.
Otherways it is in vain to cry to God, who hears not sinners, but drives them
away, who regards not servants and guilty persons, How Prayers are heard.
unless they come to the Son, or in the name of the Son. Now by what way we are
heard, by the same we are Justified: From whence is liberty, salvation and
righteousness to be sought.
For the Divine reward is always joined with righteousness.

Seeing then all of us, mortal men, are by nature sinners, and servants of sin,
therefore we must see what that is, which makes us of servants free men, of
guilty persons sons, of sinners righteous. For this is the whole subject matter
of the debate, this is the question, on which the whole controversy depends,
which is not so difficult to be judged of, if the authority of Sacred Scripture
may prevail upon impartial judgments. For the testimony of the Gospel remains
sure and eternal, which no mortal man can weaken at any time, instructing our
faith thus. As many as received Ioh. 1.
him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, and that he may teach
what it is to receive him, he presently explains the same, to them, says he,
that believe in his name, etc.

Whereby it appears evidently what it is, to which we are beholden for all that
splendour and dignity, wealth and riches, yea and the possession of Heaven and
Life. I know that in those excellent offices of good works, which you so much
cry up, in the exercise of charity, and observance of Righteousness, there is
great weight and also great Wherein consists the use and scope of the Law.
benefit; as I consess also that the law it self has great efficacy, if a man
use it lawfully. Now the use of the law consists in this, that it should bring
us to Christ, and be subservient to his glory. But when you have heaped all
these things together into one, whatsoever were by God either prescribed to us
in his Law, or written within us, they are far from restoring perfection to a
man's deeds that are altogether imperfect, or to a man's person that is wholly
destroyed and ruinated. They are far from making us of servants freemen, of
Slaves of Satan, Sons of God, heirs of his Kingdom, coheirs of Christ, fellow
Citizens of the Saints, and Domestics of the highest Father. Verily that is
not the Office of the Law, but of Christ: And it is not righteousness, but
grace that does this. This is not the efficacy of works, but of Faith: which
relying not upon Charity is justified by Faith, not Faith by Charity.
works, but being strengthened only by the promise of God brings us from bondage
to liberty, from death to life, adopts us being reconciled unto God, makes us
Sons of the promise, which is so far from being joined with Charity and Works,
that it reconciles Charity it self, and all works of life unto God, and
justifies them, without which they could not have place in Heaven, in the
presence of the great God.

Upon what account, and how Faith justifies Fallen Sinners.
NOW because I have demonstrated, what the power of Faith is, and what it
performs, I must of necessity explain upon what account, and for what cause
Faith procures unto it self so great efficacy For what cause the power of
Justifying is attributed unto Faith.
and power of Justifying; how it is said to Justify alone without Works, and
what Men the same Iustifies, whether the righteous or the wicked? If the
righteous, what need is there now of Justification or Faith, when the Law is
sufficient? If the wicked, whether those that are penitent and converted, or
the impenitent and rebellious? If the Faith of Christ justifies the penitent,
frees them from guilt, and makes them righteous of unrighteous, which neither
you your self can deny: Why then do you inveigh against Luther so unmodestly
and undeservedly? Does Luther either say or teach any An unjust complaint
against Luther.
other thing? Where does he at any time let loose the Reins to sin, or promise
liberty to the wicked, or preach Justification otherways, than to those, who
being reformed by Repentance, breathe after Christ, and join themselves to him
by Faith? What? Will you shut out those from all hope of pardon? I trow not:
And what remedy then will you show them? Will you send us to the Faith of
Christ, or to the Sentence of the Law to heal our wounds? What if the Law gives
no help here, and there is not any other thing in man, that can help
righteousness once violated, Osor. de justit. lib. 2. p. 29. Osorius against
Luther.
except Faith only placed in Christ, which neither you your self can deny: And
if this very Faith brings Salvation to none, but those that deplore the sins
they have committed, which together with you Luther affirms, to what purpose
are those outcries against Luther so Tragical, and raised without any cause?
Wherefore then do thou deceive us, O Luther? For when thou d'dst condemn
pious tears, and did cast reproaches upon wise sorrowfulness, and did plead
that all works were not only unprofitable, but pernicious. And presently going
on in the same style, and waxing more violent. For when (say you) thou did
put so much in faith, that thou said, there was help enough in that only; the
sense of thy words seems to be this: That Salvation is prepared for all without
grief, without the lessening of Riches by communicating to the Poor, without
the detestation of a fault committed. And after the interval of a few words.
But if you think that a Wicked Man, though be flies not at all from his
wickedness, obtains righteousness by Faith only, who has been more absurd, who
has been more out of his wits than thou since the Creation of Mankind?

That I on the other side, Osorius may answer to these things, but in An Answer
for Luther against Osorius.
a few words: If that were true, which you falsely say of Luther, perhaps you
might gainsome praise both of a Learned Orator, and an Honest Accuser. But now
seeing he never so much as dreamed of these things, neither can you bring forth
one word from so many of his Sayings and Deeds to maintain your unjust
accusation; I say not in your words, Who has been more absurd, who has been
more out of his wits than you since the Creation of Man? But if I may be
allowed to say this, speaking very modestly, that you are too much forgetful,
not only of your duty, but also of the argument, in which you are exercised
and: whilst you are writing of Righteousness, you do so far against all
Righteousness most basely bespatter and shamefully lash a Godly Man, a Servant
of Christ, that never deserved ill at your hands, with feigned Lies and
Reproaches, and all kind of abuses; either through ignorance finding fault with
the things you have not read, or wresting those things to a wrong Sense, which
you are not willing to understand in a right Sense. What if the Eternal
possession of Salvation must not be The unjust slander of Osorius, and
Andradius against Luther.
hoped for from any thing else but works of Righteousness, as chiefly you
Osorius do teach, (that I may comprehend also Hosius, and your familiar Friend
Andradius in the same Category! What hope can you have of your own Salvation
from these works of yours; to wit, your most false Accusations, and reproachful
Libels, in which, against Law and Right, breaking the bonds of all
Righteousness, you vomit forth those lying slanders against your Neighbor, and
that in the public Theater of the World, for no valuable cause, nor for any
true reason, nor upon any other account, but because perhaps you are stirred up
with your own immoderate passion.

Luther indeed did write of Faith, I know, and confess it, but what A defense
of Luther.
then? What fault I pray you did he commit in so doing? What has he deserved?
Why might not he as well write of Faith, as you of Righteousness? but perhaps
that displeases you, not that he did write of Faith, but because attributing
too much thereunto, he refers the whole of our Righteousness to this Faith. Be
it so, and you on the contrary refer all to the works of the Law, which of you
two is worthiest to be accused? Which comes nearest to Evangelical Doctrine?
You who refer all to, and comprehend all in the observance and study of the
Law, or he that refers unto, and comprehends all in A twofold manner of
Righteousness mentioned by Paul, the one received, the other rejected. Philip.
3. Righteousness of the Law, Righteousness of Faith, in Faith of God.
the Faith of Christ? Let Paul be called for a Witness and Umpire between you,
who though he himself was very careful in observing the Law of God, in his
Epistle to the Philippians, proposing a twofold manner of Righteousness, the
one of the Law, and the other of Faith, he judges the latter to be so much
better, and prefers it so far before the other, that he esteemed all those
other things of his own, though otherwise excellent and praiseworthy things,
being placed in the study of the Law of God, yet he esteemed them all as loss,
yea as dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, that he might
be found in him, having on the Righteousness, not which is of the Law, but
which is of the Faith of Christ, which is the Righteousness of God by Faith,
etc. What then? shall you bring us away from this faith, which is placed in
Christ, and call us back to that dung contrary to the will of Christ, and the
Doctrine of Paul; that by your teaching and guideance we may be found to
possess a righteousness, not that which is placed in Faith, but that which is
only placed in the Law? And are you upon this account so outragiously invective
against Luther, because he chose rather to follow Paul's opinion, than yours in
this point of Salvation? No, but there is some other thing in the wind, which
puts you in such a heat of contending, not because Luther attributes
Righteousness to faith, to which you your self use sometimes to attribute very
much, but because he so shuts up our Salvation in this faith alone, that he
seems wholly to exclude and despise the excellent works of Charity and labors
after Piety, in the point of Justification and Righteousness before God.

In Academical exercises, where arguments are examined according The Argument
of Osorius drawn from dictum secundum quid, to dictum simpliciter. Making that
to be true in the general, which is only so in particular.
to the Rules of Logic, those conclusions are justly found fault with, that
proceed from a thing said in particular, to prove a thing said in the general,
which thing there is no man, that is in any degree exercised in these matters,
but he may easily perceive in your Sophistry.

But if Luther had ever been a Man that had simply condemned the commendable
diligence in good works, or honest actions of virtues; I should not save him
from your lashes, or from being accounted worthy of such Ornaments as your
modesty puts upon him, that he might be judged the plague of his Country, a
Osor. lib. 2. p. 28.
turbulent Person, and disturber of Religion.

Add hereunto, if you please, the other flowers of your Satirical Eloquence,
The Reproaches of Osorius cast upon Luther.
under which you expose him in such an appearance or disguise, as one of the
most cruel, and dreadful Monsters, that ever was in the World.

An Answer to the Accusations of Osorius, in defense of Luther.
BUT now passing by your Reproaches, let us consider the The deceitful
connection of Osorius
matter it self, and the strength and finews of your Discourse. For this is
your Opinion; that, for the obtaining of righteousness the godly fruits of good
works should by no means be removed from a Communion with faith, which
otherwise cannot be lively and saving, being without charity. And because
Luther does this, you conclude after this manner, that he condemns all works of
good men; that he is an enemy and destroyer of all honest Discipline, an Author
of profane impurity and licentiousness, a plague of his Country, a troubler
and disturber of all Religion, yea, and a Monster, and what not?

But I beseech you, Sir, bethink your self, and have a care what you belch
forth against any man with an unbridled rashness; the Law commands you to Exodus
23.
shun leasing. And do you, who are so great an extoller of righteousness,
against all righteousness tear honest and innocent men in pieces with false
accusations? for if a Man does not attribute unto works the chiefect efficacy
and preemince in the point of Justification, is that sufficient cause to
suppose that therefore he utterly condemns good works? Verily it is
unreasonable so to do, as if a man disputing concerning Osorius, should thus
conclude, that because he has no power of governing Luther separates charity
from faith, and the Law from the Gospel, not simply, but in such a manner as
things should be distinguished each by their own bounds. Where and how Faith
works by love
in the Kings Chamber, therefore he has nothing he can do at home amongst his
own family: Or because he is not at all excellent in military virtue to gain a
victory, that therefore he has no faculty or dexterity in managing the affairs
of his own business. Luther separates charity from faith, and the Law from the
Gospel, and does it not without cause. But it must be considered where, in what
place, and for what cause he does it: Not to cause the godly works of good men
to be despised, nor to discourage the exercise thereof, but that the power of
justifying should not be attributed to the performance of them. Not that faith
should not work by love before Men, but that it should not work before God. For
it is one thing to work before Men, and another thing to work before God.
Therefore one and the same faith acts both ways, but one way before God, and
another way before men; for before men it works by love, that it may perform
obedience to the will of God, and be serviceable for the benefit of our
Neighbor; but before God it works not by any love, but by Christ only, that it
What is the union of Faith with Charity, and again what is the difference of
both.
may obtain the pardon of sins, and eternal life.

By which you see, what is the difference between faith and virtue, and wherein
they both agree; and how different the working of both is; How faith is alone
without works, and again how the same is not alone; for in the mean while Godly
works are not therefore condemned, because they are not admitted to the
justification of life, but the trusting in works is only overturned: Here then
a wise and suitable division should be used, Trust in works is excluded.
that things may be distinguished each by their own places and bounds lest one
thing should rashly rush into the possession of another, and disturb the order
of its station. Therefore let the praiseworthy merits of the greatest virtues
have their own honor and dignity, which no man withholds from them:
Nevertheless by their dignity they will never be so available in the presence
of the Heavenly Judge, as to redeem us from our sins, to satisfy Justice, to
deliver us from the wrath of God, and everlasting destruction, to restore us
that are so many ways ruinated, unto grace and life, to There is nothing can be
opposed to the judgment of God but Christ only.
unite us as Sons and Heirs to God, and to overcome Death, and the World. These
things cost a far dearer price, than that we should ever be able to pay so many
and so great debts by any works or merits, or means of our own. For so great is
the severity of Justice, that there can be no reconciliation, unless Justice be
satisfied by suffering the whole punishment that was due. The wrath is so very
great, that there is no hope of appeasing the Father, but by the price and
death of the Son. And again, so great is the mercy, that the Father grudged not
to send his own Son, and bestow him on the World, and so to bestow him, that he
gives Life Eternal to them that believe in him: Moreover, so great is the
loving kindness of the Son toward us, that he grudged not for our sakes to
bring upon himself this infinite load of wrath which otherways our frailty,
however assisted with all the help of moral virtues, had never been able to
sustain.

Whence Faith has received its efficacy.
BEcause Faith alone with fixed eyes looks upon this Son and What does faith
without works perform, and from whence does it receive its efficacy in acting.
The form of faith is not charity, but rather the form of charity is faith.
Mediator, and cleaves unto him, who only could bring about this Achievement
of our Redemption with the Father; therefore it is, that it alone has this
virtue and power of justifying, not with works, nor for works, but only for the
sake of the Mediator, on whom it relies. Therefore that is false, and worthy to
be rejected with disdain, which some unhappy and wicked School-Divines affirm
in discoursing of Charity, to wit, that it is the form of Faith, and that it
must not by any means be separated from faith, no more than the vital Soul can
be separated from the body, or the essential form from matter, which otherwise
is a rude and unweildy Mass. In answering of whom, I think there is no need of
many words, seeing the whole meaning and drift of Scripture, if rightly
understood, the very end of the Law; seeing Christ, and the instruction of the
Apostles, and the whole nature of the Gospel seem to be manifestly against
them, and wholly to overturn that most absurd Opinion by so many Oracles, so
many Signs, Examples, and Arguments to the contrary. Now if that be form, which
gives subsistence to a thing, how much more truly must it be said, that faith
is the form of charity, without which all the works of charity are base and
contemptible; as again the form of faith is not charity, but Christ only, and
the promise of the word.

But what, say they, are not the pious works of Charity acceptable Objection.
to God, being so many ways prescribed unto us, and commanded by him? Are not
these also remunerated with plentiful fruits of Righteousness, and heaped up
with manifold Rewards in the Gospel? I was hungry, says he, and ye fed me, I
thirsted and ye refreshed me with drink; so that not so much as a cup of cold
water shall want a reward, when it is given in the name of Christ, besides an
infinite number of other things of that kind, which being taken out of the
Scriptures are enlarged upon to the praise of Charity.

Indeed no man denis that pious and holy works of Charity are Answer.
greatly approved of God, and it is an undoubted truth, that the love of God
and of our Neighbor, as it comprehends the Summary of both Tables, and is the
greatest complement of the whole Law, so it has excellent promises annexed
unto it. Neither is there any Controversy between us about that. But when we
affirm that Charity pleases God, we ask this, how it pleases, whether simply of
it self in respect of the very work, or upon the account of faith, and the
Mediator? and then whether the same Charity so pleases, that it justifies us
before God, and obtains the pardon of sins, and overcomes the terrors of death
and sin, that it may be opposed to the judgment and anger of God? Moreover,
whether it has the promises of Eternal Life annexed unto it? If without a
Mediator and the faith of him, there is nothing which can please God, and it
is impossible that works should please him, before the person of him that
works be reconciled; it follows that Charity depends on Faith, and not Faith
on Charity: But that it rather goes before Love, and is so far from being
joined with it for justification, that it also justifies Charity, and makes all
the works of Charity acceptable to God. Confirmation by Examples.
The matters appear more evident by Example. Suppose a Jew or Turk does daily
bestow great gifts upon the poor with very great cost, and damage to his
estate: and again, that a Christian gives only a cup of cold Water to a thirsty
man in the name of Christ: in the things themselves, if merits only be valued;
there seems a very great disproportion. But there is much greater inequality in
the distributing the reward. Though a Turk bestows many thousands of Talents
upon the poor, he gains not any thing at all thereby with God. A Christian by
one Cup, not of Wine, but of cold Water loses not his reward, yea he finds
Life. What is the cause? What should you think, O Osorius, but because those
things are not valued by merits, but by faith: not by the condition of the
work, but of the worker; not by the price of the thing, but by the dignity of
the person.

In Justification not so much the Condition of the Deeds as of the Persons is
regarded.
SEE, I beseech you, of how great concernment it is, that a person One
condition of Sons, another of Servants.
should first be reconciled to God, which unless he be received into his
favor, it is not possible that his works should please him at any time. As in
the civil and politic nature, it is of no small concernment, whether a Son or
a Servant acts upon the account of reward: in like manner in the Heavenly
generation there is a great difference between Sons and Servants. The Heirs of
God and Mercenaries. For one thing is regarded in Servants, and another thing
in Sons, and their condition appears to be far different. It belongs to
Servants to be compelled by fear, but A comparison of Sons and Servants.
they that are Sons are drawn by love, and they do so much the more in the
performance of their duties, how much the more gladly they endeavor to please
their Father. They that serve, go about their business only for reward, and it
is given unto them no otherways than according to their merits. Who when they
have done all, they remain nothing but Servants and unprofitable, they never do
any thing worthy of an Inheritance. On the contrary, they who are Heirs and
Sons, though they show themselves no less obedient, and observe the will of
their Father, yet they do not therefore obey, that they may be made Heirs by
Works, but because they are Heirs, Therefore they work.

Again, they that are in a servile condition, do not come, but when called by
their Master, and perform his commands by the impulse of the Law. But the case
is contrariways in Sons, who have always access with boldness into the presence
of their Father, and cry Abba Father, performing much more of their own accord,
than by the incitement of another prescription. Servants, after they have done
their task, have their wages paid them according to their merits, but they
receive no reward of Inheritance. But they that are Sons and Heirs; an
Inheritance is made sure to them, not according to their obedience, nor by
their deeds, nor after their deeds, but by the faith of the promise, and a free
donation before all obedience, concerning which Faith, Paul said: It is
therefore of Faith, that according Romans 4.
to Grace the Promise should be firm to all the Seed. Moreover in those that
are Sons, it is only the dignity of the person, and not the merits of good
life; it is the birth, and not the works that are regarded: But the case is
contrariways in Servants; for it is not regarded what the person is, but what
the manner of life. In short, the Servant (as Christ witnesses) abides not in
the house for ever. But the Son, to whom the House is delivered wholly and for
ever, is never driven out of the House.

And here Christ only is a Son by Nature, we only by the Grace of Christ a Son
by Nature, we by Christ.
Adoption. He by Birth, we by Deliverance, of which he himself testifies: if
the Son, says he, shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, he being
partaker of his Fathers Nature, is not made a Son by his life, but is born a
Son; we being Servants by Nature, are not born Sons, but are born again, not by
works, but by faith

But by Christ our Deliverer we Christ is born a Son by nature, we by faith are
born again Sons, not by works, in the Son.
are changed from Servants into Sons. Not that we cease now to be the same that
we were, in this life sinners, miserable, weak, mortal, for this transformation
from servants into sons, is not so much performed in us, or in the change of
our qualities, but chiefly in the love of God to us. For he has so high an
esteem, and puts so great a value on Christ his only begotten, that with a
fatherly love and affection he embraces all those of mankind throughout the
world, that believe in this Son of his; and looking upon them now as Sons
adopts them for his Sons out of their servile estate, yea and makes them
coheirs The cause why God adopts us for Sons. Gal. 4.
together with his Son. Whence St. Paul said; ye are not now servants, but
sons: and if sons, then also heirs of God through Christ; for ye are all the
Sons of God by Faith, which is in Christ Jesus.

Whosoever of you are baptized ye have put on Christ. Ye are all Gal. 3.
one in Christ Jesus. But if ye are Christ's, then are ye the seed of Abraham,
and heirs according to the promise. Concerning which also John speaks to this
purpose; see what love the Father 1 Ioh. 3.
has given us, that we should be called the Children of God. And again
presently repeating the same, Dearly beloved, says he, now we are the Sons of
God, and it has not yet appeared, what we shall be, etc.

The Absurdities that arise from the Osorian Righteousness.
WHich things, seeing they are guarded with most sure confirmations of
Evangelical Scripture, hence it necessarily follows, that all this Discourse of
yours about righteousness falls down from the foundation. For if there is no
union with God the eternal father but to those, who by on exact observation of
the law conform and direct all their actions to the Osorius. The servile and
mercenaly doctrine of the Papists.
will of God, which is the law of equity and rule of Justice: you make us not
now to be Sons, nor Heirs according to the promise, but mercenaries according
to the condition of the law: Moreover by this means also it will come to pals.
that the promise is sure to no man in his life time, which is directly oppofite
not only to the mind of Paul, but also to the genuine condition of Sons. For
who in the time of this life lives so exactly according to the commands of God,
that hitherto he has never passed the limits thereof, or knows what he will do
in the remainder of his life? Whereby it will come to pass that the mind must
needs waver hither and thither, with a perpetual uncertainty. Moreover if that
be accounted sure by the word and promise of the Gospel, that they are heirs as
many as are ingrafted into Christ, then the Kingdom of God must of necessity be
an inheritance, If an inheritance, then it is not a recompense nor a reward,
but a The Kingdom of God is an Inheritance, therefore not a reward, it belongs
to Sons, therefore not to Servants. August. lib. de haeres.
Patrimony, which is not due to deeds, but to the spiritual birthright. If to
the birthright, then the bestowing of the Inheritance goes before all deeds.
Afterward Pious deeds follow, according to the saying of Augustine, which is
no less true than firm: Good works follow him, that is justified, but go not
before him, that is to be justified. Wherefore if that most pure and eternal
Nature account us for Sons, as it was proved above, in which there sticks not
any stain of unrighteousness, upon the like account it follows, The cause which
makes us the Sons of God, the same also makes us Just; but faith only makes us
Sons, therefore the same also makes us Just. The cause which justifies on God's
part is his Predestination. Ephesians. 1.
that the cause which joins us to God as Sons, the same also makes us just in
the sight of God.

But that we may rightly examine, what that cause is, first the degrees of
causes must be distinguished, of which some are related unto God, and others to
men. On Gods part in the first place comes his infinite Mercy, Predestination,
Election, the Grace of the Promise and Vocation, of which Paul speaks in more
places than one: Who has Predestined us, says he, unto the adoption of Sons
by Jesus Christ, whom he has Predestined, that they should be conformed to
the Image of his Son, them he has also called, whom he has called, them he
has also justified, etc.

In the next order follows the Romans 8. Vocation, the Donation of Christ, his
Obedience, Death and Merits,
Donation of his Dear Son, his Obedience, Death, Sufferings, Merits,
Redemption, Resurrection, Forgiveness of Sin: As for those things which proceed
from God, there is no great controversy between us. But our Opinions differ
concerning those things, which are called causes on Man's part; to wit, whether
there is one cause only or more? Whether Faith only without What the cause of
justification is on Man's part. Lib. 2. de just. Osorius.
Works, or Works joined together with Faith? And this is the thing about which
now we contend, O Osorius, for in these Books you do dispure about the
righteousness of works at such a rate, that you suppose Faith, only without
these additions, so Insufficient to perform any thing toward the purchasing
Salvation, that it is your Opinion, That this Faith of Christ only, if it be
separated from the help of Works, deserves not to be called the Faith of Chrit,
but a headstrong rashness, an insolent confidence, an impudent boldness, an
outrageous madness, an execrable Wickedness: Which sort of Words, how little
modesty they savor of, it is needless here to inquire. But how far they differ
from truth, and the inviolable authority of Sacred Scriptures, it will be
requisite to take notice; because at present this is the matter of debate
between us.

And first, if you understand it concerning this common Fellowship of Men with
one another; and Offices of mutual obedience between Man and Man, there is no
man so unreasonable as to separate Faith from the operation of Charity in that
sense. For thus Faith, Hope, and Charity have a Faith, Hope, and Charity in
what (...) they are joined together.
necessary connection. But if the (...) is applied, beyound the public society
of Human Life to those things that peculiarly belong to Salvation, and have a
relation to God himself; That if now the cause should be erquired for, which
gives us a right to the adoption of the Sons of God, and which purchases us
righteousness before him. Herein Paul in Disputing against you, does so far
take away all righteousness from works, and leaves Faith alone, that he judges
him that mingleth any thing besides for the obtaining Salvation, to be a
destroyer of Faith, an Enemy of Grace, and consequently an Enemy of Romans 4.
Gal. 2. Arg. If righteousness comes by the Law, Christ dyed in vain. Gal. 2.
Christ dyed (...) in vain, therefore righteousness is not by the Law. The (...)
between Paul and Osorius.
the Cross of Christ. For, if those, says he, that are of the Law, are heirs,
Faith is made void, the promise is made of none effect. And also elsewhere: If
righteousness comes by the Law, then Christ dyed in vain. Thus you hear Paul
manifestly asserting, what it is, that makes us heirs of the Inheritance and
Salvation, not the Law, but Faith: And that these two are so contrary in the
Office of Justifying, that if the Law be admitted, Faith is wholly overturned,
the Death of Christ is made void, the grace of the promise fails.

Now let us compare Osorius disputing of righteousness with Paul, He affirms,
that Man is justified by Faith without Works. Your opinion on the contrary
pleads that righteousness does so much consist of Works without Faith, that
Faith does nothing else but prepare for Holy Works. He asserting a twofold
righteousness of Works and of Faith, of Grace, and of Merit, so distinguishes
between both, that he sets the one against the other, by a mutual opposition;
as if they were things, that could by no means consist together, but the one
destroys the other: And he makes that evident by the example of the Israelites,
and the Gentiles; of whom those grasping at righteousness by Works, fell from
true righteousness: These, because they sought after righteousness by Faith,
solely and simply obtained it.

You on the contrary being neither deterred by their fearsul example, nor
regarding the Apostolical Instruction; and making no distinction between these
so different kinds of righteousness, you seem to comprehend all in that one
righteousness of the Law, as if the righteousness of Faith were none at all.
The Words of Paul are very manisest: To him that works, the reward Roman. 4.
is reckoned to be, not of grace, but of debt. But to him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is imputed unto him for
righteousness. What can any Man say more expressly? Afterward he adds. freely,
denying that it could be imputed freely if it were due for Works. On the
contrary, Osorius seems to be of such an opinion, that he acknowledges no
imputation of righteousness at all. He who afferts we are justified by the
Faith of Galat. 2.
Christ, and not by Works; What does he else but remove Works utterly from the
justification of Faith? Your assertion, which makes the Faith of Christ, if
works are shut out, to be no Faith, but (...) and execrable Wickedness: What
else does it in these words, but bring a Gospel not from Heaven, Lib. 2. page
46.
but from Portugal, wholly differing from that which we have received from
Paul. Which seeing we are commanded by the Apostle not to suffer, so much as in
an Angel, without wishing him accursed, what may be answered to you in this
case, I commit to your self to consider. Paul reasons thus: If of Grace, then
not of Works, otherways Grace is not Grace: If of Merit then not Freely: For in
that which is free, there can be no merit or debt.

The Arguments of Osorius, whereby he attributes Righteousness to Works, are
answered.
NOW it must be enquired, by what arguments Osorius pleads for his opinion. And
first he brings that out of the Psalms: The Lord, says he, is Righteous, Osor.
lib. 2. p. 39.
and loves Righteousness, his countenance beholds the upright: And again, The
Wicked, says David, shall not dwell with thee; the Unrighteous shall not
remain before thy eyes: and thou hate all those that work Iniquity; thou
shall destroy all them that speak leasing, etc. And now what is gathered from
these testimonies? To wit, That the Wicked have no society with the goodness of
God. For seeing God is himself the very Law of Equity and Rule of
Righteousness, according to which all our actions should be directed, therefore
it is his opinion that it is not possible, that he who puts away the rule it
self from him and hates it, should be joined to the same. But what do you drive
at in all these florid expressions? it is this; He then that asserts it to be
possible that God should approve the wicked, and join them to himself, asserts
it to be possible for God not to be God.

These things need no prolix answer: Answer.
For though we grant this to be very true, which you mention from the
Scriptures, that the rule of Divine Justice is perfect, and that eternal light
cannot endure any thing that is wicked, or not agreeable to equity: but you
have not yet proved that those should be called wicked; who flying to Christ by
Faith, receive from him the Pardon of their Sins, who having their Sins blotted
out, and all Iniquity forgiven, are written by the same Psalmist among the
number of the blessed whom God himself purifying Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, etc. Psalm.
by faith, and pouring his holy Spirit upon them, of ungodly he has made them
godly, and graciously received them into his favor, for the sake of his dear
Son.

And such we were all formerly, as your Oration describes, wicked sinners, and
all void of the glory of God, before Christ washed us with his blood: but 1
Cor. 5.
now after we are washed from our former filthiness, sanctified and justified
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God, Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Romans 8.
Elect? Those whom God Iustifies, who shall condemn? Then you go on, and deny
that it is possible, that God should be unlike himself, to favor wickedness,
or make friendship with wicked men of an unclean life. And therefore you
conclude we must needs be first righteous, before we are received into the
favor of God. Right, but who are they, whom you call by the name of Just? You
must teach us that.

If you judge they are such, as are defiled with no pollution, or can Whence
this righteousness of Osorius shall be found.
say with Christ: Who amongst you will prove me guilty of Sin? Verily, I
confess it seems not unlike to truth; what you prove concerning the conformity
of the Righteous unto. God, and that we must needs be all of us such, if we
would with acceptance have to do with that most pure Nature of the Divine
Righteousness, without a Mediator and Redeemer.

But if you take those for Righteous, Who are called righteous in a Gospel
sense.
who are Righteous by Faith not by Life, that is, those whom daily forgiveness
received by faith, brings as righteous in the Presence of God, in that sense
this debate of yours about Righteousness does us no diskindness: For by this
means it comes to pass, that whom Faith daily absolves, you your self cannot
hold them guilty of any crime: Therefore if they are not unrighteous, nothing
hinders them from being admitted with bold access Osor. de just lib. page 39,
and 40.
into the presence of the Divine Majesty, through the benefit of their Redeemer.

But you deny that it is agreeable to the nature of God, to account any man
worthy of his approbation, except him, whom his countenance beholds to be
righteous: Therefore it is necessary Of what sort is the Osorian righteousness.
that our righteousness should go before the favor of God. But whence that
righteousness should come to us, herein is all the contention between us. You
seem to acknowledge no righteousness but that which the perfection of life
procures. We place all our righteousness in Christ, not in our selves, in the
faith of him only, not in our own works. What? say you, can any man obtain
favor from that highest goodness as long as he hates not wickedness, as long
as be puts not away Iniquity from him, which has a perpetual A false and lying
accusation of Osorius.
War with Divine Equity? Who is ignorant of, or denies that? For how can it be,
that that everlasting Law should not hate sin and wickedness with the greatest
abhorrency? Well, and what do these Mountains of Gilboa bring forth unto us? at
length he concludes: That it is therefore necessary, that whosoever thinks to
be received Dejust. lib. 2.
into the friendship of God, must first hate wickedness. Verily there is no man
that denies it. For though we should grant that a wise and wholesome Repentance.
Repentance proves a man to be a sinner, but takes not away sin, it causes not
remission, nor satisfies justice.
(or) sound sorrow, whereof you speak, makes the first part of our conversion,
and that the true righteousness of faith, does not follow, except some trouble
of a penitent mind go before, it does not therefore come to pass, that the very
cause of justification should be attributed unto repentance; for if repentance
be nothing else, but a grief of mind at the remembrance of sin, it proves
indeed that sin went before, but takes not away that which was committed. It
declares perhaps some change of mind in him that committed it, but takes not
away the punishment, that is due to justice. Moreover repentance testifies that
justice is lost, but repairs not the loss thereof: As pain coming of a wound
inflicted makes not a medicine to it self, but receives it from some other
thing. In like manner, repentance goes before the remission of sins, but does
not cause it, just as Seryphius did not cause the recovering of the City of
Tarentum, who unless he had first lost it, Fabius had not recovered it. How
many may you see in a commonwealth, who having violated the public Laws, or
been guilty of Treason against their Prince, being overwhelmed with grief and
shame, with all their heart lament the wickedness of their crime, and they do
not wickedly that they are ashamed and repent. But yet they do not escape the
due punishment of the Law. Therefore the detestation of their sin proves them
guilty, but does not free them from condemnation. But if there is so great
severity of Laws and Judgments in humane offenses, which no deploring of ill
life can wash away, what then should be judged of these that are committed
against the highest and infinite Majesty? Which Angels offending in one thing
were not unpunished, having been thrust out of Heaven, and whom no sorrow could
restore again, what should be said to us in this frail condition of sinful
nature, in which dwells no good thing, who offend by a daily, either
negligence of duties, or filthiness of deeds? Is it sufficient to turn away the
vengeance of so great a God, to say, I have erred, unless there be some other
thing besides the sense of grief to help guilty and wounded nature, which may
defend this weak part of our repentance with a stronger safeguard, and may be
sufficient to appease The violation of Infinite majesty cannot be expiaced but
by an infinite price.
and reconcile offended justice with a proportionable price, and, (so to
speak,) can contend with Divine Justice by opposing a righteousness equal
thereunto? For as the wound is infinite, that is inflicted on our nature, so it
is just, that a remedy of the like nature should be applied, the strength and
greatness whereof being infinite, may by proportionable greatness be suited to
the Majesty The death of Christ (...) none but believers, and hence arises the
diguity of Faith.
offended; which verily consists not in repentance, or charity, or any offices
of ours: but is contained in Christ only, who is the only begotten Son of God.
And because our Faith only lays hold on him, and he cannot profit any but
Believers, therefore it comes to pass, that faith only without works, that is,
without any merits of works, compleats all our Righteousness before God.

Concerning the Praise of Repentance, the Dignity, and Benefit, and Peculiar
Office thereof.
BUT you will say, to what purpose then is it to repent, The benefit and
necessity of Repentance.
and to amend evil deeds? or what shall be answered to these Scriptures, which
promise in more places than one the pardon of all sins to those that lament
their sins, and are converted unto a better life? That I may answer these, I
would have you take notice of this in the first place: When we attribute the
The lying calumny of Andradius, against Chemaitius.
virtue of justifying to Faith, and in this case place it alone, being helped
by no addition of our works: Let no man so mis-understand, as if we did drive
away and (...) all saving Repentance, and other holy Offices of Duty and
Charity from every action of life, as Andradius falsely gathers against
Chemnitius.

For, that we may openly confess the truth, what else is this whole life of
Godly Men, but a continual repentance, and a perpetual detestation and
condemnation of sin, whilst we are forced by the Gospel with daily groans to
breath forth this Petition? Forgive us our sins, as if we were conflicting in a
continual place of wrestling, in which sometimes we stand by the Spirit,
sometimes we fall through the infirmity of the Flesh, and sometimes we again
make new repentance, yet we always overcome and triumph by Faith, to wit,
obtaining the pardon of our faults, and we obtain true righteousness for ever.
Therefore away with impudent slanders; let just judgment be exercised, and let
things be comprehended each in their own places and bounds.

Pious tears, a serious deploring of former destruction, and a just care of
living a better life, with all other pious exercises, are things, which we do
not thrust away, nor put out of their place, only we search what is the place,
what is the peculiar office of those things. And in the first place this is a
thing that What Repentance does by it self, what together with Faith.
should not be doubted of by any Man, that Repentance, as it is an excellent
gift of God, so it brings forth fruits not to be repented of, according to its
Office; the Office or duty whereof I reckon to be Repentance consistsof two
parts.
twofold. The first is, that which duly detests the sins committed. The other,
that which diligently endeavors the Reformation of the life, from which
follows both great praise, and greater fruits, and also very great incitements
to virtue. For he that being weary of his former wickedness applys his mind
wholly to amend his ungodly Life by a future reformation; verily he has made a
great progress toward Salvation, but he is not therefore as yet put into a
certain possession of Salvation, or because of that, taken up with the Penitent
Malefactor into Paradise. For it is one thing to weep for the things that one
has done amiss, and another thing to obtain the pardon of them. Verily he that
seriously purposes with himself to amend his life, I judge that he ought justly
to be praised; but yet that is not enough, as I suppose, to turn away the anger
of an offended God, to put away the heinous nature of Sin, to procure a clear
tranquillity of How far the fruit of Repentance (...)
Conscience, and to shake off the tyranny of death; for to obtain that Victory,
we will need another Panoply, or complete Armor than Repentance, or the forces
of our virtues; for nothing that we can do is sufficient to bring this to pass,
but only faith in the Son of God. And therefore Repentance with Charity, and
other Offices of that kind, have a necessary connection with faith; not that
they may give form to this as to a dead matter, but that rather they may
receive life and Spirit Faith in Christ justifies Charity, but Charity does not
justify Faith. Augustine in quinquage, Prolo. Psalm. 31.
from it: not that Faith has need of these for justification, but that they
themselves may be justified by the value received by Faith in Christ, which
unless they were recommended upon the account of that Faith would all be
abominable in the sight of God; and though they may be called works, yet cannot
be called good works in Gods account, unless they are supported by Faith.
Whence Augustine admonishing, not without cause, commands us to believe in him
that justifies the Wicked, that our very good works may be good works; for
those deserve not to be called good, as long as they proceed not from a good
root, etc. But here you object approved Testimonies and Examples, rehearsed out
of the Sacred Oracles of Divine Scripture, in which, without any mention of
Faith, Salvation is assuredly promised to them that Repent, as in Ezekiel, I de
sire not the death of a Sinner, but Ezekiel. 18.
that the wicked should turn from his way and live: There are set before us the
Examples of the Ninivites, of David, Jonah 3. 2 Samuel 12. 2 Kings 21. Osor. lib.
de just. p. 42. An (...) of Osorius. An Answer.
Manasseh and others; and lest I should weary you with Rehearsing of every one
of them, which are infinite, I will make a short Collection of the whole
inatter. You say that thus the Prophets proclaim, and openly avouch this thing,
that there is no hope of Salvation showed unto any, but only those, who are
with their whole heart brought back from an unclean and wicked life to the
practice of Holiness, etc. And presently concluding with this Opinion, you
teach us that there is no other way at all either to avert destruction, or
procure salvation.

Lest I should speak many things in vain, there is one Answer abundantly
sufficient for all such Objections; that there is indeed necessarily required a
sincere reformation of heart and life, in these who are to obtain life; as in
an Heir, for whom there is appointed the possession of an Inheritance to be
enjoyed, there is necessarily required dutifulness toward his Father, which
dutifulness, nevertheless, when it is most exactly performed, is not any cause
of obtaining the inheritance. And in like manner there is nothing that can be
more certain, than that Repentance and Renovation do much commend the life of
Christians to God; yet it makes them not Christians, neither does it so much
commend the person of the Penitent, as it is it self commended by the dignity
of the man: who, if he is a Christian, his Repentance is approved. But, if he
be an Alien from the faith, the lamenting of sin does not at all profit for the
obtaining of Righteousness, neither does it take away Sin. But as you Ier. 11.
Ezekiel. 33. Ezekiel. 18.
say, Repentance has Divine Promises, and indeed I am not against your Opinion
in that, for God does not desire the death of a Sinner, promising also life to
him that repents. That Is right. But let us see how he promises it, and by
pondering the Circumstances of things, times, and persons, let us consider what
is promised, and to whom, and what is the true cause of promising. Indeed the
old Law has dark promises, the Gospel also has its own promises, as both
Covenants have likewise their own atonements. I do not deny it, but this I ask
what manner of promises has repentance in the Old Law? God promises life to
them that return from their wickedness. What? does he signify an eternal or a
temporary peace and felicity of this outward life? If you answer an eternal, I
would then know what difference there will be between Legal and Evangelical
Promises? but when I do steadfastly contemplate upon the nature and kind of both
times and testaments in the holy word of God, and compare the virtue of one
Kingdom with the other, this seems to me to be the difference between Moses and
Christ; that I suppose all his Blessings and Rewards promised by God Legal
Promises.
to those that lead their life according to the prescript of the Law, go not
beyond the bounds of a certain earthly blessedness and recompense. In which,
notwithstanding we think there are contained no small benefits of God. For what
could happen to any man in this mortal state, to which we are all of necessity
subject, not only more desirable, but also of a larger extent by the wonderful
power of God, than when you are by the singular gift of God placed in such a
Commonwealth, which by a wonderful fruitfulness, and plenty of all good things,
excells all other Nations whatsoever; you should then pass your life in it,
being compassed about with the Divine Protection, that you may not only your
self live long in the Land, which the Lord your God has given you, but that it
should also be well with your Sons after you, through all Generations: that you
may maintain your state with dignity, and abundance of all the best things,
that the adversity of common fortune may have no power over you, that no Enemy
may annoy you, no tempest may cloud your tranquillity, that no storm of evil
things may shake you: that at home and abroad, whether you are in the field, or
in your house, going out or coming in, all things may happen successfully to
you, according to your hearts desire; and moreover, that God should so bless
all your wealth and works of your hands, and that at no time the powerful
providence of God should forsake you unto the utmost bounds of the most aged
life; unto these add the plenteous fruitfulness of the Land, the incomes of
Fruits and Corn, the continual increases Blessings proposed in the Law.
of wealth, the constant fruitfulness of Cattle, besides other very plentiful
Promises and Blessings of the like kind, whereof there is a long Catalogue
described in the Law, which are appointed for those, who inviolably obey the
most holy Precepts of God, and turn from their Sins to Righteousness. All which
Promises being by the Prophets set before the Penitent, seem to me to be of
such a sort, that they either signify temporary Rewards in this World, and
mitigate outward punishments in this Life; or if they be referred to eternal
Life, they do The Preaching of repentance belongs to the Gospel.
at least imply the faith of a Mediator, by a certain silent condition. And
therefore among Divines there are learned and famous men, who do rightly and
learnedly prove, that the Preaching of Repentance belongs peculiarly to the
Gospel and not to the Law. For the Law Preaches Damnation to Sinners. The
Gospel Preaches Salvation to the Penitent. Therefore when the Lord says, return
and ye shall be saved, I desire not the death of a sinner, etc. It is not the
Preaching of the Law, which pronounces the Sentence of Condemnation without
mercy: but it is the very voice of the Gospel.

And this seems to me to be the chief difference between Moses and Moses was a
certain earthly Christ, Christ is a certain heavenly Moses.
Christ, that like as he being as it were a certain earthly Christ, procures an
earthly liberty to the people, and sets before them the duties that are
incumbent upon them in leading their lives; so all the doctrine and benefits of
Christ are peculiarly and chiefly directed unto life eternal, and calls us
thereunto especially from this world. But if we suppose that these legal
promises should notwithstanding be referred to eternal life, yet when they did
not pass the bounds of that people only, and reached not to other Nations, but
to those peculiarly, who waited for the Seed promised to them, therefore the
promises of the Law included faith at least by a certain silent condition.
Wherefore as touching those legal promises, in which the holy Prophets held out
unto them, that repented and were converted, pardon and many other benefits, in
these must be considered, not only what is promised, but also, to whom the
promise is made, as being such, as belonged not to others, but those only, who
being descended from the Seed of Abraham, were contained in the Convenant, and
had a right to the Lamb slain from the beginning. Therefore according to the
authority of Augustine, we ought always to look to the root in such promises,
and the mind should always be raised up to the Mediator of the New Covenant, in
whom alone all the Promises of God are yea and Amen. Which seeing it is so, and
seeing all the Promises of Eternal Life are contained in this only Mediator
Christ, as in the only Ark of the Covenant, neither is there any faculty given
us by God, which attains to the knowledge of Christ and the understanding of
his benefits, but faith only; therefore it is, that this illuminated faith,
which only leads us to the knowledge of Christ, claims to it self only The
object of Faith. We are justified in the New Testament after the same manner,
that the Hebrews were healed, when they were stung by the Serpents.
all power of Justifying without any other means, not so much because of the
dignity of its act, or upon some account of charity joined with it, whereby it
should be formed, but only upon the account, and by the virtue of its object,
unto which it is bent, from whence it receives all this power of healing, just
as the Israelites of old, when they were envenomed with deadly Poison, regained
their health, not because they had Eyes and a power of beholding, but because
they fastened their Eyes at the command of God upon the Serpent, that was set up
before Ioh. 3. That every one that sees the Son and Believes in him may have
eternal life. Ioh. 8. Unless ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.
their Eyes. In like manner also it comes to pass to us, that whereas it is
Christ only, that bestows everlasting Life and Righteousness on them that
behold him, and he becomes not a Savior, unless he be received by Faith, hence
the inward sight of Faith being fixed upon him, brings Salvation. Whence by
evident demonstration, an argument is framed from principles and causes,
issuing into conclusions by necessary consequence according to Scriptures. As
this,

Ma. The only beholding of the Serpent set up, without any other condition
being added, healed the wounded.

Mi. Christ is the Serpent set up for us; Therefore,

Concl The only beholding of (that is, faith in) Christ set up for us, without
any additions whatsoever brings healing to our wounds.

And I know the adversaries will The Papists deny not Christ to be a Savior,
but they do not well agree in the manner how he Saves. The Council of Trent,
Hosius, Andradius, Canisius.
not deny that Christ is the only Serpent, who being made a Curse for us, makes
a Medicine for our Wounds. But if you ask, how? They will answer one thing, and
the holy Scriptures another: they affirm that this is performed on this
account, because Christ being punished for us on the Cross, has by his Merits
obtained for us the infusion of Charity. Which because it is the perfection of
the Law, therefore being acquired by the Merit of Christ, and received by our
free will, it brings forth righteousness, not that, A typical similitude
between Christ and the Serpent healing wounds. Ioh. 3. Isa. 53.
whereby we are accounted for just, but whereby we are both truly just, and
deserve life. But verily this Sophism neither agrees with the History of the
Israelites, nor satisfies the argument propounded. For if those that were then
wounded by the Serpents, by only beholding the Serpent without any other
intermediate cause, received present health: verily either this type bears not
the similitude of Christ, or Christ heals us by faith in his name only without
interposing the remedy of Charity. Otherways the mutual proportion of
similitude between us and them, between Christ and the Serpent, will not
rightly agree. They lifted up their outward eyes, we our inward, they to the
serpent, we to Christ. Both by beholding obtain health through the Promise of
God; they the health of their Bodies, we of our Souls. They presently in
beholding at the first sight, were healed in the same moment, by no endeavor
of their own, but only upon the account of the Object, and by virtue of the
Promise. And what other thing does this mystical adumbration signify, but
Justification freely prepared and promised to us, by the sole contemplation of
the Object, whereby we apprehend Christ by Faith? Will you hear the Promise?
That every one who sees him may not perish, but have eternal Life? And
elsewhere. And this righteous servant of mine by his knowledge shall Justify
many. But what is it to see him, but to believe in him? What is the knowledge
of that righteous one, but the Faith of Christ, which Iustifies from sin?
Therefore what external aspect was to them, that the light of Faith is to us.
What Health was to them, Justification is to us, whereby we are delivered from
the Curse of sin, and are absolved without punishment. But if you ask, what
way? There is an answer in readiness to wit, according to the very similitude
of the Serpent, not by any labor of ours, but by contemplation of the Object
only, and by virtue of the Promise. I pray you what is more evident? What more
agreeable? And what then should be said to those ill-employed men, who by their
new doctrine translate Free Justification, which is due only to Faith by virtue
of the Promise of God, unto works of Charity.

Of Sin and the healing thereof by Christ.
FOR Andradius, Hosius, Vega the Spaniard, and those others of the same Faction
confederate with these, seem so to contend about the Righteousness of Charity,
that having almost banished Faith out of the City of Rome, they place all the
parts of our Salvation, or at least the chiefest in Charity and Sanctification.
And now by what Scriptures will they demonstrate that? What, say they, does not
Christ heal us just as the Brazen Serpent healed the Wounds of those that were
hurt? Were we not all healed by his stripes? Is not Isa. 53. An objection of
the Adversaries.
he the Lamb that takes away the sins of the World? Is not he the Life-giving
Serpent, who gives cure for our wounds? And what are our Wounds, say they, but
Sin? What is the healing of Wounds but the putting away of Sins? What then,
shall the Serpent be more powerful in fixing his sting, than Christ in taking
it out? Shall Alam be more powerful to infect Nature, than Christ to cleanse
it? But how is nature purged, if yet the contagion of sin remains? As in a
diseased body, unless the hurtful humors are purged off, health is not
recovered, and as the Air being surrounded on every side with black darkness,
begins not to shine, before the brightness of the Sun being returned the
darkness vanishes: In like manner in the inward diseases of minds, the causes
of maladies must first be taken away, before health is restored. But the causes
of evils are sins, which if they are taken away by Christ, how can they remain
in the Saints? But if they abide not, by necessary consequence then it follows,
that the roots of all sins being cut away, they are righteous Inherent
righteousness.
in the sight of God by that righteousness, not which is imputed, but which
properly inheres in them, which is free of all spot of sin, which carefully
observes the Law, which informs the mind with Charity, and beautifies it with
Divine Ornaments, and makes us partakers of the Divine Nature. But let us put
all these together for brevities sake into the exact form of an argument.

Sin abolished does not remain. Argument.


In the Baptized, and in those that are come to years, who are converted, sin
is abolished. Therefore,

After Baptism and in those that are come to years after true conversion, there
remains no more sin.

This argument having a bad connection, Answer.
does evidently destroy it self. First, there is no man that denies that actual
sin is not abolished in Baptized Infants, in whom it is not committed. In those
come to years, if all sins are so extinguished, that no relics remain, what
need is there of any conversion? For what place is there for repentance, where
nothing is committed contrary to duty? What if the Life of the Saints is
nothing else, but almost a daily conversion and mourning for sin, how can a
daily frailty of sinning be wanting there? But let us look upon the parts of
the Argument. Sin abolished, say they, does not remain. The Material of Sin.
The Formal of Sin.
That is true indeed if perfect and complete abolishment of sin be understood,
both as to the Material of Sin, and as to the Formal, as the Schools speak.
Therefore as touching the Major, in so much I acknowledge, sin does not remain,
in how much it is abolished in the Saints. But after what manner, and in what
order it is abolished in the Baptized and in the adult, it follows next that
this should be enquired into in the Minor.

Therefore I answer to the Minor with a distinction, that sin is said to be
abolished in the Adult that are Regenerate, it is partly true and partly false,
with How sin in this Life is abolished, and how it remains.
a different respect had to diverse circumstances; But how that is understood it
must be explained, first; as touching the death of the Mediator, which brings
Salvation, there is no defect in that, but it has abundantly recovered
whatsoever perished by Adam: yea it has brought us much greater benefits, than
the evils which Adam procured unto us. But if it be asked how, and in what
order the Death of Christ effects this? I answer, not The guilt of sin. The
frailty of sinning.
by denying, but by distinguishing. For seeing two things are considerable in
every sin, the guilt obliging, or the punishment of damnation, which Lombard
calls passive corruption: and then active corruption, or the very act of sin,
or the infirmity of corrupted nature. Therefore there is again a twofold remedy
prepared for this twofold evil, guilt Obliging to eternal punishment, is not
only taken away in the life to come, but also in this life, by the holy laver,
and continual remission of sins for the sake of a Mediator. But the infirmity
of sinning, which is concupiscence in the flesh, and ignorance Hugo.
in the mind, (that I may speak with Hugo) it also is abolished in the
regenerate, but yet after its own order, and by its own degrees. For it is
daily diminished in this Life by the renewing of the Spirit, and it shall be
abolished in the Life to come, by the Resurrection of the Flesh. In the interim
the relics of infirmity stick yet in the Flesh, as both Death and Temporal
punishments stick yet in the Flesh, to exercise the Saints unto Combat; not to
condemn them to destruction. Just as the Land of Canaan was promised to the
Hebrews a great while before, which yet they did not suddenly take A similitude.
possession of: Neither was the frame of this World made immediately in one
moment, but the Works of God were perfected in distinct intervals of Days: So
neither is the whole Flesh suddenly renewed, but by degrees, and daily
increases, it is going on unto perfection.

An example may be conveniently taken from him, whom being Wounded, the
Samaritan, cap. 10. Luc. does not suddenly cure, but first pours Wine into his
Wounds, washes off the Blood, afterward he adds Oil, that he may mitigate the
grief, and the Wound may begin to cleave together: Afterward the Wound being
bound up, he puts the Sick-man upon the Beast, and afterward commands him to
be cured in the Inn. Just so Christ suffering the punishment of our Sins in his
Body, by remission immediately takes away the guilt from us, pouring into our
Wounds the gladning Oil of the Gospel, joined together with the Wine of serious
Repentance; whereby whatsoever is deadly in the Wounds, is washed away with a
health restoring Pardon: But the Wounds are not yet altogether healed. But
health will be complete in Eternal Life. In the interim he will have diseases
cured in the Church by Godly Exercises, the Cross, and constant Prayer.
Briefly, if those Men desire to know what that is, which Christ has abolished
in us by Argument.
his Death, I will say it in a word.

Whatsoever was laid upon Christ on the Cross, to be carried away for our
sakes, that is taken away from us in this Flesh.

Only the guilt and punishment of Sin, not the matter it self of our actions
was laid upon Christ to bear upon the Cross.

The act or substance of sin, is not wholly abolished by the Death of Christ in
this flesh, but only the guilt and punishment of sin.

Or more briefly let them take it thus: Whatsoever Christ by dying did bear for
us, that only he took away by Christ by dying upon the Cross did bear only the
punishment of Sin, but not our Sins: and afterward by raising us up again, he
will destroy both the punishment and the whole matter of Sin in due time.
his death in this Life. Christ by dying did bear only the punishment of our
Sins, not the Sins themselves in his Body, whereof he had none. Therefore
Christ in this Life took away only the punishment, not the matter it self of
sin by his Death. But afterward by his power he shall also take away the whole
matter of Sin in the Glory of the Resurection to come.

Concerning the necessity of the practice, and care of good Works.
THerefore in this place something has been said of Faith, and all that manner
of Righteousness; which the Divine Authority attributes to Faith only without
Works. More things elsewhere have been explained by us in other Books: From
which things just conclusions being drawn, it evidently appears, if I am not
mistaken, wherein all our righteousness consists, not in Works without Faith,
nor joined together with Faith, but wholly in Faith without Works; that is,
without the merits of Works, or any condition of meriting. For if Faith, which
is nothing else but an internal and illuminated contemplation, and receiving of
Christ the Son of God, receives a free promise of Life in him; I do not well
see what the good deeds of our Life, thought excellent, can perform in this
part of justification. Yet it does not Works, though they do not justify, yet
are not denied to be necessary.
follow from hence that the Holy practice of good Works for necessary uses,
that I may speak with Paul, is not upon any account necessary. Neither is it a
reason forcible enough, if any Man teaches that no trust should be put in
Works, that therefore there is no need of any care to do good: For what Logic
is this? Works should not be trusted in when they are performed: Therefore
there is no need to endeavor The calumnies of the Adversaries against Pious
Doctors.
to perform Good and Holy Works. We are no other ways justified but upon the
account of Faith which is in Christ Jesus: Therefore Offices of Piety are not
necessary in those, who are justified by Faith. Faith only, not upon the
account of Love, but of the Mediator, promotes us to righteousness; Therefore,
Luther is unjustly reviled as a despiser of Good Works.
it profits nothing, to repent, and to weep and mourn for sins committed: It is
of no concernment after what manner every one leads his Life; for so you seem
to gather, and not you only, O Osorius, but also as many as being like to you,
bear It is fatal to the Gospel to suffer violence, and undergo calumnies.
an enmity to Luther. And hence such fierce outcries of yours against him,
such odious and bitter ragings, reproaches, evil reports, and outrageous
invectives, being filled not so much with Evil Speeches, as most filthy Lies.
But this is no new nor strange thing, either because you are of your old temper
and disposition, Mat. 2. Mat. 26, 27. Act. 8. Eusebius, See the History of Huss.
or because it is, and always was the condition of the Gospel, which has
already been accustomed enough to such like Enemies and reproaches. So Saul
persecuted David a most moderate Prince, by whom he had never been hurt. So
when Christ was born, Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him: By the
like fury Christ himself, the Prince of the Church, was slain. So of Old,
Stephen was Stoned: The same also did the Ancient Martyrs of all Times, hear
from their own People, which Luther now and other Ministers of Gods Word are
forced to hear, (...), take away these Enemies of the god's; yea also that
Divine Martyr, John Huss, of latter memory, was brought forth to Death in a
manner not unlike that, whereby Luther is brought forth by you after his Death:
For they Clothed him with odious Pictures of Devils, and abominable Titles.
Neither is Luther here handled much more handsomely by you; being Clothed with
most vain Lies, and set forth by you in such Colors, not as he really was, nor
as his Writings had persuaded you concerning him, which it seems you have not
read, but as other accusers, to whom you use to give too much credit, have
described him: For what other thing declares this your narrative which is
curiously fitted for calumny, whereby you make him liker a Monster, than a Man,
The shameless reproaches of Osorius, cast upon Luther. Osor. lib. 2. de justit.
as if he brought in a certain new kind of Faith, that was not heard of before,
and was unknown in former times, as if he were an example of Wickedness, an
encourager of Slothfulness, an Turbulent Person, and disturber of Religion, and
trampled upon all Actions worthy of Praise, and exercises of Eminent Virtue; as
things of no worth, and condemned Pious Tears, and judged those Men abominable
and Wicked who wept and mourned for their Iniquities; or upon any account
lamented the Sins they committed.

And as if he taught a certain new way of Salvation, and such a one, as neither
requires works of vis nor any sorrow, neither occasions any trouble to sinners,
but teaches that confidence alone is sufficient, to wit, such a confidence
whereby every Wicked and Ungodly Man may be supposed acceptable to God, tho'he
himself do not at all endeavor to restrain his wickedness, or pretend to any
desire after Piety, but only so supposes in his own mind, that he is dear to
God. That the favor of God is prepared for all, yea for the unclean and
Wicked, though sin rules and reigns with an universal dominion over them.
Moreover that Luther Page 30. Page 43.
should think it a great Wickedness to lament Man's first ruin, or fall, and to
fear punishment, etc. Besides other things also of the like sort, no less
absurd than false, which being wrested by you to a wrong sense, you use to lay
to his charge, not that they are really true of him, but they are puposely
feigned by A defense of Luther.
you, that by any means possible ye may render him odious to the ignorant
People! But these cunning attempts of yours avail nothing; for the Writings and
Sermons of Luther are publicly known. There are also extant the public
Confessions of the Saxon. Churches, first presented unto Carolus Caesar, in the
Assembly The Confessions of the Saxon Churches, presented at Augusta, Ann.
1530. offered afterward Trid. Coun. 1551.
of Augusta. Anno. 1530. And afterward Anno. 1551. Showed and offered to the
Council of Trent, in which what they teach concerning the true way of
Justification, according to the Word of God, what they Judge and Preach of
repentance, and the Holy Fruits of good Works; by all which they do
sufficiently defend themselves against your frivolous calumnies, and most vain
accusations, that there is no need of any other defense besides.

The opposite Assertions of the Adversaries, against the Free Imputation of
Righteousness produced and examined.
WHich things, seeing they are so, and sufficient defense has been made for
those of our Profession, let us proceed to that which remains.

We will then first declare the opposite assertions and decrees of the
Adversaries, what they say and judge concerning Righteousness, Faith, Grace,
Repentance, and Works; and next we will compare their Opinion with ours, and
both together with the holy Gospel of God, that it may be the more evident to
the Reader, what should be judged of both. And here first come forth unto us
Osorius, none of the meanest Champions in this Cause, all whose contention
against Luther drives at this, to destroy all imputation of Righteousness, and
to leave no other way of Righteousness but that which consists in works, and
observation of the Law, and which might maintain according to the Decrees of
Trent, that we are not only esteemed righteous, but also are really or
inherently Righteous in the sight of God even unto justification. In which way
of justifying he does not exclude Faith and Grace, but he so mingles these
together, that the praise it self of Righteousness is founded on works, and all
else so subservient, that Faith first goes before, that it may only prepare and
make way for the obtaining of Grace. And Grace afterward follows, which brings
forth good works in us, and then works themselves perfect, and complete
Righteousness. For after this manner does Osorius dispute in his Third Book.
And this is the sum of what he Osor. lib. 3. de just. number. 70.
says, therefore seeing the Law either written on Tables, or received by
Revelation, cannot take away the unbridled lust of the mind, and whilst lust
remains in its vigor, no man can by any means obey the precepts of the Law,
which are given for our attaining Righteousness: Therefore it is that no man
relying only on the help of the Law can be holy, unless he be furnished with
the immediate help of the Holy Spirit against lust; and farther, because we
obtain this Divine Why works are said to be not of the Law, but of Faith.
help not by the Law, but by Faith. Therefore it is, that all actions of
Charity are called works of Faith, not of the Law; both by other Divine
Writers, and also by Paul; who frequently by the name of Faith understands all
Offices of Charity, etc. You have here a Specimen of the Osorian Righteousness,
so described A description of the Osorian Righteousness.
by him, that Righteousness seems to consist not at all in Faith without Works
but in Works, which are called Works of Faith not of the Law. Which
Righteousness whosoever wants, he denies that it is possible for him to be received
into the favor of God, (...) chiefly upon this Argument; Because that Divine
Nature being most holy, and most pure, and which can endure no filthiness of
Iniquity, it behooves him therefore that would enjoy the presence thereof, to
conform himself unto the same Image: for there is no Communion between light
and darkness, there is no union between the holiness Osor. l. 2. p. 31.
of righteousness, and the wickedness of unrighteousness. Which seeing it is
so, he therefore concludes that Luther, and they of Luther's Party do err,
first in this, that they dare assert that sin in those, whom that infinite Lib.
2. p. 34.
purity has united unto it self, by a most Holy Love, is not wholly removed,
nor altogether abolished and plucked up by the roots, nor all its fibers quite
extirpated. And also that they affirm that a Law is laid upon us by God, which
cannot be kept. In the one of which the Divine Clemency and Bounty is Page 39.
b.
distrusted: In the other, abominable reproach is cast upon his Infinite Power
and Godhead.

Concerning Righteousness, and its definition given by Osorius, and others.
THou have, ingenuous Reader, the whole Model of Osorian Righteousness
described in a short compend: in which, what is true and what is faulty, it
remains that we should examine with like brevity according to the Rules of
Evangelical Doctrine, beginning first at the very definition of righteousness,
because thereupon depends the substance of the whole Controversy. For so
Osorius defines Righteousness, that it is a state of Soul founded on the Law of
God, and that bears a clear resemblance to the immutability of the Divine
Virtue. In like manner also Andradius not much differing from him.
Righteoufness, says Andrad. lib.6. de just. p. 459 Andrad. ibid. page 461.
he, is an unmovable equity, and government of mind, which measures all its
actions and counsels by the Law of God. And the same again presently:
Righteousness is a habit of mind fashioned by the Divine Law to obey that
Divine Law and Will, as it persuades to perform the Offices of every virtue,
andC. So that I need not here gather together the definitions of others of the
Party, of whom I find so many to be of the same Opinion, that they think a
Righteous Man should be defined from works of Righteousness, just as a wise Man
from Wisdom, a Musician from Music; and other Artificers are formally
denominated from the internal Skill they have in those Arts, and wherewith they
are endued, as says Tapperus; which would not Tapper. Artic. 8. de justit.
page 18.
seem very blameworthy to me, if they understood this of the Divine
Righteousness, whereby God is Righteous, or wherewith Angels are accomplished.
But as touching our Righteousness, who are Men, and Sinners, this definition
has no place here at all.

Therefore that I may answer you, An Answer whereby the definition of Osorius
is confuted.
Osorius, and yours to these things, first I think you are not a little
deceived in examining the nature of Righteousness, not that any thing is put in
the definition that I call false, or that it does not agree to the thing
defined. For he that governs all his actions with such constant reason and
equity, that in no part of his life he starts aside from truth and
righteousness, him I do esteem to be truly Righteous, yea to be God rather, or
next to God; verily I find no mortal man such. Therefore herein is your error,
A twofold sort of righteousness.
that whereas there is a twofold and diverse sort of Righteousness set before
us in Scripture, the one which is of the Law, and peculiar to God; the other
which is of Faith, and peculiar to us; you are only so taken up in defining the
one, that you do not at all touch upon the other, about which the chiefest
matter of Controversy is here: And so you proceed in setting forth the perfect
excellency of the Divine Righteousness, and justly so indeed to be accounted
of, that in the mean while you leave no Righteousness to Man at all. For what
Righteousness shall Man have, if Righteousness be so strictly defined, that it
cannot consist, but of works of perfect Righteousness, nor be communicated but
only to perfect men? For now seeing no men are so perfect in this World, but
that this miserable depravation of our Nature is far from this exactness, and
there is none (as Augustine witnesses) as long as he is in this life, who
pretends Aug. de tempore Sermon. 49.
himself to be just in the sight of God. By necessary Consequence it follows,
that either there is no Righteousness of ours at all in this life, or it must
be another than that which your definition thus circumscribes to us; for thus
you define it.

That it is an excellent state of mind conformed by the Divine Law, founded
Osor. lib. 5. page 114. a. b.
upon Divine Prescription, free from all wickedness, and coming near in its
resemblance to the Divine Nature, andC. And indeed in that state we were
Created in the beginning. But we have lost it long since, neither are we yet
perfectly restored, but we shall be restored at length by the Divine power and
bounty of Christ, on the day that this our corruption shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal body shall rise again to immortality. In which
state of Aug. de tempore, Sermon. 49.
Resurrection we believe with Augustine, that we shall fulfill Righteousness,
that is, we shall have complete Righteousness. In Comparison of that
Resurrection, says he, the whole life, that we now live is but dung, etc. And
where now is that excellent habit of mind, coming so near in its resemblance to
the Divine Nature? Where is that constant equity of reason, and moderation of
mind free from all sin? Or what do you think of this life, which Isaiah calls a
menstruous cloth, and Augustine Isaiaeb 1. 64.
calls dung, if it be compared with that which is true Righteousness.

Whereby you do evidently discern, as I suppose, what comes of this your famous
Theological Theory of Righteousness; for if there is no way of entering into the
Kingdom of life but by Righteousness, and no Righteousness (according to your
Opinion) can consist but of a perfect observance of the Divine Law, and dignity
of works, what follows then? You must either deny that we are sinners in this
life, and assert that we are righteous by works; or if according to Scripture
you confess us to be sinners, you must despoil us of all righteousness, and
shut us out of the Kingdom of God? And what will you say to Augustine, who
esteems all the Righteousness of this life as dung? What will you say to
Isaiah, Isa. 64. Phil. 3.
who says, it is as a menstruous cloth? What will you say to Paul, who
accounted it as loss? What will you say to Christ, who calls them that acquit
themselves most righteously, not only Servants, but also unprofitable Servants,
if Luke 17. Psel. 115. Romans 3. John 1. James 3.
the Scripture evidently testifies that every man is a Liar: If the beloved
Evangelist condemns him for a Liar, who would seem to himself to be free from
sin: If (according to the Testimony of Paul) we have come short of the glory of
God. If, as James testifies, in many things we offend all; if most holy Men in
Prayer cry daily, forgive us our sins; if Augustine does manifestly Aug. de
perfect. justitiae.
deny that any man, after he has obtained the remission of sins, has lived so
righteously in this flesh, or that he does live so righteously, that he has no
sin at all: If with one mouth the public consent of the most approved Fathers
testifies the same; if moreover continual private confessions, if Conscience it
self, which is as a thousand Witnesses, convince even thy self to be a
perpetual sinner, dare thou, who art a sinful man, confuted by thy own works,
dream yet of the righteousness of works, and promise Heaven to thy self, and
others by works? And does not Luke 18.
the example of the Pharisee in the Gospel affright you, who having been
deceived by a false Opinion of his own Righteousness, and who whilst flattering
himself, he thought he was not like other men, etc. He was yet so far from that
which he persuaded himself concerning himself, that he went away worse than
those whom he most despised in Comparison of himself. But how much more
modestly would you behave your self, if with a humble meekness restraining that
insolency of Spirit, you would either frame your self to the Example of David,
who durst not come forth into the presence of God, or would put on that most
humble mind of Tertullian, who comparing his Life with another Man, thou art a
Sinner, says he, like me, yea, a less Sinner than I, for I acknowledge a
pre-eminence in my sins, etc. At Tertul. lib. de paenitentia.
least you might and ought to be admonished by the sharp rebuke of the
Laodiceans, who when they had highly flattered themselves with a false
persuasion of their own righteousness, which they took upon them by works; They
did not in any other thing more displease the Apoc. 3.
Divine Judgment; therefore Augustine said right, let no man flatter himself:
Let Man take Sin, which is his own, and let him leave Righteousness to God, etc.

But what is that, let him leave Righteousness to God; but abandoning August.
in John, Hom. 48
all Righteousness of works, to confess our selves to be that which we are,
sinners, and God only to be just? Which also Saint Paul does more evidently
confirm in these words; to declare his Righteousness, that he may be just, and
the justifier of him who Romans 3.
Believe in Jesus. In which a twofold manner of Righteousness presents it self
unto us; of which the one is Divine, and is attributed to God only; the other
is only referred to men. That therefore is peculiar to God, this is called our
Righteousness; but what difference is between this and that, there is no great
difficulty to discern. For that which is the Righteousness of God, appears
evident in all his works, and the perfect exactness of his holiness. But that
which is the Righteousness of men, is received by Faith only; not that faith in
acting is wholly without works, but because in justifying, works do nothing
before God, and that is it which the Apostle seems to to intend in these words:
saying, for this purpose that he may be just, and the justifier of him, that is
of the faith Romans 3.
of Jesus Christ, etc. For this purpose, says he, that he may be just; how is
he just? by faith? no, but by works; that thou may be justified in thy
sayings, Psalm 51. Romans 3. God is justified one way, and men are justified
before God another way.
and may overcome when thou art judged. But now what way are we justified?
by works? not at all, but by Faith. Concerning which the Apostle: A justifier
of him who is of the faith of Jesus Christ, etc. He said not, him that behaved
himself well by working, but him that is of the faith of Jesus Christ Whence a
Disciple being witness, whosoever shall believe in Christ with a direct and
intent faith, it follows by necessary consequence that this Man is esteemed
Righteous, and is justified before God. For otherwise, to what purpose should
God be said to justify us by Faith, or what need would there be here of any
mention of faith at all, if holy works of themselves were sufficient to make up
a Righteousness?

By all which, things being thus deduced and confirmed, it is easy to
understand what should be judged of this your definition. For if there is no
other Righteousness, but that which by your definition is placed in holy works,
and a perfect obedience to the Law of God: it thence follows, that either
Nothing hinders us to be both Righteous and Sinners insa different account.
Sinners in our selves. Righteous in Christ.
we are not tainted with any sins at all, or that we must necessarily confess
that we are excluded from all possession of Righteousness. Both of which are
false; for though Sin and Righteousness, in respect of one and the same thing,
through a mutual Antithesis, whereby they are opposed one against another,
cannot come together, yet nothing hinders, but we may be both Sinners, and also
Righteous upon a different account. You will say, how can that be? If you know
not, (my good Friend,) I will tell you, and in a word, that you may understand
the more expeditiously. We are Sinners in our selves, we are Righteous
inChrist. Hereunto belongs the Mystery of Christ the Son of God given to us by
his Father, that he with all his works and benefits may become wholly ours, for
our right, and for our advantage. So he is said by the Isaiah 9.
Prophet to be born; so he is said to be given, not to himself, but to us: So
he was Righteous, so he fulfilled the Law, so he died and rose again, that his
life might be to us Righteounsness, his death might be Redemption, and his
Resurrection might be Life and Glory. Moreover, whatsoever is Christ's, yea,
whatsoever Christ. is, is not so much his own as yours; O Osorius! as mine,
Whole Christ is ours.
and as it is all ours that by Faith are Jesus Christ's. Therefore our
Salvation consists of the Redemption purchased by another, and not of our
works. For herein shines forth the more than stupendous mercy, and unspeakable
Grace of a most tender hearted God, that he even dedicated his only begotten
Son wholly to our advantage, that so whatsoever was performed by him, was
performed not for his sake, but for ours; neither had it respect to him who had
no private need, but it redounds as a public good to us all, Christ bears our
public person before the Father.
because he sustains the public person of All before his Father. Wherefore if
you desire to know, what is our Righteousness! Paul and Peter will show it to
you much better than it was defined by you. For our Righteousness is Christ,
our righteous Lord, through whose name, as What is our Righteousness according
to Paul.
many as believe in his name, receive Remission of sins. What more, I pray you,
would you require unto perfect Righteousness, than that sins may never be
imputed, and that the punishments due to your sins may never be inflicted on
you?

Concerning Inherent and Imputed Righteousness.
BUT perhaps it is not enough to you, that the sins you committed are not
imputed to you, but that nothing may be committed, which may be justly imputed.
And for that cause you think no man should be reckoned among the Just, but he,
whose life being upon all accounts untainted, is conformable to the perfect
rule of the Law, having abolished the footsteps of all sins. And indeed Osor.
de just. lib. 2. lib. 7. p. 187. lib. 9. p. 228.
that should be wished for, if wishes in this case could do any good: But you
will say that it is not difficult to the Infinite Power of the Almighty God, to
give strength to perform it to those that ask it of him: And again there is not
any thing more unsuitable to his Infinite Equity, and less Osor. de just. lib.
2. lib. 7. p. 187. lib. 9. p. 228.
honor able to his Infinite Goodness, than that he should command his Servants
those things, which he knows cannot be observed by them.

But in answer, First, If those things cannot be kept by us, which are
commanded by God, that comes not to pass through any default of his, but
through our default: who being at first created by him, God commands not any
thing which cannot be observed by men, according to the opinion of Osorius it
is no fault in God, if he command those things which cannot be kept by us.
very good, brought this disability upon our selves, and threw our selves into
that necessity of sinning. And then what if it so seemed good to his Omnipotent
Wisdom, to do thus for a Declaration of his own Righteousness, as St. Paul
teaches, for this purpose that he should be Righteous? that is, that his
Righteousness might by this means become the more evident through our
unrighteousness, which could not otherways have been, unless he only had, Romans
3.
been declared to be Righteous, and we upon the same account Unrighteous
according to Works. Which if it had not been so, what need had there been, why
There had been no need for God to Justify us by Faith, if we could be
justified by works, de justit. lib. 4. page 90.
he should justify us by Faith, whom he had seen to be righteous and perfect
by Works?

Yea, you say there is very great need of faith, and you add a reason: Because
all the means of destroying and restraining Lust consists in the Grace of God
alone, which must be obtained by Faith: and there is no other way showed to
extinguish and destroy it. Therefore Page 105. Preparation for Righteonsness.
Faith, as you say, prepares the Mind for Righteousness, and makes it fit, that
the great author of all good things should bring into it the seed of
righteousness.

What? And does Faith nothing but prepare us for Righteousness? But now, what
way does it prepare? Because, say you, the Grace of God is obtained by Faith
and the merit of Christ. But proceed; what follows after? For it is God only,
by whose Almighty Power and Bounty we break the force of Lust, and restrain all
its importunity, and maintain the perfect Offices of Virtue, etc. Who ever
denied, that it is God only that can do those things? But what say you. O good
friend? Is our whole Salvation and Righteousness in the sight of God, contained
in that only, in driving out of the Mind those little Heats of all evil Lusts,
whereof you speak, in abolishing the roots of all vices, and in maintaining
duly and constantly the office of perfect Virtue.

How far the Works of Human Life are from the perfection of Righteousness.
But now, do you your self perform all these things, which you require in us
for the perfection of righteousness? Has the great Husbandman watered the
happy ground of your mind, with so great a vigor and verdure of his bounty,
that no wild Vines nor Briars do any where appear in all your life? That no
Lust draws you aside from your duty? No perturbation of affections throws you
down from your state of constancy? No concupisence of the eyes defiles the
purity of your mind? He that sees a Woman, Mat. 5. Whatsoever things the law
(...) it says to those that are in the law, that every mouth may be stopped
and all the World may be guilty before God.
says he, to lust after her, has already committed adultery with her in his
Heart. What if a man is accounted unchaste before God, if so much as his Eyes
are Adulterous, if he is next to a Murderer that is so much as rashly angry at
his Brother; if he that calls his Brother Racha, or bespatters the name of his
Neighbor R. 3.
with the smallest reproach, is in danger of the Council; what shall be said to
him, who has poured forth, not only volumes of reproaches, but Cart-loads of
spiteful speeches against his Brethren and fellow Servants, with so much
virulency and gall of bitterness? So that I need not here go through all the
Precepts of the Divine Law, as concerning loving God above all, concerning the
strictest love to our Neighbor, concerning shunning offenses, putting up
injuries, praying for enemies, the abdication of this World, the framing the
Life to a Dove-like simplicity, and other such like things. Which things,
seeing they are so various in kind, and so difficult in the observation; I
would know of you, not what ought to be done, but what you your self do express
in deeds: Not what the Divine Grace is able to do in you, but what it does in
effect: Whether he heaps you up with so many and so great gifts of his, that
you are able to perform all things, that are written in the royal Law. Which if
you can avouch so to be, I willingly congratulate your happiness, and I am not
at all against your obtaining by way of merit, that which your works do merit,
but that you may go up to the Kingdom, and may take your self Unpinioned Wings,
as Arnobius saich wherewith you may go happily to Heaven, and 'may fly to the
Stars, where you may reign with Christ, and you only, all other sinners being
shut out, may with God overcome, when you are judged. But in the interim here
it comes into my mind to ask you a thing, How will this consist with that which
the Church Rev. 15. 4. The Ecclesiastical Hymn, thou only are holy. Hierom. ad
Ctesiphontem. Dial. 2.
sings in a holy Hymn, and sings so aright: Thou only art holy? For how shall
he only have the praise of that thing, as says Hierom, which he has common to
himself with many? What if you think there is no difference between his
Righteousness and ours, and you suppose there is no Righteousness but what
proceeds chiefly from Works; either let your life show to us the same Works,
which Christ wrought, or if you cannot, let him only have the honor of this
Title, that Christ only may be righteous, and Osorius may confess himself to be
unrighteous and a sinner, that now that saying may truly have place here,
which just now I cited out of Augustine. Let man take sin, Aug. in Io. Hom. 49.
to himself, which is his own, and leave Righteousness to God.

But, you will say, what then, is there no Righteousness which belongs to men?
I do not deny that there is, but it is such a righteousness, as must be sought
elsewhere than in works. But you may say, where then? Not only I, but also St.
Paul will tell you, the Righteousness of God, says he, to all, and upon all
that believe. And again in the Romans 3.
same Epistle: The Gentiles which followed not after Righteousness, laid hold
on Righteousness, to wit, the Righteousness of Faith: On the contrary, Romans 9.
Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, attained not unto the
Law of Righteousness. Why so? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as by
the Works of the Law. And writing to the Galatians, knowing, says he, that a
man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Gal. 2.
Faith of Jesus Christ, we also believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be
justified by the Faith of Jesus Christ, and not by the Works of the Law,
because no flesh shall be justified by the Works of the Law, etc. who is so
dimsighted but he may clearly see what the meaning of the Apostle is in these
words? Wherefore I the more wonder with my self, how great a stupidity darkens
the minds of some of our own Countrymen, and especially those Jesuits, who in
a thing so perspicuous yield not unto Apostolic Authority, so that they seem
to have sallied out of some Trophonian Den, for no other purpose, but that
waging War with St. Paul, they may differ wholly from him in their opinion. For
what things can more fiercely encounter than such 1 Cor. 1. Romans 4. Romans 11.
Hab. 2.
an opposition as this, Christ is our Righteousness? Faith is imputed for
Righteousness: If of Work, then Grace is not Grace. The Just lives by Faith.
And after this manner does the Apostle and Prophet instruct us. What, say they?
We are Justified by Romans 4. Gal. 3. 2 Timothy 1. Ephesians. 2.
Works, and yet Grace is no less Grace. The Just does not live by Faith, but
the Believer Lives by the righteousness of Works. And whereas Paul does so
attribute our Righteousness to Tit. 3. Romans 11. Phil. 3. Romans 4. Romans 9.
Faith only, that he attributes nothing to Works, so often repeating these
exclusive words, without works, apart from works, not according to works. If it
is Grace, then it is not of Works: That I may be found in him, not having my
own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is of the Faith of Jesus
Christ: To him that believes in him that Iustifies the Ungodly, Faith is
imputed unto Righteousness: also placing Jews and Gentiles as in a Scheme, that
by experience it self it may be evident how hazardous it is, to seat the hope
of Salvation any otherways than in the Faith of Christ only. On the contrary,
those men overthrowing all these sayings of Paul, endeavor this only by all
the means they can, that they may measure the whole sum of our Justification by
the performance of Works, and not by Faith; that they may take away all
imputation of the Righteousness of another from us, that Faith may no more
contribute any thing to Righteousness, but that it may render us worthy and
fit, on whom the Divine Grace should. confer freely for the Merit of Christ,
the first infusion Council. Trident. Sess. 6.
of inherent Righteousness. By which new qualities being received for the Merit
of Christ, now man himself by that inherent Righteousness (as their words
express it) merits a greater and fuller righteousness, reconciliation and
adoption, and at length Life Eternal. Moreover, they proceed so far, that they
assert, there is no Righteousness at all, but that which is peculiar to every
man, and they so define it, that in all the nature of Righteousness there is no
place at all for faith, and there appears not A definition of rig hteousness
according to the Jesuits of Colonia. Censur. Coloniensis 186 frat Alpbonsus
Philip 4. p. 34.
so much as any mention thereof. For thus they define it, the righteousness of
God, which is revealed in the Gospel, is a virtue in God which distributes to
every one according to their deserving. Alphonsus adds, Evangelical
righteousness is an equal proportion of merits to rewards.

I beseech you, Pious Reader, those that profess such vile and absurd things,
will any man suppose that they have been exercised with serious meditation at
any time in the holy Scriptures, or that they have not rather bestowed their
whole age and wits in Heathenish and Aristotelian trifles? But now it will not
(...) amiss to take notice with what props of reason they confirm these their
opinions.

Against the Jesuits and their Topic Arguments, whereby they confirm Inherent
Righteousness out of Aristotle.
WHAT, say they, have you not at any time read that form of Argum. ex Topicis
Aristot. 1 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 5. Romans 4. 3.
reasoning in Aristotle? He is righteous, therefore he is endued with
righteousness; Such a man is learned, therefore he has learning? We have read
it, Say they, in the Topics of Aristotle. That is true indeed. But have ye not
also at any time read in the Epistles of Paul, these forms of speaking, Christ
is our Righteousness? We are made the righteousness of God by him? faith is
imputed unto righteousness? Answer to the Iesuitical quibbles.
the Just shall live by faith? What then? Shall we believe Aristotle more than
Paul? We believe Fishermen, Says Ambrose, not Logicians. And should we
translate our Faith, which we owe to God with faithful Abraham unto men that
are Sophisters? But now, lest those Jesuits should say, that they are not
answered, let us look more nearly into the force of their argument, and pierce
them through with their own Dart. They deny that ever this external attribution
was heard of since the World was; that a thing should receive a name
extrinsically from qualities, that can be within, so that they should be
accounted righteous before God, not by inherent qualities, but the
righteousness of another, to wit, Christ's, which is applied to us by Faith,
etc. And indeed this Reason taken out of Aristotle, might perhaps be of some
force, if they had omitted these words (before God.) But now seeing there is a
twosold and diverse righteousness, the one which is called the righteousness of
the Law, the other which is called the righteousness of Faith; and seeing the
judgments of God and the judgments of men do differ, they do foolishly and
ridiculously argue from humane things to divine, from the righteousness of the
Law, to the righteousness of Faith; for men are not justified in the sight of
God upon the same account that they are esteemed righteous before men. Yea,
oft-times it happens otherways, that those whom this World does most cry up,
and judges just by their inherent qualities, God condemns the same men chiefly
of unrighteousness out of those very same qualities: and so on the contrary
part, Men judge by qualities, but God judges otherwise.
This may easily appear evident by the Example of the Pharisee and the
Publican, either of which if they were to be valued according to the inherent
merits of their life, what cause was there, I beseech you, why the Publican
should go home more righteous than the Pharisee?

Even as with a like diversity the Scripture sometimes names them dead, whom
humane Philosophy would judge to be alive, and in perfect health. Suffer ye,
Says he, the dead to bury their dead. But pray how dead? who, unless they were
alive, they could not bury their dead? What shall we then say? that the
Scripture lies, in calling them dead, which were alive? Or does that Iesuitical
Rule rather lie, which judges those alive by reason of their inherent
qualities, whom the Scripture calls dead? How shall these things, so contrary
to one another, agree together? But that it is one thing to live, to be dead,
and to be righteous before God, and another thing before Men. The Books of Holy
Scripture are full of such Examples, and they have been often heard of and seen
by Men; and yet after all these things, those pleasant Gymnosophists deny, that
this external attribution was ever heard of since the World was, that a thing
should receive a name extrinsecally from qualities, whose nature is to be
within. Is it so indeed that this was not heard of since the beginning of the
World? what do I hear? have ye not then, good men, read these words of the
Apostle in the Holy Scriptures of God? By the disobedience of one man many were
made sinners; and again, by the obedience of one man many shall be made
Righteous. I pray you, what is the meaning of these words, by the disobedience
of one many are sinners? Again, by the obedience of one many are righteous?
Does this attribution seem internal to you, or rather external? was that
rebellion peculiar to Adam, or was it ours? If it was ours, how was it ours,
but by external imputation? What? when you hear these words of the Apostle: He
made Christ to become sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God through him, 2 Cor. 5.
etc. Did either of us receive from qualities that can be said to be within;
he, that he was made sin, or we, that we are called and made righteousness
through him? Moreover, what is that, when the Publican in the Gospel is said to
have gone to his house justified rather than the Pharisee? what was the cause
why the one went away justified, and the other went away unjustified? I think
it came not so to pass by a habit of inherent righteousness, but upon this
account rather, because the Publican confessed his own unrighteousness,
therefore of wicked he is made righteous; the other, because he seemed
righteous to himself, through a false opinion of his own righteousness, was
manifested to be unrighteous Prove. cap. 8.
according to the testimony of Holy Scripture: The Righteous Man no sooner
speaks than he accuses himself; and in another place, confess thy sins, that
thou may be justified; therefore that aying of Augustine seems worthy of
Praise; this is the true way to perfection, if every man acknowledge Aug. ad
Boniface, lib. 3. cap. 7.
in truth, and confess in humility his own impersection. And Bernard spoke no
less to the purpose, who bids us consider the Pharisee praying; he was no
Robber, said he, nor unjust, nor an Adulterer, nor careless of Fastings, nor
unmindful of the poor, nor unthankful to God, what then was wanting?

This one thing was wanting, that Bernard in Dominic. Sermon. 3.
he took no care to know what was wanting to him, but made the most of his own
merit, and therefore returned empty. On the contrary, the Publican, who emptied
himself, and took care to bring an empty vessel, received the more plentiful
grace.

By these things I suppose it is By what Righteousness they are justified
before God, by Christ's, or our own.
sufficiently evident, what this Righteousness is, and of what sort, which
makes us righteous before God, whether it is Christ's or ours? If it is Christ's,
it is not ours? How then of works of our righteousness? If it is ours, it is
not Christ's: how is a man of wicked made righteous? If of wicked he is made
righteous, that I may speak in the words of Augustine, what are the Aug. in
Psalm. 31.
works of wicked men? Let the wicked man now boast of his works, I give to the
Poor, I take nothing away from any man, etc. then thou art in this thy boast
wicked, and thy works are none. These things said he, therefore it is a false
Opinion, which men plead for, to wit, that a man cannot be called righteous by
an external righteousness. Neither is it less Ass-like which those Balqamites
do bray, who say, that it is the same thing for a man to be thus Righteous; as
if a man should say, an Ass with the form of an Ass is a Mon; for by Faith we
are called faithful, and by righteousness wear called righteous, etc. Be it so
indeed, that no Man should rightly be called righteous, but upon the account of
Righteousness; what then, seeing Christ is our righteousness, is there not
sufficient cause upon that account why we should be called righteous? should
any man require a better righteousness than that which is Christ's? And what
form of expressing, though external, can hinder, but that the righteousness
which is peculiar to Christ, may also be called ours, and may be common both to
him and us, especially seeing he is wholly ours with his merits, virtues,
benefits, and all his goods? Christ is wholly ours, with all his good things.
which qualities, though they are not properly in our selves, yet being
received from him, they pass likewise into our possession. As the Bodies of the
Stars and Planets, though dark of themselves, yet they shine and are made
bright, not with their own, but another light, to wit, being enlightened with
the light of the Sun; just so it comes to pass to us, that we are made
Righteous, Kings, Priests, Sons and Heirs of God, not by any property of our
nature or condition of works, but because the Son and Heir himself is said to
be made Sin and a Curse for us, not for any sin inherent in him, but imputed to
him.

Argument. But here again, and again those impure Sophisters object, As Christ
was made sin, so we are made righteous. But Christ was not made sin by inherent
sin. Therefore we also are not made righteous by inherent rightcousness.
that this was never heard from Aristotle, and that it is not agreeable to
reason, that he should be called learned, that has no learning, or righteous,
that is not endued with righteousness. And perhaps that may seem true in moral
virtue: Now seeing there is a twofold righteousness, as I have said, one which
they call Ethick, another which is Theological, that consists in manners, this
in faith; we must judge far otherwise of this than of that. For the
righteousness of which Aristotle treats, as it is a moral virtue distinguished
from prudence, courage, and temperance, thus it is referred to the habits of
the mind and internal qualities, according to which men are denominated of what
sort they are by Philosophers.

And though we confess this to be true in some respect, it does not at all hurt
our cause nor discourage our enterprise in clearing this point.

For all this Controversy undertaken by us drives at this, that we should
search for a righteousness, which is no moral humane virtue, but which is a
Spiritual Grace and gift of God, which is not ours, but which is proper to
Christ; whence he only is called holy and just, and we are called justified in
him, not upon the account of works, but faith, which God imputes for
righteousness unto them that believe in his name. And hence it is rightly
called the righteousness of faith, and therefore The Righteousness of Faith.
faith it self is righteousness; whereby we are accounted righteous before God,
being endued not with that external righteousness, about which those men
Philosophize, but being beautified and adorned with a peculiar and most
internal righteousness, which being so, who sees not that it is false and
sophistical which those men take out of Aristotle; that we are justified by
works, or should upon no account be called just? why so? because no man can be
called just but upon the account of the righteousness, which every man
possesses for his own in himself. For thus do those sharp-witted Men argue, who
cannot endure the free justification of Faith. To whom, that I may make answer,
let us hear this first from them: Whether faith, whereby we believe in Christ,
seems to them a virtue or not? If they judge so, Internal and inherent
righteousness whereby we are justified according to the Gospel.
I ask whether it is a moral virtue, or a theological? And then whether it is
internal, and inherent, being inwardly placed, or whether it should be called
external? If faith is an internal thing, and the same is our righteousness in
the fight of God. Why then should not this seem an allowable form of arguing
against the Jesuits, who deny that we are otherwise justified than by internal
and inherent righteousness?

Argument.
Ma. Our Faith is Righteousness before God.

Mi. Our Faith is an internal and inherent virtue.

Concl. Therefore we are made Faith is a most internal and inherent
righteousness.
righteous before God by an internal and inherent virtue.

But here again the Adversaries object, that they do not at all deny, but that
Faith is an internal virtue in us, which nevertheless makes us faithful, but
makes us not just. Why so? because we are said to be faithful from faith, but
we are said to be righteous only from righteousness; O sweet and understanding
men! as if those who are faithful in Christ Jesus, were not also just before
our God, or as if these things should only be looked upon in their names, and
needed not to be considered rather in their causes and effects. And what will
they then say to these words of Paul, being justified by faith we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ? What if the cause being granted, the
effect also must necessarily be granted, and faith is a justifying cause (as
the Apostle witnesses) how can it be, that those who receive the name of
faithful from faith, should not also upon the same account receive the cause of
righteousness, whence they are not only called righteous, but made so also in
reality.

And these things we have said by the by, against the objections of the
Jesuits; who seeing they so strictly examine the Divine Theorems of our
Religion, according to the Logical forms of arguing, it is reasonable that we
also should keep them entangled, and expedite our selves out of their nets, as
much as may be. Here therefore, seeing they require of us Arguments conformed
unto the modes of Aristotle, let them so receive them.

Argument.
Ma. Men from Righteousness are rightly and formally called Righteous.

Mi. The Faith of Christ is Righteousness imputed to us by God.

Concl. Therefore from Faith men are rightly and formally called righteous
before God.

Again.
Ma. They that do justly should be called just before God.

Mi. They that believe in the Son of God do most justly.

Concl. Therefore they that believe This is the work of God, that ye should
believe in him whom he has sent. John. 6.
in the Son of God, are deservedly called just.

For what can any man do more justly, or more holily, than to believe in the
only begotten Son of God, and to embrace him with all his faith, as the Gospel
bears witness. This is the work of God, that ye should believe in him, whom he
has sent. And what Doctrine is more excellent, than to know Christ the Son of
God aright, and the power of his Death, and Resurrection? Which knowledge, how
much it is valued by God above all other disciplines and arts, it may appear by
this, which is foretold unto us of Christ by the Divine Prophet, and my
Righteous Servant, says he, by his Knowledge shall justify many. What if our
Justification is placed only in the knowledge of the Son of God, and the Faith
of the Son is nothing else but knowledge Divinely Inspired; what credit then
should be given to those Iesuitical Sophisters, who neither admit of any
external cause of justifying, nor acknowledge any other but this, which they
themselves place in Works.

And now what will they answer to this Argument of Augustine? Augustine.


Ma. Whence we are saved, thence we are just.

Mi. By Faith we are saved and reconciled to God, and become Conquerors;
according to that saying of the Gospel: This is the Victory, which overcomes
the World; our Faith.

Conclu. Therefore, by Faith the name of Righteousness is rightly given to us,
according to the Testimony of Augustine.

But those Praters will not yet hold their Peace, neither do they endure any
either Internal or External Righteousness, but this only which they describe in
Works, and the observance of the Law: And they endeavor to prove it by this
caption. First then as touching Faith, though that is an internal Virtue, yet
they plead that it does not otherways justify, but upon the account of
Charity. But thus they dispute concerning the righteousness of Christ: Because
it is not our own, but is peculiar to Christ. There is no cause why a Man
should take upon him the Name of Righteous, from that Righteousness, John 3. So
God loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that all that believe
in him, etc. Romans 8.
which is another; to wit, according to the Law of Aristotle. Which how
frivolous it is, and contrary to the Faith of the Gospel, it will not be
difficult to demonstrate by very clear words of Scripture; for, to what purpose
is the Divine Love Preached in the Gospel, and in the Prophets, to have given
Christ his only begotten Son unto the World: Unless he had been willing to make
us partakers together with him of all his Wealth, Virtues, Merits, and
whatsoever good things belong to him? Whence Paul. He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us
all things? What if Christ was given to us byhis Father, poured forth, exposed,
and is wholly made ours, with all his goods and gifts, is there any thing in
him, whether Wisdom, or Justice, or Sanctification, or Life, or Victory, or
Death, or any other thing 1 Cor. 1. A rule of Law, that which a Man does by
another, he seems to have done by himself.
besides, which we may not by a due right lay claim to as our own? If it is
ours, upon what account then do those Gymnosophists Preach that it belongs not
to us? Of which thing we may reason thus.

Ma. Whatsoever Christ did for us, is esteemed ours, just as if it had been
done by our selves.

Mi. Christ fulfilled all Righteousness for us.

Conclu. Therefore all the Righteousness of Christ is ours by Faith, just as if
it had been fulfilled by us.

It is (...) by the Example of Adam, that Christ's Righteousness is ours.
PErhaps the thing will appear more evident by Example. Let us look upon Adam,
and in him let us behold the public calamity of our Nature: And also let us
contemplate Salvation restored again by the second Adam, from the ruin
received by the first.

For, if the Doctrine and Force of contraries be the same, according to
Philosophers, it will be more easy by that means from the Evil of the one, to
judge of the advantages of the other. Then let us compare both Adams with one
another, The first Earthly A comparison of Adam and Christ.
of the Earth, with this second Heavenly from Heaven! Who though in their whole
Nature they are most different one from another: Yet by the singular Wisdom of
God, it so comes to pass, that there is a wonderful resemblance between things
that differ very much and the reason of our Salvation being restored, agrees
most aptly with the reason of the ruin received.

First, in this, that both were Originally Princes, and Authors of our
Propagation, one of the Earthly and the The former Adam, a Type of the second.
Romans 5.
other of the Heavenly. And then afterward there was added another thing in
which he was a wonderful Type and Image of Christ who was to come a long time
after. How that came to pass we shall very well learn of Paul himself. As,
says he, by the Disobedience of one Man many were made Sinners: So by the
Obedience of one, many shall be made Righteous: and doubling the same again and
again in many words: As, faith he, by one Man Sin entered into the World, and by
Sin Death came upon all Men, in that all have Sinned, etc. And presently: If
therefore by the Sin of one Man, Death came upon all Men to Condemnation; in
like manner by the Justification of one Man, good is propagated unto all Men to
the Justification of Life. What is more clear than these words of the Apostle?
The whole force and sum of the Argument drives at this, that the true Nature
of our Righteousness is not due to our Virtues, but we must be beholden for it
to the merit of another. Setting before us such a sense as this by Argument.

Argument.
Ma. In what manner Unrighteousness is propagated in the World, in the same
manner also Righteousness comes.

Mi. Unrighteousness is propagated by the Sin of one Man As Evil was (...) ed
by the Sin of one, so good is propagated by the Justification of one; by the
Disobedience of one, many were made Sinners, Romans 5.
Only.

Conclu. Therefore, also Righteousness by the merit of one only, is derived
unto all that are allied to Christ by Faith.

Otherways.
Ma. As the matter is between Adam and us, after the same manner is the matter
between us and Christ.

Mi. The sin of one Adam is imputed to all his Posterity, yea, all As many dyed
by the Sin of one, so by the grace of one, many are justified, Romans 5.
those who transgressed not with him.

Conclu. Therefore: The Righteousness of one Christ is imputed to all his
Posterity, to wit, that believe in him; though they did not obey with him.
Which things, After what manner the sin of one, is imputed unto all; in like
manner also the Righteonsness of one is imputed to all: Otherways there would
be no resemblance between Christ and Adam.
seeing they are of themselves clear and conspicuous, the Point calls us to
return to you, O most excellent Osorius, who seem either not to head carefully
enough, or else perniciously to deny that which Paul Discourses of Imputation,
so copiously and weightily: Wherefore again, and again beseeching you, I appeal
to this sacred Righteousness, whereof you write, and also to the equity of your
own humanity; that having somewhat cleared your Eyes, you may search more
exactly into the meaning of the Apostles debate, and the force of his reasons.
And first, I would have you see, into this, what it is the Divine Apostle
chiefly treats of here, what he breaths after, what he drives at by this
similitude, whereby he compares Adam together with Christ, and proposes him as
a Type and Figure of Christ. But where there is a Type, it is necessary there
should be Adam a Type of Christ.
something, which by certain agreement of similitude may be answerable to the
Type. On the contrary, where there is no agreement, there is no Type: Where
there is no signification, there is no similitude discerned. Now whereas the
former Adam, Wherein the similitude of Adam and Christ consists.
bears a type and resemblance of him that was to follow; let us consider in
what this similitude consists. What, in propagating sin? Not at all in the very
Nature of the Persons? What is more unlike? Where then is similitude? To wit,
not in the persons, nor things themselves, but only in the manner of the thing.
But it must be explained what that manner is: For herein lies all the
controversy between us and the Papists. For otherways as touching the things
themselves, and the Persons, we are well enough agreed in that, for there is no
Man who is asked concerning Adam, and concerning Christ, but will answer
concerning both, according as the thing is in truth, that he is by nature
earthly, and in his life a Sinner, and that he brought upon us not only an
Example, but also a cause of sinning by a certain venomous contagion of Nature.
And on the contrary, that Christ is from Heaven Heavenly, and most pure from
all defilement of sin, and that he only is the Savior of the World. Concerning
which, if I am not mistaken, there is an agreement between us and our
Adversaries: But concerning the manner how these either good or evil things,
come to us from these two Originally, herein consists all the matter of
controversy between us. for as there are many who think we are no other way
guilty, but that by the example of sinning; we imitate Adam A ^
the first Author of Sinning; So you may see many, who think we are upon no
other account righteous and acceptable to God; but that being helped by Grace,
we attain unto Christ's most Holy Works, and his most pure Innocence of Life, or
do very nearly resemble the same. Who though they seem to say something, yet is
not all contained in that: For though good Education, and imitation wisely
used, has no small influence Imitation of Life.
for the becoming Virtuous, whereby it may come to pass, that some perhaps may
seem less wicked than others, and in some respect to excel others in the praise
of Piety: But imitation, or any instruction of discipline will never perform
this: In short, nor any way besides will be sufficient for this, that you may
shake form off your neck that which you drew from Adam, or that you should
attain that which is in Christ, that is, that you should appear righteous in
Christ to be seen in Adam.
the sight of God; unless Christ come in to your succor another way, than by
any of your endeavors how great soever You will say, After what manner is all
this? No Men can tell you that better than St. Paul: For after what manner the
former Adam ruined you, after the same manner the Second Adam Christ restores
you. That first Author of your kind, whilst thou was not yet born, killed thee
in the root by his, not by thy rebellion. and drew thee into misery and
destruction. In Adam behold Christ, for in like manner, being born and having
dyed for thee, by his won Innocence, not by thine, has restored thee again to
true (...) and Paradise. As therefore the transgression of Adam was imputed to
thee, who did not Sin, after the similitude of his transgression: So the
Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto thee, who did not Work after the
similitude of Christ. In the The severity of the Judgment of God in Adam again
the excellency of Mercy in Christ.
one of whom behold the severity of Judgment, in the other the excellency of
Grace. What if this perhaps seems hard and strange to any Man in Adam, that I
should suffer the punishment of another Man's Sin, and that those should be
punished for the crime of another, who committed nothing. (For it must needs be
another Man's crime; seeing I am deprived of Righteousness not for my own fault,
but for the fault of my Parent.) Let this same Man again, leaving Adam, cast
back his Eyes upon Christ: In whom the bounty of a most plentiful clemency
makes amends, by a counterpoize for the severity of the former Judgment: For
from one Man Death passed upon all, on them also who sinned not: And justly,
Though I do not so much regard merit here, I only consider the manner of the
thing. Come then, let us compare the Type with the Antitype; from the
disobedience of one Man, as I said, death passed upon all Men, who sinned not
after his example; which is a thing that cannot be denied. After the same
manner again, from the Righteousness of one Man, Life is communicated unto all,
who did not like him work Righteousness, which is agreeable by the like reason;
for otherways Christ could not agree to his Type. Here now The Type is compared
with the Archetype.
consider, whosoever thou art, Christian Reader, whether the judgments of God
in Adam should be more dreaded by thee, in which the severity of God imputed
unto thee, being not yet born, that which thou had not committed, or mercy in
Christ the Lord, should be more loved, who, tothee, not working, but believing
in him, that justifies the wicked, imputes the Righteousness thou did not
deserve.

By which you see, worthy Man, if Paul the Apostle should be credited, how
unworthy of any credit your Doctrine is, whereby you take away the Grace of all
Imputation, and leave no Righteousness besides to miserable Sinners, but what
every Man purchases by his own good deeds; which how true it is, let us examine
by that place of Paul, which convinces you of a Lie, and a shameful Error by
this most evident Argument.

Argument.
Ma. After what manner Christ was made sin for us, after the like manner we are
made the Righteousness of God by Christ.

Mi. Christ was made sin for us no other way, but by Imputation only.

Concl. Therefore we are made Righteous before God no other way but by
imputation only.

I beseech you? by your Chatholick Charity what will you say? or what will you
feign, O most dear Osorius, to this so clear evidence of manifest Scripture? Do
you not see that you are tied on every side with Bonds that are Apostolic and
wholly of Adamant? Now what Turning, what Hole to escape at can you find?
Christ is made sin for us. Wherefore? That we might be made the Righteousness
of God by him, says the Apostle: Will you deny it? I suppose you will not:
What way then was he made sin? Will you say by committing it? No, By Imputation
then? Certainly it is so: Right indeed; What if he who knew no sin, is made a
sinner before God, by the imputation of the sin of another? What, and shall not
we who are by nature unrighteous, in like manner be made Righteous before God
by the same dispensation of mercy and imputation? What can hinder but that as
the rebellion of one was imputed to us all to destruction, after the same
manner the obedience of one may be imputed to us all for Salvation? Let your
Wisdom consider what you should answer in this case, not only to me, but also
to Paul. But now, that this may be more clear, first, you see this common and
fatal necessitv of Dying, whereunto all mortal men are liable: which with the
same Foot beats at the Gates of Kings Palaces, and at the Doors of Poor men's
Cottages. Now I would know of you. whence this cause and necessity of dying had
its first original, and began to make havoc? Whether through our fault, or the
fault of another? You will say, not through our fault. What if Death had
snatched your self away in your Infancy, you had then deserved nothing your
self: And yet was you not then born on that condition that you could dye?
Verily many Infants and Innocents are daily snatched away, who deserved nothing
themselves, yet they were born on those very Death took its beginning of making
havoc from the Sin of one, not of many.
Terms that they were Mortal and liable to dye at some time. Why so I beseech
you? Unless it be because they proceed from him, the Transgression of which one
Man was imputed to all, to suffer the punishment of Death; so that that The
heaviness of Justice was again made amends for, and over-balanced by as great
mercy. 2 Cor. 5.
is cause sufficient why you should dye, because you are propagated from him,
who deserved Death; you will say by a hard enough Law. I also would fay the
same with you, unless the same Justice of the Eternal Deity had opposed an
equal remedy to this great calamity, making amends for, and alfo over-balancing
just severity with a like kind of mercy. You will say, what way? That way which
St. Paul mentions in this place, he that knew no Sin, says he, was made Sin
for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God through him. What is
that, I pray you, to be made sin for us, but to undergo what was due to our
Sins? Which if the most merciful Father condescended to Translate unto his only
begotten Son, not for any demerit of his, but for our sakes only. Verily it
cannot be, neither is it agreeable to the Justice of God, nor to reason
neither, that he should punish both his own Son, and us also for our Sins; so
that one of those two must needs follow, that if Christ has made satisfaction
for us, either Justice has nothing now in us, that it may accuse us of: Or if
it have, it is false then, which is mentioned in this place by Paul: Christ was
made Sin for us; and that is false, which we hear in the Prophet. And he shall
bear their iniquities, etc. For how did he bear them, if they remain Isaiah 53.
yet tobe born by us? Whence the Apostle concluding very well, he reasons to
this purpose: That we might be made, says he, the Righteousness of God through
him, as if he had said; as Christ did bear our Sins, so also we do bear his
Righteousness. He was punished not for his own Sins, but ours; in like manner
we are endued with Righteousness, which is not ours but his.

In which thing the admirable Artifice The Blood of Redemption encountering
with Righteousness, yet not violating Righteousness but Redeeming it.
of our Redemption is seen: Where Mercy encountering with Justice does so
contend that it overcomes also, and yet so overcomes, that in the mean while
there is not made any violation of Justice, but a just recompense for sins. For
as unjust as it is, that he, who was free from sin, should suffer the
punishment of sin for the guilty; It is again as unjust, that our sins already
expiated in him for us, should again be punished in us by the judgment of
condemnation. And upon a different account how just it was, that the sin of
one, who sustained the person of all nature, should be propagated unto all that
came of him, and should be given to public condemnation: Again, it is as
agreeable to Justice, that the obedience of one man, who undertook the cause
and person of all men, should be likewise communicated to all regenerated of
him, to the imputation of righteousness.

But you on the contrary plead, that it seems not to be just at all, that any
man should seem just by another man's righteousness, who is unrighteous himself.
I answer to the contrary, and thus I plead; neither An Answer.
was it just that Christ being innocent should be (...) into the condemnation
of Death, who was in himself free of all spots; You object to me the definite
nature of Justice: Which because it is a virtue, giving to every man according
to his desert, therefore you argue that it cannot be, but it must measure unto
all men by equal right, whatsoever is due to their merits: Be it so, and why
then does not this same justice, my good friend, distribute to Christ the Son
of God according to his deserving? Why is the innocent beaten with stripes? Why
is he torn unjustly with punishments? wherefore contrary to his deserving,
contrary to Right and Justice is he drawn to the judgment of Death, and being
innocent, is stretched forth upon the Cross? What can you answer me in this
case? What say you? What have you, whereby you may defend this distributive
Justice? What will Justice it self bring for it self, which is the most exact
and perfect of all things, so often proclaimed by you, and in so many books;
Which it may probably make a pretense for the receiving of so great an injury?
Except that it may say this only: That we, and the sins of us all, came under
punishment in this one most innocent body of his, and there were with deserved
punishments most justly recompensed by God.

Which unless it were so, Justice The singular providence of the Eternal God in
governing the business of our Redemption.
it self had sinned against him most unjustly. Now the singular Providence of
the Most High Artist has governed the matter with that moderation, that he did
both wisely look to the glory of his own Son, and our Salvation, and also to
his own justice, so that there is nothing wherein his Justice may be accused,
neither is any thing found in us, in which the very Law of Justice may justly
Romans 6.
condemn us: Whence it is rightly said by the Apostle, that there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

For otherwise, to what purpose did Christ dye, if he died not for sins and
sinners? or how did he dye for sins, if the punishment of sin remains to be
suffered again by us? How was he made sin and a curse for us, if we yet fall
under the Curse? Or what fruit will redound to us from this most Holy
Sacrifice, if Christ by the right of Redemption has not taken away that which
is due to our sins by the Law Christ Iustifies Sinners, but what Sinners?
of Justice? But if he took it away, where is then the condemnation due to
Sinners? I speak of those Sinners, who being turned from their sins by serious
Repentance, fly to Christ by Faith. But methinks I do already hear what your
Divinity in this case will mutter against us: you will not deny that Christ
died for us, and that our righteousness is placed in him, but yet so, that
these benefits of his, and rewards of justice, come not to us by Faith, nor by
imputation, but by the study of Works and Holiness, which being given to the
Merits of Christ, we receive in this Life by the free gift of God. Therefore,
Oso. dejust. lib. 7.
that we who were of old, shut up in darkness; And even extinct by the strength
of death, now we do escape the tyranny of Death, that we do now recover the
gifts of divine righteousness formerly lost and slipped out of our hands: and
that we obtain the reward of life proposed to virtue, all that consists in
this, that we should wholly abdicate and forsake whatsoever we have from our
first Father, and transfer our selves wholly to the similitude and imitation of
our second Father, and so it will come to pass that we shall purchase immortal
and divine riches, and eternal glory and true righteousness, with everlasting
praise, not by our merits, but only by the virtue of Christ, Who works all
these things in us.

Therefore according to this sort The whole nature of our Salvation consists in
nothing else but in the imitation of Christ, and expressing a resemblance of
him according to Osorius.
of Divinity the merits of Christ do nothing else in Heaven, but that they
obtain unto us Divine Grace, whereby we may by way of imitation more easily
resemble the most holy footsteps, and similitude of Christ our second Father,
and lead our lives well in this World according to his Laws. But now what if we
cannot exactly follow the footsteps of his holiness? What if imitation falter
sometimes and stagger? What if the servency of charity, and the care of our
most holy Religion, and the observance of Justice becomes too remiss? Yea, what
if somewhere a defilement of sin creeps in, as infirmity may occasion? Or, what
if, that I may use the words of Hierom, he that rows a Boat against the stream,
slacken his hands a little, does he not presently slide back, and is carried by
the stream whither he would not? and who is not remiss sometimes? Seeing Paul
also confesses that he is sometimes drawn thither whither he would not: And
then where is the righteousness which was hoped for by Works? where is the
immortality proposed to virtue? Verily unless the greater mercy of our most
gracious Father, had so taken care for us, that our whole Salvation should be
laid up in the righteousness of his Son, and if faith and imputation did not
help us more than imitation of life, our condition had stood on a miserable
enough, and too broken foundation. But eternal thanks be to Almighty God the
Father of all mercies, who, according to his unspeakable Wisdom, which reaches
from end to end strongly, and disposes all things sweetly, has not settled our
estate by any law of works, but by faith, that according to Grace the Promise
may be sure to all the Seed, that though we our selves are weak, and void of
all righteousness, yet it is sufficient, that there is one in our Nature which
has fulfilled all righteousness, and that he only is righteous for all. How,
say you, for all? Why not, as well as the unrighteousness of one Adam of old
was sufficient to bring ruin upon all? Therefore let us behold Christ in Adam,
and compare the one with the other. Who, though they are very unlike to one
another, yet agree in this, that both being First Fathers of Propagation, by an
equal similitude something came from both as Progenitors, which has spread
abroad upon all Men. To wit, Death and Life; Sin, and justice. Therefore one In
what respect the similitude of Christ and Adam agrees.
Man destroyed all Men: And in like manner one Man saves all Men; neither do
you your self deny this. But let us see how the one destroys, and how the other
saves those that Death and Sin from Adam.
are destroyed: Through his fault, say you, not our own, we contracted the
pollution of Sin in our Birth, Osor. de just. lib. 7. p. 179. Osorius is
opposed to Osorius.
these are your very words. Which, as I entertain willingly, so if they are
true, and if he in this respect was a Type of Christ, which is showed out of
Paul, what hinders but that we also in like manner in Regeneration may obtain
the reward of Righteousness, not for our own Obedience, but his? The one
sinned, and by his wickedness ruinated all Men; the other obeyed, and by his
righteousness saves all. You say, it is true, if so be we lead our Life well
according to the Imitation and Example of him. And where then is the agreement
of similitude between Christ and Adam? if the one destroyed us in our being
Born, as you your self confess, but Christ cannot save us in our Regeneration,
except Imitation be joined. And where now is the Grace of Imputation, and the
Imputation of Faith unto Righteousness, so often repeated in the Scriptures,
taught by the Apostles, testified by the most Ancient Fathers, received and
delivered by the Church? Shall it be sufficient cause to inflict Death upon thy
Body that thou wast propagated from Adam, and shall it not have cause enough
for the justification of thy Soul, that thou art born again in Christ? What say
you? Do none dye, but they that Sin after the Example of Adam? Are none saved
but those that by a due imitation attain unto the most Holy Virtues of Christ?
And what then does Baptism, the Only by being propagated from Adam, we perish:
And why are we not as well saved by being born again from Christ?
Sacrament of Faith in Regeneration, if Salvation is purchased by no other
thing but by treading in the Footsteps of Christ?

The Objection of Osorius is Answered, where the Imitation of Christ is
discoursed of at large.
BUT you will say, what, is it not an excellent thing? is it not a Pious thing?
is it not very necessary for every Man, who counts his Life and Salvation dear
to him, who looks for Immortal Glory? who seeks stable and eternal pleasures;
that he separate himself as much as he can from theImitation of the Earthly
Father, and frame himself wholly to the imitation of the Heavenly?

Who denies or is Ignorant of that, O Osorius? Who is so void of all Religion
and Object. Osor. page 180. Answer.
Sense, but is ready of his own accord, and with his whole Heart to confess
that very thing to you; which that you may persuade; you do not only explain,
but also draw forth all the force and efficacy of Speech that you can upon it
with so much earnestness and vehemence? First, who is so Ignorant, but knows
what we received from both our Parents, of which you dispute so prolixly? The
thing it self, and the experience of all things does abundantly make it evident
into what deceits and straits, into what a gulf of miseries the former has
brought us into: So on the contrary, how many, and how great good things have
proceeded from the other Father; I think it is unknown to no Man. Whose acts
for us if we consider, what is more excellent? If the greatness of his
benefits, what more Divine? If his Life it self every way perfect with all
purity of the greatest Virtues, what more admirable? Unto whose example, as the
most perfect rule for imitation, seeing you invite us so earnestly; I must
needs both willingly approve of your Piety therein, and also give you thanks
upon this account for your diligence. And so much the more, upon the account
that the unhappy calamity of these times does so greatly need such incitements,
which I know not by what means, having obliterated the footsteps of the
Heavenly Adam, seem to have degenerated again unto the Earthly Father, with a
perfect conspiracy. Wherefore, I could the rather with to these manners and
times, that those things which are very well discoursed of by you, concerning
following the Example of Christ, concerning the resembling of his Death,
concerning imitating his Divine Life; may pierce not only the Ears of Men, but
also the most inward parts of their minds. For what is more solid for Advice,
or more seasonable for the Time, than that which you so much enlarge upon, with
a plentiful amplification of Words; that every Man according to his power
should propose unto himself Christ the chiefest Example of all Virtue, and
Master of Life, for Imitation and Resemblance: That having rooted out the filth
and relics of the Old Nature; He may drive away very far from him with a
resolved and magnanimous Spirit all Taints of impurity: And because, The
imitation of Christ is very necessary for all.
as you say, we cannot be in the middle between the two, therefore it remains,
that having forsaken the party of the body, we should so fight under the banner
of Christ our Prince, we should so subdue the body it self, by the power of his
saving Crosi; all rebellion of the body should so be overcome in us, that this
unbridled lust, which maintains everlasting enmity against God, may at length
yield to his command; and that we may not lessen any endeavor, or labor
howsoever great in this most holy observance of Justice, and imitation of
Christ.

As these things are proposed by you, most excellent Osorius, no less Holily
than Eloquently; so I would that in like manner your Rhetoric might make a
suitable Harmony concerning the Imitation of Christ, in the Ears of the Roman
Bishops and Cardinals: That these Men, having abdicated the perishing and
transitory Wealth of this World, with which they overflow beyond all measure of
their own profession, and also above royal magnificence, may at length think of
the poverty of Christ, that they may diminish their Possessions, and large
Inheritances heaped together, their Diadems, and their other regalities; I say,
not according to the example of the Ancient Philosophers, but according to the
contentation of the most Holy Apostles; that seriously rejecting the luxury,
and superfluity of this Life, their vain glory, their needless vanities and
trifles may at length cease to be conform to the wicked fashions of this World:
And that laying aside all haughtiness and pride of Life, they may submit
themselves to the humility of Christ, and restrain and compose the exorbitancy
of their Minds and Spirits: And laying down this Popish Cruelty and Tyranny,
learn to become meek of Christ, that most perfect pattern of meekness, Learn,
says he, of me, because I am meek Matt. 11.
and lowly of Spirit. I do not require that those Roman Priests should wash the
Feet of the Poor according to the example of Christ, but that they should not
embrue their cruel Hands in the Blood of their Brethren; neither do I require
that they should give Water to refresh the Disciples of Christ, but that they
should not heap up Flames and Faggots to burn their Bodies, nor lay Snares for
them, or devise to entrap them privily, design their ruin and destruction,
furnish Darts and Weapons to slay them, for whom Christ was Sacrificed, and by
whom they themselves were never hurt.

If Example should be taken from Christ, I pray you, what does the Divine
Father and Creator commend more unto us? what else does his whole life breath
but mutual Charity, both toward Friends, and also toward Enemies? Who not
only does not break the shaken and bruised Reed, but upon the Cross Charitv the
bond of perfection. Colos. 3.
prays for his very Crucifiers.

Therefore we have an example singularly excellent, which we may imitate. We
have also together with an example, a commendation by the mouth of the Apostle,
by whom Charity is called the bond of perfection. Moreover there is not wanting
the Preaching of Divines, who in their Books, in their Exercises, in their
Sermons, do attribute so much to Charity, that they call It the form, the
perfection, and the very life of faith, without which there is no other virtue,
that can be helpful to Salvation: And now I need not here in many words declare
what agreement there is between the Doctrine of those great extollers of
Charity, and the practice of their lives; seeing there are so many proofs
before our eyes, so many ten thousands of men slain do witness it, and so great
abundance of Christian blood shed; there is so great outrage of Persecution
every where; there is nothing safe from slaughter, fury, tumult, snares,
contentions, dangers, articles of Inquisition, bonds, How no sign of Charity
appears in the Roman Tyranny.
and imprisonments. In some places the Turk makes havoc with the Sword, and
elsewhere with flames and smoke. And the Fathers of the Roman Court exercise
Cruelty. First, they make Laws written with blood, which afterward they commit
to Political Monarchs to be promulgated, and to the other Officers to be
executed by Law. On The Laws of the Popes are written with blood.
the sudden, Citizens of good repute, and Learned Ministers are violently haled
to examinations, and afterward to death, if any Man dare but open his mouth
against the manifest abuses of errors, they spare neither Age, nor Sex, nor
Condition. Thus (forsooth) those perfect Roman Catholic Nobles imitate the
Charity of Christ, so they follow his Divine Life, so they resemble his death,
so they show forth his meekness, so they bear the Image of the Divine Father,
so they wholly and more than wholly form and fashion themselves from the
imitation of the earthly Father, to the example of the Heavenly. Who justly
deserve to hear from the Lord: ye are those that justify your selves before
men, but God knows your hearts; for that which is of high account before Men,
is abominable before God. What if the most Holy Popes, and purple Cardinals,
those Chiefest Dignitaries of the Church, with all this your Order of Bishops,
and the most strict Orders of Monks, who by Place, Dignity, and Profession seem
to approach nearest unto Christ, and to supply his place upon earth, differ so
much from him, what cause is there why we should hope better of the whole body
of the common people, or that any Man should promise himself Salvation in
following the footsteps of Christ? but (God willing) I shall elsewhere make
enquity into this just matter of complaint.

Now let us return to you, Osorius, whose so godly and eloquent exhortations
about putting on and imitating Christ, I am so far from slighting, that I
desire they may remain most firmly fixed in the minds of men; for as nothing
appears in the most holy manners of Christ, which is not very worthy of
imitation; so no part of duty seems more agreeable to every Christian, than
that all of us should endeavor with all our might to resemble the image
proposed unto us; especially seeing Paul so gravely, and that in more places
than one, calls us hereunto, who making a Comparison of both Fathers, Adam, and
Christ, declares what we received of both. By Man, 1 Cor. 15.
says he, came death, and by Man came the Resurrection from the dead. And
presently after, proceeding on that matter, the first Man was of the earth
earthly, the second Man is the Lord from Heaven. And afterward concluding with
words to the same purpose, and exhorting us to imitate the example of his
obedience, he subjoyns; as we have born, says he, the image of the earthly,
let us bear also the image of the heavenly. And the Apostle Peter, not
differing much from Paul, proposes Christ for an Example of all long suffering;
for, says he, 1 Pet. 2.
Christ also suffered for us, giving us an Example, that ye should follow his
footsteps, who did no sin, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed all judgment to his Father, etc.

Therefore, that you contend so earnestly with the Blessed Apostles for
following the footsteps of Christ, herein we do very willingly both hear you,
and assent unto you. But that you place all the dignity of our Salvation in
this, that you refer all the promises of God to this one head, as if there were
no cause of Salvation, but that which is placed only in precepts and
instructions of Life, herein your discourse seems to pass far beyond the bounds
of sound and Apostolic Doctrine.

For though it is a thing of very great concernment, that we should frame all
the endeavors and Offices of Life to The promises of God are not tied to the
imitation ofChrist, but to Faith.
the imitation of him; yet Salvation is not therefore promised, because our
actions agree to this rule of Righteousness, neither is the title of
Righteousness given us, because we live virtuously, but because he was made
Righteousness for us: For we do not become just before God by imitation, but by
Regeneration. As of Old, not through our fault, but Adams, not by Imitation,
but by Birth and Propagation, the pollution of his Sin A comparison of the
First and Second Adam.
was imputed to us unto Condemnation. So by virtue of the Second Adam, not by
any power of our own, by being born again, not by imitating, is Righteousness
imputed to us unto the Justification of Life: Neither does it therefore follow,
that the examples of Christ are not proposed to us for Imitation.

It is one thing to reason from causes to effects, another thing to reason from
effects to causes. What if the cause is enquired into, that makes us righteous
before God? Paul will answer, That Christ is the Christ the external cause of
justification, Faith in Christ the Internal. Effects, causes.
external cause, who was made Sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God through him: But the Internal is our Faith in Christ;
which is imputed to them that believe, forRighteousness.

But if you ask, what are the the effects of this cause? Who knows not that
they are the Fruits of Pious Works, and this very imitation of Christ, which
you so greatly (yea and so deservedly cry up and) extol? For who can rightly
call himself a Christian, as you say very well, who does not apply his mind as
much as he can. to separate himself from all society of the Earthly Father, and
frame and conform himself wholly to the example of the Heavenly: I grant this,
to be very true, as indeed it is. For, I do not disallow of that which you do
rightly assume, but I confute that, which you would falsely gather from hence.
For thus you conclude; To wit, that the whole Magazine De just. lib. 7. page
186.
of our Salvation is placed in this, that by our Pious Labor and Industry, we
should purchase the Kingdom of God for our selves: That they, who affirm Faith
only is sufficient for Salvation, are mad, and singularly serviceable to the
Old Serpent; and that every action we undertake, is wholly unprofitable, if
Faith only is sufficient. This is the sum of the Epilogue of this whole debate
of yours. In which, what do you else, but by an unskilful huddle of things, and
without order in disputing, turn causes into effects, and again effects into
causes? What? when the Apostle Admonishes that Wives should be subject to their
An argument from like things.
Husbands, and acknowledge their Authority, as the Church is subject to Christ
her Husband, shall she therefore, that is by a Lawful Covenant Married to her
Husband, not be a Wife before there is added a testimony of due obedience?

So Children, born of Creditable Parents, use to resemble them not only in the
Lineaments of their Bodies, but also in the likeness of their Manners, of whom
they are begotten: What, if in some part their resemblance fails? What if their
Luke 18.
manners are dissolute? What if they have such a Son as the parable of the
Gospel represents to us: Who leaving his Father, does no part of his duty,
shall he therefore cease to be a Son? Or, shall any Man by the merits of his
Life attain to be a Son, who is by nature a Servant?

You may say, to what purpose are these things? That by these examples you may
understand, that effects depend on causes, and causes are not governed by
effects. An honest Matron, carries with that subjection to her Husband that
becomes her, and he on the otherside performs his duty in cherishing his Wife.
These things follow the Conjugal bond, but they do not make it; just so it is
in the Spiritual descent, which, like another nature, regenerates us to Christ,
and transforms us as new Creatures into the Sons of God. Of which thing, if the
cause be enquired, not Works, not Hope. not Charity, but only Faith in Christ:
Not any Imitation, but Baptism being the Sacrament of Baptism a Sacrament of
Faith. Galat. 3.
Faith performs it. Concerning which, let us hear Paul testifying in very
evident Words. All of you, says he, are the Sons of God through Faith in
Christ Jesus. Whosoever of you are Baptized in Christ, have put on Christ. He
that walks being Clothed with Christ, What can be wanting to him, unto all
Glory and Beauty of Righteousness? What can any Man desire more for the
security of Eternal Life? What is more boundless than Sublimity? What is more
Sublime than Nobility of Birth? What is more excellent than the dignity of high
degree? Than to be received not only for Servants, or Dependents of the what
Faith in Christ performs according to Paul. Galas. 3.
Mighty God, who comprehends all things by his Power; but also as Sons. yea,
and Heirs? But if you design to be taught how these so many, and so great good
things come to us, Paul makes Answer: By Faith, says he, ye are all Sons: If
Sons then Heirs according to promise. And if you ask when that comes to pass,
whether after the merits of Works, or before Works; the same Paul will teach
you: As soon as you are Baptized, says he, you have put on Christ.

To which also Chrysostom subscribing, says, as soon as a Man Chrysostom.
Belives, he is presently also Justified. Which if it be true, then it is
false, which you assert. For you affirm that the obtaining of Salvation
consists wholly in this, that we should transform our Oso. de just. lib. 7. de
just. 1. 9. p. 232. de just. 1. 6. p. 148.
selves entirely into the similitude of Christ. And again youn say, there is no
other way of Salvation established for us, but that which is contained in the
Law of God. And the same you affirmed elsewhere, having openly asserted: That
ascent into Heaven is given to the merits of the greatest Virtues, and that the
Mansions of the Eternal Kingdom, are given justly and deservedly to Holy and
Pure Men. For so, Say you, it comes to pass that the Immortal Kingdom is due by
the best right to Just Men; not only as a recompense and remard, but also as a
Lawful Inheritance, being founded upon the Wisdom and Bounty of the Father.

All which things, as being represented gloriously by you, seem at a distance
to have some show of Truth, if they be referred to that Platonic Righteousness
of yours, or to the state of our First Innocence. But now in this wounded and
destroyed Nature, they have no place at all, but that they may wholly prelude
from us all passages into the Eternal Mansions of the Kingdom. I know indeed
that the Everlasting reward of Righteousness is due by best right to Pure and
Holy Men, as you say, and those that observe the Law unblameably.

But, I know likewise that the Eternal Punishments of Hell are due to those,
that do not perform the Royal Law according to the Scriptures. What would
James. 2.
you do in this case, good Friend? What good can your Platonic Philosophy do
here? I am not Ignorant, what the Lord said to the Rich Pharisee: If Mat. 12.
you will enter into Life, keep the commands: That indeed is true. Do you then
perform what he was commanded to do; Sell all that you have, and give to the
Poor, and follow Christ Naked: But if you do it not, what else can you look
for, but to perish together with him? But now the goodness of God has found
out another way to consult our Infirmity, who has not only put upon us the
beauty of Righteousness, but whole Christ, so that you may not only, being
Naked, follow Christ, but that whole Christ may live in your self, and Cloth
you, and also may make you a Son of God by Faith.

What then, may some Man say, is not the Holy Spirit given to them that trust
in Christ, to Illuminate their minds with new light, to renew their Hearts, to
enrich them plentifully with the Riches, Gifts, and Endowments of good Works,
and to What the renewing of the Holy Ghost makes in us.
adorn them exceedingly with all kind of Virtues? What, do these good Works
nothing with God, which are performed by the influence of the most Holy Spirit?
Do they contribute nothing Oso. de just. lib. 9. P. 233.
toward Righteousness? have they no use nor place upon. the account of reward?
For this seems to be the Foundation of all your arguing: Where you write these
words; If we believe De just. lib. 9. P. 234.
the promises of God, we presently obtain the help of God, that we may very
easily do all things that are commanded us, and so may be saved: And presently
after the Interposition of a few words; You say, Faith causes us to have the
Law of God Written in our mind, and so to make an everlasting Covenant of
Salvation with the Lord. Therefore when we have the Law of God put into the
most inward parts of our mind; it comes to pass, that Lust being subdued, Evil
concupisence extinguished, the pravity of a stubborn mind taken away, the mind
becomes on a sudden, a Temple of the Holy Ghost, and is stirred up with all its
might, to the study of the Law of God: And that I may express it in one word,
such a Man contains the Magnificence, and Glory of Divine Righteousness
comprehended in his mind, And a little after you say; Therefore it is of Faith,
Says Paul, that according to Grace, the promise may be firm. What manner of
promise is that? That they who come to the Lord with the Faith of Christ, may
both be freed from their Wickedness, and delivered from the Curse, whereunto
they were liable, and may have the Law of God Written in their Hearts, and have
the very Divinity of the Holy Spirit comprehended in their mind, and not defile
their Life with any wicked deed: But may govern it by the Law of God, or as it
is in Ezekiel, They may walk in the commands of God; and perform Holy and
excellent works; and also that they may be Righteous: For hereunto all the
promises of God are referred, etc.

Answer.
What do I hear? Are then all the promises of God referred to this? That there
is no hope of Righteousness, no Romans 5. Ephesians. 3. Romans 4.
way of Salvation, no reconciliation for us, nor remission of Sins, unless the
Law be kept? And where then is that peace with God, which De just. lib. 9. page
234.
the Apostle Preaches: Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ? Where is that access to the Throne with
boldness? Where is the hope of Glory, Happiness, the Blessing, the Inheritance
of Eternal Life, according to promise; if these good things come no otherways,
as you suppose, but by a Covenant of Life, which no spot of Sin defiles? What,
has your profession of God received this Gospel from the teachings of the
Apostles, or from the opinion of Plato? It is therefore of Faith, Says Paul,
that the promise may be firm according to Grace. But what way is it firm, if it
is of Works upon any account? Or how is it of Faith, if you confine all the
Promises of God to the Law of Righteousness, which may confirm the minds of all
men, with a sure hope of Righteousness, as you say? Or what will that assurance
of Righteousness be, if you with the Tridentine and Iesuitical Iebusites
detaining us in a doubtful wavering of hope, take aways all encouragement of
good hope?

Concerning the Promises of God, what, to whom, and how God has promised.
BUT now, because here there is a convenientoccasion of speaking concerning the
Promises of God, it remains that we should hear from you, who treat of these
things so sharply, what that is, which God has promised, to whom he has
promised, how, and for what cause he does it. Now there are both many and great
Gifts of God and Ornaments partly bestowed upon us, and partly promised through
the singular bounty of his Grace; yea, seeing there is nothing in this
Workmanship of Nature, nor in the meanest things, but what we ought to
acknowledge to be his free Gift, if we would be thankful: And also amongst all
these things, which being so many and so great he has conferted upon us with
so liberal a hand, I esteem that nothing is more glorious nor more admirable,
than this large honor of his Kingdom, which the Lord himself promises us in
the Gospel. Fear not, says he, little Flock, for it is the good will of your
Father to give you the Kingdom. Which Paul We are beholden to the grace of God
for all benefits and what that is which his singular favor toward us is
ehiefly seen. Luke 12. Daniel 7.
also makes mention of, writing both elsewhere, and also to the Colossians: Who
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us unto the
Kingdom of his dear Son, etc. Of which also Daniel, a most famous Prophet, has
given an ample Testimony; The Kingdom, says he, and the Dominion, and the
largeness of the Kingdoms under the whole Heaven shall be given to the People
of the Saints of the most High, etc.

In which one benefit, seeing the whole Sum of our Felicity is comprehended; to
wit, reconciliation with God, imputation of Righteousness, remission of Sins,
Peace with God, access with boldness, hope, the glory Romans 5. Romans 4. Titus
3. Romans 8.
of God, eternal blessedness and salvation, the Inheritance of Eternal Life,
freedom from the accusation and condemnation of the Law: On what foundation
does the free Promise of God chiefly stand.
What can any Man either by desires wish for, or by Faith conceive more
glorius? For he that is promoted unto the possession of a Kingdom, what more
can be added to him, unto the highest splendor of Glory, and the degree of the
most honorable Dignity?

Therefore we have, as you see, O Osorius, the hereditary Mansions of the
Eternal Kingdom promised to us, and that not of Works, but of Faith; not
according to Bargain, but according to Grace, and therefore according to Grace,
that the Promise may be firm and sure to all the Seed.

It is a very weighty Cause, and Authority not to be contemned: For what is
more firm for all manner of security, than that which relies on the certain
faithfulness of God, and a free promise? On the contrary, what is more unstable
than that which depends on the most uncertain condition of our Works, which are
either for the most part evil, or always uncertain? Why then will thou cast us
again out of the most firm safeguard of most sure confidence proposed to us,
which rests most safely in the free bounty of God promising, as if thou drovest
us out of a Haven of Tranquillity procured for us, to be tossed in Theassurance
of confidence and persuasion from the free promise of God.
the tempestuous Waters and Straits of Diffidence and Desperation? And do you
make those things doubtful and uncertain, which through the bounty of God, we
do as it were hold in our hands with a most assured Faith, so that now there is
not any thing certain which a man may satisfy his own Soul about touching
Salvation? for, I pray you, what can be certain, if so be the Grace of the
Promise being taken away, if Imputation of Righteousness being neglected, which
is placed in Christ for us, the whole matter is brought to the account of our
actions? and you plead that we are not otherways righteous before God, than by
performing the Offices of the Divine Law?

Objection. But ( you will say) What, has not God promised in Iereremiah Osor.
de just. 1. 9. page 234.
and Ezekiel, to those that come to God by Faith, that they shall have his Law
written in their mind, that they shall have the very presence of the Holy Ghost
within their mind, and defile their life with no sin, but govern it by the Law
of God, and walk in the Precepts of God, and perform excellent and holy works,
and moreover that they shall be righteous? etc.

Ans. 1. As touching the promise of the Spirit of God, it is very true, what
you cite out of Jeremiah: For God in his bounty has promised, that he will
write his Law not only in Tables of Stone, as before, but in the inward Tables
of their minds, and indeed accordingly he has performed, and does perform
daily what he has promised. And what does your Logical reasoning gather Ibid.
p. 233.
thence?

Therefore, say you, seeing we have the Law of God put into our inward Lib. 9.
p. 232. Two Paradoxes of Osorius, both of which are false.
parts, it comes to pass, that giving credit to the promises of God, we do
presently obtain the help of God, that we may very easily do all things that
are commanded us, and so be saved, etc.

Therefore by these many things, which have been hitherto mentioned by you
concerning the Law and its Office, I perceive you have two Opinions, both of
which are false. First, That you affirm that we being supported by the Grace of
God, and guarded by his help, can very easily perform all things, whatsoever
are commanded by the Law of God. Secondly, Because you plead that all the
nature of our Righteousness and Salvation consists in performing God's
Commands; and that there is no other way to Heaven but that which is contained
in the Law of God: Both which Reasons of yours, how absurd they are, how
contrary to the Grace of God and the Gospel, and how much disallowed and
confuted, not only by all Authority of Divine Scripture, but also long since
contradicted by the sayings of the most Ancient Fathers, and how void of all
support of reason and experience, there is no Man that has so little Reason or
Religion, but evidently perceives it, and clearly takes notice of it. For,
though we do not deny that by the help of the grace of the Divine Spirit there
are wonderful, various, and manifold effects produced, and great gifts are shed
abroad in the minds of the Regenerate, for governing all parts of Life piously
and holily; but whence, I pray you, will you teach that so great strength, and
so great power to observe Righteousness is given by God, and committed unto
mortal Man, which may be sufficient for performing all things that are
prescribed in the most holy Law of God?

Concerning the Perfection of Righteousness, Ier. 31. (...). 11. Osor. l. 9.
and complete Obedience of the Law.
You proceed to press again and again that Ancient Song out of the Prophet; I
will put, says he, my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts:
And also out of the other Prophet; And I will give them a heart of flesh, that
they may walk in my Precepts, and keep my Judgments, and also may do these
things, which are just, etc.

I hear the Oracles of the Prophetical Promise, uttered with great evidence,
from whence certainly works of New Obedience do proceed, which necessarily
follow Faith; so that if any Man do now enquire for the cause of good works,
presently he learns hence, that it should not be attributed to the strength of
Man's Will, but the Gift of the holy Spirit; but now whence does this Gift
proceed, but from the Merits of Christ? or to whom is it given, but to them
that believe in Christ? For the holy Spirit is received by Faith, according to
that of Paul; That we may receive the promise of the Spirit by Faith. Wherefore
No man denies that the works of new Obedience proceed from the fountain of
Divine Grace, and the Merits of Christ.
seeing Faith is the only thing, which procures unto us the holy Spirit,
therefore it cannot otherways be, but that having received the Divine Spirit of
Sanctification, a new Life, and spiritual motions do follow in the hearts of
the Regenerate. For a mind rightly qualified with the Faith of Christ, and
being now reconciled to God, as it cannot be destitute of the favor of God, so
being stirred up by his holy breathings, begins now to be a Law to it self,
whereby it fears God, and according to its power honors him with due
Reverence, cleaves unto him with all its might, refers its actions and counsels
to him, calls on him by prayers, adheres to him in adversity, celebrates his
benefits with a thankful remembrance, lays its hope and confidence, and its
whole self upon him, and also for his sake loves and cherishes all the Brethren.

And as there is no Man that denies, Every faithful man that is truly born
again in Christ, is a Law to himself, or ought so to be. Works of Faith. Osor.
de Just. lib. 3. p. 71.
these Offices of necessary Obedience, performed by the help of the Spirit of
God are fruits of a wellinstructed Faith: So there is no controversy between
us and you in that matter, especially seeing you your self also together with
us confess, That these are not works of the Law, but of Faith, and that they
should not be referred so much to the Law, as to the holy Spirit, and Faith
relying upon his help, as you say.

But the greatest difference that is between us consists in this; that whereas
we assert, That the Obedience of Man born again by the Divine Power, is but
begun and imperfect in this mortal infirm state: You on the contrary dream of I
know not what perfection of obedience in works, the Spirit of God so working in
us, that whosoever is qualified therewith, needs nothing that belongs to
complete perfection of righteousness; for all your debate about this matter,
seems to drive at this, as being concluded with this one Syllogism.

Argument.
Ma. Whosoever walk in the Precepts of the Lord, and perform Ier. 32. Ezekiel. 11.
them, should be called perfect, who can easily live without sin.

Mi. All the Faithful according to the promise of God, walk in his precepts,
and perform them, because God promises nothing, but what he can and will
perform.

Concl. Therefore, according to the promise of God nothing hinders, but
Believers may be perfect here, who are capacitated to live without sin.

That I may answer the Argument, it is a Sophistical Argument from secundum
quid, to simpliciter, because in the Major those are called perfect, who walk
in the Precepts of the Lord, and frame their life according to them: it is true
in them who simply and perfectly perform all those things, which are commanded
in the Law, according to that perfection which is requisite. According to which
Rule, if the major be understood, that which is assumed in the minor must be
upon How far the Spirit of renovation promised and given by God reaches.
this account denied. For though God has promised to his Saints, that the
Assisting grace of his Spirit shall not be wanting, which may help forward
pious attempts in his Elect, and stir up their endeavors after more holy
obedience; but where has he at any time promised, or on whom has he bestowed
that happiness in walking, which turns no where to the right hand, nor to the
left? which stumbles not through the whole life? which in all kind of virtues,
by a constant perseverance so conforms the course of life to complete
innocence, that it never fails in any thing? The Adversaries use for the
defense of their own cause, to catch at the words, that were just now cited out
of Ierem. chap. 31. and Ier. 31. Ezekiel. 36. Deuteronomy. 30.
Ezekiel. chap. 26. I will cause you to walk in my Precepts, and keep my
Judgments, etc. And then out of Deuteronomy. chap. 30. I will Circumcise, says the
Lord, the foreskin of your heart that ye may love the Lord with all your
heart, and with all your soul. I know indeed, that in these words there is a
glorious promise contained of the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the restoring of
new obedience; but Hier. cont. Pelag. Dial. 1. A twofold perfection, or a
twofold righteousness according to Hierome. August. cont. duas Epistolas. Pela.
l. 3. cap. 8.
because there is a twofold perfection, and a twofold righteousness according
to Hierom. one, which is suited to the virtues of God, another which is
agreeable to our frailty. And again, seeing, according to the Authority of
Augustine, there is a twofold kind of Obedience; one that is seen in A twofold
sort of Obedience according to Augustine.
this Life, being but begun and imperfect. Another that is perfect, which is
completed in the life to come. It is not difficult to discern in what sense
the perfection of Renovation should be understood in the Scriptures: To wit,
not simply and absolutely, but according to the measure and capacity of this
Life. Therefore Augustine says well, that a Man is sometimes Aug. de peccat.
merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 15. Aug. de peccat. merit. and remis. lib. 1.
cap. 7. Aug. ad Bonifac. lib. 3. cap. 7.
called perfect, because he has profited in a great degree. And the same
again. But, whereas Men are called Saints, sometimes, and perfect in the
Scriptures, I say to this, that it is a certain manner of perfection, whereby
Holy Men acknowledge their own imperfection. They are also called perfect, who
in any respect imitate the perfection of the Heavenly Father, who rains on the
Just and Unjust, etc.

And again the same Augustine writing to Boniface: The Virtue, says he, which
is now in a Righteous Man, is called perfect upon this account, because it
belongs to his perfection, both to acknowledge in Truth, and confess in
Humility his own Imperfection. Moreover, Hierom not much differing from him
answered wittily: To whom, when that place of St. Paul was objected: Whosoever
of us are perfect, we understand this: To this Hierom, says: What then Hierom.
Advers. pelag. lib. 1.
do we understand, yea, what ought we to understand, that we who are perfect,
should acknowledge our selves to be unperfect, and that they have not yet
comprehended, nor yet attained unto perfection. This is, says he, the Wisdom
of Man, to know himself to be imperfect; and that I may so speak, the
perfection of all Righteous Men in the Flesh, is imperfect, etc. And afterward
again in the same Book.

Therefore, we are Righteous Hierom. ibid. Prover. 18. Hierom. ad Ctesiphontem.
then, when we confess our selves to be Sinners For our Righteousness consists
not of our own merit, but of the mercy of God, as the Scripture says: The
Righteous Man is an accuser of himself in the beginning of his Speech: And
again to Ctesiphon; This is Men's only perfection, says he, if they know
themselves to be imperfect, etc. Moreover the Adversaries set upon us with
another Argument, also, which they produce out of the words of Deuteronomy. 30. To
defend the perfection of their Deuteronomy. 30. I will Circumcise the Foreskin of thy
Heart, that thou may love me with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul.
own Righteousness after this manner.

Ma. In these two commands, thou shall love thy God with all thy Soul, and thy
Neighbor as thy self, is contained the sum of all perfection.

Mi. They that are regenerate can love God with all their Heart, and all their
Soul, and their Neighbors as themselves, according to the promise of God,
Deuteronomy. 30.

Concl. Hence then it follows, that the Regenerate, by the help of the Spirit
of God, can fulfill all Righteousness by the Works of the Law.

This reasoning, as it differs not much from the former, so there Pelagianism.
is implied in it a certain kind of fallacy not unlike it: Which, of what sort
it is, if I may with your allowance, Osorius, I will declare. For there lurks
under the words of Scripture, not rightly understood, a fallacy or venom wholly
Pelagian.

But Augustine will Ingeniously Confute this Fallacy for us, in his Book; The
Title whereof, is concerning the Perfection of Righteousness. Where he speaks
after this manner: That the state of this Controversy about the perfection of
Love, is exercised about two Questions, To wit, By whom? And when?

First, as if the Question be, by August. of the Perfection of Righteousness.
By whom Righteousness is obtained.
whom a Man may attain unto such perfection, that he may be without Sin; He
answers, that comes not to pass by the strength of Free Will, but by the Grace
of God: And so far there is no debate betweeen us, and the opposite party: But
if there be enquiry made about the time, when such a perfection is attained:
Augustine, speaks expressly, that this comes not to pass in this Life, but in
that which is to come. When Perfection is attained. Aug. of the Spirit and
Letter.
And this same Augustine, no less oppositely, in another Book dispels the mists
of this Argument with very evident Words. This precept of Righteousness, says
he, concerning loving the Lord with all the Heart, and with all the Soul. And
also; that of loving our Neighbor, we shall fulfill in that Life, where we
shall see Face to Face: But here some will object, wherefore is it commanded,
if it is not fulfilled here? Augustine Answers: To wit, That we may be
Instructed, what we ought to ask by Faith, and whither to send Hope before; and
unto what things, that are before us, we should press forward, not being
satisfied with any thing that is behind.

Therefore, according to my opinion, says he, that Man has made a great
progress in this Life, in that Righteousness, which is to be perfected, who by
profiting knows how far he is from the perfection of Righteousness, etc.

What is that? Which writing to Bonifacius, he thus reasons Aug ad. Bonifac.
lib. 3. cap. 7. Begun Obdience.
about Divine Grace: The Grace of God, says he, gives in this Life, an
endeavor to keep the commands, (And here you have the Obedience begun, as we
call it) and the same, if any thing is not fully observed in the precepts,
Pardons, etc.

And so all commands of God are reckoned as performed, because Imputation of
Righteousness according to Augustine.
whatsoever is not performed is pardoned. By which, as I suppose, you see, that
our Righteousness in this Life is of such a sort, that it consists rather of
the remission of Sins, than the perfection of Virtues, which perfection must be
looked for by us in the Life to come.

Moreover there is another thing, that must not be paffed by in this place,
that the same Augustine writing to Hierom (in the 29th Epistle,) says, Charity
Augustine to Hierom.
is a Virtue, whereby that Epist. 29.
which should be beloved, is beloved. This in some is greater, in others
lesser, in others none at all. But the fullest that cannot be increased, as
long as Man lives here, is in no Man. But as long as it can be increased,
verily that which is less, than it ought to be, is faulty; by reason of which
default, there is not a just Man upon the Earth, that does good, and sins
not: Because of which default no Man living shall be justified in the sight of
God. By reason of which viciousness, if we say that we have not sin we deceive
our selves, and the Truth is not in us, because of which, how much soever we
have Cpprian cited by Augustine.
profited, it is necessary for us to say, For give us our debts.

The Books of the Ancient Orthodox Divines are full of very Authentic
Testimonies confirming this Opinion. It is an excellent and grave saying of
Cyprian, speaking of the Regenerate; Let no man, says he, flatter himself upon
the account of a pure and unspotted heart; that trusting to his own Innocence,
he should suppose that his wounds need no medicine; seeing it is written, Who
shall glory that he has a chaste heart? or who shall glory that he is clean
from sins? But if no Man can be without sins, whosoever shall call himself
unblameable, is either a proud man, or a fool etc. For this, says Hierom,
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee; if he Hierom. adversus Pelagi.
is godly, how does he pray for pardon of iniquity? if he has iniquity, how is
he called holy?

There is not so great a Harmony found in any one man, says Ambrose, that the
Law, which is in the Members Ambros. lib. 10.Epist. 84. Aug. lib. 10. Epist. 84.
does not oppose the Law of the mind Therefore that which the Apostle John
said, is true of all Saints in the general. If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive Bernard super Cantic. Sermon. 50.
our selves, and the truth is not in us. I may also add that of Bernard, which
is very agreeable to this matter.

Who dare arrogate to himself, says he, that which Paul himself confesses he
had not attained unto? Indeed he that gave the command was not ignorant, that
the weight thereof exceeded the strength of men; but he judged it useful, that
by this very thing they should be convinced of their own insufficiency, and
that they should know what end of Why God commanded things impossible.
Righteousness they should endeavor with all their might to attain unto.
Therefore by commanding things impossible, he did not make men transgressors,
but humble, that every mouth might be stopped, and all the World might lie
under the Judgment of God.

I can bring innumerable Testimonies of the like sort out of well approved
Authors. But why do I take up my time in rehearsing the Names of Men, or
reckoning their approbations? when, that I may speak it in one word, all the
Antiquity of former Ages, the public consent of the former Church, and the
choicest Writers out of all Eldest Time, as many as ever rejected the Ancient
Pelagianism; all those with one mouth agree in this matter against you, That
there is no integrity Hieron. Augustine. Cyprian. Orig. hom. 21. on (...)
of Righteousness in this Life, which is not imperfect, which needs not
forgiveness; That there is not so great an Innocence here, which is without any
wound, which needs Cyprian de Tentatione Christi. August. de vera and salsa
poenitentia. Osor. de Just. l. 5. p. 128.
no Medicine; and that none of all the Saints have so lived, that a great deal
was not wanting to him to complete Righteousness, and who needed not daily to
pray for the pardon of his iniquity: As Augustine testifies; Because says he,
there is daily offending, therefore there must be also daily remission. Which
things being confirmed by most evident Testimonies of very Learned Witnesses:
Where (...) is that Salvation, which, according to your description is placed
in Righteousness, Holiness, Religion, and the excellent Merits of all Virtues?
Where Lib 2. page 49. Lib. 6. p. 148.
is that Righteousness of Works which reconciles us to God, and makes us like
God? Where is that Way, which is paved to Heaven for us with the excellent
Merits of Works? Where is that Ascent into the Heavenly Kingdom, which is
opened by the Merits of the greatest Virtues? Where are the Mansions of the
Everlasting Kingdom, which you assert are justly and deservedly given to Ibidem.
holy and pure men? Where is also that Immortal Kingdom, which you conclude is
due by best right, not only as a Recompense and Reward, but also as a Legal
Patrimony founded by the wisdom and bounty of the Father? What if according to
your Discipline, there is no other way laid open to Salvation, but by keeping
the Commandments; and if according to the Judgment of Bernard, the Law is of
such a weight, that it wholly exceeds humane strength, (which was just now
showed) what hope of Salvation does there now remain for us?

Verily, say you, if any man consider Osor. de Just. lib. 9. p. 131, 132.
his own strength, in so great a frailty of humane strength, it will be most
difficult to attain unto a divine state of righteousness; but if you consider
in your mind the divine riches, which, if you will, will always be present with
you, nothing is more easy. Hence, as Moses says, this Commandment, which I
command thee this day, is not above thee, nor far off, nor placed in Heaven,
that thou should say, who of us can ascend into Heaven? Neither is it placed
beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who will pass over the Sea. Neither do
you bear it now engraven on stones, but engraven upon the heart by Faith. For
if we believe the Promises of God, we presently obtain the help of God, that we
may very easily perform all things that are commanded us, and so be saved.

Must we be thus saved, O Osorius, in keeping God's Commands? is this your
harangue, and think you this so easy to be performed? Why not, say you, when
the Spirit of God helps? How little does this Saying differ from that Ancient
one of the Pelagians, which Augustine rehearses in a certain place, writing
against Julian the Pelagian, for thus they said. By an easy endeavor after
holiness, which God helps, a Man may be without Aug. cont. Julian Pelagia l. 4.
c. 3.
sins. But let us hear Augustine answering, both them and you: We deny not,
says he, that the help of God is so powerful, if he will, that at this day we
might have no evil concupisences, against which we should fight, though with
the greatest certainty of Conquest. And yet you your self deny not, that it
does not so come to pass, but why it comes not to pass, who has known the mind
of the Lord? Yet I know not a little, when I know, whatsoever that cause is,
that it is not the iniquity of a just God, nor the insufficiency of an A hidden
counsel of God in commanding those things which cannot be done by us.
Almighty God. Therefore there is something in his deep and hidden Counsel, why
as long as we live in this mortal flesh, there is something in us, against
which our mind should fight: There is also something why we should say, forgive
us our sins; and a little after, that Man understands these things who being
hunger-bitten, returns to himself, and says, I will arise and go to my Father,
and presently he subjoyns, therefore it comes to pass in this place of
infirmity, that we should not live proudly, and that we should live under the
daily remission of sins: But whether that be the cause, or another; which I am
much more ignorant of, yet that which I cannot doubt is, how much soever we get
forward under this burden of a corruptible body, if we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, etc. This he said, but why should I urge you with
humane Authority, seeing the matter it self carries against you with a very
strong voice, and the whole Scripture gives this honor only to Christ, and the
Universal experience and example of Men, and the practice of life, besides your
very own retired Sense, the Domestic Witnesses of your Conscience, do publish
a manifest Testimony against you? You say, we presently obtain the help of God,
De just, lib. 9. page 231.
whereby we may most easily perform all things, that are commanded us, etc. Is
it so? all things? what then if I ask you of that first Command of Love, which
you owe to the Lord your God with all your heart, and all the endeavor of your
mind? or of that, whereby you are commanded not to covet at all? do you perform
it? I know what a distinction the talkative Schools of the Sophisters use here,
according to the substance of the act, and according to the intention of the
Lawgiver. But I do not value these Fables of subtleties. We know this by the A
Sophistical Distinction.
writings of Paul, that the Law is Spiritual, we are Carnal and sold under sin.
I ask if thou thy self being compassed about now with this frailty of the
flesh, do fulfill this Spiritual Law of God, with that sincerity of Spirit
that thou ought? Answer ingenuously, are you silent? Romans 7.
What I my self do by my own strength, say you, I do not dispute here, yet I
can by the help of the grace of God. O cunning device: After all your debate it
comes to this, that you plead the commands of God are easy, and you would have
nothing appointed by him, which cannot be observed by us. Now after a most
heavy dream (that I may speak with Hierom) to deceive ignorant Souls, you in
vain endeavor to add, (not without grace.) But I enquire not what the Almighty
Grace of God can do of it self, but what it does in you, or in any other mortal
Man? You make the Precepts of Righteousness easy, which when the Divine Grace
assists, do not exceed our best endeavor; and yet you cannot produce one Man
that has fulfilled them all. Now what an Argument is that, that It is not
enquired what grace can do, but what it does.
a thing can be which has not been? that that can be done, which you bear
witness none has done; and to attribute that to I know not whom, which you
cannot prove to have been in the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles. Paul the
Apostle himself complains of the refractory rebellion of his Members, who was
not able to do the good which he desired, crying out that he was both carnal
and miserable, and captive. Augustine testifies that sins may be deminished in
this life, but that they cease not until death. And the same Augustine writing
to Petrus concerning holy and righteous Men, bids him hold that most firmly,
that righteous and holy men themselves, except Infants that are Baptized, none
of Hierom to Ctesiphom.
them all do live without sin in this World. And do you think that all the
roots of Unrighteousness are so plucked up in the Saints, that you can say, it
is most easy by the help of God, which is never wanting to them that desire to
pass the life without sin, and so obtain Salvation?

But Hieron is of a far different Hieron. contra Pelag. Dial. I.
Opinion; for I judge, says he, thus: That no Creature can be perfect,
according to true and complete righteousness: That one differs from another,
and that there are diverse righteousnesses in Man, no Man doubts; and that one
is greater or lesser than another; and that according to their state or measure
they may be called just, who in comparison of others are not just. Briefly,
that there is none I Cor. 13.
of the Saints, nor Prophets, nor Apostles, that possessed all Virtues; for now
we Prophecy in part, and we know in part: for all things cannot be in any one
Man. And to Ctesiphon. This should be attributed to him only, concerning
Hieron. ad
whom it is written as peculiar to him, who did no sin, neither was guile found
in his Mouth. Wherefore that I may bespeak you with Hierom, and in the same
words. Hierom, if you would have this common to you with Christ, that you can
be without fin, what do you leave him, that is peculiar to him? But if not,
what remains then, but that those high Mountains of righteousness with which
you are so puffed up, should not only fall, but also vanish into smoke?

You proceed yet, seeking as it were a knot in a rush, which yet is broke
through with no difficult wedge. You ask to what purpose the Law was prescribed
by Osor. de just. lib. 8. page 197.
God with (...) great so care, or for what end did he require the Law should
always remain in the minds of them, whom be instructed in the Law, if none of
those things which be established by Law was to be in the Power of Men? What
then, say you, did God make a jest of the Law? did he mock Mankind, Page 168.
commanding them to do those things, which they could by no means perform? and
then concluding the matter with a merry Sarcasm, you cry, O what a jesting God,
if to mock Mankind he has bestowed so much pains in preserving and instructing
that Generation, which you say is just as if a Man should bid one that is a
Cripple, run a Race, or one that is blind, view things exactly, that are done
afar off. All which things are comprehended in the sum of this Argument.

Argument.
Ma. That is in vain commanded Argument of Osorius.
which cannot be performed.

Mi. God commands nothing in vain.

Conclu. Therefore the Precepts of God are not impossible.

Ma. A just and prudent Lawgiver, never prescribes those Laws, which exceed the
strength and nature of the Subjects.

Mi. God is the most Just, and most Wise Lawgiver of all.

Concl. Therefore, the things which are prescribed in the Law of God are not
above the strength and nature of the Creature.

Answer.
To the major, I Answer two ways: First, That it holds indeed in these Laws,
which are given only for this end, that they may be exactly fulfilled by the
Subjects, that Salvation might be obtained by the same act of Obedience.

But now, though God willed this very much, that his Laws should be performed
most exactly by all, yet besides this end, there are other, both many and
weighty causes, why the Law, which is a rule of perfect Righteousness, though
it could not be kept by us in respect of perfect Obedience, yet it was
necessary that it should be promulagated, either that there might be a public
Testimony of the Judgment, and Anger of God against Sin, or that we our selves
might be brought more easily to the knowledge of our Sins and Frailty.
Concerning The end and Scope of the Promulgatioon of the Law. Romans 7.
which Paul said, when the Law came, Sin revived: Or that taking notice of the
frailty of corrupted and ruinated Nature, being more strongly driven by this
necessity; we might be pressed forward, as by the Ferula of a Pedagogue to
Christ, who is the end of the Law, as also the Law is called a Pedagogue to
Christ: Or that we may be taught, as it were by this same Pedagogy, whither we
must go: That if we cannot attain unto a full obedience of the Law, yet we may
profit in the Inchoation of obedience as much as we can.

Wherefore seeing there are so many and so great causes of making a Law, it
appears evident enough from hence, that there is no cause why the Law should
seem to be imposed upon us by God in vain: And yet it does not therefore
follow, because the Law of God, after the fall, is impossible to Human Nature,
as to the complete obedience thereof, that therefore it is unprofirable, seeing
the same has advantages so remarkable. Therefore the major of the Argument
implies a fallacy: Which A fallacy from that which is not a cause, as if it
were a cause.
by the Logicians is called Arguing form that which is not a cause, as if it
were a cause. But let us proceed to the other reasons in your arguments, which
are not reasons, but deceits and fallacies; For so you argue against Luther,
whom you bring forth most unjustly, as a certain most bitter Adversary of
Eternal Righteousness.

What is more contrary to Justice and Equity, say you, than that one should be
punished upon that account, because he has not performed those things which he
could by no means so much as begin? I hear you; and what follows? Oson. de
just. lib. 8. page 8.
You proceed also to represent the matter as it were before the Eyes of a Man,
by the framing of a similitude, The Hypocrisy, or Fiction of Osorius.
as if some Haughty and Illnatured Lord, going from home, should command one of
his Servants, who is so tied up in bonds, that he cannot move out of the place,
where be is, to provide him a Dinner, to dress his Meat curiously, to clean the
House, to cover the Table, and to spread the Hangings; I say, he that would
seriously require such things of a Man tied up; Who is there, but would judge
him to be mad, and out of his wits?

Then if the same Lord afterward returning, should whip and torture the same
Servant, who could by no means free himself from the bonds, because he had not
performed his command; should we suppose that Man, who is so cruel to his
Servant, to be a Man, or rather a cruel Beast, hid under the shape of a Man,
etc?

You have, Pious Reader, an Example of very Tragical Cruelty: Now receive the
Catastrophe of the Tragedy: What? And shall there be any Man so Wicked, that he
dare so Impudently impute so great Furiousness, and such a kind of Abominable
Wickedness, than which none seems more outrageous, to that most High, most
Excellent, and most Wise Lord, Creator, and Governor of all things?

No body, for ought that I know, good Friend. If your self knows An Answer to
the Fiction proposed.
any, I pray you point at him with your Finger to us: Though I am not Ignorane
what Men you aim at here. But passing by Names, let us search the force of your
Argument, and answer to each of its parts, being digested in order.

Answer.
Ma. It is contrary to Justice, that Anargument taken from the words of Osorius.
any man should suffer punishment for those things, which he could by no means
perform.

Mi. God does all things with perfect Righteousness and Equity.

Conel. Therefore God exacts not punishment for those things, which cannot be
performed.

A Fallacy of the Accident is committed. For this want of A fallacy of the
Accident.
strength and impotency should have a just excuse, if Nature had been properly
and simply so created. But when this weakness was not at first created with
Nature it self, but crept in some other way against Nature by Sin, we must
therefore see not only what this corrupted Nature now can do, or cannot do, but
also what it ought simply to do: Therefore I answer to the Major, An Answer to
the Major.
and freely own that punishment is not unjustly inflicted for those things,
which there is no cause but they might have been observed, either in regard of
the Lawgiver himself, or in the nature of the things themselves, but only by
reason of the impotency of the Subjects themselves, an impotency contracted
through their own default; as if a Prince send forth an Ambassador any whither
very sound and whole, to whom afterward he had commanded some things which he
could easily have performed, unless he had made himself Cripple and lame through
his own default. Now if in performing the Commands the Ambassador wants
ability, is there cause why this impotency should be imputed to the Prince, and
not rather to the Ambassador, who deprived himself of his own soundness? And
that is it which Augustine signifies, lib. de August. lib. de perfect.
Iustitiae.
Justice. perfect. Yea therefore, says he, it is man's fault, because it came
to pass by the will of Man only; that he is come to that necessity, which the
will of Man only cannot shake off. Therefore that representation which is
brought in by you of a Servant in Bonds, is nothing to the purpose, unless you
likewise prove this, that this impediment was cast upon him, not through any
fault or cause in himself; which seeing it cannot be denied by you, what
cruelty should there be reckoned to be in it, if a Lord, require just
punishment to be inflicted on a Servant that is corrupt and flagitious? Yea,
behold rather singular Clemency in the Lord, who is so far from inflicting upon
the Servant the punishment which he deserved, that he receives him into favor
without any merit; yea moreover, exposes his dearly beloved Son to undergo
punishment for the Servant? Go now, Osorius, and when you have sufficiently
considered with your self about this matter, then tell, who those are, that are
enraged with so great fury, that so impudently cast such a filthy blot of
Injustice and Cruelty upon Eternal Goodness? What if you judge so of Luther and
Calvin, of whom you speak so bitterly; what other thing do they but proclaim,
according to the Gospel, the free pardoning grace of God to all that by Faith
embrace Christ, who was slain for us? They are so far from being guilty of this
Calumny, which you most unjustly cast upon them, that you can no where find
any, who with greater earnestness do declare the infinite Riches of Divine
Grace to Mortal Men.

How Christ takes away Sins: With an Answer to the Objections of Osorius.
BUT this goodly Antagonist rushes upon us again with another Osor. de Just.
lib. 2. p. 34. A Dilemma of Osorius.
caption, which at the first sight may somewhat puzzle the mind of the Reader.
For he asks of those that deny Sin to be utterly Ibidem.
extirpated by the Grace of Christ in this Life; Whether they distrust his
Power or his Clemency? For if Christ does not abolish all Sins in them, whom he
receives into favor, that comes to pass either because he cannot, or because
he will not. If you say he cannot, you take away his Power. If you plead that
he is not willing, you rob him not only of the praise of his Clemency, but also
of his Faithfulness. Therefore whatsoever way you defend your Opinion, you
trample upon the Son of God, and cast great reproach upon him. Well said, most
excellent Man. And now by what confirmation do you prove Ibidem.
this? For seeing his Infinite Power cannot be hindered by any difficulties
from performing suddenly the things which he wills: And seeing his Love is so
great, that of old he bath engaged his Faithfulness, that through Christ he
would abolish Sins, and would deliver Mankind from all wickedness; what
boldness then is this of most impure men, who deny that Sin is utterly
destroyed in those, whom he has joined to himself with a holy Love? and assert
that Sin is not wholly The connection of the Argument.
cut off? nor plucked up by the roots? that all the remainders thereof are not
extirpated? These things said he.

Argument.
Ma. Nature can shut out all Sin, An answer to the Major.
being helped by the Grace of God.

Mi. The Grace of God helps those who are born again in Christ.

Concl. Therefore, all necessity of sinning is excluded in those that are born
again.

If you understand it of the perfect help of of Grace, which is hindered by no
difficulties, but that the infirmity of Nature may be taken away; so the Major
is true, but the Minor false. For though I confess that the Riches of Divine
Grace are infinite, and that the Gifts are excellent, which God bestows upon
his own, yet this grace of God does not so perfect any man in this Life, but
that often in small things we offend all, and pray daily, that our debts James 2.
Hieron. contraI Pelag. Dial. 3.
may be forgiven us. Yea, what is all the discourse of the Saints to God but a
continual praying and deprecating, as Hierom witnesses, whereby it extorts the
Clemency of the Creator, that we who cannot be saved by our own strength, may
be saved by his Mercy. Concerning which there is also heard Psalm 32.
a Mystical Song of the Psalm. For this, says he, shall every Saint pray unto
thee in a time when thou may be found. Whence Hierom infers not without
reason. If he is a Saint, says he, how does he pray for the pardon of sin? If
he has iniquity, upon what account is he called holy? to wit, after that
manner whereby it is elsewhere Proverbs 24. Proverbs 28. My strength is
perfected in weakness. 2 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 12.
said, A just man falls seven times a day, and rises up again. And again, A
just man is an accuser of himself in the beginning of his speech, etc.
Therefore the Grace of God helps our infirmities, that they may be diminished:
But we deny that he so helps them, that they are wholly taken away. It helps
indeed infirmities, as has been said, but yet it leaves us infirm, that it may
always help us. No man is ignorant how great power of Christ appeared in the
holy Apostles, which yet did not fully complete their strength, but it was
rather perfected by their infirmity. We know, says he, in part, and we
prophecy in part: But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be done away. We now see darkly through a Glass, but then face to
face. Now I know in part, but then I shall know as I am known.

Therefore that I may answer in a word: If you suppose there is that help of
Divine Grace, which makes Obedience in this Life to be wholly unblameable and
perfect; Augustine will presently deny that. Who discoursing of the first
Precept of Righteousness, whereby we are commanded to love God, with all our
heart, and our Neighbor as our selves: We shall fulfill that, says he, in that
Aug. cte spiritu and litera, cap. 36.
Life, where we shall see face to face; and presently; And therefore that man
has profited much in this Life in that Righteousness, which is to be
perfected, who by profiting knows how far he is from the perfection of
Righteousness.

Moreover, that which is argued from the power of Divine Grace, is not
sufficient to exclude the necessity of sin. They say indeed, that by the
perfect Grace of God it is possible that a man may not sin at all in this life:
Be it so; Yet all things are not made which can be made by the singular power
of God can do the things that he wills, but he wills not all things that he
can.
God. So by the power of God helping us we could fly, yet we do not fly: For
God wills not all things, which his power is able to do: But, you say, he
wills and commands with great Authority, that we should observe his
Precepts, which he would not command unless he knew them to be possible. It is
true indeed, if they be understood according to that Nature, which he first
created in us, So that in him there is no cause but that the Precepts, as they
should be judged right, so also they should be judged possible. But hearken to
Hierom answering you, and aptly untying this Knot. God has commanded things
possible, says he, this no man doubts of. But because men did not possible
things, therefore all the World is become subject to God, and needs his Mercy,
etc.

I know that there is not any For it is not the fault of the Commander, but the
frailty of the Hearer, that all the world should become subject to God.
thing so difficult in humane things but infinite Omnipotency can do it by a
word of his Power; to whom it would not be difficult to restore this frailty of
Fallen Nature to its Ancient State of Innocence, if he would. And there is no
doubt, but he would do it, if Hier. Dial. 2.
he had decreed to do as much by his secret Counsel, as he could do by his
Infinite Majesty. Now therefore either prove, that all infirmity of the flesh
is taken away in the Regenerate, and that they are restored to their former
Innocence, which is without all sin, and also freed from a necessity of dying,
or cease to dream of that Perfection of Righteousness in this Life, which
hitherto has not been found in any of the Saints, whether Apostles (that I may
speak in the words of Hierom) or Patriarchs or Prophets. Hierom. Dial. 1. A^
Answer to the minor Osor. de just. lib. 2. Osor. lib. 40. page 89.
phets. But that we may pass by this debate about the Power of God, from which
we detract nothing, what shall we say in the mean while of Grace, and his most
Gracious loving kindness and good will? What shall we answer to God promising
to us? For, What, says he, has not God of old engaged his faithfulness, by a
most sure Covenant, that be would ablolish all our Sins through Christ? Is not
this Grace promised to be obvious and prepared for all that are willing to
obtain it, which frees Mankind from all Wickedness, which immediately imprints
the form of Divine Righteousness upon the minds into which it enters, and
furnishes them with most invincible strength, whereby it is possible to destroy
Lust, to drive away all the pollutions of the Mind, and extirpate all
remainders of fi^thiness and impurity: De just. lib. 6.
So that now Lust being subdued, evil concupiscence extinguished, the pravity
of a stubborn mind being taken away, the mind being strengthened by the Divine
support, it is stirred up with all its desire to the Study of the Divine Law,
and most easily keeps the Law of God, and obtains Salvation.

What then, when the Majesty of the most high God has all things in his Power,
and under his Command, and his goodness is no less Infinite than his Power: Do
we suppose he will at any time be wanting to help the Creature, or shall we
distrust the Clemency of the most hountiful Creator?

An Answer.
God forbid. But pray tell me, where has God so engaged his faithfulness,
whereof you speak, that the remainders of all Sin, being cut off, and all
Infirmity of sinning being taken away, he would so heal Mankind, having so
thoroughly purged them from all Sin, that evil concupiscence being subdued, and
all matter of the Ancient Contagion being blotted out, no relics of Sin should
remain in this Life, but that it may be most easy to obey the commands of God,
and so obtain Salvation?

By what Author, by what Witness, by what Doctor, by what Testimony, or
Example, do you prove this to be true, which you Preach?

First, You say, is not this certain, A confirmation of the Osorian Assertion.
that Sin is hateful to God, which necessarily through its violence and
outragiousness divides us from Union with God? And how can it be that the Lord,
who is by Nature just, and a Lover of Righteousness, should not take away all
Sins out of the minds of them, whom he designs to unite unto himself by Love?
Moreover he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; How,
says Paul, will he not with him give us all things? If then the Testimony of
Paul be true, it is thence evident, that those are delivered from all
Wickedness, whom that infinite purity joins unto it self by most pure Love.

For, otherways if God did not take away Sin, be would be so far Osor. de just.
lib. 2. page 34.
from giving us all things, that he would suffer us in the chiefest respects to
be miserable, unhappy, and wretched. And so it would come to pass, that God
would seem to have conferred upon us no great benefit by Christ, if he left us
in the bondage of Sin, if he did not throw off the servile Yoke from our Necks,
as he had promised of Old. Moreover the Blood of Christ poured forth on the
Cross had yet brought us no advantage: For yet we are in great misery, we
cannot but be miserable whilst we are held in the bonds of our Sins: There are
also very evident Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures confirming this Assertion:
To wit, that by the Divine Power of Christ, Sin is extirpated, Lust is
destroyed, Evil Concupiscence is restrained, and the minds of Men being freed
from Sin, put on a Divine form.

For so it is recorded to us by Holy David. As far as East is from Os. lib. 2.
p. 35. Ps. 103. Ps. 51. Isa. 61.
the West, so far has he removed our Transgressions from us. And thou shall
sprinkle me, O Lord, with Hysop, and I shall be cleansed, thou shall wash me,
and I shall be made whiter than Snow.

And Isaiah foretold that it should come to pass, that all that live in the
Church by Faith, should be called Holy: And he has blotted out as a Cloud thy
Iniquities, and thy Sins as a thick Cloud. Likewise Jeremiah: At that time,
says the Lord, the Iniquity of Ierem. 50. Ezekiel. 36.
Israel shall be sought, and it shall not be, and the Sin of Judah, and it
shall not be found. And in Ezekiel, he says, I will pour clean Water upon you,
and ye shall be cleansed from all your defilements. Also Micah: He will cast
all our Micah. 7.
Sins into the depths of the Sea.

Moreover, Zechariah declares that Everlasting Fountain, which was to be
opened, to wash away the filth of all. And how glorious is that Testimony of
John the Baptist. Behold the Lamb of God that takes Ioh. 1.
away the Sins of the World?

Which Testimonies being so many, and together with these infinite others; what
do they all drive at, but that we may understand that by Christ, all the
pollutions of our sinful Nature are done away, etc. For this is the sum of
those things which you cite and heap together, with Augustine.
a long Circumlocution of Words.

Unto which being so many, there is one Answer, and a well fitted one out of
Augustine: Distinguish the times, says he, and you will reconcile Scriptures.
Our Sins are done away by Christ; no Man doubts of that. But we must see how
they are done away: He does them away in this Life, he will also do them (...)
in the Life to come; but not after one and the same manner: Sins are done away
by Christ, after what manner. Dan. 6. August.
For Iniquity is taken away and Sin receives an end, as is evident by the
Prophecy of Daniel. But if you ask how in this Flesh? Augustine will answer you:
None, says he, takes away Sin, but Christ, who is the Lamb of God that takes
away the Sins of the World: And he takes them away, both by removing the Sins
that were done, and by helping, that they may not be done, and by bringing
August lib. de perfect. just.
to the Future Life where they cannot be done at all.

Therefore in this Life, there is only a race to Righteousness, and Phil. 3.
in the other Life will be the prize. This then is our Righteousness now
whereby we run Hungering and Thirsting to the perfection, and fullness of that
Righteousness, wherewith we shall afterward be satisfied in the other Life.
Hence the Apostle says: Not that I have already attained, or am already
perfect. Brethren, I do not think that I have apprehended, but one thing I do,
forgetting the things that are behind, and being stretched forth to those
things that are before, I press forward to the mark of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus, etc.

Therefore according to Augustine here is the Race, here is the Progress, Aug.
de Spiritu and litera.
there will be the Perfection. Here as running in a Race, we proceed from
Virtue to Virtue. There we are perfected.

Now we have only the Seeds of Virtues begun, then in that August. de perfect.
justitiae.
fullness of Charity, when that shall be perfected in us, which now is
imperfect, that precept shall be fulfilled, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul. For whilst there is yet any Carnal
concupiscence, which may be restrained by continency; God is not in all
respects loved with all the Soul, for the Flesh does not Lust without the Soul,
though the Flesh is said to Lust, because the Soul Lusts Carnally, etc.

Therefore as long as the Saints are burdened with this Flesh, which they
cannot shake off, verily Sin dwelling in the Flesh cannot be absent.

Objection.
But how, say you, is Sin taken out of the World, If the Corruption of Sin yet
does reign in the Saints?

Answer.
I will tell you briefly, to wit, after the very same manner that the death of
Christ has driven (...) from our necks, and yet we dye. The same comes to pass
in the destroying of sin, that being freed from Sin by Christ, yet we are not
without sin, for these two things come always together, being tied to one
another by a very near connection. That where sin is, there by necessary
consequence Therefore fits also after the same manner is taken away by Christ.
death follows; wherefore if the flesh is yet held in bonds by the cruelty of
death, by the same reason it is proved, that the relics of sin remain also in
the flesh. But now where is then that righteousness which Christ has purchased
for us? Would you know, O Osorius? where our life is, there is also our
righteousness. Not in this flesh which we put off, but in that body which we
shall in due time put on uncorrupted. For such are all the benefits of Christ
purchased for us, that the promise of them being showed afar off, as of old the
Holy Land to the Hebrews, it is apprehended by Faith, and the Spirit in this
life, but the full possession belongs only peculiarly and in the whole to the
other life.

Christ begins his Benefits in this Life, and perfects them in the Life to come.
Now these great Benefits of the Son of God consist chiefly in this, that sin
being totally abolished, death being destroyed, he restores us, being plucked
out of the Kingdom of the Devil, unto the possession of eternal Life, in which
God communicates himself wholly to us, and is wholly all in all. And this most
glorious work of his, most full of the highest dignity, he begins in this
miserable life, and will complete it in the other life, when that shall come to
pass, which is written Death is swallowed up in Victory: O Death where is thy
Victory? O Death where Hosea 13. 1 Cor. 15.
is thy Sting? Howbeit these things are not said upon this account, as if there
were nothing in the interim, or but little in this life, which the help of the
grace of Christ does for us. As of old the help of the Eternal God was never
wanting to the Israelites in the waste Widerness, whom he was to bring into the
habitations of promise; so verily neither are Christ's benefits toward us
little, and the riches of his bounty are not small, which the present Grace of
Christ pours daily upon us with a full hand, when in this sinful Nature he
often helps our infirmities, forgives our sins, instructs us with his word,
refreshes us with hope, supports us by Faith, feeds and strengthens us by the
Sacraments, and refreshes us by his own The Land of Promise the figure of our
inheritance. What and how great benefits the grace of Christ confers upon us in
the present life.
Spirit, adorns us with his gifts, renews our hearts, and stirs them up to
spiritual motions of better life and obedience, restrains vicious affections,
by whose guidance there increase in us the beginnings of eternal life, the
knowledge of God, invocation, fear, faith, true repentance, a new law, and the
image of him, who Created us, etc.

And seeing Christ works these things in us with continual care, daily more and
more, promoting and bringing unto maturity that which he has begun in us;
there is therefore no cause why the Graces of Christ here should seem needless
to any Man.

But these beginnings of Divine Grace must be distinguished from The grace of
Christ is never idle in his own.
that perfect and complete renovation of Nature, which shall be seen in the
glorified after this life. For though it should not be doubted but great
advantages are communicated to Believers by the Divine help of the Holy Spirit,
both to shun those things that are grievously offensive, and also to exercise
the Offices of Piety; of which Paul Romans 8. They Romans 8.
who are led, says he by the Spirit of The life of the Saints in this World is
not so much life of the flesh as of says; it is not so much discerned in
justice as in justification.
God, are the Sons of God. Yet there is not given to the regenerate in this
life a complete conformity to the Law of God, but it is reserved for the other
life; for the life of the Saints in this World should not be called a life of
the flesh but of Faith rather, not a life of perfect, but of begun love and
mortification; as being not so much discerned in justice as in justification,
not in perfect holiness, but in sanctification; not in perfect purity, but in
purification, not in perfection, but in going forward.

But this good Friend ours thinks this should by no means be suffered: Who so
fights against us, as if all the Nature of Salvation consisted not in Osorius
by no means receives the word justification.
Justification (the name whereof he does not account worthy of any mention) but
in Justice it self, not in the growth, but in the perfection of Virtues: And as
if it were not allowable, otherways to aspire to those just rewards of
Felicity, but by performing these Offices of Life, which are contained in the
Law.

O miserable condition of Mortal Men, if those things are true, which you
Evangelize to us. But by what Authority of the Gospel do you confirm those
things, which you assert? You say, There is no reason that any Man should be
joined to God, unless Osor. de just. lib. 4. page 96.
he be a Friend to him. I hear you. What then? But no Man can be his friend
unless he be like him. That is harder: Let the induction proceed. But the
Divine similitude consists wholly of the study and exercise of true Virtue.
From all this therefore it is concluded. That there is no other way, that joins
us to God, but what consists in the performance of Virtue, and in worthy
Offices.

And now what will become of those, who being Just Men fall Proverbs 24. 1
James 3.
seven times a Day, and yet rise up again? What also will become of all those,
concerning whom James speaking, says, in many things we offend all? Moreover,
what will become of those, whom Christ bids Pray, Lord forgive us our debts.

Moreover whereas you say, that no Man is joined to God, or received into
favor, but he that is his Friend: If that be so, How then does God agree to
his own Law, which commands not only to love Friends, but to pray for Enemies?
Job. 3.
I beseech you, when God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son,
what else was this World then, but an Enemy to God, which yet he had so great a
favor to? Yea, Paul expressly testifies, that we were reconciled to God, not
when we were Friends, but Enemies; and therefore he says the love of Christ is
commended in this, that he dyed for Enemies. And again, if, whilst we were Romans
5.
Enemies, we were reconciled unto God, by the Death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

See. I beseech you, how great a difference is between Paul's Assertion and
yours, Osorius. He affirms we were reconciled to God when we were Enemies, you
admit no Man unto favor, but him that is a Friend to him, and conform to him
in the whole fimilitude of his Life. And how then will that command of Christ
consist, concerning loving Enemies, and that by the example of his Father's
bounty, who bestows the benefit both of Sun and Rain, not only on Friends, but
also on Enemies; if so be the Grace of Divine favor is accessible to none but
Friends. and those that are like himself.

And that I may by the by touch something here of the Mysteries of Prophetical
Scriptures, tell me what else is pointed at unto us by the reception of Jacob,
and his Sons into the Land of Egypt. Genesis chap. 47. Whom that very loving Gin.
47.
King being brought unto him, to whom they had not been so much as known
before, received for Inhabitants of Foreigners, and for dear Subjects of Men
unknown; not only into the Common Wealth, but into Friendship, not at all for
their own sakes, who brought nothing with them but hunger and poverty: But only
for the sake of Joseph, whom the King had a very dear love for. What else does
Joseph represent to us, but the sublime Son of God, dearly beloved of him? What
else should you understand in the Brethren, Father, and the whole Kindred, but
us miserable Sinners, whom being dead in Sins, Christ has quickened, and of
Enemies reconciled us in Friendship to his Father, not for any merit of our
Works or Conformity, but only by that favor, whereby he is powerful with the
Father.

But now let us briefly bring the Osorian Argument into a regular Osor. de
just. lib. 9. Nu. 96. lib. 8. nu. 20.
form, that we may the better view each part thereof.

Argument.
Ma. Those only are joined in friendship with God, who are like unto him.

Mi. They who are infected with the pollution of Sins, are not like God.

Concl. Therefore, none of those, to whom pollution of Sin cleaves, have any
Union with God.

And thence on the contrary sense it is gathered, that it must be concluded by
necessary consequence, that all spots of Sins being abolished; That man who
desires Union with God, should agree with him by a certain eminent resemblance.

I Answer, First, to the major which is not always true. Though the similitude
of manners has oftimes no small strength to procure Friendship in the common
There is nothing that so much allures unto Friendship as simili tude, whereby
it comes to pass that good Men love good Men. Cicero, in Lelius. The like
always cleaves to the like. Plat. of Love.
use of Life, as Cicero says; yet all things that are any way unlike are not so
opposed, that they cannot consist together without fighting one against
another. As there are many differences in things, yet every difference does not
unty the bond of love. As again neither do all Men every where cleave to one
another by a firm bond of Friendship, whosoever do some way agree in endowments
and Ingeny. Verily in the Divine Love, this agreement of Conformity has no
place; That they should be received into favor, who came nearest to his Image.
For so it would come to pass that all other Creatures being excluded, Almighty
God would embrace only Angelical Virtues, with his Divine Favor.

Though neither here, if you look to Angels themselves, does any proportion of
similitude unite into one with the Divine Holiness, according to the Testimony
of Roffensis: Who says that the Righteousness Roffens. cont. Luther. Articul.
38.
of Men is another than that of Angels; and again, that their Righteousness is
another than that of God. As therefore this Righteousness of Angels, if you
compare it with the Righteousness of God, will seem imperfect, and beyond all
comparison coming short of that highest Righteousness, and which yet perhaps is
without Sin: So if you compare Human Perfection with Angelical, it will have
some Imperfection; yet so, that all its works are not subject to Sin. Hitherto
spoke Roffensis. Augustine also comes to this Point, who comparing our
Righteousness Aug. de tempore: Sermon 49.
which now is with that which is to come, has these words concerning its
dissimilitude; when that Righteousness, says he, according to which they live,
shall be, and where no evil concupiscence shall be, let every Man measure
himself what he is now and what he shall be then, and he will find in
comparison of that Righteousness, that all his works now are loss and dung, etc.

And presently after: In the Resurrection we believe we shall fulfill
Righteousness, that is, that we shall have full Righteousness. In comparison of
that all the Life we live now is dung, etc. And now, Osorius, what Agreement of
similitude will you find between this Life of dung, and that highest Author,
and Prince of all Holiness.

The Assertion of Osorius, whereby he proves that there can be no
Reconciliation to God, unless all the Relics of Sin be utterly cut off.
BUT perhaps some Osorian will Another Calumny of Osorius against Luther.
here again object; Though dissimilitude does not divide the connection of
friendship; but yet things that are so different, that they are opposed to one
another by a mutual repugnancy, it cannot by any means be, that those things
should be joined together; of which sort are Virtue and Vice, Righteousness and
Sin, Love and Hatred. Therefore seeing God is altogether so just in his own
Nature, that he cannot but hate Sin; and on the contrary, Man is so wholly
drowned in sin, that in every good work, according to the Opinion of Luther,
the Saints themselves also do sin, in this so great dissimilitude of things
that are opposite to one another; how can it be that Infinite Holiness can be
joined by any Communion with Man, if he is such a one as Luther describes him?
For so Osorius, from things well said by Luther, but badly understood by him,
and worse wrested for the occasion of cavilling, does very ill argue, not
because it is true, but because it seems so to him. But let us first oppose the
frivolous Objection; and then let us take Luther's part, as well as we can,
against the cruel Incursions of his Adversaries, And first indeed it cannot be
denied that Justice and Sin are repugnant to one another by the most contrary
Romans 1.
opposition. Likewise we must confess that it is no less true, that all
impurity of sin is hateful and abominable to God: For the Anger of God is
revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who
ditain the Truth in unrighteousness; as the Apostle speaks very evidently.
Which being so, what remains then, but that the Life of the Godly should either
be free of all sin in this World, as Osorius contends; or if that cannot be, as
Luther affirms, all must be liable to the A Confutation of the Cavil. All
Judgment is committed to the Son, Job. 3. Luke 10.
Wrath of God. I answer with the Apostle Paul; That indeed would follow, unless
there comes a Mediator, who may interpose himself against the Anger of God in
the sinners behalf; who may satisfy for sin, who may obtain pardon, who may
mollify the rigor of Justice; yea, who may transpose all the Judgment given
against the guilty upon himself, and that now he himself may be Judge of the
Cause, who is the forgiver of the Crime. For so we hear in the Gospel; My
Father judges no man, but has given all Judgment to the Son. And again; All
things are delivered unto me by Father. All which benefits, seeing we receive
from Christ, the most bountiful Mediator, in such plenty as exceeds all
belief, there is no cause, O Osorius, why in such great abundance of grace, you
should press us with such strict weights of Justice, as if we were now under
the Law, and not under Grace? But how much more agreeable would it be both to
your Duty, and Salvation, that you should by a submission common to you and us,
give place to the Grace of God, and acknowledge the benefits of the Mediator,
and apply your self with all gratitude of mind to his everlasting praises, that
are worthy to be celebrated through all Generations.

Therefore that we may expedite a matter not very difficult in a few words:
Whereas you say sin is hateful to God, nothing is Sin is one thing, and a man
that is a sinner is another thing in the sight of God.
more true. But it is one thing to speak of sin, and another thing to speak of
Man that is a sinner; he indeed hates sin, and the Physician also hates the
disease, but yet not so, that he should destroy the diseased person, but that
he should heal him. Concerning which thing, if you do not trust me, hear
Augustine; he is not a God that condemns some sins, and justifies Aug. Tract.
41. in Iobannem.
and praises other sins: He praises none, but hates all, as a Physician hates
the disease, and by curing endeavors to drive away the disease: So God by his
Grace procures that sin is consumed Sin is diminished in this life, but not
taken away.
in us. But how is it consumed? It is diminished in the life of them that are
going on to Perfection: it shall be consumed in the life of the perfect, etc.

The Assertion of Luther against Osorius concerning the Sins of the Saints, is
defended.
I Come now to Luther, whom you reproach after such an unworthy manner, and
with such shameful slanders, yea and lies so tragically. Why so? to wit,
because he durst accuse the Saints themselves of sin; which seems to you so
execrable a wickedness, August. of true and false Repeniance, c. 5. Why did the
Lord wash the seet of Peter, but because there was a daily sinning, it behoved
that there should be a daily remission, etc. Cyprian. But if no man can be
without sin, whosoever says that he is unblameable, is either proud or a fool.
Hier. contra Pelag. Dial. 1. But to be perpetually without sin is only in the
power of God: Therefore either give an example of one that was always without
sin; or if you cannot confess your weakness, and do not set your mouth against
Heaven to deceive the Ears of fools, by that which really is, and that which
can be.
as if no greater reproach could be cast, not only on holy men themselves, but
also on the Author and Prince of all Holiness.

You may upon the same account cast reproaches in like manner upon Hierom,
Augustine, and Bernard, and other most approved Writers of the Primitive Times:
Whom you must either by necessary consequence absolve with Luther, or not
condemn Luther without them: Seeing there is none of all these, that thought
this Title of Honor should be attributed to any man, but Christ only, that he
should be wholly without all stain of sin. No, but Osor. de Just. lib. 2. p.
35. 36.
Luther, say you, pleads that all mortal men, though confirmed in Faith, are
yet in a state of sinning, and that sin is lively also in the Saints. even so
long as they live by Faith; and also he profeses that the same do sin in every
good work. And what has any man said or done so rightly, but it may be
depraved by relating it wrong, especially when calummy makes the
Interpretation. That which Luther asserts concerning the sins of the Saints, if
the words be suitably weighed with the state of the Question, there is no
offense in it. As if it be asked, whether the works of the Regenerate should be
called good in this Life, or sins: Luther denies not that the pious deeds of
the Regenerate are good; but affirms this very thing, That they are good in the
sight of God, and pleasing to him, which comes not How the works of the
Regenerate are good and how they are sins. Aug. in primo quinqua. Psalm. 31.
Believe in him that justifies the ungodly, that your good works may be good,
for I should not call them good as long as they come not from a good Root,
wherein consists the state of the Controversy.
to pass upon the account of the work it self, but upon the account of Faith
and a Mediator, for whose sake the pious endeavors of his own are pleasing to
God, and their begun obedience, though it is otherways of its own nature
imperfect. Therefore this is not the Controversy, whether the Regenerate by
the help of the Grace of God can do any thing in this Life piously and
commendably. Neither is this the Controversy, whether the absolute Grace of
God in the Regenerate is able to perform this, that their work should be free
of all sin. But whether the Grace of God in this flesh, furnishes any of the
Regenerate with so great a power of perfecting Aug. de Civiate, lib. 19. cap.
17. Our righteousness it self is so great in this life, that it consists more
in the remission of sins, than in the perfection of Virtues. Hieron. in Ezekiel.
lib. 14. cap. 46. It is evident that every man, though he had come to
perfection, needs the Mercy of God, etc. Aug. Epistola 31. ad Hieron. Charity
whereby we love that which ought to be loved. This is more in some, and less in
others, and in others none at all; but the fullest that cannot now be increased
as long as a man lives here is in no mau; but as long as it can be increased,
that which is less thau it ought to be is faulty, etc. Idem in Psalm. 142. No
man has at any time done a good work with as much Charity as he could and
ought.
Righteousnns, that any work of his is so complete and perfect, if it be
examined according to the Rule of the Divine Law, that it needs no Pardon nor
Mediator. But if it needs Mercy, then it is necessarily joined with pollution
and sin, so that now the Praise belongs to the Mediator, and not to Man; to
Imputation, not to Action; to Grace, not to Merit; to Faith, not to Works; that
God accepts of the Works of the Regenerate and most holy men. Neither is the
rectitude of our good things any thing else but the forgiveness of God, and the
remission of his just severity. Whence the Apostle rightly concludes, that
those who are of the Works of the Law (not speaking of evil works, but the most
perfect Works) are under the Curse, and upon this account it is true, which
Luther says, that a righteous man sins in every good Work. Not that the Work it
self being appointed by the Law of God is a sin; but because, according to the
saying of Augustine, whatsoever is less than it ought to be, is faulty: From
whence it appears evidently, that in this Life there is no Work so perfect, but
something is wanting in it, that is there is Sin in it, if it be judged
according to the strict rigor of the Law.

Concerning the Grace of God, how it is defined by Osorius, with a confutation
of his Definition.
ARguments increase, because here mention falls in of the Grace of the
regenerate. It is showed, though against the Rules of Logic, that the Grace of
God is nothing else but Justice and Virtue, upon this account: because it being
that chiefly, which makes us acceptable to God, and nothing can be acceptable
to God, which is not like unto him, be thinks he prevails sufficiently by this
conclusion; That, because nothing (...) us like Osor. de Just. lib. 5. Nu. 127,
128.
God but Righrecusness and Virtue, Therefore Grace is nothing, if it is not
Virtue and Justice. Why do I use many words on this matter? If that Grace be
understood by Osorius, which St. Paul so often commends to us in all his
Epistles, both are false, which here the Bishop assumes against the Apostle.
For Grace is not rightly defined after this manner, that it is nothing else but
Virtue and Justice, and first, that it is a Virtue Thomas did flatly deny in
his sum of Theology: Part. 12. Quest. 110. Artic. 3. where disputing of the
Grace of God, though he denies not that it may be reduced to the first species
of quality, A definition of Grace according to Osorius. Tho. 12. quest. 110.
yet he wholly denies, and confutes its being a Virtue, concludeing at length
after this manner, that it is a certain habitude presupposed to infused
Virtues, as the Principle and Root of them, etc.

Moreover in Sentent. lib. 2. did. 26. Art. 4. proving concerning the same
thing that Grace and Virtue are not the same: If Virtue, says he, should hold
from Grace is not the same thing with Virtue but only a Principle of Virtue.
the same, both that it was a Virtue, and that it rendered a Man acceptable to
God, it would follow that all Virtue would do the like. And so seeing some
Virtues are acquired by acts and not by infusion, it would follow according to
the Pelagian heresy; that a Man should be made acceptable to God by his free
will. But if it holds from another, and not from the same, from one that it
Osorius Confuted by Thomas Aqui. That Grace and Justice are not the same.
is a Virtue, and another that it renders acceptable to God, it must needs be,
that Grace and Virtue are not the same in reality. For so diverse principles
necessarily are suitable to diverse effects, that are found in division from
another.

Now if so be Grace is denied to be a Virtue, verily upon the same account
also, it cannot be called Justice, seeing Justice is necessarily comprehended
under the general name of Virtue: and what wonder is it, in the interim that
this Antagonist of ours is so ill agreed with the Lutherans; who is not well
enough agreed with the Angelical Doctors, and Leaders of his own Sect in such
evident Heads of Divinity? But now let us consider his Reasonings, and the
Confirmations of his Arguments, of what sort they are.

Argument.
Ma. That reconciles us, and makes us acceptable to God, which makes us like
unto him.

Mi. It is only Righteousness, which makes us like unto God.

Con. Therefore, Righteousness only reconciles us, and makes us acceptable.

There follows also another consequence of these things being first
pre-supposed, built upon the same foundation.

Argument.
Ma. Grace makes acceptable to God, and unites unto him.

Mi. Righteousness makes us acceptable to God, and unites us to him.

Con. Therefore, Justice is either Grace and a Virtue, or it is nothing.

First, Both these Arguments are equally liable to the same reprehension:
Because contrary to the Lawful Rules of Reasoning they conclude Affirmatively
in the second figure, as they are placed by Osorius, lib. 5. but let us help
the defect of the worthy Man's Logic. For, if I am not mistaken, he would
rather gather thus from the definition of Grace.

Argument.
Ma. To whatsoever the definition agrees, the thing defined well agrees unto
the same.

Mi. The definition of Grace does very well agree to Righteousness.

Con. Therefore, the thing defined agrees to Righteousness.

I answer to the minor by denying; for that which is the proper An Answer to
the Argument.
definition of Grace, does not agree to Righteousness, seeing the things
themselves do very much differ from one another, both as to their Effects, and
as to their Causes. For, if we believe Thomas, Grace is the Principle, and
Cause of Justice, and of all Virtues. Justice is not the cause of Grace, but
rather an effect thereof. Yea, Albertus Ratisponensis does not much Albertus
magnus in Sentent. lib. 2. Did. 16. Ar. 4.
differ from the opinion of Thomas; who commenting upon the same sentence, in
the same Did. Ar. 4. says thus.

Grace is a habit of Life universally well ordered, not according to the
degrees of things ordered, but as it is called a Relation of the whole Life to
the obtaining of the End. But Justice does not this, nor Virtue; for Justice
does not necessarily make worthy of Eternal Life, upon the account that it is
Justice, or Virtue, etc. What if the proper and true cause which reconciles us
to the love of God, and makes us worthy of Eternal Life, should be searched
for. We shall find, that it lies not in the Works of Justice, but that it
proceeds from another cause.

And what that cause is, Christ himself the best Master will teach you in the
Gospel. Whom I request, and beseech you not only to hearken unto, but to
believe. For these are his words in the Gospel: For the Father himself loves
you, because Ioh. 16.
ye have loved me, and have believed that I came from the Father. By which you
see that it comes to pass not for the sake of our Justice or Virtue, but for
the sake of his own dearly beloved Son, that God the Father cares for us, and
loves us.

What then, say you, does not Justice make Men that live holily and justly in
this World acceptable to God? Which if it is so, The Argument of Osorius,
whereby Justice is proved to be nothing but Grace.
it cannot be judged to be any other thing but Grace. For whatsoever renders us
acceptable to God, is justly esteemed to be Grace. Justice makes us acceptable
to God, therefore it is Grace. As touching the minor, I deny not that Justice,
as it is very acceptable to God, so it renders acceptable to God, if it is
perfect and agreeable to the Divine perfection; which not being given to us in
this Life, another altar must be sought, there is need of other helps.
Therefore if we would find any favor in the sight of God, we must betake our
selves to Christ, and embrace him by Faith. Though I am not Ignorant what this
good Disputant drives at, and what Masters he follows, and on what foundation
he builds. For he builds upon that A various distinction of Grace amongst the
Schoolmen, Lombardus, Sentent. lib. 2. did. 16. Gratia operans, praeveniens,
incipiens liberans. Gratia co-operans, subsequens, proficiens, adjuvans.
old and stale distinction of the Schoolmen, as much used, as it is light and
frivolous, and vain: They according to their subtilty divide the manifold
efficacy of grace, most of them into two parts, and some of them into three or
more. To wit, into grace freely given, and that which makes acceptable. And
again they subdivide this latter, as it were by an Anatomical Dissection into
more Veins, into Operative grace, which again they divide into three Rivulets,
Preventing, Beginning, delivering, and afterward into cooperating, which
likewise is threefold: Following, promoting, assisting.

O holy Christ! with what study, with what labor, what Cobwebs do these
Praters here weave, that they may darken the wholesome Doctrine of Grace with
Smoke and Soot of their idle Talk; for if we What the word Grace fignifies in
the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles.
speak of that Grace, unto which our whole Salvation is referred, who is there
but understands by the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, that it is
thus described? to wit, that it is the only thing, which being placed in the
free Indulgence of God toward miserable sinners, does with dear Love in Christ
the Son of God, embrace all that believe in him, and forgive their sins, and
for the sake of his own Son bestows his Spirit and Eternal Life and Felicity
upon them, though otherways they are unworthy: And though the Operation of this
Grace is not one, and the Effects are diverse, and the Gifts various according
to the diversity of donations; yet the Divine Grace it self is only one, which
is both freely given to us for Salvation, and makes those acceptable to God,
whom it saves, and is one and the same Cause both of Salvation and Renovation:
Wherefore their distinction is justly found fault Against Lombard, Thomas,
Scotus, and their followers.
with, who by grace making men grateful or acceptable understand habits, and
gifts communicated by God; and they do most frivolously conclude, that men are
made acceptable to God by these; whereas it is only Mercy in Christ the
Mediator, which does not only account us dear to it self, but also chose us,
before we were adorned with any Ornaments of gifts. Moreover, if the matter be
so as those men define, that not only Faith in Christ, but gifts and habits of
virtues infused by God make us acceptable to God: What then shall be said of
those, who also out of Christ have possessed many such excellent gifts as well
as we, in which many of them are not only equal to us, but some of them also
excel us; such as are variety of Tongues, gifts of Healing, Prophecy, excellent
Powers, sharpness of Wit, strength of Body, Ornaments of Mind? The Jews have a
strong hope in God. The Turks maintain Love toward one another. But what,
shall we affirm that those men also are by these things made acceptable to God?
which is absurd and unreasonable. Therefore that we may conclude, we confess
that such gifts are things which adorn this Life, beautify Nature, and declare
the liberal Bounty of God, but which nevertheless neither regenerate nor
justify us in the sight of God: For that is due to Christ only by Faith;
neither is it convenient to attribute it to any other Creatures whatsoever:
According to that of St. Paul; Being justified therefore by Faith, we have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Though in the Romans 5.
mean while I am not ignorant, what they answer here; that they treat not of
those Works, which the Heathen perform by the strength of Nature; nor those
Works, which are done by the Jews without Faith by the guidance of the Law
only, but those Works which are of the Faith of Christ. What then, say they,
are not such excellent performances of Works pleasing to God? Is not that very
pleasing and acceptable to God, whatsoever is right, whatsoever is joined with
virtue and honesty, whatsoever being undertaken with Faith is rightly performed
Three things to be regarded in good Works.
according to Duty and Piety? That I may answer this, three things by the by
must be observed, First, What manner of Works these are, which are discoursed
of, whether perfect or not? And then, how they please, of themselves, or upon
the account of Faith? Thirdly, How much they please, whether so much as to
deserve Eternal Life, and obtain the pardon of violated Righteousness; and
being set against the wrath of God, to turn away all vengeance, and be
effectual to satisfy Justice without any remission of sins? For all these must
be regarded with necessary attention. First, Because God the great Creator of
the World, is perfectly holy in his own Nature, and the Perfection of all
Goodness; it is evident that nothing is of it self acceptable to him, and
wellpleasing, which being defiled with any spot of imperfection, does not Osor.
lib. 5. page 119.
agree in all respects to the most exact Purity.

But now seeing it is most true, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 19. c. 27.
which neither Osorius himself denies, That there is no man has led his life
so exactly, that in the whole course of his life he has not been guilty of any
gross offense: And that there is not any state of Mind so framed by Divine
Grace, although it abounds with Divine Benefits, in which nothing was ever
violated by perfidiousness, or offensive through error of mind, or omitted
through negligence; or which does not more consist of the remission of sins,
than the perfection of virtues: What remains then, but that it should either be
false, which this Osorius of ours cracks of an humane perfection, or at least
it behooves that something should be searched for, besides the virtues
themselves, which may commend these first beginnings of our imperfections to
the Divine Perfection, and reconcile them to his favor.

And now then this remains to be searched into; What it is that reconciles
sinners to God, and restores them to his favor? and because this
Reconciliation All Justification is comprehended in the Grace of God only.
cannot be perfected by the Righteousness of our virtues; therefore we must
confess that all the Office of reconciling consists in the Grace of God only,
which the Papists themselves will not deny unto us, who agree with our Party in
this, That Man is justified by Grace; for so we hear it testified expressly by
Osorius himself in these words: Osor. de Just. lib. 6. nu. 151. The Papist
would seem to refer all things to the Bounty and Grace of God, though they do
nothing less in reality.
Therefore, says he, They that give Heaven to the Merits of holy men, do not
weaken the Grace of God, as some ignorant men say, but they celebrate the
wonderful effect of his Grace with due praises; for we are such as judge all
the Morits of the Saints should be referred to the Bounty and Grace of God; so
that it should always be said; Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
Name give glory, etc. I hear indeed very good words; if you had not already
imposed upon us sufficiently with words, O Osorius! But he that will with
judicious attention consider the matters themselves, and the Arguments, and the
whole tenor of your discourse, will find it to be far otherways, that you do
not at all intend what your words pretend, and that you drive at nothing more
in all your endeavors, than to hide under the plausible title of grace so
hidden an adversary of grace, (that I may speak with Augustine) together with
the other Companions of your Society; who being all instructed in the same
School, seem to make a Conspiracy about this one thing, as it were giving
notice by a watchword, viz. to overthrow all the efficacy of Evangelical
Grace, to destroy the assurance of Faith, to oveturn all: For what place is
there for Grace, I beseech you, if Heaven is given not by the free gift of the
bestower, but to the Merits of holy men, as you say? And what will you answer
Paul the Apostle, who denies that grace is any more grace, if men deal with God
by Works? whence that may be brought not without just cause Aug. lib.
depatienti. 1, cap. 20.
against you and yours, which Augustine of old brought in his contending with
the Ancient Pelagians of his time. For thus you plead; That Heaven is justly
and deservedly given to the Merits of holy men. On the contrary, Augustine
being taught by Apostolic Authority, If it is given, says he, to any Merits;
it is not then given freely, but is rendered as due; and by this means it is
not by a true name called grace, where the reward, as the Apostle speaks, is
not imputed according to grace, but according to Romans 4. An Antitliesis
between Grace and Merit. Aug. de patientia, cap. 20.
debt. But that it may be true grace, that is, free, it finds nothing in Man to
whom it should be due; otherways, according to the mind of the Apostle, grace
would not be grace, etc. And now with what fair colors cast on them, will
those things, being contrary to one another, be made to agree? Augustine with
St. Paul affirms, that grace finds nothing in Man, to which it should be due;
That it may be free. On the contrary, the Papists contend that Heaven is given
as a due debt to the Merits of the Saints. What is more contrary? Grace, says
he, does not only help the righteous man, but also justifies the ungodly: in
which there appears a twofold effect and fruit of Divine Grace, both in helping
the righteous, and justifying the ungodly: With the one of which you being
contented, ye either unworthily pass by the other, or which is more abominable,
ye oppose it wickedly, whilst ye admit no grace of justifying, but that which
seems to be joined with Virtue, and the Justice of Merits.

And yet after all these things, whereas nothing more contrary to grace can be
spoken, this sweet Orator would persuade us with his flourished speeches, that
they are no such men as overturn the Grace of God, as some ignorant men say;
but that Osor. lib. 6.
they celebrate with due praise the wonderful effect of grace, and teach that
all the Merits of the Saints should be referred to the Grace of God.

Now we acknowledge this to be most certain, that there is not any thing, but
what should be referred to the Grace of God; whence Hierom accounts it for
Sacrilege, if any man thinks he can abstain from sinning without grace. But
here there is need to explain what the word grace signifies according to the
caution of the Gospel. For grace in the holy Scriptures is not only understood
concerning the help of the Holy Spirit, but it comprehends both free
Imputation, which The word Grace is distinguished.
is by Christ (which the Papists cannot endure) and the help of the Holy Spirit
in performing the Offices of Virtues.

How the Papists and Protestants What the Papists, and what the Protestants
understand by the word Grace.
agree and differ in understanding the word Grace.
Now whereas both Papists and Protestants seem to attribute Man's
Iustifaication to grace, herein they both agree. But they say this after their
manner of speaking, and we after ours. For this is the difference between these
and the Protestants, that the Papists by the name of grace understand only
gifts, that are conferred upon those that are justified, to wit, habits, which
they call infused, and excellent Endowments of lovely Virtues, and other things
of that kind, wherewith the Elect are adorned by the free gift of God. But the
contrary party being otherways taught by the Scriptures, and confirmed by the
sayings of the Fathers, perceiving these very gifts of the Spirit of God, as
long as they live in this flesh, are imperfect, through our default; they deny
that men can be justified by these, because Divine Justice cannot at all be
satisfied by these. And therefore it is, that After what manner, and in what
sense the Grace of God justifics us.
they attribute Justification only to the grace and mercy of God; which
consists not of any remuneration of Virtues, but rather imputation of
Righteousness, and forgiveness of sins. For we do not find fault with this in
them, that they do rightly affirm, that all our good works should be referred
to the grace of God; which neither the Jews themselves nor the Turks will deny.
But A definition of Grace according to the Schoolmen.
we justly disapprove, that they do not define this grace according to
Scripture. For whereas grace is so defined by this sort of men, that it is
nothing else but a habit infused by God, like his own goodness and love,
whereby he that has it is rendered acceptable to God; and it makes Works
acceptable to him and meritorious: It is easily demonstrated both by Scriptures
and Reason, how faulty this definition is, because the thing defined is of a
larger extent than the definition: For the grace whereby God loved Jacob, and
hated Esau, before they did either good An infused Habit.
or evil, was grace; which ye^ ^as not any Habit, either begotten in The
refutation of the definition. Jacob, Esau. The Examples of the Thief, Publican,
the Leper, etc.
them by the power of Nature, or infused by grace, whereby Jacob, that had it,
that I may use their words, was rendered acceptable to God. After the like
manner the grace which in the midst of his persecution of Saints changed Paul
into an Instrument in the hand of Electing grace, was not an infused Habit, but
went before an infused Habit, and first made him a man acceptable to Christ,
before the Habit making acceptable was infused. The same should be said of the
Thief, the Publican, the Leper, and many others in the History of the Gospel,
who were not saved by an infused Habit, but only by an infused Faith; for
otherways what did that word so often repeated in the Gospel signify; Thy
Faith has saved thee? Which word, if it be true, then either Faith is
Righteousness, or else Righteousness can by no means save us. And the same
reason is to be given of the Conversion of the Gentiles; whom of old the grace
of God brought from impure Paganism to the Communion of the Gospel; not for any
Inherent Righteousness, but for his great Love wherewith he loved the unworthy
and the wretched sinners.

Moreover, what shall be said of the Apostles themselves, whom Christ verily
chose not being just, as Augustine speaks, but to be justified, when he said; I
chose you out of the World? What if Christ chose them out of the World; that
they might be just; then they were first unjust in the World, whom he chose out
of the World, that they might be just. If they were first just, and not sinners
of the World, whom Christ chose out of the World; then they first chose Christ,
that they being just, might be chosen by him. But it was not so; for he himself
says to them; Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, etc.

These things said Augustine; by which it evidently appears how our Election
and Justification purchased by Christ is perfected not by any Righteousness of
Works, but only by the free gift of Grace; whence it is called by Paul the
Election of Grace, not of Righteousness, to wit, by this Argument: What if it
is by Grace, says he, it is not now by Works, or else grace is not grace; but
if it is of works, then it is not grace; Romans 11. There was a remnant
according tothe Election of Grace, etc. Osor. lib. 5. p. 127, 128.
or else work would not be work, etc. Which things being so, it necessarily
follows, that the Righteousness, which is wholly exercised in the Observance of
Works, is not rightly called Grace by Osorius.

Therefore take the Argument of Augustine.

Argument.
Ma. It is grace which both elects and justifies the ungodly.

Mi. Inherent Righteousness does Aug. Epistola 10. ad Alipin. It is grace
whereby the unjust are justified, of which it is unlawful for us to doubt.
not justify the unrighteous; for if he be ungodly, how is he just? If he is
just, how shall he be called unjust?

Concl. Therefore righteousness is not grace; otherways according to St. Paul;
If righteousness is of works, then grace is not grace.

Moreover the grace of God, There pardon is free where vengeance might be just.
which is his free Indulgence, because it has no place properly, but where
vengeance would be just; neither is there any just vengeance, where perfect
righteousness flourishes; Therefore it must be false, which Osorius assumes;
That it is either righteousness which makes us acceptable to God, and that
Osor. lib. 5.
it is grace, or it is nothing. But now that we may grant this to Osorius for
the sake of disputing; that it is perhaps possible, that this observance of
righteousness and glorious furniniture of most holy Virtues, wherewith the
divine grace adorns us, receives this name, being given to it by some Writers,
so that in some respect it is called grace: But what then? what relation has
this to our Controversy? seeing that it is not the grace, which justifies us
before God, but there will be need of another grace whereby that same grace may
be justified: For it is not a doubtful case in this place, whether all that we
have should be referred to the grace and bounty of God: For who is so ignorant
as to doubt thereof? neither is it a matter of doubt, whether the pious works
of Christians are pleasing to God? but whether Christians do so please God upon
the account of their pious works, that they are therefore The Papists err from
the scope of the Question. Osor. lib. 3. p. 68, 69. Osor. lib. 4. nu. 103, 104.
justified; that they escape wrath, that being dead they revive; that they put
on Immortality, that they are received into heavenly glory. This your whole
discourse contends for, as if there were no other way, or manner of turning
away the wrath of God, and purchasing eternal life, but by the continual
exercise of Charity, and pious and holy actions. And because all instruction of
living well, proceeds not only from the strength of our nature, but from the
grace of God, which is (...) by faith; Therefore whatsoever you any where in
reading the holy Scriptures of God meet with of the words grace and faith,
presently you wrest that as a most sure Testimony to confirm the Righteousness
of good Works, and also to the defense of Grace and Faith. Which that the
Reader may perceive the more evidently, and also admire the sharp (...) of this
sweet Interpreter; I thought good, to bring forth one out of many and almost
innumerable, for an Example. As where Paul says these Words: Not by Works which
we have done, but according to his own Tit. 3. Hosius. Osor. lib. 4. Nu. 104.
mercy he saved us, etc. Osorius having followed his own Hosius, interprets
this place, as if these words of the Apostle should not be otherways
understood, than of Works, not those which are peculiarly ours, but those which
are performed by faith (...) in vigor and stirred up, etc. We have heard
Osorius: Receive also Hosius, who makes a noise out of the same Ex Hosio
confut. lib. 5. page 451.
Tridentine Oracle. The works, says he, which they do, are good in this
respect, as they are Christ's Works, not theirs. For in as much as they are
tbeirs, though they seem to be good Works, they conduce nothing at all to
Eternal Life: But in as much as they are God's, and the Works of his hands, so
through bis bounty they are esteemed worthy both of the title of Righteousness,
and the reward of the Heavenly Kingdom, etc. Whence all their reasoning and
discourse of good works is of this kind: God does not see and Hosius ibid.
Crown our Works in us, but his own. And moreover the same Hosius adds,
pleading after his own manner, that the reward of the Heavenly Kingdom will be
given to the Works, which indeed are ours, but not for their dignity as they
proceed from us, but for Christ's sake, whose handy-works they are, as Aug.
says: For he that lives and dwells in us works them. And for that cause (which
is more ridiculous) this Phormio goes on to rail at the Lutherans as Enemies of
Grace; Who, forsooth, as he says, do much more grievously detract from the
Glory of Christ, Ex Hosio lib. 5. Nu. 452.
than they, and make void his Cross, and diminish the price of his blood. For
when they detract from the Works of the regenerate, they do not derogate from
their merits, but from Christ, whence all their dignity derives, etc.

These things said Hosius, to whom Andradius agrees in a Speech not Andra. lib.
6. pa. ibi. Orthod. Explic.
much differing; writing these words: When we say that Righteousness is
inherent in us, we do not at all derogate Power and Authority from the
Righteousness and Merits of Christ, to whom we are beholden for all the
Ornaments of the mind. But we rather augment and amplify them: When we say he
has merited for us not a feigned and imputative Righteousness, whereby those
who are really wicked; are esteemed just, but are not so; but a Righteousness
that is true, solid, express, and engraven wonderfully upon the mind, etc. And
a little lower, he said: Yea, indeed ye Lutherans are injurious to the Son of
God, the Savior of Mankind, ye, I say, Endeavor to lessen and depress his
very gracious benefits: Who say that those Sins remain, which, he has washed
away in the laver of his own Blood; ye judge those to be defiled with
pollutions, whom he has cleansed by his infinite Virtue, and you endeavor to
take away from us that Righteousness, which he has merited for Mankind with
many labors and Blood. Hitherto spoke Andradius.

I need not here warn you, Pious Reader, what should be judged An Answer to the
Adversaries.
of the designs and discoursings of those Men, and what you your self must
beware of: with what deceit they prevent the simplicity of the Apostolic
Doctrine, with what darkness they cover their own deceits, what Man is so void
of understanding, or has been so little exercised in the Reading of Sacred
things, but The Roman Church is a Pseudocatholick.
may with his Eyes shut discern, how these things are not at all agreeable to
the mind of the Apostle? By which there is an easy opportunity given to judge,
what should be judged of this whole Generation of Men and their Church, which
they by a false Name boast to be Catholic, which broaches amongst the common
People, these so great monsters of errors, and tares of Opinions, defends them
in Schools, Preaches them in Churches, which sends forth into the midst of us
such Dogmatists, and Artificers of Enemies of Faith and Grace under the Vizard
of Religion.
deceits, who not only corrupt the small Veins and Rivulets of sincere
Doctrine, but also proceed to the Fountains themselves, and Invalidate the
Foundations of Apostolic Institution, and cut and tear the very sinews of the
simple verity. For what greater injury can be done to the Scriptures of God?
What more cruel against the Grace of Christ, what more Hostile against the mind
of Paul, and more gross against the soundness of the Christian Faith can be
said or devised, than what those Roman Potters have contributed by their
commentitious deceits, to the plague and ruin of the Christian Commonwealth?
For, what may we judge should be hoped for concerning the common Religion, the
Sins of every one, and the state of the Christian Commonwealth, if the matter
come to this, that this largeness of Evangelical mercy being taken away or
contracted, we must be called back again to the account of good Works.

Concerning the Virtue and Efficacy of Divine Grace, a more enlarged dispute
against the Adversaries; Answering their Objections.
BUT Those Men will deny that they detract any thing Osor. lib. 6. p. 151.
from the Grace of God, yea, they say that this is the common Sin of the
Lutherans, not theirs, because all that they drive at is to maintain the mercy
of God and to celebrate it with due praises: Why so I pray? for what, say they?
Do not the Pious Works of the Saints please God? Well, and what next? Should
not the same Works having proceeded from God himself the Author, be referred to
his bounty and mercy Why not?

Now then Catholic Reader, receive a conclusion, Roman Catholic ^
enough? as I suppose. Therefore he (...) detracts from good works wrought by
Christ, (...) from the Grace and Mercy of God: Well said, but pray who detracts
from those? Who denies good Works, which Christ living and dwelling in us
Works, to be good Works? Does any Man take away due praise and dignity from
those? Now Hosius talks, Osorius pleads, Andradius cries out, that the Lutherans
do it eagerly. Why so, I beseech you? Because they do not attribute unto the
performance of good Works, the Salvation that is due to them, but translate it
to Faith only.

What then, such as do not attribute Salvation to good Works, should they be
therefore supposed to attribute nothing to Works, or to cast reproach upon the
grace of God? On the contrary, they that detract the promise of Eternal Life
from the Christian Faith, Shall they be accounted Friends to Grace?

By the same reason we may turn Light into Darkness, and Darkness into Light:
Let Christ remain in his Sepulcher, let Moses rise again to be Judge of the
Living and the Dead. But now what Arguments do they rely upon in disputing
thus? Because, say they, Works of Righteousness flow from the Fountain of
Divine Grace. But what? Is not Faith in Christ the Mediator as singular a gift
of God; and does it not proceed from the Election of Divine Grace? But now let
us hear an Argument more than Catholic.

Argument.
Ma. We are justified by the A pseudosyllogism.
Grace of God only.

Mi. Our good Works have their rise from the Grace of God only.

Con. Therefore all our Justification An Answer to the Argument.
consists in good Works.

The deceit of this Paralogism must be drawn forth: And again the word Grace
must be explained: Which is Pardoning Grace, or Grace of Remission.
taken one way in the major and another way in the minor; for there it is taken
for mercy, and the free good will of God, whereby he has redeemed us freely,
whereby he loves us in Christ Jesus, and forgives us our Sins, and whereby also
he imparts his Spirit and Life Eternal to us. And this is peculiarly called
Grace of forgiveness, of which the writings of the Apostles speak aloud in many
places. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, Romans 9. 6, 4.
Coloss. 1. Romans 3.
but of God that shows mercy: And again: Sin shall not have dominion over
you, for ye are not under the Law but under Grace. And what the same Apostle
cites out of a Psalm: Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose
Sins are covered, etc.

And also that which elsewhere he testified very evidently: They are justified
freely by his Grace; moreover that none should be uncertain, what is understood
by the word Grace, presently subjoining, and as it were explaining himself, he
infers next: By the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus. But what other thing
does this adding of Redemption signify, but the Remission Renewing Grace.
of all Sins? That this may be the Argument: We are justified by that Grace,
whereby we are redeemed. But Grace by renewing us does not redeem us. Therefore
we are not justified by Grace renewing us.

I come now to the minor, in which the word grace is taken otherways than in
the major. For there it is put for remission or redemption, here for
renovation: That is, for the effectual energy Grace is divided into Two parts.
of the Divine Inspiration; in communicating Gifts and Endowments, wherewith he
afterward adorns those whom first he has justified: Whence arises a twofold
manner of distinguishing Grace, according to the twofold diversity of effects
on this side, and on that side, of which one consists in the remission of evil
Works, the other in the operation of good Works. And that is called pardoning
Grace, and this is called renewing Grace: From the one whereof proceeds the
Salvation and the Justification of the Ungodly, and from the other come the
good Works of the Godly; and yet those are not full, nor perfect.

Therefore, I answer the Argument proposed, which has more The Syllogism is
redundant with four Termini.
errors than one. Moreover it is made up of mere particulars: Also in the
minor contrary to the manner of Disputants, the case is changed, whereas the
same case should be kept that goes before in the major, and the minor should
follow thus: But our good Works are by the grace of God only; or at least, in
the major the same case of the minor should have been kept, after this manner:
Our Justification arises twice from the grace of God. Therefore all our
Justification flows from good Works. So that the true nature of this
Pseudosyllogism, belongs not to the first, but the second figure simply
concluding both affirmatively and also most Aparalogism in the second figure
concluding affirmatively.
absurdly, just as if a Man should argue thus: Our corporeal Nature was made of
the slime of the Earth: Earthen-Pots are made of the slime of the Earth,
therefore our corporeal Nature was made of Earthen-Pots. What need is there of
words? Whatsoever way these Men form their Argument, or reform it, they shall
never be able to prove, that the works of the Law, whether such as we our
selves have wrought, or such as the Divine Grace works in us, do contain in
themselves any cause of Salvation. For what manner of consequence is this?
Because habitual influences of Works, which make us acceptable to God, proceed
no otherways but from cooperating Grace: Therefore Faith without inherent
Righteousness does not justify, neither does Salvation consist of any other
thing A twofold sort of Works Romans 14.
but good Works. But because there is a twofold sort of Works, one of those
which go before Faith, another of those which follow Faith, I would know of
which of those rwo parts they understand it. If of the preoedent they will not
deny those to be Sins: For that which is not of Faith is of Sin: But if they
understand it of Works subsequent to Faith, they will say that those are either
perfect or imperfect. If perfect, and of such a sort, that they answer the
things commanded in the Law, not only according to the substance, but also
according to the manner of doing. To what purpose then is that daily saying of
the Church made mention of: Forgive us our debts? Or what will they answer to
Augustine, who evidently confutes Aug. of Nature and Grace. The reparation of
the Grace of Christ, though it is begun in respect of the mind, it is not yet
perfected in respect of the Flesh: Which shall be in the Country where Man
shall not only be able to persevere, but shall not be able to Sin.
what they maintain?

On the contrary, if they are Imperfect, Languid, and Lame, upon what account
will they make us acceptable to God the Judge, which are of themselves
defective,. and besprinkled with faults, and spots, and need another Grace, by
the commendation whereof they may be pleasing An Argument from like Comparison.
to God? What if that infinite and Eternal purity, for the most part in the
Levitical Sacrifices did not endure whatever seemed any way defective, or
deformed, or defiled with the least pollu on, and which was not exquisitely
entire and blameless in all respects; if so great integrity of all parts was
Levit. 22. Deuteronomy. 15.
required in the Levites and Priests, that it was not lawful to suffer any one
to enter into the holy place of the Sanctuary, who was wounded in any member of
his body, or deformed in any part, or had a Wen: Do you think that you can
endure the presence of the most holy God with that half-torn and ragged
Imperfection? Wherefore seeing it must needs be perfect and unblameable upon
all accounts, which by Justification indemnifies and frees us from all sin
before the dreadful Tribunal of most perfect Righteousness; surely no man can
believe that it consists in our works, but only in the works of the Son of God;
not those which his habitual grace works in us, but those which he himself has
both graciously undertaken to do for us, and also, having undertaken them, has
performed them to the full.

What Benesits come to us from Christ, and what should be chiefly regarded in
these Benefits.
NOW this is it in which chiefly the unspeakable amplitude of Divine Grace
toward us does evidently shine forth, that God the Almighty Governor and
Creator of the World, according to his fingular Mercy, wherewith he has loved
the World, having given his Son, sent him to us, and so sent him, that he for
us has fulfilled all Righteousness; for there was no need that he should
fulfill it for himself, and if he has fulfilled it for us, what hinders now,
but that may be ours, which was done for us? or Christ fulfilled all the Law,
not for himself, but for us; if for us, then we also fulfill it by him. Tho. 12.
109. page 259.
to what purpose should he do that for us, which he knew was necessary to be
done by our selves for our Salvation? But what if according to the saying of
Thomas, Whatsoever things we can do by Friends, we our selves are said to be
able to do it in some respect: How much better then may we our selves be
supposed both to be able to do, and also to have done those things which a
Friend is not only able to do for us, but has also done for us? and this is
that grace chiefly, which every where the Evangelical Writings sound sorth unto
us; unto which all our both consolation and salvation should be referred; which
Paul the Apostle having received from Christ, did propagate it with so
continued labor among the Gentiles and taught it with so great fervor of
spirit and made it evident with so many Signs and Miracles, and also confirmed
it with so many Scriptures and most sure Testimonies. Wherefore those Papists
are the more worthy to be abhorred as being Enemies to Antiquity, and Enemies
to Paul; who seem to be busied about nothing else, but to abolish the Gospel of
Christ, and to overturn the Foundations of the Doctrine of the Apostles, that
have been long since very well laid by our first Fathers, and to sow another
Gospel in the The Roman Catholics falsely so called, obtrude another Gospel
upon us,
minds of Christians: For what else does all their Doctrine drive at, who
disputing about Grace, Faith and Righteousness, do so handle the matter by
their Philosophical Principles, that he who observes their Collections,
Distinctions, Corollaries and Opinions, will perceive that they do not teach as
Christians out of the Gospel, out of Christ, out of Paul, but that the Ancient
Philosophers of the old Academy, or the Thalmudists of the Law of Moses are
again risen up and alive; except that this only difference is between them, and
the Ancient Philosophers, that these do palliate with the name of Grace, and
Faith in words, at least in some manner, but in reality, as touching the
signification of the word Grace, or the force of the word Faith, they seem to
be so very blind, as if they had read Paul little, or at least had not at all
understood him. I do not rail at the men themselves, The sum of all our
Salvation and Religion is chiefly discerned in two things, Faith and Renovation
by Grace. Grace. Faith.
whom I rather account worthy of pity, but it is not at all convenient to
endure the Errors of men, because they cast no small blot upon Religion, and
are injurious to Christ, and do violence to Paul, overthrow the simplicity of
the Christian Faith; moreover they adulterate all the sincerity of Evangelical
Doctrine with their Niceties, and after a certain manner subdue it unto humane
Philosophy. Which that it may appear the more evidently to the Minds and Eyes
of beholders, let it not be tedious to you to hearken a while, first what
Divine Truth, and then what Humane Opinions teach us.

But because there are two things chiefly in which the whole sum both of our
Salvation and Religion is contained, Grace, and Faith, of which the one belongs
to God toward men, the other agrees to men toward God: It very much concerns
Christians, that their Minds be very well instructed in both. And Grace indeed
is discerned in those good things that are given to us, and promised by God.
Faith is exercised in those Offices, which are chiefly due from us to God, and
are greatly requisite. Therefore that we may rightly apprehend the nature of
Grace, we must see what and how great those gifts are, which the bounty of God
has partly bestowed upon us, and partly promised: Concerning which thing it
remains that we should examine what the Scriblers of Popish Divinity do hold.
Now what they teach about this matter, is for the most part to this purpose.
They place the end of humane Life in blessedness, and the School-Divines
dispute about this very blessedness Wherein Beatitude consists according to the
Shcolastick Doctors. Divines disputing about the chief good.
just after such a manner as the Philosophers of old did of their chiefest
good; unto which every man, must endeavor according to his power, to attain by
industry and diligent labors, and the merits of the greatest Virtues. And when
the former Pelagians affirmed that we could do Pelagians Adversaries of Grace.
that by the strength of Nature, there were not wanting others at the same
time, who valiantly opposing the help of the Grace of Augustine a defender of
Grace against the Pelagians.
God to Free Will, successfully rejected and exploded this wicked Opinion by
the Scriptures. After this came another kind of Divines, who having followed
Augustine, The Papists Semipelagians.
disputed thus against the Pelagians, that we cannot so much as will good by
Free Will without Grace, or merit Eternal Life by any means without Grace. And
that is true indeed. But that those same men joining Grace again, deny not that
we can merit Life by Works, and that ex condigno according to their worth; I do
not see what difference is between these and the Pelagians in that; except that
in the manner of working they somewhat differ; for those work without grace,
these no otherways but by grace; but both do equally Wherein the Papists agree
with the Pelagians.
err from the scope of true Justification: For as untrue as that is, that it is
in our power to perform any thing aright without the Grace of God: It is again
as false, that this grace of working was not given by God for any other
purpose, but to produce meritorious works, whereby we may be justified. Though
I deny not that by any means that the Divine grace of How Thomas Aquin. and the
Thomists define grace.
the Spirit is both fruitful and abounding with the greatest Virtues, which can
never be idle; but it does not therefore follow by sufficient strength of
Reason, that the reward of Eternal Salvation is due to the merits of these
Virtues, as the generality of Sophisters chatter with a great noise in Schools:
For thus Thomas the Prince of this Faction, and the others that are partakers
of his Discipline discourse of grace, and in their Summularies do define this
grace, as if it were nothing else, but a certain habitual infusion of the
heavenly gift in the essence of the Soul, because, (as they suppose) it is a
principle of meritorious Tho. 129. 109. Art. 6. That the will may be prepared
to work well, and to enjoy God, there is required an habitual gift of Grace,
which is the principle of a meritorious work.
works; for so Thomas defines it. And Guillermus not much differing from him,
calls this grace a form freely given to us by God without merits, which makes
him that has it acceptable, and makes his work good, and meritorious. Of these
then is a vulgar definition made up, and it thus defines grace unto us, that it
is, a gift of good will freely given, making its possessor acceptable, and
rendering Guillerm. in sentent. lib. 2. qu. 26. Art. 1. a common definition
among the Schoolmen. Albert. in sentent. lib. 2. did. 26. Art. 2.
his work good. And Albert shows the manner how it makes a man good; in as much
as by infused Virtues, as he says, it perfects the will of man for act, etc.

By these things, I suppose, it appears Grace is a habit in the essence of the
Soul, which according to infused Virtues make perfect for act, and makes the
possessor good. A vulgar and usual defininition of Grace in the Schools. The
Schoolmen disagree with one another in the manner of Grace. (...), (...), (...).
evident enough what Opinion hitherto has been usual amongst those men in the
Popish School. In which neither their Divines themselves are well enough agreed
with one another; for some place this habitual gift of influencing grace in the
essence of the Soul subjectively (that I may speak in their own Dialect)
amongst whom is Thomas and Bonaventure. Others chose rather to refer it not to
the essence, but the powers of the Soul as its proper subject, of whom is
Scotus, and the Allies of that Order.

Again, There are those who Osor. lib. 5. p. 26. Do thou deny Grace to be a
Virtue? what then is Grace if it is not a Veatue? Thomas against Osorius.
think grace is nothing else but a Virtue; which is the thing that Osorius
strongly defends in his Books. But Thomas confutes this Heresy with much
greater strength, and bears it down with suitable Reasons. But the sum of all
their sums drives at this, that Faith only may be excluded from Justification,
and that they may not acknowledge any other Justification, but what consists in
exercising of Works: Neither do they think this grace to be given to us upon
any other account, but for this end, to fulfill (as they say) the Commands of
God, according Faith excluded from Justification by the Thomists. Thom. 12. q.
109. Art. 5.
to the due manner, without which the fulfilling of them cannot otherways be
meritorious.

The Error of the Tridentines in defining Grace is examined.
I Have explained the sayings of some Divines, which differ several ways from
one another, yet they are all wonderfully agreed in this one thing, as it were
by a common Conspiracy, that they may take away from sinners that saving Grace
which only justifies us. Let us join also unto these, if you please, the
Sophisters of later times, and especially the Nobles of Trent, and the
Heretics of that Council, whose Writings, Opinions, and Decrees, when they are
read, what do they declare? I will say in a word, and truly, nothing that is
sound, nothing that is not full of Error, nothing that does not disagree with
the genuine verity of the Word. But what that Error is, lest we should seem to
accuse them without cause, let us explain in a few words, but true; to wit,
seeing there is a twofold Testimony of the Grace of the Father toward us in
the Scriptures; the one whereby in a free gift he bestowed his Son upon us
(...) the other, whereby he bestowed his Spirit: The Son to die for us, the
Spirit to (...) our Life; there is not any man, but should confess that they
are both great gifts. He gave his Son, than whom nothing was dearer to him; he
bestows his Spirit, than which nothing is higher in Heaven. But for what
purpose does he bestow both? how does he give them for our advantage? for what
end? with what fruit? what did he design in so doing? by what Reason was he
persuaded? by what necessity? by what mercy was the most gracious Father and
maker of the World moved? I would very willingly ask this first, either of
Thomas Aquinas, or rather of those Tridentine fellow-Priests; for if Free Will
being helped by the grace of the Sprit of God, as they say, could do so much by
meriting through the infused Virtues, even as much as was sufficient for
obtaining Salvation, what cause then was there why all this charge should be
put upon Christ the Son of God? What need. was there of his blood? Why did not
the most gracious Father spare his Life? But if so be that all other helps of
grace could afford no help to expedite the business of our Redemption; Then it
remains to be asked of those men, what they affirm of Christ, whether they
acknowledge him the only Savior or not? And indeed I know that they will not
deny that Christ is the only Savior. But in the mean while it remains that
they should answer me this, after what manner this only Savior saves his own,
whether only by his Innocence and Death, or by adding other helps besides? Now
if they judge that other securities are necessarily required, it must be why
the holy Spitit is given. Thom. 12. qu. 114. Art. 4. The motion of humane mind
to the fruition of divine good, is a proper act of Charity, by which all acts
of other Virtues are appointed for this end, according to which other Virtues
are commanded by chariey, and therefore the merit of Eternal Life belongs
chiefly to charity. etc. Censura Gololoniens. fol. 148, 149. christ by his
Death has merited this, that Believers are endued with charity and other
Virtues, which qualities, being now received by the Merit of christ, man
himself by. Inherent Righteousuess merits a greater Righteousness,
Reconciliation, and at length Life Eternal, etc. And fol. 170, Faith is only
the preparatory Cause and way to Justification, that afterward we may by
another thing be righteous before God, not by Faith apprehending Christ, etc.
Justification is divided into two parts.
known what sort of Securities these are. Aquinas with his Associates answers,
that those are gifts procured by the Holy Spirit, and habitual Infusions of
Charity, and the like faculties of exercising Righteousness, which helps unless
they are added, the Death of Christ, according to his Opinion is not of such
efficacy that it should be able enough of it self alone to merit Salvation. And
now, what then if those are added? does then at length full and perfect
Righteousness arise from these together, partly from the blood of Christ, and
partly from renovation by new qualities, which may reconcile us being justified
unto God. For thus Andradius with his fellow. Tridentines divides
Justification, which Paul attributes simply to Faith, into two parts, of which
he affirms that the one consists in the remission of sins, and the other in the
obedience of the Law. O the Pest of Sophistical Divinity, and intolerable
deceits! for by this distinction it will come to pass, that Christ is not the
only Savior, nor a complete one, but the Spirit that bestows these qualities;
for if the only formal cause of our Justification consists in nothing but only
the renovation of the Jacob. Pava. Orthod. Exp. 6. p. 470. Then the Spirit is
communicated, when, at the coming of Righteousness; we are made righteous; when
all our sins being extinguished, we are renewed by charity spread abroad in our
hearts by the Spirit; which Charity, because it informs the mind with the Love
of the Divine Law, is called Righteousness. Of how large an extent the fruit of
the Lord's passion is.
inner man, by a willing receiving of grace and gifts; what shall now remain
that may be attributed to Christ the Savior and his blood, but that he should
only give a Dye to our merits, which being so Dyed, may bring us directly into
Heaven. But if it be so, that the Death of Christ alone does not fully complete
our Redemption; to what purpose, or what way did he say it was finished, when
his passion was finished? Or how are all things in Heaven and in Earth
reconciled by the blood of his Cross, as Paul witnesses? Moreover, the same
Paul in many places, and in all his Epistles, places the price and Redemption
in no other thing, but only in the Blood and Cross of the Son of God: In whom,
says he, we have Redemption through his blood: But how shall we say that all
things are reconciled by blood, if Charity and the other gifts of Renovation,
and Merits are the things which make us acceptable to God, Ephesians,
and claim unto themselves, the greatest part of our Reconciliation? What is
this else, but to thrust Christ down not only from his Office, but also from
the Throne of his glory Christ only by his Personal Office is a Savior, and
the Holy Spirit by his Office is a Helper and Comforter of them that are saved.
with a gigantick fury?

Concerning the Reward and Merits of good Works.
What then? Are there no Merits then, say they, of the Righteous? Is there no
reward by way of Merit left in Heaven, which Christ promises to be so plentiful
in the Scriptures? What, will all that provision of inherent Righteousness
avail us nothing toward Life? Will so many labors and store of most Holy
Works profit nothing, wherewith we being Clothed by the Holy Spirit, are
advanced daily more and more toward the Answers. Aug. Epist. 65.
fullness of Righteousness? Augustine will answer to these things, and first of
Merits. If you ask, says he, whether there are no Merits of the Righteous?

There are indeed, because they Righteousness receives not its virtue from
Merits, but Merits receive virtue from the Justified.
are Righteous; but there were no Merits, that they might be Righteous. For
they were made Righteous when they were justified, etc. The Dignity of (...) is
valued by the Person of the believer, not the Person by the Deeds.
Therefore they were not made Righteous by Merits, if we believe Augustine, but
Merits proceed from the Just: By which you may understand, that a Person is not
valued by the Dignity of his Works or his Grace; but that the Diginity of
Merits receives its value from the Justified Person. Wherefore seeing Men are
not made Righteous by Merits, as Augustine witnesses, but Merits receive their
Virtue and Dignity from the Justified, it easily appears from hence, what
should be judged of reward by way of Merit. For if after the like manner it be
asked, whether there is no reward of the Saints in Heaven: that which Augustine
answers concerning the Merits of the Righteous, the same do I also acknowledge
concerning the reward of the Saints, that the Saints want not a reward, and
that a large How the Reward of the Saints is appointed in the Scriptures.
one in the Heavens. For they who are Holy. a Reward shall be appointed for
them, not for the Works themselves, because they are Holy, but because they
that work are Holy.

For not Heaven, but a reward in Heaven is given not to Holy Works, but to
Heaven is not a reward to the Saints, but in the Heavens.
the Workers. But if any proceed to ask, whence they are Holy: I return to
Augustine, That they are Holy from thence, whence they are also made Just, not
by Works, but by the Faith of the Workers. As for Example, if any Heathen or
Pharisee, who is a stranger to the Faith of Christ, should do this same thing,
that a Christian does, though he should do also greater things, yet the Works
would not please God. And why should his Works displease? Or why should the
Works of a Christian please, unless it were for Faith? And that is it which
Prophetical verity in old time foretold should come to pass, that the Just
should live by Faith; he says, not that the Faithful should live by
Righteousness: By which you see, that this Life whereby we live by the Faith of
the Son of God, is not rendered unto the Merits of Works, but consists of Faith
and Grace; for grace and the gift of God, is Etrenal Life: If grace, where is
reward? If a gift, where then is Merit? But what shall be said in the mean
while unto Testimonies, that are To. 6. An Objection concerning the rewards
proposed. Answer.
frequent in the Scriptures, which oft-times propose great Rewards to Pious
Works? First, it is to be considered by the very Name of Obedience, Debt and
Duty are employed: Now the Obedience we owe, can properly deserve no grace: What
Man at any time commanding a hired Servant to do his Duty, bestows grace or
praise upon him for that which he owed upon the account of Obedience, or
therefore does assign unto him any portion of his Inheritance? What does the
Lord himself answer That which is due upon the account of Obedience deserves no
grace.
to such Servants in the Gospel? Say ye, we are unprofitable Servants, we have
done that which was our duty to do, etc. Now then wherefore Lu. 17.
are those things called by the Name of reward, which God renders unto our good
Deeds? I will tell you: God proposes rewards: verily so he does: but the same
God proposes Dangers and Combats. The most excellent Master of the Wrestlings
sees what and how great storms of Temptations must be undergone, how many
labors must be endured, how many difficulties lie before them: He sees through
how many Casualties and Dangers, the strait way to the Kingdom must be
undertaken by them, who are planted in Christ: And therefore that they may not
faint in their minds, but proceed with the greater courage in their undertaken
Warfare, rewards are showed to them as certain prizes, and recompenses of
Victory, to stir up their minds; whereby the most Gracious Father may mitigate
the crosses of his own Servants, and comfort them in their Sufferings, with
proposing hope of Rewards.

And hence is that frequent mention of Reward and Recompenses in the
Scriptures. Not that those things To. 8.
which the Saints suffer in this life, are worthy of rewards.

For the sufferings of this time are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed in us: But because it so seemed good to the Clemency of God, to esteem
those Merits of ours which are none, as if they were Merits indeed, and to
Crown them, as if they were very great, which deserve no grace at all. For who
has thanked a Servant, as the Gospel Witnesses for the Service, which he owed
to his Master after he did his Commands? And would not rather have punished him
if he had not done them? But if he find any praise or reward beyond his Merit,
he has cause to give thanks to his Master, but not to boast of August.
praefatione in Psalm 31.
his own Merits. Therefore Augustine admonishes rightly and understandingly: If
you would be a stranger to grace, says he, boast of your Merit. And verily
Bernard was not wholly without sight, though he saw not all things, when he said
it was sufficient for Merit, to know that Merits are not sufficient.

Briefly, that we may express the thing in a word, whatsoever it is, which is
called a reward in Mystical writings, is nothing else but Grace proposed in the
place and name of reward. What if this present Life, which we enjoy in the
Flesh, if the convenience of Life, and other Ornaments, though transitory, and
temporary, are very rightly accounted, not to be, our Merits, but the Gifts of
God, how much more rightly shall that Heavenly and everlasting reward of Life,
wherewith the most gracious Father crowns us, seem to proceed, not from the
dignity of our Works, but from his singular Mercy and Grace. Which though
sometimes it takes the name of reward, yet if we rightly consider the matter,
we shall find nothing in all this whole Fabric of our Redemption, but the only
and singular Grace of God.

First, because he endued thee with Faith, and the knowledge of his Grace is
often signified in the Scripture, under the name of reward. Whatsoever we are
or shall be, we are in debt to the Grace of God sor it.
Son: And because afterward he washes thee in the saving laver of Faith, and
because having washed thee, he calls thee forth to be a partaker of the
Inheritance of the Saints, translating thee into the Kingdom of his Son, whom
he freely gives unto thee; and Adopts thee for his Son together with him, and
appoints thee for his Heir: Promises the Heredetary Kingdom, and adorns,
changes, refreshes and comforts thee with his Spirit; beautifies thee with
Virtues, justifies thee by Faith, overlooks very many of thy Sins, esteems thy
good deeds which are very small, as if they were the greatest, and rewards them
as if they were eminent.

He brings thee forth to the Combat, looks upon thee Fighting, adds Strength to
thee, guards thee with Patience, restores thee when fallen, gives thee a way of
escape in Temptations, and raises the up, when thou art Dead, and exalts thee
to the Mansions of never perishing Glory.

What do you contemplate, I beseech you, in these, but the boundless and
altogether Infinite greatness of Grace? And to (...) all that has been said of
it, whatsoever it is, that we are, or shall be, that we (...) that we live, and
are to live; What is (...) but the grace of God, that shows Mercy? Not of Man
that wills or runs? Examine and search your self, and all things that are
yours: First consider your Vocation, who calls thee to this Grace; it regards
those only, whom Divine Grace sets apart for it self, not those that are puffed
up with Human Learning, not those that are of the noblest extraction, and
dignified with the high Titles of their Ancestors, but God has chiefly chosen
the base and unpolished things of this World, which seemed contemptible and of
small value, according to the vulgar opinion. And that I may express it in a
word, those things that were nothing he exalts unto the highest Sublimity. Why
so? But that A wonderful and secret operation of the Grace of God is showed by
Examples.
he may have all the glory to his own free Grace, and no place for glorying
left for Human endeavors, and merits? Of which thing if any Man require more
sure examples, let him call to mind the calling of Peter. with the rest of the
Fishermen, that were his sellow Apostles, and chiefly let him admire the
stupendous History of Paul's Conversion: In whom if we look at his very
Original, as Augustine speaks, and seek for his Merits, we shall find that they
belonged to Damnation, not to Salvation.

The calling of God and his Grace, are Free and Gratuitous, beyond all Merits
of our Works.
LET Us come down nearer to our seves, and now take Example from thy self,
Christian Brother, whosoever thou art: consider with your self both what you
now are, and what formerly you have been; You stand in Faith, Who gave it you?
You continue in the Faith, Who upholds you? You are assaulted by Temptations,
but do not succumb, Who helps you? You are perpetually in danger amongst so
great a Multitude that perish; Who supports you? You Sin daily, Who forgives
you? Dangers, Terrors, Miseries, weariness besiege you on every side, Who
gives you help? Moreover, whithersoever you turn your self, what do you see
else, but all Arguments of Favor and Grace, which take away from Men all
confidence in Works, and glorying in Merits? And where then is that thrice
accursed curse of the Tridentines, whereby all and every one are devoted to the
Trident. Council. Sess. 6. Can. 11.
dreadful destruction of Damnation, who setting aside the helps, the
Coadjutor-ship of Merits, asserts that the Grace of God, whereby we are
justified, consists only in the favor of God: And whoever dare say that a Man
is justified by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness only, or by the
remission of Sins only, whilst Charity does not together with it communicate
its influence in the Hearts of the Godly, and that the grace of working well is
not joined thereunto, etc. Which if it be true, what should be judged of the
Prophets, what should be judged of Christ himself, who are of a contrary
judgment? We must either acknowledge that those were destitute of the Spirit of
God, or else that those Tridentine Sanctions are contrary to Divine Grace. The
Prophet cries with a loud Voice, the Apostle also cries, that it is not of him
that runs or wills, but of God that shows mercy.

And, will the Tridentine Councillors remonstrate against this; that Man's
Salvation consists only in the Favor of God? Wherein then? Running, say they,
must be added, and the choice of Free Will must be added thereto. Who denies
it? We run all of us, each one for his own Portion, being placed in our Stage
by God: For the Christian Life is a race, not a play, an exercise, not a
vacuity from business, a warfare, not slothfulness. Be it so indeed, yet in
this same race how unhappily do we oftiems run? How often do we stumble? How
many ways do we fall, how blind and traversed Free Will.
a way do we often go? And so sometimes we run head long, either wandering
every one his own way as the Prophet speaks, or with the Sheep of the Gospel
wander sometimes out of the Folds? Isa. 53.
But we return presently, say you, into the Way. well: But who, I beseech you,
calls you back? Your own will, or the grace of him, that has mercy? I see that
you return, and I praise it, but to whom is this praise due? To the strength of
your will, or to free mercy? And now I would have you teach me what this
running of yours deserves. You only look at how much you proceed in running,
but you do not also take heed how much you fail in your race. And after all
these things do you yet boast of your merits, as if the reward of the
Everlasting state were due to your Labors? In which assertions I do not drive
at this, to dissolve the Pious endeavors of making Progress, or to dishearten
them by desperation.

For the Admonition of the Apostle is not in vain; so run that ye 1 Cor. 9. 2 Timothy 2.
may obtain. And again: no Man is Crowned, except he strive Lawfully. Let us
therefore so strive, that we may be Crowned, let us so run that we may obtain.
But we do not therefore obtain, because we run; but we do therefore run,
because the promise is made to them that run, not to them that slumber: So that
the running is not the cause The promise is not therefore made, because we run:
But we do therefore run because the promise is made. 1 Cor. 15. 2 Timothy 4.
of the promise, but the promise stirs up to running, and adds alacrity to the
runners. Therefore the Apostle that he may make them the more valiant in
striving, adds this promise, your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. And
speaking of himself, I have fought, says he, the good fight, and a Crown of
Righteousness is laid up for me, etc. What then, do you not see that labors
well performed, have their own reward due to them?

Be it so indeed: But we treat not here of the labors of Men, but of the
merits of Labors, we do not ask, with what rewards the goodness of God
dignifies us, but what we our selves deserve Difference between Gift and Merit.
to receive. For there is no small difference between Gift and Merit. If Merit
is called that, to which a recompense of reward is due by reason of its
equality, it is certain there is no equality between those things which we do
here on Earth, and those things which being promised we expect in Heaven. The
Inheritance of the Everlasting Kingdom is promised, not that which upon the
account of hire is due to our Works, but which is promised to our Faith by the
free gift of God.

Whence Paul, when he said the wages of Sin his Death, he does not add next
thereunto, the reward of them that live Godly is Life Eternal: But the grace,
says he, or the gift of God is Eternal Life.

And why does he not as well say, the reward of Righteousness is Eternal Life?
But that the difference between gift and reward, between grace and recompense
might be evident. For if it is of Romans 6. Ephesians. 2.
grace, than it is not of works: If of works, than it is not of grace. But now
that he might manifest the Infinite Riches of Divine Grace toward us through
Christ Jesus: He Proclaims openly that we are saved through Grace by Faith. And
that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not of Works, lest any Man
should boast. Which also elsewhere inculcating more clearly, He says, not by
works of Righteousness which we have done: How then? But according to his mercy
has he saved us.

And now what is that mercy, but the favor and loving kindness of God, which
remitting the rigor of Justice, spares those that are unworthy, pardons the
penitent, receives them that are undone into favor, which favor or mercy also
glories against Judgment? All which being so, what should be said of the
Hypocritical Fathers of Trent, who by the public decree of their Council of
Trent. Sess. 6. Canon. 11.
Senate, pronounce those accursed, whosoever dare say, that the grace of God,
whereby we are justified is only the favor of God.

The Absurd Paradox of the Tridentines, whereby they deny that we are justified
by the favor of God only.
BUT Now by what other thing then will they say that we The Tridentines deny
that we are justified by favor only. Glossa ordinaria in cap. 6. ad Romans The
ridiculouscomment of the Gloss of theSchoolmen.
are justified, if we obtain it not by the favor of God only? By the Law? But
that works Wrath? By the works of the Law? But the Apostle expressly excludes
those: Not of works, lest any Man should boast. But here I call to mind the
ordinary Gloss, which does resolve no difficulty, but makes one, by it is
subtle comment, partly affirming that we are justified by works, and partly
denying it. For thus it says, our works, as they are ours, have no power to
justify, yet consider them as they are not from us, but are wrought by God in
us through Grace, they merit Justification. And for that cause the Apostle
would not say, the wages of Righteousness is Eternal Life: But chose rather to
say, the grace of God is Eternal Life. Why so? Because, says this device,
those merits, to which Eternal Life is rendered, are not from us, but they come
from grace, whence they receive the virtue of meriting: O wise, yea rather wild
talk to vilify grace? What if the Spirit of Christ influencing the Hearts of
his own, stirs up the Holy Offices of Charity, and excellent motions to Piety?
What does not the same Spirit also vouchsafe all other gifts to his Church,
bestowing on some gifts of Prophecy, on others diverse kinds of Tongues, on
others admirable Virtues of Curing and Healing; and on others of Teaching, for
the Edification of the Saints. What shall we therefore place our whole
Justification in those gifts received from Christ?

I know that there are both many and eminent virtues, wherewith the Spirit of
Christ always adorns his Church; but it is one thing to adorn, another thing to
justify the Church. The gift of Sanctification is one thing, the cause of
justifying is another: both whereof, though Christ perform by his grace, yet he
Sanctifies one way, and Iustifies another, for he Sanctifies by his Spirit; but
he Saves and Iustifies only by his Death and Blood: But you will say, if
Salvation is not placed in Grace, why then is the grace of God called by Paul
Eternal Life? Verily it is certain, and must be confessed, which Paul teaches,
that our Life must be attributed wholly unto grace, to which also it behooves us
to attribute all other things. But we must look what way this grace saves and
justifies; for it is that on which the whole controversy depends: In which the
generality of the adversaries are greatly deceived.

Against the Tridentines.
It is Demonstrated by the Scriptures, that the grace of God whereby we are
Justified, consists only in the free favor of God, and Remission of sins, not
in the Merits of Works, or Infusion of Charity.

THomas Aquinas, and they that follow him, according to the gloss which they
call ordinary, do not deny that Tho. Aqui. lib. 2. sent. did. 26. q. 6.
which the Apostle affirms, That we are saved by the Grace of God: But if you
ask after what manner: they answer, that it comes to pass upon the account
Glos. 9. To. 6. Orbelius lib. 2. Sent. did. 2. Bonaventure. Alex. Halensis.
of good Works. For these are the words of the Gloss: Grace, says it, is called
Eternal Life, because it is rendered to those Merits, which grace has
conferred. And to the same Sense are the Comments of Orbelius, Bonaventure,
Halensis, and others, because, say they, without grace no Man can observe the
Commands of God. And Thomas adds elsewhere, that to fulfill the Commands of the
Law according to the due manner, Grace is necessarily requisite, to wit, to
fulfill them with that Charity that ought to be, by which the fulfilling of
them becomes Meritorious. Which Comment of theirs, we having formerly explained
how false and frivolous it is, there is no need now of any new Arguments.
Verily the Christian Doctrine teaches us far otherways; for though we confess
that which is reasonable: That the Divine Grace is never idle, but always stirs
up the minds of the Regenerate to the best things; yet these Works are never of
so great value, as to promote them unto Eternal Life, which is freely promised
by God, not to them that Work, but to them that Believe; or if Salvation is
premised to them that Work, it is not therefore promised because they Work: But
they that truly believe, do therefore Work, because Salvation is promised.
Salvation is promised to them that Work, not for the sake of the Works
themselves.
Therefore Justification first proceeds in the most direct Order, as the cause
of good Fruits, but that is not effected by these: But it consists only of the
free favor of him that confers it upon them, not upon the account of them that
Merit, but upon another account; to wit, That whereby the most bountiful Father
of his Romans 11.
own Will, has given to us, Meriting nothing, his only begotten Son, who has
fulfilled the Law for us, and has satisfied the Justice of God for our
Unjustice. For herein consists all our Salvation, and the Efficacy of Divine
Grace, and the praise thereof In what thing chiefly the Efficacy of Divine
Grace appears.
appears very evidently, Not that we in the mean while being idle, should do
nothing; but that doing all things, we should Attribute nothing to our selves,
imputing all to the Mercy of God.

Which things that they may be confirmed with the greater evidence and
certainty, let us compare them with the most sure Oracles of Sacred Scripture.
And Examples of Divine Grace are produced out of the Scriptures. AdamGen. 3.
First, beginning at the very first Head of that Book, let us consider Adam,
that Miserable Progenitor, and Overturner of our Nature. Who when he had both
privately and publicly destroyed both himself and us all, by an abominable
Wickedness, received at length the most Blessed Tidings of the promised Seed.
What could the bounty of God have promised more firmly, or given more largely
to any Man, though he had been most Holy? And what did that first and chiefest
sinner deserve to receive? Abraham was commanded Abraham. Genesis 12.
to leave his Native Country, and to go out whither God called him, thereunto
was added a very glorious promise of giving him an Inheritance, and he obeyed
him that called him. The promiser did not fail, he was increased and enriched
above measure; but if I ask, by what Merit of his own, what can the Admirers of
Works answer me here? Afterward Ifaac was born to him, when his Isaac. Genesis 27.
Father and Mother were so Old, that there was no hope remaining of their
begetting Children. Why so? But that God might make it manifest, that in the
benefits of God, there is not left any thing for Human Pride, wherein it may
Joseph. Genesis 65.
glory? Joseph very kindly helped his Brethren, who were in danger to Perish
for Hunger, though they had very inhumanly Conspired his Destruction, neither
did he only furnish them with plenty of Corn, but also promoted them to great
Honors. And now what Merits did they bring with them, that they should be so
Honorably Entertained? The same may be asked concerning the Israelites, who
The Israelites delivered fromthe Bondage of Pharaoh. Exodus 12.
having slain a Lamb without blemish, were delivered from most grievous
Bondage: for what Virtues of their own? Whether for keeping the Law? But the
Law was not yet made, at least it was not yet written. Was it because they
obliged the Prophet Moses with kindnesses, whom rather The Law was
promulgatedbyGod, after the deliverance of the People.
they endeavored to betray, by most unjust ways and complaints? After they had
endured so many laborious Travels and Iourneys, they came at length to the
promised Land of their Inheritance, in which, First, the Town of Jericho is
Besieged, the Walls fall down, not by strength, but by sounds. Afterward
having slain and subdued so many Kings in one day, the People is placed in
their Habitations. It was verily a great Miracle of Victory, but whence
happened this Victory? What shall we say? Because the Israelites were more in
number: I suppose it was not so: was it because they were stronger? Neither was
that the cause: What, did they then excel all the other Nations in Virtues?
Yea, what Nation was ever more perverse? But you will say, they obliged God to
befriend them by observance of his Worship. Yea, how often and how grievously
did they exasperate God with their sins? How wickedly did they murmur against
their Leaders, and so provoked the anger of God against themselves? How often
was the Clemency of God by their Perfidious Rebellion, Wicked Contrivances,
Untractable Stubbornness, Murmuring Concupiscence and Perverseness, not only
provoked, but also almost overcome, so that he would have utterly destroyed the
Rebellious People with all their Posterity, unless Moses, the meekest of Men,
by Humble Prayer with hands lifted up, had turned the provoked Anger of God
into Mercy? But it is better to take notice, what the The Land of promise, the
Victory of the People of Israel. Deuteronomy. 9.
Lord himself speaks against this People with his own Mouth: Say not, says he,
in thy Heart, when the Lord thy God shall destroy those Nations before thee;
For my Righteousness the Lord brought me in, to possess this Land, whereas
those Nations were destroyed for their own Abominations: For thou shall not
enter in to possess their Lands, for thy own Righteousness, nor for the
uprightness of thy Heart, but because they did wickedly, they were destroyed at
thy entering in: And that the Lord might fulfill the Word which he promised by
Oath to thy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Know therefore, that the Lord
thy God has not given thee this Land for thy Righteousness, for thou art a
stiff-necked People, etc.

Ye have heard the naked and simple History, but yet true, of the thing that
came to pass, and not only true, but also much 1 Cor. 7. The Land of promise is
a Type of the promised Kingdom.
more Mystical. If all things happened to them, as the Apostle witnesses,
under a figure, what else should we judge concerning this History, but that
under the History, lies hid a more hidden Mystery: For it can not be doubted,
that this Land of Canaan, that was promised to the Israelites, Represents those
Celestial and Immortal Mansions of the inheritance above, which if it be true,
let us compare the truth with this figure and shadow, the Antitype with the
Type. Just as they, not being helped by any Merits, of their own, yea,
contrary to all their Merits, neither for any peculiar cause in them, but
through the singular favor of God promising, and for the sake of the Fathers,
to whom it was promised by Oath, received by gift the possession of the Country
that flowed with Milk and Honey: So also we should Judge of the Heavenly
Country of Immortality: That it is not due to any Virtues or Works of ours, but
that it comes to us by the free promise of God, for the sake of his Son, into
whose hands all things are given, that are in Heaven and in Earth.

What will the Angelical Dogmatist answer here with his gloss? But that either
those things did not happen to them Thomas Aquinas with the ordinary Gloss.
in a figure, and that they belong not at all to us; or he must needs
acknowledge that our Interests are hereby Represented answerable to theirs.
That I we may proceed in the Sacred Mysteries of Scripture, what shall I now:
say of those, who being bitten by Serpents, had no other way of Recovery, but
by the Serpent set up upon a pole? Again what shall I say of those in the
Prophet Jonah; who being in dreadful danger, as soon as they had thrown out
Jonah, and had committed him The Hebrews recover their Health by looking on the
Serpent. Jonas a Type of Christ, saving the lives of his own by his Death.
to the mercy of the Waters, the Tempest being presently quieted, escaped safe
with the Ship? What else do all these Arguments teach, but that casting away
confidence in all other things, and distrusting our selves, we may account that
all the help for our obtaining Salvation, is placed in no other thing or
virtue, but in his death only, who by his Blood, has Reconciled all things
both in Heaven and in Earth. How often in the Psalms, in the Prophers, in the
Gospel, does the Scripture, shutting up all under fin, take away from Man not
only Merits, but oft-times drives the Holiest unto this by an acknowledgment of
his own unrighteousness, that he acknowledges his Salvation to be placed, not
in those things that are given, but those that are forgiven to him by God. For
as touching the name of Merit or Reward, if it be found any where (for it is
found sometimes) let no Man from hence flatter himself, as if God owed it to
any Man: But let him know rather, upon what account he is said to do that: not
because the Deeds, which of themselves are imperfect, deserve life (yea, which
rather stand in need of Pardon:) But because the bounty of God imputes these
Works, such as they are for Merits to them who Work: Why so? To wit, because
they are the Works of the Faithful; who, if they were The Pious Works of
Believers are impured for Merits, not according to Righteousriess, but
according to Grace.
not Believers, their Merits would have no room at all, nor be of any value in
the sight of God. As if a Father say to a Son, if so be thou love Learning,
thou shall obtain any thing of me, and be my dearly beloved Son: By this Speech
the Father does not so oblige himself to the Son, as if for no other cause, but
for performing Obedience, he would receive him to himself for a Son, yea,
because he is a Son; therefore the Father commands what he will, and the Son
performs what he ought. God uses sometimes thus to propose a Recompense and
Rewards to the Regenerate, whereby we may be stirred up to do well: And there
is no doubt but the Rewards promised, will follow the office performed.

But in the mean while let us see to whom this promise was made, and for what
cause it was made; of which thing let us understand what is the Opinion of
Osorius: God has promised, faith he, to all that live Osor. de Just. lib. 6.
p. 150.
righteously, great wealth, exceeding great pleasures, and an immortal Kingdom,
very great dignity, everlasting glory, etc. There are many faults in these
vicious Argumentations, and that is none of the least, which is committed by
making a division not sufficient: In which kind Osorius offends here: For
whereas there are two kinds of promises very much differing Legal promimises.
Evangelical promises.
from one another; the one belionging to the Law, being annexed unto certain
conditions; the other belonging to the Gospel, being free, without all
condition of Law. The whole discourse of Osorius is so taken up in that Legal
kind, that he does not so much as make mention of the other. God has promised,
says he, to all that live righteously, etc. That is true indeed, if we look to
those Romans 2.
things that belong to the Law: For the Law, as it has its threatenings, so
also it has its promises proposed to them that live unblameably; in which we
are commanded to do this and live. Concerning which Paul also says, Peace and
life to every one that does good, etc. So then the Law promises, and the
Gospel also promises, but upon a different account; for they differ in this;
The promises of the Law regard the Desert of Life: But the Grace of the Gospel
does not so much regard the manner of Life, as the Faith of the Person, and
measures his dignity, not by the merits of Works, but measures the merits of
Works themselves, by the Faith of the Believer, and the dignity of the Object
only on whom he believes. Wherefore as touching Rewards proposed in the Gospel,
it is not enough to look only on the things themselves, which are proposed, but
the consideration must be referred to the Faith and Person of Believers, of
what sort they are, whether planted in Christ by Faith, or out of Christ, to
whom the promise is made? If out of Christ they are servants and unbelievers,
no promise or expectation of reward belongs to them. But if in Christ they are
Sons and regenerate by Faith; then all is due to Faith, not to Works: It is of
Grace, and not of Merit, whatsoever the Father either promises his Sons for
Love's sake, or imputes unto them in the place of a reward. And indeed this
Imputation, in which all the confidence of our Salvation is contained, proceeds
from the grace and favor of God only; and also it must be considered, that
there Imputation twofold.
is a twofold kind of Imputation with God; the one, whereby the Righteousness
of Christ is ascribed to us, and when for his sake, our petty duties are
imputed for great, and recompensed with the highest rewards; the other, when he
does not punish, but pardon great crimes in his own that are regenerate:
Concerning which the Apostle said, God was 2 Cor. 5. Romans 4. Psalm 32.
in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them. But the Sons of the Papacy do in no ways endure this Imputation. Why so?
Andradius together with Monhemius and the Colognists think it an unworthy
thing, that any man should be called righteous by another man's Righteousness,
Andrad. lib. 6. Orthod. Explic. page 477. 454.
which is not inherent in himself. Tiletanus cries that it is more than absurd,
and that it has not been Tiletanus in Apolog. contra (...). p. 226.
heard of in the World, that that can be the true form of any thing, which is
not in it. As if a man should call Cicero courageous with the Courage which is
not in himself, but in the mind of Achilles. To whom that I may answer, this
cavilling would take place, if our affair were carried on by Nature, and not by
Grace; if by Law, and not by Redemption.

I know that our Debt is infinite, the payment whereof the Law does necessarily
require of us. Neither do I deny that we are not able to pay, nor will ever be
able to pay that debt, if our ability be considered. But what if some rich King
intervene, who paying the debt that was owing, gets himself a right to the
indebted Citizens, and having freed them from all obligation, makes them
subject to his own command; what will those furious and importunate pleaders
for Works say here? May we not enjoy the bounty of another, because we have no
ability of our own? what, will they say that no payment is By the Law it is
reckoned that he did a thing, who does it by another.
just, but what is paid with a man's own money. That which is done by a Friend
for the sake of a Friend, is it not just as if it had been done by himself? If
that which was due from us, be paid by the price of Christ, is there any Law so
cruel as to exact the same debt of us again? and what will the Adversaries
require more here? that he should be condemned for unjust, whosoever has no
Righteousness of his own: And indeed I acknowledge this to be true in
Iudicatories, if no Redemption intervene, which may satisfy in the room of
another. But now seeing our Affairs are in such a condition, that the
condemnation of the Law, has nothing that it can demand of us; I think that is
a sufficient Plea for us, which was done by him, who made satisfaction for us.
But these men do again cry out against us, saying that it cannot be by Nature,
and that it is no less contrary to all natural Reason, that any thing should
take its being from that form, which is not its own, but another's.

I answer, That it is true indeed formally, as to the essence of a thing, but
not judicially: For though the Righteousness of another, which is not inherent in
us, cannot render us essentially just, who are by Nature unjust: But nothing
hinders but the Righteousness of another may help our Righteousness, according
to Judicial Imputation; just as nothing hinders, but the Riches of another may
be cast upon another Poverty, by a certain Communion or Imputation of good
things; so that he who in himself is poor, yet may be esteemed rich in another:
And not unlike unto this is our Communion of mutual Imputation with Christ; for
as our sins being imputed to Christ, were hurtful to him, even unto the damage
of punishment; so by the like Mystery of dispensation, the Righteousness of
Christ being adjudged and imputed to us, though it does not inhere in us
essentially, yet in respect of possession and dispensation of Judgment it is
profitable to us for a reward of Life, just as if it had been our own
Righteousness; for otherways to what purpose is Christ said to have done and
suffered all these things for us, if what he did and suffered, serve not for
our advantage? But if they serve for our advantage, why cannot those things be
justly accounted for ours, which were undertaken in our name, and for our sake?
If the name of Imputation does so greatly offend them, which they think does
not well agree with Christian Piety, wherefore then does Paul so often seem in
his Writings not only to use this word Imputation, but to delight in it? But
afterward, Christ willing, There is frequent mention of Imputation in Paul's
Writings.
we shall discourse of this matter more largely in its own place.

THE Second Book: CONCERNING Faith and the Promise.
YE have heard then of Grace and Merits, of free Imputation and Remission of
sins, on which depends all our Justification and Salvation: But now seeing this
Remission, whereof I speak, must be received by Faith only, it remains that we
should in this place treat somewhat of Faith, especially for this cause, either
that we may confute the Calumnies of Adversaries, or that if it be possible, we
may help the Errors of those, that are so great Enemies to this manner of
Justifying, which we affirm to consist of Faith only, without Works.

Upon which kind of Doctrine, if we only, or first of all Men should stand, I
should less wonder at so great Tumults of these Men.

But seeing Christ himself, and Paul and the Prophets and Apostles profess
themselves to be not only Witnesses, but also the Authors and Leaders in this
Opinion, whereby we are taught, that we are justified only by Faith in the Son;
when every one of the most Learned Writers and Interpreters, who were of the
Primitive Antiquity, attest the same with unanimous consent, from whose
Instructions we our selves also have learned the same, what is come to those
Popish Wits, why they should Faith without Works, imputed for Righteousness.
oppofe themselves so unreasonably and so fiercely? And now let us consider
what that is which so much offends them. Luther disputes that Faith is imputed
unto Righteousness without Works. Paul the Apostle taught the same before
Luther: What will Osorius say to me here? what will the Pope of Rome himself
say? what will the Senators of Trent say? To wit, that good Works must be
joined with it. What, must all good Works be joined with it, or not; if they
shall say all, where will they find those that have completed this exact
cyclopedy of Virtues in this Life, except the Son of God only? But if they
understand it of most, or some good Works at least, yet that will not be
sufficient. For unless every one of the Virtues joined together as it were in a
mutual Bond, are united for Righteousness, they cannot profit at all being
separate: Who ever loved his Neighbor as himself, according to the Prescript
of the Law? But suppose there were some such Man: What Wherefore Worksare
separated from Justification.
if such a Man rages with Concupiscence of the Flesh or Eyes, though the inward
mind does not consent? what if the mind swells with self-love, or overflows
with the pride of Life? what if it is enslaved unto Covetousness, or some where
fails in its duty? what advantage will it be to be observant of Charity?
Briefly, what if it be so, that thou aboundest with all other virtues, but only
failest in one command, does not the Sentence of the Scripture condemn thee for
the Violation of the Law? Moreover we may speak in the words of Thomas Tho.
Aquin. (...). 109.
himself: That if the mind is inwardly guiltless as to any consent unto the
sin, yet such is the condition of our Nature, says he, that though through
grace, it is healed in respect of the mind, yet in respect of the flesh, by
reason of which it serves the Law of sin, corruption and infection remain in
it. Romans 7. The obscurity of ignorance To. 7. To. 8. Wisd. 9.
remains also in the intellect, concerning which, Romans 8. we we know not what
to pray for as we ought, etc. and Wisd. chap. 9. The thoughts of Mortals are
frightful, and uncertain of our being provided for, etc. Hitherto has Thomas
spoken. From all which it remains, that Justification confists either in Faith
only, as in the next cause: Or that the Accession of our Virtues, which are
neither perfect nor entire, do not at all avail to Righteousness before God,
but rather to accusation: For Cursed is every one that abides not in all
things, Deuteronomy. 27. Galat. 3.
that are commanded in the Book of the Law to do them, etc.

What is the proper Nature and Definition of Faith, whereby we are justified
before God, is enquired into from sure and true Foundations of Scripture.

By the many things which we have hitherto discoursed of grace, and its gifts,
I think there is a sufficient defense made against the assaults of Sophisters,
for the guarding of this principle, which assigns all the power of justifying
to Faith only, through the free mercy of God: But because I see it is not clear
enough amongst Divines, what that Faith is whereof we speak, I thought it
requisite to speak something of it in this place: To wit, that having surveyed
the Opinions of others, and rightly explained those things which seem to need
distinction about the manifold homonymy of this Word, we may at length be led
as it were by the footstepsof the word of God, to that true Faith, which truly
and simply justifies us.

But because the word Faith is used in various Senses, and there are many
things that are believed by us, (for The manifold signification of Faith.
whatsoever things we find to be true and sure, we presently give credit to
them) but yet any sort of persuasion settled in the mind, though it be true, or
any sort of truth about things conceived, does not therefore upon that account
justify before God.

Therefore in this so great diversity of things to be believed, we must see
what that Faith is, whereof all our Salvation and Righteousness before God
consists, and what is the proper and simple definition thereof; whence it
receives its power to justify, to whom it belongs, and in what Notions it
differs from that Faith which our Adversaries hold. Which state of Faith, if it
had been rightly and definitively seen into by our Divines, I am either
deceived, or else those boasting admirers of Works would wholly Error and
disturbauce among Divines proceeds chiefly from the wrong defining and
misunderstanding of Faith.
change that Opinion, or at least moderate themselves more in this matter of
disputation. But now I know not how it comes to pass, that whereas no kind of
Doctrine either more admirable for dignity, or more excellent for use, or more
happy for the Salvation of Men has shined forth, or that moreover appears more
perspicuously to the Eyes of all Men by manifest Testimonies of Evangelical
Scripture, yet there is no opinion that has more numerous, or more bitter
Adversaries: Which whence it comes to pass, I can not be satisfied in
wondering, unless that whereof I spoke, be the cause thereof, because they seem
not to have discerned aright by the Gospel, what that Faith is to which free
Justification is proposed: Which may appear evidently by many Arguments, and
such as are not at all obscure unto him that reads- their Writings,
Collections, Articles, Councils, and Disputes: And in this very Rank Osorius
comes first, and next Hosius, one of his nearest Osorius. Hosius.
Allies; who opposing the Faith of Luther, does not so much consute that, as
betray his own ignorance. For what ignorance is this? What kind of
intemperance? that drawing your pen against your Adversary, whom you cannot run
down by true Reasons, you carp at things not understood, and you wound the
Innocent with false Accusations? where I beseech you, Luther is falssy
traduced. Osor. li. 2. pa. 32.
did Luther either Teach or Dream of this Faith, which you feign he holds: To
wit, that every one obtains Righteousness, or is justified upon that account
only, because he determines himself acceptable to God; for these are your
words, and not yours only: For Hosius also harps no less upon the same string,
together with you, and the whole hundreds of almost all the Divines of that
Class.

I know that Luther has discoursed many things gravely and excellently of
Faith, and freely saving Righteousness of Faith. But he understands this Faith
which justifies us, much otherways than your accusation pretends. Who was ever
so mad, as that he judged Faith to be confined within these limits, and that it
is no other thing, but that every Man should have a very good opinion of his
own Salvation, and should be strongly persuaded thereof in his own mind.

Though in the mean while, I deny not that there is always joined with Faith a
confidence of good hope, yet if we will rightly examine the proper Natures and
Causes of things, we will find that there is no small difference between Hope
and Faith. For every Man does not obtain Righteousness, upon the account that
he is very courageous in hoping well. For otherways, what Turk or Jew is there,
who does not in his own mind catch at a goodly persuasion about his own
Salvation, and the gracious There is always joined with Faith a confidence of
good hope.
favor of God? We may also add unto these the Pope of Rome, who by a certain
Magnifical, but most vain, hope flattering himself doubts not of his being the
only Successor of Peter. So also the Papists, doubt not but as soon as they
have whispered their Sins into the Ears of a Priest by a silent Confession,
that immediately they go away Pardoned after the performance of this Work; and
when they put the Innocent Servants of Christ to Death or the Faith, they do
not at all distrust that they do God Service, whereas the matter is far
otherways.

Therefore it is requisite to see, not what every Man hopes, but how rightly he
hopes: nor how great his hope is, but how true. The same also must Confidence
and hope accompanies justifying Faith, but does not it self justify. It is
requisite to see, not how great Faith and Hope is, but how true.
be done in Faith: But that it may appear true, it should not be measured by
Human Opinion, but according to the right Rule of Scripture. Neither is it only
requisite to look, what any one promises, but to whom and for what it is
promised. There are wonderful and infinite things, which the bounty of God
promises in the way of free gift. For Salvation and Life Eternal is promised.
Yet these good things are not therefore promised, because they are hoped by us;
but we therefore hope because they are promised. So then Hope does not go
before the promise, as a cause, and make it, but follows it as an effect, and
it depends upon the promise, and not the promise upon it. By which you see that
it is not Hope, no not, when it is most right, that justifies us, and renders
us capable of the promise of God: But some other The difference between
confidence hoping, and Faith justifying. Confidence, or Hope looks properly at
the promise, Faith looks at the Person of the Redeemer.
thing. What is that, I beseech you, but Faith, to which properly the promise
is made? For the Covenant of Eternal Life is made properly with us believing,
and not only hoping, that is not for the sake of that which is hoped, but for
the sake of that, on which Faith relies.

Not every Faith Iustifies. Not every Faith Iuifies.

BUT What I just now said of (...). 3. Sentent. distinct. 23. I believe a God,
I believe God, I believe in God.
Hope, the same also again must be said of Faith, that it must be true and
right, and not only that it must be great. For every Faith does not avail for
Justification, because there are many and diverse kinds of believing: First
there is a Faith, whereby we both know that God is; and fear him: and the
Devils themselves are not without this Faith. There is another Faith whereby we
believe God and give certain credit to his promises. The Schoolmen add unto
these a third kind of believing, whereby we are said to believe in God. And
this Faith they divide variously into a formed and formless Faith: into an
habitual and actual faith. There is also a faith, that is often taken for hope,
and so defined: As in the Epistle to the Hebr. 11.
Hebrews: Where Faith is called the substance of things not seen, but hoped
for, and the evidence of things not appearing, but future.

Moreover there are those that divide the use of this Word into many forms.
Andreas Vega, reckons in the general Nine Significations of the word of Faith.
Andreas Vega Hisp. De Just. q. 1. Nine Significations of Faith in Vega.
Put because in these which I have hitherto reckoned, there is no mention made
of that person, from whom all the Virtue of Justifying proceeds, therefore I
see not how it can be, that Justification should rightly agree to the same.
Wherefore this seems less strange to me in Osorius, Hosius, and others of that
School; if their Opinion is not so right about the Justification of Faith, for
they seem not to have clearly enough discerned, or at least not to have fitly
defined that Faith, which the Evangelical VVritings propose unto us.

But if this Faith, that we profess, contained no other thing in it, It is no
wonder if Faith as it is defined by the Papists does not Justify.
but that which they pretend to in their Books, I would be of the same Opinion,
which they Preach: To wit, That it avails little to the procuring of
Righteousness. That this may be the more evident, I would have Pious Readers
listen to what those Men teach concerning Faith, and how they define it. And so
they define it, that either through blindness they know not, or by
dissimulation they make as if they knew not, what is the true Faith proposed to
us in the Gospel for Righteousness. And that we may begin first at the
Tridentines, they so define it, That it is a firm assent unto those things,
that are revealed, and made manifest by God. And Osorius following these Men
Collects The definition of Faith in Osor. lib. 2. Numb. 46.
the Universal Nature of Faith after a manner not much differing from them,
That it is a firm and constant assent of the mind, stirred up by the Authority
of the Speaker.

But what this Faith is, which Osorius describes after this manner, let him
look to that. Verily any Man may think it is not this Faith, which Paul speaks
of, in disputing of Righteousness, or (...). lib. 3. Did. 23.
to which we from the Authority of Paul affirm that Righteousness should be
attributed properly. Though in the mean while we deny not, that this Faith is
true, which is asserted by Osorius and others, whereby, for the Authority of
the Church teaching, we believe whatsoever things belong to Religion; which
though they are not seen, as Lombard says, yet What Faith is according to
Osorius and the Papists.
they are believed whether they are past, or expected to come. As he that gives
credit to the things contained in the Articles of the Creed, and that are
expressly mentioned in the Scriptures: He that believes and professes, that the
World was made by the Word of God, and that God is, and that he Created all
things of no thing.

Moreover that he believes and professes that he is powerful, and very good,
Osor. lib. 1. page 7.
(That I may proceed in the very words of Osorius) endued with boundless and
infinite virtue, and bounty watching over all parts of the World, and passing
through them, beholding and taking notice of all things, and looking well to
every thingaccording as the dignity and condition of each thing requires; and
whatsoever else belonging to the profession of Faith, is taught in the Writings
of the Prophets, Verily that Man is not at all mistaken in believing. For the
things that are seen by an Internal light of Faith are very true, though they
are very remote from the Senses.

But yet this is not the Faith, though it be true, that justifies us, Not every
Faith apprehending true things justifies.
who are miserably defiled and wretched Sinners, before God. For what
Circumcised Jew, or hateful Turk is there, but believes all these things, which
Osorius, with a long multiplication of words, Preaches of God, and his Power,
and Justice, and Immensity? For they together with us confess one God, and rely
on his promises with great hope, call upon his Name, observe his commands as
well as we, and also flatter themselves with the Title of the true Church; Yea,
also they are not Ignorant that the Dead shall be restored to Life, and promise
Eternal Life to themselves: Moreover many things, which they see not with their
Eyes, they retain. by Faith, and pursue by hope. Briefly, they do no less
believe God themselves, and confess God. But if the Christian Faith, according
to the Magisterial position of Lombard, should be placed in nothing else, but a
solid apprehension of things to be hoped for, and a sure expectation of those
things, which do not appear, what hinders, but that both Jews and Saracens may
be reckoned faithful upon this account.

What then, you will say, Does not Paul writing to the Hebrews What manner of
Faith is this which is (...). Hebr. 11.
expressly comprehend Faith in that same definition, To wit, That it is the
substance of things hoped for, etc. Verily, I neither reject Paul the Author of
this Epistle, nor disapprove the definition, neither do I examine that, nor do
so much as enquire for it, which is enquired for in Lombard: Whether this
description be more agreeable to Faith than Hope? But this I answer: That we
may confess this Faith to be true, which is here defined. But surely that is
not the Faith which properly justifies the wicked in the sight of the Lord.

Why so? Because there is wanting to the definition, the Genus, Property, and
difference, which distinguishes Faith from Hope. Also, there is wanting the
true and proper object of Faith, which should by no means have been omitted; To
wit, The person of him, in whom only all the promises of God, and the whole
cause of our Justification is contained. Who unless Faith looks upon the
promise, but yet not upon this only, but rather another object, whence it
receives Justification.
he comes in, in vain other things are either believed or hoped for by us,
neither will all that substance of things hoped for, avail us any whit unto
Salvation. What then, you will say, Has not the most gracious Father promised
us his mercy? Has he not engaged himself by an inviolable Covenant that he
would pardon our Sins? Must we not give credit to those things, which are
promised by God? He has promised indeed, I confess, but how? Only in Christ
his Son. To whom? Only to them that believe in the Son. I know and acknowledge
that the promises of God are most sure, in which he promises as Osorius Osor.
lib. 6. Nu. 150. Lib. 5. Number. 21.
rehearses; Infinite Riches, excellent Pleasure, an immortal Kingdom, great
Dignity, everlasting Glory. But yet these good things are neither so promised
or given by God, that in the mean while he exacts nothing of us for the
obtaining of these good things which he promises. Therefore this is not the
state of the question, whether we should believe God promising, which is common
to us with the Jews themselves and Turks.

Neither do I ask that, what the Lord has promised: For Salvation is promised,
Pardon of Sins is promised: But this is it which properly comes in question
here: Upon what account, and for what cause, this Salvation and Pardon of Sins
is promised, whether there is no condition interposed? Or whether there is some
condition? But I think there is none, can say, there is no condition. Therefore
it remains that we confess there is necessarily some condition. Which of what
manner it is, let us examine by the Scriptures.

But in the mean while perhaps some Man will object: If the promise of God be
confined to certain conditions, how then shall we with Paul make the A
Question. How the promise is free if it is confined by a condition. Answer.
mercy of God free, whereby he freely justifies the Wicked? Yea verily, I both
judge and hold that the Mercy of God is most free: Free, I say, in Christ.
Otherways without Christ there can be no hope of Mercy, nor promise of
Salvation, nor remission of Sins. And the Sons of the Papacy will not deny this
that all the riches of the Divine promise and of our Salvation stand in Christ.
And indeed in so much they are in the right. For hereby I understand the
Mediator, by whom The Mediator.
God dispenses his Heavenly gifts to us: That (...) Christ. But I do not yet
perceive well enough, how he dispenses by this Mediator. For tho I acknowledge
him to be Mediator, to whose merit only we are beholden for all our Salvation,
The Promise with a Condition.
yet because this Salvation by the Merit of Christ, is not Communicated unto
all, neither is it derived to us but upon a certain Condition, I would gladly
learn of those Men, what is that Condition prescribed unto us by God to obtain
Salvation, or how this meritorious Efficiency of the Mediator Works in us: And
here presently Answers Lombard, Lombard.
and others that favor the Lombardick Discipline, that it comes to pass this
way; To wit, by Charity infused through the Merits of Christ, which being
received by our voluntary taking it in, we are incontinently not only named
just, but are really so.

O Divines! As if Christ had been given to us, and had come from the Father for
no other purpose; but that he might procure unto us the Divine Infusion of For
what (...) Christ was given to us of the Father according to the Papists.
Charity, as they call it. And why could he not by Prayers, obtain this same
infusion from his most bountiful Father, when he was present here? what, was
the Father so hard, and so inexorable, that he could not be mitigated by any
Prayers, to communicate the benefit of grace to any Man, without the death and
Blood of his own dearly beloved Son? But what hindered? Because he was not
willing who by nature is Charity it self? Or because he was not able, who is in
Majesty Omnipotent? But now being endued with the gift of Charity, what will
you obtain by that? You say, Salvation and Righteousness. Trident. Council.
(...). 6. c. 7.
Upon what account will you obtain that? Because Charity being the fulfilling
of the Law, thereby it comes to pass, that Charity being spread abroad in our
Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and inflaming us to the Obedience of the Law, it
easily performs all those things, which are the duties of life; so that we are
now not only accounted, but in reality are called, and are indeed Righteous.
That is right indeed: Therefore if I am not mistaken, this is it, which I see
those Men drive at; that all our hope of Salvation is placed in the performance
of the Law: And that the Summary of the Divine promise, is contained in that
condition, if we perform the things that pertain to the Law: Which because they
cannot be performed without Supernatural Infusion of Andrad. Orthod. explic.
lib. 6. page 471.
Charity, therefore Charity informing the mind with the love of the Divine Law,
is called by them Righteousness.

Ingenuous Reader, you have the Summary of this Sophistical Divinity briefly
described.

Concerning which that you may judge more rightly, look now at this wonderful
Order of Causes.

Concerning the Threefold cause of Justification, 1. Conditional, 2. Formal, 3.
Meritorious.
1. FIrst they place the end of all Righteousness and the Salvation promised to
us in the observance of the Law, upon The order of causes according to the
Papists in the manner of justifying.
this condition, that if the Law be performed, we may live, but if not, there
should remain no other way of obtaining Life.

2. But because this perfect performance of the Law, according to the due
manner of doing, as they speak, is not in the power The nextand last cause of
Justification, is the perfection of the Law.
of Nature, nor in the Law it self, without a special Supplement of grace, as
they call it, therefore they necessarily require Charity spread abroad in our
Hearts, which they define the formal cause of Justification.

3. But now by what ways and means this infusion of Grace and Charity is
obtained, they assign two causes chiefly, of which the one is placed in the
Death of The cause of procuring grace is the Merit of Christ, and the voluntary
acceptance of free will.
Christ, as the Meritorious cause: The other they place in the voluntary
acceptance of our Will, which because it could reject this grace which it
accepts according to its liberty, therefore they Attribute unto it the Merits
of Meriting at least [ de congruo or Agreeableness:] Merit de congruo.
and in the mean while, Faith amongst those Men is nothing valued or accounted
of. And it is no wonder, for they do not understand by the Gospel, what Gospel
Faith is, neither do they seem to have had any experimental knowledge, what the
power and efficacy thereof is.

But that I may answer the Sophistical talks of these Men: First, as touching
the next and last cause of Justification, which A Refutation of the Popish
Division as touching the order of causes. The condition of Justification,
depends not on the perfection of the Law, as the next and ultimate end.
they say consists in the perfection of the Law; how false it is, and contrary
to the Gospel, who is so void of the knowledge of the Gospel, but clearly
perceives it? For though the voice of the Law confines us by a most rigid
necessity, to the perfect condition of performing all Righteousness, yet the
meek voice of the Evangelical promise sounds far otherways: Which requires no
other condition to obtain Salvation, but Faith only, whereby we believe in the
Son of God.

But what should you say to those Men, who know scarcely any more difference
between the Law and Gospel, than Night Owls that are dimsighted at Noonday.

Concerning the Formal cause of Justification.
AND that is no less false, which they most vainly dream concerning a formal
cause; which is easily confuted after this manner. First, that we may grant
this, that Charity should be reckoned amongst Charity is in part as the Saints
often teach.
the chiefest gifts of God, which being so often praised by the Apostle, cannot
be praised enough by any Man, yet never was there given to any Man in this life
so great an excellency therein, that he should fulfill all the Righteousness of
the Law. Whence because charity of life, as they call it, is imperfect, (for we
love in part according to theMagisterial Sentence,) that can neither be called
Righteousness, Sentent. lib. 3. did. 31. Charity does not go before Faith, but
follows after it, neither does it form Faith, but it is informed by Faith.
nor be the form of Faith. Unto this there is added another reason, because
when it is given most largely, yet Charity is never given for this end, that it
may justify us in the sight of God, nor that it may inform faith, but rather
that it self may be informed by faith, and may be subservient to faith, for
Works of Charity are fruits of faith, not the cause of faith, they follow, but
do not go before faith.

For Magdalen did not therefore believe in Christ, because she loved Christ,
but because she believed in Christ; therefore she loved much. Now if that be
called the formal cause by Philosophers, which furnishes matter with Life and
Soul, and if Divines account this the life, whereby we live to God, what then
will they say to the Prophetical Scripture, whereby the Just is said to live
not by Charity, but by faith? What also will they answer to the Words of
Christ, in which he teaches that life Eternal consists in this, that we should
know the Father the true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent?

And again, where in very evident Speech, he Attributes life to faith only, and
not to Charity. He that believes in the Son, faith he, has Eternal Life.

Concerning the Meritorious cause of Justification.
BUT in the mean while, because these things have been already largely
discoursed of, there follows after this, that which is next in this Series of
causes, that we should In what respect the Meritorious cause of Justification
should be placed in Christ.
now examine with the like briefness the Meritorious cause of Justification,
which those Men by the Authority of Trent comprehend only, and wholly in
Christ. And now what then will those Scribes and Disputers of this World answer
here? What do the Works of the Just Merit nothing in the sight of God? Do they
help nothing toward the obtaining of Righteousness? And where then is that
Merit Merits of congruo and condigno Merits of Superrogation that are undue ex
opere oper ato.
de Gongruo and condigno? Where are the Works of Supererogation that are above
due? Where is that grace, which the Sacraments confer upon us, ex opere oper
ato? By what Argument now will Andrew Vega defend this. Axiom of his? Faith,
says he, and other good Works, whereby we are disposed unto grace that makes us
acceptable, and whereby we are formally justified, and made acceptable to God,
are Meritorious by the way of agreeableness of such grace, and of our
Justification, etc. Whence it is evident, that either Christ is not the only
Meritorious cause of such grace, or that all the other helps of Merits are of
no value. Though in the mean while, I do not deny that the death of Christ is
truly Meritorious; but let the adversaries consider diligently what it has
merited: That the spiritual help, say they, of Divine Grace and Charity to
perform the Law. might be diffused into us. What then? Dyed Christ for no other
cause. but that he might obtain the gift of Charity for Mortal Ephesians. 2. Colos.
2.
Men to perform the Law? Did he not rather dye upon this account, that he might
blot out the Hand writing which was against us in the Law, having nailed it to
his (...), that he might take away the Enmity, and might destroy Death for
ever; might dispossess the Devil of his Kingdom, that there might be food and
sustenance for our hunger; that he might make Principalities and Powers subject
to his Triumpham Dominion, that he might take possession of all Power in Heaven
and in Earth. What, if the power of Charity to perform the Law is so great, as
they preach, could not this Charity otherways get entrance, unless the Son of
God dyed? Yea, were not the Patriarchs, Prophets, and many others of the Saints
adorned with the same supernatural gifts? Moreover, since the Death of Christ,
is there so great an influence of Charity infused into the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets before the Death of Christ.
Grace present with any man, that he is able to fulfill all Righteousness?
Because the Merit of Christ is perfect, it is necessary that those things also
should be perfect, which he has merited for us by his most perfect price. But
on the contrary, my Opinion is, that I think Christ to be indeed the
meritorious cause of our Justification, and that he is not so much the
meritorious, Christ only is the meritorious cause of Justification.
as the efficient cause of our Renovation, seeing it is he that baptizes with
the Holy Spirit and with Fire. Suppose we grant that this Charity flows in upon
us by the Merit of Christ, yet I do not therefore call this same infusion of
Grace a cause of meriting Justification, nor any part of a cause thereof; but
it seems rather fit to be reckoned amongst the effects and fruits of
Justification, which follow from thence; neither does it follow, because the
works of Grace and Charity come to us by the Merit of Christ, that therefore
the same do merit Justification before God; for it relies upon no condition of
works at all, but only the promise, and that a free one also; and so free, that
it implies no condition except one only. And because in this place we enquire
what is that only and peculiar condition, the The promise of God unto Salvation
relies upon one condition only.
Doctrine of the Gospel will easily teach us, if so be we are more willing to
hearken to the Gospel, than to the Opinions of Trent.

On what condition properly does the Promise of Justification rely.
BUT the condition, whereby we Faith consists of two parts, inward knowledge,
and outward confession.
are properly justified, is this: That we should believe in Christ, and adhere
to him by a constant confession. In which Faith, in the mean while, a diligent
Caution should be observed, that this Faith should be directed unto a proper
and legitimate Object; which I wonder that it has not yet been taken notice of
by those School Doctors hitherto: Of whom some place the Object of Faith in the
first Truth: Others take for its Object, all things that are written in the
holy Scriptures: Others do esteem for The Object of (...) to the (...).
the Object of Faith, all things that are laid before us to be believed by the
Authority of the Catholic Church. And they say not amiss; for I deny not that
all these things are both truly and necessarily to be believed by every man:
For he that believes the whole Architecture of this World was framed by the
handiwork of God in the space of six days, he is indeed led by a right Faith,
as all Truths are to be believed with a most sure Faith, whatsoever are
mentioned in the Books of the Scripture, which Faith of every particular Truth,
as I suppose, does not therefore justify a man: For the sense of our question
is not, what is truly believed by us, but what Faith that is which justifies
the wicked before God from his sins; and that we should search by the Gospel,
what is the proper Object of this Faith. In the mean while that is a very
ridiculous thing, and too barbarous, that the Pope in his Decretals reduces the
Object of Faith to the Keys and Succession Bonifacius in Decretals.
of the Roman Chair, and that as necessary to Salvation; but away with this
Deceiver and his Cheats.

Concerning Faith and Assurance, and what is the proper Object of Faith.
NOW let us discourse of others, The Object of Faith according to the more
sound Orthodox.
who reasoning with more sound Judgment about Faith, do not fetch the proper
and genuine Object of Faith, whereby we are justified, so far off from the very
first Truth, as Thomas; nor reduce it to every particular Truth of Scripture,
as the Colonienses; nor define it by the Decrees of the Church, as the Duacene
Doctor, and Jesuits of that Place and Order; nor place it in the Infallible
Authority of the Roman Chair, as Boniface; but coming much nearer to
Evangelical The definition of Falth according to the more reformed Divines.
Truth, do thus define Faith unto us, that they place its Object in the Mercy
of God only. For thus is Faith defined by most of our Divines at this day, to
wit, That it is a firm and constant relyance on the Mercy of God, promised
freely for the sake of Christ. Which definition, if it be true, by this means
it appears that the Object of Faith is placed no otherways, nor in any other
thing, but in the free Mercy of God laid hold upon; Faith often taken for trust
in mercy.
which neither I my self deny to be true in this sense, as Faith in this place
is taken for a relyance, as it is often used in this signification, because it
has a respect to Mercy, Whether only relyance on mercy properly justifies us
before God.
and brings forth Assurance in the mind of Believers. But whether this relyance
properly justifies us before God, it may here be enquired not without profit.

A Question.
Whether only relyance on Mercy justifies of it self?

Verily as for my part I am not, Assurance of Salvation is necessatily joined
with Faith.
nor ever was the man that would be, prejudicial to another man's Opinion: I
allow that every man should be persuaded in his own mind; I hinder it not. But
if I am permitted freely to profess in a free Church, what my Opinion is, my
reason leads me to think that this relyance on Mercy, and assurance of
Salvation promised, must be a thing very nearly joined with Faith, and which
every man ought to apply to himself; but then when it is most applied, it is
not that which properly and absolutely unloads us of our sins, and justifies us
before God; but that there is some other thing proposed in Gospel, which by
Nature should in some respect go before this assurance, and justify us in the
sight of God. For Faith in the person of the Son, which reconciles us to God,
does necessarily go before. And then relyance on most assured Mercy follows
this Faith, concerning which none of those that believe in Christ can doubt.

Objection. But you may say, What, does not Mercy promised in Christ go before
the vocation of Faith? does not the same Mercy freely justify Believers?
Moreover seeing the Promises of God are most sure, may not the same be safely
and constantly trusted in?

That I may answer these men: An Answer to the objection.
Indeed the Mercy of God moves first; no man doubts of that, which is the cause
and original of all good things. But it is not that which is matter of
Controversy in this place, Whether Mercy on God's part is the Mother of Mercy
the first cause of our Justification on God's part.
our Justification; but what that is on our part, which has power with God for
our Reconciliation; whether relyance on Mercy, or Faith in the Person of the
Son. I know that the Mercy of God is immense and infinite, in which is
comprehended all the Election of the Saints. Neither am I ignorant that those
things are most sure, which are proposed to be believed in the Articles of the
Creed; than which, as nothing is more sure, so neither is there any thing,
which any man ought to doubt of about the assurance of those things, which are
promised, or concerning the On our part are considered relyance on the Mercy
promised, and Faith in the Person of the Mediator.
faithfulness of the Promiser. For what is more sure than the Promises of God?
what more stable than the faithfulness of the Promiser? what more free than
Mercy freely proposed in Christ? Wherefore the rather, this unsavory and no
less reproachful barking of Hosius, Andradius, and such like men, should be
hissed away out of the Society of Christians; who kicking against the pricks;
bring all things into doubt The Opinion of the Papists concerning the
uncertainty of our Salvation in Christ exploded. Hosius lib. 3. confut. p. 140.
and uncertainty, with the Academicks, and they look upon it as a thing
unsufferable, for a man to take upon him to rely upon the promise of Salvation;
which they of Trent condemn with an Anathema, Hosius detests it as vain and
unprofitable arguing, as if this assurance of Divine Grace did nothing but open
to the Consciences of men a door to a certain slothful laziness and dissolute
life: Therefore, says he, as prudent Fathers and Masters sometimes do, they
hide their Love toward their Children and Servants, that they might keep them
the more in fear and in their duty: So God does also toward his Servants, that
being kept wavering between hope and fear, he may by that means the more easily
drive them from security and negligence, etc.

Concerning the Assurance of Christian Reliance, against Hosius.
A Worthy comparison for sooth, An Answer against the Hosian uncertainty.
of God and Men, which disannuls and destroys all the Promises of God, the
whole Doctrine of the Gospel, yea and the foundations of all Religion. For to
what purpose should God promise by his Word, if he would not have us assured of
those things which are promised? A Son was promised to Abraham, and he
believed, not at all distrusting him that promised, and it is accounted a
praise to him: What then? Do you praise the undaunted confidence of Abraham,
and do you dispraise ours? In like manner the Seed to come was promised to
miserable Adam: To what purpose? that he might stick in a trembling wavering
diffidence? or rather that he might support his mind with the expectation of
the promised consolation? There are so many engagements of promises in both
Covenants, which if the Divine Truth would not have made sure unto us, why then
would he have them written in the Word, and recorded in Books? Briefly, why are
we commanded in the Christian Articles of Faith to believe the remission of
sins, the Resurrection of the flesh, and Life Eternal, but that we might reckon
those things to be most sure unto us, which are inserted in the Articles?
Therefore that is false, which Hosius affirms, That no man is bound to believe
firmly, or to hold assuredly either concerning himself, or this man or that
man, that his sins are forgiven him for Christ's sake; that he is in a state of
grace, and that he is assuredly to possess the Kingdom of Hosius lib. 1.
confut. p. 15. Hosius ibid. Osor. de Just. l. 2. p. 32.
Heaven, etc. And again, neither is that less false, which he fathers upon men
of our persuasion, as if we held thus, that every man is a partaker upon that
account only, because he has determined himself to be a person that will be
accepted of God; which is not true, and is not without an impudent calumny. For
we are not of such an Opinion, as to believe that an assured persuasion of
Mercy should by any means be separated from Justifying Faith, (which the
Divines of the Popish way do abominably:) neither again do we transfer properly
the very cause of Justification into this confidence and naked application of
Marcy, (as they falsely slander us.) Why so? because, yet some other thing is
wanting, which must needs go before this application of the Promise, and which
is necessarily required to the true cause of Justifying.

The cause of Justification depends not on confidence, or the application of
Mercy only.
YOU will say, What then? Is The cause of Justification in respect of God is
Mercy in respect of us, Faith in the Mediator.
not the free Promise of God a most true cause on which our whole Justification
depends? If you say on God's part, it is true; if you ask on our part, you must
go further, and something seems to be necessarily joined with the Promise. Now
that we may set the thing more evidently before your eyes; God promises
Salvation to his own, and that freely, and for Christ's sake. That indeed is
most certain, and beyond all controversy. Go on, And you put trust in the
Promise of God: You do very well in doing so, and I commend the constancy of
your confidence. When Salvation is promised freely for Christ's sake, shall
therefore an absolute Promise save all men promiscuously for Christ's sake,
without any restriction of condition? I suppose God will not save all
promiscuously. Now then this Promise belonging not to all, but some certain
persons only, upon some certain condition, I would know, who those are, to whom
this Promise properly belongs. You say, Believers, and in that you say well;
but how, or believing in whom? Are they not those that believe in Christ
himself? Faith only in the person of the Son of God justifies.
Is it not he only, for whose sake only Salvation is promised to Believers?
Does not this Faith only in the Person of the Son of God make us partakers of
the promise? Does not this Faith only justify before God? Moreover, is not
this the only condition, which every where the voice of Christ, and the
Apostles in the Gospel, and the voice of the Prophets inculcate; which the
appointment of the Father especially requires; that we should hear his beloved
Son, that we should receive Christ, that we should believe in his Name, that we
should fly to him by Faith, and betake our selves wholly to him, that we
should believe in him, whom he has sent, whom the Father has sealed, that we
should digest him inwardly in our minds, that we should be ingrafted into him,
and should grow in him, that we should know Jesus, and him crucified only, that
we should behold him only, as the Israelites of old beheld the Serpent in the
Wilderness; that we should put on Christ.

Hence come these so frequently repeated Sermons in the Gospel concerning the
Person of Christ: He that believes Ioh. 6. Ioh. 1. Ioh. 3. Ioh. 6. Ioh. 11.
Ioh. 14. Ioh. 6. Romans 4. Romans 3. Ioh. 20. Act. 8. Act. 16. Philip. 3. Ephesians 3.
Galat. 3. Act. 26. Act. 10. Ioh. 8. Ioh. 6. Ioh. 15. Galat. 3.
in me has Life Eternal: As many as received him: They that believe in his
Name: He that believes in the Son of God. That every one that sees the Son,
and believes in him: He that believes in me shall never Die: Do ye believe in
God? Believe also in in me. We believe and know that thou art Christ the Son of
the living God. He that believes in him, who justifies the Ungodly. Justifying
him, that is of the faith of Jesus Christ. If thou confess with thy Mouth the
Lord Jesus, etc. That we may believe that (...) is the Son of God, and
believing may have Eternal Life. If thou believe with all thy Heart, etc.
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy House; The
Righteousness which is of the Faith of Christ. We have access through the faith
of him. The promise of the faith of Jesus Christ. By faith which is in me. By
his Name all that believe in him. If ye do not believe that I am he. Except ye
eat my flesh. Except ye abide in me. If ye abide in me. Ibid. Ye are all the
Sons of God by Faith in Jesus Christ.

What is the True and Genuine Definition of Faith.
BY Which so many and so evident places of Scriptute, there is no Man that
cannot be most sure, what is properly The Object of Faith that justifies. The
Object of Faith which certifies.
the Object of that Faith which justifies us; To wit, no other thing, but the
person of the Son of God: As again the object of Confidence is the promise of
God. Which things being so, it will not be difficult to gather from these
Notions of Scripture, what is the true and genuine definition of justifying
Faith, concerning which we are making enquiry: which seems, that it ought to be
defined according to the right rule of the Gospel after this manner. To wit,
That it is a right knowledge of the Son of God planted in our minds, The
definition of faith whereby we are justified.
whereby we acknowledge a promised Christ, and receive him being held forth,
and with our Mouth profess him to have dyed for us, and rose again, Worship him
in Spirit, and embrace him with all our mind, together with all his benefits.

And this Faith as it is a singular gift of God, so of all the gifts of God, we
believe this faith is that only which justifies believers in the sight of God.
To which, though assurance and confidence of the grace of God is most nearly
joined, which is it self also sometimes called by the name of Faith, yet this
confidence does not properly infer the cause of Justification, but receives it
being brought; neither does it cause Justification; but is rather caused by it,
and renders those assured, who are justified by the Faith of Christ; but
Persuasion of Mercy follows the faith of Christ in Order.
does not it self justify. For God does not therefore forgive thee, and
receive thee for a Son, because thou embracest the Mercy of God with a Holy
confidence; but because thou embracest his Christ with a right Faith, and
confessest and love him, he loves thee: neither do we therefore believe in
Christ, because we are assured of Salvation, and trust the promises; but
because we believe in Christ, therefore we attain unto a certain hope of those
things that are promised in Wherein Justifying faith and assurance do differ.
Christ: for Eternal Life is promised to him that believes in the Son. And from
hence arises that clear Distinction between Faith and Assurance; for they
differ in Subjects and Objects. The Faith of Christ, which brings forth
Righteousness, takes its place in the higher part of the Soul, wherein the
understanding is. Assurance has relation to those powers of the Soul, in which
hope, and the like affections The Subject of Faith. The Subject of Assurance.
are placed. As touching the Objects, Assurance has respect to the Mercy, or
the promise in Christ: faith is directed to Christ himself, because he obtains
Mercy for Believers.

But perhaps too much has been said of those things, which, being clear enough
of themselves, would not at this time need any Explication, unless I were
forced thereunto by the Calumnies of Hosius, Osorius, and such Others, whose
Opinion seems to me, to be faulty upon a Twofold account. A twofold Calumny of
the Papists.
First, in that they think this Doctrine of Christian Assurance, which we
Establish in Christ, should by no means be endured in the Church, and which
they call Confidence and Presumption, than which they affirm, that nothing is
more hurtful and pernicious to the Salvation of the Godly. Hosius adds his own
Judgment; that to him no Abomination (as he expresses himself) seems greater in
the sight of God, than this so great presumption of the Heretics: Neither
wants he here his Authorities Hosius in confut. lib. 1. page 14.
wrested from the Scriptures: What, says he, does not the command of the
Gospel teach us, to confess our selves to be unprofitable Servants in all
respects, yea, when we have performed all that God commanded us: From whence
Hosius presently gathers, that he who assures himself that he is in a State of
Grace, he does as much as if contrary to the command of the Lord, he called
himself a profitable Servant. O Wise Headpiece! As if this Assurance and full
Persuasion, which we maintain, did rely on any Dignity of ours, and did not
wholly depend upon the certainty of the promise of God. I come to their other
Calumny, no less absurd, whereby they most unjustly slander us, as if we
referred the whole cause of our Justification to nothing else but only an
opinionative assurance; so that to obtain the Remission of sins, we taught that
no other thing is necessary, but that every Man should, by a special faith, be
persuaded in his own mind, that his sins are forgiven him, which is most false,
as there is almost nothing true in the Books of Hosius. For though we confess
this to be most sure, that nothing is more sure than our Justification by
Christ; yet if the cause be enquired for, which properly justifies us from our
sins, we answer, It is faith, not whereby we believe that we are Justified, (as
Hosius chatters) but whereby we believe in Christ the Son of God, who only is a
propitiation for our sin.

Concerning the Word Justification, what it signifies in the Scriptures:
Whether it consists of Remission of Sins only, or not. And by what ways and
means Justification is obtained.
NOW (ye Papists) ye have our Opinion of Justifying Faith, and the true Nature
thereof explained unto you, what its power is, and what its object: Moreover ye
understand how this Faith is distinguished from Hope and Assurance: And wherein
the true and next cause of Justification is taken up; whereof if ye enquire for
the Internal cause, it is faith only, whereby we belleve in Christ: If ye
enquire for the External Matter thereof, it is Christ only, whom we embrace by
Faith. But because ye do by no means allow thereof, that we should be Justified
by Faith only; that we may confute your Calumnies in this matter, or amend your
error, I see there remain two things to be unfolded by me, and to be
considered by you. First, What the Scripture properly understands by the word
Justification: And then, Who and what manner of persons they are, who are
Justified by Faith. As touching Justification, they of Trent deny that it
consists only in the Remission of sins, unless there is joined therewith a What
it is to be Justified in the Scriptures.
voluntary receiving of grace, and some other things go before, by which as
preparatories, Men are disposed to receive Justification.

But Pious Reader, If you have not yet. heard what this Preparatory Trident.
Conc. cap. 7. Sess. 6.
Disposition is, and by what degrees it arises, and into what order it is
digested by these Men, it is worth while to take notice of it. For Men are
disposed unto Righteousness, whilst being helped By what ways and means Men are
prepared for Justification.
by the preventing grace of Divine Vocation, without any Merits of Works going
before, they receive Faith by hearing. Now what this Faith is, it has been
showed above; for according to the opinion of the Papists, it is a firm assent
unto those things, that are revealed and discovered by God: And yet they plead
that a Man is not presently Justified by this naked assent, Trident. Council.
Sess. 6. cap. 6.
or faith; But it behooves that other Dispositions be added by Divine grace,
whereby men are prepared for Justification; Faith, Fear, Hope, Love,
Repentance, Hatred and Detestation of Sin, Love of Righteousness, Prayer and
the like: so that indeed the beginning of Justification is the free calling of
God; Whence Faith comes by hearing: Whereby Men believe those things to be
true, that are revealed by God: Whether they be such things as belong to the
free mercy of God toward sinners, through the Tiletanus in Apol. page 250. 241.
Redemption which is in Christ Jesus: Or whether they be such things as belong
to the fear of Divine Justice; from which Faith, by consideration of the Divine
Judgment fear arises, whereby Men are terrified to their advantage, that they
may forsake and detest their sins. And afterward from the same faith through
consideration of free Mercy, purchased fo penitent sinners by Christ, assurance
proceeds, whereby they are persuaded that God will be gracious to them for
Christ's sake. And thus by this consideration of so great goodness, they begin
to call upon God as the Fountain of all Righteousness, and to love him, and to
cast away sin, and to endeavor after newness of life, and to keep the
Commandments. And by this means we obtain a perfect disposition or preparation
to Righteousness, whereby we are commanded to prepare our Hearts to the Lord.
And afterward Justification follows this preparation, which is not only the
Remission of sins; but also Sanctification and Renovation of the inner Man, by
a voluntary accepting of grace, and gifts, whence a Man of unjust, is made
just, and of an Enemy, a Friend, that he may Free Will cooperating.
be an Heir according to the hope of Eternal Life, etc.

But now, from what part of the Apostolic or Prophetic Scripture, have they
taken this Doctrine? From none, neither is there need of any. The Tridentine
Oracle is sufficient for Scripture. Amongst the Doctors, Canisius endeavors a
valiant defense of this Decree; but he gains nothing at all. For though we
acknowledge with Augustine, and the Doctors, that which cannot be denied, that
we are Debtors to the grace of God; for all we receive, both for those things
which belong to the forgiveness of sins, and also those things which belong to
new Obedience: Yet what makes this for the matter we are now treating of? For
the Subject matter at present, is not what the efficacious power of Divine
grace performs in us (without which, Augustine justly pleads against the
Pelagians, that all our strength is wholly ineffectual;) but what that is which
justifies a wicked Man before God? What that (...) wherein this our
Justification, whereof I speak, consists; in the Remission of sins only, or in
the possession of Virtues? Moreover what that is, which is properly signified
in the Scriptures by the word Justification? Though in this also, the
Adversaries are not very well agreed with one another; but in this one thing
they are wonderfully agreed, to oppose Saint Paul with all their might. First,
they of Trent, as I have said, do thus divide their opinion, that they make two
parts of Justification: The one in Remission, which they attribute to Faith:
The other in new Obedience, and Works meritorious of increase, as they speak,
by which the Righteouness of Faith is perfected, of which opinion Tilet an Where
ein Justification consists according to the Tridentines. Tiletanus in Apol.
page 237.
is the Author. Again, there are Others, who are so far from explaining what is
signified by the word Justification, that referring all to the Righteousness of
Works, they think that Justification is not worthy to be mentioned in Books: Of
whom, and the chief amongst many, is this Osorius of ours. Thomas Aquinas
discoursing of many things about Justification, as also about many other
things, seems to have described it after this manner: To wit, according to the
nature of Motion which is made in Man, from one contrary to another: So that it
is a kind of Transmutation (...) 12. q. 113. arti. 1. What the Justification of
the wicked, is according to Thomas. A (...) al motion in Justification.
from a State of unrighteousness to a State of Righteousness, And he explains
the reason, why this is called the Justification of a wicked Man, in these
words. To wit, because all motion is denominated more from the term to which,
than from the term from which: therefore that Transmutation whereby a Man is
changed from a State of unrighteousness through the Remission The Term to which.
of sin, to a State of righteousness, it takes its name from the term to which,
and it is called the Justification of the wicked. These things said he: and he
said not amiss, if so be it be rightly understood, for suppose we grant that
which must necessarily be acknowledged, that there is no Justification of a
wicked Man, without a Transmutation, and that Transmutation is not made without
Remission, The opinion of Thomas is examined.
and also that there is no motion without a twofold term, yet there is a
twofold consideration requisite here: First, where he places his term to which?
That is, where he would place this State of Righteousness? If in this life, it
is false: But if in the other, it is most true: For here, by the help of Divine
grace, we proceed from Virtue to Virtue. But we shall attain the term of full
Righteousness only in the life to come. And then as touching the word
Righteousness, I must ask Thomas what Righteousness he means, if he means,
Human or Inherent Righteousness, whereby he thinks we are Justified before God:
I answer, That we shall never attain unto that state of Righteousness in this
life: But if he understand That Righteousness which (...) Preaches, which is
God's, and not ours, the assertion of Thomas does not at all differ from the
words of the Apostle: for thus says he, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God through him: First, what is called this Righteousness of
God? but that which is not ours: Which God approves in us by his imputation.
And then why does he add, (through him) but that we may understand that this
Righteousness consists not in any Whether Justification consists in Remission
only, or in change of qualities. 2 Cor. 5.
performance of our Virtues, but is only upon the account of Christ's imputed
to us, that he only may be just and the justifier of him that is of the Faith
of Jesus.

Reasons are brought against the Definition of Justification set down by Thomas.
BUT because here we fall into a debate with Thomas, about the definition of
Justification; Out of whose Breasts the late School Divines seem to have sucked
whatsoever poison runs in this Controversy: It will not be unconvenient as it
were by tracing his Footsteps, to pursue the deceits of this definition by a
more exact enquiry, and to confute them by just Authority, that we may as much
as in us lies, bring to nothing these Sophistical tricks. But by what reason
more happily, or by what authority more conveniently shall I do it, then if I
oppose St. Hierom to St. Thomas, who I think is nothing inferior to him, as it
were beating out one hard wedge with another harder wedge. Now, whereas Thomas
measuring this peripatetical Justification by a Physical Motion, he terminates
it by these bonds, to wit, That it is a Transmutation from a Term of
Unrighteousness, by Remission of sins, to a Term or State of Righteousness:
immediately the Divines of the Council of Trent following him, snatch at this
same definition, and thus express it, that it is a Translation from that State,
in which Man is born a Son of the first Adam, into a State of grace and
adoption of the Sons of God by the second Adam, Jesus Christ our Savior.
Though this latter definition seems to be somewhat more cautious in words, but
it differs not much in the Sense, yet one answer is sufficient to both of them.

And first I ask this of Thomas, and then of the Tridentines, What they mean by
this motionary Translation of theirs, from Term to Term, from State into State,
as they teach. If this be their meaning, that we, who before were dead in sins,
having our sins afterward forgiven through Christ, and being again received
into grace with God, being freed from death, and the bond of Damnation, are
vouchsafed into favor, and received unto life, and Placed in a free condition:
Herein they do wholly agree with us: But if otherways, they think thus, That
there is no Justification made, but that which consists of the change of
qualities, so that he who before was a sinner, an Evil Doer, a Deceiver, a
Perjured person, an Adulterer, a Glutton and Drunkard, having changed his life
now, begins to be another Man, fasts twice a week, and out of his own wealth,
willingly supplies the want of the needy, being forward to help all, unto the
expending of the tenth part of all his goods, and so leading his life, and
changed into a new Man, that he appears Just and Holy, not by
thatRighteousness, which either needsRemission, or is imputed to the bounty of
the Judge; But which by reason of true Virtues inhering by grace, is justly
approved in the sight of God: What hinders, I beseech you, but upon this
account the Pharisee in comparison of the Publican goes away justified? The
Histories of the Heathen Nations abound with examples of many, who, when they
had been very much corrupted by their own disposition, or by education,
returned afterward to a remarkable amendment of their Life, and a habit of
good manners: And what will hinder, but we may reckon those also among the
Justified, according to the Philosophy of Thomas: If so be Justification be
nothing else but a certain motion from contrary into contrary, that is a
transmutation from a state of Unrighteousness to a state of Righteousness?

But there is added in the definition, by the remission of Sin, and what does
this help their cause? For if there is no other Justification, but that which
consists of Remission of Sins, why then do they of Trent deny Justification to
confist of Remission of Sins only. Moreover whereas in the Remission of Sins
always a suspicion of hidden Sin lies hid, which needs the Patronage of a
Pardon, where now will that state and term of Inherent Righteousness consist,
which cannot otherways defend it self before the Judge without his Mercy and
Remission.

But why should I contend with any more words about this matter, when the
Opinion of Hierom is contrary thereunto, who speaking particularly of these
degrees of Righteousness, utterly beats down and overturns all this, both
Station and term, settled by Thomas. For whereas Thomas disputing about the
motion of Justification proceeds from one term to another term in which the
motion ceases, and the transmutation receives an end and station; on the
contrary, Hierom running through all degrees, teaches that we never Hierom.
cont. Pelag. Dial. 1. Phil. 10. 23.
fix in a station, and are always in a race in this Life, and that that is
always imperfect here, which we Men thought to be perfect. And he confirms it
by the example of Paul: Who forgetting things past stretched himself always to
things beyod him; by which he teaches that things which are behind should be
neglected, and things to come should be desired, that what he thought perfect
to day, whilst he always endeavors after better things, the morrow he finds
it imperfect.

These things said Hierom. Therefore if Paul being in perpetual motion, could
find no ftate of Righteousness in which he could rest: It follows by
consequence from hence, that either there is no Justification of a Christian in
this Life, or that surely it is not defined by its right terms, by Thomas or
the Thomists; whence a just connection is framed on this manner.

Argument.
Ma. Where there is a perpetual Race, there is no station, nor term of motion.

Mi. There is a perpetual Race in this Life, toward obtaining Life.

Con. Therefore there is no station of attaining to Righteousness in this Life,
and end of notion, which Thomas sets down.

By these things, I think it is sufficiently evidenced, what is the
Justification of a Wicked Man in the Scriptures, and in what thing it chiefly
consists: not in a transmutation of inherent qualities, by a voluntary
receiving of Grace, as they of Trent would have it; but in the judiciary
absolution of the Judge, whereby he that is guilty is sent away free, and
indemnity is given to him. Whence Justification seems to be defined not amiss
by some: That it is an action of God, whereby he absolves the condemned Sinner
from the Law, in his free mercy, for the sake of Christ, justifies him from his
Sins, and glorifies him being justified. Though in the mean while it is not
denied, that it is a matter of great concernment, how every Man leads his Life,
and amends it. But yet it is one thing to speak of Righteousness, and another
thing to speak of Justification. And again, it is one thing to be exercised in
the common use of Life, and another thing to be exercised in judicatories.

There the amendment of Life has praise: but in judicatories, no regard uses
to be, of what you are to do, but of what you have done; not what new qualities
better Grace has brought. but by what remedy former Sins may be done away. And
now I pray you, what then must be said and looked for in that most strict
Judgment of the most high God, where the scene and sink of the wholeLife comes
to be brought forth from its lurking places to the light; where impurity of
Life, Deceits, Injuries, Filthiness of Lusts, the Defilement of Conscience and
Concupiscence, the Wickedness of Words, Works, Counsels, and Thoughts, the
Ambition of a pust up Mind, the stubborness of Hatred, Love, Envy, and the
other Affections Rebelling against Reason, the Love of the World, Earthly
Desires, the Contempt and Ignorance of God, The neglect of Duty. Moreover the
whole sink of things formerly done, will be all at once laid open; What will
the miserable Sinner say here? What will he bring? To what will he fly? Will he
fly to his secret Confessions, and Expiatory Penances and Satisfactions: that
will not be sufficient.

These things may declare thee to be a Sinner, and a Penitent, but not at all
Righteous. What then, you will say, has not God promised to the Penitent the
pardon of their Sins? Be it so, but where then is the Tridentine.
Justification, which is denied to consist of Remission only, whereas you bring
nothing into Judgment, but Confessions, Penances, and Deprecatory Tears? For
what need is there of any Satisfaction or Repentance, when you have committed
no Sin? But if otherways, Where then is your Righteousness, whereof you boast?
To wit, say you, Remission of Sins being once received by Repentance, together
with Remission it self, flows in Sanctification, and the Renovation of the
inner Man, and the other gifts of Grace by the Holy Spirit; whence Man of
Unjust, becomes Just, and of an Enemy, a Friend, etc.

What and dare you trusting Out of Alphonsus and the Tridentines.
in this Righteousness of yours enter the lists with the Majesty of so great a
Judgment? And think you that your Virtues are such that they will overcome at
this Judgment Seat, when they are Judged? Not by the Righteousness, say you of
my Virtues, but by those works, which the efficacious Grace of God works in me:
Which Righteousness is not mine but God's: Not of my own Free will, but of
Grace acting in me.

Now then wherein will this Righteousness of yours differ from that Pharisee in
the Parable of the Gospel? Whose Life if you look into, you see it is honest
enough and unblamable, if you look upon Grace, he seems no less to acknowledge
it, and to attribute all his Virtues to it. Otherways, why did he with so much
reverence, and so carefully give thanks to God, that he was not like other Men,
unless he had thought that whatsoever good Works he had, were received of his
gift and bounty? The Pharisaical Righteousness of the Roman Catholics.
For his Prayer does sufficiently declare that; wherein he seems not so much to
Glory in his own good deeds, as in the grace of God, which he had received, to
which he ascribes all these things which he had done. Therefore if it be true
that these Roman Catholics define, That true Justification consists in no
other thing, but in Works of Righteousness, done by the grace of God: what then
does hinder but this Catholic Pharisee, according to their Catholic Opinion,
should be sent away to his House justified? Which not being so, it remains
therefore that another manner of Justification should be sought for by us than
in Works of Righteousness Works not of the Law but of Grace.
which inheres, and is planted in us by the grace of God.

But here the Roman Legions fight with all vehemence for their Catholic
Righteousness, as for their Camp: First by Natural Reason, that it is contrary
to Nature, for any Man to receive the Name or Essence of Righteousness from the
Righteousness of another. Moreover that it is much less reasonable, No Man is
Righteous (...) by inherent Righteousness according to the Roman Divinity.
for God who is the highest perfection of Righteousness, and the Eternal
Verity, to will or be able to pronounce Men Just that are impure and defiled
with wickedness and Evil deeds, and who are not truly righteous. That I may
answer these men, two things offer themselves to be considered; one which
belongs to A twofold Error of the Papists.
the cause of Justification, and another, which belongs to the explication of
the word. In both of which the Adversaries are greatly mistaken. First in this,
that treating of the cause of Justification, they seem to place it in no other
thing next and immediately, but in every man's own Righteousness, not which is
imputed, being received from another, but which every one has within himself,
trusting to this foundation: That because every thing receives its name and
essence only from the form that is inherent; hence they gather, that none
should be accounted just but those only, whom their own life and not another's
Formal Righteousness. Judicial Righteousness.
makes righteous. If they understand it of Formal Righteousness only, and not
Judicial, it has no absurdity, and may, without any inconvenience be granted
to them. But what then? what is this so much to the purpose? for this is not
the matter of debate, what we are, or are not, formally in our selves; but what
the Sentence of the Judge does judicially determine concerning us. We contend
To justify according to the Papises, is nothing else, but to make righteous.
not about Habitual Righteousness, but Evangelical Justification. For it is one
thing to dispute about Righteousness, and another to dispute about
Justification.

But these Logical Divines confound these two with one another too unskilfully,
defining Righteousness thus, as if it were nothing else but to make righteous:
Or if there is any difference, this is the manner of it, that. our Faith in
Christ is by no means Two parts of Justification, of which the first consists
in remission, the other in works of Faith. Alphonsus in (...) Christ. Relig. p.
456. The other part of Tridentine Justification.
the cause of perfect Righteousness, but only the beginning of that which is to
be perfected: And that we do not therefore stand as righteous in the sight of
God, because our sins are forgiven us, and we are reconciled to God for
Christ's sake. Though also they do not deny this, that in this very remission
or reconciliation, where. by a wicked man is first justified before God through
Faith and the Merit of Christ; some part of humane Justification is contained,
which also is necessarily requisite. But they say that it is not enough, that
sins are forgiven, and that we are reconciled unto God (which is the first part
of Justification) unless another part also be added thereto, which compleats
the former; which, of what sort it is, you may see here by their own words.
When first, say they, man begins to detest sin, as offensive to God, and so of
a wicked man is made just, and reconciled, at one and the same time, and in the
same instant God infuses his Grace, waiting no interval of time: which Grace,
where it comes, there we having received inward Renovation by the Holy Spirit,
receive Righteousness, and are made truly righteous before God: And this is
that other part of Justification, whereof I spoke, without which no
Righteousness is truly perfected; because it is most certain, that God
justifies no man, or pronounces no man just, but him whom by the gift of his
Spirit through internal Renovation he makes righteous, and clothes, adorns, and
endues with Righteousness, etc.

Answ. Why should I answer these men in many words? If they understand it of
the Power of the Divine Bounty; I grant that there is nothing which the
Infinite Power of the most high God cannot do: But it is not the matter of our
Controversy, what the heavenly Grace can, but what it will do. Neither does it
follow as a rational consequence, because that the Almighty Grace of God can
make us just, that therefore we are made just: Therefore either prove that
there Aug. de perfect. Just. For that is not sin, which is not imputed for sin;
ibid. Whosoever says, that after the remission of sins received, any man has
lived, or does live so righteously in the flesh, or that he has no sin,
contradicts the Apostle John, who says, If we say we have no sin, etc. for he
says not, we had, but we have.
is any man endued with such a Righteousness, which does not always stand in
need of the Mercy of God: Or confess that which is the truth with Augustine,
that all assurance of our Justification acquiesces in the remission of sins
only through the Mercy of God.

Against the Tridentines, who deny that we are Justified by Mercy or Remission
only.
BUT it pleased the Tridentine Senate to determine otherways; for this is their
Opinion, That Justification is not purchased by God's pardoning Grace only, but
by the commendation of Virtues: But let them again hear, what Augustine answers
them to the contrary; who in opposition to the Tridentine Opinions refers all
to the Grace of God only, and to Imputation, writing these words: All the
Commands of God, (says he) are esteemed to be done, when that which is not
done is forgiven. A very short sentence, if it be reckoned according to the
number of words. But if we rightly consider their efficacy, who sees not that
all the buildings of the Adversaries, whereby with so much ado they establish
their inherency, are utterly overturned by this Answer of Augustine? Which that
it may appear the more evidently; First, Let us gather the assertion of the
Council, on which all their defense seems to lean, into the exact form of an
Argument, according to the art and use of Disputants, which should rather have
been done by them: And then let us see what should be answered by the Authority
of Learned Interpreters.

The Argument of the Tridentine Council.

Argument.
Ma. Whosoever observe all the For Inherent righteousness.
Commands of God, they have an Inherent Righteousness, and that which is their
own.

Mi. Whosoever keep all the Commands of God, are esteemed for righteous before
God.

Concl. Therefore they that have a Righteousness, which is their own and
inherent, are justified before God.

Answer.
The smoke of this Argument will easily vanish, by using the distinction of
Augustine. Therefore we answer the Minor by the Authority of the Doctor: For A
twofold manner of keeping the Commands. Psalm. 39.
there is a twofold manner of keeping the Commands; one is, when whatsoever is
commanded by God is done. And after this manner the Son of God only is
righteous, of whom only it is said, In the Volume of thy Book it is written of
me, I come, that I might do thy will, O God, etc. The other is, when that,
which is not done, is forgiven. And after this second manner we are righteous,
that is, we are accounted for righteous, not upon any account of Merits, but
only by the pardon of those things that have been done amiss: Wherefore by
retorting the Argument upon the Adversaries, we may dispute after this manner.

The retorting of the Argument.
Ma. The observation of all the Commands of God, procures true Righteousness to
men.

Mi. The keeping of all the Commands is performed, by remission and imputation,
when that which is not done is pardoned.

Concl. Therefore by Remission and Imputation real Justification is procured
for us.

The Minor is upheld by the legitimate Testimony of Augustine. lib. Retract.
cap. 19. But the Tridentine Heroes do here answer: That is true indeed as it is
understood August. lib. Retract. c. 19.
of the first Justification, but not of the second. For by such an usual Scheme
of Sophistical Speech they use to baffle the most evident Oracles of Scripture
concerning our free Justification by Christ. As when Paul reasons of Faith
justifying freely without Works, they interpret it thus, that it is said of the
first Justification, which consists of Remission only and Reconciliation by
Faith. But that there is another Justification, besides this, which by inward
Renovation is begotten of Inherent Righteousness, to which they attribute the
much more excellent part of true Justification. But here again Augustine helps,
by confuting this idle Tale with sound speech; who writing of this same second
unjust Justification of theirs, Our very Righteousness, says he, though it be
true, because of the end, or true good, to which it is referred; yet it is so
great in this life, that it consists rather in the remission of sins, than in
the perfection of Virtues. Yea the same Augustine elsewhere adjudges the Life of
the Regenerate how laudable soever, to a Curse, if it is to be judged in a
separation from Mercy. What then? Augustine. curses all the Righteousness of
Humane Life without the Mercy of God. And should not they of Trent be accursed,
who are not afraid to curse those, that with Augustine affirm, that all the
comfort of our Justification relies upon the Mercy of God only, forgiving us
our sins for Christ's sake?

Let us add hereunto the reckoning Oecumenius in cap. 3. ad Romans
of Oecumenius, lest we should not be too sufficiently guarded with Witnesses,
who commenting on the words of Paul, Romans chap. 3. Wherefore, says he, all,
after they believed in Christ, are justified freely, bringing Faith only with
them; and also intimating, what that is, wherein all the assurance of our
Salvation is placed, he introduces the remission of sins only, in these words,
Being washed from our sins by Jesus Christ, etc. And again confirming this
same, and asking how this Justification is brought to pass; he makes answer
himself, saying, By remission of sins, which we have in Christ Jesus. And soon
after demonstrating the same more evidently, viz. wherein Righteousness, or the
Justifying Grace of God chiefly Oicumen. ibid.
consists: Herein says he, that men who are dead in sins, may be justified by
the remission of sins. Behold a demonstration of Righteousness set before you,
that not only God himself is righteous, but also justifies his People by the
Faith of Jesus. By which there are two things which you may see to be very
evident: First, That all power of justifying is placed in Faith only, according
to this man's Opinion; where he says, bringing Faith only with them: and then,
That against the Tridentines he teaches, that all this Justification, received
by us from God consists in the remission of sins: For what is more evident than
this speech? All Justification, Oicumen. ibid.
which proceeds to us from God, consists either in the forgiving of iniquities,
or in the covering of the same, or in their not being imputed, etc.

And these things we have said hitherto, are taken out of Oecumenius, to whom,
if we must agree, what credit then should be given to those Catholic
Tridentines, who deny that they are justified by the remission of sins only?
which how contrary it is to all reason, I need not plead against them with many
Arguments, because they ought to be convinced of falsehood by nothing more than
by their own Actions. For who looks into the Lives of those Popes, Cardinals,
Bishops, Monks, but he may easily perceive by those things which he daily sees,
that there is nothing whereof they stand in greater need, or desire more
ardently, than the gracious Clemency of God, in forgiving those sins which they
have committed? This does appear both many other ways, and also it is most
evidently testified by their public and daily wishes, suffrages and prayers.
In their Temples, in their Liturgies, in the Solemnities of their Masses, in
their Antiphonies, what other thing do they cry for, what do they request of
God, but that they may obtain the pardon of their own sins, and the sins of
their Parents and Benefactors? Otherways what is the meaning of those words
daily repeated in the Prefaces of their Masses; Let the Almighty and Merciful
Lord give unto us the indulgence, absolution, and remission of all our sins,
andC? What is the meaning of so many Advocates in Heaven, Patrons and
Favorites, to obtain Mercy from God? Moreover, to what purpose are those
words, wherewith they daily confess to God, and blessed Mary, and all Saints.
And again, when they, days and nights without measure and end, vehemently call
upon the He-Saints and the She-Saints, and chiefly the blessed Mary, with such
sort of cries: By Out of the Roman Missal.
thy pious interposing, wash away our faults. O most holy Virgin, Mother of
Grace, I am unworthy of Grace, and less than all thy Mercies, My sins (...)
anding in opposition, O most holy! I deserve not to be heard by (...). O
immaculate! hide not thy face from me so (...) a sinner. O Star of the Sea!
suffer me not to wander from the way, but by the guidance of thy Light deliver
me from the darkness of sins. O Queen of Mercy! do not lose the renown of thy
Ancient Mercy in me a miserable sinner. Hail Savioress: Redeem me, O
Redeemeress! My sins burden me. The World wraps me up. I have sins. I know not
Merits. O most bountiful! take away my sins; draw me from the World, etc.

I beseech you, good men, what is the meaning of these Monsters of Religion? If
those things be true, which your prayers declare, how is not your Doctrine
false? with what Solder or Glue will these things so dis-joyned cleave to one
another, that they who by an assiduous deploring of their sins, confess
themselves to be sinners; the same men should seem to themselves to be formally
just and perfect men in the sight of God by inward Renovation? that they should
say they are less than the Mercies of the holy Virgin, and in the mean while
the Mercy of God should be less than that it can justify alone? That they know
not Merits, and yet bring in no other thing but Merits to make Justification
perfect? What a contradiction is this of the Divines? Or who should suppose
them worthy to be believed, who contradict in their Temples, that which they
dispute for in their Schools? For they pray so, as if they were void of all
Righteousness. But in Councils they so behave themselves, as if no
Unrighteousness were inherent in them, and as if nothing were wanting to
perfection of Righteousness. Now, these things being so, what remains to be
said to these Men, but that with Hierom, we should say this: Let those Men
either defend what they say, or forsake what they cannot defend. The Prophet
cries, It is the Lord's Mercy that we are not consumed, and those Men hope,
that they shall not be saved by Mercy only, but shall be Righteous before God,
by the Righteous performance of Works.

Isaiah so great a Prophet, or rather Evangelist, under the sense of his sins,
confesses his lips are unclean. And the same Isai. 5. 53. Dan. 9.
elsewhere says, We have all gone astray, like Sheep. Daniel in his Prayer
laments, We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have behaved our selves
unrighteously, and departed from thy Commandments, etc. And lest any Man should
pretend that these things were signified by the Prophets, not in their own
Name, who were Saints, but in the person of the People, the Prophet presently
made confession of himself, adding, Whilst I was yet praying, and confessing my
sins, and the sins of my People, etc. Abraham and Sarah, though praised upon
the account Abraham and Sarah. Genes. cap. 17.
of their Faith, were rebuked in their laughter, and their very thought was
rebuked as a point of unbelief, and their silent Motion of Heart was not hid
from the knowledge of God though they were not Condemned of distrust, because
they laughed. Moses, than whom none was more familiar with God, after he had
received so great a power of grace, yet he offended at the waters of strife,
and did not obtain to enter with his Brother Aaron into the Land of promise.
Peter the Apostle in whom so great Moses Aaron Psalm. 143. peter. Mat. 15.
gifts of grace received shined forth, yet he is almost drowned, and deserved
to hear, O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? If there was
little Faith in him, I know not in whom it is great: Except in those successors
of Peter, and the Fathers of Trent. Paul himself though he Paul. Philip. 3.
was taken up into the third Heaven, yet writing to the Philippians, openly
professes, that he had not yet attained unto that which he sought for, but
having forgot those things that were behind, he pressed forward with all his
might, toward those things that were before. And does any in this life hope to
attain unto that, which Paul with all his endeavors, was not able to attain
unto?

But why should I prosecute this matter any further? The Moon shall be
confounded (said the Prophet) and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall
reign before his Ancients gloriously: and in another place, the Heavens are not
clean in his sight, and he charged his Augels with folly. The Moon is ashamed,
and the Sun consounded, and the Heaven is covered with Sackcloth. Wherefore
then are not the Tridentines afraid to appear in the presence of so great a
Judge, as if they were free from all guilt, whilst they have nothing to trust
to, but their own Inherent Righteousness?

The frivolus Objection of the Adversaries, is more largely exa mined and
confuted.
BUT what shall be said to those unruly Persons and Deceivers, who though they
have undertaken a cause, that they cannot (...) Tiletan in defense of the
Council of Trent. pt. 1.
defend, being convinced by so many Testimonies of Scripture and Examples. Yet
such is their obstinacy, they do not submit to the Truth, when they are
overcome by its Evidence. What then have they to say for themselves? By one you
may understand what they all are. (...) Tiletanus, a Commentator upon the
Council of Trent, arguing against Chemnitius, thinks his cause is well enough
defended by this curiously contrived Sophistry. Whereas the Holy Scriptures
reser all the concernments of Man's Justification, to the Grace of Remission
only, he interprets it thus by the Authority of the Council: To wit, he
acknowledges it to be true in the first Justification, or in respect of the
beginning of Justification: For they say, when a wicked Man is first Justified
by Faith no Works, or Merits of Works go before; but by the free grace of God
for Faith, and the Merit of the Son of God the Mediator, he is received into
favor, obtains a Pardon, and is made an Heir. Well said: But what then Sirs;
do ye think that this is not sufficient to Establish a Man in everlasting
Felicity? No indeed, if your Opinion be true, unless there be added hereunto in
the lives of those that are come to years, a perfect Obedience to the Law of
Righteousness, which they affirm to be easy, and possible to every Man. And
because Human frailty can by no means attain unto this: Therefore there is need
of the assisting grace of God, which being altogether infused at once, as
Alphonsus affirms, does so Alphonsus in (...).
renew a Man in the Spirit of his Mind, and endues him with so great Charity,
that there is nothing so hard in the Law of Commandments, but he can perform it
with ready Obedience: Whence it comes to pass, that he is called Righteous, not
only by Name, and by Imputation. But is in very deed, and as they speak, really
Righteous, and Merits Eternal Life.

Ye have here briefly set before you, a Summary of Catholic Divinity,
concerning the perfection of Righteousness, which, though there is no Man, but
sees how absurd and unreasonable it is; yet that it may appear the more
evidently, it will not be a miss to reduce all the debates of the Adversaries,
into a short form of argument.

The Tridentine Argument.
Ma. Whosoever perform all the Commands of God, they are truly Righteous, not
by Imputation, but by true Virtue, and Merit Eternal Life.

Mi. The Regenerate by renewing grace, obtained through Faith, and the Merits
of Christ, perform all the Commands of God.

Conolu. Therefore the Regenerate (...) not only accounted, but also are really
madeRighteous by grace, and Merit Eternal Life.

In this one Syllogism, (if it be attentively considered,) as in a little Map,
all the Polution and Deceit of the Popish Doctrine is comprehended; and it is
no hard thing to answer it.

And first, I would not unwillingly grant them that which they assume in the
Major; for the Laws appointed by God, comprehending all Righteousness within
the limits of their Circumference; if there were any Man whose life was exactly
squared according to the strict Determinations of this Law, and defective in no
Circumstance, I should esteem him to be worthy, not only of the Title of
Righteousness, but also of the Rewards that are due to a Righteous Man.

Let us proceed to the other parts of the Argument. The Minor follows next, But
the Regenerate in Christ, whom Faith has once justified, having just now
received Divine grace, they attain unto such a degree of Charity, that they are
wanting in nothing that is requisite to the most perfect Obedience of the Law.
But I would fain know where those Regenerate Men are, and who they are, for it
is abundantly evident, that they who are the maintainers of this Doctrine, are
no such Men themselves. Their lives are so well known, that there is no need of
other Arguments to prove it. They brag of so many and great things (...)
Righteousness, Grace and Charity, whose Virtues, (whereof they so much boast)
and manner of life, if they be compared with their profession, what is more
disagreeing? What more differing from Righteousness? Whereby has Peace and
Grace less flourished, and Iniquity more abounded in manners?

In what times has the love (if not of all, at least of most Men) waxed so
cold? It is needless here to complain of the vulgar. This complaint chiefly
concerns those that sit in the Chair of Hierarchy, and are employed in
Ecclesiastical Functions, and I wish there were (...) as just cause thereof, as
we see in most of (...). But perhaps they will defend themselves (...) the
example of the Pharisees: Of whom (...) is said, that they sat in the Chair of
Moses, (...) taught that which was true, though they (...) not act according to
what they taught. And indeed, the Example whereunto they compare themselves,
would please me well (...) unless I judged them to be worse then (...)
Pharisees of those days: For though the lives of those Men are Condemned, yet
their manner of Doctrine was not so contrary to Divine Institutions; but the
case is otherways with them: For not only their lives are far from that
Righteousness which they teach, but their Doctrine also concerning this
Righteousness, and many other things is without any Foundation from Scripture.

But you may say, what then? Does Christ the Bridegroom forsake his Bride? Or
is his grace lessened, that he is unwilling or unable to help his Servants?
What think you of Charity? Which being the fulfilling of the Law, according to
the Testimony of the Apostle, will it do nothing in the Hearts of those, in
whom it is shed abroad, toward the fulfilling of the Law of God? I hear your
Objection, and thus I answer it: Christ neither does, nor will forsake his
Church. Yet notwithstanding, he is not so present with his Church at all times;
but that he leaves some Frailties and Imperfections in her. And the Bride does
not so fully enjoy Cant. 3. Grace, Charity.
her Bridegroom, but that she has sometimes occasion to complain, as it is in
the Song of Solomon. I sought him whom my Soul loves, I sought him, but I
found him not, the Watchmen of the City found me, etc.

But as touching Charity, and an habitual gift of grace, about which Thomas
reasoned so largely, we also detract nothing from it, as we have said before.
But this grace has its own degrees and measures, and Charity was given to
renew us, not to justify us.
bounds wherein it is contained. For Charity is not given to justify any Man
by Working, neither is so great a power of Divine grace, communicated to any
Man in this life, as to fulfill all Christian Righteousness in every iota and
Title. Though it be certain, that the bounty of God beautifies the Church with
many and great Ornaments, yet he does not cause her to arrive at so great
perfection in this World, but she always has need of the mercy of God, and the
Remission of sins. Indeed he preserves his Saints, and enriches and ennobles
them, that they never perish, but not so, that they never sin. This fullness of
grace, the Father hestowed on his own Son, by a singular prerogative of his
Will, that all might receive of his fullness, for God gives not the Spirit to
him measure; but he has not dealt so with others, but he has given to every
Man according to the measure of the Rule, whereby he distributes to us, lest we
should glory without measure, or stretch our selves too far above that 2 Cor.
10. Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 13.
grace, which is given to every Man according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Therefore let no Man arrogate unto himself, that which belongs not to
him, but that which belongs to us is this: We know in part (as the Apostle
speaks) and we prophecy in part, and now we see through a glass darkly. But
when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part, shall be done away.
Therefore, perfection not being attainable, let us be content with that,
whereof we are The Church of God in this life, is never so perfect, but that
she has need of the Mercy of God.
capable, and leave that fullness of perfection, which is void of all sin, to
him, to whom only it is due. And let us not be seduced by a foolish persuasion,
to conceive a desire of seeming to be that which neither we can be, nor any of
our Forefathers ever were. Let us look back to the times and manners of Men,
let us view the lives of the Patriarchs, Captains, Kings, Prophets, and the
greatest Heroes. Of whom no Man can say, that they were strangers to the grace
of God: And yet there is not one of them all, in whom Hierom finds not
something blameworthy, in writing to Ctesiphon, and does not except so much as
the Apostles themselves, and the Evangelists: Moreover, let us search into all
the People of the Old Testament, and their Actions. Whereas the Law was given
them by Moses, do we suppose that they were utterly separated from Divine
grace? Though the Messiah was not yet come, yet the Faith of the Messiah, the
Calling and Election of God was not wanting to them; Amongst whom also there
appeared many evident instances of Divine grace, who also being adorned with
all kind of Virtues, thought no less of themselves, than the Catholics of our
time: And yet, what says the word of God concerning Ioh. 7.
them? Moses gave you the Law, and none of you all keep the Law.

But it may be objected, so great a power and abundance of Heavenly grace, had
not yet shined forth in these days, as afterward the Messiah brought with him
at his coming. I hear what you say, but what do you infer from this? Do such
Men think, that by the help of this grace, they can do that, which the others
could not do; that is, that by living Holily, they can attain unto all things
that are requisite unto Righteousness, or perfect Obedience of the Law? But
suppose it be so, as Christ then objected to the Pharisees: Did not Moses give
you the Law, etc?

In like manner any Man may object to you Did not Paul a Servant of Jesus
Christ, a proclaimer of the Gospel, a teacher of the Gentiles, a chosen Vessel;
did not he in writing to Timothy and Titus, prescribe a Law to you Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, showing in a Compendious Speech how ye ought to behave
your selves in the Church of God, and what manner of Men it 1 Timothy 3. A Bishop
must be (...) the Husband of one Wife, Vigilant, Sober, Modest, given to
Hospitality; apt to teach; no Drunkard, not greedy of filthy Lucre, but Meek,
not a (...), not Covetous, one that rules well his own House: having his
Children in subjection with all decency. Not a Novice, not puffed up, having a
good testimony of them which are without.
becomes those to be, who are overseers of the House of God.

And yet who among you so Administers his Office, that nothing is wanting to
him, in the Catalogue of all these Virtues? In the management of which Office
notwithstanding, if he do perform the chief things indifferently well, he loses
not the name of a good Bishop. Just so it is in the fulfilling of the commands
of God, and the performing works of Righteousness. For, as Hierom asserts, to
have all things, and to Hierom. ad Ctesiphon. Dial. 1.
lack nothing that belongs to his Virtue, that did no Sin, neither was guile
found in his Mouth.

Now if you can never, or but very rarely find in the person of one Bishop the
performance of a few Duties belonging to his Office, what should be said of
those things, which being commanded by the Lord himself in the Gospel, belong
alike unto all; as when he gives precepts of mutual Charity, of forgiving
Brethren, of every Man's taking up his Cross, which if a Man refuse, Christ
looks not upon him as a Disciple: Of Faith in God, which is not tainted with
any wavering: Of Meekness and Humbleness of Mind, resembling the simplicity of
little Children: Of Chastity which does not allow so much as an unclean glance
of the Eye: Of bounty toward all Men: Of perfect Patience toward our very
Enemies, and the most exact Purity, which is void of Covetousness, and whose
treasure is laid up in Heaven, which is not (...) with any ambition or vain
Glory, and designs it self wholly and all that it has for the glory of Christ
only.

But why should I enlarge any more upon those things, which no Man can easily
set forth by Words, and with much greater difficulty can he frame his Life
according to them. So great is the severity of Divine Righteousuess, which
suffers no rash anger, nor the least reproach cast upon a Brother, nor so much
as an idle word to go unpunished. Christ commands our Speech to be Yea, yea,
and Nay, nay, telling us, Hierom. ad Ctesiphon. Dial. 2.
That what is more than this comes of Evil, upon which place let us hear the
interpretation of Hierom: Who of us, says he, can avoid being liable to this
fault: Seeing we must give account for idle words in the Day of Judgment? If
anger and reproachful speeches, and idle Precepts of Evangelical Righteousness.
talking are liable to the Judgment, the Council, and Hel-fire; what punishment
will be due to unclean lusts, and covetousness, which is the root of all Evil,
etc. Hitherto are his words.

But wherefore is it, that we are commanded, to suffer him, that takes away our
Coat, to have our Cloak also: And when any Man strikes us on the one Cheek, to
turn to him the other, to give him that asks, and not to withdraw from him
that would borrow of you, to love our Enemies, to do good to them that hate us,
and to pray for them that persecute us, and despitefully use us. Perhaps such a
one, as performs all these things, may be found in the Family of the
Catholics: Verily Hierom could not find so rare a bird, as he speaks, amongst
all that he knew. Now if we that are Christians, are commanded by God to pray
for them that persecute us: What will become of those, that are so enraged with
a Spirit of Persecution toward the Innocent Servants of Christ, and cause so
great Slaughters, Tumults, Conflagrations, and Murders, such dreadful
Tragedies, and mischiefs every where amongst the People of the Lord? By whose
implacable fury and outrage so much Christian Blood has hitherto been shed. And
yet after all these abominable cruelties, How comes it that the ringleaders of
them, and chiefest incendiaries, are not ashamed to talk in their Councils of
the perfection of Righteousness, and of Grace, and Charity, which is the
fulfilling of the Law?

But let us return to the subject matter of our present discourse. Mark 9.
Our Heavenly Lawgiver proceeds in instructing his Disciples to a perfect
contempt of this World, so that he commands us to cut off an Hand, an Eye, and
a Foot, when it offends. Suppose it be spoken Figuratively, to signify those
things, which are nearest and dearest to us in this Life, do we think it an
easy matter, (that I may speak in the Language of Hierom) suddenly Hierom.
to tear away a thing so beloved for some offenses? And in another place the
Lord gives this command: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that Mat. 19.
thou possessest, and come and follow me. Though this was said to one Man only,
yet nevertheless, (as I suppose) this is given for a warning to all Christians
alike, to bridle their unruly affections, of whom every one should be in a
readiness, to forsake all things, that upon any account hinder their progress
in true Righteousness.

Hereby ye do see, O ye Fathers of Trent, what the Doctrine of Christian
Righteousness requires of you. Therefore weigh your selves in this balance, and
frame your Life according to these Rules of Perfection, who make so much ado in
pleading for inherent Righteousness, and the merit of Works, and are not
willing to be justified by remission only. Therefore let the Popes. Cardinals.
Pope cast away these vanities of high flown Pride, these Bulls, and vain
Titles, and these Royal and more than Royal Dignites of St. Peter, which do not
at all agree with the Spirit of Gospel-Renovation. Let the Cardinals, if they
be Churchmen, cast off this Pomp and Magnificense, which they take possession
of beyond the bounds of their calling. But if they be secular Men, let them
behave themselves with greater moderation in secular Affairs.

If the Bishops, Archbishops, and their Colleagues, the Abbots, and the
Churchgovernours Bishops, Governors or the Church.
adorned with their Miters, would be accounted the Successors of the Apostles,
and not the Pharisees, let them leave off so to enlarge their Phylacteries, and
diminish their Worldly Grandeur and Wealth, wherewith they are too much puffed
up, and learn to contain themselves within the bounds The Orders and Rules of
Monks.
of Apostolic moderation that, after the manner of the Apostles, they may grow
truly rich in Christ. Christ does not acknowledge them for Servants, that serve
two Master. Therefore if the Monks and Religious Orders would be Christians,
let them cease to be Franciscans, Dominicans, etc.

If they profess Christ to be their Lord, let them call themselves by his Name,
whose profession they have taken upon them, and forsake those Idols, and
irregular rules. Christ Jesus in the Gospel could not endure his Disciples,
when they did but mutter with one another about the degrees of Dignity. The
strise about Primacy in Churches.
And what else has this Holy Mother Church of Rome been striving for these
many Years; in raising debates with other Churches, about Primacy, but that she
might have the Superiority, and all others be subject to her Dominion. And what
other thing are all the Cities, Nations, and People in league with her busied
about: Or for what purpose is all this Slaughter and Persecution through the
whole Christian World, at this day, but that they may by all means Establish
and protect the Dignity of their Mother Church of Rome? But how these things
agree with Charity, and the perfection of Evangelical Doctrine, let themselves
judge.

But wherefore do I so much enlarge upon this matter? The reason is, to make it
evidently appear, that, when the Tridentines have said all they can, yet the
whole concernment of our Salvation and Justification consists not in our
Merits, and Mercinary Works, or Integrity of Manners, and Holiness of Life,
but in the gracious favor of God: Whereby he not only renews the Inner-man,
but delivers the whole Man, both outwardly and inwardly, from the bondage of
Death, wherein he was wretchedly ensnared; frees him from the Curse, redeems
him from the slavery of Satan, and a state of Damnation, forgiving all his
Sins, and daily offenses, whereby he most justly deserved Eternal Destruction.

Now these things appearing very evident, what remains, but that either the
Tridentines should lead so Holy a Life, as being weighed in the balance of
Righteousness, has no need of the Pardon of Sins: Or if they cannot do that,
let them lay down their Pharisaical Pride, and acknowledge with other Sinners,
that all the blessedness, which comes by Justification, lies only in the mercy
of a gracious God, who deals not with us according to our Sins, and though he
may justly, yet he does not impute our Evil deeds to us. As the Apostle teaches
us out of that Prophetical Psalm: Where the Psalmist explaining Psalm. 31.
the true blessedness of Man, says, Blessed are they, whose Iniquities are
forgiven, whose Sins are covered. Blessed is the Man. unto whom the Lord
imputes not Iniquity. Now if the forgiveness of our Iniquities is sufficient
to blessedness, is it not also sufficient to Justification?

But what else is our Justification, but blessedness? As Oecumenius bears
witness: Blessedness is the highest degree of good Blessedness the highest
degree of all good things.
things. Which if it be true, what other thing will those Men require, to make
Justification perfect? To wit, a Supernatural infusion of Grace, as they call
it, whereby being purged from all pollution of Sin, we are not only accounted
acceptable to God, but in Lorichius cap. 8. Of the Remission of Sins.
reality are unspotted, and partakers of the Divine Nature: About which matter
let us hear the arguing of Lorichius. The force of whose argument consists in
this.

Argument.
Ma. The Spirit of God dwells in the regenerate.

Mi. The Spirit of God dwells not where there is any Sin.

Con. Therefore no Sin remains in the regenerate.

Answer.
No Man discovers the deceit of this argument better than St. Paul himself, who
complaining of himself, and deploring his misery, could not, according as he
desired, totally root out the strength of Sin out of his Flesh, though he was
held in Captivity against his will, and yet no Man can say, that he was void of
the Grace of God. But let us more accurately examine the reason of the Argument:
Which seems to draw its chief force from things privatively opposite; for Sin
and Grace are privatively opposite. Which cannot consist together in the same
subject. Whence this Reason of the Argument follows.

Argument.
Ma. There is no Union of Sin with the Grace of God.

Mi. The Regenerate stand in the Grace of God.

Con. Therefore no Sin remains in the Regenerate.

Answer.
Here there is need of a Twofold A Twofold kind of Sin.
distinction; To wit, of Sin, and of the Sinner.

For as one Sin is reigning, (...) another is not reigning: So there Reigning
Sin.
is more then one sort of Sinners. For though both the Godly and the Ungodly
Sin: Yet not after one and the same manner: For that Man Sins one way, who
rushes upon all manner of Wickedness against his Conscience, and wittingly and
willingly perseveres in sin without Repentance; of whom it is said, John 3. He
that works 1 John 3.
unrighteousness is not of God; And that man sins another way, who is rather
overcome by his infirmity, than yields willingly to the sinful inclinations of
his flesh, though sometimes he slips into the evil, that he Sin not reigning.
would not: And nevertheless with his mind obeys the Law of God, and
endeavoring after Holiness, in the midst of his sins he strives and cries out
against them. Therefore I answer with this distinction of the Majon; which I
deny not to be true in those, who living according to the flesh, wallow in all
filthiness without measure or shame: Of whom Paul said expressly; Romans 8.
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but yet it must be acknowledged
after the Example of the same Apostle, that the Holy Spirit of God dwelling in
us, may consist with infirmities in the Regenerate. And ofttimes after this
manner the Apostle joins the Old Man and the New Man in the Regenerate; the Law
of the Members, and the Law of the Mind; the Flesh striving against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the Flesh; as when speaking of himself, he testifies:
Therefore I my self with my mind serve the Law of The Saints themselvessin
sometimes.
God, and with my flesh I serve the Law of sin.

As this disease of infirmity, being never idle in the Saints, does often drive
them into great and grievous sins, and brings them to such distress sometimes,
that for a season they seem like unto the wicked, forsaken of God, and void of
all Faith and Consolation: But God in his infinite Goodness never leaves them
so destitute of his Mercy, whom once he has planted in his Son by Faith, but
that he puts his hand under them, when they fall, that they are not broken to
pieces; and again he stretches forth his hand unto them to reduce them from
their sins. Though he is greatly offended and angry at their wickedness, yet in
his wrath remembering Mercy, he does not cast them off for ever. This appears
evidently by the known Examples of David, Peter, Manasseh, Evah, Adam, Aaron,
Miriam, Solomon, and others. And this is the difference They that sin finally.
The Saints, though they fall sometimes into sin, they do not continue in sin.
between the godly and ungodly, that though both of them fall into grievous
sins against their Conscience, yet in this they are distinguished: the wicked
run headlong on in their sins, and taking pleasure in them, not only for a
while, but through their whole life give themselves up to the bondage of
corruption, and take no care to return unto God by Repentance; but the case is
contrariwise with the Godly and Regenerate; for though they may sin securely
for a time, and reigning sin may have dominion over them for the present, yet
nevertheless by the Grace of God they are brought to the acknowledgment of
their sins, and are recovered by Repentance.

Therefore I answer to the Major with this restriction: It were so, except
Remission came together with Conversion, without which Divine Grace has no
place in sinners. Now, though Conversion may seem lost for a season by the
falls of the Saints, yet notwithstanding the Regenerate are not cast out of the
favor of God, in as much as they are not finally forsaken. Otherways if any
sin of infirmity should utterly make void all the Grace of God, how was the
Grace of Christ sufficient for Paul, when he was buffeted by 2 Cor. 12.
a Messenger of Satan? or how is his strength said to be made perfect in
weakness? Moreover, how else is that saying of the Apostle true, Where sin
abounded, grace has superabounded, if Divine Grace has no union with any, but
them that are arrived at perfection?

But here again there arises an 1 John 3.
Objection out of John; Whosoever is born of God cannot sin, etc. And what is
concluded from hence? Therefore he that is truly regenerate in Christ, is free
from all pollution of sin. The same fallacy returns again, from that which is
said in a certain sense, to that which is said simply. A Fallacy from that
which is said in a certain sense to that which is said simply.
If the signification of the word (sinning) be taken simply in this place, for
any kind of sin, in this sense it is false, which they assume, by a wrong
interpretation of John. But if it be understood of those only, who wilfully
give themselves up to work wickedness, or through obstinate malice allow
themselves in sinning, and resolutely persevere therein; I confess that which
they cite out of the Apostle is true of such; to wit, that they are not of God,
who sin after this manner, which yet cannot be truly said of the regenerate
that are born of God. Therefore the difference should be observed, not only of
the things which are committed, but much more of those that commit them: For
the same disease of corrupted Nature, and inclination to sin, abides in both,
which nevertheless the Regenerate suppress by struggling against it, resisting
their vicious affections, as much as in them lies. Howbeit they are not so
perfect and entire, but that sometimes they wilfully fall into gross sins; but
they do not continue in them, but at length return to God by Repentance:
Therefore let us grant that, which neither can be denied, nor ought to be
excused; that both the godly and ungodly, by reason of the common Law of
Infirmity are liable to sin; but yet they differ very much in their purpose and
continuance. Solomon knew this difference, and therefore spoke of it, The
righteous man, though he fall Prove. 24. Prove. 24.
seven times, yet he rises up again; but the wicked fall into mischief.

Perhaps they of Trent themselves will not deny, that there is some natural
infirmity common to the godly and ungodly, which makes it possible for them to
sin, if they will; but they deny that the godly can will to sin, because by a
voluntary receiving of Grace they are endued with so pure Charity and
Innocence, that being polluted with no spot of unrighteousness, they are not
only accounted clean and undefiled by imputation and the remission of sins, but
are in reality righteous and unblameable by the true possession and exercise of
Virtue. But where will they find those righteous men, that dare profess
themselves free from all guilt of sin? As I may speak it of all the other
Apostles, so here I would ask them particularly of John, whom they quote,
whether they think that he himself should be reckoned in the Catalogue of the
righteous, who are not tainted with the least spot of sin? Let us 1 John 1.
then hear the Apostle confessing of himself: If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. Now then, if so great a
Disciple of Christ, and one so dearly beloved of him, durst not plead a total
and perfect freedom from sin, nor could do so without a Lie, dare those
Tridentine Seducers attribute that unto themselves? and do they suppose that
the World can be so blinded by them, that it does not easily take notice of,
and detest their manifest Lies, Deceits, and Impostures, and so great an
impudence in Lying and Deceiving.

Pious Reader, what Testimonies of greater Authority do thou look for? That
which the Tridentines affirm the Apostle denies. If they say true, the
Canonical Truth is a Lie: But if it be blasphemy to entertain such a thought,
must not they of Trent be Liars? What need is there to prove it? I will express
it in a word. The Testimony of Scripture, the Consent of Nature, the Experience
of all Ages, the Judgment of the Learned, the Sayings of the Ancient Fathers,
the Examples of all the Saints, the general Opinion of all good men, the guilty
Conscience of evil doers, the constant Prayers of the Church, her Complaints
and Tears, the Rebellion of the Flesh, the wicked Imaginations arising in the
Heart, the Deceit of Errors, the Groans of troubled Spirits, the Disturbances
incident to a Mortal Life, and Death it self common to all men: Moreover, the
constant Confessions of the Papists, and their often repeated Absolutions; what
is the meaning of these so many and weighty Arguments? What is it that they
declare, but that the Righteousness attainable in this Life, is either none at
all, or such as Augustine describes, that consists more in the remission of
sins, than in the perfection of Virtues? And lest any should flatter himself
with August. de Civitate Dei, l. 19. c. 17. August. in Joan. Tract. 4.
hopes of perfection in this Life, let us hear what the same Augustine
commenting upon John infers: Let not sin reign in your mortal body: He says
not, let it not be but let it not reign: For, as long as you live, of necessity
sin must be in your Members: Yet let the dominion be taken from it; let not
that be done which it commands, etc. And again writing to Macedonius; Who of us
is without sin? And presently again repeating Aug. Epist. 54. ad Macedon.
the same: But who in this Life is without some sin? But him we call good,
whose goodness prevails; and him we call best, who sins least. Therefore those
whom the Lord himself calls good by reason of the participation of Divine
Grace, he calls the same also evil, because oftheir infirmities, until our
whole man be thoroughly purged from all corruption by passing into that Life,
in which we shall sin no more, etc. Thus said Augustine. Where then is that real
infusion of Virtues, as they call it? where are these new Qualities, and that
Inherent Righteousness, that has no need of remission of sins? for what need
is there of remission there, where there is nothing to be forgiven? For what
sin can remain there, where the perfect purification (as they speak) of Body
and Soul from all pollution of sin, makes us holy, and partakers of the Divine
Nature? Briefly, that I may comprehend Andrad, lib. 6. Lorichius, c. 8.
the matter in a few words, lest this discourse should grow into too great a
bulk, I suppose I have sufficiently, by what I have discoursed at large,
cleared these things following: First, what is A brief summary of the things
treated of before.
the nature of true Faith, which causes Righteousness; what is its proper
Object; from whence it receives power to justify, which we have proved by the
Scriptures to proceed wholly from its object, that is, the person of him only,
in whom we believe. Now because Faith only embraces the person of Christ,
therefore it is, that Faith only, upon the account of its Object, and not for
the sake of our Virtues, justifies the sinners and ungodly.

What sinners are justified by Christ.
BUT here there is another thing to be enquired into; to wit, who are these
sinners to whom this Justification belongs. In which the difference must of
necessity be observed: For as it is not every Faith, or act of believing, that
procures Justification, but that only which eyes the Mediator: So this very
Faith does not belong to all sinners promiscuously. Though all men are sinners
by nature, and James 3.
in many things we offend all; yet all are not sinners alike. They that have no
sense of their sins, no trouble in their Conscience, nor shame for the
Abominations they have committed, but run on headlong and without fear into all
wickedness; Faith only justifies sinners, but whom.
though they prosess Christ, and Faith in him with their mouth; yet their heart
is void of him; neither does this empty profession yield them any benefit. Of
which sort of men Christ Preaches in the Gospel, Not every one that says to
me, Lord, Lord, but he that does the Will of my Father, etc. After the same
manner the whole Epistle of James treats of these, and such like men, whom he
denies to be justified by this counterfeit and hypocritical Faith. But on the
contrary, those that sincerely repent and mourn for their sins, and abhorring
their own Wickedness, return to Christ with all their Hearts, and receive him
by Faith, these only are (...), whom Faith alone Iustifies without Works,
according to that well known saying of Paul. And by this means it will not be
difficult to reconcile both the Apostles, Paul and James, to one another. For
as James a Servant of Jesus Christ cannot deny but Faith, when it is found
James a Servant of Jesus Christ, and Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ reconciled.
in a Penitent and Humbled sinner, justifies him freely without Works, and
before all good Works: So on the other side, neither does Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, approve of that Faith, which works not by love, nor admits
abominable wretches of profligate lives, to have any fellowship with Christ.

Which things being granted, what can the Papists say against this Assertion,
concerning justifying Faith? Or what valuble Author can they produce in defense
of their Erroneus Doctrine. Now if to justify from sins, is nothing else but
to absolve from sins, as we have demonstrated out of the Apostle: Is there any
that can absolveus, but Christ only? Or how should he absolve, unless he be
received? Or after what manner, by what Instrument, by what hands must he be
received, but Faith only? And what absurdity is it then for us to profess that
we are justified by Faith only?

An answer to those that say the (...) of Faith is (...) pretending that it
opens a door to Irreligion, and Licentiousness.
BUT they pretend that this Doctrine Hosius in confut. (...). 140. Canis. in
praefatione in Andrad. (...).
is pernicious, and contrary to a Pious Life, and good manners: For, (as they
say) it encourages Men that are weak by nature, and prone to evil, to sin with
the greater boldness. Canisius confirms this: Wheresoever, says he,
Justification by Faith only is taught, it comes to pass, that usually in such
places, Men sin without any fear or shame: And vain Men to encourage themselves
in living profanely, flatter themselves with hopes to go unpunished, because
they lay hold on Christ Andrad. Vega de justificat. in Epist.
by Faith. And it is no wonder says Vega, for what should he be afraid of, yea,
what should he not despise and make light of, who is once persuaded, that Faith
only is sufficient for his Justification: And that the Kingdom of Heaven is not
shut up from any sin or wickenness, if it were never so great?

Osorius adds his Vote to theirs: If Faith only is sufficient, and if every
Action that Osor. de just. (...). 7. Osor. ibid. (...). 2.
we do, is unprofitable and defiled, it follows, that all who embrace this
imaginary Faith, do altogether neglect good Works, etc. And elsewhere.
Therefore you cannot by such Doctrine, exhort a Harlot to forsake her Lust, nor
a Thief to refrain his covetous desire of other Men's Goods, nor a wicked Man to
depart from his (...) but that he should (...) this naked and empty Faith only,
which is void of all works of Charity; for by such instructions, he will
conceive a strong persuasion, that by this Faith only, he is very dear to God.
Than which, what can be more absurd? An Answer to the Objections.
Though I grant this to be true, that nothing can be more absurd, than if we
say that Harlots, Highwaymen, and Outrageous Cutthroats, who breaking the
bonds of natural Modesty, give themselves up wilfully to all impurity, are
acceptable to God by Faith only. I say, suppose we grant this to be true, what
follows from hence? Then Faith only (as you say) does not justify. O ingenious
arguing, worthy of the Roman Mitres. It is true, that such as your Description
sets forth to us, are not Justified by Faith. But what a Connection is this?
there are many, who by the Preaching of free Justification, are encouraged to a
greater Licentiousness in sinning. Therefore, that which is taught concerning
justifying Faith, is false. As The consequence is denied.
if the Truth or Falsehood of things depended on the using or abusing of them.
What has ever been so right or good, but evil Men have made it the occasion of
Destruction to themselves, or others, by the abuse thereof. If this Argument
were reasonable, the Sun might cease to shine, because there are some that
abuse his light, to commit the vilest Enormities: And healthful Herbs may cease
to be planted The abuse of good things should be taken away, but the things
themselves, should be continued.
in Gardens, because the venomous Spider sucks the worst poison out of them.
The Physician also may cease to Administer Medicines, because there are some
found, who after they have recovered their Health, do sometimes commit such
things, that it had been better, if they had still lain sick in Bed. Yea, on
the Lord's days there are not a few, that through idleness, commit many sins.
What then, because they that know not how to use good things aright, take
occasion to abuse the time of the Lord's Day to Gluttony and Drunkenness, and
to open a door to Licentiousness, should we therefore reject the Lord's
institution? No verily, Human things must give place to Divine, and the usual
custom of Men of wicked Lives, must not be your rule to walk by, but that which
God has commanded to be done. Christ commands the Gospel to be Preached Mark
16.
to every Creature: Will ye forbid it, though many abuse the Gospel? But what
is this Gospel of Christ, that he commands to be Preached? He that believes,
and is Baptized, shall be saved. Do you hear that Salvation is simply promised
to Believers; and that it consists of nothing else but Faith, and that
Sacrament of Faith? Will you deny it? Whether then shall we believe Christ, or
you? So it pleases him to open unto sinners, the Treasures of his abundant
grace. And will your envy shut up that from us, which he has opened? do you
neither enter your self, nor suffer others to enter? Christ also speaks thus by
the Prophet, ye have been sold for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without
price: What is the sense of these words, (without price) but this, without any
Merits of Works at all, that is, your own Merits, but not Esa. 52.
the Merits of another. What then? If the procurement of another, has brought
you to death, may not also the procurement of another, restore you to life
again? And in the same Prophet, the Holy Spirit proclaims how beautiful the
feet of those are upon the Mountains, that bring good tidings, that publish
peace: And yet do you endeavor to stop the comfortable course of Gospel
Preaching and in the room thereof, do you obtrude your old erroneous Doctrine
of mournful Sorrow, and heartless doubting.

You will say, Why not? For it will be better for Men to be kept in fear, for
who will be anxious about the Fruits of Repentance, Hosius (...) lib. 3. page
140. Against the assurance of Christian Salvation.
or his progress in grace, if every Man be sure of his own Justification, and
of the favor of God? And therefore Masters and Fathers conceal their love
toward their Sons and Servants, that by this uncertainty, they may be the more
obliged to their Duty: And it must be believed, that God deals just so with his
Creatures, etc. Thus said Hosius. Where then is that peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, if no Man must be assured of the favor of God? Where are those feet of
them, that run upon the Mountains, and bring glad tidings of Peace, if it is
not lawful to publish the Righteousness of Peace? We are not against the
Preaching of Faith, (say they) but we would not that Faith only should be
Preached. That is the only thing that Objection. Faith only.
we require, for the cause that we mentioned, because when this form of
Doctrine is taught, of necessity the consequence thereof is the Ruin and
Destruction of all ( honest Discipline.)

That I may answer this Objection, though it has been sufficiently Answer. In
Sermons frequent Exhortations are used to Pious Works.
answered already, two things must be considered, one whereof belongs to the
manner of Preaching, and the other to the truth of the Doctrine. And first as
touching Preaching, their Objection is very false: For though we teach that
Faith only Iustifies, yet we neglect not to use strong motives to the practice
of good Works, and sharp Admonitions, and not only Admonitions, but also severe
threatenings, yea, and moreover Excommunications, if need be, to restrain wicked
practices.

The frequent Sermons that are Preached in our Churches bear witness to this,
in which according to our power, we exhort unto Works of Piety, and by the
Authority of Scripture, thunder the Judgments of God, against Harlots,
Adulterers, Covetous Persons, Highwaymen, Sorcerers, that they may know there
will be no place for such in the Kingdom of God and Christ, except they amend
their lives. Who was more zealous than Paul, in exalting the Righteousness of
Faith? And who was more Holy in Life than he, or more fervent against the sins
of those that walked not after the Spirit, but after the flesh? The Books of
our Divines do evidence the same, in which they discourse no less of
Repentance, and good Works, than of Faith, joining always the one with the
other. Therefore as touching the manner of Teaching, you will find, that it is
not Faith only, which is Treated of in the Churches and Books of Men of our
persuasion. But if the matter of debate between us, be about the cause of
Salvation and Justification, there is nothing more agreeable to sound Doctrine,
than that an ungodly sinner is Justified before God by Faith only without Works.

But you may object; this Doctrine An Answer to this Objection.
hardens the People in their sinful courses. If you understand it of all, it is
false: If of evil doers, that run on in sin against their Conscience, and take
no care to restrain their Lusts: As for such, who ever said or taught, that
they are Justified by Faith only? And yet nevertheless the Truth of this
Assertion remains invincible, whereby we affirm that a wicked Man is Justified
by Faith only, without Works, if the Scope and meaning thereof be well
understood. Which will be easy, if by adding that, which supplies the room of
a predicate, the proposition be made entire. As when Faith only is said to
Justify, add unto the Subject of this Enunciation, its own proper predicate,
or I may rather say, add the proper Subject of Justification, and understand
aright, who they are, whom Faith only Iustifies without Works, according to the
saying of Paul: For herein chiefly lies the (difficulty) of this Controversy,
Ambiguity. Faith only Iustifies, but not all kind of Sinners.
Neither is there any thing wherein the Adversaries are more grossly mistaken:
And herein they follow the Footsteps of those, concerning whom Cyprian justly
complains, saying, They look at that, which is said in the first place, but
regard not, what follows after. They catch at that which we assert of Faith
only Exclusively, and think there is injury done to good Works, if Faith only
is sufficient to Salvation: But they take no notice what manner of Persons they
are, to whom this Justification by Faith belongs. It is the Advice of those
School Divines, to consider the reasons of things proposed, according to their
Subject matter, and why then do they not observe their own Rule in this
Evangelical Assertion? Christ affirms it, Paul confirms it, yea, the common
practice of life, natural Reason, and Experience, and the Conscience of all
good Men proclaim that Ruin comes only from our Works, and Salvation only from
Christ. And because we receive this only Mediator Christ by Faith only, hence
it is that we assert it is Faith that justifies believing sinners before God.
But let us see what manner of Sinners they are, whom Faith Iustifies: Is it the
Rebellious, and Impenitent? No verily. Then it must be such sinners, as are
Converted, and Humbled, and have the fear of God before their Eyes. But there
is no fear, that such will continue to wallow in their former filthiness, but
on the contrary, they are hereby so much the more stirred up to amend their
lives. All Ages have abounded with Examples of those, to whom the Doctrine of
free Justification by Faith in Christ, as it conduced much to their necessary
consolation, so it was no hinderance to their leading an holy life. If Charity
(according as the Adversaries themselves do testify) is the perfection of the
Law, which is the Rule of Life; I would ask such men, whether he to whom more,
or he to whom fewer sins are forgiven, has the strongest obligation to love
either God or his Neighbor? which of these two mentioned in the Gospel, loved
Christ with the greater ardency of affection, Simon the Pharisee, or The Love
of Mary Magdaline.
Mary, that brought with her no good works at all, but a great multitude of
sins? And why was her Love to the Lord more vehement? but because she had more
sins forgiven her? But let us proceed; Wherefore were so many and so great
offenses forgiven her, but for her Faith, which guided her Love? for she did
not therefore believe in Christ, because she loved him, but because she knew
him to be the Son of God, her Faith being thereby incited to act the more
vigorously, she loved much. For, Love proceeds from Faith, and not Faith from
Love. Because we believe Love rises from Faith, not Faith from Love.
therefore we Love, but we do not believe, because we Love-Whence the Lord,
regarding more her Faith then her Love, said unto her, thy Faith (not thy Love)
has saved thee.

How Love and Repentance are concerned in Justification.
BUT You may say, Is Faith alone here? Is it not joined together with Love and
Repentance? I grant indeed, that they are all three together in the person of
the Believer. But in the Case of Justification Faith only is regarded: And the
other do follow as Fruits and Effects thereof. For as that Woman, unless she
had believed in the Mediator, made known unto her by Faith, she had nevor
loved him: So she had never come unto him, as her Physician, unless the Disease
of her Troubled Conscience had driven Charity is no cause of Justification.
her. Wherefore if we reason aright about Causes, these things follow (...), as
Effects and Fruits thereof, but they are no causes of obtaining Salvation.

We have spoken of Mary Magdalene, let us now behold the Pharisee, and compare
the one with the other. If the Woman that was a Sinner, by her love mericed (as
they speak) Justification, What shall we say of the Pharisee? Did not he also
love the Lord? Would he have gone to him so Courteously, or invited him so
lovingly? or received him into his House so kindly, or entertained him at
Dinner so honorably, unless he had been moved with some Affection of Love?
What shall I say of his Faith? Did he not believe; being instructed by the Holy
Scriptures, in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth? Did he not
receive Christ as a Prophet? Now he believing in the Father, and receiving the
Son with Affectionate Love, What could be wanting to him, that was necessary to
Justification? If so be all our Justification is perfected by Charity? And yet,
I suppose, no Man will say, that this Pharisee was justified by Christ, that
is, set free from all Condemnation by this love of his. Why? Because Faith in
Christ as a Savior was wanting. But suppose he had Faith, and he trusting to
his own Righteousness, and being puffed up with Pride upon that account, had
begged no help, and imagined he needed no Pardon, would this Faith have availed
him to Justification? I do no not believe it: But you may say, That is true
indeed, and therefore this proves, that Faith only does not justify.

I answer, and also request the Adversaries, that, laying aside the desire of
vain jangling, they would examine the matter according to Scripture and right
Reason.

Though the manifest Testimony of the Apostle Paul, and the Examples of the
Saints make it an undoubted Truth, that only Faith in Christ the Son of God,
has the power of justifying without Works. Yet it cannot open this power upon
all; but only those in whom a fitness is found for receiving the displayings of
Divine Grace.

Of the Repentance of those that are Justified by Faith.
BUT None are found more fit, than those, that seem to themselves most
unworthy, and none less fit, than those, that are most highly conceited of
their own worthiness. Seeing we are all Sinners by Nature, nothing can be more
reasonable, than that we should acknowledge the filthiness of our own
abominations, and cast our selves down at the Feet of Almighty God.

And there is nothing that God more requires, than this: Whose Nature, or
rather Mercy is such, that he delights not in any thing more, than in a humble
Heart and a broken Spirit, as the Psalmist declares: Psalm. 34. Isa. 57.
He saves such as are of a contrite Spirit. And in the Prophet Isaiah, God
testifies of himself, that he is the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
Eternity, and dwells in the high and Holy place, and also with him that is
humble and of a contrite Spirit, to comfort the humble Spirit, and to revive
the Heart of the contrite ones. And for that cause he calls aloud in the
Gospel, and offers his kind invitations chiefly to such as labor, and are
heavy laden, that they may come unto him, and be eased.

What is coming to Christ, but believing? What is it to be eased or refreshed,
but to be justified? Though indeed he calls all, and despises none, that come
Andrad. Vega. De Iustif. page 833. Coming to christ is believing in him. Esa.
16. 9. Esa. 9.
to him: Yet so it comes to pass for the most part, that none come to Christ as
they ought, unless they be pressed and burdened under the sense of their Sin
and Misery. And again, that Heavenly Physician is seldom sent unto any others,
but such: As the Prophet bears witness, who making a particular description of
those, to whom Christ was to be sent, he sets before us the meek, the broken in
Heart, the Captives, the Prisoners, the Mourners in Sion, them that are walking
in Darkness, and sitting in the shadow of Death, etc. And the Psalmist speaks
much to the Ps. 107.
same purpose, Ps. 107. describing the Mercy of God on this manner. He fills
the hungry Soul with goodness, and such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow
of Death, being bound in Affliction and Iron. Though he being sent by the
Father, is given to all, yet he is not entertained by all with the like
Affection.

The Lord himself shows the cause thereof: For, what need have the whole of the
Physician? Therefore as a skilful Physician, does not Administer his Medicines,
but when sickness requires it, so Faith cleanses none, but those, whom
Repentance also amends, Ioh. 1. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful to
sorgive us, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin.
neither does the Gospel heal any, but those whom first the Law has slain, and
Conscience has wounded. And as that is most true, which we Preach by the
Authority of Paul the Apostle, that Men are justified by Faith only without
Works, so on the other side it is false, which the adversaries assert, that by
this Doctrine of Faith it comes to pass, that all care of good Works is cast
off, and the reins are let loose to all manner of wickedness: Howbeit if they
speak of such impenitent persons as go on resolutely in their Sins, we
acknowledge, that such as they, are not justified by Faith, and yet we assert
that this is no way prejudicial to the cause that we plead. But if they speak
of such, as join Repentance with Evangelical Faith, and therefore stand in need
of consolation, if they deny that those are justified by the Faith of Christ
only; they discover themselves to be utter Enemies of the Gospel, and
adversaries to Christ. And again if they assert that such penitent believers
become worse by this Doctrine, they do therein err exceedingly, and lie
abominably.

Wherefore that the Mouth of Malice and Slander may be stopped; I admonish
these professors of Divinity, who condem (...) this Doctrine of Paul as
Heretical, that they would take our proposition, not by halves, but whole, and
join the legitimate predicate of the proposition with the subject, that when
Faith only justifies the Uogodly, but not unless he be first humbled by
Repentance.
Faith is said to justify, they should reckon that is not enough, unless they
understand aright, whom this Faith justifies. To wit, none of those that
continue stubborn and impenitent in their wicked courses, but only such as
acknowledge their Sins with grief of Heart, and being weary of their former
abominations fly to Christ by Faith for resuge.

But here they take another occasion to cavil (...) For if Faith justifies
none, but them, that repent, then (as they say) Faith only does not justify;
but together with Faith a Godly Sorrow, and Mourning for Sin Justify also.

I Answer, It is true indeed, that Faith is joined with Repentance, in him that
is justified from his Sins. And yet Repentance is no cause of Justification: As
those, that are afficted with a painful Disease, Their pain makes them desirous
of a cure, but yet there is no healing virtue in this desire. So Faith and
Conversion are jointly united in the person, that is justified.

But as touching the cause of Justifying, Repentance indeed prepares a Soul for
the reception of Justification, but the cause of justifying lies altogether in
Faith and not at all in Repentance. For the just Judge does not absolve him,
who has violated his Justice, because he is grieved upon that account, but
because he believes in Christ, who has satisfied Justice, and for whose sake
Pardon is promised to such as Repent; for in him are all the springs of our
Justification.

But lest this Discourse should grow too Ample, for if every thing were treated
of particularly, it might be enlarged beyond all bounds: Let us come close to
the Adversary, (and Fight Hand to Hand) that in a Summary Representation it may
the more easily appear to the Reader, with what Arguments they defend
themselves, what Arguments they defend themselves, what Scriptures they quote,
what force and what fallacy is in their Arguments.

THE Third Book: A Confutation of the Arguments, Whereby the Adversaries defend
their Inherent Righteousness, against the Righteousness of Faith.
An Argument taken out of St. James.
No Dead thing Iustifies.

All Faith without Works is Dead. Therefore, No Faith Iustifies without Works.

Answer.
First the manner of arguing is captious, and transgresses the right A Fallacy
in the terms.
Laws of Logic. For the terms therein exceed the due number: For there is a
redundancy in the conclusion, by this addition, without Works. For this should
have been the conclusion: Therefore no Faith, that is without Works justifies.
And that may be well granted without any disadvantage to our Cause. For,
suppose we grant, that Faith is Dead, which is not moved with a desire of doing
good Works, according to the saying of St. James, yet it does not therefore
follow from hence, that no Faith Iustifies without Works. From which two things
do follow, worthy of consideration.

First, That no Faith justifies, that is not lively: And next, though it
abounds in good Works, and never is without them, yet it only without Works
Iustifies.

This will appear evident by the Example of St. Paul: Who though he was not
conscious to himself of any Wickedness, yet he durst not affirm himself to be
thereby Justified.

I think nothing hinders, but the whole Argument may be yielded unto, if so be
the terms are rightly placed.

The Adversaries gather out of the Apostle James, that Faith is dead, which is
without Works, and herein we do not much oppose them. But what follows from
hence? Therefore, (as they say) dead Faith without Works does not justify.

And I deny it not: But what Conclusion flows from this manner of Arguing?
Therefore only Faith does not justiste? Why so? If no Faith, but that which is
lively, justifies, and if it receives Life only from Works, then this is the
consequence, that Faith justifies, only upon the account of good Works.

I Answer, First, though we grant it is true. that the Faith which justifies us
in the sight of God is lively, and always joined with a Godly Life: Yet, that
this Faith justifies and reconciles us no other ways, but upon the account of
good Works, is most false. For this is not a good consequence from the
premises: Because Faith is not alone in the Life of the Believer, therefore
Faith is not alone in the Office of justifying. Or because the Faith that
justifies is not a dead, but a lively Faith, therefore it does not justify
alone without Works: For herein is a fallacy of the Consequence. But you may
object? Whence then is Faith said to be lively and not Dead, but from Works?
Which if it be so, of necessity it must draw all its Life and Virtue from Works.

Nay, the matter is quite contrary: For though in the sight of Men, Faith is
not discerned to be Lively and Vigorous, but by Works, yet Faith receives not
Life from Works, but rather Works from Faith. As Fruits draw their Life and Sap
from the Root of the Tree, but not the Root The Life of Faith is not begotten
of Charity, but only is evidenced thereby.
from them: Just so external actions proceed from Faith, as the Root, which, if
they be good, they evidence the Root to be sound and lively, and this is all
they do, but they communicate no Life thereunto.

And this Life and Virtue of Faith is not one, but Twofold: And it acts A
twofold Life and Operation of Faith.
partly in Heaven, and partly in Earth. If you ask what it does amongst Men
upon Earth: It does good to its Neighbor, working by Love.

But before God in Heaven it justifies the Ungodly, not by Love, but by the Son
of God, whom it only lays hold of, Therefore those Men seem not to have got a
clear insight into the Virtue and Nature of the Grace of Faith, that suppose
the whole Life thereof to consist in Love, as if Faith of it self could do
nothing, but as it receives Virtue and Efficacy from Charity.

Indeed both may seem to be true in the External Actions of Human Life, in
which Faith lies like a dead thing, unless it be enlivened by Charity to the
exercise of good Works. And hereunto belongs that saying of Paul, whereby he so
much commends Faith working by Love, understanding What Faith Works with God,
and what with Men. A twofold Opperation of Faith.
such Works, as Faith working by Love brings forth to the view of a Human Eye.
Yet with God Faith has a far different operation; for it only, without any
reliance upon Works, or assistance of Charity, but trusting to the naked
promise of God, and the dignity of the Mediator, climbs up to Heaven, and gets
access into the presence of God, where it does great and wonderful things,
combating with the Judgment to come, fighting against the terrors of Death,
Satan, and Hell, pleads the cause of a Sinner, obtains his pardon, absolves and
justifies him from the accusations of a guilty Conscience, takes away all
Iniquity, reconciles God to the Sinner, appeases his wrath, subdues the power
of Death and the Devil, and procures Peace, yea and Paradise it self; with
theThief, that had led a wicked Life, and yet at Death was justified by Faith
in the Redeemer. Who would desire more or greater things? And now so many and
great things being done by Faith, let us enquire, After what manner it does
them? Not After what manner does (...) only Justify. (...) Life of Faith is
not Charity but Christ.
as it lives and works by Love, but as it lives only by Christ, and relies on
the promise: for the Life of Faith, which lives (before God) is not Charity,
but Christ, not receiving Life from Charity but communicating life unto it, and
justifying Works, that they may be acceptable to God, which would otherways be
abominable. Unto the truth of this we have a sufficient Testimony given us by
Paul: When he says, my Life is Gal. 2. 1 Cor. 4.
Christ; and again, the Life, that I now live in the Flesh, I live, not by the
Love, but by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

And elsewhere speaking of himself, he says, That he was not conscious to
himself of any Wickedness, and yet he denies that he is thereby Justified, as
the same Apostle discoursing about the works of Abraham, though they were never
so Eminent Romans 4.
for Holiness, yet he saw nothing in them, which that Great Patriarch might
make a matter of Glorying before God.

Hereunto may be added the Arguments of others, that have been Ex Andrad. Viga
de Iustificatione. Quaest. 1 Ex Canisio and aliis.
strangely wrested out of Scriptures: There are six Reasons principally, which
they pretend the Evangelists furnish them with, against the Righteousness of
Faith. First, they draw an Argument from these words of Christ, Come ye blessed
of my Father to the Kingdom prepared for you: For I was an hungered and ye gave
me Meat.

Argument.
Da. That, which is the cause of blessedness, is also the cause of
Justification. Whom he has Justified, them he has also Glorified, etc. Romans 8.

Ri. Works of Mercy, are the cause of blessedness; for I was an hungered, and ye
gave, etc. Mat. 25.

I. Therefore, Works of Mercy, are the cause of Justification.

Answer.
I deny the Minor. For Works of Mercy, as they are considered in themselves,
are not the cause of Justification, or blessedness, but rather effects and
furits of Justification: for they are no otherways pleasing to God, but as they
are performed by persons in a justified state, and it is by the Faith of
Christ, that they become acceptable. For unless Faith go before, and justify
the person of him that works, his works are not at all regarded by God,
because they do not satisfy the Law of God, being tainted with the corruption
of depraved Nature, and come far August. we are justified by that by which we
are saved.
short of that perfection, which Divine Justice requires. Wherefore if we will
Reason aright about the cause of blessedness, this manner of arguing will
appear to be more forcible by. an evident Testimony of Scripture.

Argument.
Ma. That which is the cause of Psalm. 32. Romans 4.
blessedness, the same is the cause of Justification.

Mi. Remission of Sins is the Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven,
etc.
cause of blessedness and Salvation.

Con. Theresore, Remission of Sins is the cause of Justification.

But you may say, What must then be answered to the Words of Christ, who seems
to promise the blessedness of the Kingdom as a reward of Works? You may find an
answer to this objection in the Book of Iacobus Cartusiensis, who has written
Iacobus Cartusiensis de Authoritate Ecclesiae, An. 1440.
on this manner. Men do accept and love the persons of others, for their Works
that are acceptable, and profitable to them; but God accepts the Works for the
sake of the person, etc. Therefore here there is need of a distinction between
the Work, and the person of the Worker. But you may say: Are not Works that are
performed in Charity, for the relief of the Poor, pleasing and acceptable to
God? We deny not that our selves: But we enquire into the cause wherefore they
become acceptable: Which that it may appear the more evidently, let us examine
these words of Scripture; I was an hungered, said Christ, and ye gave me Meat: I
was thristy, and ye gave me Drink, etc. I ask in the first place, who is it
here, that was an hungered? You will say, Christ either himself in his own Body,
or in a Member of his Body. Did you then feed Christ, when he was an hungered?
That was Piously done indeed? Therefore I see and commend what you have done.
But I ask, what was it that stirred you up to do it? Whether was it Charity,
setting Faith a work, or was it not rather Faith setting Charity a work? But
what if some other that was no Member of Christ, whether Heathen or Turk had
need of your Meat? Would you in your Charity have fed him? I doubt of that. But
suppose you your self had not believed in Christ but had been an Enemy to him,
if you had seen one that belonged to Christ almost ready to perish for hunger,
would you have relieved him? I do not believe so. Why? Because it is only
believers, that feed Christ, but Infidels persecute him. The Lord, was thirsty
on the Cross, and he had Vinegar given him for drink; which was a Hellish
wickedness. But why did they give him Vinegar? Was it want of Love, or was it
not rather want of Faith in those unbelieving Pharisees? Who if they had not
wanted Faith, they would not have wanted Charity, to administer help, and
Charity, would not have been unrewarded. But let us Works withoutFaith,
thoeminent in themselves are of no value with God: yet on the contrary the
Works of believers that are mean in themselves lack not their reward.
proceed: Suppose one that is not a believers, whether Turk or Heathen, should
refresh a hungry Christian, by giving him of his Meat, as old Simon the
Pharisee entertained Christ with a Dinner: And many of the Heathens have been
Eminent in offices of kindness and Love. Can the giving of Meat and Drink by
any such without Faith merit Eternal Life? Surely not. But if a believer gives
his Christian Brother so much as a Cup of cold Water in his necessity, shall he
lack his Reward? Christ himself says he shall not.

Hereby you may see whence it is that our Virtues and good deeds are acceptable
to God, and dignified with Rewards; not for themselves, but for the Faith of
him that works them, which first justifies the person before all works. And
after the person is justified, his performances are accepted; and though they
are of small value in themselves, yet they are looked upon as great, and
rewarded plentifully. Wherefore we How the name of reward in Scriptures is
attributed to works.
deny not, that sometimes in the Scriptures the name of Reward is joined with
Eternal Life; and that the works of Brotherly Charity may in some sense be
called meritorious, if so be these works are performed by persons, who are
already justified, and received into favor by remission of sins, and have
obtained a right unto the promise of Eternal Life. Not that their works are of
such value, that they should make satisfaction to the Law of God, or merit any
thing with God ( ex congruo, or condign) as they phrase it, either by
congruity or worthiness: But they are imputed as Merit by Grace: Not that
Eternal Life is due to the works themselves; but because there are consolations
laid up in Heaven for Saints and persons in a justified state, to support them
in their afflictions: Eternal Life not being due to them for their works, but
by right of the promise; just as a Son and Heir, to whom his Father's
Inheritance Works imputed for Merits by Grace.
is due, does not merit the right of Sonship by any duties that he performs,
but he being born a Son, his duties upon that account are meritorious, so that
he wants not a due reward and recompense. Therefore in this Popish Argument
there is a fallacy.

Another Argument taken from the words of Christ, Matthew. 25.
Da. HE that does the will of the Father, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Ti. It is the will of the Father, that we should do good works, that are
commanded in his Law.

Si. Therefore, an entrance into Heaven is obtained by the works of the Law.

Answer.
Suppose we grant all contained Andr. Vega.
in this Argument, what will these Roman Iusticiaries infer from thence?
Therefore (as Vega speaks) Faith is not sufficient to Salvation, without the
keeping of the Commandments. It is easy to answer him in a word. Let him keep
the Commandments according to the exact Rule of the Divine Will, and he shall
be saved. But neither he, nor any other man can perfectly keep the Commands of
God in this Life: From whence we infer this by necessary consequence, That
either there is no hope of obtaining the Kingdom, or else that it lies not in
the works of the Law.

Now if it be so, what remains, but that finding this is not the way to Heaven,
we should seek for another way; and because there is no door of Salvation
opened to sinners in the Law of Commandments, therefore we must fly to another
Refuge: But what that Refuge is, appearing to us from Heaven it self, the
Divine Will declares unto us, which is not set forth in the Old Law, but in the
New Testament of the Gospel. And this is his Will, that every one who believes
in the Son, should not perish, but have Eternal Life. For whereas the Law was
weak because John 6. Romans 8.
of the flesh, God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness, of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Objection. But here some may object; Will the Faith of Christ justify us. in
such a manner, that there may be a Legality and Impunity for us to disobey the
Will of his Father? God forbid. The Liberty of the Gospel allows not that; for
it openly affirms, That they, who are justified by the Faith of Christ, walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And to this purpose our Lord himself
speaks, though not in the same words; Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, Matthew. 25.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my
Father, which is in Heaven. For what is it to do the Will of the Father, (but
as Paul expresses it) to walk, not after the flesh, but after the spirit? In
which place a perfect obedience to the whole Law is not required to
Justification; but the meaning of our Lord's words is this, that he requires a
Faith which is not counterfeit, nor hypocritical, but upright and sincere;
which does not only outwardly and with the mouth, make mention of the name of
the Lord, or the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, as the Pharisees
and Hypocrites did of old, but heartily endeavors to walk in the fear of God;
and though it cannot perform all things commanded in the Law, yet it strives,
(as much as in it lies) to shun all things that are contrary to the Will of
God, that, at least, sin may not have the dominion, if it cannot be wholly
excluded or rooted out. Thus I understand these words of Christ, To do the Will
of his Father, which is in Heaven: For God requires us to do his Will, A notion
of Bucer. It is one thing to do the Will of the Father, and another thing to
obey it without any imperfection.
but does not exact a complete perfection of Obedience in this Mortal Life. On
the contrary, he that makes an outward show of Faith, and an external
profession of the Name of Christ, whilst he takes no care to lead a Life
suitable to his profession, but runs on in sins against his Conscience, it is
certain, that such a Faith, according to the saying of Christ, profits him
nothing, though he boast in the Name of the Lord, as much as he will; not that
Faith without Works does not justify before God, provided it be true, and not
counterfeit; that is, if it is received into a heart truly humbled, as seed
into good ground; But because that Faith, which does not provoke unto Love and
good Works; though it may be boasted of at a high rate, yet in reality it is no
Faith at all, but only a shadow, and A feigned and hypocritical Faith.
false resemblance of Faith. And the same Answer may serve for all their
Arguments, which they have wrested out of the Sermons of Christ in the Gospel,
to defend their Doctrine of Justification by Works. Of which sort are these
next following.

Argument.
Matthew. 7. Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, we have prophesied in thy
Name, and in thy Name we have cast out Devils, and in thy Name we have done
many mighty works. Then shall I profess unto them, I know you not, depart from
me, ye that work iniquity.

From these words they draw this Argument.

Ce. Whosoever is rejected of Christ, is not justified.

La. Every one that works iniquity, though he has the Faith of Miracles, is
rejected of Christ.

Rent. Therefore he that works iniquity, though he has Faith, he is not
justified.

Or thus:
We are approved by Christ after the same manner that we are justified.

By Works ofRighteousness we are approved of Christ.

Therefore by Works of Righteousness we are justified.

Answer.
I answer to the first. The Minor An Answer to the first Argument.
must be understood with a distinction; He that works iniquity, is taken two
manner of ways in Scripture. Sometimes godly men work iniquity, and likewise
wicked men; for both of them sin; but they differ in their manner of working
iniquity. Godly men commit many things which they hate, and which are truly
sins: But because they delight not in them in their inner man, but in their
love to Christ, they endeavor with all their might to return unto God by
Repentance, God does not impute their sins to them; wherefore those sins that
are done away by remission, are not reckoned for sins. But the case is far
otherways in those that are wholly bent upon the fulfilling of the lusts of the
flesh, and continue in them Answer to the second. The strength of our Virtues
is weak.
with delight and satisfaction. And unto them belongs that sentence of Christ,
whereby he commands all that work iniquity, to depart from him.

As touching the second Argument, it is a fallacy (a non causa, pro causa, as
we call it) if our Virtues were of sufficient efficacy to merit the Grace of
God, there would be some ground for that which they infer. Now our Works being
such as have always need of Mercy, and never satisfy the Law of God, nor bring
Peace to the Conscience, nor support us under the stroke of Death, or the
weight of Judgment. How evidently does it hence appear, what we should answer
to this Argument? Good Works are pleasing to God; I grant their assumption. But
first the person must please God, and be reconciled Works please for the sake
of the perfon being first reconciled.
to him, that so his works may please and be acceptable; for the person being
once reconciled, the works from thence derive their dignity. I acknowledge
therefore that works of Piety are pleasing to God, but yet only as they are
performed by persons reconciled and justified. But if the manner, how they that
do good works, are reconciled, be enquired into, they do not obtain
Reconciliation by works, but before all merits of Aug. de fide. and operibus.
works; for works go not before him that is to be justified, as a cause
thereof, but always as an effect follow him that is justified. As fruits, if
they be good, they receive their goodness from the Tree, whence they grow, but
they are not the cause why the Tree is good. So in like manner we grant with
Augustine, that the righteous have great merits. But it comes not from their
merits, but from another caufe, that they are righteous. So Jacob was Jacob.
David.
beloved of God, before he had done either good or evil. What did David before
he was anointed King, to deserve so great a dignity? The same may be said of
Abraham, of whom we read in sacred Records, how great things were promised to
him, when first he was called away from his Fathers house: But the Scripture
gives us no account of any merits of his, as Abraham. Adam. Abel.
if thereby he had Right unto so great preferments. What shall I say of Adam?
did he not first lose Paradise, before he received the promise of recovery? And
God had respect unto the Sacrifice of Abel. What is your Opinion concerning
this? Did the worth of his Oblation procure him this favor? Or shall we say
there was some other thing that made his person acceptable to God, before he
had any regard to his Sacrifice? If you cast your Eyes about upon all the
Histories of the holy Scripture, and take a view of all the Generations of the
People of Israel, when God in his great goodness did bear with all the
provocations of that People, can you discern any thing in their works, that
merited so great long-suffering, and patience; or should we say that it was
only for the sake of Christ, that was to be born of that Nation? In like manner
it may be said of the Church, which though it has been in so many dangers, and
compassed about with so many troubles and snares, yet it continues firm
notwithstanding all this opposition, in spite of the very Gates of Hell.
Wherefore is it thus? Is it for its own merits, or should we account the Grace
and Power of Christ to be the only procuring cause thereof, and no strength nor
merit of ours? Now it is evident to every reasonable man, that the same thing,
which is the cause of Preservation, is also the cause of Salvation to the
Church, which consists not in our Works, but only in the Faith of Christ, and
his free Bounty.

An Argument out of St. James.
Not the hearers of the Law, but the James 1. Romans 2.
doers shall be justified. Not the hearer of the Law, but the doer shall be
blessed, James 1. Mat. He that hears my words and does them, etc.

Therefore not Faith only, but Deeds do justify.

I answer. The Argument may be granted if the Minor be rightly added with The
Argument retorted upon the Adversaries.
the Inference, which we shall set down here, that the Argument may appear in
its perfect form.

He is righteous that by deeds fulfils the Law:

No man by deeds fulfils the Law in this life.

Therefore no man is justified by deeds in this life.

The Minor is evident by the Authority of the same Apostle James: Whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and offend in one thing, is guilty of all. There is
none in the Land of the Living, but fails in some thing. James 2. Yea there is
no man that James 2.
offends not in many things. Therefore no man in this life fulfils the Law of
God, no not James himself.

Let us now consider the words The words of Christ are considered. Matthew. 7.
of Christ that are cited out of the Gospel: He that hears my words, and
does them, etc. Who does not clearly apprehend the mind of Christ in these
words; for it is manifest that his design was, to rebuke the counterfeit
pretenses of Hypocrites, and thereby to stir up the minds of his own Disciples
to the power A good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.
of Godliness, and sincerity in their profession; which he does in more than
one place, and not without weighty reasons. For, as nothing is more detestable,
so nothing is more usual, than for false Hypocrites to be covered with a Vizard
of Holiness, who having no experimental knowledge of the things which they
profess, nor drawn unto God by Effectual Calling, nor taught by his Spirit,
being ignorant of God, and strangers to the practice of Holiness, do make a
great show amongst all men, outwardly pretending to that, which they are not
indeed, but would seem to be, who take little or no care at all, to be any way
instrumental for the Glory of God: But their chief endeavors are to increase
their gain, and satisfy their ambitious desires, that they may be great in
this World, and get applause and renown amongst men. Such a frame of spirit is
in most Hypocrites. But the great searcher of hearts, who looks into every dark
corner of the Soul, and discerns all the most hidden imaginations, is not
unacquainted with their Hypocrisy, and there is nothing more abominable unto
him. Therefore our Lord, in giving Instructions of Piety to his Disciples,
strictly commands, that such as take upon them the profession of Faith in his
Name, should not only make show of it in words, or account it enough to incline
their Ears to his Doctrine, but also practice it in their Lives; and endeavor,
as much as in them lies, to walk suitable to their profession. By what I have
said it may evidently appear, that these words do not express the way how we
are justified, but they only declare, what manner of men they ought to be, who
are Justified, and have obtained a right to the Heavenly Inheritance by Faith
and free Grace.

Another Argument.
The Foolish Virgins were shut out of Heaven, not because they Ex Andrad. Vega.
Mat. 25.
wanted Faith, but because they neglected taking Oil in their Vessels. Mat. 25.
The same appears in the slothful Servant.

Therefore: The Kingdom of Heaven is due to good Works, and not to Faith.

Answer.
The Consequence must be denied. For this is the true consequence A bad
Consequence.
thereof: Therefore Men are justly shut out of Heaven for Evil deeds and
Impiety. For though a slothful and lazy Servant ought to be shut out of the
House, yet it does not therefore follow, that the Inheritance must needs be due
to him that faithfully and diligently performs his duty. The Kingdom of Heaven
is given to faith, not to duties, by way of gift, not by way of bargain, not
for merits, but freely. And though faith in the mean while is not idle, but
diligently exercises it self in the ways of Holiness, yet the possession of
this great benefit should not therefore be attributed unto Works? suppose an
adopted Son, in managing well his Father's Goods, shows himself a faithful
Steward in his Father's House; is not his Father's Inheritance bestowed upon
him, of free gift, notwithstanding all this care and industry? Moreover that is
not true, which is denied in the Antecedent, that the foolish Virgins were not
shut out for want of Faith. For had they had true Faith, they would not have
wanted provision of Oil. For Faith, that is lively, cannot be slothful:
Therefore in Scripture these Epithets are given to Faith.

1. That it is true 1. Timoth. A good Conscience and Faith unfeigned.
and not feigned.

2. It is sure and not 2. James. Let him ask in Faith, not wavering. Mat. 14. O
thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt?
wavering.

3. One and not diverse. 3. Ephesians. 4. One God, one Faith.


4. Lively, and not 4. Habbac. The Just lives by Faith.
dead.

5. Great. 5. Mat. 15. O Woman, great is thy Faith, etc.


6. Fervent, and not 6. Mat. 14. Luke 17. If ye have Faith as a grain of
Mustard Seed.
luke warm.

7. Laborious and 7. James. 3. Faith without Works is dead, etc.
not Idle.

8. Strong. 8. Coloss. 2. The confirmation of Faith.


9. Courageous and 9. Ephesians. Taking the Shield of Faith.
not fearful.

10. Stable and not unconstant.

Another Objection taken out of John 5.
They that have done good, shall come forth unto the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation; and again, Romans 2.
Every Man shall be rewarded according to his Works.

The Argument of the Adversaries, taken out of Ioh. 5. Romans 2.
Therefore, the Salvation or Destruction of Men depend on their Works, and not
Faith only.

If any Man desires to see this Argument in a Syllogistical term, he may take
it thus:

There is no Justification without Works, where there is a reward given
according to Works.

The Judgment of God rewards according to Works.

Therefore, there is no Justification (in the Judgment of God) without Works.

Answer.
As there is nothing more sure than the Words of Peter, in which he affirms,
that Christ is appointed Act. 10. 2 Cor. 5. Romans 10.
Judge of the Living and the Dead, so also that is a truth, which is asserted
by Paul: That we must all appear before his Judgment Seat, who will render to
every Man according to that, which he has done, whether Good or Evil.

Therefore you say, Not Faith but Works do justify, which are the procuring
cause either of Salvation or Destruction. But this is not the consequence of
the Words of the Apostle, nor the sense of that Scripture. But, if we Reason
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost in these places of Scripture, we must
rather draw these consequences from them. Seeing such a Judgment is
approaching, as will bring every one to render an account of their Lives,
therefore no Man should flatter himself with hopes, that any of his offenses
either in words or deeds will go unpunished, but every Man should so frame his
Life, that Faith and Holiness may be jointly united together, and not separated
from one another.

And this is a truth, which many now a days have need to be admonished of, not
only Papists, but also Protestants, who make profession of the Name and Faith
of Christ, but yet notwithstanding, they so behave themselves as if they
thought an-outside show of Religion were sufficient, and as if they did not
look for Judgment to come, they are so void of care to walk worthy of that Holy
profession, giving themselves up against their Conscience to all uncleaness
with greediness, whereby they both greatly provoke the wrath of The inevitable
severity of Judgment should stir us up to care and watchfulness.
God, and put themselves in dreadful danger of the loss of Eternal Salvation.
Against such Men as run on into open wickedness, without measure or remorse, we
may by better consequence draw this inference.

We must appear all of us before the Judgment seat of God, where account will
be taken of all the Actions and Practice of our Lives.

Therefore, let every one that has regard to his own Salvation, endeavor
according to his power to lead a Life suitable to his Profession, and without
Hypocrisy, to join a good Conscience with a good Faith.

For the word of Truth has told us: They that have done Ioh. 5. Coloss. 3.
Evil, shall come forth unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

But are such Scriptures contrary to Justification by Faith, in such as
together with the profession of faith in Christ, join the fruits of Obedience;
which though it is not perfect upon all accounts, yet it is yielded in
sincerity and uprightness of Heart, according to their weak power, and
capacity? Which though it comes far short of the complete perfection of the
Law, yet nevertheless our Justification is full and perfect in the sight of
God: For what is defective in our Works, he supplies by his own imputation,
through As we are Workers, but as we are Believers. Romans 4. Habbac. Ioh. 17.
faith in his Son, which Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness, not for our
working, but for our believing: for though the abominable rebellion of wicked
Men, who walk not after the Spirit, but after the flesh, brings upon them the
Judgment of Condemnation, yet this continues to be a truth: The Just shall live
by Faith. And he that believes in me shall never perish.

But you may say, The Sentence of the Judge remains evident and uncontrollable;
which promises the Resurrection of Life, to them that lead a Godly Life.

I answer, It is very true, which the Lord says, but the conclusion drawn from
hence is very false. For in these Words Christ joining the Fruit and the A
Fillacious Sophismfrom the concrete to the abstract.
Tree, Persons and things together, gives the comfortable hope of Eternal Life
unto his own Servants, who according to their power, labor diligently in the
Gospel: Not thereby determining what their Works deserve, but showing with how
many, and great rewards he will crown their labors; who have suffered any
thing for his Name. But those Men contrariways arguing from the concrete to the
abstract, and dividing things from persons, conclude amiss by this Enthymema.

They that are believers in Christ, exercising themselves diligently in all
Holiness; shall be received into Eternal Life.

Therefore, Good Works are the cause of Eternal Life.

To this I may make a brief and easy Answer.

Answer.
I deny the consequence: for it is a Fallacy ( a non causa pro causa) for in
the antecedent the works of the godly are brought in as effects, but in the
conclusion A Fallacy.
as a cause: whence there is no sound conclusion from the concrete to the
abstract. For it is no rational arguing, because believers living Holily
receive the gift of Eternal Life, therefore their deeds merit Eternal Life.
Just as if a Man should reason on this manner; a Wife being Obedient to her
Husband, is admitted to be a partaker of all his Goods: Therefore her Obedience
is worthy of a share in all his Possessions: A Son being Obedient to his
Father, is received for his Heir, therefore his Obedience deserves the
Inheritance. Works are evidences of faith in Christ, but not the cause of
Salvation. Just as a Tree, that brings forth Fruit, if it has any goodness in
it, receives it not from the Fruit, but the Fruit has all its goodness from
the Tree. In like manner the works of the Godly, have nothing, that they can
claim a right unto in Judgment: If they find any favor or reward, that is not
due to them, but partly to Mercy, and Mercy forgiving Evil deeds. Imputation
puttidg a great value upon final things.
partly to Imputation for the sake of the Mediator: to Mercy, which pardons
Evil deeds: to Imputation, which puts a great value upon good Works, though of
very little worth in themselves, and crowns them with rewards: So that all the
praise belong, not to Men, but to God: Not to Righteousness but Grace, not to
Works, but Faith, not to Judgment, but Mercy.

But you will say, Shall we not all come to Judgment? Must we not all appear
before the Tribunal of God? It is true, we The Judgment of God is twofold
according to Aug. de confut. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 30. The Judgment of damnation,
the Judgment of discretion.
shall all come: But Augustine tells us of a twofold Judgment, one of
condemnation, and another of discretion, whereby the Goats shall be separated
from the Lambs, and not Lambs condemned with the Goats. It is an Article of my
faith, that we shall all of us come to Judgment, but I do hope the Elect of God
will not come into the Judgment of Condemnation. And here we must carefully
distinguish between the Lambs and the Goats; between those that are united to
Christ by Faith, and the damned crew of Unbelievers. For though in this just
Judgment of God, every one shall give account to God of all their Works. And
there is no doubt but a reward will be given suitable to every man's Works; but
in a far different manner to the one and the other. For they who seek for
Salvation not by Faith, nor the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness only, but
by the Works of the Law; they shall receive a reward according to the desert of
their deeds; upon this condition, that they shall live by the Sentence of the
Law, if they fulfill the Law as they ought; but if not, what else must they
expect, but that, according to the just Decree of the Law, no violation thereof
should be found so small, as not to make the sinner liable to Condemnation, and
justly so. For he that has no power in himself to obtain Righteousness, and is
not willing to receive it, when it is offered by another, if he suffer the
punishment due to his sins, let him not accuse the Law of unjustice, but
himself of unbelief.

On the contrary, they that by sincere Faith are converted unto Christ, if they
have committed any evil thing (for who among the holiest that is) can run
through his Race without a fall: Their sins can do them no hurt in the
Judgment, which are already done away and pardoned before the Judgment by Faith
and Repentance. And besides this, if they did any thing well, and worthy of
praise, they receive an everlasting Reward, not for the merit of the Work, but
according to free Imputation, whereby God in his Infinite Mercy sets such a
value on the works of them that believe in his Name, though they are vile and
contemptible in themselves, that he rewards them with the recompense of the
promised Inheritance, not for any merit of theirs, but according as he has
promised it freely in his Son. Now there being a twofold The Righteousness of
condemnation. The Mercy of separation.
manner of Divine Judgment (as we have showed out of Augustine) one, belonging
to the Justice of condemnation, and another to the Mercy of Separation.
According to this diversity of Judgment, we must distinguish between those that
are to be called before this Tribunal of the great Judge; for all of us must be
called and presented before it; but the distinction between those that shall
appear must be observed: For though we are all sinners by Nature, and in the
practice A twofold kind of sinners. Romans 8.
of our Lives; yet we are not all sinners after the same manner. There are some
whose sins are already forgiven by Faith and the free Grace of God; and there
is no doubt but the Mercy of Separation will deliver such from the Judgment of
Condemnation, because there is nothing that can be justly alleged against
them. For who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? Or, how can they in Righteousness be called
to Judgment for these things, that were pardoned by the Judge himself, before
they were brought under the Trial of Judgment? For the offense being taken
away, the offender is not liable to Judgment: Wherefore no Sentence of
Condemnation should affright those that are in Christ Jesus. What Law can hold
them guilty, that are not under the Law, but under Grace?

And again, there are others, that having passed their days in all manner of
wickedness and abominations, at their departure out of this Life, carry with
them a guilty self-condemning Conscience unto Judgment. Of which sort of
Monsters this World has been very fruitful: Such as Epicurus, Who are liable
to the Judgment of Condemnation.
Diagoras, Lucian, Sardanapalus, vain glorious Boasters, implacable Persecuters
and Murderers of the Saints; and such like: Who, though they may flatter
themselves in this Life, as if they were safe and out of danger, yet they will
find to their sorrow, that there is a Judge before whom they must unavoidably
appear, and give a strict account of all the actions of their Lives.

Therefore as touching the Judgment of the Evil and the Good, as I deny not
that it is certainly true, the Lord will judge the Living and the Dead in
Righteousness and Equity: So, if they understand it of the Judgment of
Condemnation; I answer, as the Lawyers use to say, The Exception limits the
Rule. For though this Judgment is to be The Rule of Right.
general, yet if it be taken for the condemnatory Judgment, the general Rule is
of force, excepting those things that should be excepted. But what this
Exception is, and to whom it belongs, it appears evident enough by the
distinction of separation, mentioned by Christ in several John 5. Luke 21.
places: He that hears my Word, and believes in him that sent me, shall not
come into condemnation, but shall pass from death to life. And again, where the
Lord foretelling the time of his coming to Judgment, Why the day of Judgment
is called a day of Redemption.
says thus; When these things begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up your
heads: And presently gives the reason thereof; for your Redemption draws
near. Wherefore did it please him to make mention of Redemption to his
Disciples without naming of Judgment? Certainly it was, because, as Paul
speaks, There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, as on the
contrary, there is no Redemption to those who live without the Faith of Christ,
in slavery to this World and the Flesh. And elsewhere the Lord, when he turned
himself to his Disciples, and could promise them nothing that was more glorious
and magnificent, he said unto them, Ye also shall sit upon Thrones, judging the
Twelve Tribes of Israel. Moreover Paul writing to the Corintbians, says, The
Saints shall judge the World.
Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World? And yet breathing forth
something more glorious, he exalts Saints above the highest pitch of worldly
dignity adding further: Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? If the
Saints shall be judges, how should they be judged in this Court of Judicature,
in which they have something to do, but nothing to fear.

Whether the Judgment of God is terrible to the Saints.
THerefore let Canisius produce what he can answer unto these Scriptures; for
it is his Opinion, that all men should be possessed with fear of Judgment.
These are his words; Not only Sinners, but Pit. Canis. in opere Catechistico de
Iudicio; cap. 3.
also Saints themselves are oft-times affrighted at the fore-thoughts of
Judgment. Thus the Jesuit speaks in his own Dialect. But let us hear what
Scripture-proofs he brings to maintain his Assertion. Hence, says he, David
feared, and with great fervency breathed forth this Petition: Lord, enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant. In like manner Job feared, though he was
innocent; What shall I do, said he, when God arises to judge, and when he
visits, What shall I Psalm 142. Job 31.
answer? For destruction from the Almighty was a terror to me, and because of
his greatness, I could not endure. I was afraid of all my sorrows, for I knew
thou would not hold me innocent, etc.

To this Objection, I answer in short; Who knows not, that, in us, and our
Works, there is nothing whereof we ought not to be greatly afraid? So David,
and Job, and all the Saints; the more they call to mind the actions and
practice of their Lives, the more they are surprised with the fear of Divine
Judgment, and repose the less confidence in themselves.

But this does not at all abate our rejoicing in Christ Jesus; so that relying
upon the never failing Promise of God, and being assured of the remission of
our sins, we strive against this fear as much as we can. Howbeit we cannot be
so perfectly rid of It is incident to the greatest Saints to be in donbt
sometimes concerning their spiritual graces and to be afraid of their sins.
this fear, which is placed in our Nature, but that it will sometimes return
and cause trouble to the most eminent Saints. But that, which sometimes happens
through infirmity, is one thing, and that which always becomes the Saints to
do, is another. So David and Job before the return of spiritual comfort, were
in terror, but, after God had restored unto them the joy of his Salvation, all
fear vanished away. Canisius in saying, the Saints should be possessed with the
fear of Judgment, does, what in him lies, to root out all the assurance of
Faith out of the minds of the godly, and to make the Promise of God, and our
fiducial relyance on him, utterly void, and of none effect. Does Christ
encourage us to lift up our heads for joy of the approaching Redemption, and
yet dares Canisius command us to hang them down for fear of Judgment? Romans 8.
Galat. 4. Philip. 1.
Does Paul promote the Saints unto so high a pitch of dignity, that he places
them on the Seat of Judgment together with Christ. as his Assessours and
Assistants. And yet must Canisius thrust the godly down as low as the ungodly,
to render a strict account of all the transactions of their Lives? The holy
Spirit in the Souls of Believers, with fervency breaths after Christ, crying,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Should Canisius then Apoc. 22.
endeavor to quench those holy desires by unbelief and distrustful fears? The
Sacred Writings of the holy Apostles call the Spirit of the Saints, a Spirit,
not of bondage to fear, but a Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father;
and yet has Canisius the Jesuit the impudence to call back the Saints from a
Spirit of Liberty, to a slavish Spirit of Bondage? Is this any society with
Jesus? Paul desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ. All Believers in
Christ desire the same being afflicted in this Life. For all that desire to
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution in this present evil
World. The Souls of them that were slain, under the Altar, are greatly longing
for the coming of this Judgment: But, as for Canisius, he would persuade us to
be afraid of this day, and not to wish for it, and love it, as the Apostle 2 Timothy 4. For them that love his appearance.
Paul teaches us. John in the Revelation bids us rejoice, because the Marriage
of the Lamb is approaching, but the Jesuit bids us mourn. The Lamb's Wife
clothes her self in fine Linen in token of her joy; but Canisius would have
her clothed in Sackcloth.

Nevertheless I deny not the truth of that, which he gathers out of Bernard,
Gregory and Augustine concerning the dreadful severity of this Judgment, than
which I know that nothing can be more terrible to them, that seek Salvation by
the Righteousness of the Law, without flying to Christ for refuge.

But on the other side, we ought not to abate the comfort, nor discourage the
fiducial reliance of Believers in Christ, who are planted in him by Faith.
Though they acknowledge their own imperfections, yet they strive against them,
and endeavor daily, according to their power, to make some progress in
Holiness. And therefore, as there is nothing in their good Works, whereof they
may boast; So also there is nothing in their evil Works (being now forgiven)
which they have cause to fear. Let us now proceed to the other Arguments of the
Adversaries.

Argument.
If there are no merits of Works, then that saying is false; Thou shall render
to every one according to his Works. But the Consequent is false, therefore
also the Antecedent

The Minor has been answered already by making a distinction of persons: For
there being a twofold sort of men, to wit, Such as are in Christ, and such as
are out of Chrst, there must be a different Judgment made of the one and the
other.

First; Those that are in Christ, being united unto him by Faith, the Judgment
of God uses to begin with them in this Life. As touching the Life to come, the
Lord has made this Promise concerning every Believer; He shall not come into
Judgment, but has passed from Death to Life. John 5.


Secondly; Suppose we grant, that the Elect of God shall be called to Judgment,
the account that they shall then make, will be very easy, who have Christ for
their Righteousness. Whence it follows by necessary consequence, that this
Judgment will be to them a Judgment, not of Condemnation, but of Absolution.

Thirdly; Sentences of the Law belong properly to them that are under the Law;
but as for such as are regenerate by Faith in Christ, because they are not
under the Law, but under Grace, the Law has no dominion over them.

Fourthly; Whereas it is said, That every man shall receive according to his
works; those works are either good or evil: If good, they are good upon the
account of Faith only, (for what is not of Faith is sin) and so they are beyond
all danger: But if evil, either they are forgiven, or not forgiven. If they are
forgiven through Faith and Repentance, they are not called to Judgment: If not
forgiven, it is, because they want Faith, and so they are the works of the
Unregenerate. Whence it follows, that this Judgment of Condemnation does not at
all belong to them that are regenerate by Faith, but them that are unregenerate.

Another Objection.
That place in Mat. 22. concerning Of the wedding garment.
the wedding garment is objected. The King entering into the Marriage Feast, saw
a man not having on the wedding garment, etc. I wonder what those Papists can
find in this place of Scripture to cover the shame of their own nakedness, when
there is nothing, that less advantages their cause, or weakens it more. The
wedding garment, say they, signifies Charity, from whence they form this
Argument.

They that have on the wedding garment, are admitted to the Marriage Feast.

Charity only is the wedding garment;

Therefore, they that are adorned with Charity, are admitted to the heavenly
Marriage Feast.

An Explication of the Parable of the Wedding Garment.
THE Minor must be denied: Answ.
Though works of Charity are of no small advantage, to adorn and beautify
faith in the exercise fo Civilty and Morality; yet a Garment suitable to the
Heavenly Marriage Feast, cannot be made of such Cloth; but of other Materials.
What that is, whereof this Garment must be Romans 13. Galat. 3.
made, Paul the Apostle teaches us, Put on the Lord Jesus Christ. And again,
whosever of you are Baptized, ye have put on Christ. Because we put not on him
by Charity, but by Faith only; Therefore faith is the Garment, made white with
the Blood of the Lamb, which Clothes us for this Marriage Feast, not Apoc. 7.
Charity, nor the filthy ragged apparel of our Works. Which that it may appear
the more evident, let us diligently consider both the Parable and the
signification thereof.

First, He that compares our The Parable of the Marriage, and Marriage-Garment
considered and explained.
great happiness in Christ to a Marriage Feast, How could he more significantly
set forth that, which is the most joyful of all things? For what is more
joyful, or suitable to Mirth than a Marriage Feast? Where all things resound
with Joy, and Dancing, where there is no sign of Sorrow, where no Lamentation
is heard, no Tear is seen, yea all Tears are wiped away Isa. 25.
from the Eyes. Unhappy is he, that partakes not of the great felicity, and
unspeakable Joy of this blessed Marriage Feast. He that unworthily dishonours
it, deserves to be abhorred, and he that disgraces it with Sackcloth and Ashes,
or any other Garment, and comes to it without the wedding garment, is not
worthy to enjoy so great a blessedness.

Now consider, besides the joyfulness of the time, the greatness of the
benefit; both which are Infinite and Eternal. For The Marriage of the Lamb of
God with his Bride.
as there is no firmer, nor nearer Bond amongst Men, than that of Marriage: So
nothing is more Divine, nothing is more Glorious, than that Bond, whereby the
Miserable, and Mortal Daughter of Adam is joined unto the Immortal Son of God,
the frail Church to the Heavenly Bridegroom, that they both become one flesh,
and have God to be one Father to them both, and have the same Family, the same
House, the same society of Life, and the same The Guests of the Marriage.
possession of all Goods. Which thing is so exceedingly wonderful, that it
surpasses all human understanding. Just as if a great King, being desirous to
show forth the Riches of his munificence should invite Beggars, and the Blind,
and the Cripple, and every one that was least worthy, and entertain them with a
Feast, and enrich them The Guests of the Marriage Feast.
with abundance of his best gifts; Is it possible, that any Man among them
durst imagine, that this was due to his own Virtues, or Merits?

It remains that we should view the Guests themselves, and also the garments of
the guests, whom he invites to this Marriage banquet, and not only invites,
Luke 14.
but compels them to come in. Call the Poor, says he, and the Lame, and the
Blind, and compel them to come in, that my House may be filled? Who are these
Poor, and Blind, Who are the Blind, and the Lame, that are invited to the
Marriage.
and Feeble, and Naked, but such as have no provision of their own Works? Who
have nothing in themselves, whereof to Glory, but only in the Lord. Such as
were the Publicans of Old, and Sinners of the Gentiles, and Pagans, concerning
whom Paul Discourses in words of great weight.

The Gentiles that followed not after Righteousness, laid hold on
Righteousness, that is, the Righteousness that is of Faith. But contraryways,
Israel that followed after the Righteousness of the Law, attained not
thereunto: Wherefore? Because Romans 9.
they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. How great
stupidity then and abominable impudence is this in vain glorious Men, who being
by Nature wretched, and Blind, and Naked, and most miserable Beggars,
notwithstanding all this, are exalted to the highest dignity of union with God,
and Against the Righteousness of Works.
that not for any merit of their own, but the free donation of Christ, that yet
they neither acknowledge their own nakedness, nor testify their thankfulness
to God for the Riches of his Grace, but think themselves abundantly beautified
with their own ornaments, and sufficiently furnished with merits to attain unto
Righteousness: But what a Righteousness is this of theirs? If it be the
Righteousness of Works? Who then are those poor and needy, that are admitted to
the Marriage? They that are adorned with the beauty and glory of Merits, and
abound with Riches of good Works, How can we account such to be poor, and
blind, and lame? And if they are said to be compelled to come in, where is the
free will of the Tridentines? Or its cooperation? But on the contrary if by
the poor here be understood such as have no good works that can commend them,
nor any help of free will, that are decked with no ornaments, but are admitted,
or rather drawn to the Marriagefeast by the grace of Christ only, How then can
Charity abounding The Wedding Garment.
with the works of the Law, be truly called the Wedding Garment?

Howbeit, I know there are some great Divines, that rather approve of this
interpretation, that the wedding garment here mentioned Should signify
Charity. But when I consider exactly the circumstances of the Parable, if
without offending those, that have better Judgments, I may freely profess, what
is my Opinion, I do rather suppose, that our Lord's design was, to signify the
same, that Paul the Apostle expressly Philip. 3.
speaks of himself, that I may be found in him, not having my own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the says of
Christ; the Righteousness, which is of God by faith. And if we are not blind,
we all see evident proof of the same, not only by words, but by the example of
the Israelites. Wherefore if none are entertained in this Marriage Feast, but
they that have on the wedding garment, and if Israel that followed after
Righteousness is said to be rejected upon no other account, but because they
sought it by works, and not by faith; can it be doubted, that this Nuptial
ornament consists not in works, but in the faith of Christ? I know, there are
many kinds of garments, as also there are many differences of things,
Agreeableness should be every where observed, according to the circumstances of
places, times, and things.
of Men, and of places: But all things agree not with all places, nor with all
Kingdoms.

One thing is suitable to a Court of Justice, another thing to a banquet.
Judges sitting on the Bench, and Guests at a Marriage feast, do not only differ
in the frame of their Spirits, but also in their outward Garb. A suitableness
of things, places and times, should be observed. The Law has its own The
Kingdom of the Law, and the Kingdom of the Gospel. The difference between the
Law and the Gospel.
Kingdom, and Christ also has his; and both have their own Inhabitants: As the
Kingdom of the Law receives none but the righteous; so the Kingdom of Christ
rejects none, though they be wicked, if they are brought to Repentance by
believing. And though both Kingdoms belong to God, and are under his dominion,
yet the manner of administration of both Kingdoms is not the same: For in the
dominion of the Law God was pleased to manifest his Righteousness; but the
Kingdom of Christ is the gift of Grace and Mercy: And as by the free gift of
God it is offered to all that believe, so it receives none but such, as are
glad, freely and willingly to embrace the Grace offered. And for the same
reason chiefly, this Kingdom of Christ is by a very fit similitude compared to
a Marriage Feast and a wedding garment: And not without cause; for if in a
Marriage Feast all things abound with mirth and joy, how much more should we
rejoice, and be glad in Christ, by whose procurement we obtain the manifold
riches of Everlasting Salvation and Glory?

Therefore what remains, but that we should with thankful hearts gladly receive
these great benefits, of our dear Savior; and What the wedding garment
signifies
especially because by the wedding garment, in this place, nothing else can be
understood. For as a wedding garment is a token of the joyfulness of the mind
at the Marriage Feast; so by this weding garment is signified with what joy and
gladness, with what holy reverence and thankfulness, the Guests of this Banquet
will enjoy the heavenly benefits. Whereunto the Apostle exhorts more than once
with so much vehemence, that we should not be over-sollicitous for any thing,
but always rejoice in the Lord, and glory in nothing, but in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, praising God in our hearts, as it is expressed in that
sacred Hymn; Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory. But
how do those superstitious Papists glory in the Lord, who trust to their own
Works, whose rugged and burdensome Religion consists wholly in Watchings, Vows,
Ordinances of Men, sleeping on the ground, and such like hardships, and an
affected austerity of life. But let us proceed to the Arguments that remain.

Another Argument.
There are also many other Scriptures, which they have wrested abominably for
the defense of their Opinion about Inherent Righteousness. As for example,
where the Lord says, That he came not to destroy Matthew 5.
the Law, but to fulfill it: Hence they infer, that all that would be saved,
must of necessity keep the Law. That I may answer this Objection, I acknowledge
that saying of the Lord to be very true, and I know what he professed in words,
he performed in the practice of his Life: For he came not to destroy the Law,
but perfectly The sense of thatScripture, I came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it.
to fulfill it, and that not so much upon his own account, as upon ours. But it
is not therefore a right consequence, which they draw from an ill formed
Argument.

Argument.
Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

Therefore there is no Salvation to any, but those that perform the Law.

This is a false consequence; for there is more in the conclusion, than in the
antecedent: For this should have been the conclusion, Therefore should we
diligently endeavor to fulfill the Law, according to his Example, especially in
those things that belong to us; for we are not subject to the same Ceremonies
of the Law, that he was: As when he was circumcised, and went to the Feast at
Jerusalem thrice a year, abstained from things that were ceremonially unclean,
and from things strangled, and blood, and celebra-ted the Passover according to
the Law; and many things of that kind, whereunto we are not now obliged.

But, though it be very true, that he came to fulfill the Law; yet we are not
therefore obliged to the fulfilling of the Law, as a thing necessary to our
Salvation. For the Office of Christ is distinguished by a twofold end: For he
was sent by his Father partly for this purpose, that in our stead he might
yield perfect Obedience unto the Law, to which impossibility we our selves had
a woeful Obligation, and that he might stir us up unto Virtue by his own
Example; but the Office of the Mediator consists chiefly in this; That he has
delivered A twofold Office of Christ the Mediator.
us from the dreadful Curse of the Law, and by his Death made full satisfaction
to Divine Justice for all our Debts, and translated us from our bondage and
slavery into a blessed state of liberty: Which makes us now to rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God. Therefore The Error of those who take Christ for
theirLawgiver.
it is seasonable here to give notice, that they who upon this account take
Christ for a Lawgiver, as if he had been sent by God for no other cause but to
make new Laws in the World, are in a great Error: For though he made a sound
and right Interpretation of his Country Laws, which were commanded by God, and
given by the Ministry of Moses, yet he was not sent principally for this
purpose, to make new or old Laws, but rather to bring help to those that were
under the Curse of the Christ is not a Lawgiver, but a Redeemer.
Law, and thereby in peril of damnation.

Another Argument.
Unless Christ had kept the Law, he had neither saved himself, nor others.

Therefore we cannot be saved, unless we keep the things that are commanded in
the Law.

Answer.
Under this similitude there lies Christ is one way under the Law, and we that
are in Christ another way.
hid a great disparity: For there is no small disproportion between us and
Christ. If he had failed in any thing commanded by the Law, there was no other
Redeemer, that could have interposed for him. The same may be said of the
Angels if they had sinned: But if we through infirmity go astray, the blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ is in readiness for our Redemption, to raise us up when
we are fallen, to procure the pardon of our offenses, and to restore us unto a
blessed state.

Argument.
Unless a man be born of Water Andr. Vega, de Iustif. page 741.
and the holy Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. Unless
ye eat the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life
in you, John 6.

Therefore Faith only is not sufficient for Salvation.

Answer.
Verily there is no other Weapon put into our hands, that we can retort with
greater advantage upon Enemy, than this very Argument: For the Mystical
signification of both these Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, is
nothing else but Faith in Christ Jesus: for as Baptism is called a Sacrament of
Faith, and therefore is sometimes by Augustine put for Faith; so those that are
well instructed in the knowledge of Christ, understand, that to eat the flesh
of Christ, is the same with believing in him. If we rightly consider the nature
of this Sacrament, there cannot be a more evident demonstration that we are
justified by no other thing but Faith only. For by what Argument could it be
more manifestly set before our Eyes, how great benefit redounds to us from the
shedding of the blood of Christ, than by the Institution of the Sacramental
Bread and Wine, for a memorial of his Body and Blood? Or by what other thing
could he more effectually represent unto our Faith the powerful efficacy of his
Death, than by the Institution of this Sacrament?

First; Pious Reader, call to mind, and consider with your self this miserable
and mortal Nature; which how void and destitute it is of all things, and how
empty of Divine Grace, and laden with iniquities, you cannot be ignorant. Thou
who in thy self art a wretched and destroyed man, come to the Banquet, where
thou art commanded to take the Sacramental Bread and Cup in the name of him
that was slain for thee, and then thou art bid, Eat; for otherwise to what
purpose should you hold the Bread in your hands when it is broken, and reached
forth unto you, unless it be The glorious resemblance between the Bread of the
Sacrament, and the Lords Passion.
received inwardly for digestion. Eat, says he, and drink ye all of it; for
this is my Body, and this is my Blood, that was shed for you. What was his
design in expressing himself thus, but to make us understand, that his Death
would be like a great Supper to his whole Church, in which, sinners, that in
themselves were wretched and miserable, and empty and hunger-bitten, might be
refreshed with an everlasting Feast of fat things, according as the Lord had
long since promised by the Prophet Isa. 25.
Isaiah. For as this mortal Life cannot continue without daily nourishment; so
neither hope of Eternal Life, nor any other Grace can endure, unless it be
supported by Faith in the Lamb of God, and thereby receive spiritual
nourishment. John 6.
And therefore unless ye eat, says he, the flesh of the Son of Man, etc.
Whence it is evident, that there is no Justification for miserable sinners, but
that which consists in Christ only, who was slain for us. Yea there is no
Justification in him neither but by Faith, which receives inwardly, and digests
this Bread that came down from Heaven; according as we are taught in the
Gospel. He that believes in me has Life eternal; that believing, ye may have
life through his name. Unless ye believe that John 6. John 2. 38. Luke 8.
I am he, etc. Thy Faith has made thee whole. Wherefore, there can be no surer
demonstration that Faith only justifies, than is held forth in these very words
of the Sacrament, whereby the flesh and blood of Christ is represented in that
holy Banquet under the similitude of Bread and Wine.

Another Argument.
Unless your Righteousness exceed Matthew. 4.
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore, not Faith only, but also Works of Righteousness exalt us to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

I answer.
By these words the Lord gives us serious Instruction, what manner of lives
they ought to live, that are justified: But he does not thereby signify, what
is the proper cause of Justification; one Judgment should be made of the causes
of things, and another of their effects. If you enquire for the cause of
Justification, the Lord has resolved that doubt; Thy Faith has saved thee.
This is Life eternal, that they should know thee, John 17.
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. In like manner Paul
expressed himself: If thou confess the Lord Romans 9.
Jesus with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart, that God raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. But if you enquire, what manner of lives they ought
to live, that make sincere profession of the Faith of Christ, we are taught in
this place, and many other sayings of Scripture, that they ought to differ much
from the lives of the Scribes and Pharisees; to wit, that they who are created
in Christ Jesus, should behave themselves without a Pharisaical Vizard of
external Holiness, or a proud conceitedness of their own Righteousness; but
that they should be adorned and beautified with sincerity and uprightness of
mind, and persevere in the practice of good Works, which God has prepared,
that we should walk in them; he said not, that we should be justified by them,
but that being justified by his Grace, we should walk in them, bringing forth
fruits worthy of our Vocation.

Another Argument.
Every Tree that bears not good fruit shall be cut down, and cast into the
fire, Luke 3.

Therefore, Faith only is not sufficient to Salvation without Repentance.

I acknowledge the Divine Authority of that Prophecy, which is true, as it is
generally known to all that have heard of the Gospel: For who would endure an
Unfruitful Tree, that cumbers the ground, and bears either no Fruit at all, or
such as is hurtful to the Husbandman? But suppose it brings forth good Fruit,
and beautiful to look upon, I would ask them, whether the abundance of Fruit be
the cause, or whether it is not rather the demonstration of the Tree's
Fruitfulness; and whether the Fruits do not rather receive their growth from
the Root, whence they come? Therefore, if Repentance is reckoned amongst
Fruits, it does not make the Man, in whom it receives its first beginning,
perfect and good, but only evidences what manner of Man he is now, and has
formerly been. For unless a wicked Life had gone before, no Repentance had
followed after. Moreover, Repentance does not make a Sinner perfect, but
evidences what he is.
Repentance could do no good, unless Faith be joined therewith, by which a
broken hearted Sinner may get access to the Throne of Grace. But you may say,
Are not grief and remorse for Evil deeds, and resolutions to the contrary,
things very acceptable to God, and are not only conducible to the amendment of
former miscarriages, but also a great cause of future Reformation?

I Answer, The sorrow of an afflicted Conscience, which we call The material of
Repentance.
Repentance, is a lovely effect, but it proceeds from an Evil cause: yet I deny
not, that it is a very excellent thing, and never too late, but always
acceptable to God if so be it is accompanied with Faith in Christ. Neither do I
deny that by means thereof Men are deterred from their customary Evil courses,
and stirred up to the exercise of Virtue. Which though we grant to be true,
what does all this avail toward the justifying of a sinner from those Sins,
that he has formerly committed?

If a Man has transgressed the Laws of the Commonwealth, and being arraigned
before a Judge is forced to give account of all the actions of his Life; will
it be enough for him to say, I was in an error, or I repent of my fault? Will
fear of judgment, or shame, set a Man free from the condemnation due to sin,
unless the Righteousness of a bleeding Savior, apprehended by faith, do
interpose, and ward off the stroke of Divine vengeance from the guilty Sinner?
Without Heb. 9.
shedding of Blood, says the Apostle, there is no remission.

Now then, if neither Holiness of Life, nor Prayers, nor Tears; nor the Blood
of all the Saints can avail any thing toward the mitigation of the bitterness
of this Judgment, and the only remedy be the death of the only begotten Son of
God, what will your Repentance do in this case? Indeed, I acknowledge that the
Scripture attributes much to Repentance, and there are glorious promises
annexed thereunto; but two things must be considered here. First, Of how large
an extent the Promises are, and How far the Promises reach and to whom they
belong.
next, to whom they do belong: for there are some rewards given in this Life,
and others that are reserved for Life Eternal. Verily Eternal Life, which is
the benefit of Redemption, as it could not be purchased by any works of ours,
so likewise it is not promised as the reward of Repentance or if in any
Scripture it seems to be so promised, it is not simply upon the account of
Repentance, but for another cause; To wit, the faith of the worker, and not the
work it self.

Therefore these things should be put each of them in their own places, and
comprehended within their own bounds. That it may be understood aright, what
Faith does, and what Repentance, and what efficacy is in both, and how they are
distinguished from one another, and also how they being joined together do
contribute mutual assistance to one another in the Justification of the
Ungodly. For though we deny What Faith does, and what Repentance.
not that both are very pleasing to God, yet the one is acceptable to him one
way, and the other another way. For faith is acceptable through Christ, but
Repentance only upon the account of Faith. And it is also a certain truth,
that, though by faith only, as the procuring cause, we obtain Justification in
the sight of God: Yet this very faith does not put forth its power of
Justifying upon any, but penitent and brokenhearted Sinners, and therefore in
the Gospel we are so often invited to Repentance. Not that it is not true faith
only, which justifies without Repentance; but because faith, if it be true,
justifies no others, but them that have turned from their Sins in sincerity,
and are converted unto God by Repentance. For such as have no trouble of
Conscience, nor sorrow for Sin, but run on obstinately against their
Conscience, and continue in their Evil courses, it is a vain thing for them to
hope for Justification by Faith, whereof they falsely boast, for all such
stouthearted Sinners are far from Righteousness. None need the Physician, but
they that are Sick, neither does Christ invite any to come unto him, but such
as are heavy laden: Come unto me, says he, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. But what is coming to Christ, but believing in
him according to the saying of Augustine?

Therefore, as Christ rejects none, that come unto him, that is, such as return
to him by believing, but revives and justifies them; so faith in Christ, in
which only our Salvation consists, is no where of a saving efficacy, but only
in those whom it finds August. de (...) and gratia, cap. 7. To come to Christ,
is to believe in him, for he himself says, No Man comes to me, unless it be
given him of my Father.
burdened and afflicted.

Another Objection.
If Faith only were sufficient to Justification, it would follow Andrad. Vega,
de Just. 2. p. 741.
that good Works are not necessary.

But the Consequent is false.

And, Therefore the Antecedent also is false, That Faith any is sufficient.

Vega confirms the Minor with this Argument: Unless good Works had been
necessary in all respects, Paul had not so carefully given Instructions about
Virtue, and rebuked Vice, and so mightily commended good Manners, and Integrity
of Life; but we shall afterward enquire into the Minor.

I come now to the Argument: And,

First, I deny the Major; for this is not a necessary Consequence.

Salvation is obtained by Faith in Christ only.

Therefore, good Works are not necessary.

The necessity of Virtue, and honest discipline is, and always has been, very
great in all respects both private and public; yet this necessity does not at
all detract from the peculiar dignity of Faith, that it should not be the only
cause of Justification; as on the other side, the Justification of Faith does
not take away the necessity nor lessen the care of a Godly Life. Therefore both
Faith in Christ, and the practice of Holiness are necessary; the one, to
justify Sinners in the sight of God, and the other to exercise them that are
justified in this World.

Therefore, There is need of a distinction in this case: for according to
Philosophy, a thing is said to be necessary two manner of ways.

First, Absolutely and simply, when one thing is so necessary to A twofold
necessity, 1. Absolute.
another, that it cannot be done or consist without it.

Secondly, In respect of Consequence, when a thing is of such a 2. In respect
of Consequencee. How are good Works are necessary to Salvation.
Nature, that as soon as it begins to be, other things also are joined with it.
or at least soon follow after, and thus good works in persons justified, are
necessary to Salvation, not simply, but in regard of Consequence.

By what I have said, any Reader that is not void of Sense, may easily discern,
that we seek not to banish good Works out of the World, that they should not be
necessary, but we only remove them from being a cause of Justifying: That so
both Faith and Works may be put each of them in their own place, and contained
within their own bounds. For Paul did not in vain, nor without great necessity
exhort with much Paul was a Zealous Exhorter to a Holy Life.
vehemence to the Godly practice of a Christian Life. For what is more glorious
in it self, or more worthy of the profession of Christianity, or fitter to
adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel, than that those, who are called by the Name
of Christ, should resemble him exactly in their manners, and the practice of
their lives: And as they profess themselves to be Citizens of the Heavenly
Kingdom, they should according to their power endeavor to lead a Life like
Heaven, upon Earth? On the contrary what is more abominable or odius, than if
those, who have been engaged by so many benefits, exalted to so great dignity,
and are joined to him into so near an union by so many Covenants and
Obligations, if yet they do not follow his Footsteps, nor imitate him in the
practice of their lives?

Therefore in this we and they agree, that Works of Piety are very necessary;
but we must consider, wherein this necessity lies: For they are effects which
of necessity depend upon their cause, from whence they proceed, but the cause
has no dependence upon them by any necessity.

By the like Consequence, we call many things necessary in common Offices of
Civility and Humanity; as when Kindnesses are received, what is more necessary,
and according to Justice, than a thankful remembrance of a Favor received, and
a readiness of Mind, to give evidence of thankfulness, not only in Words, but
also by repaying Kindness with Kindness, if there be Opportunity? Which
thankfulness was nevertheless Necessity of Consequence.
no cause of the Kindness that was done. Let us here compare other kinds of
Offices: Who knows not, that a Son and Heir ought of necessity to be dutiful to
his Father? But again, who can be ignorant, that this is no cause in him, why
he should receive the Inheritance? The same also may be observed in Marriage,
where the Wife being tied to her own Husband, of necessity owes Subjection to
him, which nevertheless she shows to him, not so much for any Law of necessity
that extorts it, as of her own accord, and willingly, being provoked by a
Principle of Love; moreover when she shows him the greatest Subjection, this
necessity is no cause of the Marriage bond: Just so it is in the performance of
Godly Works, which Paul commands us to maintain for necessary uses, not that
necessity of Tit. 2.
Works is any cause of Justification, but because it cannot otherways be, but
that where true Faith is, there of necessity good Works are required, and yet
they are not so much required, as they are a necessary Consequence; for who was
ever endued with the true Knowledge of Christ the Son of God, or had the secret
breathings of his Spirit, or had a lively sense of his unsearchable Power, and
the unspeakable Glory of his Majesty, but is drawn after him with the Cords of
Love, and cleaves unto him with all his Heart, setting light by all the
Vanities of this World? Moreover who has a true savor of Christ, but he
dispises the World, and all the things of the World, as the dirt under his
Feet? So that now there is no need of any Law to exact Works of Righteousness
of him, who is truly planted in Christ, because he is a Law to himself, and
does more of his own accord, than can be commanded by any Compulsion.

An Argument of the Jesuits.
The Word [ only] is not found in the Holy Scripture, therefore Faith only does
not justify.

Though it is not true, that this exclusive Word is no where found in the Holy
Scriptures, yet suppose we should grant it to be true, what would be the
Consequence? Verily those things that follow from a necessary Consequence,
though they are not expressed, yet they are implied. And therefore, ye also
your selves admit many Words into your Confession of Faith, of which the
Scripture makes no mention? But let us proceed, you say this Exclusive Word is
not found in Canonical Scripture, I confess it is not, in so many Letters and
Syllables. But seeing we meet with so many other things in sacred Writings,
that exclude all these Accessory Works (which ye intrude) from having a share
with Faith in justifying a Sinner, what hurt is it to sound Doctrine, if the
Word Romans 3. Ibid.
[only] is not expressed; when you read such Scriptures as these; being
justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3. By the Works of the Law no Flesh shall
be justified. The Righteousness of God is manifested without the Law, Romans 3. a
Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Christ, Gal.
3. Not of Works, Romans 11. Without Works, Gal. 3. Romans 11. Tit. 3. Ephesians. 2. 2 Timothy 1. Romans 9.
Romans 4. Not of Works, Tit. 3. Not of Works, Ephesians. 2. Not according to Works, 2 Timothy 1. Without Works, Romans 9. What is the Signification of such Expressions,
but that, all Works being excluded, it should be understood that Faith only is
the procuring cause of Justification; for what else is Faith without Works, and
without the Law, but Faith only? Therefore by the necessary Law of Consequence,
we may argue thus, we are justified by Faith, and are not justified by any
other thing inherent in us, according to the Scriptures: Therefore we are
justified by Faith only. Or we may Confute the Adversaries with this Argument.

Argument.
That from which all other things are excluded, must of necessity remain alone.

The Scripture excludes all other things in Man from Faith:

Therefore of Necessity it is Faith only that justifies.

But whereas they deny, that this (...). Romans 3. now he demonstrates that Faith
only has in it self the Power of justifying. Oecumen. photi. in Cap. Romans 3.
only believing. Origin. Cap. 3. The only just cause of Glorying is in the Cross
of Christ.
exclusive Word is found in the Scripture; let them read, Mark 5. and Luke 8.
where the Lord says, Only believe, and thou shall be saved.

I come now to the Greek and August. de verb. domini Sermon. 4. He would have
this one thing imputed, whereby the others are gathered by Consequence. Amb. 1
Cor. 1 It is appointed by God, that a Believer should be justified by Faith
only. Chrysostom. Sermon. 5. in Cap. 2. Ephesians. Paul professes him to be Blessed, who
is supported by Faith only. Basil. de humil. by Faith only, which is in Christ.
Hierom. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 1. Nazianzen. de moderatione, Our Righteousness
is Faith only. Bernard. our Righteousness is no other thing, but the Indulgence
of God. Thom. Aquin. in 1 Timothy 1. Therefore there is no hope of Justification,
but in Faith only.
Latin Doctors of the Primitive Church, Basilins, Nazianzen, Hilarious, Ambrose,
Augustine, Hierom, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Photius, Bernard, to
whom, if you please, you may add Thomas Aquin. who all Commenting on the same
Words of Christ and Paul, do not only agree with us in the same Opinion, but
also, in the same exclusive Word, as has been evidently proved in our former
Answer to Osorius.

Thought it be manifest, that we assert nothing here, which the Orthodox
Divines of the Primitive Church have not confirmed unanimously, and in the same
Words; yet nevertheless these things so evident in themselves, do not satisfy
those perverse Sophisters, who when they cannot deny the very Words of learned
Men, yet they take occasion to contend with us about the Sense of the Words, in
which they pretend that we do greatly err; for they have found out a curiously
contrived Distinction: Saying, That by Faith A twofold Justification (...) to
the Papists.
only is understood the first Justification, but not the second. Thus these
cunning Artificers of Words have turned one Justification into two, one, that
is obtained by the first Grace, as they call it, before all Works, as in
Infants, when they are Beptized: And another, which is in Persons come to
Years, by the practice of good Works.

That I may Answer this frivolous Distinction: First, I object this saying of
Augustine, good Works that follow The second Justification of Papisis overturned.
him that is justified, do not go before him that is to be justified; which if
it be true, what remains, but that they should either Confess, that there is no
such thing as this second Justification, which they have devised, or else that
good Works go before him that is to be justified, contrary to the Doctrine of
Augustine?

Moreover, if they think there is sufficient cause, why Faith only should not
be admitted, because it is not expressly mentioned in the Holy Scriptures, why
should not also this Distinction of theirs, (about a second Justification by
the practice of good Works) be rejected upon the same account, which is no
where expressed in the sacred Oracles: But by a manifest Contradiction is
opposice to Heavenly Truth? It is an Ancient and Famous Rule of Lawyers, That
there A Rule of Law.
is no occasion of distinguishing, where the Law makes no Distinction. In what
place of Scripture can those Sophisters find this Distinction between a first
and second Justification; whereby Infants Baptized are otherways justified,
than they that are come to years, for both were alike dead in their Sins, and
they are both alike regenerated, and live by Faith in Christ the Son of God.

That we may briefly Consute this Sophistry, whereas neither the Holy
Scriptures, nor the Godly Doctors of the Primitive Church ackonwledge any
manner of justifying, but one only: How comes it to pass, that those men have
devised a twofold Justification? making two, of that which is but one: So that
the first Justification consists of Faith only, and the second is made up of
Works? But it is easy to withstand this absurd device, by the Authority of
sufficient witnesses; amongst whom Ambrose comes first into Ambrose in Cap. 3.
ad Romans
Mind: who has expressed himself thus; Because there is one God of all, he
has justified all after the same manner; and what that manner is, he shows in
these Words, He justifies them no otherways, but as they are Believers. And
presently after, he excludes all Merit of Works; For nothing, says he, is the
cause of Dignity and Merit, but Faith only: And again, Seeing that a Man is not
justified before God, but by Faith only, etc. Therefore let us infer It is
proved out of Ambrose, that a twofold manner of Iustificatoin is impossible.
from these Words of Ambrose, if there is one manner of justifying, as there is
one God; Then no Distinction can make two Iustifications of that which is one
only: As no Distinction can make the one only God, that justifies, to be two.
Again, if Believers are no otherways justified before God but by Faith,
according to the Testimony of Ambrose, and there is no other Dignity nor Merit,
that God regards, but only Faith; what place is there for a second
Justification made up of the Merits of Works?

Hereunto let us add the Testimony Gregor. 2. lib. Moral. Cap. 40.
of Gregory, which is very seasonable to confute the Forgery of those vain
Sophisters concerning their second Justification. These are the Author's Words:
Grace begot me, being naked in the first Faith, and the same Grace will save
me, being naked at my Reception. Thus Gregory spoke of Nakedness: And what
Nakedness is that, but the want of Virtue and good Works, (as he himself
Interprets) which is the Condition of every gracious Soul, not only of Men come
to Years, but also of Infants when they are Baptized in their first
Regeneration? If we are found Naked in our Reception into Glory, where then is
that second Justification ( made up) of good Works? but if it is not so, where
is that Nakedness whereof Gregory speaks? How can these things so much
disagreeing, consist together, that we should both be Naked and void of good
Works, and also clothed with good Works, and thereby Merit Gregor. ibid.
a second Justification? In the mean while this should not be omitted, which
the same Gregory mentions of Grace, which he divides not into a first and
second, as the Papists do now adays, but he shows, that it is one and the same
Grace, which both first regenerates us, and also afterward receives us into
the Kingdom of Glory. By which it is evident, that there is but one manner of
justifying, which consists not in the Merits of Works, but in Grace only, and
the Hope of Mercy, unto which Men fly for refuge in their emptyness of Virtues,
as he speaks.

But let us proceed.

Another Argument.
Evil Works deserve Eternal Destruction.

Therefore, Good Works Merit Eternal Life.

Answer.
Both are true indeed, if you consider things in respect of the just rewards
due unto them. For as the vile Abominations of an Ungodly Life procure the
Wrath and Vengeance of God, so Works of Righteousness would procure his favor,
if we could perform good things with as great perfection as we do Evil things.
But because we cannot do that, therefore of our selves, we can deserve nothing
according to the rules of Justice, but only Death and Damnation. But now by the
right of Redemption through Christ, we are set free from the Law of Justice,
and translated into the Kingdom of Grace; by Virtue of a new Covenant, whereby
it comes to pass, that God has respect not to our Merits, but only to Christ,
the price of our Redemption.

Therefore I answer, That this opposition of contraries is of force according
to the strict severity of the Law, but not according to the Grace of the
Gospel, for here there is a block put in the way; To wit, The Blood of the
Redeemer, that frees us from the Law of Sin and Death.

Moreover, the Argument from contraries avails not, except the contraries are
set equally in their full extent one against another. Now Evil Works in us are
perfectly Evil, but good Works, though assisted by Grace, yet because of the
refractary imperfection of the Flesh, in the sight of God are imperfect at the
best, as they are performed by us. Wherefore Hierom says, The perfection of all
Righteous Men in the Flesh, is Imperfection.

Another Argument.
The Grace of Justification, is lost by Evil Works.

Therefore, it is retained by good Works:

Answer.
By the same Answer, the Fallacy of this Sophistical Argument is discovered,
because our Sins and Virtues are not equally contrary to one another. But
whereas it is said, that the Grace of Justification is retained by Obedience,
though this in some sense may be granted, yet Justification is not thereby
procured. Moreover when we say, It is retained by Works, that should not be so
understood, as if this were done for the Merit of the Actions, but only for the
sake of the Redeemer, upon whose account first the person is accepted, and
afterward the actions are well pleasing, which otherways would be unclean and
of no value.

They say, that perseverance in Righteousness is lost by Evil There is a
twofold consideration both of good and Evil Works.
Works. But Evil Works, as they are in us, admit of a twofold consideration;
either as they are inherent in us, as in all Saints, through the infirmity of the
Flesh, and we presently rise up again by Repentance, and Faith. And such kind
of Sins, (as Paul asserts) shall not have dominion over us, or in the next
place, as we give up our selves to Sin, against our own Conscience; that we may
serve it, and take a sinful delight therein: But such a Sin can by no means
consist with this Faith, whereof Paul speaks, which has place in none but
those, that are turned from Sin, and returned to God.

Another Argument.
Faith Iustifies.

Faith is a Work. Therefore, Works Justify.

Answer.
I Answer; The Argument is faulty, because the middle term is of a larger
extent in the Major, than in the Minor. For Faith in the Major is taken
correlatively, for Christ, or the Promise, which is apprehended by Faith. In
the Minor it is taken only for a quality of the Mind, as it is an act of our
Will: Otherways if Faith is taken in the Minor just as it is in the Major, it
is false, and the Minor should be denied; To wit, That Faith is a Work.

Another Argument of the Jesuits.
If Faith only Iustifies, it would Justify without Charity.

Faith does not Justify without Charity.

Therefore, Faith only does not Justify.

Answer.
I may oppose unto this Argument, another not unlike it, that the Fallacy of
the one may appear the more easily by the other. Thus then by way of Instance a
Man may infer, If the heat of Fire An Answer by way of Instance.
only makes warm, then it makes warm without light.

But the heat of Fire does not make warm without light joined therewith.

Therefore, The heat of the Fire only, does not make warm.

I doubt not, but by this mutual comparing of Arguments, it appears evident to
the Reader, how like the one is to the other, Every Union of things does not
confound their Offices.
and consequently how he should judge thereof; so that there is no need of any
further Refutation. For all things that are joined, and agree together in some
respects, are not therefore engaged in the same Office.

He that has Feet, Eyes, and Ears, though he has not these Members in
separation from one another, yet it is an untruth, if it is said, That he sees
not with his Eyes only, or walks not with his Feet only.

Though I deny not, that in the performance of those duties, which belong to
this Life, Faith is not separated from Charity: So if we look upward to things,
that are Divine and Eternal, if we contemplate and view, what that is, which
can help us at our appearance before the Dreadful Judgment Seat of God, and
appease his Wrath, and deliver us from Eternal Destruction, and conquer Death
and the Devil, and regain the favor of God, and Justify us, and procure us
the Crown of Life, Faith only in the Mediator does so bear rule in these
affairs, and so fully performs all things requisite to our Salvation and
Redemption, that here Charity has nothing to do; for the Kingdom is not
promised or due to you, because you love this or that Neighbor after your
manner, but contrarily, because you neither love God as you ought, nor your
Neighbor as your self, therefore unavoidable destruction is due to you, unless
Faith only through the Mediator should come in for your help, and set you free
from the condemnation due unto you, notwithstanding your Charity. Faith is so
far from needing to be joined with Charity for Justification, that unless
Charity it self were justified by Faith, it could not stand, nor keep it self
from falling to ruin and Destruction.

Of the like nature is that Argument, which they wrest out of the Writings of
the Apostle Paul.

An Argument out of 1 Cor. 13.
If I have all Faith, so that I can remove Mountains, but have not Charity, I
am nothing.

Therefore, Justification comes by Faith, and good Works.

Answer.

Erasmus did write in his Exposition on the Second Chapter of James: Faith
which is cold without Charity, and puts Erasmus and censurus Parisiensium Tit.
7. They of Paris argue that Faith can be without Charity.
not forth it self, when the matter requires, it is not Faith, but only the
Name of Faith, etc. They of Paris argue contray ways, that Faith can be without
Charity, out of this place of Paul: If I have all Faith, so that I can remove
Mountains; Erasmus following Basil, Interprets this Scripture on this manner;
That we should take this to be feigned by the Apostle for Amplification, which
is not, nor can be.

And seeing Thomas Aquin. here by [all Faith] understands perfect Faith;
Therefore, because perfect Faith is not found without Charity, it is necessary
that according to the Interpretation of Basil, we should here take notice of a
Trope or Fiction, which Quintilian also reckons amongst the forms of amplifying.

Therefore, whereas we deny a Dead Faith without Charity, to deserve the name
of Faith, we speak this by a very usual Trope, as we say, That an unprofitable
and idle Man is no Man, or, Wine which is decayed, and has lost its strength,
is no Wine. Therefore that which is cited out of Paul: If I have all Faith, but
have not Charity, etc. Must be understood thus: Not that Paul simply affirms
Faith to be a gift of God without Charity: But he speaks Figuratively to
amplify the praise of Charity, as he that says: Though I have an hundred
Tongues, and as many Mouths, yet I could not fully set forth the matter as it
is, he does not therefore presuppose, that there is any Man, who has an
hundred Tongues, and as many Mouths.

Paul uses the like Figurative Speech: Though I speak with the 1 Cor. 13.
Tongues of Men and Angels, for Angels have no Tongues, but it is feigned by
way of Amplification to signify some excellent Tongues surpassing those that
are human. Thus he said.

If what has been hitherto said, does not satisfy the Adversaries: I Answer
thus: That this Speech of Paul belongs not to the manner of Justification, but
to the Life of the Justified Person; If I have all Faith, says he, But want
Charity, etc. What then? Therefore Charity enters together with Faith into
Justification. But this is no good Consequence. But this is rather the
consequence thereof. Therefore Charity is necessary in the Regenerate. Which
must of necessity be granted, for Love is necessary and pleasing to God; To
wit, In those that are in a state of Reconciliation, and for the sake of
Christ. For God naturally delights in the Obedience of his own: Which though it
be imperfect, yet he approves of any endeavors in those that are reconciled
unto him by Christ. So then Faith, that is Christ apprehended by Faith
Iustifies us freely. But on the other side, we must not receive this Grace in
vain: But he receives it in vain, who is not obedient to the precepts and
Chrysostom.
example of Christ. Howbeit, there are also some that answer, that this Faith
here mentioned by the Apostle should only be taken for the Faith of Working
Miracles; amongst whom is Chrysostom, who calls this the Faith, not of
Doctrine, but of Miracles.

Moreover whereas they urge this word of the Apostle, as if he had A cavilling
about the Word [all.]
used it in a general signification: To this it may be answered, that the Word
(all) signifies often not the universality of a kind, but the perfection of a
species, to which it is joined, as 2 Cor. 9. God is able to make every good
gift abound in you, that having all sufficiency in all things, etc.

In like manner in this place of Paul: If I have all Faith, that is, the most
perfect Faith of working Miracles, so that I can remove Mountains, etc.

Another place out of Paul. 1 Cor. 13.

Now these three remain, Faith, Hope, and Charity; but the greater of these is
Charity.

Argument.
Our Justification flows from An Argument out of a place of (...) 1 Cor. 13.
the more worthy cause.

Charity is a thing more worthy and great than Faith.

Therefore, we are justified more by Charity than by Faith.

Or if you would rather take it thus:

If we were justified by Faith, and not by Charity, Faith would be greater than
Charity.

But Charity is greater than Faith.

Therefore, we are justified rather by Charity than by Faith.

Answer.
That I may briefly Answer both these Arguments, First let us rightly conceive
not only the words of the Apostle, but in what sense he speaks them. These
three remain, says he, but the greater of these is Charity: in which words we
hear the Apostle preferring Charity before Faith: And we acknowledge it to be
true, but let us see in what sense it is true.

I will make use of an argument like it: There has not risen a Mat. 11.
greater than John the Baptist amongst those that are born of Women: Therefore
John the Baptist must be greater than Christ. I answer, from the sense of the
Scripture: Though Christ seemed less than John the Baptist by the judgment of
the World, and the general opinion of People, yet in the Kingdom of Heaven he
was, and always will be, greater than John; we may observe something like this
in Faith and Charity. Though in this World, in Men's dealings with one another
mutual Charity has the preeminence: Yet in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, in
our concernments with God, against Satan, Death, Sin, the Judgment of God, his
Wrath and Vengeance, and the terrors of In the Kingdom of Heaven, Faith is
greater than Charity.
Conscience, Faith does so far excel, that it only has the Dominion not only
above Charity, but also without it.

If the dignity and excellency of any thing is discernable by its effects, and
performances, as a Tree is known by its Fruits, let us now compare these
Virtues with one another, that it may the better appear, what each of them can
do, what is the efficacy of Charity, what Faith performs, and how much it
excels.

And first, as touching Charity, and its Offices, let us hear how 1 Cor. 13.
The Offices of Charity.
greatly the Apostle commends it. Charity, says he, is patient, and bountiful,
and courteous, fitted for every condition of Life: Charity does not envy, does
not behave it self unseemly, is not puffed up, seeks not its own things, but
seeks the good of all; it is not easily offended, nor desirous of revenge; and
though it suffer injury, it devises not to do evil to any man; it delights not
in the wickedness of the wicked, but rejoices in the Truth; it suffers all
things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things, waiting for
better, with an undefatigable expectation. Though other things Charity
commended from its duration
may fail; though Prophecies, and Miracles, and Knowledge may cease, yet
Charity will never fail; mutual Love will endure for ever.

Hitherto ye have heard the Apostle set forth the duties and offices of
Charity, with deserved praise, which, though they are exceeding great and
magnificent, and cannot be sufficiently commended by any man according to their
worth; yet such is the nature of all these offices of Charity, that they pass
How great things Faith does in Heaven.
not beyond the bounds of this mortal Life, and the mutual Communion of
Christians with one another.

But now let us raise up our minds, as high as we can, to contemplate the power
and efficacy of Faith, and what it does, not only upon the Earth, but in Heaven
in the presence of God. Whilst Charity is exercised in this inferior World
amongst men, Faith ascends into the Kingdom of God, where first by a sublime
contemplation it lays hold on the Son of God the Mediator at the right hand of
Majesty, takes a view of his Kingdom, and the glorious Riches thereof, and is
ravished at the admiration of the universal Power that is given to him over all
Heaven and Earth; and searches for the Promises of the Father, that are
ratified in his Son the Mediator, and by search understands them, and in
Heaven beholds them to be sure and infallible; wherewith the mind of a Believer
being now confirmed, takes pleasure in them, and triumphs with great joy; and
now Faith, by relying on these Promises, becomes fearless of danger, and
invincible, and stands firmly against the fury of Satan, the power of Death,
the terrors of a guilty Conscience, the Gates of Hell, the malice of the
World, and the oppositions of the rebellious flesh. Hence flows a gladsome
tranquillity of Conscience, and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and thence it
is that Hope derives its fiducial Relyance, and Charity its fervent Zeal from
Faith only.

For the mind being supported and safe guarded by Faith in Christ, what more
can it wish for, to arrive unto the highest pitch of felicity? Moreover, who
can fully express with words, or conceive in his mind all the good things, that
Faith by means of the Mediator prepares in Heaven for those, that are yet
grovelling upon the ground? This Faith is that which reconciles man (who was in
a woeful and wretched condition) unto God: Iustifies a sinner that was at the
brink of despair, opens the Gates of Paradise to the penitent Malefactor:
Obtains the Grace of the Holy Spirit for the Centurion, gives Peter the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, justifies the Publican, procures pardon to the man sick
of the Palsy, heals the Woman with the bloody Issue, restores sight to blind
Bartimaeus, procures us the Grace of Adoption, the hope of the Resurrection,
and Life Everlasting, and overcomes Death, which can by no other power be
conquered, and gets Victory over Satan, who cannot be subdued by any of our
Virtues, nor by our Charity; but the Shield of Faith only drives him away, and
puts him to flight.

Thus, pious Reader, I have given you some description both of Faith and
Charity; you may take your liberty to judge, how you should account of both;
and what should be attributed unto Charity, which, though it may seem to claim
the principality in things belonging to this Life, yet in Justification, and
obtaining the pardon of sins, it is How Charity is greater than Faith; and how
Faith is greater than Charity.
so far from having the superiority, that in this case it can do nothing at
all. What need is there of words to prove this? for Paul the Apostle explains
himself abundantly, in what sense Charity is greater; to wit, because of its
duration, which appears evident by these things that follow: For he draws this
Inference from what he had said; Charity, says he, never fails; though
Prophecies and Miracles may be abolished.

Another Argument out of St. James, cap. 2.
Abraham was justified by Works.

Therefore Faith only does not justify.

Answer.
Paul furnishes us with an Answer to this Argument. Whereas that excellent
Patriarch made no doubt of sacrificing his dearly beloved Son at the command
Justification before God, Justification before men.
of God; therefore the Apostle James says, That he was justified by Works. If
they understand it amongst men, it is true, but not in the sight of God, unless
we would give the Lie to Paul, that choice Instrument in the hand of Christ,
who discoursing of the Works of the Patriarch; he says, That if he has any
thing to glory in, he has it before men, but not before God. And why before
men, and not before God? but because the Justification What the Justification
is whereof James speaks.
of men is one thing, and the Justification of God is another; for men judge by
the appearance, and the sight of Works moves them to justify. Now the whole
Epistle of the Apostle James, is taken up about this outward appearance of
Works before men; and its whole design is, that by our good deeds, and Charity
(which is inseparably joined with saving Faith) we should give evidence, that
the Faith, wherein we glory before God, is a lively Faith, and not counterfeit,
nor unfruitful: Wherefore presently he adds; Show me thy Faith without thy
Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. By which it easily appears,
what Justification it is, whereof the Apostle James speaks to wit, that, which
by works discovers it self before men.

Now as for this, neither Paul, nor any other man doubts of it. For what man is
there but will confess that Charity and good Works must of necessity be joined
unto Faith, which unless they be seen by men, in those that make a profession
of Faith, it is very evident, that such a Faith as they profess, is in reality
no Faith at all, but an empty name and shadow thereof. But what does all this
make against Justification by Faith? That Faith appears not to be lively in the
Eyes of men, out of which, as out of a living Root the blossoms and flowers of
godly works do not grow. But does not Faith therefore justify in the sight of
God without works, because it is not evidenced by the Testimony of good deeds
joined therewith?

But suppose that good works are joined with Faith, which give evidence to men
that it is a lively Faith: Will Faith justify thee? you will say, Why not? and
I acknowledge the same my self. But I ask, wherefore does Faith justify before
God? because of the works that appear unto men? or are the works rather
acceptable because of Faith? But how many works seem to be excellent in the
sight of men, to which human Reason gives applause, and men, because of them,
are accounted holy and just, when yet the matter is far otherways? And this is
that Human Human Justification, which consists in the showing of good works.
Justification, which I spoke of, and the Apostle James has written of, which,
though someties it judges according to Truth, yet much oftener it is deceived
in judging: Why so? because the Judgment of God, and the Judgment of men are of
a different nature. What man looking upon the Lives of the Pharisees, their
long Prayers, frequent Fastings and Washings, their holy-like deportment, and
all their outward shows of Piety, but would have judged them to be men very
near, and dear unto God? when yet none were greater An outward appearance is
often deceitful.
Strangers and Enemies to God than they? What man is there at this day, who
looking upon the Orders of the Monks, their Vows, Fastings, Rules, Austerity,
and Rigor of Discipline, but would reckon them amongst the chiefest of those
that are justified, when yet they are no such men in the sight of God?

And yet in the mean while I deny not this to be true, which James writes: For
he that being endued with no Virtue, or Love to Virtue, makes an outward
profession of Faith in Christ, and leads not a Life suitable thereunto, I say,
according to the Apostle James, that such a man's Faith is little worth. But if
such a man in the last hour of his Life, come to himself, and fly to Christ for
Refuge by an unfeigned Faith, and beg for Mercy, and cast himself wholly upon
Christ, what would the Apostle James say in such a case, Will not Faith only
without Works justify such a man as this? The penitent Malefactor is an
evident proof of the truth of this, who had no other thing but Faith only, to
commend him to Christ, and so to be admitted into Paradise: Like unto which
there are many Examples daily of them that die on Gibbets; so that the
Judgments of God are very wonderful, who has mercy on whom he will have mercy.

But now let us return to what we were saying of Abraham. If we look upon his
Faith, what was more sincere? If we consider his Works, what was more glorious
and wonderful? Therefore upon both accounts he was certainly an admirable man.
Now let us compare his Faith with his Works. And because it is evident that he
was justified before God, let us enquire whether he was justified by Faith,
(...) Works; because he could not be justified upon both accounts, as the
Apostle witnesses; If it is of Faith, then it is not of Works; but if it is of
Works, then it is not of Faith. What shall we say then to these things? let the
Scripture answer. Abraham Genesis 15.
believed God, when he promised, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness.
And the same Abraham obeyed God, when he commanded; and why does not the
Scripture in like manner add, That this was imputed to him for Righteousness?
Gal. 3.
Let us hear what the Apostle answers. The Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the Gentiles by Faith, he first told the glad tidings to Abraham: and
what glad tidings was this? That he and his Seed should be Heirs of the Romans
3.
World. A great Promise indeed. But how did he obtain this Promise, by Faith,
or by Works? There is an answer ready made to our hand by the Apostle: The
Promise came not by the Law to Abraham, or to his Seed, that he should be Heir
of the World, but by the Righteousness of Faith. Why so, Paul? why, not by the
Law? and why by the Righteousness of Faith? That he might be the Father of all
the faithful, who walking in the footsteps of the Faith, which was in the
Uncircumcision of our Father Abraham, shall have. Faith in like manner imputed
unto them.

But here. St. James is represented as fighting with all his might against this
Doctrine. For the Adversaries say thus. Did not the Apostle James assert with
great Authority, That Abraham was justified by Works? and will ye deny it? God
forbid, that any man should undervalue the Authority of that holy Apostle. And
yet I suppose St. James would not have us to disbelieve the Scripture, which
teaches us far otherways, attributing the Justification of Abraham, not to
Works, but to Faith: For Abraham believed God, and we read, it was imputed unto
him for Righteousness. But God has not said in his Word concerning Abraham's
going to sacrifice his Son, That it was imputed to him for Righteousness. Or
let us grant the assertion of St. James; That Abraham was justified by Works.
But where and how was he thus justified? before God? St. James says not so.
Then it is before men. And Paul himself denies not that: So that there is no
real disagreement between Paul and James.

But this does not satisfy some Sophisters, who account it is not enough, that
the holy Patriarch is justified by Works before men, as Paul teaches, unless he
be also thereby justified before God: For though he was first justified by
Faith, (as they say); yet nothing hinders, but that afterward he might be yet
more justified by Works, and this they call a second Justification. But Reason
shows that to be an utter impossibility, for it implies a manifest
contradiction; for it is a contradiction not to be justified by Works, and
again to be justified by Works. And Reason 1.
seeing one of those is denied by the Apostle: How can they maintain and plead
for the other. But hereunto may be added another Reason. If there is a twofold
Justification, Reason 2.
one by Faith and another by Works, it would follow, that there is a twofold
manner of Justifying: But there is one and the same manner of Justifying, as
there is one God, as has been proved out of Ambrose. Therefore it appears,
that there is not a twofold Justification. A third Reason is this, seeing
Justification Reason 3.
consists of the Remission of Sins, and God forgives no Man his Sins, to whom
he does not perfectly forgive them: Therefore it follows that the Justification
of those, that are justified, is complete and perfect, and cannot be made more
perfect than it is already. Now in the next place, let them prepare to answer
this Argument of Paul.

Whosoever is justified by Works, Reason.
has whereof he may Glory before God, Romans 4. Abraham has not any thing
whereof he may Glory before God.

Therefore Abraham is not justified by Works before God.

By these things which we have quoted out of Paul, and other sacred writings; I
suppose, it appears evident enough, what we should judge of the Works of
Abraham: Which, though they were excellent, and worthy to be admired before
men, yet they found no place for glorying before God, according to the
Testimony and Interpretation of the Apostle.

We need not be at any great trouble to find out the cause thereof. Tiletan.
Tiletan and other Jesuits produce a cause thereof out of Augustine: Because the
Works of Abraham, were not of the Law, but of Faith, not of the Flesh, but of
Grace, which because they were not done by the Power of Free Will only, but in
the Faith, and (expectation) of Christ, therefore all Praise and Glory was due
to Christ, and none to them; which Invention of theirs though it savours more
of Wit than Solidity, yet though we grant all this to them, there is no
inconvenience in it, seeing both of us acknowledge with Paul, that the
Patriarch Abraham found neither matter of glorying, nor Justification before
God by Works; and therefore that he had no cause of glorying, because he was
not justified by Works; for otherways, if he had been justified by Works, he
should have had, wherein to Glory, as the Apostle Paul speaks. But now he has
not any thing, wherein he may Glory before God, therefore he was not justified
by Works. And thus hitherto we have treated of the Arguments of the
Adversaries, as much as may suffice not only to discover, but also confute
their Sophistical Wiles, and captious Deceits, who fight with so great
eagerness for their inherent Righteousness, against the Testimony of the Holy
Scripture, and the Sacred Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the bright shining Light
of Grace, yea and against their own Salvation. It remains in the next place,
that we should hear, what those Men on the other side answer and oppose to the
Arguments, and most approved Reasons managed, not only by us, but by St. Paul,
and with what Cavillings and fraudulent Devices, they darken and baffle the
clear meaning of the Apostle's Words, and with what deceit they wilfully wrest
and deprave the genuine Signification of his Words by their most absurd
Interpretation, to the intent they may maintain their own erroneous Doctrine.
If they did this only in Ignorance, they should not be so much the Objects of
our Anger, as of our Pity and Commiseration, as being Men misled into Error.
But they behave themselves as if they were unwilling to be undeceived. And
though they cannot but see the Truth in such a clear Light of the Scripture:
yet they wilfully shut their eyes, because they are not willing to see, or at
least believe the clear shining Light of the Truth; which that it may appear
the more evident unto all Men, let us now produce the Answers and deceitful
Shifts of the Adversaries, whereby they maintain their own Cause against our
Arguments. And because there are eight Arguments out of St. Paul, which we
oppose against the Papists, we think it is not unprofitable in this place to
set down, what the Papists answer unto these.

The Answers of the Adversaries, which they oppose against the eight Arguments
of St. Paul, together with a Refutation of those Answers.
BY the Works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified before him; for by the
Law comes the Knowledge of Sin: But now the Righteousness of God is manifessed
without the Law, being testified by the Law and the Prophets; to wit, the
Righteousness of God, by the Faith of Jesus Christ upon all that believe, etc.
Which is also confirmed by these Words, Gal. 3. Knowing that a Man is not
justified by the Works of the Law, for by the Works of the Law no flesh is
justified, etc.

I Appeal unto thee, Courteous and Pious Reader, what Man is there (if he duly
consider these Words of Paul,) that can gather any other thing from Free
Justification by Faith is proved by the Words of Paul.
them, but what their genuine Signification holds forth? Which is this: That
the Works of the Law should be utterly excluded from having any hand in
Justification. And if Works are excluded, what can be a more undoubted Truth,
than that we are justified by Faith only?

What is more solid than this Argument of Paul? What can be more plainly
expressed? What Words are more familiar. if so be they are not darkened by a
Sophistical Interpretation? If according to the Testimony of Paul, we are not
justified by Works, or obedience to the Law, but by Faith without Works; who
can deny that our Justification consists of Faith only, unless he desperately
oppose himself, not only against Paul the Apostle, but also the Holy Spirit God?

But behold here the Deceit, or rather the Malice of sinful Men. They do not
openly reject the Words of the Apostle, but wrest the sense and meaning of them
to serve their own purpose. They deny not, that Works should be excluded: but
pray, take notice of the captious Snares of Sophisters, who endeavor by a
cunning way of distinguishing, to baffle the simplicity of Apostolical
Doctrine: For they divide asunder Works, and their Justification into two
parts, calling the one, Works of the Law, and the other Works of Grace: And
they say, the Works of the Law are unprofitable to Justification; but the other
they account very necessary. Therefore, they Answer to the Words of Paul with
this Distinction: By the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified, etc. The
meaning of these Words (say they) is this: No Man shall be justified before
God, for his own Works, which he has done, as by the Virtue and Merit thereof,
but by the Virtue and Merit of Grace infused. For, according to Paul's manner
of speaking, then a thing is said to be done by Works, when it is done by
Works, when it is done as a Andr. Vega de just. page 751.
due Debt, or for the Works. Wherefore there being a twofold Justification, (as
they say) one by Grace infused, and another by the Obligation of the Law
without Grace: In this Case, Justification by Works, and every thing that is
contrary to Justification by Grace is excluded: And so the saying of the
Apostle holds true, as they Interpret: to him that works, the Reward is not
imputed according to Grace, but according to Debt, as if he should say, that
what is given by Romans 4.
Works or for them, is not given according to Grace, but according to Debt;
therefore that Justification which is separated from Grace, is excluded, but
not the Justification that comes by Works with the Assistance of Grace, etc.
What else should I Answer to these Sophisters, but that I pray God to give
them Repentance, and a better frame of Spirit, that they may not always resist
the Holy Ghost, and overspread the Truth with darkness. What Man is there, but
clearly perceives, that it is altogether contrary to the Words and Meaning of
the Apostle, to build the Hope of Salvation upon any Works; when he does so
manifestly teach and protest against it, denying that we are justified any
other way, but by Faith without the Works of the Law. Yea, they themselves
deny not that the exclusive Word is understood of the Works of the Law, though
not of the Works of Grace, but now what are these Works of Grace? those
(forsooth) which the influence of the Grace of Christ, performs in the Souls of
the regenerate; but were not the Romans to whom the Apostle wrote, regenerate
in Christ? Were they not partakers of the same Grace? Did they not abound in
the Works of Grace? Whom yet the Apostle denies to be justified by their own
Works. It is true indeed (say they) if you understand it of their own Works,
which are called Works of the Law, but not those Works which are Christ's.
How ridiculous is this! as if those things that are planted The Distinction of
the Papists is idle and Impertinent.
(...) us by the Spirit of Christ, were not also oftentimes called ours. Yea
Faith it self, which is most especially reckoned amongst those Gifts, it is
usual to Scripture to give it the Epithet of ours and yours. Paul expresses
himself thus, [By the Communion of my Faith and yours] and again [Hearing of
your Faith] and in another place [Your Faith which is in Christ, etc.] Is it
not evident that he speaks of that Faith, which we have in Christ through the
free gift of God? How much more then may this be understood of Works, which
when Paul excludes from Justification, it cannot be doubted, but he understands
it not only of Works, that are ours wholly, Romans 1. Ephesians. 1. Colos. 2.
and done by our own Strength, but also of those Works that are done by the
help of Grace operating in us; so that there is nothing in the Works either of
the Law, or of Grace, except Faith only, but what rather contributes to
Destruction than Justification: (What is commanded in the Law of God, that we
can do without Grace?) Therefore seeing Paul removes all Works from the Office
of justifying, it must needs be, that he understands it of the Works of Grace,
as well as of our own Works, or the Works of the Law: What shall we say of the
Works of Christ, were not they Works of the Law: For he himself has said, that
he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; were not the things which he
performed in fulfilling the Law, Works of Grace? What difference then is
there between those Works, that are called Works of the Law, and those other
that are called Works of Grace? So that it appears, that he who excludes the
Works of the Law, excludes also the Works of Grace from Justification. Though
I acknowledge there is great difference between Wherein the difference between
the Law and Grace consists.
the Law and Grace, in respect of the manner of Doing, and the ends of their
Offices: For what the Law exacts, that, Grace performs; but in respect of the
things themselves, and the Actions unto which they are directed, seeing both
the Law and the Grace of God are exercised in the same subject Matter, there is
no difference between them.

The Law commands us to Love our Neighbor, and lays a Punishment on him, that
disobeys. But Grace communicates Strength and Ability to perform what the Law
commands. Which when we perform, we are said to do not only a Work of Grace,
but also a Work of the Law by Grace; so that it is a matter of small
concernment, whether it be called a Work of the Law, or a Work of Grace, a
Work of our own, or a Work of Faith. Therefore if the Scripture denies, That
a man is justified, and attributes his Justification to another cause, that is
Faith, what should be inferred from hence, but that Man's Justification comes
neither by the Works of the Law, nor the Works of Grace. A Similitude.
Just as if a Man writing to his Friend, should say thus: This Benefit was
procured for him by no Money, or charge of his own: What matter is it, whether
it was his own Money, or borrowed of some other Man, when the meaning of the
Writer was to signify, that this Benefit, whatsoever it was, was not bought
by any Price of the Receiver, but obtained by the free Bounty of the Giver.

So Paul desiring to set before the Eyes of all Men the boundless Immensity of
Divine Grace toward Mankind, that they might behold and embrace it, expressly
denies, The Distinction of Hosius.
that Man is justified by the Works of the Law. But here the Distinction of
Hosius (as I have said) presents it self. It is true, says he, in respect of
the Works that are of the Law, and belong to our own Free Will, which being
attended with Imperfection, can avail nothing to Justification: To which I
Answer in a Word. Give then that Grace, which may furnish frail Nature with
Strength, to yield perfect Obedience to the Law, and may restore us to perfect
innocence in this Life, and you have won the cause. But in the mean while, let
those Disputants consider, how many gross and pernicious Absurdities proceed
from this kind of Doctrine; for hereby the infinite greatness of the free Grace
and Mercy of God toward us is taken away and abolished, this also destroys our
thankfulness to him for his goodness, and withholds Consolation from afflicted
Consciences so that very great injury is done to him, that has freely
communicated so many and so great Benefits, and much greater injury is done to
those, on whom they are bestowed: Hereby also it comes to pass, that there
remains no Assurance in the Promise of God, no firmness in our Faith, no
soundness in the Doctrine of Religion, nor Comfort or Refreshment in the
Suffering of the Saints.

A second Argument out of St. 2. Arg. out of Paul. Romans 3.
Paul.

Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption, which is in
Christ Jesus, whom he has set forth to be a Propitiation by Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness at this time, that he may be Just, and the
Iustifier of him, that is of the Faith of Jesus Christ; and again, we reckon
that a Man is justified by Faith without Works.

Unless the Hearts of these our Adversaries were fully set in them to pervert
the ways of the Lord, it could not otherways be, but these clear and evident
sayings of the Apostle must be sufficient to satisfy them, and prevail upon
them to beware lest they kick against the Doctrine of the Apostles, and exalt
themselves in their proud Imaginations, and vain Conceit of their own
Righteousness, against such clear Manifestation of Divine Grace. But here the
Roman Legions make a fresh incursion again. and the Ringleader of them is
Andraeas Vega, who fights against the Andraeas Vega.
Righteousness of Faith: Whom there is no need of answering in this World: For
he has been removed out of this Life a great while since, that he might answer
to God his Judge. And because he denied, that he was justified by the Faith of
Christ only, let him look to it, what he must answer his Judge in that
Judgment, wherein he must give account of his whole Life, where of necessity he
must either overcome or fall. If he overcome, where is the Truth of Scripture,
in which it is said, God only overcomes, when he is judged? But if he fall,
where then is the Righteousness of Works? What if David, so great a King and
Prophet could not endure that God should enter with him into Judgment. If Job,
a Man of so Holy a Life, yet durst not answer to one of a thousand. What will
our Vega say, what will he bring? his Cowls, his Fastings, his lyings on the
Ground, his Night Watches, his Vows, his Liturgick-Prayers, his
Propitiatory-Masses, his Mumbled over Confessions, his Penances and
Satisfactions? But who has required these things at your Hands? Nay, but Isa.
1.
he will defend himself, and take Sanctuary in the Law, which he has
fulfilled, not by the Strength of his own Free Will, but by the help of Divine
Grace. Say you so? David, being guarded with as much Grace, as any Man was, yet
sunk down under the weight of the Law of God. I suppose Job wanted not Divine
Grace, and yet he dares not appear before God in Judgment. Aug. de perfect.
just. But when the highest Lord shall sit on the Throne, who will boast that he
has a clean Heart? And who will boast that he is pure from his Sin? Unless it
be those that Glory in their own Righteousness, and not in the Mercy of the
Judge?
And will Vega nevertheless hope to bring such an account of his Life before
the Tribunal of God; that if God strictly Mark it, and weigh it in the balance
of his Justice, he will not find more Sins than Merits therein?

But I need not ask him, what he will answer to God his Judge: To whom I know
he can make no satisfaction with all his inherent Righteousness: But this is
that which I ask him, and not him only, but all the other Tridentines also,
what they will answer the Apostle Paul, who openly pronounces a Curse both on
Men and Angels, if any of them should dare to preach any other Gospel than he
had preached. And what Gospel is it, that we have received by the preaching of
Paul? Is it not the same that he taught so often in all his Epistles, with
frequent Repetitions, and great Care and Diligence, and also confirmed it with
Miracles? Now the sum of the Gospel, which he preached, is this: That Man is
justified freely without Works by the Grace of God, through the Redemption,
which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through
Faith in his What manner of Gospel Paul preached. Romans 3.
Blood. Is not this evident in the writings of Paul, etc. And yet Vega not
being contented with this Gospel, nor deterred by the Curse which the Apostle
denounced, has arrived at so great an impudence, that he takes upon him to
contradict, what the Apostle has confirmed with so great Authority. The
Apostle says, freely without Works, but he says, freely, but not without Works;
but how.is it freely, if not without Works? Paul says, the Righteousness of God
by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all that believe. But what says
Vega and Hosius the enemy of Paul? This universal Term [all] says he, is not
here by the Apostle applied to every one of the kind, but to every kind of
every one: So that the meaning is this: Righteousness is communicated to them
that believe, whether they are Jews or Gentiles. Thus said Vega.

O Saint Paul, What Ignorance was this in thee, or unskilfulness of Speech?
Thou might learn of Vega to speak more curiously, and to polish thy Style
according to the elegancy of the Roman Court, after this manner. The
Righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and not only all,
but also unto every one, and upon every one present and to come, that believe,
so that thereby you might comprehend not only the kinds of every one, but also
every species of the kinds, and every individual of the Species. But that I may
answer seriously to the vainglorious Spaniard. It was your Duty, O Vega, to
correct your Spirit of Error, by the divinely inspired Words of Paul; and not
to pride your self in such vain and empty Notions. For who sees not the clear
and perspicuous simplicity of this Speech of Paul, whereby he proclaims a
common Interest in Eternal Life and The popish comment about the universal Sign
is overturned.
Righteousness, not only to Jews and Gentiles in the general, but to every one
of them in particular, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, that believe in
Christ? Unless the Apostle had together with the universal Term set down the
proper Mark of Distinction, that is, the peculiar Condition of attaining to
Righteousness, you might have some color of Reason for what you pretend. As
for Example, when the Scripture speaks thus. They shall be all taught of God:
God would have all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, in
such a Case a Man may interpret the universal Term. (As Augustine did) in such
a manner as you speak of: To wit, that it is not every one of all, but some
particular Persons of all kind of Men and Nations, that attain unto the
Knowledge Aug. de praedest. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 8.
of the Truth; but the Case is otherways in this Expression of Paul, where the
Apostle together with the universal Term, adds also a peculiar and proper mark
of Distinction: So that he does not only make the Righteousness of God common
to all in the general, but also expressly sets down a certain manner, whereby
all do attain unto it, and to whom it peculiarly belongs; in these Words: By
the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe. Whence of
necessity it follows, that every Man's Righteousness consists in his believing
in Christ by Faith unfeigned, and embracing of him according to the saying of
the Prophet, Hab.
The just shall live by Faith.

But let us again hear what the Prating Sophister has to say for himself.

But whereas (says he) the Just shall live by Faith, and God is said to
justify Man by Faith, it does not therefore follow by consequence, that Works
are not necessary; for it is one thing to live by Faith, and another thing to
live by Faith only; One thing to be justified by Faith, and another thing to be
justified by Faith only; and if these Words [Faith only] are sometimes found in
the Books of Catholic Doctors, by the Word (only) good Works are not excluded,
but all other Sects and Ways to Salvation, except Faith only, and the Christian
Religion. Thus said Vega.

To whom that I may answer, First, whereas he inferrs, that good Works are not
necessary, because the Just live by Faith, he may as reasonably gather Thistles
No Man denies Works to be necessary.
from the Vine; for this is no good consequence: The Just shall live by Faith,
therefore Works are not necessary: Which we also with Paul, do notwithstanding
account to be necessary. And in the next place, whereas he says, that it is one
thing to be justified by Faith, and another thing to be justified by Faith
only: Though we grant this to be true, yet I see no great difference between
these two Expressions: To be justified by Faith without Works, and to be
justified by Faith only. Thirdly, Whereas he Cavils about the Word Only, what
it excludes, and what it excludes not in the Books of the Catholics, we do not
trouble our selves much about that; but this is manifest in the Writings of
Paul, that Works themselves, though otherways they are very excellent, and also
necessary upon other accounts, yet in this free Gift of Evangelical
Justification, they are excluded without all Controversy. Though that also is
an untruth, which he asserts of the Books of the Catholics: For Basil (that I
may produce one of them instead of a great many) expresses the same in manifest
Words, taking away from every Man all occasion of glorying in his own
Righteousness, and testifies that each one of us is justified by Faith in
Christ only. And therefore he presently produces the Example of Paul to confirm
the same, and Paul Glories (says he) in the Contempt of his own Righteousness.
I may also add the Words of the same Basil upon the 32. Psalm, where giving a
Description Basil. in Psalm. 32.
of a perfect Man, he says he is such a one as puts no trust in his own good
deeds, but has his whole hope and reliance on the Mercy of God alone. I think
it is not amiss to join unto Basil his intimate Friend Nazianzen, who assents
and subscribes to the words of Basil Nazian.
on this manner: Faith only is our Righteousness.

But let us proceed unto the remaining Testimonies of Paul. For (as I have said
before) Vega with his Associates heaps together eight Assertions for Justifying
Faith out of Paul.

But the other five Assertions of the Apostle, together with the Answers of the
Adversaries, do follow in this order.

3 Assertion. Romans 4. If Abraham was justified by the Works of the Law, he has
whereof to glory, but not before God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for 3 Argum. St. Paul, Romans 4.
Righteousness. To him that works, the Reward is not reckoned according to
Grace, but according to Debt. But to him that works not, but believes in him
that justifies the ungodly, Faith is imputed unto him for Righteousness. As
David also declares the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord imputes
Righteousness without Works. And likewise Romans 11. If it is by grace, then it
is not of works; and if it is of works, then it is not of grace.

4 Assertion. Romans 10. If thou shall 4 Argum. Romans 10.
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart, that God
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for with the heart man believes
unto Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation. For
the Scripture says, Whoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed. There is
no difference between Jew and Greek: For every one that calls upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved.

5 Assertion. Acts 13. Be it known 5 Argum. Acts 13.
unto you, Brethren, that through this Man remission of sins is preached unto
you, that through him every one that believes may be justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

6 Assertion. Acts 10. To him all 6 Argum. Acts 10.
the Prophets bear witness; That all that believe in him, do receive through
his name remission of sins.

7 Assertion. 1 Cor. 3. For other 7 Argum. 1 Cor. 3.
foundation can no man lay, than that which is already laid, that is, Christ
Jesus. But if any man build upon this foundation Gold or Silver, etc. If any
man's work is burnt, he shall suffer damage, but himself shall be saved, yet so
as through fire, etc.

8 Assertion. The eight Argument 8 Argum.
is gathered from many Examples of those, who were justified by Faith only, and
admitted unto Baptism: As three thousand of those that believed at the
Preaching of Peter on the day of Pentecost, were baptized, Acts 2. and the
Eunuch, whom Philip baptized, Acts 2. The Iaylor and his family, whom Paul
baptized, Acts 16. etc. By which Examples it may be rationally proved, that the
Apostles judged Faith to be sufficient to qualify a man for the receiving of
Baptism, and therefore also for receiving of Justification.

By these proofs of Scripture this Doctrine is sufficiently confirmed, which
attributes the Justification of the ungodly, not to Works joined with Faith,
but to Faith simply without Works. But because I am not now dealing with men of
moderate Principles, but with cunning Sophisters, let us for a while bring the
Apostle out of the Church into the School, that he may fight hand to hand
against them with their own weapons, and confute Arguments out of S. Paul.
them with their own Arguments.

The Righteousness of the Law or of Works, and the Righteousness of Faith, are
so contrary to one another, that they cannot consist together; but the one of
necessity makes void the other.

But we look for Righteousness by Faith.

Therefore not by the Righteousness of Works.

Again.
If according to Grace, then it is not according to Debt.

But according to Grace it is imputed to us for Righteousness.

Therefore not according to Romans 4.
Debt.

Again.
That whereunto blessedness is ascribed, to the same also is ascribed
Justification.

Our blessedness is attributed unto the remission of sins.

Therefore our Justification also Romans 10.
is attributed to the same.

Another Argument.
If Works are necessary to Salvation, then Salvation would not consist in the
belief of the heart, and the confession of the mouth.

But our Salvation consists in confessing the Lord Jesus with the mouth, and
believing in him with the heart.

Therefore Works are not necessary Romans 4.
unto Salvation.

Another.
If Works had been conducible to justify Abraham before God, then he should
have had cause of glorying before God, Romans 4.

But Abraham had nothing wherein he could glory before God.

Therefore Works do not avail Acts 13.
to Justification.

Another.
By the Law of Moses no man can be justified.

All Doctrine of Works belongs to the Law of Moses.

Therefore no Salvation comes by any Doctrine of our Morals, or Works.

Another.
Whosoever builds upon Christ 1 Cor. 3.
the Foundation, Gold, or Hay or Stubble, shall be saved, either without fire,
or through fire.

Therefore Faith only without Works procures Salvation.

An Induction from Examples.
The Scriptures tell us of many An argument taken from Examples. Acts 2. Acts 8.
that were justified and baptized without making any mention of Works. On the
day of Pentecost three thousand were baptized; Acts 2. The Eunuch was baptized
by Philip; Acts 8. The Iaylor with his family; Acts 16. The sinful woman, Acts
16. Luke 7. Luke 18. Luke 23. Luke 18.
whom faith saved; Luke 7. The prodigal Son; Luke 18. The Thief on the right
hand; Luke 23. The Publican; Luke 18. And a multitude of others obtained
Salvation without any condition of Works.

Therefore, only Faith in Christ justifies the humble and broken hearted sinner.

Unto these things so very evident and clear, what do the Adversaries object?
with what subtilties and distinctions do they defend their Popish Error of
Inherent Righteousness? Inherent Righteousness.
Be pleased to hearken; though what they say is fitter for laughter and
derision than instruction. And first as touching the distinction, that Paul
makes between him that works, and him that works not; between Mercenary
works, and Justification imputed without Works; between Debt and Grace; between
the Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of Faith, let us observe
how those Sophisters cloud and darken it with their vain janglings. For whereas
the Apostle argues on this manner from the Rule of contraries. If it is of
grace, then it is not of works; but if it be of works, then it is not of grace,
etc. If the Inheritance is by the Law, then it is not of the Promise, etc. And
again, Romans 10. Gal. 3.
distinguishing between the Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of
the Gospel, he so divides the one from the other, that difference appears
evident. Of the Righteousness, that comes by the Law, says the Apostle, the
Law it self speaks on this manner; He that Romans 10.
does these things shall live in them. But what says he of the Righteousness
that is of Faith? If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus. and believe
with thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. What is
more evident than this distinction? what words are more perspicuous? But what
is there that can be so A Sophistical Pretense.
well conceived in the mind, or expressed in words, but it may be wrested by
the wrong Interpretations of such men as take delight to set themselves in
opposition against the Truth? for thus they A Sophistical Objection.
speak. Are not pious works the gifts of God? Does not Charity shed abroad in
the hearts of the Saints by the Holy Ghost, inflame the minds of Believers, and
provoke them to all things that are honest and agreeable to the Will of God?
Which Works of Charity, when God crowns and rewards them in us, they are not so
much our works, as his gifts; for they are not our works, or performed by any
strength of our own, but they are the works of How Grace justifies according to
the Opinion of the Papists.
God, which we perform by his help, and they should be wholly attributed to his
Grace. Whence also they oft-times are called in the Scriptures by the name of
Divine Grace. As Paul also, bearing witness of himself, says, By the grace of
God I am what I am; for this grace of working not being attained unto by any
human industry, or strength of our Nature, nor any precedent obedience to the
Law, or works and merits of our own, but only by Faith in the merits of Christ.
Therefore Paul says well, That we are justified by faith without works;
speaking of such works as belong to nature, but not Works considered in a
twofold respect, as they are either of grace or of nature.
to grace; which are a man's own works, and not God's; and are called the works
of the Law, not of Faith. But by the works of the Law, the Apostle understands
such works as are performed by a man's own free will, or by the direction of
the Law and Nature only, without the assistance of Grace. And this is the
meaning of Paul, (as those Popish Doctors would have it) when he distinguishes
between Justification by Works, and Justification by Grace or Faith: So that if
it be by grace, then it is not of works, to wit, such works as are done by
Nature, and not by Grace; but if it is of works, then it is not of grace; for
then grace (says he) would not be grace; which opposition must be thus
understood, according to the Opinion of those Popish Teachers; so that grace
does not wholly overthrow all works, but those only, that are performed by the
strength of Nature without the assistance of Grace. But contrarily, the pious
works which proceed from Grace and Faith, their Righteousness is so far from
being made void by Grace, or the Righteousness Aug. de spirttu and litera, cap.
30.
of Faith, that it is rather thereby confirmed. For the Law (as Augustine
speaks) is not made void by Faith, but rather established; for Faith obtains
the Grace, whereby the Law is fulfilled. Therefore whereas Paul distinguishes
between the Righteousness of Works, and the Righteousness of Faith. This is the
Answer the Catholic Faction gives to this distinction. In this place the
Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of Faith, are not set in
opposition one against another; (as they express themselves) but Righteousness
by the Law, or in the Law, is that which is opposed to the Righteousness of
Faith. And they say, The Righteousness What is righteousness by the Law. The
righteousness of the Law, righteousness by the Law, or in the Law.
that is in the Law, or by the Law, is that obedience which is performed to the
Law by natural strength without the assistance of Grace: For these things
differ not a little from one another; for the Righteousness of the Law is one
thing, and the Righteousness by the Law, or in the Law, is another thing. From
which distinction they draw this Inference; That the Righteousness of Faith, or
by Faith, does not exclude the Righteousness of the Law, but is exercised about
it, and fulfils it: In as much as the Law signifies Obedience to the
Commandments, which faith by obtaining grace performs: And because the Grace of
God performs the Law, that is the certain cause why the works of the Law, which
are the gifts of God, ought not to be excluded from Justification, just as
Faith it self cannot be excluded, because it is the gift of God, as much as the
Works of the Law and Charity, which are infused by the Grace of God. This is
the entangling Sophistry whereby Andraeas Vega, and others of his Association
persuade themselves that they can break through the force of all the former
Arguments.

An Answer to the Adversaries, wherein their Frivolous Exceptions, and
Sophistical Subtilties are confuted.
BUT these Sophistical Distinctions which they make use of, as antidotes in
difficult cases, are so absurd and unreasonable, that there is not any Poison
more deadly and injurious to the Doctrine of Salvation.

And I greatly wonder at the power and efficacy of Error, that so stupifies
their undestanding, that in the light of Noonday they can be so blind, and err
so perniciously, and betray their own Ignorance so shamelesly. It is a Rule of
Lawyers; (as I formerly have said) A Rule of Lawyers.
Where the Law distinguishes not, we ought not to distinguish. What need then
is there in a thing so evident, of so many by-ways of distinctions, and
Labyrinths of perplexities? for Paul has spoken expressly, and given many
weighty Arguments, whereby he makes it very clear, that it is theGrace ofGod
only, to which we are indebted for all our Justification. But those men are of
another mind, saying, That this Grace consists not in the favor of God only,
whereby he receives sinners for the sake of Christ, but also in Moral Virtues
and Charity, whereby the Law is fulfilled. Though I deny not that the excellent
gifts of honest actions are bestowed upon us by the Grace of God: Yet our
Justification before God depends not upon this grace of working: Therefore we
do not utterly reject the distinction that they bring of pardoning and renewing
grace, if they keep them duly within their own bounds. But that which they
conclude from hence, we altogether disapprove. I know and confess it is the
Grace of God, which both sanctifies and justifies; which both pardons and
renews: For we are daily renewed unto new obedience by the influence of Divine
Grace. But though this be so, we are not renewed for this purpose, that by this
newness of obedience we may be justified: But before Renovation we are sirst
justified by Faith in the Son of God; all the sins of our former life being
blotted out for the sake of Christ in whom we believe: Unto which Justification
succeeds the renovation of imperfect Obedience, but not such as justifies a man
from his sins in the sight of God: for Aug. de fid. and oper. c. 15.
good works go not before him that is to be justified, but follow him that is
justified. For whereas hence they make a twofold Justification; a first (as
they call it) and a second; of which the one is before works, and the other
after works, whereby it is perfected; it is a vain imagination, not derived
from the fountains of sound Doctrine, but from the filthy Cisterns of Sophistry
and vain jangling. For the Gospel acknowledges no Justification but one only,
and such a one as endures for ever.

As Christ, whom he loves, he is said to love unto the end: And as God has
once chosen and called those unto Salvation, whom he will justify for ever; so
also he likewise once justifies those whom he will glorify. For I see no such
difference between these things, but that what agrees unto Election and
Vocation, may also be attributed to Justification. Wherefore as God's election
and calling of those, who are justified, is one, and not twofold; it must
follow by necessary consequence, that there is but one Justification of those
who are chosen. Therefore if God has once chosen those, that are to be
justified, why may not one Justification be sufficient for them, whom Election
has called unto glory? especially because there is one and the same cause and
manner both of electing and justifying. He chose The cause why we are chosen
and justified in Christ only.
them in Christ first, whom he predestined unto life: And in like manner he
justifies in Christ those, whom by the sacred Decree of his Election he
appointed to glory. But if you ask the cause, why God chooses his own in Christ,
I answer, That the cause thereof is not placed in the works of men, but it
depends upon the free favor of God, and the like we may say of Justification;
for those, whom he justifies, he justifies in Christ; but if you ask, why does
he justify in Christ, the cause appears evident, which cannot be found in our
Works, but before all Works in the favor of God only.

But you may say, Those things are not well compared with one another, which
disagree in Nature; for Election, and Vocation, and Glorification are such
things, as being once determined of God, cannot be disannulled. But the Case is
otherways in Justification, which may sometimes be lost, and sometimes
retained, according as it is hindered or not hindered by the Grace of God. For
thus spoke Vega de fide and operibus, q. 2. pa. 754. It is sufficient, that we
by believing only, be justified, unless we do otherways hinder the Grace of God
by our Sins.
Vega, and Scotus, and others. That I may Answer such Men, I confess indeed, if
the manner of our Justification were such, as those Men feign, to wit, if its
chief reliance were upon Works, and the increase of Virtues; it would be true,
which they assert, concerning the uncertainty of losing or keeping
Justification. But seeing all the stability of our Justification depends not at
all upon our Works, but upon the Merits of Christ by Faith, and the Remission
of Sins by his Righteousness; therefore it is, that as there is one Election
and Vocation, and that sure and firm, so also Justification is not twofold, but
one and the same, and such an one as endures for ever. I call it one, because
there remains always One manner of justifying and that perpetual.
one and the same cause and manner of Justifying, which relies not on the
Merits of Works, but consists of Faith and the Remission of Sins. And though
the Sins from which we are justified, are not all of the same kind, but are
distinguished by times and variety of Actions, yet nevertheless Justification,
that is, the Remission of Sins in respect of the form and manner is not diverse
but one: Not twofold but simple, as Faith also, which is the procuring cause of
Justification is not, which though it is daily increased, yet it remains always
one and the same. Moreover, as this Justification which increases together with
Faith is only one, so also the same being firm and stable, no less than the
Promise of God, on which it relies, undergoes no change, but continues firm,
and constant and the cause thereof is, because it relies not on The Distinction
of a first and second Justification is confuted.
Works but Faith only, whence the Apostle said. It is therefore by Faith, that
according to Grace the Promise may be sure to all the Seed.

On the contrary, they who make a twofold Justification, and assign diverse
causes of both, of which the one confists of Faith only, without Works going
before, which they call the first, and the other, which they call the second is
increased by Works of Grace, as they speak. I see not what they can find in the
Scriptures, for the defense of their Opinion; for Paul writing to so many
Churches The cause of Justification is not twofold but one.
acknowledges no cause of Justification, but one, which he professes to be
Faith in Christ, and that without Works. What need is there of better evidence?
Can you not be persuaded to believe the Truth, which has been so often and so
perspicuously demonstrated by so great a Master as Paul? But to what purpose
has Christ appointed him to be a Teacher to us Gentiles; if we despise his
Instructions, and choose to our selves other Masters, that teach another Gospel?
And what else do those Men, who reject the Apostle's Doctrine, and hearken to
such as teach contrary thereunto? Paul says, Without Works Man is justified:
Will you then dare to plead for Justification by Works in Opposition to the
Apostle? Dare you deny what he affirms? But you say, I detract nothing from
Works in opposition unto Paul, but I add Grace, from whence they receive the
power of Meriting and Justifying. Then, according to your Opinion, Works being
assisted by Grace do justify, but without Grace they avail nothing.

But what will you answer to St. Paul, who without making any Distinction of
Works, says not of such or such Ephesians. 2.
Works only, but indefinitely and in the general of all Works. It is of Faith,
and not of Works, lest any should boast. And again, to the Romans, If by Grace,
then it is not of Works, and elsewhere, Romans 11.
To him, that works not, etc. And how often does he in all his Epistles
Attribute all Power of Justifying to Faith, shutting out not only such or such
Works, but all Works of what kind soever, concerning which Paul speaking
indefinitely and absolutely, utterly excludes them from any concernment in
Justification. Which would be false, if any Works, whether performed by Grace
and in Faith, or without Grace, were conducible to Justification. And hence
this Argument arises.

An Argument against inherent Righteousness.

We are justified without Works by Faith, as Paul testifies.

Works of Charity infused by Grace, are Works.

Therefore, without these Works also, that consist of Grace, we are The
Caviling of the Papists.
justified.

The Adversaries Answer to the Major: Paul asserts, that we are justified
without Works, but with this Exception, unless they be planted in us by Faith,
and the influence of Grace; for the Apostle excludes not such kind of Works,
because they please God, and procure Justification. Contrarily those Works
only are excluded, that are of the Law, or of Nature, without which we are said
to be justified. But this Answer does not satisfy the Words of Paul, who
without making any such Exception or Distinction of Works, teaches simply and
indefinitely, that we are justified without Works. By what An indefinite
Proposition.
Logic then have these Sophisters learned to make a definite and particular
Proposition of that which is Indefinite and Universal? Or what Reason have they
to confine that unto a particular Case, which Paul speaks of Works in the
general? Let us consider the Words of the Apostle: Who, if he had believed,
that Works of Charity infused, procure Justification in the sight of God, it
cannot be doubted, but he would have expressly said so much. Now he says
expressly without any Exception: By Works shall no Flesh be justified.

Whence we may form this Argument.

If Works performed by Grace and in Faith, were meritorious of Justification,
then some flesh would be justified by Works, seeing there are many Believers
that Work by Grace.

But no flesh at all shall be justified by Works, as Paul bears witness.

Therefore it is false, that good Works performed by Grace have any Power of
justifying. Romans 3.


Let us confirm the saying of Paul by Scriptural Examples. That which Paul here
preaches of free Salvation without Works, the same Isaiah foretells, will come
to pass, though in other Words yet to the same purpose, under the Symbols of
Wine and Milk. All ye that thirst, says he, come without Isa. 55.
Money, and without Price, and buy Wine and Milk. What is signified here by
Wine and Milk, but the glorious Mystery of our Justification? and what is the
signification of these Words, wherein we are commanded to eat without Money and
without Price, but that the Lord would intimate unto us by the Prophet the same
thing, that the Apostle declares, to wit that we attain unto so great Felicity
by the free Gift of God only, and not by Works or Merits of Works? For what can
be the sense of these Words of the Apostle [Without Works] but the same that
the Prophet expresses in these Words (without Money, and without Price:) What
hole can the Papists find here, to creep out at? Without our own Works say
they, or without those that go before Faith, as Campian says, or without the
Works of the Law as Osorius speaks, but not without the Works of Faith, or
those Works which flow from the Grace of God; but this vain Sophistry is
overthrown A frivolous Trick of the Sophisters.
by the similitude of the Prophet, which would be utterly absurd, unless upon
all accounts Salvation were freely offered without any Condition of Works. For
otherwise, what will they answer the Prophet, or how can they interpret his
Words, where he commands to eat without Money and without Price? Will they
distinguish Money in this place just as they distinguish Works? So that they
reject that Money as unprofitable, which is our own, being purchased by our own
labors, but what is given us of God, they are so far from excluding this, that
unless we have it, it is in vain to come and eat. O vain janglings of
Sophisters, not so fit to be confuted by Arguments as to be hissed away, and
accursed by an Apostolical Execration. Suitable hereunto is that saying of the
same Prophet: Ye were sold for naught, and ye shall Isa. 52.
be redeemed without Silver: What else can be understood by these Words, but
the freeness of the Infinite Mercy of God toward us without any Merit of ours?
Where then are the Merits of inherent Righteousness, which the wicked bring
before God, if none obtain Justification, (as they plead) but those who are
first endued with Charity, and thereby are rendered just and worthy of Life
Eternal?

For the Confirmation of what we assert, let us add also the Example of
Abraham: From whence we may argue thus.

Argument, Romans 4.
The Works of Abraham were done in Faith and Grace.

The Works of Abraham have no Praise or Glory before God.

Argument.
Therefore Works done by Faith and Grace Merit nothing before God.

I am not ignorant, what these Interpreters Answer, absurdly wresting The
Words of Paul wrested by the Papists.
these Words of Paul to another Sense, contrary to the Mind of the Apostle. For
thus they comment upon this place. If Abraham by Works, etc. The good Works
of Abraham done in Faith, are not by these Words excluded from Justification,
neither is he declared to be justified by Faith only. But the Works of the
Law, done without Faith, are excluded, which sort of Works because Abraham did
not, therefore he is truly said to be justified by his Works before God.
Moreover (as they say) it is not proved by these Words, that the good Works of
Abraham: being a renewed Man and righteous, though done in Faith, did not
justify, but that Abraham was not justified by Works only without Faith. Thus
they say, What should I answer then, but that their Interpretation does not
agree with the Mind of the Author? Paul writing to the Romans, when he had
proved it by many and weighty Arguments, That a Man is justified by Faith
without Works, being about to confirm the same by an Example; He enquires
concerning the Works of Abraham: What shall we say, that Abraham our Father
according to the flesh found? For if he was justified by Works, he has whereof
to Glory, but not before God, etc. First, let us see, what these Works were of
which Paul treats, and next whose Works they were? The Adversaries Tarrianus
Jesuit. pro epist. pent. lib. 4.
Answer, and amongst those Campian our Countryman, who a while since, when he
was urged by this place of Paul, concerning the Works of Abraham, is reported
to have answered thus, like his own Jesuits, the Works of the Law, as they are
done without Faith and Grace, avail nothing to Justification; but because the
Works of that Holy Man were not such, being replenished with Faith and Grace,
therefore he is truly said to be justified by his own Works before God, yet not
as his own Works. What do you say? Was he justified by Works, of whom Paul says
expressly, that he had no cause of glorying in his Works before God? Was the
Apostle ignorant of the Holiness and Excellency of the Works of the Godly
Patriarch, which were not without Faith, and the Grace of God? And yet Paul
denies that these Works, though excellent in themselves, availed any thing
before God, in respect either of glorying or of Justification? And it is
evident by the Authority of Paul, that it was of Faith, and nor of Works that
he was justified before God; for Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for Righteousness: How then will those Interpreters agree with the Apostle,
in affirming he denies; for they contrarily do plead that Abraham was justified
by his Works: Whereas in opposition thereunto the whole scope of this Epistle
is to remove the works of the Saints, though excellent in themselves, from
Justification; not that pious works should be contemned, but that the free
Bounty of God toward sinners may evidently appear, who liberally communicates
his Righteousness, not to the dignity of Merits, but to Faith; not to him that
works, but to him that believes in him, that justifies the ungodly, (who
justifies the ungodly, says the Apostle.) But here Campian objects after his
former manner, pleading; first, That Abraham was justified by Works; and next,
he renders the reason, why he was justified by Works; because that his Works
were not done in Circumcision, nor in the Law, but before Circumcision and the
promulgation of the Law, by Faith and Grace: And therefore they were acceptable
to God.

Thirdly; Commenting upon the scope of the Epistle, he affirms, that we
misunderstand the words of the Apostle, because his whole drift through all
that Epistle is, to separate from Justification the Ceremonies of the Law, and
the Works, that were done before Faith in the Law, or by the Law only without
Grace. For thus he reasons, and such are all Camplan's Objections. To all which
I answer, that they are most false.

1. Whereas he affirms, That Abraham An Answer to the first Objection.
was righteous by Works, Paul expressly denies it, Reason openly confutes it and
the thing appears evident of it self. For what need had he of the promised Seed
and a Redeemer, if already he had been righteous by Works? or what need was
there, that Faith should be accounted unto him for righteousness, who was
afterward to obtain the praise of Righteousness by Works? Moreover, death
being the wages, not of righteousness, but of sin; by what right could he be
subject to the dominion of death, if he had not been a sinner? If he was a
sinner, how then was he righteous by works?

2. Whereas he says, That these works were not done according to the Law, nor
under the Law, but before the promulgation of the Law, I would ask him, What
the Law is; which if it is nothing but the Rule of Righteousness, An Answer to
the Objection.
how can any man be just, where there is no Law? But what man was there ever in
the World, but he carried about with him the Law of God, if not written in
Tables, yet written on his heart, and engraven on his conscience? But the
Decalogue was not yet engraven on Tables of Stone. But what was contained in
the Moral Decalogue, which that holy man did not already comprehend within his
own heart, both of loving God and his Neighbor, of not Murdering, of not
committing An Answer to the third Objection.
Adultery, or honoring Parents? etc.

3. As touching the scope of this Epistle, how greatly is campian mistaken? For
who is so void of sense, that he does not clearly perceive, that the drift of
the Apostle is not that, which those Jesuits dream of, to attribute our
Salvation or Justification to any Works, either going before, or following
after? Neither was this Office of an Ambassador committed unto him, that he
might contend with the Jews about Ceremonies, or with the Gentiles about Moral
Duties; but as Peter was entrusted with the Apostleship of the Circumcision, so
also the Preaching of the Gospel to the Uncircumcision was committed unto Paul;
not that he should Preach the Law, but the Faith, which before he opposed: Not
that he might declare the Righteousness of Works (in which there is no
Salvation) but that God by him might reveal his Son amongst the Gentiles, and
might manifest unto the World that heavenly Trophy and glad Tidings of Peace
and Victory obtained in Heaven by Christ, and spread abroad far and wide
through the Churches, the boundless riches of Divine Grace, which he had
experienced in himself. For he was called for this purpose to the Apostleship,
that the infinitely gracious Lord and Redeemer Christ Jesus might first
exercise his Mercy toward him, and afterward by him declare his great Mercy
toward Sinners, not only by hisExample, but also by his Ministry For 1 Timothy 1.
thus he bears witness of himself, that the Ministry of Reconciliation was
committed to him, for which he was appointed to be a Preacher, and Apostle and
Teacher of the Gentiles, in Faith and Truth, that he being an Ambassador in
Christ's 1 Timothy 2.
stead, might invite all men, yea and beg of them, that they would 2 Timothy 1. 2
Cor. 5. Ephesians. 3.
be reconciled unto God. And this seems to be the principal scope, that Paul
aims at, not only in the Epistle to the Romans, but also in all his Doctrine,
to proclaim amongst the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and that he
might set before the view of all men, what is the Communion of the Mystery that
was hidden with God in former Ages, etc. But now in the Righteousness of Works,
no such Mystery lay hidden with God from former Ages. Therefore it is false,
and abominable, which Campian the Jesuit, and such like Sophisters assert
concerning the scope and sense of Paul's Epistle to the Romans: For by the Law,
(which Paul excludes from Justification) they understand that part thereof
which comprehends Ceremonial and Judicial Works, wherein the Jews gloried; or
Works The blind Error of the Papists about the sense and scope of Paul's
Epistles.
purely Moral, performed before Faith, on which the Gentiles relied. Yea on the
contrary, when Paul removes the Law from Justification, he does not only
exclude it, upon the account of Jewish Ceremonies, or Moral Works performed
before Faith; but also upon the account of its weakness through the flesh, both
in Jews and Gentiles, both in the regenerate, and the unregenerate; so that it
cannot make sufficient satisfaction to the Justice of God. And Paul affirms,
That for this cause God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh.

What did God do, but what flesh could not do? For sin, he condemned sin in the
flesh. In what flesh? ours, or his own Sons? Who of all the Regenerate, though
endued with great habitual Faith and Grace, has so led his life, walking not
according to the flesh, but according to the spirit, but he always carries
about with him flesh, that is weak in many respects, and vicious and subject to
sin? Concerning which every one may complain with the Apostle: I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. And again; I find a Law. that
when I would do good, evil is present with me, etc. For Romans 7.
what they speak of Works following Faith and Grace, how little that helps
their cause appears not more evident by any Argument, than by the Lives of
those, that maintain this Controversy, if they be strictly enquired into. If
that be true, which Campian with his Jesuits pleads for, That Righteousness is
not obtained in men come to years, but by Works that follow after Faith: Let us
behold then what excellent Works this Faith of the Mother Church of Rome brings
forth; seeing they so much glory in the Title of Catholic Faith, and Preach so
many things about Charity, which is the fulfilling of the Law.

Let us look into the Life and Works of the Roman Popes, Cardinals and Bishops,
and the whole Crew of the Monks and Jesuits; Where can you find more of the
flesh, or less of true holiness, than in those false-hearted and painted
Hypocrites, whose whole profession of Religion consists, in Purple Gowns, high
topped Mitres, Purple Caps, Rings adorned with Jewels, solemn Vows, Ceremonies,
which in reality are rather Stage Plays than Exercises of Piety. This appears
to be too true by the unhappy Tumults raised in the World, the Wars and
Persecutions that are stirred up by none more, than by those very men, that
call themselves Spiritual and Catholic; whom it should become to be the
chiefest encouragers of Concord, and Messengers of Peace.

But having so much enlarged upon this sort of men, with their Works and
Merits, let us return to the Examples of those of whom we spoke before, who
were freely admitted unto Baptism, and received into favor by Faith without
any commendation of Merits at all, yea without mention of any Works, except
such perhaps as were evil: Amongst which number those Jews may be reckoned, of
whom three thousand at one time were Baptized by Peter.

Likewise also the Eunuch whom Faith only without Works, made not only meet for
Baptism, but also an Heir of the Heavenly Kingdom: And the Iaylor, whom Paul
Baptized. Moreover, Paul himself, and all the Apostles, and Publicans, the
family of Cornelius, Zacehaeus, Mary Magdalen, and the Thief on the Cross; If
Faith without Works was sufficient to them for the Grace of Baptism, why not
also for the obtaining of Justification and Life Eternal?

Vega, and those of his Association, Vega de Iustificat. p. 771.
answers after his usual manner, that in all these Repentance was joined with
Faith, and other things also belonging to good Manners, and a godly Life. But
it easily appears how vain and insignificant this Answer of Vega is: He says,
Repentance and other Virtues are joined with Faith: Which, though I confess to be
in some sense true in the lives and persons of them that are justified; but
these things have no union with Faith in the concernment of Justification. And
first, as touching Repentance, abundance has been said before; for seeing
Repentance is nothing but a mourning for sins committed, it may indeed of it
self afflict the guilty person, and fit him for receiving of Grace; but it
cannot obtain a pardon for the sins committed before a Secular Judge, and much
less before the Judgment Seat of God. For that is the Office of Faith, which as
it only obtains a pardon, so it obtains it for none but them that are
afflicted, and repent, and believe in Christ. For for their sakes chiefly
Christ was sent by his Father into this World, that he may help all them, that
being in distress, fly to him by Faith. In which three things are to be
considered, and placed each of them in their own bounds and territories. First,
that we may see what the Mediator does, what Faith performs, and what sorrow
for sin produces. All our Salvation flows from the Mediator as from a Spring
and Fountain. But if you ask, how, or for what cause he saves; I answer, by
Faith. And if you ask, whom he saves; I answer, those that repent of their
wickedness, or whom he draws unto himself by an inward Call: Does the Lord then
save those for their Repentance? No verily. Suppose a man is greatly grieved at
the remembrance of his bypast life, but yet comes not to Christ; will grief for
his sins save him? No surely. Yea, who can come to Christ unless he first hear
and understand, who he is from whom Salvation must be sought? Now it is Faith,
and not Repentance, that does this: For it is not the grief and sorrow of a
broken hearted sinner, but Faith that discovers a Savior to us, and guides us
to him, and obtains Salvation from him: Yea, which is Salvation to them that
are in distress: for thus it is written: This is the will of God, That every
one that sees and believes in him, should John 3.
have Eternal Life. By which it is evident enough, what should be attributed
unto Repentance, and what to Faith, in the case of Justification; for sin is
not therefore pardoned, because he that sinned has repented, but because he
that sinned not at all, has died for sin, therefore the sinner is forgiven,
not for his Repentance, but for Faith, whereby he believes in him, that died
for our sins, and rose again for our Justification.

Where Faith is joined with Works, and where it is not joined.
AND hitherto we have been speaking of Repentance. But as touching the
Reformation of the Life in other respects, though I know that nothing is more
convenient, than that Faith, which is rightly instructed in Christ, should have
Charity, and other Offices of Piety, suitable to the Christian Profession
joined with it.

Yet it must be considered what Romans 4.
manner of Union this is, and of how large an extent: for Faith and Charity
have that wherein they are of necessity united. And they have that also,
wherein they must of necessity be separated. Where we deal with God about
Salvation, Justification, and the Expiation of sins, here Faith only without
Works is powerful and overcomes. But in dealings with men in the Lives of the
Justified, in popular duties, in the exercise of Virtue, there is a very near
Union between Faith and Virtue, of which the one cannot consist without the
other. Therefore these things should be measured by their own bounds, that we
may attribute unto Faith its due, and to Works their Aug. de Haeres. Haeres. 54.
due, and unto both that which is meet. For as that poisonous Error of
Eunomius should be abhorred, who is reported to have been so great an Enemy to
godly works, that he thought it was not a matter of any concernment how any man
led his life: So also great care should be taken, lest in shunning the Soylla
of Eunomius, we fall upon the other Carybdis of the Papists, which is no less
pernicious, being misled by the Popish Doctors, who make such a confused Union
between Faith and Works, that neither Faith without Works, nor Works without
Faith procure Justification.

But this Union is easily confuted by the Authority of Scripture: For if Faith
only does not bring Believers into a state of Salvation, unless it be joined
with great Holiness of life, why did not Christ join these together, when he
said simply; He that believes in me has Eternal Life? Why did not Peter join
them together, when, according to the Testimonies of the Prophets he proclaimed
remission of sins to all that believed John 6. Acts 10. Acts 16.
in his Name? Why did not Paul join them together, when instructing the Iaylor
in the Faith, he said unto him, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved, and thy house? Many other such like things may be mentioned.

The History of the Galatians is well known, who being led aside by the false
Apostles, did not wholly cast off Christ, nor excluded Faith in Christ, but
they would have had the good Works of Believers joined with Faith in the
Article of Justification before God unto Eternal Life: for which cause, how
angry the Apostle was at them, his Epistle bears witness.

But here again a place of St. Paul out of the same Epistle is objected, Gal. 5.
where writing to the Galatians, he speaks of Faith, that works by Charity.
From hence the Tridentine Divines infer a necessary connection between Faith and
Charity; so that Faith without Charity, like matter without form, avails
nothing to the Tridentine Counc. 1. Sess. 6. cap. 7.
perfection of Righteousness. And they say of Charity, which they call
Righteousness inherent in us, That it is so impossible that it should be
separated from Faith in the concernment of Justification, that they assert it
only to be the formal cause of our Justification. But it is Objection from the
words of Paul.
not difficult to answer to this place of Paul. For in that Epistle the Apostle
endeavors with great diligence to call back his Galatians to the Righteousness
of Faith from which they had swerved. In the mean while, lest they should be
seduced by a counterfeit Faith, by these words he intimates, what Faith it is,
that he speaks of: Not such a Faith as is idle and dead without Works, but
which works by Answer.
Love. And in this sense we deny not that Faith is not alone. But what
consequence is that?

Lively Faith is not alone without Charity.

It is a lively Faith that justifies.

Therefore in Justifying, Faith is not alone without Charity.

This Argument is disproved in the Schools of Logicians; for it is a Sophism (a
non causa ut causa.) Therefore I answer to the Major: The Faith that is lively
is not alone without Charity: That is true in working, but not in justifying.
Therefore as touching the Cause and Office of Justifying, this is not the
consequence thereof: Therefore in Justifying, Faith is not alone without
Charity. But as for the the Minor, though Faith that justifies is called lively
in respect of good Works, yet it does not justify in respect of those Works,
but only upon the account of its Object, which, because Faith only without
Charity embraces; therefore Faith only without Charity receives from thence the
power of Why Faith is alone in Justifying.
Justifying. If all things that any way are, or are done together, should be
joined in one and the same Office, it would come to pass, that he that has
Feet, Eyes and Ears, because he has not these Members alone, therefore he
should be said to go not withhis Feet only, but to walk with his Eyes, and see
with his Ears, as has been formerly demonstrated. Just so the case is in
Faith, Charity, and other Virtues: Which though being infused by Grace, they
inhere How Faith, Charity, and other virtues are joined together.
in the same subject, yet each one of them are distinguished by their peculiar
Offices. Therefore if it be asked concerning the Office of Justification, What
it is that reconciles us to God, and procures Eternal Life for us? I answer, it
is Faith, and that only. If you ask; how? I answer, by Christ, the Mediator.
Again, if you ask, what manner of Faith that is? I answer, It is not an idle or
dead Faith, but lively and active. But if you would know by what marks you
distinguish between a true Faith, and that which is counterfeit? St. Paul
answers that question; The Faith, that is true, works by Love.

What, where, and How Faith works by Charity.
BUT here there are several things, that need to be explained, as, what Faith
works, where, and after what manner it works; for Faith does not act every
where after one and the same manner: It acts one way with men, and another way
What, where, and how Faith works by Love.
with God. It is true, that it works by Love, as Paul says but it must be
understood in respect of men, not in respect of God. Neither does Faith perform
the same in both respects, nor after the same manner; for with men it works by
Love, but with God it works not by Love, but by Christ only, by whom it is
admirable to consider what, and how great things Faith performs. It obtains
grants of Petitions, pardon of sins; it reconciles, justifies, wrestles,
overcomes, reigns, and triumphs. Faith only does these things, not with men,
but with God; not working by Charity, but by Christ our Lord. Therefore Faith
works one thing by Christ, and another thing by Charity: By Christ it obtains
Salvation, by Charity it performs Obedience to the Law. Does it perform perfect
Obedience? No. Does it then perform imperfect Obedience? But that is not
sufficient to procure Righteousness and Salvation. And where then is that
excellent integrity of Life? Where is Charity's meritorious efficacy to
purchase Salvation? Where is the Assertion of the Tridentine Decree, which only
attributes the beginning of Justification to Faith, but makes the formal cause
thereof to be Charity or New Obedience, which they call Righteousness inherent
in us, whereby we are not only accounted righteous, but are both called, and
also really are righteous, before God; adding also a dreadful Curse, if any
dare be of another Judgment. Which manner of Doctrine, if it be admitted, it
utterly Trid. Council. cap. 11. If any say, that a man is justified by the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness only, or by the remission of sins only,
excluding Grace and Charity, which is spread abroad in the hearts, and inheres
in them. Or if any say that the Grace whereby we are justified is only the
favor of God, let him be accursed. If any say, that Justifying Faith is
nothing else but a fiducial relyance on the Mercy of God, forgiving sins for
Christ's sake; or that this fiducial relyance is the only thing whereby we are
justified, let him be accursed, Sess. 6. cap. 2. Romans 4. 11. Romans 3.
disannuls the sacred Scripture, and overturns all the foundation of our
Religion. For if this be the condition of our Salvation, that it must rely upon
good deeds, and not free Imputation only: Where then is that Righteousness,
which is attributed unto Faith so often Preached by Paul? Where is the
difference between the Law and the Gospel, which, unless it be carefully
observed, we may be as blind as to the knowledge of the Scripture, as Moles and
Batts at Noonday. Moreover, where is that opposition mentioned by Paul between
the Righteousness of the Law and of Faith? between Grace and Debt? Where is
glorying in Works excluded? Where is Faith accounted Romans 4.
to Abraham for Righteousness? And how will the Tridentine Decrees agree with
that which Paul says: Faith is accounted for Righteousness not to him, that
Works, but to him, that believes in him who justifies the ungodly? And where be
those remarkable exceptive and exclusive Particles, whereby our Salvation is
wholly cut off from Works, and ascribed unto Imputation? Moreover where are all
those sweet Promises, if those Testimonies out of the Prophets.
Men rob us of the Assurance of Salvation and God's Imputation?

Let us now proceed to the Prophets, that if any are less moved with the
Authority and writings of the Apostles, if they have any thing to say for
themselves, they may either Answer the evident Testimonies of the Prophets, or
yield unto them. And first, that I may begin at this, I ask of them, that deny
that it is sufficient to assurance of Justification, that Christ has fulfilled
all Righteousness for us, unless thereunto be added also a Righteousness
implanted and inherent in us, being formed in us of his free Bounty, which
makes us formally Righteous, satisfies the Law, and merits Life. Which if it be
so, I ask of them, Whether any Man will be assured that he is in a state of
Salvation in this Life. If they deny it, where then is that Peace and Joy in
the Holy Ghost, whereof there is so frequent mention in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles? Where is that frequent singing of Praise in the Books of
the Prophets? Where is that Everlasting Joy and Gladness, which Isaiah the
Prophet foretells shall be upon the head of those who being redeemed by the
Lord, shall come into Sion with Praise? Where is that way so straight, that
Fools cannot err therein? Where is that Voice of the Prophet preaching Peace,
and proclaiming Glad tidings, and comforting his own People, which taking away
all Fear, Grief and Sighing, confirms fearful and affrighted Consciences,
strengthens weak Kness, and feeble Hands, yea provokes the very Beasts of the
Field, and the Ostriches to the Exercise of glorifying God.

If yet we waver in doubtful and uncertain fears, and have no firm hope of
Salvation, but in that Righteousness, which is inherent in our selves according
to the Pseudocatholick Opinion of the Church of Rome, where then is that
fiducial reliance; where is that Holy Courage, concerning which Jeremiah the
Prophet foretold: In those days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely. And again to the same purpose Ezekiel foretelling of the future Peace
of the Church: And Ierem. 23. Ezekiel. 34.
I will make with them a Covenant of Peace. And they that dwell in the
Wilderness, shall sleep safely in the woods, and shall be in their own Land
without fear: And presently he subjoins: But they shall dwell safely without
any fear. Hereunto belongs the encouragement, that Isaiah gives the People of
the Messiah, commanding them not to be afraid. Fear not, says he, Isa. 41.
Isa. 43. Isa. 44.
for I am with thee. And again, Fear not for I have redeemed thee. And again,
Fear not, my Servant Jacob, etc. Hereunto also agree Zeph. 2.
the Words of Zephaniah Prophesying by the same Spirit: Be glad, O Daughter of
Sion, and be joyful, O Israel, and rejoice with all thy Heart, O Daughter of
Jerusalem. The Loard has taken away thy Judgment, he has turned away thy
Enemies. The King of Israel, the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall not
be afraid of evil any more, etc. How then does this so great Peace and
Tranquillity of Conscience, so often repeated in the Prophets, consist with that
trembling fear and doubtfulness, which the Papists plead for? For what
encouragement is there for Hope, when the Mind is restless through fear, and
all thingsly at an uncertainty? For how can Hope avoid being uncertain, if
Salvation must be hoped for by Works, and not by free Donation?

Howbeit we are not ignorant, nor deny that Sanctification and Renovation, and
the practice of good Works, that flow from hence, are Benefits bestowed upon us
by Christ, which of necessity all good Christians must endeavor to attain
unto. But that is not the state of this Controversy, for the debate here is
not about governing the Life in this World, but about Eternal Salvation, and
the cause thereof. Nor whether Offices belonging to Christian Piety should be
performed; but whether, when they are performed, they are so much accounted of
by God, that they Merit Salvation, and reconcile an offended God to Mankind?
Whether Virtues and good Works are able to stand before the Judgment Seat of
God, without being condemned according to the rigid Sentence of the Law?
Whether under great Terrors of Conscience, when Salvation hangs in doubt, we
may safely rely upon them, that we may become the Sons of God, and inherit
Eternal Life. And yet it is not therefore false, that as long as this Life
endures, it is very requisite, that Believers should be careful to The
necessity of Pious Works.
lead Holy Lives, and utterly abhor all wickedness. But it must be considered,
how it is requisite. In respect of the necessity of Obedience, it is true, but
if you say, that it is requisite in respect of our obtaining a right unto
Eternal Life and Salvation, nothing is more false, or pernicious, because it is
not purchased by our Merits, but is given to us, that deserve not, and are
unworthy, and it is given then, whilst we are yet Sinners, that it may
evidently appear, that all the Glory of our Salvation is due to the Mercy of
God, and not to our Works, which follow Reconciliation to God, as Fruits
thereof, but do not procure it.

Therefore as I have already admonished, I must again renew this Admonition.
that in this course of Obedience, the godly practice of Charity should not be
separated from us, but should of necessity accompany Faith: but yet it must be
so admitted, that it shut not out Faith from its own Office and Dignity, nor
justle out the glorious Riches of the Grace of God, which is in Christ Jesus:
Nor darken the Glory of the Cross of Christ, nor take away Consolation from
troubled Consciences, nor corrupt the sound Doctrine, which the Apostles have
taught us; which seeing it places all our Salvation in nothing else, but the
Benefit of Redemption by Christ, let men of understanding and Piety judge which
of the two Opinions is in the right; whether they that place all the Hope of
their Salvation in Faith only, or they that place it in the Righteousness of
inherent Works only, and call Faith, if alone, a Presumption. Verily if the
Spirit of Christ could not Apoc. 3.
endure those Laodiceans, who were puffed up with a false Imagination of their
own Righteousness, and understood not how wretched and miserable, and naked
they were: I suppose it may easily appear what should be judged of Popish
Catholics, and all this Divinity of theirs. I beg of Christ, the infinitely
Glorious, and only begotten Son of God, King of Kings, Preserver of Life, the
Merciful Author and Defender of our Salvation, the Glory of Heaven, the
brightness of his Father's Glory, according to his Infinite Goodness, unto
whose Everlasting Dominion all things are subject, that are in Heaven and in
Earth; that we miserable Men, whom Nature has brought into this wretched
Condition, who are Poor and Needy, Naked and Blind, and utterly. destroyed,
being restored by his Bounty, and having Salvation bestowed upon us by his free
Gift, and being clothed with his Ornaments, and enriched with his Wealth, and
carried on by the safe conduct of his Spirit, we may grow in him daily more and
more, and never fall from him, being strong in the Faith, and fruitful in good
Works, until at length at the coming of his Kingdom, we be received into those
blessed Mansions of Immortality, where he Lives and Reigns with the Father and
the Holy Spirit in Eternal Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

