A WAY to prevent the Indignation and Judgments of God from coming on a
Kingdom, Nation or Family; Commended to the Consciences of all Concerned.
FIRST, All you Vintners that sell Wine, that keep Taverns or such like Houses;
and all you Innkeepers, and you that keep Victualling-Houses, Alehouses,
Strong-Water-Shops, etc. see that you never let any Man or Woman have any more
Wine, Ale, strong Drink, Brandy or strong Waters, or other strong Liquors, than
what is for their Health and their Good; in that they may praise God for his
Good Creatures. For every Creature of God is Good, and ought to be received
with Thanksgiving.

But if you do give or let Men or Women have so much Wine, Brandy, strong
Liquors, strong Beer or Ale, till they be Drunk or to make them Drunk;

1. You destroy the good Creatures of God.

2. You destroy them, that have not power over their Lusts, no more than a Rat
or a Swine, who will Drink till they are drunk.

3. You are a great cause of Ruining them in their Healths, Purses and Estates,
(their Children and Families) in feeding of them in their Lusts, by letting
them have more than does them good; which also tends to bring God's Judgments
upon you, to your own ruin and Destruction.

For many when they are full of Wine, Beer or Strong Liquors, then they will
cry for Music, Pipe and Harp, and it may be their Whores also: And so in this,
you that suffer or allow such things, are Nursers of Debauchery and Corrupters
of them, and of your own Families also.

And also such Men, when they are full of Wine or Strong Liquors, and have
destroyed the Creatures, by taking more than does them good, then they are got
to that height that they are ready to Quarrel and Abuse, or Kill or Destroy one
another; and sometimes Kill other People (who do them no harm) as they are
walking or traveling in the Streets or Highways. For when they are overcome
by strong Liquors, then are they fit and do ly open to all manner of wickedness.

And though you think by selling or letting People have Wine or Strong Liquors
more than does them good, or is for their Health, The more they Drink, the more
Gain you think it brings you; and the more you vend your Goods, the more Profit
you get: Ah poor Sellers! Do not you think, that God with his all-seeing Eye
does behold you and your Actions? And cannot the Lord soon bring a Blasting
upon all your Undertakings and such Ungodly Gain and Profits, and whatsoever
you have gained by your Covetousness and from the Lusts of others, through
which they do destroy their Estates, Children and Families? Will not this bring
destruction upon you and your unrighteous Gain, which you have gotten by
feeding their Lusts? For that which feeds the Destroying Lusts, must needs be
the Destroyer; and the Profit of that will not be Gain to you in the end.

For are not you sensible, how many, after they have spent their Estates or
part of them, they will run into your Debts for Wine or strong Liquors, yea,
such as you let have more than did or does them good? And is not this the
cause, that many break by trusting, and other ways as before mentioned? Trust
should be with that which is Trusty, which does not Wast or Destroy; and such
God will bless. And therefore take heed of letting any Man or Woman have any
more Wine or strong Liquors, than what is for their nourishment, health and
good.

See what a dreadful Woe the Lord pronounced against them, That rise up early in
the morning, that they may follow Strong Drink, that continue until night, till
Wine inflame them: Then they call for the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and the
Pipe, etc. But such regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands: A sad state! Woe unto them that are Mighty to Drink
Wine, and are Men of strength to mingle strong Drink. And therefore all are to
shun such things; all are to be sober, and to mind and fear God, that they may
escape these Woes: as you may see in Isaiah, chap. 5.

And therefore all Vintners and such as sell Wine, with Alehouses, Inns and
Victualing-Houses, who sell Ale, Brandy and strong Liquors, never let any one
have any more than does them good, and is for their health (as is said before)
so that all may eat and drink the good Creatures of God to his Praise and
Glory; which Drunkards and Gluttons cannot, nor they who let them have the
Creatures of God in excess or immoderately, till they are drunk and surfeited,
for such do feed themselves without the Fear of God.

SECONDLY, Let all who go under the Name of Christian Families, train up their
Children in the Fear of God, and keep themselves in the Fear of God, that they
may keep all their Servants and Families in the Fear of God; out of all
Looseness and Wantonness and Vanities and Excess, and from all Drunkenness,
Fornication, Whoredom or Uncleanness, and Unrighteousness, and all Vngodlyness;
that they may keep out of all those things, that displease or dishonor the
Lord God. And do not nourish up the Lust of the Eye, nor the Pride of Life, nor
the Lust of the Flesh; for if you do, you nourish up that which is not of God
the Father. And therefore to shun all these Evils, and to depart from them, and
keeping in the Fear of God; this is the way to bring the Blessing of God upon a
Land, Kingdom, Nation or Family.

G. F.

God will destroy them which destroy the Earth,

Revel. 11.18.
Drunkenness makes a Man worse than a Beast, and makes a strong Man Weak, and a
Wise man a Fool.
This Testimony and Warning was and is owned and subscribed by (many) Vintners
and others, concerned in the Trades and Callings before mentioned, who were
present at the reading of the Manuscript.
LONDON, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and Stationer, at the Sign of the
Book in Grace Church Street, near Cornhill, 1682.


