A Warning TO ENGLAND, And to all that profess themselves CHRISTIANS, Who Have
the Form, but deny the Power of Godliness, that they Sin No More, lest a worse
Thing come to them.

Let this be speedily dispersed.

George Fox.

As ye have received Christ Jesus, the Lord, so walk in him, Colos. 2.6.

For, even our God is a Consuming Fire, Heb. 12.29.

Printed in the Year 1674.

A WARNING TO ENGLAND, etc.
This is to all ye People that are called Christians, that walk not in the
Spirit of Christ, to consider your Lives and Conversations, and for to see, how
unlike you are unto Christ and his Apostles, which all True Christians are to
walk as he walked, and as the Apostles and the true Christians in the Primitive
Times did; and your Conversations should be in Heaven, as theirs was.

AND now, all you that do not walk as you have the Apostles for Examples, and
to walk as Christ walked, as in 1 John 2.6. If the Lord God Almighty, who is
the Creator of all, and the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made,
shou d deal with you as you deal with him, who spend his Creatures upon your
Lusts, and devour them and consume them immoderately; I say, If the Lord God,
that created all, and gives the Increase of all, and upholds all by his Word
and Power (For, the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof.) I say, If
the Lord God should restrain the Earth from Increasing, and all other Creatures
which give you Food, for Three or Four Years, what a Condition would you be in,
that destroy them so upon your Lusts? If the Lord God should bring a FAMINE,
and stop (I say) the Earth from yielding its Increase to you, that so destroy
and consume his Creatures upon your Ungodly Devouring Lusts, Wasteing so much
avinly, which would nourish so many both in Clothes and Diet, as are ready to
Famish, and Starve for Want? Have not you seen how the Lord God has brought
the Sword among you? And are not you as Proud and as Vain, without his Fear as
you were, though so many have been consumed by Sword? Then did not he bring the
Plague, and swept away many Thousands thereby, and scattered you out of your
City of London? And then after did not he bring the Fire, to the Astonishment
of many? And what if the Lord should hinder the Earth from Increasing, how
could you but say, It were Just with the Lord so to do, and to bring a Famine
upon you, seeing that you do not Repent, and Amend your Lives, and Fear and
Serve him that made you? And all these good outward Creatures, which he has
given to you, and daily gives in his Mercy, that you might serve and fear him,
and not to consume them upon your own Lusts, and has given you Rain and
Fruitful Seasons; now what, if the Lord should Restrain his Hand in those
things from you, that do so devour them, and consume them, and waste them upon
your Lusts, Could you say any other wise, but The Lord is Just in so doing?
seeing that you amend not your Lives, Ways, Words and Doings; and are such,
that feast and are feeding your selves without all Fear, as you may see in Jude
12. and so are the Clouds without Water, and Trees without Fruit. So, if God
should send you Clouds without Water in them, and your Trees without Fruit,
remember the Fig Tree that Christ cursed, that did not bear Fruit, and think
upon your selves, and you are all Trees: but see what Fruits of Righteousness,
of Godliness, of Virtue and of Holiness you bear to God; for, without Holiness
none shall see God: And therefore take heed of promising your selves Liberty,
whilst your selves are Servants of Uncleanness and Corruptions, as in 2 Pet. 2.
And when you Destroy, Consume and Devour God's good Creatures upon your Lusts,
do you think of God? Don't you feed without any Fear of God? And do not many
live after that sort, as they did that said, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye? as in 1 Cor. 15.42. And does not the Apostle say, That
every Creature of God is good, and nothing ou^ht to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving; for God has created them to be received with
Thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer? And now when
you destroy the Creatures upon your Lusts, with Gluttony, Greediness and
Drunkenness, you are not in a Capacity then of Praying or giving Thanks, but of
Cursing, Swearing, Damning and Murdering, and all other Evils you are subject
to run into, and then often brings Misery and many Evils upon your selves and
Families.

Tim. 1.4. Now Every Creature of God is good [Mark] and nothing ought to be
refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving; for God created them to be
received with Thanksgiving: And the Thanksgiving must be given to him that
created them; and therefore you ought to receive no Creature but with
Thanksgiving to the Creator, and you ought to give him Thanks that created all
to his Glory; and if you do not, you are of them that feed without all Fear of
God, your and their Creator. And they that take the Creatures in God's Fear
with Thanksgiving, will not destroy them, nor consume them upon their own
Lusts, and they are sensible of the Goodness of the Creatures, and of the
Goodness of God that gave them: And they that feed without the Fear, and are
the Clouds without Water, and the Trees without Fruit, and devour, consume,
destroy and waste the Creatures of God upon their own Lusts, destroy their
Bodies and Souls, their own Families, Wives and Children, and bring themselves
to Rags and Beggary.

And such are not sensible of the Goodness of the Creatures, nor the Goodness
of the Creator; and from such God had no true Thanks, but his Name is
Blasphemed by such daily: And though many may say, that We say Grace before
Meat and after; but you should live in Grace, and not turn from the Grace of
God into Wantonness, and walk despightfully against the Spirit of Grace; for
the true Giving of Thanks to God, is with the Spirit of Grace and Supplication,
Zach. 12.10. and Jude 14.

So they cannot truly give Thanks to God, that turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness, and walk despightfully against the Spirit of Grace; and therefore
Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. And the Lord says, What have thou to do
to take my Name into thy Mouth, and hate to be reformed? And every one that
names the Name of Jesus, is to depart from Iniquity: else, Christ will bid such
as do not depart from Iniquity, Depart from him; this is a sad Sentence, for
the Savior and Redeemer and Mediator, to bid them Depart from him ye Workers
of Iniquity; for I know ye not: So, though you may say Grace (as you call it)
with your Lips; yet if you feed without Fear, and work Iniquity, Christ will not
own such.

And James says, Ye have lived in Pleasures on the Earth, and in Wantonness ye
have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter, and so forth: Were not
such to Weep and Howl? And therefore don't you think this Day will not come upon
you, that are found in these things: Therefore be you Warned in time.

And does not the Apostle command you ( Ephesians. 5.16.) To redeem the Time; for
the Days are Evil? And therefore see how you can redeem your Time that is
past; for does not the Apostle tell you what the Fruits of the Flesh are, and
what the Fruits of the Spirit? So see what Fruits you bear, and of what sort.

And don't you read in Romans 1. of such, that gave themselves up to Vile
Affections, and were filled with Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness,
Covetousness, full of Envy and Murder, Debate and Deceit, taking all things in
the Evil Part, Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God, Doers of Wrong, Proud
Boasters, Inventors of Evil Things, Disobedient to Parents, without
Understanding, Covenant-Breakers, without Natural Affections, such as never
cease from Sin, which Men (though they knew the Law of God, how that they which
commit such things are worthy of Death) not only do the same, but have Pleasure
in them that do them, Romans 1. And therefore consider these things, all you who
are found in these Practices, and Amend, lest God's Wrath and Judgments break
forth suddenly upon you, ere ye be aware. For, do not you know, that The
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Idolaters, nor Wantons, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Extortioners, nor Railers shall inherit the
Kingdom of God: Therefore ye must forsake all these things, if ye expect to
inherit the Kingdom of God, as you may see in 1 Cor. 6.

And don't you read of some, that in Words professed God, but in their Works
denied him? And have not they that have professed themselves Christians,
brought a great Dishonor to Christianity, yea, among the very Turks and
Heathen, by their Drunkenness, Whoredoms and Uncleanness, Cozening and
Cheating, and Cursing and Swearing, Thefts and Murders; so that amongst the
Turks it is become a Byword, What! Do thou think I am a Christian?
Therefore, oh! that that Holy Name (whose Name is above every Name) by which
you are called, that you should walk so unworthy of it, as to cause his Holy
Name to be Blasphemed! and knowing, there is no Salvation by any other Name
under Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus, Oh! therefore, that every one that
names his Name, would Depart from Iniquity, and might walk as he walked: And
let your Moderation (ye that be called Christians) be known unto all men; for
the Lord is at hand, and sees all things, and will render unto every Man
according to his Works: And don't you know, ye must give an Account for every
Idle Word? and therefore, ought they not to be Gracious, and seasoned with
Grace?

And whether therefore you Eat or Drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the
Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Now there is no Waster, Drunkard, Glutton, that can
Eat and Drink to the Glory of God; but to the Dishonouring God, Devouring and
Destroying his Creatures, and Consuming them upon their Lusts, and feeding
themselves without the Fear of God: And if all Christians did mind this,
Whether they Eat or Drink, that they do it to the Praise and Glory of God,
there would be no Drunkard, no Destroyer, no Devourer, nor Waster of God's
Creatures found in Christendom.

And likewise, Whatsoever you do, to do it to the Praise and Glory of God.
[Mark] Whatsoever you do: In this no Christian would Dishonor God; in this
they would always have the Lord before their Eyes, and his Fear placed in
their Hearts.

And therefore, whether we live, we should live unto the Lord, and whether we
dye, we should dye unto the Lord: So all that are true Christians do live and
dye unto the Lord; But they that live in Pleasures, are dead whilst they live,
as in 1 Timothy 5.

And consider ye what the Prophet Hosea says to the professing Jews, that did
not live according to the Law of God, nor the Prophets; and may not the same be
said unto you, that profess your selves Christians, but live not according to
the Gospel? Says the Lord, I gave them Corn, Wine and Oil, and multitude of
Silver and Gold, etc. And therefore I will return, says the Lord, and take
away my Corn in the Time thereof, and my Wine in the Season thereof; and I will
recover my Wool and my Flax, given to cover their Shame.

And therefore consider this, ye Christians, What (I say) if the Lord should
stop the Earth from Increasing (for the Lord has given you Corn, Wine and Oil,
Silver and Gold, Wool and Flax, which you consume and destroy upon your Lusts,
the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which is not
of the Father) so that you should not have so much Corn as to feed you, and as
much Flax and Wool as to cover your Shame, think you, would it not be Just with
the Lord so to do? Let the Witness of God in your Consciences, and your daily
Practice, and the Scriptures answer and testify against you.

For truly, when I was in Lancaster-Prison, I looked out of the Bars of the
Window in the Tower, and saw the Angel of the Lord God, with his Drawn
Glistering SWORD, shaking it over this Nation, to Execute God's Vengeance, and
the Court was all as a Flaming Fire; And this I saw before the beginning of the
Dutch War, before the Plague, and before the Fire: And now I say again, If God
Almighty, that created all for his Glory, and gives the Increase of all (For,
the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof) and, Whether you Eat or
Drink, or whatsoever you do, you should do it to the Praise and Glory of God)
and now, if you do not, but consume the Creatures of God upon your own Lusts,
and with Gluttony and Drunkenness waste and destroy them, and live Wantonly,
Wickedly and in Pleasures on the Earth, which is a Mark that such are Dead from
God and Christ whilst they live: Now, I say, if God Almighty, the Creator,
should stop the Earth from Increasing with Cattle and other Creatures, and
bring a FAMINE upon you, how could any but say, The Lord is Just in so doing?
For, look over Christendom, and see what Voluptuousness, Drunkenness, Excess,
Rioting, Debauchery, Oaths, Cursing and Swearing, that makes the Land to mourn!
Do you think there was the-like in Sodom and Gomorrah, whom God fet forth as
Examples of his Wrath, and such as suffered the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, who
followed Strange Flesh? Therefore Dread all ye that defile your selves and
follow after Strange Flesh; see Jude. Though you may think ye sit as Queens,
and glorify your selves in your Pleasures, and may say in your Hearts, Ye
shall see no Sorrow; but alas! Woe and Torment will follow: And therefore,
before it be too late, Repent, and consider these things.

And remember Esau, that profane Person, which for a Morsel of Meat sold his
Birthright, and afterward he would have inherited the Blessing, but he was
rejected; for he found no place of Repentance, though he sought it with Tears:
And therefore while ye have Time, Repent; for, know ye not, that all that
forget God, and do wickedly, he will turn into Hell? And therefore forsake your
Wickedness.

And do not you read, That the Lord Jesus will show himself from Heaven with
h^s mighty Angels in Flaming Fire, rendering Veng^ance unto them that do not
know God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ [mark, that do
not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; [People may Talk of it, but not
Obey it] who shall be punished with Everlasting Perdition from the Presence of
the Lord and from the Glory of his Power. Mark this Sentence, and take it to
Heart, as in 2 These. 1.7, 8. And see the sad Sentence upon the Wicked in Mat.
24.51. and chap. 25.41.

And was it not in all Ages the Sins of the People, and their committing Evil
and Wickedness in the Sight of the Lord, that brought the Wrath, and the
Plagues, and the Sword, and the Famine upon them, as you may read from Moses,
in the Time of the Law, to the Days of Christ, and after Christ? And is it not
the same that brings it upon them called Christians now, that make a Profession
of the New Testament, as the Jews did of the Old, and live not according to it?
Oh England! consider these things; oh Christendom (so called) consider these
things; and walk honestly, as becomes the Gospel, and not in Gluttonny and
Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness neither in Strife nor Envy, but put
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no Thought for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Lusts thereof, Romans 13.13.

But unto them that are Contentious, and disobey the Truth, though they may
talk of it, shall be Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish will be
upon the Soul of every man that does Evil: And therefore take heed, lest (after
the Hardness of your Hearts, and your Impenitency) you heap unto your selves
^^^a^h against the Day of Wrath, and of the Revelation of the Just Judgment of
God: Take heed of this, you that deny Revelation; you will find you will feel
it in the End, if you Amend not, Romans 2.

And therefore take heed of Disobedience, and Rebelling against the Lord's Good
Spirit, as in Neh. 9. For unto them which are Disobedient, Christ is a Stone of
Stumbling, and a Rock of Offense; and therefore, it is not the Professing, but
the Obedient and Believing, to whom he is Elect and Precious.

For behold, says the Lord, the Day comes, that shall burn as an Oven; and
all the Proud, yea, and all that do Wickedly, shall be as Stubble; and the Day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, and shall leave them
neither Root nor Branch, Man. 4. Therefore consider all ye that are Proud, and
do Wickedly; Do ye think this Day will not come upon you ere you be aware, and
neither leave you Root nor Branch? What Good will all your Profession do you,
if ye do Wickedly and are Proud, when ye are found but as Chaff and Stubble
consumed by Fire? Therefore take these things to Heart in your private
Chambers, and see whether ye be not as Stubble or Chaff: But upon them that
fear the Name of the Lord, shall the Son of Righteousness arise, with Healing
in his Wings; and they shall grow up as Calves in the Stall. And therefore, my
Desire is, That you may all Repent, and Amend your Lives and Doings, and turn
to the Lord, from all your Evil Ways, Words, Lives and Conversations, and fear
him, which to do, is to Depart from Evil, that the Wrath of God and the Lamb
may not come upon you; for I desire the Good of all your Souls, and the Eternal
Welfare of all People.

And the Apostle says in 1 Cor. 10. Neither let us (to wit, the Christians)
commit Fornication, as some of them (to wit, the Jews) did, and fell in one day
three and twenty Thousand.

Neither be ye Idolaters (to wit, the Christians) as some of them were (to wit,
the Jews) as it is written, The People sat down to Eat and Drink, and rose up
to play.

Now, all these things came upon them (to wi^^ the Jews) for Example, and they
were written to admonish us, that Christians should not follow them.

And the Prophet says, Hab. 2.15. We unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink,
that put thy Bottle to him, and make him Drunk also, that thou may look
on his Nakedness; thou art filled with Shame for Glory: Drink thou also, and
let thy Nakedness be uncovered; the Cup of the Lord's Right Hand shall be
turned unto thee. Now consider this, ye that profess your selves Christians,
and live not the Life of Christianity, whether ye be not found in these
Practices that the Scriptures declare against.

Hagg. 1.6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye are not
satisfied; ye drink, and are not filled; ye cloathe you, but you are not warm;
and he that earneth Wages, puts it into a broken Bag.

Now, is not this the Condition of many called Christians, that drink, and are
never filled; and eat, and are not satisfied; and earn, but waste their Wages?

And in Amos 3.15. and 4.1. I will smite, says the Lord, the Winter-House and
the Summer House, and the Houses of Ivory shall perish, and the Great Houses
shall be consumed, says the Lord, Hear this Word, ye Kine of Bashan, that are
in the Mountains of Samaria, which Oppress the Poor and Destroy the Needy; and
they say unto their Masters, Bring, and let us drink, etc.

Now, consider this, ye that are found in such Practices, and see what Judgment
the Lord brought against such.

And in Hosea 4.18. there you may see how Ephraim's Drunkenness stinked; Their
Drunkenness stinketh (says the Prophet) they have committed Whoredom.

And does not the nominal Christians Drunkenness stink, think ye, together with
other their Uncleanness?

And in Prove. 20. its said, Wine is a Mocker, and Strong Drink is Raging; and
whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.

So mark, ye unwise Christians, that are found in this Raging with this Strong
Drink; and do ye think that ye are wise, that are deceived with Wine, the
Mocker?

And in Prove. 4.14. to the 18th v. Enter not into the Way of the Wicked, and
walk not in the Way of Evil Men, and avoid it, and go not by it; but turn from
it, and pass by; for they cannot sleep except they do Evil; and they cause some
to fall; for they eat the Bread of Wickedness, and drink the Wine of Violence.
Were not these things judged by the Law of God? And are they not judged by the
Gospel? And don't you think that the Lord will make such to drink the Wine of
Giddiness? as in Psalm 60.3. etc.

And in Psalm. 80.5. Thou have fed them with the Bread of Tears, and gave them
Tears to drink in a great Measure. And do ye think that ye Christians, that
feed your selves without the Fear of God, and consume his good Creatures upon
your Lusts, must not be fed with the Bread of Tears, and have Tears to drink
from the Hand of the Lord.

And in Isa. 56.12. Come ye, say they (to wit, the Shepherds or the Watchmen)
I will f^^^h Wine, and we will fill our selves with Strong Drink; and to morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant. And were not these reproved by
the Prophets? And are not such reproved now by the Gospel?

And in Isa. 28.7, 8. For all their Tables are full of filthy Vomitings. Now
look into your Houses of Drunkenness, ye called Christians, and see what
Filthiness is there; and by such Doings ye Devour the Creation, and cause the
Drink of the Thirsty to fail, which would do them Good, which you destroy, and
do your selves Hurt withal.

And the Prophet Isaiah says, But they have erred because of Wine, and are out
of the Way by Strong Drink: The Priests and the Prophets also have erred by
Strong Drink; they are swallowed up with Wine, they are gone astray through
Strong Drink; they fail in Vision, they stumble in Judgment.

Come, try your selves by these Scriptures, ye that call your selves
Christians, and ye Priests and Prophets; and see whether by Strong Drink ye
have not stumbled in Judgment, and erred in Vision, and are some of you
swallowed up with Wine?

And does not the Prophet cry against the Pride and the Drunkenness of Ephraim?
And do not many now, that are called Christians, take a Pleasure and Pride in
making others Drunk? And were not such threatened with judgments, and cried
against then? And are nor such to be Warned now, as then?

And now take heed, lest this come upon you, as is spoaken of in Isaiah 24. The
Earth shall be clean emptied, and utterly spoiled, the Lord has spoaken it;
because the Inhabitants of the Earth have transgressed his Laws, and changed
his Ordinances, and bro^^^^ his Everlasting Covenant; therefore the ^^^se
devours the Earth, and the Habitations thereof: Then the Wine fails, and all
that were of a merry Heart do mourn; the Mirth of Tabrets cease; the Voice of
them that Rejoice ends; the Joy of the Harp cease; the Earth lamenteth and
fades away; the World is feeble and decayed; the Proud People of the Earth are
weakened; they shall not drink Wine with Mirth; Strong Drink shall be bitter to
them that drink it; the City of Vanity is broken down; every House is shut up,
that no man comes into it: There is a Cry for Wine in the Streets; all Joy is
darkened; the Mirth of the World is gone away: Surely this shall be in the
midst of the Earth among the People as the shaking of an Olive Tree, and as the
Grapes when the Vintage is ended.

Now, consider these things, ye that profess your selves Christians, and are
the Transgressors of the Gospel, and the Commands and Law of Jesus, as these
Jews did, the Law of God and his Ordinances under the Old Covenant: Do ye think
this Curse and Judgments won^t come upon you, that are found in these Practices?

And in Isa. 5. VVo unto them that rise up early to follow Drunkenness, and to
them that continue until Night, till Wine does inflame them; and the Harp,
Vial, Timbrel and Pipe and Wine are in their Feasts; but they regard not the
Work of the Lord, nor consider they the Works of his Hands: Therefore (does
not the Lord say) he will lay his Vineyard waste, and it shall bring forth
Briars and Thorns.

And therefore take heed, ye Christians, so called, that practice such things,
lest your Vineyard be laid waste also.

And VVo unto them (says the Prophet) that are mighty to drink Wine, and to
them that are strong to pour in Strong Drink; which justify the Wicked for a
Reward, and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him; and call
Evil Good and Good Evil. Therefore as the Flaming Fire devours the Stubble, and
as the Chaff is consumed of the Flame, so their Root shall be as Rottenness,
and their Bud shall rise up like Dust, because they have cast off the Law of
the Lord of Hosts, and contemned the Wine of the Holy One of Israel: Therefore
is the Wrath of the Lord kindled against his People, and he has stretched out
his Hand upon them, etc.

And now consider ye this, that profess your selves Christians, and are found
in these Practices; Have not ye cast away the Command and Law of Jesus Christ,
and contemned his Instructions, who says, Be ye Holy, as I am Holy; without
which none shall see the Lord: And ye ought to walk as Christ walked: And will not
he render Vengeance in Flames of Fire against all such as obey not the Gospel,
and walk not as becomes the Gospel?

And did not the Lord bring his Judgments upon the Jews for such Actions? And
do you think he will clear you of such Actions, because ye make a Profession of
Christianity and the Gospel? Nay, nay; be not deceived: God's Wrath and
Righteous Judgments will be revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men; and therefore Amend and Repent, lest these Judgments
come upon you at unawares: When you and your Priests are crying, Peace, Peace,
sudden Destruction comes upon you, as it did upon Sodom and the Old World.

And you that be found out of the Power of Godliness, as the Jews were found
out of the Law of God; do ye think that the Stone will not cry out of the Wall,
and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer to it, against you that delight in
Sin and Wickedness?

This Vision is plain, says the Lord; he that runs may read it: and the Vision
is for an appointed time, but at the last it shall speak, Hab. 2.

Therefore while ye have time Repent, and give over pleading for your Sin and
Body of Death and Wickedness to the Grave; for there is no Repentance there;
and as the Tree falls, so it lies; Therefore cease to sin, and break off your
Iniquities by Repentance. For the Grave cannot confess to the Lord, nor Death
cannot praise him, and they that go down into the Pit cannot hope for the
Truth; but the Living, the Living shall confess thee, as I do this day; the
Father to the Children shall declare the Truth, thus says Hezekiah, Isa.
38.18, 19.

And you may see these Evil Works and Workers before mentioned, to wit,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. are the Works of such as go into Hell; for the
Scripture says, All that forget God, and do wickedly, shall be turned into
Hell, as aforesaid; and so into that which burns with Fire and Brimstone; and
therefore says the Prophet, Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her Mouth
without Measure; and their Glory, and their Pomp, and he that rejoices among
them shall descend into it, Isa. 5.14. Therefore consider this, all ye
Drunkards and Unclean Persons, that feed your selves without Fear, and destroy
and devour the Creatures of God upon your Lusts, lest Hell swallow you up,
which has opened its Mouth without Measure; be sur^ it will, except you
speedily Repent and Amend your Lives and Doings, and turn unto the Lord. Though
you may call Drunkenness and Uncleanness Good-Fellowship, and call others Fools
that will not follow you into the same Excess of Riot, yet it is the bad
Fellowship; for the Good Fellowship is in the Good Spirit of God, which
mortifies these Evils and the Works of the Flesh, which are manifest; as,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Envy, Murder, Drunkenness,
Gluttony, etc. whereof I tell you (says the Apostle) that they that do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.

Wor^ester-Prison, this 1st of the 11th Month, 1674. G. F.

THE END.

