OH People! my Bowels yearn, my Bowels yearn toward you, whose desires in any
measure are after the Lord: O that you would now (I SAY, THAT YOU WOULD NOW)
return with all your hearts unto Him, and obey the Voice of his Power in you;
then should you be made able to stand, and endure the fiery Trial which is come
and coming. Oh! the Day hastens wherein all Profession that is not grounded in
the Life and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ (what ever the show of it be) will
be so shaken, that an utter (I SAY, AN UTTER) blasting and withering shall come
upon it; and for that cause the Lord does, and will yet suffer Great Trials
(YEA, I SAY, GREAT TRIALS) to come both upon the Professors and Possessors of
his Name; that so his Children (the Possessors) may be manifested unto all, and
discerned from all that are but Professors, though never so fair and seemingly
covered: for all Coverings, but what is of the Power and Spirit it self, shall
be too narrow; and all that are not covered with the Spirit and Power of
Emmanuel, their shame and nakedness shall appear more and more.

This is the Testimony which the Spirit and Word of Truth gives; therefore he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear, before the Day of his Visitation be
wholly past, and the things belonging to his peace be hid from his eyes: for
yet a little while and the voice shall be, He that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; for the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with flesh, but his
Plagues and Indignation shall be poured out upon such as will not be gathered
in the Day of his Patience, Long-forbearence, and Free-love; and he or she that
loves Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, House or Land, Liberty, Honor,
or any thing more than the Life of the Lamb, shall be counted not wortthy of
Him, and plainly manifested so to be. Read this who can; and he that can
receive it, let him: for the time draws nigh (YEA, I SAY, THE TIME IS COME)
that these Sayings must be fulfilled.

These words were formerly conveyed through G(...) ^he younger, only the words,
viz. I SAY, with the word* (...)n (...) Capital letters, within several
Parentheses)* (...) have added, who am required thu^ the (...) is

22th day of the Month called July, in the year accounted 1670. John Pennyman.




