TITHES, OFFERINGS, AND FIRST FRUITS, Commanded by the Law in the Old
Testament, IS NOT GOSPEL, Neither before the Law nor after.

AND ALSO Circumcision and Oaths, and Swearing, and the Sabbath Days commanded
by the Law in the old time in the Old Testament, is not Gospel neither before
the Law, nor since in the glorious Gospel-day of Christ.

And also the trial of the Ministers and Teachers, who are they that Plant
Vineyards, and Plow and Thresh in hope, and keep a Flock, and Minister holy or
spiritual things, etc. as the Apostles did in their days.

By George Fox.

Christ has blotted out the hand writing of Ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to the Cross,

Colos. 2.14. And behold at Evening-tide trouble, and before the Morning he is
not; this is the Portion of them that spoil us, and the Lot of them that rob us,

Isa. 17.14. London, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, 1683.

TITHES, OFFERINGS, AND FIRST FRUITS, NO Gospel-Commands, Although Commanded by
the LAW IN THE OLD TESTAMENT.
CHrist has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances contained in the Law,
that was against us, and contrary to us, and has taken them out of the way,
and nailed them to his Cross; and has not he spoiled the rule and authority,
and power that held them up? And he has made a show of them, openly triumphing
over them in his own person, having abolished in his Flesh, the Enmity, even
the Law of Comandments contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of
twain, one new man, so making Peace. Now what was this Law and Commandments,
and Ordinances? were they not Tithes, Offerings, and the outward Altars and
Tabernacles, and outward Circumcision, and the outward things contained in the
Law? and the outward Priests with their Garments and Services, with all the
outward Signs, Figures and Shadows, which Christ has abolished, blotted out,
and nailed to his Cross.

And all their Jewish Ceremonies, with outward washing and sprinkling, and all
their observing their Meats, Feasts, and Sabbath Days, and Oaths, and Swearing,
has not Christ abolished all these things, and nailed them to his Cross, and
triumphed over them, and changed the Priesthood, and the Law by which it was
made; and disannulled the Commandments that gave the Priest his Tithes, who was
made a Priest after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but Christ is made a
Priest after the power of an endless Life. Now as for them that say Abraham
gave Tithes, the tenth of all the spoil that he had gotten in the Wars, to
Melchisedeck King of Salem; but that is no proof nor example, that Kings and
Governors, and Captains that did conquer their Enemies, did give the Tenths,
etc. And the Sons of Levi, who received the Office of the Priesthood, had a
Commandment (according to the Law) to take Tithes of the People, that is, of
their Brethren; but the Apostle says, Levi who received Tithes, paid Tithes in
Abraham, when he was yet in the Loins of his Father Abraham, when Melchisedeck
met him; so it was Levi that paid them in Abraham: and the Gospel was Preached
to Abraham by the Lord, saying, In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be
blessed, before Abraham was either Circumcised, or Levi paid Tithes in Abraham,
(I say again) the Gospel was Preached to Abraham, and the Promise was to
Abraham, before either he was Circumcised, or before he went to offer his Son
Isaac, or Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, saying, In thy Seed shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed. And how was Faith reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness? when he was in Circumcision or un-circumcision? not when he was
Circumcised, but before he was Circumcised, not when Levi paid Tithes in
Abraham, but before Levi paid Tithes in Abraham; for the Promise that he should
be Heir of the World, was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the Law, but
through the Righteousness of Faith, and this was before either Abraham was
Circumcised, or Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, and now the Levitical Priesthood
is changed, and the Law by which he was made and the Commandments disannulled,
that gave him his Tithes, and Christ has blotted out the Law and Hand writing
of Ordinances, etc. and Nailed them to his Cross, and triumphed over them, and
therefore if you be circumcised Christ profits you nothing, so the Gospel and
Faith was preached to Abraham before either Tithes or Circumcision was, and
Christ he came not after the order of Levi, or Aaron, but after the order of
Melchisedeck and of the Tribe of Judah.

And it was the Sons of Levi that were commanded to take Tithes, it does not
say the Sons of the Tribe of Judah, of which Christ came, hat were commanded to
take Tithes; but the Levitical Priesthood is Changed, and the law by which the
Priesthood was made, and the Commandment disannulled by Christ our
High Priest, who is made higher than the Heavens; and we who are of Faith, and
in the Gospel, we are not under the law of Tithes, Offerings and outward
Circumcision, etc. but we are under grace that teaches us, etc. and brings us
Salvation and as the Apostle says; Wherefore my Brethren we also are become
dead to the Law, by the body of Christ that you should be married to another,
even to Christ whom God has raised from the Dead; for Christ is the end of the
Law for Righteousness sake, to every one that believes, for Moses describes
the Righteousness which is of the Law, that a man which does these things shall
live by them, but the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise;
Say not in thy heart who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring Christ
from above, or who shall desend into the deep, that is, to bring up Christ from
the Dead; but what says it, the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in
thy heart, and this is the word of Faith which we preach; that if thou confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has
raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved; for with the heart man believes
unto Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation: for
as many as are under the work of the Law are under the curse: For if the
inheritance had been of the law it is no more of promises, but God gave it to
Abraham by promises before the law, and are not Tithes the work of the law
seeing the Apostle says, As many as are under the law are under the curse; but
Christ has redeemed us from under the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us; so that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God it is evident,
for the just shall live by Faith, in the Faith which Abraham lived in before he
was Circumcised, and Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, and the Apostle said, God
has made them able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter but of
the Spirit; the letter kills, the Spirit gives life, now this letter must be
the law and Old Testament and further says, that if the ministration of death
written, and engraven in stones was glorious, how shall not the ministration of
the Spirit be rather glorious; For if the ministration of Condemnation be
glory, for that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory that excedeth, for if that which is done away was glorious,
much more that which remains is glorious; So that the Ministration of
Condemnation and the Ministration of death Written and Engraven in Stones is
the Ministration of the letter; Was not this the Law and Old Testament; and old
Covenant, and Moses who put a vail over his face that the Children of Israel
could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished, (Mark that
which is abolished) but the Jews minds were blinded, for until this day remains
the same vail untaken away in Reading of the Old Testament: which vail is done
away in Christ but even unto this day, when Moses is read the vail is upon
their hearts, and is it not upon the Christians, who read the Old Testament of
Moses, that commands Tithes, Offerings, Swearing and First Fruits, and Altars,
and Priests with their White Garments, etc. for are not all these things done
away by Christ, has not Christ nailed them to his Cross and triumphed over
these things; that was commanded by the law, in the law of the old Covenant and
Testament, Nevertheless, says the Apostle, When the hearts of the Jews shall
turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away. Is not that the vail of the
Letter the Ministration of death, the Ministration Written and Engraven in
Stones, and the Old Testament and the vail of Moses, and is not this vail over
the Christians hearts in reading Moses, and the Old Testament, and preaching
and practicing of it (viz) Tithes, Swearing and Offerings, etc. and can this
vail be taken away until you turn to the Lord, and were not the promises of the
Lord to Abraham, and the Gospel preached to Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
Nations be blessed: I say was not this Gospel and Promises to Abraham before
circumcision, and before Oaths, and Swearing, and Levi paying Tithes in
Abraham; and does not Christ in in his Gospel-day which was preached to Abraham
say, It has been said of them in old time, thou shall not for-swear thy self,
but perform thy Oaths to the Lord, and was not that old time the time of the
Law, the Old Testament and the old Covenant that commanded Circumcision,
Oaths, Tithes and Offerings; and Christ says, But now I say unto you, swear
not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; for what is more than
these comes from evil; and James says the same, James 5. Above all things my
Brethren (In his general Epistle to the 12 Tribes scattered abroad) Swear not
neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath (Mark) any other
Oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest you fall into
condemnation, does not the Apostle here conclude that Swearing and Oaths were
in condemnation in the time of the Gospel and New Covenant, and New Testament,
although they were Justified and commanded in the old Covenant, and by the law
in the Old Testament, but forbiden under the penalty of going into evil and
condemnation, in the glorious Gospel of Christ's day and his new Covenant who
says, Out of the mouth of two or three witnesses every word is established,
and they should not accuse an Elder but with the mouth of two or three
witnesses, and does not say of two or three Swearers every word should be
established, this is the command of Christ in his Gospel-day, and New Testament
and new Covenant of grace and of light and life, and they that love Christ will
keep his Commandments, John 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him; and Jesus said,
If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. He that loves me not, keeps
not my sayings, John 25. And Tithes that Levi paid in Abraham and renewed them
in the law that was commanded in the Old Testament, Tithes, Offerings,
Circumcision, and before Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, so
Circumcision outwardly was but a sign of the Circumcision of the Spirit, Christ
having ended the Law and the Priesthood that was made by the law, and
disannulled the commandment that gave Tithes, and blotted out the handwriting
of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took them out
of the way and nailed them to his Cross; now this handwriting of Ordinances
was Circumcision, Tithes, Offerings, and Oaths, and Swearing, etc. in the Old
Testament which Christ has nailed to his Cross, and has spoiled the
principalities and powers of the Jews, which held them up, which was against us
and contrary to us in the New Testament, and the new Covenant in the glorious
Gospel-day of Christ, and Christ in his new Covenant and New Testament and in
his Gospel-day, who came of the tribe of Judah, not of the tribe of Aaron, that
took Tithes he says to his Ministers and Apostles, that he sent forth to
preach the new Covenant, the New Testament and the Gospel; Freely you have
received, freely give, etc. and this was the command of Christ, and he that
loves him will keep his Command, and his words, and sayings, and they are
beloved of God and of Christ; and Christ and his Father will come and make
their abode with him, John 14.

Whereas you say that the Jews paid Tithes of Mint, and Rude, and of all manner
of Herbs, to the Sons of Levi, and Christ said unto them, These things ought ye
to have done to the Sons of Levi, etc. (mark) have done, I do grant that the
Jews ought to have done these things, to pay the Tithes to the Priests, and to
the Levites, for Christ many times when he had healed the people, he bid them
go to offer to the Priest for their Cleansing, and therefore were not the
Tithes part of the Priests wages, which had no lot in the Land as the other
eleven Tribes had? but you that call your selves Christians do not pay Tithes
to Jewish Priests now. But this paying of Tithes that Christ spoke of, and
offering to the Priests was before Christ himself was offered up, for as the
Apostle says, The offering up of the body of Christ once for all, and by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and Christ after
he had once offered up himself a Sacrifice for sin forever, sat down at the
right hand of God, Heb. 10. And so did not Christ cause the Jews Sacrifices and
oblation and Tithes to cease; by the Offering up himself once for all, for all
their Sacrifices and Offerings, ended them and abolished them all, with all
their Tithes, which the law commanded to be given to Levi, and nailed them to
his Cross, and Changed the Levitical Priesthood and the Law by which he was
made, and disannulled the Commandments that gave him his Tithes; and said unto
his Disciples, Freely receive, and freely give.

And the Promises and the Gospel was given and preached to Abraham, before the
Lord gave his Sabbath to be a sign betwixt the Jews and the Lord, that they
might know that it was the Lord that Sanctified them, for ye do not read the
Lord gave his Sabbath to any of the old world, nor to Noah, nor to Shem, nor to
Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, but the Children of Israel after they came out of the
land of Egypt; or the land of Ham, Psalm. 105.15. And the Sabbath which God
gave unto the Children of Israel; was a sign betwixt him and them, this sign
served till Christ the Seed came, who is the Substance that ends the signs and
figures, and therefore Christ says to the Jews; The Sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the Sabbath; therefore, Christ the Son of man is Lord of the
Sabbath, Mat. 12. and 8. Mark 2.17.

The Scriptures that the Priests in Christendom teach and used to bring for
their taking of Tithes, and maintenance of people, and made havoc of the
peoples goods; yea, of theirs that they did not preach to nor hire them, are as
follows, first some have said and others do say that the workman is worthy
of his Hire, and the Labourer is worthy of his Meat; But is it not unjust in
you that profess your selves Ministers of the Gospel; and Ministers of the Law,
or for any other people to demand and force yearly wages or meat from them that
never hired them, nor set them at work, and not only force wages and meat, but
cast such into prison that has neither hired them nor set them to work, is
this according to the Law; Do unto another as you would have them do unto you;
is not this practice both below the law and the Gospel, let the Priests and
Teachers of all sorts and people consider, Secondly. you Teachers say, Who
goes a warfare at his own Charge?

But what is your warfare, who tells the people here is no victory, nor
overcoming the enemy on this side the Grave, and others say they must have a
Purgatory to cleanse them when they are dead, then who would be at charge to
maintain such Warriors; seeing they must be slaves to carry the Devils body of
death, and body of Sin to the Grave; and other Warriors say, they must have a
purgatory when they are dead, surely these cannot be the lambs Warriors who
make War in Righteousness; and the lamb and the Saints have the victory over
the Devil and his Works; Then they must needs be the Devils Warriors that say
there is no victory on this side the Grave; But they must carry the Devils body
of death and sin to the Grave: and others say they must have a purgatory when
they are dead to cleanse them in, so such are the Devils Warriors and not
Christ's.

Thirdly, You say, Who planteth a vineyard and eats not the Fruit thereof?
But how can you plant a vineyard who say you have not the same power and the
Holy Ghost which the Apostles had, for if you had the same Holy Ghost and Power
the Apostles had, you might eat of the vineyard which you had planted, and the
Apostle does not say that you might eat of other vineyards, by force and
violence, which you have not Planted, but is not this a Heavenly and a
Spiritual Plantation; That is Planted by the Power and Holy Ghost the Apostles
were in, which Plantation brings forth Spiritual fruit: But how can you plant
a vineyard and do not own the true light which is the life in the word, which
enlighteneth every man that comes into the World; for without the light of
Christ they are Spiritually blind, and The natural man knows not the things
of God, for they are foolishness to him; and therefore such are not like to
plant vineyards for God.

And again you teachers say, Who feeds a Flock and eats not of the Milk
thereof; Now they that feeds this flock which the Apostle speaks of; it
must be with the same Power and Holy Ghost the Apostles were in; and who with
it feeds their flocks with Spiritual food, as the Apostle did, who writes to
the Corinthians his flock, which were Babes in Christ; but the Apostle does not
say, nor tell you, that you should eat of the Milk of other flocks by force and
cruelty, which you do not feed, and wring Milk out of them whether they will or
no; and cast other flocks into Prison, because they will not give you Milk,
that you do not feed, this is contrary to the law and the Gospel also; and
below the Preachers and Doers of the law, which is not, To do unto others as
you would have them do unto you; and likewise you Teachers say and have said to
us; Thou shall not Muzzel the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, etc.
Now ye teachers consider you say that people must carry a body of death, and a
body of sin to the Grave with them, and there is no perfection on this side the
Grave; and other Teachers say they must have a purgatory to cleanse them, when
they are dead, from sin, and now none of you can gainsay but that a body of
death, and a body of sin is Chaff; and that which people must be cleansed from
is Chaff; and the Corn or Wheat that is to be trodden out of this Chaff, is Gods
Corn or Seed; that comes into his Barnes or Barn, and therefore how can you be
said to tread out the Corn, when people must have a body of death, and sin to
the Grave, and a purgatory when they are dead to cleanse them in, from their
Chaff; therefore how can you be the Oxen the Apostle speaks of, to tread out
the Corn; when you plead for Chaff as long as people lives; and when they are
dead also, then they must be cleansed from it, is not Gods Corn or Seeds
perfect that they tread out; but the Apostle tells the Saints that was Gods
Corn or Seed (which they had trodden out) Ye are complete in Christ who is the
Head of all principalitys and power; In whom also ye are circumcised, (Mark)
are with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh; by the Circumcision of Christ, seeing that ye have put off
the Old Man with his deeds, and have put on the new man which is renewed in
knowledge; after the Image of him that created him; and buried with Christ in
baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation
of God; who raised Christ from the Dead; here it is clear the Apostles with the
Power and Spirit of Christ had trodden the Corn out of the Chaff, and this was
before they went to the Grave; but while they were upon the Earth, and such
when they put off their earthly Tabernacle they slept in Jesus and die in the
Lord, and are blessed, etc.

And again you Teachers say, He that plows, ploweth in Hope; But how have you
plowed in hope, when you say that people must have a body of death, and a body
of the sins of the flesh to the Grave, and others say they must have a
purgatory to cleanse them from sin when they are dead, then have not all you
Oxen trodden in vain, and Plowed in vain, that you have not gotten out Corn to
Sow your fallow ground; and does not all your ground lie fallow with Weeds,
Briers, and Thistles; for is not sin and death compared to such, and is not
your fallow ground full of such, that bears no fruit to God, but the Apostles
who trod out the Corn and Plowed with the power and spirit of God; by which
many were begotten to God, and lead by his Spirit, and were the Sons and
Daughters of God, and were born again not of corruptible seed, but of the
incorruptible, by the word of God, and a Chosen Generatiration, a Royal
Priesthood and a holy Nation, a Peculiar people who were called out of
Darkness into his mavelous Light; and as living stones are built up a
Spiritual household (Mark are) an holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; and this condition of the Saints
was attained while they were upon the Earth.

And again you say, He that thresheth in hope shall be partaker of his hope;
Now here you may see as before mentioned, that the Apostles that thresht in
hope with the power of God and his Holy Ghost, they were partakers of their
hope, but you that say people must have a body of death, and a body of the sins
of the flesh to the Grave, and must have a Chaff purgatory to cleanse them when
they are dead, from sin which is the Chaff; and that you have not the same
power and Holy Ghost that the Apostles had, then with your unclean Ghost and
Power you have thresht in vain, and got out no Corn, and so are not partakers
of that purifying hope which John, speaks of, that purifies even as he is pure.

And again you Teachers say; If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a
great thing if we shall reap your carnal things; But how can you say, that you
sow Spiritual things to the people as the Apostles did, when you say that you
have not the same power and Holy Ghost that the Apostles had; But you say that
people must have a body of death, and sins of the flesh to the Grave, and there
is no perfection on this side the Grave, and others say they must have a
Purgatory to cleanse them from sin when they are dead, so in this you sow evil
things from the evil one, not Spiritual things from the Spiritual one; and are
the Ministers of the letter, and sow to the flesh, and of the flesh you may
reap great Crops of corruptions, of your fallow Fields, and the Apostles were
made able Ministers of the Spirit, and sowed to the Spirit (to wit) the Spirit
of God in people, and of the Spirit they reapt Life eternal, and what can you
sow that have not the same power and Holy Ghost (that the Apostles had, with
your unclean Ghost and power) but sin and death to the body of sin and death;
which you have from the devil the power of death, and Weeds, Thistles, and
Brambles, upon your fallow ground; for to preach up a body of death and sins of
the flesh, and Imperfection to the Grave, and others to preach up a purgatory
to cleanse them from sin when they are dead, this is neither to preach the law
of God nor his Gospel.

And again, They which Ministered about holy things live of the things of the
Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers of the Altar; So has
the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel,
but the Apostles tells you in these words, and says, I have used none of these
things, neither have I written these things that it should be so done unto me,
etc. Verily that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ
without charge, that I abuse not my Power in the Gospel, so here you may see an
example. Have you used none of these things, nor written that these things
should be done unto you? have you made the Gospel of Christ Jesus without
charge? let your practice and the people that hears you speak, whether this
Scripture be your rule as you say or no, the Apostle says, Be you followers of
me, even as I also am of Christ; Have you Teachers in Christendom been the
followers of the Apostle as he was of Christ, who said, He sought not his own
profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved.

But have not you Ministers of Christendom sought your own profit, after Tithes
and great Parsonages, more than the profit of people, that they might be saved.

But I return to the matter again, They that Ministered about the holy things,
lived of the things of the temple; and they that waited at the Altar are
partakers with the Altar; Now these were outward things that the Jews lived on,
but you will confess those outward Altars or Temples and things were figures of
the heavenly Temple, and Altar in the New Testament, so the Lord has ordained
that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, now the Apostle
said, that The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto Salvation, to every
one that believes; So they that live of the Gospel lives of the power of God.

And again the Apostle says, The Gospel was sent down from Heaven by the Holy
Ghost, and Christ said unto his Disciples, when he gave them Commission to
preach, Freely you have received, freely give, Mat. 10. and the Apostle said, I
have preached to you the Gospel of God freely.

And again the Apostle said, They had received the Spirit which is of God, that
we may know the things that are freely given to us of God, and God that spared
not his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things; So here you may see God and Christ did give freely
to their Apostles, and therefore they were freely to give; and whatsoever City
or House they entered, and they that received them they were to eat and drink
such things as they set before them: For the Labourer is worthy of his hire:
And the workman is worthy of his meat. Go not from house to house, so hear you
may see what the Laborers hire was, to eat and drink such things as were set
before them, they were not to Go from house to house, then they were not like
to go from Parish to Parish, for a Bigger benefit, and they that would not
receive them, nor hear them, They were to shake the dust off their feet against
them, and go their ways, so then they were not to go to the Magistrates and
complain against them, and get a warrant to have them before the Magistrates,
for them to send them to prison, for that practice is not the Gospel of Christ.

G. Fox.
From South-gate 1682.
THE END.
Books Sold by Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, Book seller.
WIlliam Penn's No Cross, no Crown. Barclay's Apology in English. -- in Latin.
Case of Protestant Dissenters. William Shewen's true Christian Faith. Stephen
Crisp's Epistle of Caution. Mather's Manual for Young Men. Cabbalistical
Dialogue. Midnight Thoughts. Dying Words of an Indian King in America. Thomas
Ellwood's Antidote against Will. Rogers. The Cause why Adam and Eve were driven
out of Paradise, and the Jews out of their own Land.

