ENGLANDS SAD Estate and Condition LAMENTED, IN THIS JUST COMPLAINT, Taken up
against the greatest part of her Inhabitants, Because of their great
Abominations, and Treacherous Dealings, both with God and Man; For which Cause
the Terrible and Righteous Judgments of the Lord are coming upon them, and the
Land.

WHEREIN Is also contained some PROPHECIES and EXHORTATIONS.

By George Fox, the Younger.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmil in
Martins le Grand, 1661.

ENGLANDS Sad Estate and Condition, LAMENTED, etc.
OH ENGLAND, England! The Abominations of the greatest part of thy Inhabitants,
who can declare them! They have reached Heaven, so as they are come up before
the Lord, the Jealous God; and Woe unto that part of thy Inhabitants, who have
sinned out the Day of their Visitation, and have wholly slighted the Day of
God's patience, and long Forbearance, and would have none of his Reproof, but
have altogether rejected the same, and have made a mock at Sin, and have
sported themselves with their own Deceivings and Lusts, and have gone a Whoring
from under the God of their Lives: Wherefore thus says the Lord, the only
God; I will make such become a Hissing and Reproach, and my Anger they shall
not be able to Escape, because of their provoking Abominations, and Treacherous
Dealings both with Me and Man.

Oh England, England! How have, and yet do, a great part of thy Inhabitants
Rush into Idolatry, and all manner of Profaness and grievous Abominations, even
as the Horse and Mighty Rush into the Battle! How do they drink in Iniquity
even as the Ox, or Parched Ground, drinks in Water! Oh! What manner of
Lamentation shall I make for thee, my Native Country! Or, What manner of
Complaint may I take up against a great part of thine Inhabitants, who have
long Sought, and yet seek thy Ruin and Destruction! Verily, their Actions have
Declared them to be like the Inhabitants of Sodom; Yea, their sins have rendered
them to be as bad as those of Gomorrah. O they have Vexed the Righteous Soul;
Yea, and they have Grieved the Spirit of the Lord from Day to Day with their
Unjust Conversations. They have multiplied their Transgressions, and heaped up
their Iniquities till they are become as the Sand on the Seashore without
Number. Oh! The Lord has long striven with them; yea, He has also long born
their Iniquities, He would have gathered them to himself out of their
Abominations, Yea, he would often have healed them, But they would not; but they
have stiffned their Necks, and hardened their Hearts against the Lord and his
Counsel day after day, and have chosen their own ways and works even to their
own hurt, and would by no means be reclaimed; for when the Lord has reproved
them (by the Light of his Son in their own consciences) and set their sins in
order before their eyes, they have stopped their Ears, and closed their Eyes,
and wilfully Rebelled against the Power of God, and trampled upon his Witness
[the Light in them] as a thing of naught, counting it not worth the taking
Notice of. And when the Lord has raised up Prophets, Children, and Servants,
and sent them out, Commanding them to lift up their Voices like Trumpets, to
show the People their Transgressions, and to preach Repentance and Amendment of
Life: Yea, to warn and exhort them to turn from their Sins to God, and to lay
before them their great Abominations, and to Prophecy what should come upon
them, if they would not turn from the evil of their Doings. Oh! how have a
great part of thy Inhabitants Scorned, and Derided these! Yea, how have many of
thine Inhabitants Beaten, Whipped, Stock't, Stoned, and Imprisoned some of these
till Death, for bearing their Testimony for the Lord against a crooked and
perverse Generation, who hate such as speak uprightly, and abhor such as
reprove Sin in the Gate, that so it is even thus come to pass in thee, O
England, That he that departs from Iniquity, makes himself a Prey to this
Generation of Evil doers, whose hearts are set upon their Lu^ts, Idolatry, and
grievous Abominations! and the Lord has beheld it, and it pleases him,
because there is no true Judgment: for these Evil doers are all gone out of
the way; yea there is none of them that regard to do the thing that is Ju^t and
Good, any further than it may be advantageous to their own Corrupt Designs.

Oh England, England! How often has the Lord God smote thy Rulers and Mighty,
and Proud Men! how often has he laid their Honor in the Dust! Yea, How often has
he Overturned and Confounded thy Mighty Men, even thy Men of War, with thy
Princes, Nobles, and Captains of Thousands, Hundreds, and Fifties! O how often
has he Overturned thy Governments, and Changed thy Governors! But how few of
them have so Regarded the Outgoings of the Lord in all these things as they
ought to have done? And how few of them have rightly Weighed and Considered the
Causes for which the Lord has brought or suffered so many Changes in the Land?
Or, have those who saw the Causes that provoked the Lord of Hosts thus to Act,
labored so to remove them as they ought to do (or might) have done? Nay,
Assuredly they have not; for the Lusts of this World, and the Pride of Life
has blinded the minds of most; and such who have seen what their Duty was, the
honor of this World, and that cursed Self-intere^t has stopped and hindered
most of them from doing those things which they saw they ought (and which they
had opportunity also) to have done. Oh! How have the new Governors in almost
every Change of late, cried out of the Tyranny and great Oppression of those
whom they did Succeed? and, how have most of them Vowed unto God, Declared to,
and Promised the People, That they would Remove the Burdens and Oppressions
that the foregoing Rulers had Laid, and Continued upon them: But alas! very few
of them, have regarded their Vows, Declarations, and Promises, either to God
or Man; but in Treachery and Deceit have they gone on, Serving themselves and
their own Lusts, and not the Lord nor their Generation faithfully: For,
although many of them have been very large in Promises and Good Words (whereby
they have long sought to Deceive the hearts of the People) yet it is but very
Little that has been done for their true Liberty; because that wicked Spirit,
which seeks to make it self great by the Ruin of others, has Ruled, and
does yet Rule, in the hearts of many Rulers; and this is of the Devourer and
Destroyer, who cannot forgive Enemies, but Cries out of Rebellion and Treason,
laboring to exasperate the Spirits of Others, that so occasions may be gotten,
if possible, against them, thereby to bring them under, and keep them in
Bondage.

Oh England, England! Such is thy sad Estate and Condition, that several of
thy Rulers are; and have been, as roaring Lions, even greedy to Devour; And
many of thy Teachers have been, and yet are, like Troops of Robbers, Robbing
and Spoiling of many of thine Inhabitants. Oh! How have most of thy Prie^ts
Temporized, and Daubed with every Power, as they have come up in the many
Changes! How have they increased Envy, Wars, and Destructions, amongst thy
Rulers and People! How have they one time Cried up, and Prayed for the same
Thing, which, at another time, they have Cried down, and Prayed against! Oh!
Who shall ever believe them? Their god is their Belly; and who is it that many
of them would not Join unto, if thereby they might be upheld in Pride,
Idleness, and Fullness? How often would they Change again and again? And what
Idolatry is there that many of them would not Run into for their Bellies sake?
Ah poor Nation! Are they not yet striving to kindle a Flame within thy Bowels?
Has not the Lord divided them? and, are they not laboring with all their
might to Divide and Rend thy Inhabitants yet more and more? Yea, surely, and it
is Just with the Lord to suffer it to be so; because of the greatness of their
Abominations, which are daily increased.

Ah poor Land! How art thou overspread with Wasters and Spoilers! who like
Caterpillars devour thy Pleasant Fruit. Oh! the Whoredoms and Idolatries, that
are daily committed and acted in thee, Who can Declare them! Oh! thy Chief
City, thy Chief City, that bloody City! Can its Abominations be Paralleled in
the Earth! Surely it has Exceeded Sodom in Wickedness. The Lord is very Angry
with a great part of its Inhabitants, and his Vengeance is nigh to come upon
them. Woe unto you Whoremongers, Drunkards, Gluttons, Swearers, Cursers,
Blasphemers, Cheaters, and Idolaters! Woe unto you, Proud, Wanton, and Profane,
Vain Persons! Woe unto you, Mountebanks, Stage Players, Bear-batters, Gamsters,
and all manner of Abominable Workers, and you that Build up Towers, Scaffolds,
and Vain Heathenish Representations and such like; and make and garnish Images,
to draw peoples minds after Idolatry, and for your Cursed Gain and Lusts, in
pretense of Honoring your King. Oh! How are people drawn into Gazing and
Wondering after these Abominations! It grieveth the Righteous Soul to behold
such great Wickedness! Oh! You Wicked and Abominable Workers, and Devourers of
the Creation! The Lord God will meet with you in a time when ye are little
aware of Him, He Will Stain your Pride, Vain Glory and Idolatry, and give you your
Portion amongst Devourers (except you speedily Repent) and your Abetters,
Strengthners, and Helpers forward of such Ungodliness (that do it knowingly)
and Delighters therein, The Lord will not acquit you, He Will smite you for these
things, and that right soon. O! Ye, Idolatrous people, Do you think, that the
Lord God of Pity and Patience, suffered your King to Hide himself from his
Enemies in an Oak, for that end, that ye might Devour his Creatures in making
an Idol of it? Is this the use you make of that which you say was Gods Mercy
toward you? Is not this the way to turn those things, that might have been
Mercies to you, into Plagues and Judgments? Oh! How do you Daily provoke the
Lord against Your selves, and your King? Oh! You Wicked Workers, How dare you
make Representations of Destruction and Ruin? How dare you make a Sport of
such things? Verily, your Provocations are great, wherewith you provoke the
Just God; And it will be Just with him to bring Ruin, Desolation, and
Destruction upon you and your City; Verily, great is the Judgment that is nigh
you, and your sins draw it on you apace. Do you think that the Lord cast out
Back-sliders, Hypocrites, and Unfaithful men, to set up and establish Idolaters
and open Profane persons? Nay surely: Therefore Tremble ye Wicked Workers, and
Howl ye Profane Idolaters, for the Mighty and Terrible day of the Lord is near
to break out upon you. Thus says the Lord God, I Will Scat^e^, I Will Scatter,
I Will Split, Divide, and Separate: I Will Break and Dash to Pieces, and none shall
be able to Gather, Bind up, or Join together: For mine Anger is kindled, and my
Jealouse shall burn till I have devoured mine Enemies, says the Lord.

Therefore ye people of England (that yet live in wickedness) who have not
wholly finned out the day of your Visitation, To you I now speak; You that seel
the Lord yet striving with you; O Return, Return speedily unto the
Manifestation of his Spirit, whereby he strives with you, to show you your
Abominations, and to draw and lead you out of the same; O be not still
Stiff-necked, but hearken to the Word of the Lord, which shows you the
thoughts and Intents of your Hearts, and hearken and be obedient to the Call
thereof, that so by its power you may Hasten out of Babylon, both Young and
Old, Rich and Poor, High and Low, Noble or Ignoble, Professor or Profane, who
yet are there; For the Lords Controversy is great with Babylon her Merchants,
and Inhabitants, and he will not much longer spare, but he will suddenly smi^e,
and none shall be able to hinder his stroke: Yea, yea he will wound and none
shall be able to heal; For the measure of her Iniquities, Idolatries, and
Whoredoms are nigh full, and the Wine of her Fornications, has caused the
Fatts to overflow, and she is come up into remembrance before the Lord the Just
God, who will Plague her and all her Merchants and Inhabitants according to
their Abominations, whereby they have grievously provoked Him. Therefore, come
out of her, whilst Mercy and Time is offered, lest you perish with her in her
Judgments, which the Lord is Strongly and Swiftly bringing upon her.

Oh England, England! A day of Sorrow and Calamity is comeing upon many of thy
Inhabitants, I have long been sensible of it; even a day of such Breaking,
Confusion and Judgment, as has not been for a long space; For thy People have
Wearied out the Lord with their Iniquities, and grieved his holy Spirit with
their Abominations, days without number.

On England, England! The Lord has a Precious and Holy Seed in thee; Yea, He
has a Remnant; which he has Raised by his Power to, and for himself, which
are exceeding precious in his sight; and these a great part of thine
Inhabitants have Shamefully entreated, and grievously oppressed, and
persecuted; And they have Patiently born the same, and have labored in the
Life of Innocence, and Spirit of Emanuel, to Inform thy Rulers and People in
the Things that are Just and True, and have shown them the Ways which have,
and do Displease the Lord, and have Exhorted and Warned thy Inhabitants, Time
after Time: But notwithstanding their Doctrine, Lives, and Conversations have
manifested their Innocence and Vprightness of Hear^ before God and Man, Yet
have many of thy Rulers, Priests, and People, Oppressed them more and more;
Some Spoiling their Goods, others Imprisoning their Bodies, in filthy Holes and
Dungeons, till Several of them have Sealed their Testimony for the Lord with
their Blood, which cries for Vengeance in the Ears of the Almighty, and the
Lord has heard the Cry thereof, and has looked down and beheld the Actings of
the sons of men, and he is near to Visit; Yea, the Lord has beheld, and does
behold, the Snares that have been, and are laid for the Innocent, who have no
other Helper but him alone; and therefore they have Committed their Cause unto
Him who shall bring it to pass: Yea, he has taken Notice, how several of thy
Rulers have combined together, and endeavored to Force His Babes to Violate
his Royal Law, and to Break his Command (who says, Swear not at all) to Uphold
and Obey theirs, which is Contrary to his; Yea, He has taken Notice of the
Cruel Sufferings; and great Temptations of his People, who, many of them, are
yet Imprisoned; and both their Bodies and Estates threatened to be Destroyed (by
some evil men) if they will not break the Royal Law and Commandment of Christ,
which he has placed in their hearts to Obey and Do. Oh! The Lord has seen the
Partiality and evil Intents of several of the Judges and Rulers of this Land,
who have had Power to let the Innocent go free, and yet keep many of his
Ministers and Servants (many of which have outward Estates) Prisoners in many
places; although they have no more against them, than against those whom they
have turned forth, which is nothing else but for their Obeying the Command of
Christ in them, (who this day says unto his People, Swear not at all, as he
said to his Disciples formerly) and for meeting together, and Speaking and
Praying in his Name, for the Edifying, Comforting and Building up one another
in their most holy Faith. The Lord has also taken notice, that when some of
the Rulers might Relieve the Innocent, and let the Oppressed go free, they will
not; and then to cover themselves, they will say, They cannot act contrary to
the Law: But when a Ruler will act that which he has no Law for; he can then
plead a Prerogateve Royal for that: and thus are the innocent Lambs of Christ
made a Prey upon.

Oh! the Oppressions of his People, and others, are great this day in thee, O
Land; and the Crying of the Fatherless, the Widows and the Needy is come up
before the Lord God of Compassion, who will thoroughly plead the Cause of his
People, and the Poor and Needy of the Land.

Oh England, England! I have often heard and treasured up what the Lord has said
in me, concerning thy Inhabitants; but now must I declare it in the Appointed
Season, Thus has the Lord spoken in me for a long time, concerning thy
Inhabitants, saying, The People are too many, the People are too many; I will
thin them, I will thin them: [Mark] that is, He will make them fewer, for they
cumber the Ground. And the Spirit of the Lord has often signified unto me, for a
long time, That an Overflowing Scourge, yea, even an exceeding great and
terrible Judgment is to come upon thee, O Land! and that many in thee shall
fall and be taken away in the Judgment; and the Spirit of the Lord signifies
unto me, that the time draws nigh, and that the Decree of the Lord is so
firm, that though some of the Lords Children and Prophets could appear so, as
to stand in the Gap, yet should not that alter his Decree, only in the
Righteousness of the Lamb they shall be hid and saved from his Wrath, what ever
may be done to any of their Bodies; but his fierce Wrath and Indignation shall
be poured forth upon the Ungodly, and a great Desolation and Destruction shall
there be; for he will overturn and overturn, till he has dis-throned and
thrown down the Man of Sin, and exalted and established the Kingdom of his Dear
Son, over all the Kingdoms of the World; and the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the Holy
People, the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, who is King of Saints.

Behold, ye Despisers, and Wonder! This is the Work which the Lord will
accomplish by his own Power, though you will in no wise believe it; but you
shall feel, even both Hypocrites and Profane, that the Lord is able to bring
to pass the thing that is in his heart.

And you who now think to set up and establish your Idolatry, and to live in
Pzophaness without control; and you who appear so hot against some of these
things, and labor to stop and pull them down (mark) that you might set up and
establish your own Hypocritical Will Worship in another dark dead Form, I will
frustrate you both, says the Lord God, and you shall grind and waste one
against another, as the upper and nether Millstone; And I will pluck out from
you, and preserve a holy Seed, beyond expectation; and I will be avenged on you
for that which you have already bruised, or shall yet bruise [mark] And I will
hurry and hurl you round with a mighty Stream; for the Waters shall roar and
swell: And after I have executed my vengeance upon the Rebellious and
Treacherous Dealers, I will then bring forth the Remnant of my Holy Seed, which
shall be preserved from their Fury, and they shall spread over all, in my Life,
Power Knowledge and Wisdom, wherein they shall stand in Dominion; Yea, and they
shall rule the Earth in Mercy, Justice, and true Judgment; and they shall
forgive and love their Enemies (as they do at this day) and do the thing that
is just and good unto all, without respect of persons; yea, they shall seek the
good of the whole Creation in the true love and self-denial; for the Spirit of
Love, Meekness, Healing and Restoring shall mightily fill their tender Bowels,
and my Blessings shall fill their Dwelling place, and the Earth, for their
saltes: these things will I accomplish by my own Power, and in my own time,
says the Lord God.

But although these things, touching the holy Remnant, shall certainly be
fulfilled in their Season, Yet before they be fully accomplished, great will be
the Trials of many of the Righteous, and there will be great Judgments
executed in thee, O land, by Him who oft-times makes a fruitful Land barren,
because of the Wickedness of them that dwell therein; and Just will it be with
Him to deal so with thee, because of the great wickedness of the greatest part
of thy Inhabitants, who are departed and separated from the Spirit of Mercy,
Love, Compassion and Healing, and are laboring to Devour, Oppress, and Destroy
one another, and the whole Creation.

Oh England, England! There is also a People in thee who are come to see the
Great Idolatry and Superstition, which many are now striving to revive and set
up in thee; yea, there is a People in thee, which see and believe that the
Worship which is now a setting up, with the Vain Music, Altars, Mass in
English, and the foolish needless Garments of the Priests, and such like Popish
stuff, that these things are Idolatry, Folly and Vanity and butia mocking of
God; and yet some of these People will run after this Vain Worship, for
self ends, stavish-fear, and to keep themselves in esteem with, or amongst
those who plead for it: And others there are in thee; who instead of being
sorrowful for such Abomination and Superstition, or reproving the Practicers
thereof in the solid, seasoned, savoury Life and holy Dread of the Lord God,
they write and speak scoffingly of those things, even to the stirring up one of
another into vain Laughter, and so make a Sport of others Idolatry; and this
grieveth the Spirit of the Lord also, and does not convince, but exasperate and
harden those that are zealous for their blind Worship and Superstition.

There are also a great number of brittle, fiery, rash, unsatisfied people in
thee, O Land, who are as unstable as Water, and these rebelling against the
Light, not knowing the way of it, because they abide not in the path thereof,
they are restless, rouling, and raging oft-times like the Sea; One time they
will have a Parliament, and cry out, They shall govern and heal them; and when
they have gotten them, in a short-time they grow weary of them: And then
another time, they will cry out for a King, and say, He shall heal them, and
make up their Breaches: But there people are not long of one mind, for they are
much like the Athenians, who spent their time in little else but either to tell
or to hear of some New thing: These People also are like mighty Tides in thy
Channels, O England, which one while run with Violence, driving all unsettled,
light, unfixed things one way, and shortly after run with as much violence the
contrary way: Therefore in a miserable condition are those Rulers whose
strength is in such a People! And until Rulers come to be settled, and fixed in
Him who is the Rock of Ages, and singly to rule in, and for Him, whom the Winds
and the Seas obey, who makes the Waters to stand on heaps, and divides them
hither and thither; and alters the natural course of Tides as he pleases (as
he has done thine of late, to show thee the Figure of the People) they can
never be safe, neither will the People be stilled long together; but there will
be Swellings, Ragings, Overflowings, sore Breakings and Ruins.

Oh! that the foregoing Rulers would have been persuaded to have Received Him
for their Teacher, who Rules in the Kingdoms of Men, then should they not
only have seen, what the Lord cast out others before them for, but they should
have been taught how to have denied all those things which the Lord was angry
with others for, and they should have received Power to have abstained from the
same; but they would not hear and obey the Lord, nor his Prophets, and
therefore were they cast out also.

And therefore, Oh! that the Rulers that now are, would be persuaded (whilst
they have their Day) by the Lord and his Servants, to receive the Lord Jesus
Christ, to be their King and Teacher, and then they should not only see for
what cause the Lord cast them out, and others in their Age, but they should be
taught to deny and forsake all those things which God was angry with them, and
others for, and they should receive Power to do those things, which they and
others before them left undone; But alas! How few are there that will Hear,
Regard, and Obey the Prince of Life and his Followers, and therefore is
Desolation coming as a mighty Flood, which none shall be able to stop.

Now all People, in what Sect or Opinion soever, in whom there are any true
Breathings and Desires after the Lord, and the way of his Holiness, Fear not,
neither be Dismayed, because of the Rage that you may yet see the Waters of the
Land in, and because of the Confusion and Cruelty of the People; But stand
still in that Life which begets Breathings and Thirstings in you after the
Lord, that you may come to see and feel his Salvation, and that you may be
gathered into that Patience, Meekness, Contentedness, Rest, Peace, and
Satisfaction, which many of the dear Lambs and Children of my Father are
gathered into, wherein they Lie down, and none can make them afraid, though
their Bodies and Estates be oppressed and abused. Oh! Stick not, Stick not in
your Forms without Power, neither Flee the Cross, any longer; but wait in the
True Simplicity, to feel God's hand of Tender Love, which he reaches forth to,
and manifests in you, to lead and guide your minds into his Pure Worship,
which is in the Spirit and in the Truth. Oh People! This is the Worship that he
will set up. He will be LORD and LAWGIVER in the Consciences of his People; and
those that will not be content that EMMANUEL should Reign over them, he will
Slay them with the Sword of the Spirit, The Words of his Mouth.

Oh! Hearken, hearken a little, and stand still, that you may bear the voice of
the True Shepherd in your own Hearts, who calls for Truth in the Inward
Parts, and he will discover what lodges Within, and He will show you the Way
wherein you should walk, and he will let you see what the Cross is unto, and He
will teach you when you are alone in your Beds, or wherever you are; if you
will receive Him who gives you Life and Breath, whose gentle Reproofs and
Instructions are the Way of Life.

Therefore you in whom the Breathings and Desires after the Lord are; Consult
not with Flesh and Blood, neither reason against the Cross, but submit to every
Appearance of Gods Power in you, which appears to Crucify the Fleshly Birth
and Nature; which has stood, and does stand in Rebellion and Enmity against
the Pure and Precious Life, and Requirings of the Lamb of God; that so that
Mind which is at enmity against God, and that Nature in you, which is
disobedient to his Commands in Spirit, may come to be Crucified, that so there
may be a Change Inwardly felt and witnessed, by the working of the mighty Power
of Christ in your Inward Parts; and then the Desires and Breathings which are
Begotten in you after Righteousness, they will be strengthened, and the
Teachings of the Almighty will be Truly known, and you believing in the Power,
you will receive Power to obey and Practice whatsoever the Lord shall* make
known unto you by his Spirit to be his Will and Requirings.

Oh People! Let the Dread of the Lord Seize upon your Spirits, in this the Day
of his Power, wherein he is Trying, Sifting and Winnowing the Nations, and wait
to feel that Life arise within you, which bears Testimony against all evil
within and without; that so ye may become more and more acquainted with the
Teachings, Drawings, and Leadings thereof, that thereby you may be drawn and
led out of those things which have kept your Souls in the Death, and hindered
you from enjoying the Pure Peace of God. And this know and consider; that all
that come to witness their Souls raised out of Death, and brought to enjoy the
Peace of God, they must Believe in the Life of the Quickening Spirit, which is
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who for Sin Condemns Sin in the Flesh,
and appears in the Inward Parts of man, to work out Sin and transgression,
(which has Separated from God) and so to make clean the heart and inside of
male and female.

Oh People! This is the Work of Christ the Son of God, even to make manifest
and destroy the Works of the Devil, and so to reconcile man unto God, by the
Virtue of his own Life, which he gave a Ransom for many; and blessed are all
those that believe in the Life of the Son of God, and feel and know it
manifested in their mortal flesh: for they shall witness the Power of it to
make all things new, and so their Souls will come up in the hand of God, and
his Peace will be Received and Enjoyed.

Oh people! Wait to know, and feel this Work of Christ within you, that so you
may be made able to Stand in the Judgment, and to Endure the Trial, and that
you may be Hid from the Wrath of the Lamb, which is night to come upon the
Rebellious. Oh! Consider this, Those that are his Followers, they come throw
many Tribulations, and their overcoming their Enemies is by his Blood, not by a
talk of it, but by the Virtue and Power of it sprinkled in their Hearts, which
washes and makes them White, Clean, and without Fault before God. Oh People
my Bowels yearn! my Bowels yearn toward you! whose Desires in any measure, are
after the Lord: O that you would now Return with all your hearts unto Him, and
obey the Voice of his Power in you; then should you be made able to stand, and
endure the fiery Trial which is come and coming. Oh! the Day hastens wherein
all Profession that is not grounded in the Life and Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ (whatever the show of it be) it will be so shaken, that an utter
Blasting and withering shall come upon it; and for that cause the Lord does,
and will yet suffer great Trials to come, both upon the Professors, and
Possessors of his Name; that so his Children [the Possessors] may be manifested
unto all, and discerned from all that are but Professors, though never so fair
and seemingly Covered; For all Coverings but what is of the Power and Spirit it
self, shall be too Narrow; and all that are not Covered with the Spirit and
Power of Emmanuel, their Shame and Nakedness shall appear more and more. This
is the Testimony which the Spirit and Word of Truth gives; therefore, He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear, before the day of his Visitation be wholly
past, and the things belonging to his Peace be hid from his Eyes: For yet a
little while and the Voice shall be, He that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; For the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with Flesh, but his
Plagues and Indignation shall be poured out upon such as will not be gathered
in the Day of his Patience, long Forbearance, and Free-Love; and He or She that
Loves Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, House, or Land, Liberty,
Honor, or any Thing more than the Life of the Lamb, shall be counted not
worthy of him, and plainly manifested so to be: Read this who can; and he that
can receive it, let him: For the Time draws nigh that these Sayings must be
fullfilled.

Printed the 13. of the Second Month.
THE END.

