Northern Memoirs, Calculated for the Meridian of SCOTLAND.

Wherein most or all of the Cities, Citadels, Seaports, Castles, Forts,
Fortresses, Rivers and Rivulets are compendiously described.

Together with choice Collections of Various Discoveries, Remarkable
Observations, Theological Notions, Political Axioms, National Intrigues,
Polemick Inferences, Contemplations, Speculations, and several curious and
industrious Inspections, lineally drawn from Antiquaries, and other noted and
intelligible Persons of Honor and Eminency.

To which is added, The Contemplative and Practical Angler, by way of
Diversion. With a Narrative of that dextrous and mysterious Art experimented in
England, and perfected in more remote and solitary Parts of Scotland.

By way of Dialogue.

Writ in the Year 1658, but not till now made public, By Richard Franck,
Philanthropus.

Plures necat Gula quam Gladius LONDON, Printed for the Author. To be sold by
Henry Mortclock at the Phoenix, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

To my worthy and honored Friend Mr. J. W. Merchant in London.
SIR,
AS this compendious Volume of my Northern Memoirs contains nothing of
Obscenity whereat I may Blush, so I hope no Absurdity worthy your reprehension:
Yet because modelized in the plain Methods of an English Dress, will perhaps
occasion the Sciolist to interpret me but a Junior Academian; And truly so he
may, if when to consider my slender Education. However, I have endeavored, as
much as in me lies, to avoid all Prolixity, and long Parentheses, which
possibly would relish unpleasant in your Ear; so have I abhorred repeated
Tautologies, lest fearing to nauseate and surfeit your Appetite.

For that end, Sir, I Will be brief in my Description of Scotland, and as concise
as possible, in my Contemplative Angler; so sum up both as compendiously as I
can. In Cambridg, it is true, I had my Education, but Travel having the
Ascendent over me, I afterward rambled the remote Northern Tracts of Scotland;
where, to admiration, I inspected that little Artick World, and every Angle of
it. It Is true, Travel always affected me, and to travel by Books, when nothing
else presented to transport me, was a solitary kind of Satisfaction, but no
Fruition. I must confess 'twas in an ill Juncture of Time, when the Nation was
alarmed by the fatal approach of an Intestine War (that perplexed my anxious
Thoughts with various Inquietudes) because then to see a preternatural Cloud
arise, that neither Men nor Counsels were prophetic enough to consult, whereby
to stop the Deluge of this hostile Inundation that threatened to involve the
Kingdom in Blood.

In this Dilemma I left the University to seek Umbrage in the City of London;
but my Retirements contributed equal trouble, for now a Smoke began to rise in
every Corner, and like a Meteor, it blazed out at last into fuliginous Flames,
that overspread the beautiful Prospect of Peace; which not only distracted the
Minds but the Manners of Men, because then to behold a Storm rise out of a
Calm, that not only threatened Prerogative and Privilege, but a National Exit,
unhappily calculated to compel the People to see their own Ruins wrapped up in
the Destiny of War. Where some, because never enough satisfied by being well,
endeavored by inadvertency to make themselves worse, and striking their
Breasts with their own Weapons, forced all the Kingdom to bleed at last. So
that now every Man runs to seek a Pleget to stanch, if possible, the reeking
Wound; yet no Man so propitious to find his own Cure, by which he fancied all
the rest incurable. That now so generally and epidemically the Kingdom was
diseased, that deliriated and distracted, they let one another Blood. Nor
stopped it here neither, for the cultivated Fields stained all over with English
Blood (beyond all precedent) bled, till the Life of that Non-such Charles
expired.

But now since England is so happily blessed under the prudent Conduct of a
valorous Prince (whose Heroic Virtues like a Corona surround him) presents me
an opportunity to step into Scotland, to examine there her remoter Stars, fed
by the vital Flames of our Southern Orb; supposing it no Riddle, to fancy any
Man ridiculous that holds up a Taper to illuminate the Sun: for if when to
consider, that the beautiful Cynthia sheds her Nocturnal Beam abroad, only to
sprinkle the Universe with cold Influences, from thence we conclude that the
Major Luminary ( viz. the Sun) adds to her Obscurity his bright Reflections,
since she of her self is but a borrowed Light, that can neither warm the World,
nor cherish it with Vegetation. But the Light of the Sun not only invigorates
the Creation with Light and Warmth, but is also a creational Good in the Ends
of Production.

Come then, whilst it is Day, let us step into Scotland, to rummage and rifle
her Rivers and Rivulets, and examine her flourishing Streams for entertainment;
there the Rocks and the Groves will be our solent Reception, and the Cities and
Citadels supply us with Accommodation; and there I fancy our Time will be well
enough spent to view the Country, and give a Description of all her
Curiosities: which I here present you, my worthy Patron, in this short
Narrative, not doubting your Clemency to absolve my stripling Muse, though not
Fleg enough to elevate it self to the lowest Elevations of your generous
Acceptance. But I Will do what I can in these Northern Tracts, to bring you a
Discovery of some of her Rarities, whose solitary Shades strike a Damp to my
Pen, because to behold there such unexpected Landskips, Meanders and Labyrinths
(which I frequently met with) as exposed my Resolution to a farther Progress,
whereby to discover all her Northern Gaities that shined so splendidly in every
Fir-wood, as also in her lofty domineering Hills, that over-top'd the
Submissive shady Dales, and overlooked the rapid Torrents of Rivers, and
pretty purling gliding Rivulets; where the polished Rocks, and imbellish'd
Fortifications, beyond belief, so surpised my Genius, that it puzzles me to
report these remote Curiosities.

For you are to consider, Sir, that the whole Tract of Scotland is but one
single Series of admirable Delights, notwithstanding the prejudicate Reports of
some Men that represent it otherwise. For if Eyesight be Argument convincing
enough to confirm a Truth, it enervates my Pen to describe Scotland's
Curiosities, which properly ought to fall under a more elegant Style to range
them in order for a better Discovery. For Scotland is not Europe's Vmbra, as
fictitiously imagined by some extravagant Wits: No, it is rather a legible fair
Draught of the beautiful Creation, dressed up with polished Rocks, pleasant
Savanas, flourishing Dales, deep and torpid Lakes, with shady Fir-Woods,
immerg'd with Rivers and gliding Rivulets; where every Fountain o'reflows a
Valley, and every Ford superabounds with Fish. Where also the swelling
Mountains are covered with Sheep, and the marish Grounds strewed with Cattle;
whilst every Field is filled with Corn, and every Swamp swarms with Fowl. This,
in my Opinion, proclaims a Plenty, and presents Scotland, a Kingdom of
Prodigies and Products too, to allure Foreigners, and entertain Travelers.

So that now Scotland represents a Star that reflects a Beam on our Southern
Orb; but England is the Magnet that attracts this Northern Chalybs by sweet
Influences, (and mild Condescensions) whereby the Fruits of Peace and
Tranquillity protrude, and bud up to unite Interests in one another. The Orbs
were made for the Erratick Stars; and every Star as a lesser Orb (destinated
for Light and Discovery) renders the Creation beautiful to excess, by Divine
Appointment of the Divinest. For the Sun we see is not impaired, because to
lend us a Ray of Light; nor does it lessen Superiors (in any Degree) to
communicate their Virtues to influence Inferiors. Do Stars run retrograde to
make Subjects Slaves, when the whole Creation is but under subjection by divine
Condescension of the great Creator? Nor is there any thing of Slavery (save
only Servility) except Man who enslaves himself to his Lust; or by Tyranny
imposed upon his Fellow Creature. And now, Sir, I have done, in doing my Duty,
not only to my Country, but singly to your Self: give me leave therefore to
wind up my Epistle, and solicit Pardon if any thing be amiss; supposing my
Language runs harsh and rugged; but that I cannot help, because drawn from the
rough Draught of a Martial Pen, which shows my Style may be somewhat
unpolished. Nor can I flatter the Times, for I never was a Parasite nor a
Time-server; so that Errors excepted, I may hope a Pardon and an easy Penance
from so mild, so moderate and judicious a Patron, under whose Patronage I lodge
my Sentiments; and subscribe my self,

Worthy Sir, yours to serve you, Philanthropus.

A Dedication to the Virtuoso's of the Rod in Great-Britain's Metropolis, the
famous City of London.
GENTLEMEN,
I Was somewhat unwilling my Angler should pass the Press, till sedulously
examined by some of your Ingenious Society; and the rather, because it is
eminently known, that many amongst you are experienced Proficients, in the
Mystical Art and Intrigues of Angling: whose Approbation will indisputably
accommodate my Design, provided it come time enough, before my Angler encounter
the Press. However if it come short, I shall satisfy my self (as if already
confirmed) that you will please to embarque in these my solitary Examinations of
those Rivers and Rivulets in England and Scotland, where the Fields in Winter
are paved with Frost; yet are the Meadows in Summertime beautified with Greens,
and decked and adorned with redolent Sweets, that perfume the Air, whose
delightful Fords are furnished with Trout; and to advance Recreation, the
generous Race of Salmon: an entertainment perhaps not every where understood,
nor is it by every Angler (I persuade my self) thoroughly examined.

But, Gentlemen, I have brought you somewhat else; which for ought I know may
prove a friendly Diversion, if you please to inspect this Narrative and Survey
of Scotland, where perhaps you will meet with such Entertainment, as may not only
benefit, but in some measure delight you, after your Exercise of fishing for
Trout. What then if you step from the Waterside, and contemplate Nature; so
raising your Scenes, you will admire the Creator, in his rare and admirable
Creational Work; there you may see the Operation of Elements and stellate
Influences; there also you may see the curious and various Amalgamations of
Earth into Cristaline Forms, and Opacous Bodies; and there you may see how the
Luminaries are adapted Parents of polite Stones, Metals and Minerals: How
Vegetables also protrude and bud up, because impregnated with prolifick
Vegetation; and how the Principles naturally operate in Animals, inspired and
animated by the Soul of the World.

We have also considered some Moral Duties, in reference to Men of sober
Conversation: Nor are we altogether barren of Solitudes, and Divine
Contemplation. The Stars we consider as fiery Objects, and he that made them
thus gloriously to shine, made them also to influence and impregnate the
Universe: for God through Wisdom hung up aloft these bright, shining and
globical Bodies, whereby to illuminate this stupendous Creation; and that by
reason of their Rapidity and circular Rotation, they impregnate the Earth with
prolifick Virtue: and as we see the Stars surround the Earth, the Orbs beyond
dispute immure the Stars; but the Heavens encircling both the Orbs and
Elements, plainly demonstrate that from the Divinest, every created Individual
has both Ends and Means naturally and specifically appropriated to it self,
whereby to make it visible; and Visibility terminates in Time. Which Notion to
explain in a philosophical Sense, seems to imply, that both Matter and Form
results in their own proper and natural beginning. Know therefore that
Corruption is the Child of Putrefaction, and Putrefaction is the Prison and
Sepulcher of Death; Death therefore precedes the Resurrection, and the
Resurrection is the Clavis that opens Eternity.

But, Gentlemen, pray excuse me if I wander too far from the Waterside, to
gaze and admire these glorious Metaphors, the Divine Oracles of him that made
them, so not only lose my Opportunity of Angling, but endanger to lose my self
in these solitary Meanders; rarely frequented and trod by the Vulgar. Give me
leave therefore to retrieve my self, and introduct you into the slender Margin
of this my uncultivated Book; and examine the Volume, if provided any thing may
be found there worthy your ingenious Entertainment, or the general acceptance
of so splendid a Society, that gives Laws and Rules to all the Anglers in
England; that accommodates every County with Rods for Diversion, and inriches
every River with Hooks and Lines, that circumspectly prescribes Critical Hours
for Recreation, and consults both the Mean and Elevation of Angling, whereby to
augment and quicken the Spur of Pleasure. But I Am sorry I can raise my Scenes
no higher, to elevate this admirable Piscatorian Science, beyond the Elysium of
the Angler's Arcadia. For had I that preeminence of Pen and Fancy, to
illustrate what the Art of it self deservedly requires, I should impoverish
England, nay it may be all Europe, if not all the World, to select Expressions,
to express and decipher it is deserved Encomium. But finding my self unable to
accomplish this great Undertaking, I Will silently sit down satisfied, under the
Rhapsodies of Contemplation; inviting my Associates so to do, when encountering
the Rocks and Rivers for Recreation.

Now, Gentlemen, since Magnetism is so little known among Artists, I less blame
the indigency of those that know not how Nature by innare Quality attracts her
own Likeness, than other inconsiderate Rationals, that sport away their time in
pursuit of their Lusts. Let the Angler therefore (if he please) select
Contemplation, and pity such others that are destitute of those heavenly
Advantages, till the Strokes of Grace and a pious Example or Education, compel
them to write Memorandums of the glorious Creation, in the fair and legible
Copy-Book of Wisdom; so imitate Nature in her daily Progress, till ariving at
the Super-excellency of practical Christianity, which truly to know, is Wisdom
in the Abstract, that transmutes our Nature into Grace, and our Humanity into
Divinity. But this you will alledg is heavenly Transmutation; and so it is beyond
the Mediums and Discovery of Art, or the Indication of Nature (improper
therefore to introduce Undergraduats): It Is true, it is so; but what then?
cannot they omit the thoughts of Elements, to mingle sometimes their
Contemplations with things more sublime? Cannot they relinquish their Exercise,
to converse with heavenly Objects? This I advise to, and my Book will instruct
them.

Now I have given you a Platform for Contemplation, which opens the Windows of
the Mind to inspectulate (if possible) invisible Objects; but not to darken
your sight by gazing too much at the Sun; for the more amiable and illustrious
any thing is, the more astonishing is that thing, and ought therefore to be the
more admired, consequently desired, before the Methods of Industry, or the
lineal Progress of Art. But in as much as Angling is a great part of our
Business, let me admonish the more Ingenious Artist to be mindful of
Experience, lest peradventure he slide into the slippery Tract of an Author, so
unman himself of practical Demonstration. Against which Hypothesis I exhort the
Angler, whilst capable to trace the silver Sands, or florid Meadows of Thames
and Trent, to consort with Ingenuity amongst Rocks and Meanders, where probably
he may meet with his Friend,

Philanthropus.

A Dedication to the Academicks in Cambridg, the Place of my Nativity.
GENTLEMEN,
I Present you with a fair Opportunity to travel Scotland, and stay at Home:
but then you will lose the benefit of tracing those Northern Tracts, where you may
pick up admirable Curiosities in every Angle, because naturally replenished
with great Variety. But not that I commend the Country to flatter her
Inhabitants, nor intend I to exceed in my Method and Style, when only to
describe her Cities and Citadels, Towns and Castles, etc. For that End expect
an impartial Account from a Candid and (I would, if permitted, say) a Regular
Pen, that neither profits nor loses by imbellishing or demolishing either her
Towns, Cities, Forts or Fortifications.

But the longer I comment upon this Northern Subject, the more Arguments I
bring to convince the Incredulous, that Scotland's national Stores, and
commodious maritime Ports, will treat you with good Accommodation and civil
Entertainment. Nor do I seem to contradict my self, when modestly concluding
every impartial Examinant under the Persuasion of my Opinion: nor doubt I to
convince him, that shall hereafter trace her delightful Shores, and observe the
various and distinct Classes of her numberless Numbers of Fish and Fowl, her
lofty and domineering Mountains, and mountainous Ascents burdned with Firs, her
pleasant and fertile Fields filled with Corn, and her Meadows and Pastures
crowded with Herds of Cattle, but that he will conclude with me, that her
Cities and Seaports flourish under the Conduct of Trade and Navigation. And
where the gilded Highlands are the Lowlanders Prospect, and the Skirts of the
Hills sanctuary to the bordering Planes, shading her Plants from the fiery
Strokes of the Sun in Summer, that defends them against impetuous and
immoderate Cold in Winter, incident there to in regard so situated, that it
lies North Latitude near fifty nine Degrees, though reaching the Cusp of our
Southern Situations.

Formerly, I confess, I flattered my self with Scotland's Intemperance; but my
Opinion is otherwise now, because having sufficiently examined to the contrary,
and adjudg it an Error in any Man to denounce Sentence before Examination. Are
the Artick and Antartick Poles at variance, because of Distance and seemingly
contrary Actings? or stand they in opposition one to another, because
Aristotle's Philosophy could not reconcile them? Must it therefore follow that
there is no Correspondency, no Congruity nor Harmony betwixt them? when it is
evident they are exerted by the Universal Spirit of Nature, whereby they act
and react upon one another: else would the Tides of themselves stand still, and
because wanting Motion, the Ocean would stagnate, and at last result in
Putrefaction; so by consequence invite a new Creation.

Let Scotland therefore be England's Chalybs, and let England be unto Scotland
a Magnet to attract, contemporate, and mingle those Northern Severities, by
Southern softened Reflections of moderate Heat; lest peradventure the Rose
withers, and the Thistle meet with the fatal Stroke of the Syeth. Nature is but
one in all her Operations. So let these two famous and flourishing Kingdoms
survive their Enemies, whilst I strip off some of Scotland's sweetest Flowers,
to present them to Cambridg, the place of my Nativity, with this legitimate
fair One; intending her an Academian there, because I fancy in Time she may
grow a Proficient, when at present to appear so amiable in Rags; and probably
deserves better Ornaments than my slender Education is capable to give her,
whereby to manuduct her to point the Ground, till she her self treads the Stage
of the World, as her Heroic Ancestors have done before her.

In the mean time, let me flatter my self, that no Gentleman will be so
ingenteel to censure my Survey, because not lineally Artificial. I grant my
Methods might have been reformed by riper Judgments, and my Discourse placed in
better Order, which possibly merits a Reproof: but I have this for Answer, that
I Am but a young Practitioner in the Press; and because finding my self obliged
to conduct and pilot a Northern Princess ashore, I labored all I could to
bring her to the Borders, expecting some others in readiness there to give her
Entertainment. But I found my self defeated, and this beautiful fair One
neglected, notwithstanding all the Shores were crowded with Spectators, that
viewed and reviewed her modest Approaches, yet none had the Manners to bid her
Welcome. However, since she is come, I Will present her to the Angler that treads
the shady Tracts and beautiful Shores of Came: together with the rest of the
Fraternity of the Rod, that ramble the Margin of famous Thames, Trent, Severn,
Owse, Tweed, Tine, Eden, Ask, Dove, Darwin, Tees, Yor, Air, Need, etc.

Now since no Art more than Angling elevates and advances the generous Mind of
the Contemplative Angler, let me invite and encourage him to patrole the
solitary Streams of Trent, if he purpose to undergo the Toil of the Art, before
he publish himself an Artist: for the Practicks of Angling will not appear
legible, whilst the Theory remains paradoxically unintelligible, (here is a
Cipher pricked down instead of a Figure) so that should I emblazon or entitle
my self an Artist, or a Proficient of the Rod, how can I avoid running the
Risque of being reputed Ostentatious? On the other Hand, to remain silent after
the Periods of Forty Years Exercise, every Angler will censure me ignorant, and
my Silence interpret me wilfully obstinate. Thus I steer betwixt Sylla and
Charybdis. But as I cannot impede or hinder the Thoughts or Suggestions of any
Man, so by the Law of Retaliation, no Man ought to hinder or misinterpret my
modest Resolutions, when but to challenge the Degree of an Undergraduate in the
Art. Nor have I confidence to raise my Ambitions higher; than to superscribe my
self an Admirer of the Rod, and a Lover of silent and solitary Streams. Let my
Writings therefore remonstrate my Experiments, and my Experiments manifest my
Zeal for Solitudes, and my natural affection to the Place of my Nativity, which
can never be wanting whilst I Am in a capacity to speak or write my Name,

Philanthropus.

A Dedication to the Gentlemen Piscatorians Inhabiting in or near the sweet
Situations of Nottingham, North of Trent.
GENTELMEN,
IF to violate Faith (though but with Infidels) we forfeit not only our Reason,
but Religion; so not to dedicate some part of my Experiments to your Ingenious
Society, might justly prohibit me the freedom of tracing your flourishing
Fields and fragrant Meadows, inamel'd with Flowers, that perfume the beautiful
Suburbs of Trent; upon whose delightful Banks I formerly used to spend some
solitary Hours, in pursuit of the scaly Fry, and where the Plenty and sweet
Situations invited me not only to contemplate, but improve this mystical Art of
Angling: though it is true, the Rudiments (in the minority of Youth) were laid
in Came; yet Silver Trent's orient Streams graduated my juniour Experiments, by
unfolding her Meanders, and making obvious the Intrigues of her rapid Fords,
replenished with variety; nay so great variety of Fish, that only to express it
would almost bring Truth into Suspicion; when from the more profound and
solitary Deeps, the Artist (if expert) may summons up Lucit, and the generous
Race of Salmon.

But, Gentlemen, I am not Angling now, I Am only telling you those original
Motives to this solitary (and Piscatorian) Science, that grew up with me when
an Adult; for then I courted the shady Streams of Came; but Trent (as I told you
above) gave me Education. To Trent therefore (and the Place of my Nativity) I
direct my Influences, let Malice do its worst; nor are they extravagant
Notions, nor broken Fragments, collected from Foreign nor Domestic Authority,
but lineal and practical Experiments and Demonstrations, drawn up and
cultivated by the Mediums of Art, and the exact Methods of Observation; which
without vanity, I dedicate to your Society inhabiting the flourishing Ports of
Nottingham; which I doubt not you will accept of, though not much to enrich you;
however you may taste of those solitary Hours laboriously spent in
Great-Britain's Hellespont, (the famous Trent) where I used to refresh my self,
and ramble up and down her delightful Fords, to gratify and satisfy others as
well as my self with the Fruits of Experience. So that should I call Sea and
Land Elysium, it is not altogether improper so to do, since Earth and Water
complete but one Globe.

In those florid Fields, near the Fords of Trent, I frequently wandered up and
down to crop the Buds of Experience; yet I plundered no Man's Orchard to enrich
my Arbory, nor borrowed I other Men's Labors to adorn my Discoveries: the
Bounty of Heaven, that always blessed me with benevolent Success, restrained me
from rifling the Records of my Ancestors; when to put a Rod in my Hand, and
place a River before me: so that I should offer Violence to Reason and Art, if
now to consult the Authority of others, when such a large and legible Folio to
write by, as the great and stupendous Volume of the Creation; which to
contemplate, interprets the Divine Practice of Solitudes, and becomes not only
contributary to the present, but the future Generations.

To study Contemplation is the high way to Heaven, where the Suburbs consist of
a Divine Composition, and where you may read by those Oracles the Stars, the
beautiful Order of Celestial Bodies, and the great and lesser World all
Harmony; for Heaven and Earth are Correlates, which duly to contemplate, poises
our Passion, and baffles our Pride; which necessarily pursues the Footsteps of
Generation, as naturally as Rust follows Copper, which without dispute is the
Death of the Compound; consequently Tradition, if penitentially admitted, and
Ignorance opposed to the Mediums of Art; there uncultivated Arts present no
Dispondencies, nor need a Man solicit Reality in Practicks. But this I oppose,
and confidently assert, he that licks up the fabulous Fiction of slippery
Authority, to confirm his false and untenable Position, brings unsound
Arguments to prop and support the slender Faith his Opinion leans on; whereby
he exposes himself to Clamor and Reproach, and the Censure of every judicious
Examinant.

Give me leave therefore to remonstrate my Resolution, since the Arguments and
Allegations in my Book are my own. Yet had I robbed Virgil to adorn my Muse,
peradventure my Fancy had been more fruitful; but take it as it is, since so
freely dedicated to the Virtuosos of the Rod, from whom in modesty I may
reasonably expect some charitable Censures of this my Sober and Contemplative
Angler; advising them to direct to the Gnomen of Practicks, omitting Theory,
and the useless Prescriptions of the Ancients. Then shall no Man need to grope
the Invention of others, but manifest every Truth by plain Demonstration. Thus
far I may safely sail under the Angler's Protection: but should I write
Marginal Notes, and place them to the Test of unpractical Anglers, beyond
dispute I should split on a Rock, and wanting a Pilot to bring me off, I might
live without Hope, and die in Despair; which I resolve against, whilst capable
to write my Name,

Philanthropus.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
LET me manuduct you through the slender Margin of my uncultivated Book, to
contemplate the Evangelical Sweets of Reason and Religion, two requisite and
necessary Priniciples for a Christian. For since it has pleased God, through
infinite Mercy, to breathe into Man a rational Soul, whereby he was made Lord
of all the Creation, to govern and conduct the Creatures committed to his
Charge, with respect of Duty to his Sovereign Creator: this capacitates Man to
act prudentially; for imprudent Actions proceed from Rashness, and the
inconsiderate poize of Reason. So to be religious, it is the Christian's Corona,
that enables him to contemplate his present State and future Felicity: Which to
accomplish, he must cruciate himself with his Thoughts and his Lusts, and strip
himself of all imaginary Vanities, to ruminate how the certain uncertain State
of Mortality in a Moment breaks up and terminates in Death. And it is requisite
it be so, since the Body's Solution displays the Soul's glorious Ascension out
of this elementary Tabernacle of Earth and Clay; whereby with more vivacity she
may elevate her self on the Wing of Faith, by Divine Attraction, to those
glorious and invisible Exaltations: which beatifical Vision, no mortal Tongue
can well express, nor can Mortality conceive nor enjoy here, save only by a
Divine Faith, and a Holy and Heavenly Speculation.

Now, how necessary is the study and practice of Christianity, the true, noble,
and the heavenly Birth! For a Christian is such by Regeneration, and to be
regenerate is a Child of God; and a Child of God is a Saint here. For militant
Saints in Grace here, shall be triumphant Saints in Glory hereafter, made
beauteously to shine in the New Jerusalem, and wear the Royal Badg of Heaven,
and that is an immortal Angelical Crown; to which is affixed the Diadem of the
Divinest, in legible and intelligible Characters of the Cross. God in Love with
his own Image, beautifies and adorns the Soul with Immortality. It Is true,
Heaven knows no Limit nor Dimension; but Earth has Periods. With what
Circumspection therefore ought we to travel through this mortal Pilgrimage, to
the sacred Temple of Piety and Devotion, where the blessed Sweets of Eternity,
are perpetually tasted by contemplating a Preparation for Death. And what is
Death but the Key of Eternity? These and such like pious Considerations, lift
up the standard of the Mind to the Elevations of Contemplation. For if the
Progress of Life be but one single Scene of a Tragedy, of necessity the World
must be the Theater, Life the Prologue, Heaven the Design, and Death the Exit.
So not only to live, but to live well, imports a welldying; and to die to Sin,
is to live Eternally.

Thus whilst premeditating the Life of Solitudes, give me leave to publish to
the World this mystical Art, and the Intrigues of Angling; and because animated
by the Mediums of Experience, I thought it Argument good enough to gratify the
Age, and reward the Industirous with Trophies of the Art, which indeed is the
ultimate End and Period of Experiment. Now tell me a better Accommodation than
what naturally flows from solitary Hours solemnly dedicated to the Divinest;
when to discourse with Birds in shady Bowers, and converse with Fish in Rivers
and Rivulets; to obliterate the World and vain Conversation; so take our flight
as high as Heaven, by Divine Faith and Heavenly Contemplation: such a Life as
this explains the Angler not only a Monument of Patience, but Experience: so
that Ambition can never be a Bait to ensnare him, that already is delivered
from Pride, and the Arrests of Arrogance. O how sweetly does such a Man's
Habitation smell, whose Entertainment and Salutation is the Dialect of Peace,
where every Action, if thoroughly examined, reads harmonious Lectures of Concord
and Content, laboring what in him lies to stand a distance from this ambiguous
World, whilst the World pursues her flattering Admirers, and such only as
vainly heap up accursed Riches to perplex themselves, and blast Posterity. But
I fancy, and it may be but a Fancy, that some prevaricating Zoilist will
arraign my Hypothesis, and stigmatize Anglers (and the Art) with those black
Blemishes of Barbarity and Cruelty, when only designed to kill a Fish. To which
I reply, That the Creatures in the Creation (by Divine Appointment) were
appropriated for Use, and what may that Use be, if not the Refreshment and
Nourishment of Mankind? Adam had a Commission from the King of Heaven,
impowering him Lord over all sublunary Creatures. Will any one question this
Privilege? And Peter was commanded to arise, kill and eat; when doubting with
himself the Legality of the thing, who disputes this Commission? Now for any
Man to question these Divine Truths, (except a Banian) be questions the
Scriptures, the Authority of Truth. The Creatures in the Creation (we must
grant) were designed for Nutrition and Sustentation; yet no Man had a
Commission so large to take away Life upon no other account than to gratify his
Lust. Then the next Question arising will be, Whether the Rod or the Net is
rather to be approved of? I have only this to answer, (since both contribute to
Health and Maintenance) the Apostles themselves they used the one, why then may
not the Angler plead for the other?

Thus far I enter the Angler's List, and resolve to encounter this critical Age
by promulgating the Series of the Art of Angling. But to shape out Rods, twist
Lines, and appropriate Times and Seasons, with variety of Waters, and
sutability of Baits; as also the making of Instruments, arming of Hooks,
forming the accurate Proportion of Flies, shaping of Corks, staining of Quills,
forming of Swivels, and drawing out Wiers, besides casting of Plumbs, and
moulding of Shot, I resolve against; for it is nothing my Business, though a
Task neither intricate nor tedious to the several and various Artificers
pregnant in the Art. For that end you may dedicate your Opinion to what
scribbling Putationer you please; the Complete Angler, if you will, who tells
you of a tedious Fly Story, extravagantly collected from antiquated Authors,
such as Gesner, Dubravius, etc. but I rather commend you to famous Isaac
Owldham, whose Experiences sprung from the Academy of Trent: so did that
eminent Angler, George Merrils; and as eminent as he was John Fawlkner, whose
known Abilities to cultivate this Science (both for Directions and Manuels) I
modestly prefer before any other.

Yet how frequently is this Art promulged by Mudlers, and under the plausible
pretense of Anglers? when upon examine you will find them deficient in Practicks,
and indigent in the lineal and plain Tracts of Experience; yet so fortified
with Confidence and Ignorance, enough I declare to make an Artist blush, if
only but to hear them assert, that from one River in a Nation, all the rest may
be nationally understood: which preposterous impertinent Opinion, if I should
not publicly oppose, it would seem to confirm and assign me a Confederate with
the Rout and Rabble so ignorantly opinionated. But I shall offer my reason, to
avoid the suspicion of an Imposture, lest I be thought to traduce my Proselytes
into the extremes of an Error; otherwise I had shrouded my self under a
Taciturnity, had not I dreaded the Censure of other able and practical Anglers,
that in reason may expect a replication from me. For that end, I publish this
Treatise to the World, where my Arguments are synonymous, connect together like
Links in a Chain, in opposition to that inconsiderate Opinion, that by one
River all the Rivers in England, etc. may be included for Fish and Diversion.
Which is alike probable, that an Orchard without Cultivation, should produce
Foreign Fruit: or the Peak in Derbyshire, should assign us Gold instead of
Lead, or the Minera of Oar.

Now supposing this eminent difficulty resolved, yet some will be solicitous to
puzzle themselves about Baits and Seasons; so that I foresee it will aggravate
and fret their intoxicated Patience: Where note, such may search (as already
prenoted) in the moldy Records of Androvanus, Dubravius, Gesner, or Isaac
Walton, whose Authority to me seems alike authentic, as is the general Opinion
of the vulgar prophetic: for neither all nor one of them is an Oracle to me,
Experience is my Master, and Angling my Exercise; yet moderated so, that I
don't always employ my self with throwing in, nor haling out, as Pochers do,
that covet more than their Panniers contain; this makes the Sweet of their
Labors unprofitable, when the Angler only designs Diversion the final end of
his Recreation. However, somewhat of this Nature is expected from me, otherwise
the Prejudicate will conclude me ignorant, or affected with paucity: but I
shall prevent that Suspicion, by publishing to the World this Treatise of
Angling; wherein the Practicks are manifestly divulged, though the
Contemplative be but in part expressed. And what hinders (I pray you) to
withdraw sometimes from the trembling Streams of Trent, to dedicate your vacant
Hours to the Shrines of Solitudes; to sit upon Rocks, or in shady Groves; there
to contemplate the beautiful Creation, and meditate our present and eternal
furture State; so with a holy and reverentical Fear, call to mind the Creator
and Original of all Things; through whose Wisdom Kings rule, and Princes decree
Justice? But doubting some may want other moral Inducements, to such I have
brought a Glass of Morality, wherein they may view the World's state of
Inconstancy; but to the more religious and contemplative Angler, a Model of
Piety, ( Jacob will struggle hard for a Blessing) where be may see the
enamored and Seraphick Soul surmount the Ether, whilst Earthworms
like-Otters prey below upon Fish.

Now to such as love Travel, I have brought them History, but to such others as
love Fish and pleasant Waters, my Treatise: for the studious Geographer, here
are Cities and Countries, but for the active Engineer, Castles and Citadels.
Should thy Fancy be mean, here are shallow Brooks; deep Rivers require the
skilful Art of Swimming. Thus my Book seems a Mart, where a Man may trade for
Trifles, or merchandise for things of greater Value. The World is all Purchase,
and Death the Play Master. Think not therefore to naturalize Earth into Heaven,
since every thing adheres and partakes of its own Nature. I advise therefore
the Lovers of a solitary Life, to study Sobriety, Temperance, Patience and
Chastity; for these Divine Blessings are the Gift of God. So is Contemplation,
which never shines so clearly as when retired from the World and worldly
Encumbrances. Woods, Rocks, Grotta's, Groves, Rivers and Rivulets are Places
picked out for Contemplation; where you may consider Creational Work, and melt
with the warbling Notes of Philomel, and the innocent Harmony of musical Birds,
that deliciate the Air, and delight the Attention. Or you may proportion your
Meditations with the Pulse of the Ocean, or the soft and murmuring Complaints
of purling Streams, that imprint their Passions as they pass along, when
melting the smiling florid Banks.

Nature consults no Artificer to imbellish and adorn her illaborate Works; and
shall the God of Heaven, the great Creator, draw his Lines from the faint
Shadows of Nature? Pray but consider, who makes the Sea keep her regular
Motion, the Constellations their Rotations, and the erratick Stars roll in
their several Orbs? Are not all the Reins of Government in the Divine Hand of
him that made them? Is not the Christian's Diadem, and the Purchase of the
Cross there? Liberty and Freedom there? the sweet Tranquillity of Peace there?
the blessed Society of Saints and Angels there? Justice and Mercy there? the
results also of Life and Death there? And where shall we be found if not there,
in those everlasting Arms of Beatitude, that exert our Souls by the Divine Ray
of Contemplation?

Study Patience, practice Humility, and let Repentance be our daily Exercise;
since these with other Virtues, are Duties incumbent. Then may we sing
Hallelujahs at an Angelical pitch; and that is a strain above the World's Ela.
These, and such like Divine Impressions, we ought to imprint on our immortal
Minds, when with impatieney we pursue our Exercise, either to the River, or
solitary Lough. For the Taper burns, and the Thread of Life (because lap'd up
in this fine tiffany Web of Mortality) like a Meteor terminates sometimes in a
Blaze: Too late then to confer with Reason, or think of Religion. So farewell,
and be happy in the Rules of Friendship; but happier to live in the amiable
Arms of Virtue, ever honored, and admired, by thy Friend

Philanthropus.

To my Book.
GO, tell those Men that bait their Hook with Gain,
That plow the Hellespont, and cross the Main,
To fish for Gold in every muddy Pit,
And hourly wait for every paltry Bit;
That make their Shops the Fishponds, and the Fry,
Knacks of all sorts, to catch the Standers-by;
That trole with silver Hook, but use no Rod,
And freely strike, perchance the Line but nod:
That use no other Links than such as are
Composed of golden Threads, not Stone-horse-hair:
Such mudling Anglers, all the Baits they lay
Tempt nothing more than Arguments of Clay.
Not well consid'ring, all this while they paddle
In Craesus wealthy Ponds, their Eggs prove addle.
For when they come to scale their Fry, and Cook,
Every surprise reached them with silver Hook;
They must conclude more Fin than Fish was caught,
'Cause every Action proves an empty Thought.
Come, trace the Angler's footsteps, he will lead
Thy Genius to some Grove, or Rock: there feed
Thy thoughts with Contemplation; whilst most Men
Think such retirements but a Cave, or Den:
And I Will assure thee when thou come to know
Those Virtues that from Contemplation flow,
Thou surely wilt conclude the whole Creation
Was made for Man; Man, but for Contemplation.
Philanthropus.
To my Honored Friend Capt. Richard Franck, upon his Contemplative Angler.
I Am no Fisher,
But a Well-wisher
to the Game:
And as often as I look
And read in your Book,
so often I blame
My Minutes spent with frothy Recreation,
Whilst others live aloft by Contemplation.
Its true, sometimes I read
In Cambden and Speed,
and sometimes Mercator:
Yet in them I cannot spy
How the scaly Fry
floats in the Water.
We grant those Anglers were elaborate
To fish the World; but you the Anglers State.
John Richards.

To my Worthy and Honored Friend, Capt. R. F. on his Contemplative Angler.
SIR, you have taught the Angler that good Fashion
Not to catch Fish with Oaths, but Contemplation.
No Man that is Wise, but out of good Intention
Will hug your Plot, and well-contriv'd Invention.
To take the Fowl, and Fowler let alone;
That Is not the killing two Birds with one Stone.
But he that catches Fish, and Fisher too,
Has done as much as Man or Art can do.
Honor's the Bait for one; but silly Flies
Are mortal Engines for the scaly Fries.
And he that thinks to escape the present Danger,
Fastens himself, thinking to noose the Stranger.
For one or other's still caught in the Net
When Politicians have the Pool beset.
And haling to and fro, to fill their Dish,
Lites on a Chub perchance, or some such Fish,
That dies without Redemption, unless be
Amphibion-like, can live by Land, or Sea:
But in the Calms of silver silent Trent,
There Is no such danger in the Turnament.
For you may fish till Sunset, nay all Night,
Find but your Gamesters a fresh Appetite;
And that a Bait will do, when you would court
Your Game ashore, that dies to see the Sport.
Mercurius Hermon.

To my Honored Friend Capt. R. F. Author of the Contemplative Angler.
I Know, Ingenious Sir, that Sol's bright Rays
Make Tapers useless; so will be my Praise
Of this your Angler, for what I express
Can nothing add to that illustrious dress:
Except in this, as Colors dark, we know,
Cause brighter Colors far more bright to show.
The Garb it is clothed in, indeed is Rich;
Made up of neatest Ornaments of Speech;
Graced with most pleasant Fancy, and the Flowers
Of purest Elegance, picked at such Hours
When you have sat to hear the Muses sing
On the sweet Banks of the Castalian Spring:
Adorned with most curious Observations,
Ioin'd with most sober Contemplations:
Things both Divine and Moral, and withal
Pleasant Descriptions Geographical:
Full of Ingenious Variety,
Mixed here and there with dainty Poesy.
So that there is scarce a Line throughout the Book
That is not furnished with its Line and Hook,
With which the Reader will be caught, when is Eye
Is searching how to cheat the scaly Fry.
Ladies will make it their Companion,
And learn by it to fish in Hellicon.
Who, when that their fair Eyes shall chance to view
Your active Fancy, will with haste pursue
After the same, to see its utmost flight;
And so involve a progress of Delight.
Here Is nothing to offend their Eyes or Ears,
Nor fill their tender Breasts with dismal Fears.
No horrid Plots, nor base Conspiracies,
Nor noise of Arms from Mars his Nurseries:
No Fields of Blood, nor Air disturbed with Tones
Of harshest Discords sent from dying Groans.
Arnoldus, and Theophilus will lead
Them in more pleasant Paths: They now may tread
On Scottish Ground with Pleasure; for that Place
Looks brisk and fair, since you have washed its Face.
'Twill please them when they do behold the State
Of this new Structure bravely situate:
And then immediately they will fall in love
With that alluring, and delightful Grove;
And those harmonious Birds that sit and sing,
Whilst every pretty purling pleasant Spring
Does murmur as it glides, and loath to be
Deprived the Sweets of such Society.
Here may be found those virtuous harmless Sports,
That far transcend the Vanities of Courts.
Here may be seen each Hill's majestic Brow
Smile on the amorous Valley that is below.
Here may a Man enjoy such pleasant Naps,
As Poets have upon the Muses Laps:
Whilst gentle Zephyrus from Rosy Lips
Sends whispers, which through fragrant Bushes skips
Upon the gentle Streams, that glide away
Whilst Lambs do bleat, and pretty Fishes play.
And thus through paths that strewed with content,
You bring the Reader to the silver Trent,
Upon whose fertile Banks methinks I see
Apollo's Darlings making Melody:
Led by your Fancies thread from their own Spring,
And in delightful Tones sit sonneting:
Who when they mention you in their sweet Lays,
May the Angler echo your deserved Praise.
John Slator.

To my Honored Friend Capt. R. F. Author of the Contemplative Angler.
ATlas i have seen, and I have read your Book,
Where every Argument's a Line and Hook
To catch the curious Reader; let him throw
But to surprise the Fish, he is surpised too.
For whilst in shady Streams the Anglers watch
To catch the Fish, the silly Purdues caught.
Nay I have seen, when I have seen you spread
The trembling Streams with neither Silk nor Thread,
That you with Horse-Hair upon throwing in,
Has Fish surpised that never wagg'd a Fin.
Mussles in Trent, I Have seen them leave the Water,
And swim ashore as if 'twere them you sought for.
Cheese after Meat prohibits other Dishes,
And after Shellfish rarely other Fishes.
Now Anglers look about you, whilst you draw
Your Game ashore, and preach the Common Law
Of Destiny, as if it were a Favor
To sentence Death beyond all good behavior:
You know not but your selves in project may
Be angled for, whilst you devour the Prey.
If so, the Fisher with the Fish takes share,
And both alike their fortunes equal are.
Richard Johnson.

The Author to the Poet.
IT IS true, you do allow a Man may fish
In Trent's calm Streams, and complement his wish.
What then? were Trent all Fish, without content
I Would neither covet Fish, nor value Trent.
The glorious Eye of Speculation differs
From airy things that is hung about with Ciphers.
It Is not the Man that is Rich, it is the Mind
That makes him happy' cause it is unconfined.
Riches remonstrate horrid shades of Night
The Day puts off, which Phoebus puts to flight.
And Fear our flight pursues, so that where e're
We lodge our Fears, Death he brings up the Rear.
But Solace and Content, is such a Thing,
And so Divine; it is great Jehovah's Ring,
With which he weds the World, to make Earth's Portal
The Celebration of things more immortal.
For Heaven and Earth in unity repose,
From thence our Contemplation sweetly flows.
The great and lesser World's all Harmony;
The Spheres are vocal Pipes, Man's but the Key,
That when Jehovah's Fingers touch to play,
The ravished Soul shakes off this mould of Clay;
And hovering with her Wings, at last makes flight
Unto those endless Cords of true Delight.
Philanthropus.

A Brief DESCRIPTION of the Cities, Citadels, etc. in Scotland. With the
Contemplative Angler.
Theophilus. IT was in April when every Bough looked big with Blessings, and
the florid Fields, and fragrant Meadows (adorned with Green) sent forth their
sweet and redolent Perfumes to refresh the Universe. Chanticleer then gave the
Day a Summons, and the early Lark, earlier than the Sun, salutes the Air,
whilst blushing Phoebus paints and gilds the Azure Globe, whose Celestial
Influence (by refulgent Magnetism) blessed all the World with Prolifick
Blessings: so that the whole Creation began to vegitate, and every Vegetation
sent forth sweet Aroma's; the Birds began now to build their Nests, and every
Bird to choose his Mate; whilst the Groves and delightful Springs, as also the
Forests and unfrequented Deserts celebrated the fragrant Spring; when the
frigid Congelations of Frost and Snow were all struck dead by the blazing fiery
strokes of the Sun.


Arnoldus. What infer you from these pretty Metaphors?


Theoph. I infer thus much: The Vernon Ingress smiled a Blessing, when she sent
the melodious Harmony of Birds to melt the Air. The Nightingale with her
warbling Notes, the Blackbird, Thrush, Linnet, and Golden-Jay, besides the
Canary and delicious Bulfinch, filled all the Woods with their solitary
Strains: And because beating the Air with such proportionable Harmony, every
Bush became an Aviary, and every Grove a mellifluous Consort, whilst the
purling Springs, and more shady Rivulets, softened by the gentle Breathings of
Zephyrus, seemed tacitly to express a secret, whispering, silent Praise.


Arnold. To whom?


Theoph. To whom think you? unto Jehovah the great Creator.


Arnold. Very well expressed! Proceed.


Theoph. Things thus posited, under such a rectoral Governance, my Reason, and
all my Faculties were excited to contemplate the excellent Beauty of this
stupendous Creation: but above all, when to consider Man Lord of this
Creational Work, and invested with Power to conduct the Creatures, and
entrusted with the Cargo of the whole Creation; this I confess was very
surprising, when but to consider him in a Natural State, and compare him with
the Excellency of Celestial Beings.


Arnold. What observe you from thence?


Theoph. I observe him complicated, and compounded of Elements; and Elements of
themselves they drop in sunder.


Arnold. But what if you take him translated into a State of Grace and
Regeneration?


Theoph. Why then I Will grant the first Death is past, and the second Death
shall have no power to hurt him.


Arnold. So far you will grant him to excel all created Beings.


Theoph. Yes: But not as he stands in a Natural State.


Arnold. Do but consider him a living Monument of Praise, enriched with all the
Endowments of natural Perfection; besides those eminent Qualifications of
Piety, which entitle him Excellent, and confirm him a Creature adorned with all
the signal Marks and shining Characters of this stupendous Creation.


Theoph. Why so?


Arnold. And why not so? Does not the Lion and the Leopard, with the Tiger,
Wolf, Panther and Vulture, pay their Veneration to him? Does not his very
Aspect confound the Crocadile? and with one superficial Glance of his Eye, he
mortifies the Basilick. Consider the Composure of his Face and Features,
together with the delicate Frame, and his well-compos'd Fabric of Body: Do not
these present him a Composition of Majesty? Surely it does: for all the
Creatures honor and adore him, which demonstrates him a Monarch, and of such a
Princely Sovereignty, that the whole Creation pay their Services to him.


Theoph. You wilfully misinterpret me, or prevaricate your own Judgment, by
taking wrong Measures. That Dignity and Virtue (you sum up) that formerly
shined as a Ray about him, is now become a Cloud, a promiscuous Cloud to
obscure him.


Arnold. How can I mistake my self, when to consider him in a most eminent
State; and such a Capacity of Beauty and Excellency, that the mazed World think
him more than a Monarch?


Theoph. They may think what they will of his Primitive State, but convinced by
Experience, he is not so now. It Is true, the time was, when all the Creatures
with a solid Submission humbled themselves before him; but that was then in his
State of Innocence, in Eden's fair Fields, before Transgression, before he
unhappily found out the Art of Sinning; then and there it was they paid their
Veneration, but do they so now? We experience to the contrary: for the Beauty
and Majesty of that glorious Image was so macerated and torn by the Talons of
Sin, that it has grown up since to a Flood, to deluge Posterity. This Act of
Disobedience divested our Protoplast, and influenced his Successors so, that
every Generation since Adam, has labored under the same Predicament; for that
dethroned Adam in Paradise, disinherited us, and Adam's Posterity; there it was
Man lost his Prerogative; and here it is, Sin makes us less than Men.


Arnold. Can one single Act in our Protoplast so vacate the Royal Grant of
Prerogative, to enervate the Conduct of succeeding Generations? Surely no. The
glorious Act of Government shines universally in Man, and will so to the
succeeding Generations. The whole Creation was placed in a Posture of Servitude
to Adam, as he himself stood a Subject in Obedience to his Creator. So that if
I rightly understand Creational Work, the great End was to discover hidden
things, and manifest Idea's, with the Consequent of Production of their various
Species. So that, under Submission, I may as rationally conclude, that the
Creatures in the Creation have now, as then, a natural Right to bend their
Submissions to Man's Princely Sovereignty.


Theoph. I very much doubt it; for no sooner Adam lost his Prerogative, but he
he felt a Trepedation invade all his Vitals, and his Soul began to blush within
him, because afrighted with the Aspect of Sin, that at a distance presented him
the Picture of Death: now the same Death that strangled him, strangles all his
Posterity. Thus it was when Adam lost his Government, and thus it is with us
when governing imprudently; for till then the Creation was unacquainted with
Disguise; nor till then did the Creature relinquish his Authority, till he
relinquished his Primitive Simplicity.


Arnold. What happened then?


Theoph. There happened a Change in all the Creatures, because they perceived a
Change in their Conduct; where note, ever since that general Revolt, the
Creatures have been cautious to repose a Trust under mortal Protection, because
destitute of Power to govern himself.


Arnold. Will you deny Man a Sovereign Power and Divine Right, to entitle
himself Universal Monarch?


Theoph. That Is not the Point in Dispute: I have already granted, that Adam's
Divine Graces sprung spontaneously from the refulgent Ray of the Majesty of
God. But what is that to us? Can we restrain our Hands from Blood, and our
Hearts from Malice, and precogitated Sin? Now every Man knows the Reward of Sin
is not Death simply, but Divine Justice, and Divine Justice bars out all the
Footsteps of Mercy.


Arnold. That Is undeniable; however I Am convinced, that could we but govern our
own Irregularities, our Passions, our Ambitions, and exorbitant Desires, we
should shine like Stars (among Men) and seem in some sort almost immortal.


Theoph. That word (almost) was well put in: but to the Argument, as to Point
of Government; if unlike Christians we govern our selves, we tacitly slide into
the Inconveniency of Slaves; and such we may suspect our selves to be, because
to sink under the weight of every single Temptation, by which means we sully
all those excellent Privileges that adorned our Protoplast in his Primitive
State.


Arnold. What State then must we call this, a State of Apostasy?


Theoph. You may call it what you please; for every Man is in a State good or
bad, but worst of all is that State that lifts up its Hand to rebel against
Heaven: Such were the Giants in the days of old, and such are we now because
overgrown in Sin. How often have we violated the Authority of our Commission?
and how often have infringed the Liberties of the Creation? Now in the
Primitive State there were no such Proceeds; for then the Creatures flew as
naturally to Adam's Hand, as terrified now they fly from ours. The Turtle then
was heard in every Grove, now they coo no where except in Aviaries: all the
Families of Birds then filled the Air, now they are compelled to whistle in
Cages: then they expressed their Gratitude with Demonstrations of Joy; now they
lament their Destiny, because doomed to die. This was the Golden Age our
Ancestors lived in, but it is the Iron Age we live in now. For Innocence in
effect is almost lost, and it is well if we lose not our selves.


Arnold. However I cannot yield to this Conclusion; that Adam's Commands were
so torn and macerated, that surviving Posterity should neglect their Obedience:
For if when to consider how many Generations have traveled through the Map of
Time (from our Ancestors to us) and Time you know informs us of Experience; How
rational is it then to conclude (but I only offer it for Argument-sake) that
was Adam repossess'd of Paradise again, and premonished of Sin, (as we are
daily precautioned) whether or no it might not be thought to raise a
Circumspection in him, to evade the Serpent, the Sin, and the Woman's
Temptation? Into this Opinion most Ages have crept, and our Modern Assertors,
and Predicators approve on it.


Theoph. That Is a Point beyond my Sphere; I meddle not with why may not's;
however I allow you a Privilege, and freedom of thinking or saying what you
please; but then you ought not to circumscribe Bounds to another. However, this
I assert, That such was the Original Purity of Adam, in his State of Innocence,
that his Graces then shined with Heavenly Rays, and Heaven we know is all
Generosity. But every Generation since Adam, has so diminished that Beauty and
Luster, that from Men we are almost dwindled into Morts.


Arnold. Ay, but my Friend, have you well considered, how that the formal
Fabric of Man's Natural Body, does represent unto us the World's Epitome? Why
not then by the glorious Speculation of his Mind (under a renovating and
regenerate State of Grace) he may represent something of the invisible Glories?


Theoph. You come near to the Point; Did not the Generations more and more
degenerate? but this beyond Precedent has outdone all the rest. For by offering
Violence against all that is good, will at last offer Violence against it self;
and this is but just by the Law of Retaliation.


Arnold. Why so?


Theoph. Because so vehement in the pursuit of Sin, we outdo our Ancestors; and
what is the Conclusion? Adam you see was made an Exile, and compelled to
relinquish the Sunshine of Paradise, he was forced to sit down under the
Shades of Mesopotamia: but we renounce both Law and Gospel, to monopolize the
World, and aggrandize Posterity; this is now our deplorable State, compare it
with Adam's, and give your Opinion.


Arnold. My Opinion in short is, Adam comes short of us: for as he was the
Father of all his Posterity, so, as Father, we patronize all manner of Impiety.
Now I have given you my Opinion, how do you approve on it?


Theoph. I Will sum it up thus. Whilst Adam stood in Purity his Beauty shined
without Deformity; so that by the Will of the Divinest, had he kept his
Station, Posterity had never been doomed to die by the cold and icie Finger of
Death.


Arnold. O Theophilus! that one single Sin should so deform him that was
elevated and exalted above the Beauties in the Creation!


Theoph. Just so it happened to that bright Star Lucifer, (and his aspiring
Conspirators) whose Ambition dethroned him, and so it will us. He striving to
get above that that was super-excellent, lost that Excellency the Supreamest
had given him. So we placing our Affections on exterior Objects, we but
inamour our selves with our own Similitudes: Judge of the Consequence.


Arnold. Is the Law of Nature a standing Rule or no? If it be a Rule, it ought
to be obeyed; for its natural in kind to answer kind.


Theoph. Can Nature, as Nature, exert our Zeal, to stir up in us the lively Act
of Faith? Surely Faith is no Part of Creational Work, it is rather a Bough or
Branch that buds up from Regeneration. The Excellency therefore of the things
that are, are not of themselves, but dependent on some other infinitely more
glorious; such is the Creator.


Arnold. He that made the World had no need of Assistance; but all things that
are made were made by him alone. Creational Work therefore was discovering
hidden Ideas, and making Invisibles to appear visible.


Theoph. God the Creator made himself manifest, in time, by his glorious Act of
Power, in creating; who by his eternal Wisdom and Providence upholds it, that
it drops not asunder.


Arnold. That Is manifest by the Eye of Sense; but he that sees by the Eye of
Faith, sees beyond the Creation, for he sees the Creator; and in seeing him, he
sees his Redeemer.


Theoph. Why then struggle we so hard after superficial Knowledge, to defeat our
selves by the dull Prospect of Sense; for if when to create Inquietudes in our
selves, we labor and toil with unprofitable Anxiety?


Arnold. What but the Curse anticipates the Blessing? Man and the Creation were
made in time, and Time was drawn out by the Wisdom of God; but the
Understandings of most Men differently discerning, differently distinguish,
till Time, the Harbinger of Eternity, eats out his Character, so translates him
to the Shades of his silent Sepulcher.


Theoph. What infer you from this?


Arnold. Solomon was a Man inspired with Wisdom, and endued with Understanding;
and God gave him Eyes to foresee the Vicissitude and Revolution of Times and
States.


Theoph. Solomon had a Divine Soul, incorporated with humane Nature, whose
Ambition (if proper to say so) coveted Wisdom rather than Wealth: and God
answered his Desires. In that Day Solomon was the Jewish Oracle: but every Day
is the Almighty's Holy Day, and Time and the World like a Globe in his Hand.
Consider therefore, the same Excellency of Spirit Solomon had, hovers still
over us, like a Glory about us; and by Divine Permission over every Generation:
But because falling short of Solomon's Knowledge (and Divine Speculation) we do
not as Solomon, all alike discern.


Arnold. Grant the Argument admits of no Contradiction, yet you will find it a
Task difficult enough, to study the Art of Self-resignation.


Theoph. Solomon, you grant, he refused Wealth for Wisdom. But what think you
of Saul, that went as far as Endor, and raked up the Ashes of the Dead, to
enquire a Victory?


Arnold. I think the Case different, both in Nature and Quality; the one chose
Wisdom, but the other Witchcraft: so to connect them together, draws on a false
Conclusion.


Theoph. Then the Consequence follows; Readiness reasoning with Flesh and Blood,
as it was impious; so his Application to Sorcerers and Necromancers was also
diabolical, who to accomplish the End of his Conspiracy, consults not Endor
only, but the Brood of Infernals.


Arnold. He did so, who denies it? I know what you will alledg, you will tell me
the Tree is known by its Fruits. I grant all this, and what then? yet I dare
not interpret Saul a Son of Perdition: God's Mercy never wants Wings to fly to
the disconsolate Penitent, whose Mercy super-excels his Divine Acts of Justice.
Therefore judge not Saul, lest we judge our selves, when by the Heart only things
are legibly construed.


Theoph. It Is true; the Heart made legible, discovers a Phoenix or a Vulture;
the first living, (as Hippocrates says) and the last dying: so that neither
Physic nor Philosophy can make mortal immortal. There Is neither Energy nor
Excellency in the superficial Form: Virtue lies concealed, as a Jewel in a
Cabinet: No Man therefore can be read by his Species.


Arnold. To grant your Conclusion, proves the thing less difficult in knowing
others, than to search within to know our selves. Solomon had Wisdom and Divine
Discoveries; and Saul had Courage to encounter the Philistines.


Theoph. That Authority that tolerates Solomon to have Wisdom, the same
Authority concludes Saul inquisitive after Witches.


Arnold. Admit it does, (what then?) that Power that gives Life a Being, is
indisputably more noble than the thing that has Life. God created the World,
and by Wisdom animated it with Life; so that Life shines every where, in every
Individual; this is manifest to every Man, and every Creature that breaths in
the Creation.


Theoph. This I agree in, but I cannot reconcile my self to your Opinion, that
Solomon and Readiness Case run in parallel Lines: Lucifer and Michael, though
Stars of the first Magnitude, yet they paid not equal Adoration to their
sovereign Superior.


Arnold. I don't question but you will grant, that nothing has Life of it self,
but from something else that is eminently superior: That the World is governed
by Divine Providence, and that every Beginning is destinated to Death in time.


Theoph. All this I grant, what infer you from thence?


Arnold. I infer and observe you are somewhat too severe in censuring Readiness
Sin by the Rule of your Judgment unpardonable. Now for one Man to take upon him
to judge another, he betrays his Rashness, because his Judgment is not
infallible.


Theoph. I know where it pinches, you will hinge upon Mercy.


Arnold. I must tell you that God is a merciful Judge, whose Mercy, as recorded,
is above all his Works; and a Mystery so sacred and secretly concealed, that
Angels themselves dare not pry into it; How then shall Man discover this
admirable Arcanum of Mercy, when locked up in the secret Cabinet of Heaven? Let
us not assume such previous Conjecturals, but rather consult and expostulate
Death, since Death is the Wages and the Reward of Sin. Man and the World
terminate in the Arms of Death, because they alike consist of elementary
Principles: But Death will be found the Extinguisher of Life, except that Life
that is lighted by the Torch of Regeneration; that Life will outlive the second
Death.


Theoph. But you will agree in this, that a vicious Man living (and reigning) in
Sin all the Days of his Life, his Life may be taken for a living Death.


Arnold. I Will comply with any thing except Censoriousness; for that end trumpet
not Solomon's Praise too loud, lest the Echo resounding, echoes Ostentation.
On the other Hand, not to hope an Indemnity for Saul, we straiten God's Mercy,
which is infinitely boundless. So let us leave it to the Judge of all the World:
for if the World be left to determine this Case, she will denounce a false
Judgment, because of her Partiality. Nay, she may be suspected uncharitable
too; and such are we, if Children of the World, because subject to err by the
Rule of Instability.


Theoph. You bear hard upon me, yet I Am loath to give up the Cause; there is
little or no Difference in the length of our Weapons: but this I Will say, so
drop the Argument. Solomon was an Oracle of Wisdom and Learning, and the
blazing Star that shined in Jerusalem. And Saul was a King, and the first King
in Israel; but then he was that King God gave in his Wrath, which was soon
after removed, for David stood in Readiness way.


Arnold. So did Vriah in his, when inamoured on his Wife.


Theoph. But David was a Prophet, and a Man of God; and Saul was censured for
his impious Exorcisms, as if the Tincture of Regeneration was obliterated in
him.


Arnold. God forbid that the Sting of Sin should be so venomous a Poison, that
no Antidote can cure it! Did not the Lord of Life die to conquer Sin, and
Death, and Hell, in every Believer? Let us be so charitable as to parallel Saul
with Sampson, who had his Dalilah, as Saul had his Endor. Here we read that
David found Repentance, after the Prophet's Reproof: And Sampson had his
Satisfaction upon the Lords of the Philistines. These two had their Pardon
feal'd before Death; and fain would I be so charitable to conclude so of Saul.


Theoph. Ay, but Readiness Fault is writ in Capital Characters.


Arnold. That Is instituted for our Admonition, and the Reformation of
succeeding Generations.


Theoph. O Arnoldus! the Generations to come will abominate this, that inflames
it self to set the rest of the World on fire.


Arnold. Then let them burn and consume one another; for Lust and Pollution
augment the Flames.


Theoph. Do not all the Nations and Kingdoms about us exhaust their Treasures
to indulge themselves, and devote their Services to the Hypocrisy of the Times?


Arnold. It Is rare (to a Miracle) to find Faith amongst Men, especially such as
daily expose Conscience to the wreck of Opinion: And he that makes a God of his
Belly, devotes all his Services to his luxurious Appetite. Thus Men, as by
Machination, traduce one another into the Devil's School, to brazen themselves
against the Modesty of a Blush, lest Sin should be thought to be shame-fac'd:
And others raking up the Embers of Revenge, fire themselves by quenching the
Flames.


Theoph. So let them. But what is all this to our Angling Design?


Arnold. Stay a little till we come to the Waterside: In the mean time I have
a Question to put, and that is this; How comes it to pass that the Hinge and
Poize of Politic States, move and turn about with such rapid Motions, that
Kingdoms and Potentates are dashed in pieces?


Theoph. The Naturalist, we see him consult Natural Causes, and the Judicial
Astrologer Planetary Events; but the more Religious devotes himself to the
Providence of God. Is there not a Time for Frost, and a Time for Hail? a Time
for Rain, and a Time for fair Weather? a Time for Revolution, Dissolution and
Death? and all these Times and various Changes are exercised by him that holds
the Poize and Balance of Government. That Naturalist therefore that concludes
a Divinity in Celestial Influences, does but grope in the dark; and the
Astrologer pins his Faith upon other Men's Sleeves.


Arnold. You tread upon the Heels of my former Assertion.


Theoph. What if I do? I hope not to hurt you. The Prince of this World rules
in the Air, insinuating himself into the Heart of Man, from whence comes War,
and the Rumors of War, as Rapine, Ravages, Murder and Blood. Does not Pride
strut up in the Face of Piety, and Hell presume to justle Heaven? And can Good
and Evil (think you) run in parallel Lines? No Arnoldus, I persuade my self,
this Age lives within one Step of Destruction, were it not upheld by an
Almighty Providence.


Arnold. O the Subtilty of Man's Heart, that nothing but Arrows from the
Almighty can reach it!


Theoph. He that reads his own Heart, without a Perspective, reads all the
World; but to know God is Life eternal, and that is more than the World knows,
because wanting the Key of Knowledge.


Arnold. Man is like a Ship in a turbulent Sea, where every Wave threatens him
with Death, and every Gust of Wind one Step to his Grave. How mindful therefore
ought he to be of Wellliving, which answers the Ends of Well-dying.


Theoph. Divinely alluded! Man therefore by how much the more honorable he is
than the rest of his Fellow Creatures, by so much the more nobly and divinely
ought he to be exercised in the Piety of Christianity and Self-resignation.


Arnold. This is good Advice, but still methinks I see a Storm coming; not that
I prognosticate another Revolution; No, no, rather a Desolation by Sword or
Famine: for Sin, like a Granade, tears up all before it, and rips up the
Foundation of Kingdoms and Commonwealths.


Theoph. It is true, Sin is the original Cause of all National Calamity; and
there is no Satisfaction for Sin, but the Death of a Savior: The Cross must
purchase the Crown: The old Man must die to seal the Regenerate Birth. What
have we to do but consider the transitory State of things, and the Stability of
that that gave them a Being? Here Is nothing but rumbling and jumbling about us,
till he come, whose Right it is to reign, and subdue all Monarchs, and make
their Thrones his Footstool.


Arnold. By this prophetic Discourse, methinks I smell a strong Scent of
Invasion. But where the Storm will fall, God he only knows. Are not the Nations
about us like an Acaldemy of Blood, that darkens the Air, and terrifies my Pen
to write such dismal and tragical Apprehensions? Will not the Sword, Plague and
Famine contend for a Victory? O how sad will it be to see the Father fall by
the Dint of Sword, the Mother crawl by the infected Walls of a Pesthouse, and
the poor innocent and comfortless Infant perish in the Streets, and pine away
with Hunger? Three such meciless and unsatiable Conquerors, and all to keep the
Field at once, will totter the strongest Camp in Christendom.


Theoph. Then where is our Security, and what signifies the Strength or the
Artifice of Man, when God has a Controversy with the Kingdoms of the World? The
Christian's Arms then will prove the best Security. He that cruciates his
Lusts, outlives the Vice of Impiety.


Arnold. What then becomes of him that throws Virtue into the Embracements of
Vice, and prostitutes Justice before every clamorous Derider? that lifts up the
Standard of Impiety, to justle Religion, and profanes the Altar by
superstitious Adorations? that mounts Ambition on the Theater of Luxury and
Hypocrisy, and opposes the Gospel and Divine Oracles to humane Tradition, and
the vain imaginary Inventions of Men? that in Defiance of Heaven opens the
Portals of Hell, and advances the Curse instead of the Cross? What must we
conclude from such dreadful Consequences, but that God will tear the Nations in
pieces?


Theoph. There was a Time when the Law shined bright; yet at the same time the
Gospel shined behind the Horns of the Altar, (but in this our Time neither Law
nor Gospel shines) the Divinest then had his Residence in the Sanctum
Sanctorum; but Hell is let loose now, and Heaven violated with Oaths and
Imprecations.


Arnold. The Times were blessed in those Halcion Days, when our Patriarch Jacob
was clothed with Innocence; but in this our Day we are all turned Esau's, to
pursue the World and inconstant Vanities: And though no Gospel-Star then shined
amongst them, nor was Christianity known in their Courts; it is well if we that
are Christian-Professors live up to the Practice of sound Morality.


Theoph. We read in the Sanhedrim, that the Seed of Hagar stood in opposition
to the Seed of Sarah. But Abraham's God will dwell in Tents, rather than in
Temples with the Prince of this World: Yet Rachel had her Idols, who adds
Sacrilege to Idolatry, by taking away (or stealing) those of her Fathers.


Arnold. When the Turk turns Christian, there is Hope the Persian will fight
under the Banner of the Cross.


Theoph. Then he will be fit to turn Roman Catholic, to stamp the Cross on every
Service, and Vengeance with a Semiter on the Breasts of Protestants: to immure
their Proselytes betwixt Stone-walls, so starve them to Death under Pretense of
Sanctity; and because not to die a violent Death, the Anchorite fancies he dies
not at all. Is not this a fine way to mortify the Flesh, when at the same time
they will surfeit with Fish? that grope in the dark at Noonday, and hold up a
Taper to illuminate the Sun? that like Spiders they will unravel their own
Bowels, though it be but to entrap a silly Insect.


Arnold. I look on the Hierarchy of the Church of Rome, like Men that encounter
a blasted Fate: Where Priests are Saints Bells, but defective of Sound; and
Oracles at the Altar, but dumb in Explanation: that kindle their Tapers to
blaze in the Temple, and consecrate Sacrifices without a Blessing; so cover
their Nakedness with a Babylonish Garment: Where Mattins are metamorphosed into
Masquins, Collects translated into Collations, and St. Anthony's Bells into
nocturnal Cabals. These are the Men that can mode Religion, and dress it up to
humor the Times.


Theoph. Religion of late is very much discoursed, and after some sort crept
into most Men's Mouths; but least in practice of any thing practicable. If they
tell you that Asians are Athenians, you are bound to believe them: and that
Turks are Christians, you cannot disprove them, since France and the Port have
been Confederates. Nay there are some blear-eyed Romanists, under Pretext of
Christianity, will swear, that to worship Images is no Idolatry. And some
others of such voracious Appetites, that they will eat the Horse, and digest the
Stirrups. And some amongst them (I speak what I know) are never satisfied till
glutted with Spoil, which exposes every Man to the Lust of his Adversary, whose
Power is as equal to restrain his Will, as the Body to refrain from Drought in
a Fever.


Arnold. I make no doubt on it, we have Copernicans amongst us, that can fancy
the Earth, as the Orbs, turn round; so rapid are the Minds of some in this
Adultrous Generation, to be winding and turning, till He comes that will
overturn, and dissolve the Elements like Ice in warm Water; so melt down the
Creation with one single Blast, and strike that dead that violates his Regal
Commands: The all-glorious beatifical Star of Heaven's high Tribunal is already
risen in our earthly Horizon, which virtually lifting up it self by magnetic
Power, lifts up our Souls also by a Magnetism of Divine Sympathy, whereby we
shall ascend above these muddy Cisterns of Earth and Clay, to blaze aloft in
those illustrious and most illuminated Mansions of Beatitude and Eternity.


Theoph. I grant what you say: There are a sort of Men that flatter themselves
with Self-righteousness, and shape out Condemnation as a Reward to others; that
can spy the Mote that deforms their Brother's Eye, but the Beam that shades
their own is no Impediment. Thus some gaze at their own Pageantry, and too
frequently answer their own Petitions: that say to themselves, All is well,
when nothing's well but what is ill: that live so near the Portalls of Death,
as if there were no Death in dying. Such Men as these think the Sun shines
Blessings no where but in their Chimney-corners: that build their Habitation
upon a sandy Foundation: that judge and pre-judg both Moralist and Heathen,
(that rather deserves their Pity and Charity;) and censure all the World, when
they themselves cannot live without it.


Arnold. What crazy Props such Men lean upon, that exchange their Profession
for Profit. If Christ be our Foundation, let us believe as Christians; not
barely to honor the Appellation of Christianity, but live the Life and
Practice of Christians, otherwise we build on a sandy Foundation, that sinks
beneath the Surface, or tumbles down in the Storm. We daily observe the Earth a
fixed Body, yet it bears not the Heavens, nor it self neither; because it hangs
by Poize of its own, and the Providence of God supports it: For our blessed
Savior that made the World, is the Support of the World; for none less than he
that made the World, had Power to redeem Man, and save the World. This is the
Water of Life that is drawn from the inexhaustible Fountain of Christ our
Redeemer. This is the true Physician of Life, that blots out the dismal
Characters of Death. Thus whilst the formal Christian draws Streams from the
muddy Cisterns of the ambignous World, his Devotion reaches no higher than
himself, and the gaudy Titles of Ambition and Hypocrisy.


Theoph. Shall I oblige Arnoldus to entertain us with a Contemplation of
Seraphick Joys, whilst the silent Night passes away, and the blazing Torch of
the Sun appears, that causes an early Blush in Aurora.


Arnold. Every Day has a new Birth, but Time and the World had but one
Beginning. The Night was made to shadow the Day, but the Sun to light and
illuminate the Universe* and this was ordained by the Wisdom of him that stuck
the Stars in this beautiful Order, before whose triumphant Throne the devout
Penitent prostrates his Devotion, and pours forth his Orizons and sweet
Adorations in the Presence of that great and ineffable Good, that made the
glittering spangled Orbs, and is himself the Light of the World; before whom
every Nation and Kingdom must bow or break; whose Mercy infinitely excels all
his Works, and whose Justice and Judgment who shall dispute?


Theoph. O ArnolduS! pray goon.


Arnold. The Elements, nay the Heavens contain him not, nor is he comprehended
within the circular Globe of the Spherical Orbs. These luminous Bodies of Sun,
Moon and Stars, were ordained by him to light the Creation: for he that made
them gave them a Being, and dignified them also with prolifick Virtue, adapting
them Parents of Vegetation, Procreation, and Prolongation of Life, whereby to
regulate and reform Times and Seasons; as also to distinguish betwixt Summer
and Winter. The greater Light he made to govern the Day, but the Moon he made
to patrole the Night; and that they have Influence upon secondary Causes, no
Man is so irrational, I hope, as to question it.


Theoph. For my part I do not; pray proceed.


Arnold. Thus the Stars and Constellations have Divine Order and Influence; and
the Celestial Powers and Principalities, as Angels and Archangels, Thrones and
Virtues, have Dominion also over humane Frailties: And where the Patriarchs and
the Prophets are with the Apostles and Evangelists, with the whole Quire of
Saints, Cherubims and Seraphims, perpetually singing Praises and Glory to him
that sits on the Throne, and rides triumphant on the Wings of the Wind. O let
the silent Deeps and the ponderous Mountains, with every thing that has Breath,
praise the Lord! For the Earth is his, and the Fullness thereof: by whose Wisdom
the World was made, and Time begot; and by whose infinite Power the separated
Elements live still in Harmony; who formed the Fetus of Earth, and made the
Firmament its Swadlingband: and in the vast Circumference of Heaven he hung up
the glorious Creature the Sun, whereby to illuminate and illustrate the World;
whose Center nor Circumference contains him not; nor the Excellency of his
Glory that superexcels all Creatures and Creations; from whom the deplorable
Sons of Men wail for Deliverance and Redemption from Sin.

And now let us contemplate the nocturnal Muses. Sleep first presents us with an
Emblem of Death: yet is it the poor Man's Solace, tho the rich Man's Terror: A
Repose and Recreation to the wearied Limbs, but a Disease of Inquietude to the
voracious Mind: the Body's Requiem, and Death's Effigies. Now Death is the
desired Hope of him that truly conteMplates the State of Immortality: And as
Mortality is the End of Sorrow, so by Consequence it is the Beginning of Joy: A
Period of Misery, but the Trophy of Victory: The Resurrection of Life, and the
Bloomings of Eternity. For as the barren Ground thirsts after Rain, so does the
Oppressed seek Deliverance in Death.

Great and good is our glorious Creator, whose Divine Excellencies superexcel
the Creation; whose infinite Wisdom displayed it self before Time and the World
had as yet a Beginning. Pardon my Presumption, most sovereign Power, when to
prostrate my Humilities before thy sacred Shrines, that with a holy Reverence
and divine Piety all my Devotions may be acceptable to thee. We are but finite,
but Thou art infinite: Infinite in Power, to create the World; and infinite in
Wisdom and Providence, to uphold it. Thy Government is in Heaven, yet thou
rulest upon Earth; but thy Habitation here is the Tabernacle in Man.

O sacred Divinest! direct us in thy Paths of Wisdom, to lead us the ready way
to thy self: for thou rewardest every Man answerable to his Works, and our
Works (as Paul says) do certainly follow us; then will they as certainly be an
Orb to environ us; and because an Object continually before us, we can neither
evade nor shake them off, whereby they will delight or be a Terror unto us. As
the Tree falls, so it lies; and in the Grave there is no Repentance: therefore
seek the Lord early in a Spirit of Meekness; for the Meek are said to inherit
the Earth, whilst the Proud that exalts himself, shall be abased. Thy powerful
Arm has often reached Deliverance, the Righteous therefore shall rejoice in thy
Salvation; and all that solicit thy Paths of Peace shall be found in their
Duty as by Wisdom directed; but Destruction as a Judgment is prepared for the
Scornful: Therefore let the Pious rejoice in his Hope, for the End of the
Wicked shall be an Abomination.

Lord! when we contemplate our mortal State below, and those invisible immortal
Powers above, blessed for ever to behold the Glory of thy Majesty; it brings us
to consider the Beginnings of Time, and to ruminate where we were when the
Foundations of the World were laid and stretched out; and who but thy self (by
Infinite Power) fastened the Ends thereof, and lifted up the Curtains of
Heaven's glorious Canopy, and caused the Face of the Firmament to shine! Who
but thy admirable Arm could separate Light from Darkness, the Sea from dry
Land, and confine them with Barrocades of Rocks and Sand? Who made those stormy
Winds to blow, and those boisterous Hurricanes (the Rage of the Almighty) so
tempestuously to roar, and roll themselves on the Face of the Deeps? O what
Hand, except the Divinest, could make Mortal immortal, and bring Salvation from
the Loins of Iesse! Can the Shades of Darkness speak the Wonders of thy Praise,
or the Night discover the Eyelids of the Morning, that when the Sun prepares
his Course like a Giant, will the Clouds clap their Hands, and the Stars and
Constellations shout for Joy? But the Dead shall arise, and Mortality shall be
clothed with an immortal Livery, that shall never tarnish, nor never diminish,
but survive and outlive the Ides of Time, and flourish when Time shall be no
more.

Then let us consider our present State, the Shortness of Time, the Vanity of
Things, and how light all our Services and best Performances weigh in the
Balance. Let us also consider the Morning Star, the illustrious Aurora is
rising upon us, and then it will be a perpetual Day. Let us imprint on our
selves the Characters of our Eminent Ancestors; but above all, the lively
Sufferings of our blessed Savior on the Cross, and no longer paddle in these
Puddles of Sin, nor stumble in the Face of the Sun at Noonday: for wounding our
selves by Sin, makes our Savior bleed afresh. We have excellent Precedents,
that of David notwithstanding his Integrity, and that other of Solomon, tho the
Prince of Wisdom; of Hezekiah too, tho a very good King; of Josiah and others;
of Paul a Convert, of Peter a devout Reluctant, of Job's Patience, Moses his
Meekness, Abraham's Faith: all these were Men, besides hundreds more in holy
Writ) now eminent Saints; whose Pieties like so many Trophies hang up aloft in
the new Jerusalem, to adorn that Beautiful and Divine Habitation, where the
Lamb is the Light, and where no Darkness can approach, nor Night close the
Casements of their Eyes any more, nor the pale Aspect of Death the second time
seal the Indenture of a profound Silence. Consider it seriously, for Piety is
good Policy; and a holy, devout and penitent Life no Impediment to a virtuous
Christian: And so good Rest, Theophilus, that sleeps in silence.


Theoph. Silent I am, but not asleep; nor do I dream when I contemplate the
everlasting Praise of the great Creator. How quickly has the Night dismantled
her self of those shady Sables that covered Day, and concealed the flaming
Steeds of the Sun, when advancing to approach our Northern Horizon?


Arnold. Come then, let us rise, and shake off Security: for as Sleep is no
solid Direction to point out to us the Way to Heaven; so Death (tho at a
distance) is no long Reprieve (nor assured Protection) from the Grave.


Theoph. Our former Ancestors lap'd not themselves in Downy Quilts, but made
the Earth their common Reception: But this Age degenerates from Potentates to
Pedanticks; and carnally devote their Services to every idle and voluptuous
Fancy. Do we not see with what Eagerness some Men pursue all dishonest Actions,
whilst some others under the Consideration of Riches, hug a concealed Joy in
their ill-got Treasures? whereby they contrive the Calamity of the Poor, and at
the same time rejoice at the Misery of the Orphan, whose Morsel they swallow
down as greedily as they devour the Widows Habitation? Thus some contrive
Calamity, and sin by wholesale, magnifying their Ambitions more than Men, when
at the same time they dwindle into Morts.


Arnold. But if Beginnings have Periods, as certainly they have, the Poor will
rise up in Judgment against such; and a Jog of Conscience, besides the
Consequence of Blood, attend their Door. Their Favorites and familiar
Flatterers then will dismiss themselves, and vanish like a Mist, and the dark
Night of Horror overshadow all their Enjoyments: Their delicate and delectable
Morsels will melt into Moonshines, and themselves transformed into Dust and
Ashes. This is the Lot, and will be the Fate of all those that pervert
Blessings into profane Impieties. But I forget my self, for the Sun appears,
and the Day will suddenly gain ground upon us; let us arise and fit our selves
for a solitary March.


Theoph. We shall soon be ready, it is only dismounting our Apartments to mount
our Horses. What shady Groves are those, and what wandering Object's that, that
courts the Sycamores, and talks to the silent Rocks, as if there were a Remorse
in Stones? surely it is Agrippa.


Arnold. I Am of your Opinion, what makes him there?


Theoph. I know not, except he is come to summons us home.


Arnold. Pray examine him; I think it is thrice three Months since the last time
I saw him.


Theoph. Shall I call him to us?


Arnold. Prithee do.


Theoph. Agrippa, from whence come thou?


Agrippa. From the flourishing Fields in Albion.


Theoph. What Is the News there, this is an Age of Inquisition?


Arnold. So it is; have you brought us any thing?


Agrippa. I Am no competent Judge of the Times, nor of National Affairs; but I Will
present you with some Books and Letters.


Arnold. Have you no Scheme of Modern Transactions? nothing verbal?


Agrip. What can be discoursed of the Times, and the various Projects of Men of
the Times?


Arnold. Recollect your Memory, and refresh your self; but when the Sun
advances the Meridian, repair to that solitary Grove, where Theophilus with
me, will stay your coming; besure you disappoint us not, and bring your
Narrative of all the Proceeds.


Theoph. I question not he will be very mindful.


Arnold. Come then, let us chat a while, and discourse Rome divided among the
Romanists. Nay, what will you say to see the Church look asquint at the Pope,
and Portugal to lift up his Heel to kick against his elder Brother of Spain?
It Is Madness rather than Manners to hear them wrangle and jangle about
Religion, when there is nothing left on it but bare Opinion; which if you will not
conform to, they will stamp the Character of a Stelletto upon you, or the bloody
Impressions of an Inquisition.


Theoph. What, no better Entertainments in the Spanish Court, than such rough
Salutes as Inquisitions and Stelletto's! I should rather approve, that Virtue
in a Prince is the richest Diadem in his Crown; and Clemency to his Subjects
(the vital part of his Kingdom) more obliging than all the gilded Baits of
Flattery. Money, it is true, is the Sinew of War; and Honors and Dignities
gaudy Accomplishments. What of all this? when all comes to all, Honesty is the
best Policy.


Arnold. Let me tell you, Theophilus, Gold Chains best become great Men; but
not that Gold makes Goodness, nor Dignity Greatness, any otherwise, than a Badg
of Honor makes a Man truly honorable: nor is Honor more legitimate than
inherent Worth; both spring from one Root originally, and live above the Smiles
or Frowns of Fortune. Nor can such a Man be perverted that hates the nauciating
Scent of a Parasite, that disclaims against Pensioners that pick his Pocket,
and abominates Sycophants that fawn and flatter, and seem to adore the rising
Sun; yet with Impatience longs to see it set. Not but that no Sun shines
without some Cloud, nor any Court is kept without some Flatterers, till that
time comes (and I hope is at hand) that Virtue shall naturally flow from the
Streams of Piety, (and not from Imitation) which spontaneously spring from the
Celestial Fountains of pure Christianity.


Theoph. When Democrasians dagger the Crown, then the perplexed Native stands a
tiptoe (every minute) expecting some fatal Event: and so it is, when Insolency
justles Justice, then the Magistrate suffers Affronts in his Legal Justiciary
Proceeds. Such Scorpions as these wound and infect the Body Politic.


Ar. From thence I observe, whenever Pride is most predominant, there of
necessity a Nursery of War is planted, that in time will murder the Blessings
of Peace. We have learned by Experience, that Fullness of Bread (without a
Blessing) perverts into Wantonness, so into a Curse, that by degrees grows up
into such a Vice, that murders all it meets with, and kills without Care; it is
a Virtue therefore to shun its Acquaintance.


Th. Come Arnoldus, let us enter this solitary Grove, here we may dwell among
Rocks; consort with the Creation, and keep time with the Pulse of the
fluctuating Ocean. Here we may refresh our Ears with the relishing Notes of
tunable Birds, and astonish our Eyes with the beautiful Model of Heaven: Where
whilst we gaze on those glittering Orbs, our Hearts as inspired may breath
forth Flames.


Ar. A solitary Life I always approved of, to trace the polite Sands, to sit
down under the Shades of Woods and Rocks, and accost the Rivers and Rivulets
for Diversion, (as now we do) and trample on the beautiful Banks, and florid
Medows, beautified with Greens, that will not only refresh our Senses with
their redolent Perfumes, but enamour us beyond express, when to see their Banks
bathed by such Silver Streams. Come and let us pitch our Tents in these
delightful Plains, where every shady Grove as an Vmbrella, will shelter us from
the scorching fiery Beams of the Sun, till the Earth sends forth her sweet
Aroma's; over which the burnished and beautiful Firmament of Heaven surrounds
all the Earth (and the blessed Creation) with Melody like Birds, and murmuring
Streams; I fancy it a kind of Counter-Paradise for Mortal Content: And how
sweet and sublime is that Contemplation that surmounts Angels for Divine
Associates! Observe, Theophilus, that little rolling Rivulet, where every Eye
may evidence Fish in those purling Streams courting the Sun, as if naturally
enamoured with Stars and Celestials. Such Observations flow from our present
State, let us therefore consider both the Author and the End.


Th. If Ends and Beginnings have a like Fate and Period, (as indisputably they
have) then Time and our latter End contemplates Eternity our future Hope; so
that a retired Life, of all Lives in my Opinion, will be most agreeable to our
present Condition: for I like not the Aspect of our Friend Agrippa.


Ar. Nor I neither, but be it what it will be, the Rocks and the Woods, if I
calculate right, shall contribute to Arnoldus; any Man may read in legible
Characters a discontented Frown on his Martial Brow.


Th. What if it be? it will not make new Breaches in our Loyal Breasts.


Ar. Nor cement old ones; for here is a Breast ready to receive the Charge of
Danger, tho Death be Conduct. I value not the Swellings of my Adversaries, were
every one of them as great as Goliath, as deep-mouthed as the Cyclops that roar
in Mount Aetna, or as formidable as Thunder, that cleaves the Cedars, and the
sturdy Oaks; yet the Shrubs may escape, and live in hope to see a Purgation of
such eminent Contenders.


Th. If ill Omens presage fatal Conclusions, I like not Agrippa's Aspect.


Ar. Nor I that Resolution, that only endeavors Self-security.


Th. Would you have me turn the Point upon my self?


Ar. No, nor your Friend neither, by turgid Repetitions; come what will come,
let us talk no more on it: high Tides have their low Ebbs; and the higher any Man
rises, the greater is his Fall expected. I know the World is such an inviting
Morsel, that attempting to swallow it, some have been choked. Alexander of all
Men bid fairest for the World, yet when he went out of it, a Sepulcher of six
Foot served to inter him.


Th. It Is just so now; have not we a sort of Senators, that, impatient of
Destruction, pull down the House upon their own Heads, to noose other Folks in
the same Snickle?


Ar. There Is nothing can stand against the rapid Torrent of a giddy Multitude;
it is good to stand clear of Malcontents, that justle Superiors, and call
Parliaments Pick-locks, and Robbers of the People, under the pretense of
public Faith.


Th. Such Furioso's I must confess are of an odd Kidney, that can silence
Justice, and sentence the Laws; that sit uneasy under Governments, tho of their
own contrivings; that are angry with any thing that is uppermost; nay, they
shall arraign themselves, if no Superior to contend with: Such Men I question
not will condemn us for Victims, tho without Breach of Law, or Affront to good
Manners.


Ar. That can never be done by any, except such as exchange their Loyalty for
Luxury, that degenerate from Native English Men, and renounce their Oath in
Baptism; that swear they do not swear, and be Religious to boot. But the great
Acts of former famous Men, will live upon Record on the Stage of the World,
whilst the World has a Being; more especially such great Actions as drew Life
from Virtue: Such Heroes we have had (but asleep now) whose Memories still
blossom, and after Death smell sweet in the Dust.


Th. What then? must we despair of our selves, as poor silly Birds do that are
seized in a Gin, and wait Deliverance from the wretched Fowler, as if Death
would solace our captivated Fears, and refer them and us to the Grave for
Reconciliation?


Ar. I am not ignorant that the Rape of a Sword results in a SCar, and
amputates sometimes to the loss of a Limb, lest peradventure the whole Body be
hurried into a Fever: For the Sword you must know is Death's cold Harbinger,
that depopulates Kingdoms, and lays Countries in waste, sucking the Lives of
the Subjects and Treasure of the Nation, till at last like a Cripple it creeps
to its Grave.


Th. But what if the Banks overflow with Plenty, and the Nation superabound
with luxurious Inhabitants, may not a War in such case be thought requisite to
purge the Kingdom of superfluous Vagrants?


Ar. Where Excess and Intemperance extend the Veins by Surfeit or Pleurisy
beyond their natural Bounds, it is better to bleed than blow up a Kingdom.


Th. I Am of your Opinion in that matter: in all acute Distempers, there ought
to be adequate and expeditious Expedients: but without Offense, may I ask you
one Question?


Ar. Two if you please, if I can answer them.


Th. Why those signal Interruptions so often invade you, that seemingly discover
some odd Apprehensions.


Ar. If they do, what then? is it more than the Consideration of distracted
Times?


Th. Sooner may the Tides forget their natural Course, than I forget to sigh a
Penance for my Native Country.


Ar. But then have you considered the Passion of such corrumpant Grandees, that
think whole Kingdoms Gobbets not great enough to gobble down, to satiate their
Appetites, till completely made victorious over Life and Fortune?


Th. The only way then to stop the Glut of such furious Drivers, is to
interpose our selves, whilst others more innocent escape their Fury.


Ar. You almost persuade me into a kind of Pity.


Th. Or rather it may be into a Passion.


Ar. That Is a Sin entailed on Posterity, as naturally as Wax subjects it self
to the Impression of a Seal: So that should I call Affection Passion, it but
represents a Moral Glass, wherein every Man may read his own Face by Reflection.


Th. And no sooner to retrieve or withdraw, when immediately he forgets both
Form and Features.


Ar. Then let all Suspicions suspend themselves; so steer your Course to some
other Point, and call Agrippa from behind that Sycomore.


Th. I Will step and call him: So ho, Agrippa.


Agrippa. What Voice do I hear in these unfrequented Woods and solitary
Streams? Diana's Fountain, nor was Dodona's Grove otherwise than an Emblem of
such mortal Contents; what Rivers are enriched with Trout and Salmon, and Trees
burdened with the Harmony of Birds; for such a Life who would not covet
Banishment?


Ar. What News Agrippa from the Coast of Albion?


Agrip. We have a Generation of People, that can make as good Papists to
Morrow, as themselves are Protestants to Day; that if Popery were but turned up
Trump, would produce you their Charter in Queen Mary's days: they will walk to
Church with you, and lie in her Bosom so long till they sting both her and you
to Death, which makes all Mankind stand a tiptoe to see a tottering Government
sink, and press down it self under its own Weight.


Ar. What! have the Grandees no Influence on the People, are they grown void of
natural Affections to themselves?


Agrip. What Charity they have for themselves I know not; but this I know, they
have none for one another; nor will they contribute one single Sigh for the
Kingdom's Calamity, but rather shove the Burden upon the Peoples Shoulders.


Ar. This is Forty One all over; O the Miseries that Forty One brought upon the
Nation! (thus some cry out) but not a word of the Wickedness of the preceding
Years that brought the Misery upon Forty One. Those barbarous Stigmatizings,
Brandings, Gaggings, Pillorings, Whippings, cutting off Ears, like lopping of
Trees, oppressive Judgments, unheard of Proceeds by the High Commission, and
Star-Chamber-Courts; Judicatories fitter for the Spanish Inquisition than
freeborn Englishmen and Christians; by which means Liberty and Property were
invaded at pleasure.


Th. I remember what King Ahab said to Elijah the Prophet, Art thou the
Troubler of Israel? And I remember what the Prophet replied to the King, No,
but thou and thy Father's House are, in that ye have forsaken the Commandments
of the Lord, and followed after Balaam. Here we see the King charges the
Prophet, and the Prophet he charges the King; but the Prophet proves the Charge
upon him.


Ar. This was the Case in Forty One; the King demands some of the Members of
the House, and they returned the King for Answer, It was a Breach of Privilege
of the House; but if his Majesty pleased to order a Charge against them, they
would proceed to speedy Justice.


Th. Was it in Forty, or Forty One, when the King with an Army invaded the
Scots, and spent his Money to little purpose?


Ar. Yes truly, it was about that time; for then was the Massacre calculated
for Ireland, and Archbishop Laud's Publication of his Book of Sports for the
Profanation of the Sabbath in England: here you see Prelacy and Policy went
hand in hand together to murder Religion and Property, which brought them under
the Severities of Justice.


Th. Ay, but how came the King to be made a Public Example?


Ar. Not because he had married with a Popish Princess, that gave great
Encouragement to the Papists in England: Not for sending a Congratulatory
Letter to the Pope; Not for abdicating himself from his Parliament; Nor for
advancing his Standard Royal at Nottingham, and proclaiming open War against
his Subjects. There was something under his own Hand appeared against him,
besides countenancing Papists, and protecting Delinquents from Justice.


Th. The Scots betrayed him (I have been told so) every body says they sold
their King.


Ar. As much as you sold him: it is true, the King threw himself upon the Scots,
and the Scots threw him back again upon the English; this is Matter of Fact,
but few understand it, and fewer will believe it.


Th. For the love of Friends, let us have the Truth whatever it cost.


Ar. The naked Truth is; The Parliament of England about that time, when the
King at Newark threw himself upon the Scots, owed or was in Arrear to them
200000 l. Sterlin, for Service done; for which they had for Hostage, Newcastle,
Carlisle and Berwick upon Tweed: But upon paying them one Moiety down, they
resigned their Hostage, and withdrew into Scotland, tendering the King to the
English Commissioners, who at that time had no Instructions concerning him,
till they sent to the Parliament to know their further Intentions, who ordered
the Commissioners to apply themselves to the King to know his Royal Pleasure.


Th. And what was his Answer?


Ar. He desired to be removed to one of his Southern Palaces, in order to which
they removed him to Holmby. But the Jest lay here, the English without
Instructions could not take him, and the Scots by Instructions would not take
him: this was the critical time when no body would have him; See Ludlow's Reply
to Hollingworth.
and the Reason the Scots gave for it was this, That he had made such Breaches
in the Bowels of England, they were unwilling to take him into the Bowels of
Scotland. This is the Truth on it, and this is the Scots selling their King. But
where is Agrippa? what have you done with him? And I would as gladly know what
our proud Superiors intend to do with us, except to spin out our Lives with the
Wealth of the Nation.


Th. Agrippa, Shall I ask you one single Question? Whether is best, a Petty
King in every County, or a Parochial Bishop in every Classis, to ride the
People but half way to Heaven?


Agrip. I approve of neither; though some oppose a single Person to an Eyesore
in the Kingdom, and at the same time conclude a Heptarchy more than enough
totally to devour them.


Th. Such a Government would enervate the People, and such Superiors live upon
the Spoil of the Country.


Ar. Is this the present State of Things, and the Project that prevails in
every Man's Head? What, is there no Trimming nor Neutrality left amongst 'em?


Agrip. Yes, there is enough of that, and Solicitations for Peace among sober
Men and Mechanics.


Ar. But what say the People as to Church Government? Is one Religion or more
in fashion?


Agrip. Religion is made a mere Stalking-Horse, to answer the Ends of every
Design, and worn so threadbare, that there is nothing left to cover it, save
only the Name on it. It Is true, there is some small Alteration in the Church, so
is there in the State, by a late Purgation; the Army also is decimated, and
it is thought the Mystery of Law will be made legible, to speak our Modern
Dialect: but the Priest paramount is the bravest Fellow, because Presbyter John
struts a Horseback, whilst the Proselyte like a Pensioner holds the Bridle;
but to speak plain English, most hold the Stirrup.


Ar. What say Mercurius, and Publicus Anglicus?


Agrip. You have them both, and the National Diary to boot, where you may read
the various Products of Men, frequent Tumults in every Corner, general
Discontents in Families; Heatings, but no Healings, in their grand Consults.


Th. What do they vary for?


Agrip. Something superlative; but the Generality cry, Tempora mutantur.


Th. By this I perceive some dig deep to hide their Counsels.


Ar. Deep or shallow, it is a Tiffany Plot; any Man with half an Eye may easily
see through it: Who is it cries up Peace, only those Men whom the Times court,
and the Constitution flatters? such Men as these may cry up for Peace, while
others solicit an every day's Novel: No, Theophilus, there is nothing pleasant,
every thing seems in a hurly burly; and France and Spain at Sword's Point.


Th. O but then what becomes of our Force in Flanders? and what Prospect have
we of the Sweeds Expedition?


Ar. The Sweed you may read looks asquint on the Dane, the Portugal in Trouble,
the Venetian unsafe, and the Turk infested with intestine War. Poor Europe, who
can but pity thee! more especially our Native Country Albion, where every
Politician expects to be made a Monarch; and where every ambitious Clown
aspires to the Eminency of a Crown.


Th. Now for a Book and a Brook, to contemplate, and recreate; this rises to
the Standard of the Philosophers Solitudes. Rocks and Rivers with Hermetick
Groves, shadowed with Myrtles and purling Streams, will for ought I know better
answer our present Occasion, than a Foreign Hope can insure us Accommodation.


Ar. These Elementary Bodies, the beautiful Rags of Flesh and Blood, what
present they but moving Shadows, that vanish in a moment at Death's Appearance?


Th. And do not some Men undermine themselves by supporting themselves on the
Crutch of Mortality? But the Arm that shakes the Foundation, cannot that Arm
shelter us from the Storm?


Ar. Yes sure, since he that made the World gives it Nutrition, who by his Act
of Providence makes Provision for its Continuation. Yet there is nothing that
had a Beginning, but has its Period, and in Conclusion melts into Invisibility.


Th. That Is certainly true, for the Wages of Sin is Death; all Men therefore
must die, so must that proud Tyrant of France, whose Sins above knee-deep have
sunk him up almost to the Chin: so that whoever comes within compass of his
Steerage, he splits the Vessel, or inevitably oversets her; exposing his
Natives and others to a malicious Fate: Therefore how difficult is it to sail
betwixt Sylla and Charibdis?


Ar. And as difficult almost to weather the Times at home; for whenever a State
stands a tiptoe, the common People are threatened Exiles.


Th. I would not be thought so rash to preanticipate before trial; nor would I
truckle to uneven Tempers of Men and Times, by a supine Complacency, so to be
coaks'd out of my Life by the sugared Temptation of Designers.


Ar. Unthinking Men whilst the Storm is yet rising, rise before it, so fool
away their Lives: He that falls in with a discontented Family, propounds to
build on another Man's Ruin. The Divine Powers shake the Arm of Flesh; and what
is too difficult for God to do? He that made the World, can throw it down and
dash it in pieces.


Th. Yes sure, and us too, if we stand within distance (I mean in his way of
Justice against Impenitents.) O my Friend, let us remove further off.


Ar. What Star must direct us? and whither must we go?


Th. Into the solitary Shades of Scotland; for every Eye will trace us out here.


Ar. What! so unjust to our selves, to fly without an Offense! so condemn our
selves before trial! when our own Innocence I should think were enough not only
to clear us, but also to protect us.


Th. Time's sandy Glass slides swiftly into Eternity; and so may some of these
eminent Contenders slip into their Graves. That Wind blows high that makes our
Fortunes stagger.


Ar. Nor could Thunder shake the Courage and Constancy of David to Jonathan:
Here we have for Precedent two of the Worthies in that Age, the one no less
than a King and a Prophet; and the other no less than the Son of a King. Come,
let us stand the Charge, there is no Man knows what a Day may bring forth.


Th. Yes, I Am so prophetic to foresee a Stone Doublet, or something worse; why
then to contribute such Advantages to Men of no Faith? Nay, I wrong 'em not, to
say faithless to themselves.


Ar. On the other hand, who would harbor or engender Fear, which lively
prefigurates a faint Repulse, that never got Honor by Inches? so that I
resolve against preparing for Flight, and alike resolve not to think of Fear.


Th. Such Resolutions will stem the Tide, and struggle with Death; but who can
withstand the Torrent of Invaders, or stifle a Mutiny that invades the Camp?


Ar. I should forfeit both my Reason and Discretion, to foresee Danger
approach, and run headlong into Ruin; want of Foresight (not to foresee)
argues to me but a purblind Sight: And that Resolution I always approved of,
that is best understood by a constant Courage; the Morals of Equity justify a
Cause, and the Justness of a Cause puts a Period to doubts.


Th. The Supreamest gives Wisdom, and Man a Capacity to choose it; which, if he
refuses, it argues an irreverend Neglect, both of the Donor and the Gift.


Ar. Do we not see Nature commissioned from the Divinest, to dress up and
beautify this stupendous Creation; and how Wisdom and Providence give a
Blessing to preserve it? And do we act our Reason to throw both away, Wisdom
that made us, and Providence that preserves us?


Th. It Is true, the Limit and Bound of Nature, is by the sacred Decrees of
Providence: and Wisdom has no Limitation, because essentially from the Creator
himself.


Ar. Art imitates Nature, and Necessity is the Mother of Invention; Science
also invites to Study and Practicks, but Theory gives the Prospect, and
Operation finishes the Project. From whence it follows, that Arts are sold to
Ingenuities, and the Reward of Labor and Industry to Experience, and the
Promulgation of Health and Maintenance. What tho Caesar and Pompey contend for
an Empire? Alexander Magnus bids fair for the World.


Th. I have waded to the Chin in the Practicks of Experience; but never
attempted Kneedeep in the Rudiments of Politics.


Ar. And I have lived under various Dispensations of Providence, by the Divine
Power and protection of the Divinest.


Th. Nectar and Ambrosia have filled my Cup, almost to an overflowing; while my
Associates were the Pious and the Penitent (but not the Politic) with Apollo
sometimes to bear a part, with musical Instruments that never spoke Treason;
this is a Life that lives above the World.


Arnold. O the heavenly Raptures that flow from Contemplation; they are enough to
raise the Mind by divine Faith, and a holy Speculation, to the very Suburbs and
Portals of Paradise.


Theoph. And such is Unity, for it is the Key of Harmony; which if but touched
by the divine Finger of the great Jehovah, how quickly the World is put in Tune.


Arnold. And quickly out of Tune, where Policy is planted in the room of Piety.
Now I always thought Piety the best Policy, when beautified with the Ornaments
of true Christianity. For since God himself has blessed Man with Reason, and to
his Rationality added intellectual Understanding, let us act above Sense, for
that enslaves us; and once enslaved, we are captivated with Fears.


Th. Were I a wise Expositor, I should interpret this Sentiment by the rule of
Travel.


Ar. And whither would your Fancy direct you?


Th. Into the very Center and Bowels of Scotland.


Ar. What would you propound to your Self, when there?


Th. The exercise of the Rod, and learn to Fish.


Ar. And who shall instruct us?


Th. Our selves, who should? You shall be my Tutor, and i will be your Pupil.


Ar. Must I be didactick to initiate this Art?


Th. No Man (than your Self) knows it better.


Ar. If so, you must arm your self for Angling Encounters; for I best approve
of a resolute Combitant, whose Conduct and Courage equally strive against all
vicissitude of Fortune; and smiles when at the precipice of Danger. Such a Man
bears the triumphant Standard of Constancy in all Difficulties, and doubtful
Uncertainties?


Th. Are Lectures to be read in Features?


Ar. Are Lovers by Sympathy capable to feel those amorous Flames, that scorch
their Hearts in each other's Breast?


Th. If that Axiom be true, my Breast has burnt long enough.


Ar. With what?


Th. It may be with Passion.


Ar. And it may be with Suspicion.


Th. Let all Suspicion (and the Nature of it) be for ever suspended.


Ar. If that be your Resolution, give me your Prospect.


Th. The flourishing Fields, and the plentiful Streams in Scotland.


Ar. Shall we ramble the Highlands?


Th. Ay and the Lowlands too, for i will hazard my Fortunes with my Friend, and
share in his Adventures.


Ar. Is that your Resolution?


Th. Yes, that is my resolve; I must confess I had rather go than stay.


Ar. Stay then, and i will go with you.


Theoph. Why now I Am answered, Doubts can have an end;
And so have mine, since lodged in such a Friend
To Nature, human Learning, Sense and Reason;
Compounds of purest Peace; no Plot, nor Treason
Harbors in that calm Breast, where Art and Science
Bud up like Twins, and bid a bold Defiance
TO Ignorance and Profaneness: let thy Lot
Be what it will, and see if mine be not
The same adjusted: know that I can bear
The hazard of my Fortunes any where
To vie Arnoldus; if Arnoldus lay
Commands on him that is ready to obey.

Ar. This looks somewhat like a Foreign Doctrine.


Th. However you will find it an innate Principle.


Ar. If so, then we run but one single Risque; which of necessity will
incorporate us in one single Adventurer: in order thereto, let us first
dispatch Agrippa, whose Countermarch will very much advance our Progress.


Th. That Is well considered, pray let it be so; that without interruption we
may ramble all Scotland.


Ar. And the studious Art of Angling, must not we make that our employment?


Th. Yes sure, but how must we accommodate our selves with Rods, and other
convenient Manuals and Instruments, whereby to pursue this mysterious Art?


Ar. Trouble not your self with that little Affair; Here, Agrippa, take you
these Letters, and sweeten your Rhetoric with returns of Arnoldus, so often as
enquired for by my dear Constantia.


Agrip. Can the Tides forget their natural Course? I Will court Sun and Moon to
sprinkle the Tracts with propitious Beams, to return me prosperous.


Ar. But when you approach those harmonious Ports where Constantia dwells, be
well advised what you say or express; let not one Word slip that may cause a
Tear; for if one Star falls, all the Heavens lowre.


Th. And remember me (honest Agrippa) to the Vertuoso's in Nottingham; together
with the generous Society of Anglers, that traverse the fragrant Banks of those
silver silent and murmuring Streams of the famous Trent.


Ar. Near whose cultivated Shores, and florid Medows, shines the Life of my
Life in the constant Breast of my dear Constantia.


Agrip. I Will observe your Punctims, and pay your Respects.


Ar. Do so.


Th. Agrippa, farewell, and forget not Theophilus, who petitions their Welfare,
and thy prosperous Journey.


Agrip. Heavens influence your Designs.


Ar. Now he is gone (nor will he be long in going) in the mean time let us
contemplate the beauteous Creation, and retire to those solitary Rocks to
defend us from the radient and refulgent Beams of the Sun, that direct their
Strokes upon us; such Retirements will moderate Extremes: afterward we may
stretch our Limbs to encounter our Recreation, and sport our selves with the
princely Trout, in the flourishing Rivers and Rivulets in Scotland, which
probably may contribute as much Satisfaction, as any other Rivers in the
Promontories of great Britain, if dexterously examined, and industriously
managed with Patience, and other Requisites, suitable and agreeable to the
Methods of Art.

We may also in our Progress, as we travel the Country, take a Survey of their
Towns, Forts and Fortresses; the like we may do of their Cities, Castles and
Ciradels; with their Rivers, Rivulets, and solitary Loughs; which will furnish
us with Fish enough, provided we can furnish our selves with Baits. But to
furnish every Angler with a new Bait, was the studious Invention of Isaac
Walton, Author (as you may read) of the Complete Angler, who industriously has
taken care to provide a good Cook, (supposing his Wife had a Finger in the Py)
which will necessarily be wanting in our Northern Expedition; where the Fry are
numerous, (nay numberless almost) in some of those Rapid and Trembling Streams;
from whence the Artificial Fly (if that Exercise be well understood) will
contribute as much as any thing, to court them ashore, and sweeten our
Recreation. But I speak more peculiarly to ingenious Artists, not to those
flegmetick Fellows indigent of Art; such only I allot an accidental Fate.


Th. Methinks I grow impatient to attempt these silver Streams with our
harmless Artillery; here needs no Auxiliary force to guard our Approaches, when
only to trample these delicious, pleasant and fragrant Banks, enameled with
Flowers, and green Coverings, where every crystal purling Stream is
overshadowed with a stately Fir Tree, or some spreading Sycomore; through which
Zephyrus inspires a softened breath of Air to curl the Surface of the milder
Streams, and where the glittering Shores shine like Peru, or the golden Sands
of the admired Tagus, as if purposely erected for a Tomb or Sepulcher, therein
to inter the generous Trout; which is the Anglers Trophies, and the ultimate
Period of Art. Reach me that Rod, Arnoldus, and furnish me with Tackle to try
my Fortune. Are these Flies proper, and suitable to the Season? Is the Line
tapred, and the Rod rush-grown? Every thing answers to promise Success, and now
have amongst them; for I resolve beyond dispute to approve my self an Angler,
or shame the Art.


Ar. An Angler; an Allegator rather, to rush so rudely upon a River, and forget
your Rudiments.


Th. My passionate Zeal hurried on by Avarice, confirmed the difficulty of
catching Fish, no more, than a cast of my Fly to summon them ashore.


Ar. That would excuse your over-forwardness, to put a force upon your
Exercise; the Anglers Direction and the Mediums of Art, are the Pole Star you
must steer by.


Th. You do well to reckon up my Errors, and lay down Rudiments to oblige me to
reform: all that I solicit, is to be Master of my Exercise; that Theory and
Practice be made legible and intelligible; Nature then will demonstrate her
self obvious to the Artist.


Ar. You have hit the Mark, it is true what you say: Art at the best is but
Nature's Imitation; Instructions made legible, gratify the Ingenious, whilst
the Ignorant read but Lectures in their ABC.


Th. Then I need not despair; however as I Am solicitous after the Secrets of
the Art, direct me how to flourish a Fly in a torpid deep and melancholy Water;
such as this is.


Ar. Stand close be sure, that is your first Caution; and appear least in sight,
that is your second Direction; and dibble lightly on the Surface of the Water,
that is your third and final Instruction: now order and manage the Affair as
well as you can.


Th. So I will; and fancy that a City is more than half conquered, where
Resolution has got footing in the Besiegers Camp.


Ar. From your Inference, I must conclude, that confident Theophilus will
approve himself an Artist, because he is so forward in the Art of Angling.


Th. I Will observe the Anglers Axioms.


Ar. So you must, if you intend to be an Artist; but how will you flourish a
Fly in that solitary Water, whereby to complete your self Lord of your own
Exercise? consider it seriously. In the next place, you must mind the Season of
the Year. Small Rains, fair Weather, and intermittent Sunshine, all these
contribute to your Entertainment; but Snow-broth, and Storms, stand in
opposition to your Recreation. You must also observe, the Wrack of Clouds, and
the hovering Winds that curl the Streams; these Circumstances judicially
observed, an ordinary Artist may kill a Trout, provided he purdue himself at a
reasonable distance. But what must be done when the Air is undisturbed, nor the
least breath of Wind to fan the Sholes? Can you then kill a Fish to recompense
your Labor, and sweeten your Toil? Come, lend me your Rod, and I Will hazard my
Skill to puzzle the Art, or lay a Trout in your Lap.


Th. That Is as much as to say, you will give me Handsel.


Ar. And I do but little, if I do not do that. Observe that Bush, whose slender
Branches wantonly dangle, sporting themselves on the Cusp of the Water: there is
no Stream you may observe, nor any thing of Motion, nor the least breath of Air
to invade the Calms. Put case I kill a Trout from that silent Surface, what
will you think on it?


Th. I Will think you an Artist.


Ar. When?


Th. When I see your success.


Ar. Have amongst them then --: Now there is what I promised you.


Th. And I Will promise you, you are a Man of your Word.


Ar. I seldom use to be less.


Th. And I Will never desire to be more. But one thing I observe, and that is very
remarkable: why so circumspect in making your Approaches, when accosting the
River, as an Engineer approaches a Fortification?


Ar. There Is Reason for that I do.


Th. Then there is Reason you resolve me what I shall do, since Trouts are so
difficult to deal with.


Ar. You will tell me more (I question not) when you come to examine them.


Th. And that will not be long if I have my liking. But what an admirable Fish is
the Trout for Shape, Beauty and Proportion?


Ar. Such is the Char; next to him the Umbar.


Th. And are they of as much Agility of Body?


Ar. In every respect.


Th. Of necessity then they must be excellent Companions to consort with the
Angler, whiles the Miser and Avaricious hugs his Bags, the Epicure his
luxurious voracious Appetite, and the wretched and covetous Angler his Paunch
and Pannier. Let Art, Industry and Experience gratify the Artist. But as
Fortune favors you in your second Adventure, such are my resolves to magnify
the Art.


Ar. You do well I perceive, to do nothing rashly.


Th. And you do it better, by doing on it advisedly.


Ar. Then have at all; and I think I have him, look how he leaps and struggles
for Life; but this prognostics a Sign of Death: for when the Swan sings his
own Funeral-Epitaph, which of the Family of Birds join in Consort with him? so
when the Trout dances Coranto's to the Angler; what but the Line rings his
Funeral Passing-peal? Now see how he lies gasping for Breath, though every
Breath of Air is as bad as Opium; and laments his Misfortune to be so
unfortunate, because not to live out half his Time; where every Cheque of the
Line challenges Death, and sends him a Summons to prepare for the Pannier. So
that you see he is no sooner deprived of natural Strength, but submits himself
to the fatal doom of the Angler, who assures him no better Quarter than Death.
Are not these terrible Arguments to terrify the Fish out of his Element? who
whilst he endeavors to evade the Angler, falls foul upon the Art with equal
Hazard; and designing Flight, pursues the Pursuer: so struggles with the Artist
to cheat his Appetite, by proffering his Life for a silly Fly. By this you may
see it is not difficult to court him, when with little difficulty he comes to
Hand, nay to his Grave, merely for a mouthful; for this simple Novelty cost him
his Life. And what was it think you? only a Fly of another Figure, and of a
different Complexion; the one Artificial, but this was Natural, and there he
lies naturally devoted yours, not daring to petition his Judg's Reprieve. Where
note, for your encouragement, I present you with my Conquest; and dedicate both
my Practice and Experience to your self, purposing perhaps a farther
Examination. For since to find Fish so prodigal as to meet me half way, what
cause have I to doubt of carrying them to their Journey's end?


Th. Here Is lucky Handsel for a young Beginner.


Ar. And you are that young Beginner; pray accept of Handsel.


Th. Thanks, Arnoldus, if Thanks be Argument good enough to retaliate your
Bounty. But what must we think of those hovering Clouds?


Ar. I think they will bring us Summons of Night, otherways I am loath to
relinquish these pleasant Streams, that divert the Angler with such profitable
Entertainments.


Th. If the Night approach, it is time to withdraw; but to withdraw from such
sweet Diversion goes against the Grain. Eden, farewell. Nay I Will repeat it
twice; Farewell, Eden. With what reluctance do I relinquish thy Smiling Fords,
though to solace my self in the Fortress of Carlisle.


Ar. You are shrewdly hurt. Will Refreshment incommode you after the Toils of
Recreation? and your observation of this late Encounter invalidate the Art?
Ingenuously tell me, what your Observation directs to?


Th. This I observed worthy my Observation, that it was a Field fairly fought,
but I cannot say without loss of Life.


Ar. And I declare it a Conquest of an easy Purchase, where Arms and Artillery
(the Rod excepted) amounts not to Sixpence.


Th. Was it six Shillings, what a Purchase is that to experience Art, and
tantalize Fish? What Is the single hazard of a Hook and Line, (a valuable
considerable Loss indeed) to lose the Value of Two pence, to purchase a Fish
worth Ten pence? Pray what is it more than earnesting the River with a Hook and
Line, to stem the Adventure? which I value not a Rush, was every Hair a Thread
of Gold, and the barbed Hook of superfine Silver; I Would expose the Worth on it for
the Fin of a Fish.


Ar. This Resolution surmounts the Adventure.


Th. Besides all this: here is another Observation, well worthy our own and the
Angler's consideration; and that is, our Labor and Travel: it is no more than a
Walk to trample the deliciated and cultivated Fields, on the fragrant Banks
that bridle the meandring Streams. O who would not solicit Patience to crown
such charming Rewards, entailed upon Anglers, in their solitary Recreations?
Instruct me, dear Arnoldus, in this liberal Art, and ingenuously tell me how
you took these Trouts.


Ar. With nothing, upon Reputation, but a natural Fly, which I suddenly
snatched from that slender Twig: For if you remember my turning to that Bush, I
mean that Hawthorn that flourishes behind you; there it was I discovered some
Insects, which properly to consult, are as truculent as Death, more especially
in the Ides of April and May. It was only with Dracks that I killed these
Trouts; nor is there any Bait that excels it at the Tail of a Bush, or the Brow
of a Bank, provided always you appear least in sight; dibble but lightly on the
Surface of the Calms, you infallibly raise him; and the better to secure him,
stand but close, and you certainly kill him.


Th. This plain Discovery speaks both Theory and Practice. Such Instructions as
these (except to an indigent Artist) will indisputably complete him an Angler
in an instant.


Ar. Come then, if you please, let us lap up our Lines, and trace these
pleasant Fields to the Town of Carlisle, where we may refresh our selves with
the Country Curiosities.


Th. I think it very good and wholesome Advice, to comply with your Motion for a
Modicum: For when the Water with Exercise extimulates our Stomachs, I fancy
Diet will relish better than Discourse; and when we have closed-up the Orifice
of our Appetites, clean Linen I fancy will be very acceptable. The for the
Morning-Watch, trust to my Diligence, for I Will rise with the Sun, or it may be
before Day, to be in a readiness to survey this ancient City, Citadel, Castle,
Cathedral, Ports, Vanports, Curtains, Counterscarps, Bastions, Redoubts, etc.
of all which I purpose a brief Description, and that you may expect before our
Departure.


Ar. You direct good Measures; but let me first advise you to observe Access,
Situation and Strength, the Complement and Resolution of their Armed Men; their
Arms also, Ammunition and Artillery; what stock of Provisions is stored in
their Providors; and whether Nature or Art challenges the Superiority in her
Fortifications. This is part of the Task you impose upon your self; and by Noon
be in readiness for our Departure; about which time (if I calculate right) the
Tide will commode us for our Northern Passage over the trembling tottering
Sands. In the mean time, let not the Night nor our Sleep invade us, nor our
Watchings slide into wanton Embracements: For the Watchman of the Night will
declare against such, and a Serpent concealed in the Secrets of Conscience,
shall gnaw and devour our Habitations with our selves.


Th. Vainly and profusely to lavish Time, we but flatter our selves with sordid
Delusions, that vanish if but touched by the cold icy Finger of Death. How in a
trice Honors become fugitive before us; and Mortality in a moment incorporates
with the Grave; Tissues and Orris Hangings become a Prey to the Moth; and
polished Pavements of Jasper, with those others of Marble, how quickly Time
translates them into Tombstones: Nay, those Delicacies and Viands that
surprised the Palate, are by this also converted into nauseous Excrements. So
that upon the whole, this Elementary Composition in conclusion results in Dust
and Ashes.


Ar. It Is very true: for did Man but consider the Instability of Transitory
Enjoyments, he might read himself more miserable in living than dying; but
there is a State (tho unknown to the Ignorant) that is too great and glorious
for Mortals to purchase: but Christ has already done that for inglorious Man,
whose longest Progress of Life on the Stage of this World, is no more than a
Dream to the length of Eternity.


Th. Now the fair Star Aurora springs upon us, I must be stirring, Arnoldus;
you know I have set my self a Task to survey this City and Fortress of
Carlisle, which I purpose to describe.


Ar. That will be time enough about Noon.


Th. And it may be I can do it now as well.


Ar. Come then, let us have it; I see you're in haste.


Th. Carlisle, I have considered it but a little City, a little Observation
therefore shall serve to describe it. However, it is a Fortification (that is
true) tho it stands in a Nook, or more properly to call it a Corner of England,
whose Foundations are Rocky, and surrounded with a Stone Wall. At the South
Entrance you may observe a small Citadel fronted with Stone, and such are the
Houses of the same Material; nor are they much elevated into the Air, where the
Battlements are seen above the Houses, which argues the Wall a serviceable
Defense. In the midst of the Marketplace they parade their Guards: And at the
North-west End of the City stands their Castle (strong and formidable) upon
whose bulky Battlements several Pieces of Cannon are planted, to scatter Fury
in every Quarter. There is also a Cathedral situated South from the Bastions of
the Castle, worthy any Man's Description, were it not so torn to Tatters that
there is little to describe, which only serves now as a Monument to gaze at,
because impoverished by the strokes of Time. But the Ports, and sally Ports of
this Northern Fortress are girt about with Rocky Stone; and the Wash of Eden
bathe some of her Sconces; that River I mean where Arnoldus fished when he slew
the Trouts.


Ar. It Is very true, the River Eden floats near the Skirts, and the
Fortifications of Carlisle. But then you must consider there is another River,
commonly known by the Name of Annon, (of a more rapid Motion, and more resolute
Streams) which issues from the famous Top of Erricsteen, not far from as famous
a Mountain called Tintaw. This Annon glides along the Southern Marshes of
Scotland, which afterward espouseth with the Ocean Westward, and gives Name to
a Dale, commonly called Annon's Dale. But there is another River the Natives
call Ask, which juts just upon Annon, on the Scottish Promontories, so tumbles
into the Sea at N. Nor-West, as near as I can guess at the quaking Sands.


Th. Pray give us that Relation?


Ar. I remember on a time as I traveled these Parts, to Admiration I saw two
thousand Horse, all advance in Divisions over those silly Shores, which so
pressed and deprest the tottering Surface, that not till then, nor before, I had
ever seen Sands shaped into Valleys, then again into Mountains; nay, such
prodigious overgrown Mountains as almost amazed me: because when to behold
from such palpable Levels, Mountains as it were raised up in a moment; and in
the twinkling of an Eye, all melted into Valleys. And the nearer the Bodies
approached one another, the farther they seemed to be asunder. So that upon the
matter the Advance of this Brigade, was little more than to make new Hills, and
depress and sink them again into Dales. So that looking behind me when
discharging the Fords, there was nothing remaining but Sea and Sand, checkered
as it were part perpale. This is the first of our Northern Wonders, and the
Rarity is almost beyond Belief, were it not so commonly experienced by almost
every Traveller that travels these Northern remote Parts: otherwise it might
render me ridiculous to report it, and look too fabulous to gain a Reputation.
But he that has beheld this admirable Prospect will credit my Relation, whilst
the more ignorant and prejudicate suspend their Censures.


Th. And must we adventure to attempt these tottering Sands?


Ar. Yes, indisputably we must.


Th. In my Opinion then it is requisite we summons a Guide.


Ar. That Is well considered, for there is no passing without one.


Th. So ho, Iockey.


Servus. Wha's there?


Th. Here Is one or two that want a good Guide to pilot us over these sinking
Sands.


Servus. Ise come belive.


Ar. Prithee come now, and direct us over these quaking Sands.


Serve. Marry sall I, Ise be your Guide I tro, to speeroot the bliethest and the
bonnyest Gate I con: haud a Plack, Ise but fet my Spear and Cutrements, whelk
in guide fa I may not won without.


Ar. Then take 'em with you.


Serve. Marry sall I, sa that now and then as I gang by the Gat, gif the Bourn
be clear, and Ise pre a guide blink; Ise wap a Samon ore the Crage I tro, than
with a Grip ore his Luggs we my ene hand; I tro Ise hold him a bit, an for au
his struggle, Ise mar his march to Sea any mare. Come ben me Joes, and won
awaugh; span yar Groond ore this silly Bourn, Ise pre it, and prieve it; it is
guide enogh, come awaw, follo me now. Whelk way won ye, ken ye I tro? Guide fa
Sirs, yar misleard, won away thick way, mare and mare yet to thick hond: For an
the quick Sands get a grip au yor Nagg's shakle Been, good far Sirs heel womble
down the bourn; an what au ye then? but au's weel enof now; for now ye treed on
bonny Scottish Grond.


Th. I know not what Ground it is, nor what to call it; but this I know, that
I Am glad we can welcome our selves on this side Danger. What think you,
Arnoldus, have not we made an eminent Exchange, to truck a Southern Rose for a
Northern Thistle? Farewell old England, I shall venerate thy Memory, and thy
fertile Medows, and never forget thy florid Fields that glut the Sith, nor thy
fragrant Gardens that perfume the Air.


Ar. And welcome Scotland, I say; for this Night I purpose to lodge in Dumfreez;
but who must carry our Impliments and our Fish?


Th. Let us catch 'em first, and then consider their Portage.


Ar. That Is but little difficult to do, where every Field is accommodated with
Rivulets, and every Rivulet furnished with Trouts, as we travel along this
mountainous Coast of Galloway: Look but before you, and view those Ports; such
are the Entrances into the Decays of Dumfreez, whose Situation and Buildings
bespeak it spacious, and a Town that will furnish us with Fish and Flesh; where
we may stay till to Morrow, and solace our selves with her flourishing Streams;
whose lofty Banks barrocade the beautiful Pontus Arnotus, a pleasant portable
River below the Situation of the Town (unplundered of Exercise) that will
recreate and recruit us with Fish enough, if the Season but serve to experiment
the Art.


Th. I approve very well of your Motion, but a Modicum first will be very
seasonable. Let us summons the Cook to know what he is got in the Kitchen; and
give Charge to the Chambermaid (if there be such a thing in Scotland) to take
care that the Windows be decked and adorned with Flowers, whilst the Boards and
Floors are strewed with Greens: For I Will examine every Thread in our Beds, to
see if they be cleanly washed, and thoroughly dried, the better to accommodate
us in our Northern Expedition.


Ar. Do so, and I resolve in the Morning to examine your Breviate of the
various Particulars of this Night's Entertainment, how you approved of your
Lodging, with the memorable Apprehensions of England in Scotland. The Sauce
also, you must tell how that savoured; and the rest of your Delicates, how they
digested; together with your Linen, how richly perfumed.


Th. Were not Complaint a ridiculous Orator, I would tell you the Mutton was
small, but good; but Cookery I persuade my self never worse contrived: And the
Linen was sweet, and clean enough, of a modest Complexion, but not
Lavender-proof: Then for their Pewter (the like was never seen) it was
tarnish'd with nothing but a Face of Lead. The Beds I confess were soft enough,
and if I don't mistake my self, short enough: Yet every Angler may without
difficulty resolve how sweetly Rest relishes after Recreation; and how grateful
Solace seems after good Success. Shall we spread the Water this Morning with
our angling Artillery, and examine the Fords before we feast our selves?
Resolve this Morning's Exercise my Benevolence, only stand by and furnish me
with Directions.


Ar. Your Motion inclines me to promote the Adventure, and the rather because
to introduct you into the Anglers Society. Hold forth your Hand and grasp this
Rod, take also this Box, and this dubbing Bag of Flies, and select a Choice.
The Complextion of the Water must also be considered; and Depths and Shallows
are necessary Observations. But above all, mind carefully the Clifts of those
craggy Rocks, from whence you must expect the head of your Game, if you angle
for Trout. And be circumspect and cautious when and how you strike, lest
peradventure Passion provoke your Discretion, so endanger the loss of what you
labor for.


Th. These are Sovereign Admonitions.


Ar. Mind therefore your Directions, and fish like an Artist; for here if your
Line but reach the Water, you raise a Trout, or it may be a Salmon. Where note,
if you be indigent of this generous Art, and unskilful to manage so eminent an
Encounter; perchance you will sacrifice your Labors to loss, so in conclusion
lose your Reputation.


Th. I shall be mindful of that.


Ar. Then direct your Eye to those bubbling Streams, at whose murmuring
Descents are most profound Deeps. But then again there is Cataracts, and falls
of Water; from whose fair Invitations neither doubt nor despair of Incomparable
Entertainments. That Is the Sirenes Seat of Trophies, where Trouts tumble up and
down for Diversion: don't you see them pick, and cast themselves on the Surface
of the Streams, amongst those knotty stumpy Rocks, almost drowned in Water? Lay
but your Line in at the tail of that Stream, where it is sheltred with craggy
rocky Stones, and manage your Game with Art and Discretion, I Will uphold you
sport enough; but be circumspect (be sure) and look well to your Line, lest
peradventure your Tackle be torn to pieces.


Th. Doubt not of my Care and Circumspection.


Ar. Then take your Lot, and cast in your Line; and flourish your Fly, for it is
dubbed with Bears Hair; and the Point of your Hook, it is so snug and so sharp,
that, as it ought, it must always hang downward. Moreover, it is proportioned of
an excellent Compass, winged also with the dapple Feather of a Teal; a
dangerous Novel to invite a desperate Fish; and suitable to the Day and Season,
in regard it is bright.


Th. Why thus to capitulate? let us in amongst them.


Ar. Two words to a Bargain; be better advised.


Th. It Is past that now, and I Am past my Senses, to feel such Trepidations on a
sudden invade me; What Is the matter with me that I Am thus out of Order?


Ar. I perceive you disordred, but not much deliciated.


Th. If I were, it is folly to complain, when past all hope to expect redress.


Ar. How know you that?


Th. I know you will not tell me what it is that tugs thus.


Ar. It may be a Trout; or it may be a Salmon.


Th. Or it may be both, for ought I know; for it is almost impossible that one
single Fish should raise the Water to such Eruptions.


Ar. And impossible for you (I perceive) to reclaim him.


Th. Do but resolve me what it is, and then I Will resolve my self what to do.


Ar. Make your own choice, what would you have it?


Th. I would have it a Fish.


Ar. So it is; and it may be a Fish of the largest size: therefore look well
about you.


Th. I may look which way I will, and despair at last; what makes the Water
swell with Ebullitions?


Ar. Nothing I suppose but a change of Elements, the Fish has no mind to come a
Shore.


Th. And I have as little inclination to go to fetch him.


Ar. Then were your Hazards equal; and hitherto as I apprehend, you have much
the Odds.


Th. Odd or Even, I know not how to manage him.


Ar. Would you put a force upon Neptune, to compel his Subjects a Shore?


Th. Had I Skill enough, I would certainly do it.


Ar. So I perceive; but you are almost now at a stand; Pull.


Th. On the other hand he strives to pull all in pieces; which he will
certainly do, if I do not reclaim him. But where is he now?


Ar. Gone to the bottom, it may be.


Th. And it may be I begin to smell the Plot; he courts the Deeps for
Self-security.


Ar. Then you fancy the Streams will not protect him; because there is no Plot in
them.


Th. Plots for the most part you know lie deepest; so he sinks to the Bottom
for Self-preservation, and creeps to Death as if of old Acquaintance.


Ar. Rash Results reap Repentance: mistake not your self by dooming his Death;
he is but slipped to the Bottom to recruit himself, and indenture with Stones to
oblige their Protection.


Th. What must we have now another Vagary? Is my Scaly Companion surrounded and
compounded of nothing but Frolicks? which for ought I know may cost him his
Life, if he is not mindful to look to his Hitts.


Ar. And you must be advised to look well to yours; for he will not come a Shore
to beg his Life. Stand fast therefore, and call to mind your former Rudiments;
for trust me I shall give you no other Supply than some friendly Admonishments
to reconcile you together.


Th. What, no Directions; nor any farther Instructions?


Ar. If two to one be odds at Football, and against the Rules and Law of fair
Play, the very Thoughts on it would make me blush, and appear shamefaced, if but
to think two Anglers should at once consult together to encounter one Fish.


Th. Then I Will fight him my self, and run my own Destiny. See where he comes
tumbling and tossing, and volting himself in the stiffest Streams. Can no
Element contain his active Violence? Will he twist his Tail to cut my Line for
an Experiment? But this kind of cunning may perchance defeat him; he may prick
his Chaps, and yet miss my Bait.


Ar. And you may miss him, that will not stand upon a Trifle.


Th. A Trifle did you say? I Will trifle him no longer. Ha Boys! he is gone again.


Ar. I suppose he is gone where you cannot come at him; and that is to the Bottom
for another Insurrection.


Th. So it appears, for he is invisible in a Moment. This is a kind of Hocus
pocus: Surely I fancy he has out lived his Time.


Ar. Flatter not your self with that fly-blown Opinion; for I Am apt to persuade
my self he will live beyond the Art of your Exercise; this I know and perceive by
his working, that if you work not wisely, he will work a Reprieve.


Th. Then i will work with him, and trifle him a Shore, to examine the Point, and
exchange of Elements. I see he is convulst by fluttering his Fins; and I Am sure
he is half dead by rigling his Tail; nay, more than that, he lies still without
Motion: And are not all these mortal Signs of Submission?


Ar. And if he submits, he dies without Redemption: and Death you know is a
total Submission.


Th. I Will kill this Fish, or forfeit my Reputation.


Ar. Take your Chance, for I know you are resolute.


Th. I Will take my Chance, and return Victorious.


Ar. But there is no Triumph you know, till possessed of the Trophies.


Th. And I am pretty near them, was it not that one or two Stratagems strangely
amuse me; the one of them is the casting himself on the Surface, as if
designing thereby to cut my Line; and the other his fastening himself in the
Bottom, thinking, as I apprehend, to tear all in pieces; which if he do, I lose
my Reputation: besides I grow weary, and would fain horse him out.


Ar. You may do what you please, you are Lord of your own Exercise; the Law is
in your Hand, manage it with discretion.


Th. I Will manage it with all the industry I have.


Ar. Do so, and you will see the Event.


Th. Then have at all.


Ar. And what have you got?


Th. I have got nothing but the Footsteps of Folly.


Ar. And Nothing out of Nothing is Folly in the abstract; was not I Prophetic?


Th. An Oracle too true to confirm my Loss; for what have I left? nothing but
Folly, to lament and condole this fatal Conclusion: to be robbed by a Fish that
I reckoned my Reward; Is not this Felony, to steal my Tackle, and ruin an
Angler? but he is marked for my own, and let whose will take him, I Will challenge
an Interest.


Ar. That Is very pleasant; when another has caught him, you will put in your
Claim.


Th. So I will, where-e're I find him; for his Marks I am sure will certainly
betray him.


Ar. As if he wore your Livery to no other purpose than to describe his
Servitude.


Th. So he does; for my Hook I am sure hangs still in his Chaps, and part of my
Line is entailed to it.


Ar. I thought all along what it would come to, for I knew well enough there
was nothing wanting but the exercise of Patience to kill this Fish.


Th. What would you have done had it been your Case?


Ar. I would not have handled my Play-fellow so rudely.


Th. What! you rather laugh at me, than pity my Loss.


Ar. I pity the Fish to feed upon such sharp Commons.


Th. Peradventure the Hook may go near to choke him.


Ar. That it will never do, nor hardly check him upon a fresh Entertainment.


Th. Why so; will the Hook remain in his Chaps without Detriment to the Fish?


Ar. Some small Season it may remain; but Time and Action soon discharges it.
For if when to consider his frequent Motion, his continual gliding and glancing
against Stones, it loosens the part without Detriment to the Fish, so that the
Hook of it self leisurely drops off.


Th. How comes this to pass? it is incredibly strange.


Ar. Yet not so strange as true that you have lost a Line, as complete a Line
as Art could proportion: it is well you kept your Rod, for i will assure you it is
exactly taper'd; and as straight and plient as ever flourished a Fly to
facilitate Death by D^xterity. But this artificial Novel you lost but now,
gives no more satisfaction to a voracious Appetite, than a Witch's Banquet; or
the unlimited Desires of a wretched Usurer, who never desists the pursuit of
Riches, till tantaliz'd, like your Game, to Death with a Trifle.

And now Theophilus, I must reprove your Precipitancy, because a great Error in
young Anglers. Patience must be moderated to promote the Art, and Time
procrastinated to proclaim the Angler an Artist. These Precepts I have laid
down oftener than once, always provided your Swim be clear, your Line long, and
strong enough; then shall you see the Fruits of your Labor, and the Fish
himself act the part of a Felon, that puts a Knife to his own Throat, wherewith
he secretly murders himself: and that this Desperado had certainly done, upon
exchange of Elements, so become his own Executioner; who beyond dispute had
struggled to strangle himself; which without difficulty is easily and the more
expeditiously done, by frequently but cautiously exposing him to Air; for that
suffocates his Vitals, whereby he necessarily falls under very fatal
Cons^quents. And how little a thing blots out the Character of Life, every one
knows, that knows Air is as Opium to force a sleepy Pulse; that deprives of
Motion, and makes passage for Death.

Be mindful therefore to observe Directions in handling and managing your Rod
and Line, and cautiously keeping your self out of sight: all which Precautions
are requisite Accomplishments, which of necessity ought to be understood by
every ingenious Angler. And so is that secret Art of Striking, which ought
never at any time to be used with Violence; because with a moderate Touch, and
a slender proportion of Strength, the Artist for the most part has best Success.

Another Caution you must take along with you; and that is, when you observe
your Game begins to make an out; that is, when he bolts, or when he launcheth
himself forth to the utmost extent of your Rod and Line, which a well-fed Fish
at all times frequently attempts, upon the least Advantage he gains on the
Angler: be mindful therefore to throw him Line enough, if provided you purpose
to see his Destruction; yet with this Caution, that you be not too liberal. On
the other hand, too straight a Line brings equal Hazard; so that to poize your
Fish, and your foresight together, is, by keeping one Eye at the Point of your
Rod, and the other be sure you direct on your Game: which comes nearest the
Mediums of Art, and the Rules and Rudiments of your precedent Directions.

But this great Wound is easily solved; for if when to discover your Fish fag
his Fins, you may rationally conclude he then struggles with Death: and then is
your time to trifle him a Shore on some smooth Shelf of Sand, where you may
boldly land him, before his Scales encounter the Soil; which he no sooner
apprehends by the prospect of Death approaching; as a dying Man that grasps
every Twig, because thinking thereby to save himself; so will your Game
extinguish his Strength, and blaze out the Flames of his Life with a Struggle.

Another Expedient is the landing-Net; or the Landing-Rod, which I rather
approve of: let the Swim be deep, or let it be shallow, we direct this Artifice
to amuse the Fish, and facilitate his Destruction, when he struggles with
Difficulties: Notwithstanding all this, some Hazards must be encountered, by the
more Ingenious that flies high at his Game. Incomparable Sport the Salmon
makes; and so did this, for he made me laugh.


Th. Why so severe to run at my Misfortune? take the Rod if you please, and
display your Skill, i will defy all your Art to discover such a Fish; though
unfortunate I must confess, to hazard my Reputation, with such ill Success;
whereby to lose such an eminent Encounter: but I am come to that point of
Resolution now, that Fish that comes next but to smell my Hook, shall prize the
Scent on it so long as he lives; where an Inch of my Line shall cost him an Ell
of his Life; though he attempts to saw my Line in sunder, with the ragged and
jagged Teeth of his Tail.


Ar. And is this the Earnest you intend to handsel us with? Such a small Stock
of Experience will neither admit of general nor particular Directions to
instruct and initiate Proficients in the Art, to try their skill with a
resolute Fish. Reach hither your Rod, and that Bag of Flies. Now should Fortune
contribute equal Success, we need not despair of a hungry Breakfast: however,
i will adventure, and have in amongst 'em; Did you see him show?


Th. Yes, yes, I see something make a Show; and it may be Fish.


Ar. What a Fish with an it, and a may be too? stand close, I advise you, for
he will rise again, provided as hitherto he has made no discovery.


Th. What then, will you discipline and teach him the Art of Invasion?


Ar. I Will teach him to know that if one Element will not contain him, another
must; so, so, I have him fast enough to distinguish the difference. And now for
the Landing-Rod to measure his Dimensions. See where he lies, and tell me how
you like him; can you think him as large as that you encountered?


Th. It Is no matter what I think; it may be he is Inferior, or it may be
Superior.


Ar. That Is modestly Ingenious, to lessen your Loss by advancing my Reputation.


Th. And you more than fortunate to succeed so well: shall we lap up our Lines,
and return to Dumfreez?


Ar. With all my Heart, for the Clock strikes Ten; and the Sun is in his
Elevation toward the Meridian. This is no time for farther examination, till
about four after Noon; except in an obscure and clowdy Day: for the Crisis and
critical Time for Diversion, is late in the Evening, or early in the Morning.


Th. It Is enough I perceive; your generous Motion moves me to wave the present
Recreation. On the other hand, your Experience I must confess promulges the
Art, and your self an Artist. All this I grant, and more than this, since to
confirm this Evidence quickens my Appetite.


Ar. Ay, but what think you of the Wing of an Ox? Would not such a Modicum melt
sweetly in your Mouth?


Th. If luxurious Dreams, and Witches Banquets are equally alike impoverished
Vanity; then to contemplate England in the Bowels of Scotland will represent to
us but fictitious Delusions. Rather would I have you tell me how you like the
Commons, and tell me then how you approve the Cookery.


Ar. I like it so well, that I could heartily wish it had been better ordered
for your Entertainment; but the difficulty is such in this Northern Latitude,
that good Cooks and good Fish seldom dwell together.


Th. Then let them dwell asunder; however, it is well it is as it is, better
ill-cook'd than none at all. However, in the mean while reflect on your self,
and give us a Description of the Town of Dumfreez.


Ar. I fancy e're long you will change your Note, when you traverse these
pleasant Northern Tracts. In the mean time I Will gratify you with a Breviate of
Dumfreez, where a Provost, as Superintendent, supplies the place of a Mayor; a
Magistrate almost as venerable as an English Constable.


Th. That Is wittily applied; What comes next?


Ar. Nay, hold a little, I have not done yet with the Eminencies and the
Remarks of the Town of Dumfreez; for you are to consider it was anciently a
Town girt about with a strong Stone Wall: But the late Irruptions, or perhaps
some State-Disagreement has in a manner defaced that regular Ornament;
otherwise the cankrous Teeth of Time have gnawn out the Impressions, as
evidently appears by those ruinous Heaps. Nor is the Arnotus in all parts
portable, notwithstanding her Shores are so delightful.


Th. What is there more yet? Pray go on.


Ar. In the midst of the Town is their Marketplace, and in the Center of that
stands their Tolbooth, round about which the Rabble sit, that nauseate the very
Air with their tainted Breath, so perfumed with Onions, that to an Englishman
it is almost infectious.

But the Kirk is comely, and situated Southward, furnished once a Week with
moveable Spectrums, (you know what that means) yet the Outside than the Inside
is more eminently imbellished, if Sepulchers and Tombstones can be said to be
Ornaments: And where Death and Time stand to guard the Steeple, whose Rings of
Bells seldom or rarely exceed the critical Number of Three.

Here also you may observe a large and spacious Bridge, that directly leads into
the Country of Galloway, where thrice in a Week you shall rarely fail to see
their Maid-Maukins dance Coranto's in Tubs. So on every Sunday some as seldom
miss to make their Appearance on the Stool of Repentance.


Th. Then it seems by your Relation they keep time with their Comers, that
hazard their Reputation for a Country-Custom (or the love of Liquor) rather
than omit a four-Hours drinking.


Ar. That Is true enough; and it is an ancient Practice among the Female Sex, to
covee together (about that time) as naturally as Geese flocked to the Capitol.
Now the very Name of Comer they mightily honor; but that of Gossip they
utterly abominate, as they hate the Plague, or some mortal Contagion. So that
whether to conclude it a vulgar Error, and an Abomination among the Scots to
lick up an English Proverb, it matters not: Or whether to fancy a more laudable
Emphasis in the word Comer, than there is in Go-sip; I leave you to judge of
that, and those other abominable Customs, that drink till they sigh to do
Penance for their Sins. Will this expiate the Crime, and extenuate the Fact?


Th. Yes, when Oil quenches Fire; or Fire forgets its natural force to burn. So
let us leave Dumfreez, and accommodate our selves with the Country-Curiosities:
and to make our Design yet more sweet and pleasant, let us rally what
Descriptions of Places we can, not only to gratify our selves but others. In
the mean time favor me with your bad Fortune of the Dish of Sewins, and the
Duck Moggy dressed, when she flung it into the Fire, to singe off the Feathers.


Ar. Why thus to reflect on the Country-Absurdities? Had you been then in
place, distressed as we were, I doubt not but that Duck had gone daintily down,
notwithstanding you think it so sluttishly cooked. Hunger at no time solicits
Sauce to incite; and Necessity as little as any thing disputes Dainties. The
Landscape of Want invades natural Strength, and reads Lectures legibly in any
Man's Features. But the manner of their Cookery, or rather Scottish Sluttery,
I Will tell you the Story, and how it was.


Th. I shall be very attentive.


Ar. Near the English Promontories stands the Town of Iedard, whose Skirts are
washed by the famous Tweed. But Westward from thence (and inclining yet more
Norward) are the remarkable Antiquities and Ruins of Boghall; and not far from
thence is the admirable Tintaw, a prodigious Mountain over-looking the Marshes.
From whence, or from Erricsteen (that is not far from it) there issue forth
three eminent and considerable Rivers; as that of the Tweed, Loyd, and the
River Annon: But of these three Rivers we shall discourse more at large, as
opportunity presents in its proper place.

And now let us advance to our Country Cottage, since compelled by the Extremity
of Rain, and increasing Waters. To which place when we arrived, like Men in
amaze, we stood gazing at one another, because to see the Sheep grazing on the
Tops of those Houses, where there was hardly Grass enough to graze a Goose in.
By this you may conclude their Buildings but low, and I Am sure their Doors and
Entrances were so strait, that they exercised our Strength beyond our Art.
Archimedes Engines signified but little, till the Soldiers set their Shoulders
to support the Eves by which means the Horse got an Entrance in: and that
Horseman that was not thoroughly wet, was doomed that Night to go Supper-less to
Bed.

Thus in a Storm we stormed the Town, and 'twould make a Man storm to be
treated only with Oatmeal, of which we made Cakes; for every Soldier became a
Baker; and the Flesh-meat they procured us was dressed without Slaughter; for
none we had except my Duck (you formerly discoursed) so that most of us roosted
with an empty Appetite: and every Man that went that Night to Bed, was
sufficiently alarmed before it was Day. Oat-straw was our Sheets, and
Port-mantles our Pillows. It Is true, some had Cloaks, and 'twas well they had
them, otherwise they had been constrained to use Plads; and he that used one
but to cover his Carcass, mustred (I uphold him) more gray Coats than black
Coats, that clawed him more perniciously than a Middlesex Bailiff.

The next Day we recruited with some Country Ale, but so thick and roapy it
was, that you might eat it with Spoons. Besides, some small quantity of Mutton
was brought us, enough to discover the Cookery of the Country: and the Linen
they supplied us with, were it not to boast of, was little or nothing different
from those Female Complexions that never washed their Faces, to retain their
Christendom. But among the rest I had almost forgot to remind you, that the
Soldiers and the People were jointly agreed to part without the loss of one
Tear in the Morning.


Th. I hope not to see, nor would I willingly dream of such bad Commons, a
hungry Belly, and nothing to bite on; nay, worse than that, more Sluts than
Cooks: and in every House fowl Women, fowl Linen and fowl Pewter; yet in their
Rivulets such Silver Streams. What, not a Bed, nor a Thread (but linsey lowsy)
to keep a Man dry! who could project or contrive worse Entertainment for the
worst of his Enemies?


Ar. Why, how now, Theophilus, is it that time of day? he is an early Angler
that angles by Moonshine.


Th. Mistake not your self, I Am only groping for Baits; it may be I purpose to
angle early.


Ar. Who questions it, when you catch 'em so fast before Sunrise, what will
you do when it is break of Day?


Th. O, Arnoldus, I Am almost worried to death with Lice, my Skin is all motled
and dapled like an April Trout. Can you blame me to relinquish this lowsy
Lodging, when my battered Sides are pinck'd full of Ilet-holes? One Brigade
pursues another, and Flight I find the best Expedient; for my Enemies I
perceive are so desperately resolved, that they will rather die than quit the
Field. Dangers foreseen are the sooner prevented, and I design to sleep in a
whole Skin as long as I can. Zanker, farewell, I am glad to see thee behind me,
and no need of a Surgeon.


Ar. Did you think of Boghall, when the Vermin last Night were so busy about
you? the Story of my Duck was pleasant to you, and so is this to me. Those
Characters and Impressions sealed on your Sides (by these Scottish Interlopers)
will oblige you to remember Zanker these seven days. You have not been used to
such coarse Entertainment, nor treated as I have been, with such Scots Commons.
Is this the fruits of private Practice to complete your self a Graduate, tho
you steal your Preferment from a Nitty Corporation? at the best you can be but
Bachelor of Backbiters-hall. But now jesting is done, and you're half undone I
perceive; what will you do now in reference to Zanker? can you give us a
Relation of that Corporation?


Th. Yes, that I can, and will do, notwithstanding the Difficulties I have
encountered. Zanker stands situate on a Flat or Level, surrounded as you see
with excellent Cornfieldsd: but more remote it is besieged with Mountains that
are rich in Lead-Mines. The Planets I fancy them very benevolent to influence
this swompy Rocky Earth, and shine Metallic Blessings into them, to commode
the indigent and almost uncultivated Native. Heaven it is true, is always
propitious, because never to impose the Law of Sterility, when to supply the
whole World with the Bounty of Increase. And tho the People hereabouts are
destitute of Ingenuity, and their Fields for the most part impoverished for
want of Cultivation; yet are their Rivers and Rivulets replenished with Trout,
because undisturbed with the noosy Net, which augments the Anglers, if not the
Artizans Entertainment.


Ar. Here Is no Character of Zanker all this while.


Th. I am just coming to tell you, that Zanker is a Town and a Corporation too;
tho not bulky in Buildings, yet there is a Bailiff, Master sometimes of a
Brew House, whose Entertainments (in my opinion) may easily be guest at,
provided you reflect on our late Accommodation.

There is also a Marketplace, such an one as it is, and a kind of a thing they
call a Tolbooth, which at first sight might be suspected a Prison, because it is
so like one; whose Decays by the Law of Antiquity are such, that every Prisoner
is threatened with Death before his Trial; and every Casement, because bound
about with Ironbars, discovers the Entertainments destined only to Felons. Now
the Marketplace is less worthy of a Description than the Tolbooth; for no Man
would know it to be such, were he not told so.

There is also a Kirk, or something like it; but I might as reverently call it
a Barn; because so little to distinguish betwixt them, and the whole Town reads
daily Lectures of Decays; so do her Ports, her Avenues and Entrances. Where
note, I call her the Child of Antiquity, by reason of her Ruins and irreparable
Decays. It Is true, I was not murdered, nor was I killed outright, yet I
narrowly escaped as eminent a Danger, when almost worried to death with Lice.


Ar. However, I am glad you escaped without Scars; and advise for the future,
that you examine your Lodging before you make your formal Entrance. In the mean
time, let me restitute some part of Amendment, by an easy, tho solitary Journey
over this mountanous Country, to sweeten your Entertainment. And in regard of
your Unexperience in these Northern Tracts, I shall direct our Course through
the Coast of Galloway, a Compendium of the Highlands immerg'd in the Arms of
the Low-lands: and I Will appeal to your self, when you have seen her Fertility,
if you do not envy her blessed Inhabitants, because enriched with the Plenty of
Rivers and Rivulets, Woods and Groves; besides, benevolent Fields, and
profitable Pastures Yet sometimes we must ramble over some rotten Bogs, as now
we do; and permit our Feet (as at other times) to climb those knotty craggy
Mountains, that, like a Gnomen, direct to the Town of Kilmarnock, a kind of a
Corporation, where we may expect the comfortable Issues of good Entertainment;
for worse than the last is madness to contemplate.


Th. Is that the Town that presents at a distance?


Ar. Yes, that is Kilmarnock, an ancient Corporation, heaped up and crowded
with Men and Mechanics: through the midst of whose crazy tottering Ports,
there runs a River replenished with Trout, where we may treat our Appetites, as
already our Apprehensions, with the Entertainments of Dumbarton, whose rapid
Streams when we come to examine them, are enough one would think to surfeit the
Angler. To which place it is now but one days Journey, nor need we hackney it at
more than an ordinary rate, before we discover those beautiful Ascents, and the
Hostile Habitation of our Friend Aquilla, that dwells in those Western florid
Fields, who will bid us welcome, and rejoice to see us. Nor will Glasgow be any
Impediment in our way, whilst we only survey her beautiful Palaces, so direct
to the lofty Turrets of Dumbarton.


Th. Let the Sun, or his Star the beautiful Aurora, arrest me, if otherwise I
arise not before break of Day, and be in readiness for a March to the famous
Glasgow, where you purpose to refresh, and briefly examine the
City-Curiosities; as also the Customs of their magnificent Situations: whose
Academick Breasts are a Nursery for Education, as the City for Hospitality. And
let this be your Task as we travel to Dumbarton, to give us a Narrative of the
Antiquities of Cloyd, as also of the Town of Kilmarnock, where we slept this
Night, that so bravely refreshed us.


Ar. That I can do as we ride along.


Th. Do so, it will be very acceptable.


Ar. Then to expostulate the Antiquities of Kilmarnock; as it would puzzle the
Pen of an ingenious Historiographer, so I for that end was thinking to evade
it, and refer it to some other of more mature Judgment; since you your self,
and consequently others that read my Relation, will probably reduce me to the
Probate of a Censure. On the other hand, the Native who lives under an
Expectation, would equally condemn me for my Taciturnity, should I silently
pass by and imprint no Remarks on their Silty Sands, and Silver Streams. To
this Dilemma I am driven by the Censures of some, nor can I escape the Clamours
of others: So that I sail betwixt Sylla and Charibdis. However, I shall use my
best Endeavors to gratify both as near as I can, and consult the mean and
Mediums of Veracity, so far as Experience and Discovery can inform me: So that
I shall say but little more than to tell the World that Kilmarnock is an
ancient Corporation, crowded with Mechanics and Brew-houses.


Th. But that is not all.


Ar. If not enough, then you must have more it seems; and not only for your
self, but for those that are more inquisitous. And what will they say? why you
and they both will tell me, it is only risling into Ruins. Nor indeed is it
other, when in our Progress we proceed to prove little more, save only a
discovery of Ruins and Decays.


Th. Be it what it will however let us have it.


Ar. Well then, if to go one step further, surely it will not cripple me: let me
tell you then, it is an Ancient Manufactory.


Th. And what of all that? is this more than what we formerly knew?


Ar. It Is more than I knew, that you knew so much. But this Discourse,
Theophilus, better becomes an Antiquary, than one that queries: for should I
but step into her dirty Streets, that are seldom clean but on a Sun-shiny Day;
or at other Times, when great Rains melt all the Muck, and forcibly drive it
down their cadaverous Channels into the River Mar, whose Streams are so
sullied then, that the River loses its natural Brightness, till the Stains are
washed out, so become invisible. All which to examine, is enough to convince
you, that the Influence of Planets are their best Scavenger: for the Natives in
this Northern Latitude, are naturally so addicted to Idleness and Nastiness,
that should not the Heavens contribute the Blessings of Rain, they would
inevitably surfeit with their own Uncleanliness.


Th. All this we will grant you; the Footsteps are evident.


Ar. Where note, these Inhabitants dwell in such ugly Houses, as in my Opinion
are but little better than Huts; and generally of a Size, all built so low,
that their Eves hang dangling to touch the Earth: nor are they uniform, nor
hold they Correspondency one with another: and that which is worse than all the
rest, is their unproportionate ill Contrivance; because, when to consider a
Dwarf of a House, so covered over with a Gigantick Roof. By which you may
imagine, our former Projectors had but little Project for curious Contrivances;
and to speak plain English, as little costly.

The next thing in course that falls under our Consideration, will be their
Artificers. But the Moors (more than all the rest) have gained the Reputation
for the temper of Dirks, Razors and Knives, whose Temper is so exact, that it
super-excels all the Mechanics in Scotland. Where note, you may observe there
are Artists amongst them, though not one good Structure to be found in
Kilmarnock; nor do I remember any Wall it has, but a River there is, as I
formerly told you of, that runs through the Town; over which there stood a
Bridge so wretchedly ancient, that it is unworthy our Commendations any
otherwise, than as Travelers commend the Bridge they go over.

Another part of their Manufacture is knitting of Bonnets, and spinning of
Scottish Cloth; which turns to very good Account. Then for their Temper of
Metals, they are without compeer; Scotland has not better. And as they are
Artizans in Dirks, so are they Artists in Fudling, as if there were some Rule
in Drinking. So that to me it represents as if Art and Ale were inseparable
Companions. Moreover, their Wives are sociable Comers too; yet not to compare
with those of Dumblain, who pawn their Petticotes to pay their Reckoning.


Th. Here Is a jolly Crew of Alemen (but very few Anglers) crowded together in
the small compass of a little Corporation, curiously compacted. For the Houses
you may observe besiege the River; and that River to divide the ruinous Ports,
left only as Relics that remain discoverable: however it is my Opinion that a
Stone Wall has incircled the Town, since hitherto as to Observation, there is
rarely a Town of any eminency in Scotland, but is or has been beleagured with a
strong Stone Wall; but as to that i will silence my self.


Ar. Well then, I Will proceed to pilot you down these solitary Descents, that
direct to the eminent Ports of Air, near whose difficult entrances stands a
strong Citadel, formidable and spacious, in the Base of a Pentagon, erected on
purpose to reduce Insurrectors.


Th. Must we dismount these Hills, to traverse those Valleys?


Ar. Yes, surely we must, if designing to trace the fertile Fields and beautiful
Plains of the now famous and flourishing Glasgow, where we may accommodate our
selves with various Guriosities; for the Days are long enough, and our Journey
no more than a breathing to Dumbarton. Now the first Curiosity that invites us
to gaze at, is a large and spacious Bridge of Stone, that directs to the fair
lmbellishments of Glasgow. But our next Entertainment, is the pleasant Medows,
and the portable Streams of the River Cloyd, eminent in three Capacities. The
first is, because of her numberless numbers of Trout. The second is, because of
her multiplicity of Salmon. But the third and last is, from her native
Original, and gradual Descents; because so calmly to mingle her Streams with
the Ocean. Not that we now consider her florid Medows, nor shall we recount her
Nativity from Tintaw, because so strongly opposed and presumed from Erricsteen,
distant from thence some few odd Miles.


Th. If you please, let that Argument drop till farther Opportunity.


Ar. I am thinking to do so, and proceed to discourse this eminent Glasgow.
Which is a City girded about with a strong Stone-Wall, within whose flourishing
Arms, the Industrious Inhabitant cultivates Art to the utmost. There is also a
Cathedral (but it is very Ancient) that stands in the East Angle, supervising
the Bulk of the City, and her ornamental Ports. Moreover, there are two
Parish-Churches; but no more to the best of my Observation. Then there is a
College; which they call an University, but I Am at a stand what to call it,
where one single College compleats a University.

Now let us descend to describe the Splendour and Gaity of this City of Glasgow;
which surpasses most, if not all the Corporations in Scotland. Here it is you
may observe four large fair Streets, modeled, as it were, into a spacious
Quadrant; in the Center whereof their Marketplace is fixed; near unto which
stands a stately Tolbooth, a very sumptuous, regulated, uniform Fabric, large
and lofty, most industriously and artificially carved from the very Foundation
to the Superstructure, to the great admiration of Strangers and Travelers. But
this State-house or Tolbooth, is their Western Prodigy, infinitely excelling
the model and usual built of Town-halls; and is, without exception, the Paragon
of Beauty in the West; whose Compeer is no where to be found in the North,
should you rally the Rarities of all the Corporations in Scotland.

Here the Reader (it is possible) may think I hyperbolize; but let him not
mistake himself, for I write no Ambiguities: Truth stands naked in plain
Simplicity; and Partiality I abhor as a base Imposture. He that reads my
Relation, and the Morals of this famous Glasgow, will vindicate my Description,
and place the Fault to him that invents the Fable; for it is opposite to my
Genius, as also to my Principles, either to deface a beautiful Fabric, or
contract a Guilt by magnifying it beyond its due Merit. I have, and therefore
shall, as near as I can, in an equal Poize balance things aright. Permit me
therefore, as a Licentiat, to read you but a short, yet pertinent Lecture, and
I Will tell you what Entertainments we met with in Glasgow, as also what hopes we
have to meet with the like in the Circuit of our intended Northern Progress.
But this I offer to the Dubious only; if peradventure there be any such as
scruple, I Will refer them to the Natives to evidence for me, which I am
satisfied they will with ten thousand Manifesto's.

In the next place, we are to consider the Merchants and Traders in this
eminent Glasgow. Whose Storehouses and Warehouses are stuffed with Merchandise:
as their Shops swell big with Foreign Commodities, and Returns from France, and
other remote Parts; where they have Agents and Factors to correspond, and
enrich their Maritime Ports, whose Charter exceeds all the Charters in
Scotland: which is a considerable Advantage to the City-Inhabitants; because
blessed with Privileges as large, nay, larger than any other Corporation.
Moreover, they dwell in the Face of France, and a Free Trade, as I formerly
told you. Nor is this all, for the Staple of their Country consists of Linens,
Friezes, Furs, Tartans, Pelts, Hides, Tallow, Skins, and various other small
Manufactures and Commodities, not comprehended in this Breviat. Besides, I
should remind you, that they generally exceed in good French Wines, as they
naturally superabound with Fish and Fowl; some Meat does well with their Drink.
And so give me leave to finish my discourse of this famous Glasgow, whose Ports
we relinquish to distinguish those Entertainments of Dumbarton, always provided
we scatter no Corn.


Th. What to think, or what to say of this eminent Glasgow, I know not; except
to fancy a smell of my Native Country. The very Prospect of this flourishing
City, reminds me of the beautiful Fabrics, and the florid Fields in England,
so that now I begin to expect a pleasant Journey. Pray tell me, Arnoldus, how
many such Cities shall we meet with in our Travels; where the Streets and the
Channels are so cleanly swept, and the Meat in every House so artificially
dressed? the Linen I also observed was very neatly lap'd up; and, to their praise
be it spoke, was Lavender proof: besides, the People were decently dressed, and
such an exact Decorum in every Society, represents it to my apprehension an
Emblem of England, though in some measure under a deeper Die. However I Will
superscribe it the Nonsuch of Scotland; where an English Florist may pick up a
Posie: so that should the residue of their Cities in our Northern Progress seem
as barren as uncultivated Fields; and every Field so replenished with Thistles,
that a Flower could scarcely flourish amongst them, yet would I celebrate thy
Praise, O Glasgow, because of those pleasant and fragrant Flowers that so
sweetly refreshed me, and to admiration, sweetened our present Entertainments.


Ar. Now the Day Star springs, and the flaming Steeds of the Sun invite our
departure. The Smiles of the Weather prognosticate we shall reach Dumbarton in
very good time; where we may redress and refit such Tackle, as shall serve to
accommodate both our Art and Exercise: for near to those famous and flourishing
Ports, there glides a rapid and peremptory River, that gulphs forth of the
Bowels of Loemon, replenished with Trout; and beyond all measure of
incomparable Salmon, (if I calculate right) where we may sport to Day, and to
Morrow too, provided the Season serve to our purpose. So from thence we may
pass into the Fields of Luss, (by fording the Loemon) where beyond dispute we
shall gratify our selves with such solitary Entertainments, as the Angler most
delights in: So from thence by crossing the Loemon Eastward, we arrive in the
steril Fields of Bohanan; a Situation by some thought almost inaccessible, by
reason of Hills, and multiplicity of Boggs.


Th. What lofty domineering Towers are those that storm the Air, and stand a
tiptoe (to my thinking) upon two stately elevated pondrous Rocks, that shade
the Valley with their prodigious Growth, even to amazement? because to display
such adequate and exact Proportion, with such equality in their Montanous
Pyramides, as if Nature had stretched them into Parallel Lines, with most
accurate poize to amuze the most curious and critical Observer; though with
exquisite Perspectives he double an Observation, yet shall he never trace a
Disproportion in those uniform Piermonts.


Ar. These are those natural, and not artificial Pyramides, that have stood,
for ought I know, since the beginnings of Time; nor are they sheltred under any
Disguise: for Nature her self dressed up this elaborate Precipice, without Art or
Engine, or any other Manual, till arriving at this period of Beauty and
Perfection: and because having Laws and Limits of her own, destinated by the
Prerogative Royal of Heaven, she heaped up these Massy inaccessible Pyramides,
to invalidate Art, and all its Admirers, since so equally to shape a Mountain,
and to form it into so great and such exact Proportions.


Th. Then it is no Fancy I perceive, when in the midst of those lofty and
elevated Towers, a Palace presents it self unto us, immured with Rocks, and a
craggy Front that with a haughty Brow contemns the Invader. And where below at
those knotty Descents, Neptune careers on brinish Billows, armed with Tritons
in Corslets of Green, that threatens to invade this impregnable Rock, and shake
the Foundations; which if he do, he procures an Earthquake.


Ar. This is the Rock, and that which you see elevated in the Air, and
inoculated to it, is an artificial Fabric, invelop'd as you now observe in the
very Breast of this prodigious Mountain; which briefly, yet well enough, your
Observation directs to, both as to the Form, Situation and Strength. Moreover,
it is a Garrison, and kept by the Albions, where formerly our Friend Foelecius
dwelt; who of late, upon Preferment, is transplanted into Ireland* however
Aquilla will bid us welcome; and if I mistake not, he advances to meet us; look
wishly forward, and you will see him trace those delightful Fields from the Ports
of Dumbarton.


Aquil. What vain Delusions thus possess me! nay what idle Dotages and
Fictitious Dreams thus delude me; if these be Ghosts, which I fancy Men. O
Heavens! it is our Friend Arnoldus, and (if I mistake not) Theophilus with him.
Welcome to Dumbarton.


Ar. Thanks dear Aquilla, thus friendly to salute us; we are come to see you,
and have deserted the beautiful Tracts of Albion, to trample the solitary
Fields in Scotland. Behold these Evidences; we have brought our Rods, where
note you may easily guess our Design.


Aquil. Above all Men you are fortunate; for had you studied an Age to time
your Business for a Day's Diversion, the Heavens could not shine Stars more
propitious. Do but see how the Ground is chap'd and parched, and the Streams so
lean and barren of Soil, as well they may, for no moisture has fallen to
refresh the Earth, nor drive down Soil to recruit the Rivers and feast the
Fish, this Month or more, till yesterday; and then the Clouds began to dapple,
the Face of the Firmament to lowre, the Sky to discolor, the Air to moisten,
and the Spouts of Heaven seemingly to drop: yet when all came to all, it came
to nothing; for the Tears of this Storm converted into a Calm; so exhaled into
Meteors, for ought I know: for when we expected a Deluge of Rain, there fell by
chance but some few extravagant Drops; which for Greediness made the Fish
almost forsake the Water; the Complexion whereof being but a little changed,
you may fancy, if you please, to fish under a Color.


Ar. Notwithstanding all this I Am for the Fly.


Th. And I Am for any Bait, or any Color, so that I be but doing.


Aquil. Then I Am for the Ground-bait, and I persuade my self it will turn to
best Account, and prove most profitable to answer my Expectation: For with but
three sorts of Fish we must trifle our time ( viz.) the active Eel, the
dextrous Trout, and the incomparable Salmon; all which will as greedily pursue
a Worm, as a luxurious Appetite pursues his Paunch. Bring but a Brandlin or
rather a Gildtail, and try whether Trouts be destitute of an Appetite.


Th. They must have good Stomachs sure, if they be always eating.


Aquil. You are waggish, Theophilus, but really I am serious; for now we begin
to discover those silent and solitary Deeps, those rapid and swift Falls of
Water, besides those stiff and strong Streams, that invite us to treat the
Family of Fish. So that I conceive it is almost impossible to direct a Line,
and miss a Reward: And the bottom, if you please, let us examine that with
Ground-bait, to prove the Effects of our Art and Skill, to summons Contribution
from so generous an Adventure. But if Midwater we consult, then I commend the
Canker, with the Catter-pillar, or the Grub; or, if with a depinged Locust, you
will not lose your Labor; nor will you starve your Cause, if to strip off the
Legs of a Grasshopper. All these are excellent Baits, but the green Monket of
the Owlder-Tree super-excels them all. Then there is the Pink (which you call a
Minew) if displayed with a Swivel at Mid-water; or you may if you please drag
him from the bottom of the Deeps, so glide him all along through the Region of
Limpid Streams, the better to display this amorous Charm, so obtain the Point
by the Mediums of Art, as already is advisable by consulting the Artist.


Th. Now I perceive we but trifle Time, this tedious Discourse obstructs
Recreation. Let us stretch our Limbs with the length of the Streams; we have
Day enough and pleasant Weather, why then so vainly to procrastinate Time with
flattering Thoughts of suggested Enjoyments, which signify no more than Honor
in Dreams? Come, my Friends, let us reform that Error by the Progress of Art.
So that if our Labors be spent to advantage, and our selves, like Artists,
sufficiently recompensed by the Rod; we may sport the Day away, and lengthen
our Expectation, that to Morrow's Recreation, if the Season favor us, may glut
us with Pleasure, and burden us with Spoil.


Ar. We shall cross the old Proverb I perceive, since no Arguments are Engines
strong enough to convince Theophilus, that Haste makes waste; whose unlimited
Zeal after Recreation is boundless beyond measure; insomuch that a Grompus
will not gratify him in point of Diversion. Come then, and trim up your Line, and
arm your self, and observe those translucid trembling Streams that dash
themselves against those Rocks; hazard your Fortune there for once, and be sure
you begin at the Head of the Stream, and so gradually pursue the extent of your
Colony, and fish by Direction according to Prescription, both with Worm and
Minew; then hope a prosperous Issue, as I question not but you do. In the mean
time let me caution you, that with circumspection you purdue your self, if
intending to surprise and captivate your Game; for by this time I fancy you
have already beleagured them: Be advised therefore to repeat your Discipline,
and keep your Distance. So I leave you to your Fortune and a fair Day, for I
purpose to attempt the Head of Loemon; and about four Hours, or it may be five,
let us make our Rendezvous in the Caves of that Rock. As for Aquilla, he needs
no Direction, whose Knowledge and Experience is so general in these Streams,
that an Age to examine them would not better improve him. Now let us separate,
and each Man to his Adventure; but be mindful of the Place, and the prefixed
Time appointed: so that after the delicious Toil of Exercise, we may produce
the Issues and Effects of our Labors, when successfully we meet, as I hope we
may. Aquilla, farewell, and farewell Theophilus; to whom I contribute my Wishes
for thy fortunate Success, to gain the Laureat from the best of Anglers that
pursue the Art.


Th. What, do you question it, that know so well my Abilities? here I Will stand
to my Arms; and in this solitary place, I Will hazard my Rod and Line with my
Reputation and Fortune.


Aquil. Resolved like a Vertuoso of the Rod and Line; there you may mingle
Meditations with your Recreations, whilst you consult those purling murmuring
Streams that rally from the top of those craggy Mountains: see how they
trickling tumble down those solitary Rocks, whose Descents, like Diapasons,
shaped into musical Sounds, must of necessity invite the Fish to dance: so that
sometimes they elevate themselves so high, that I have seen them throw
themselves a Foot above Water. This we call the Contemplative Angler's Harmony;
and it proves his Harvest too, when they freely bite. So farewell, Theophilus;
but remember the Rendezvous at the previous Descent of that spacious Rock,
beautified with Firs; not far from thence stands a pleasant Grove: through
which there glides a glittering Rivulet, begirt round about with admirable
Rocks: search well those Meanders, and you will find me fishing.


Th. It Is very like I may, And what then? In the mean time, here I Am deprived
of Society, except to fancy Fish my solitary Companions, the Cavities of Rocks
my Sepulcher, and these shady flourishing Trees an Emblem of Death; for Aquilla
he is gone, and Arnoldus has left me to lament my Self, and five hours
Separation. But why so melancholy among these purling Streams, that seemingly
interpose betwixt my Passion, and their silent murmurings? Do not these
repeated Echoes (if I hit the Key) lively remonstrate the life-touches of
Solitudes, and the true Imitation of sweet Contemplation? Sympathy in
affection, I call that amiable; and the fair and beautiful Prospect of the
Mind, that represents the real Signature of Friendship.

But this Pace I perceive will not carry on my Design, nor are Complaints proper
Engines or suitable Instruments to surprise Fish. How pitifully it looks for the
Angler to lie puling, whilst Fish like Allegators are pulling all in pieces,
let any Man judge that is destinated to be undone. Most unfortunate Theophilus,
but now too late to lament thy Remissness; and rather than unpunished, let thy
shameful Loss be enough to torment thee. What at once all vanished, nothing
left but thy self! so that were not I left, there was nothing to laugh at; and
I worthily deserve it, because to lose my Reputation. What an opportunity have
I lost in losing my Rod, and an equal Fate to lose my Exercise? but from Twig
to Twig I Will traverse the Streams, and examine every Bush to repair my
Misfortune: so that at leisure I may lie down, and lament my Remissness; for
condemned by my self, there needs no Judge to sentence me. Hold a little! I
discover some thing, either the Stock of my Rod, or a Counterfeit. So so, I
shall patch up my Losses by finding my Rod, for it lay where I left it, and my
bag of Flies lies not far from it. And now I have a Patent, I resolve to take
Toll, and examine what Contribution these Streams will advance me.

However, lest Precipitancy spoil my Sport, I Will preponder my Rudiments; and
they prognostiate here is a Fish, or something like it; a fair handsel for a
foolish Fisher. But here is the old Game again that we had at Dumfreez. This
capering, for ought I know, may cost him his Life, for I resolve to hold his
Nose to the Grind-stone: dance on and die, this is the way to your silent
Sepulcher; for upon that silty gravelly Shelf of Sand, I resolve to land him,
or lose all I have. And now I fancy him weary of Life, as aged People that are
burdened with Infirmities; yet I want Courage to encounter him, lest fearing to
lose him, which if I do, I impair my Reputation. Howe^er, I Will examine my Stock
of Confidence, and see how far that will go: but then I want a Landing-hook,
and he is resolute to make an escape; and I would be as resolute to restrain,
and if possible to confirm him my Prisoner: so that what Progress to hope for
in this solitary Adventure, I know not, till farther examination. However,
here is no Body but Trees to reprove me, except these Rocks; and they will tell no
Tales. Well then, as he wants no Agility to evade me, I Will endeavor with
Activity to approach him: so that the difference betwixt us will be only this,
he covets Acquaintance but with one Element, and I would compel him to examine
another.

Navigators report, that Fish can fly, and so shall this, or I Will forfeit my
Discretion; and if it succeeds well that I conquer this Fish, Matriculation
falls in course from the Vertuosos of the Rod. Now he runs to divert me, or
himself; but I must invite him nearer Home, for I fancy no such Distance.
Though his Fins fag, his Tail riggles, his Strength declines, his Gills look
languid, and his Mettle decreaseth; all which interpret Tokens of Submission:
yet the best News I bring him, is summons of Death. Yet let not my Rashness
preingage me to a loss of my Game. For to neglect my Rudiments, is to ruin my
Design, which in plain terms is the Destruction of this resolute Fish; who
seemingly now measures and mingles his Proportion with more than one Element:
and doomed to a Trance, he prostrates himself on the Surface of the Calmes,
dead to apprehension; save only I want Credit to believe him dead, when calling
to mind my former fatal Precipitancy, that invited me to a Loss; and so may
this Adventure prove, if I look not well about me, to land and strand him on
that Shelf of Sand, where I resolve, with my Rod, to survey his Dimensions.
Then have at All, or it may be Nothing; however it succeeds well, for I Am
insured of a Victory. Welcome a Shore my languishing Combitant, if only to
entertain our Friend Arnoldus.

I am fast again, or have hold of another Fish; but I Will undermine his Design
by an old Stratagem: for now I have got the way of catching them, I only want
the knack of Cookery to dress them. The Exercise of Angling obliges me to love
the Art; and I see it is good to hearken to Counsel; for had I neglected that, I
had run retrograde to Reason, so lost my Reward. But this Fish I fancy is not
so resolute as the former; this yields himself Captive upon slight Summons, so
dies by the Law and Force of Artillery. My Hook I perceive has divested him of
Power; and I shall deny him Capitulation for Life, who must also change
Elements with his late Predecessor, or I Will lose all I have to compass my
Design. I fancy I have hold of another Fish; if so, I shall want Arguments to
express the Sweets of this Exercise, and the Pleasure of Solitudes to the
Contemplative Angler. By this you may perceive, it is necessarily requisite at
all times, especially upon Emergencies, to hearken to Counsel; for indisputably
had I pursued irregular Measures, and slighted Arnoldus his solid Instructions,
so followed the Dictates of my former Resolution of making Fish fly, all had
flown in pieces: And how fondly then had I betrayed my own Folly, by exposing
my self and my Reputation to a loss? On the contrary, I can triumph, and say
all is well; and tell what Execution my Minews have done, that my Rod and Line
and Swivel's secure. Where note, I think now to pack up my Impliments, and
hasten to the Place we formerly agreed upon; approving it necessary in all
Societies to observe the Punctilio's of Promise among Friends. Another thing
secretly affects me; and that is, to think what an Artist Arnoldus will extol
me.


Aquil. This is the Place, and the prefixed Time of Agreement is at hand; yet
on these glittering Sands there is no Tract to trace the impress of the Feet of
Arnoldus or Theophilus. Surely Angling's all Charms, to break the Links of the
golden Chain of Promise. But whither will these rash Presumptions hurry me?
what, to suspect Friendship, the Diadem and Darling of Human Society? Yonder he
advances, to the Place appointed; I Will step and salute him, and make a Present
of my fortunate Successes. These are the Toils and the Fruits of my Labor,
which I freely dedicate to our Friend Arnoldus.


Ar. Where killed you these Trouts? With what Artifice did you surprise them?


Aquil. With nothing but a Minew, some call it Penk.


Ar. I understand your meaning; but where did you Fish?


Aquil. In those purling Streams, at the foot of that Rock.


Ar. I should have thought it impossible, did not these Evidences convince me,
that so small a Rivulet should lodge and harbor so large a Fish. Here Is a
Salmon Aquilla, that I but newly tickled to Death with a Fly; accept my
adventure, I have another for Theophilus when he comes up with us.


Aquil. He is yonder, I see him coming, and could heartily wish he had seen but
the Death of this brace of Salmon, to put a zealous spur to his Exercise.


Ar. Besides these Salmon, I have two brace of Trouts, that would make a
Cockney's Teeth stand a Water and spring a Leek, for no other purpose than to
tap his Mouth.


Aquil. Our Fortunes are unequal, the Garland is yours, and never may it wither
from your Heroic Brow. Now we shall see what improvement Theophilus has made
in this Piscatorian Negotiation. Yonder he comes, let us hasten to meet him.


Ar. Welcome Theophilus! are our Fortunes equal? What Phenomena of Pleasures
spring from solitary Rocks? How fancy you this inoffensive Life, to sit in the
Sunshine, then remove into Shades near the Brinks of bubling murmuring
Rivulets, that sigh a pleasant silent softness, whilst the Birds harmoniously
deliciat the Air, and Fish in frolicks dance Coranto's to the Angler; whilst
Man (Lord of the Creation) is captivated with Divine Contemplation; fancying to
himself a kind of an Elysium, representing the shady Fragrancies of Paradise?


Th. O Arnoldus, I was certainly enamoured to see how the shady Trees hung
dangling about me; whilst the murmuring Streams through the Lungs of Zephyrus,
made Music to my Fancy, tho not to the pitch of the melodious Philomel, and
the Chorus of Birds that beat the Air with their mellifluous Quires, which
springs fresh thoughts of the Nonage of Time, when the Constitution of the
Creation was a composition of Harmony.


Ar. But the luxurious Angler admires another Consort. He loves no Music but
the twang of the Line; nor any Sound, save the Echoes of the Water; no Rest
nor Pause, but impatient till they bite; no Flats nor Sharps, but solitary
Pools and rapid Streams; no Beats nor Shakes, but struggling and strangling:
and, in short, no close except that of the Panier. So that I may properly call
his Harmony their Haltering.


Th. Just such Success I had; for Art was useless to catch such Fish, as
careless of their Lives, they cast them away. Look here Arnoldus, I have
brought my Evidences; this Brace I caught, and this caught me.


Ar. Here Is suitable Diversion, our Exercise has equaliz'd the Balance of
Success: Not an Artist amongst us barren of Sport.


Aquil. Nor the Water out of temper; if it hold so to Morrow, we may flatter
our selves the Town's our own.


Ar. It may be so, if all hits right: What, two Sundays in one Week? Don't you
observe it rain already? However let us trace these glittering Sands, to those
solitary Fields that direct to Dumbarton: we have spent the time to sufficient
Advantage, had there been nothing more in it than initiating Theophilus, whom I
persuade my self will consult the Art, and manifestly in time approve himself
Eminent.


Th. Come Gentlemen Piscatorians, and Vertuoso's of the Rod, Dumbarton begins
to present unto us; where like Heroes we may triumph, because from these Fords
to carry off such Trophies, as will evidence for us the Remarks of Spoil; and
where the Inhabitants must be indigent of Civility, if not civilly to treat us,
whilst we commode them with the choicest Treasures of Loemon. What think you
Gentlemen? your Opinion on the Measures I have taken.


Aquil. I approve on it very well.


Ar. So do I. But first if you please let us enter their Ports, and examine the
Distinction betwixt Diet and Disease. As also we may consult if their Beds are
burdensome after Exercise; which I desire to experience, and the rather, in
regard (as I perceive) by those Signals, the sprinkling of Rain, we must be
forced to depart to morrow Morning.


Aquil. A Sentence too severe; we cannot morally separate so soon.


Ar. Morally or Naturally, it must be so; for when the Coverings of Rain shut
up the Casements of Day, and Darkness as a Pavilion overshades the Night, it is
madness to contemplate Recreation in Angling, when the Rivers are hourly
recruited with Rains.


Aquil. I approve not of hasty Resolves, as prognosticate a parting before we
meet; the Law of Friendship binds it otherwise.


Th. A very bad Handsel to earnest our Separation.


Aquil. So it appears: for should every Man measure his present Occasion by the
Rule of Necessity, my Duty compels me to the Turrets of Dumbarton: And how
disconsolate shall I be to discourse Rocks and Stones, when deprived the
Society of my Friends and Associates?


Th. One Day more, Arnoldus, will break no Squares; let Time arrest us, I Will
put in Bail.


Aquil. Here Is a friendly Advocate to furnish us with fresh Arguments, that may
bring about, for ought I know, new and fresh Results after the Series of second
Thoughts: Who so unkind now to frame a parting, or denounce the Sentence of a
Farewell to morrow?


Ar. That must I, to wander in the Fields of Luss by Sunrise; otherwise we
shall not reach Bohannan by Sunset.


Th. So then, my Mouth is stopped I perceive; nor have I any thing more to offer
by way of Argument, only my Lamentation for our so sudden Separation. Aquilla,
farewell; Arnoldus and I must jog on together: but assure your self, if my Stars
are but so propitious as to favor my return by the way of Dumbarton; no Body
I Will assure you shall be more soilcitous than Theophilus, to redouble a trouble
upon our Friend Aquilla; and for more than a Night: And so farewell.


Aquil. I cannot part.


Ar. Then go along with us.


Aquil. That Is morally impossible; how can I leave my Charge?


Ar. Then pray discharge us; for we are upon Duty?


Aquil. Be prosperous and propitious, I Will pray your Welfare; and contemplate
your Enterprises in all virtuous Actions.


Ar. This your Kindness obliges me to retaliate, with as much Piety as becomes
a Christian. So farewell.


Th. And with as much Religion as becomes an Angler, accept of my Charity: so
farewell.


Ar. Now Theophilus, let not Sleep circumvent us; the Loemon, I perceive,
begins to swell. We must rise with the Sun, or sooner, if possible: we must not
triste nor delay the Time in crossing the Loemon, if we intend to stretch up
the lofty Mountains in the Island of Luss.


Th. I see it is Day, for the blazing Torch of the Sun begins to paint the
Universe. Let us mount our Horses, to mount this Mountanous Country of Luss,
where the Hills represent the lofty Alps.


Ar. Look back on those inferior Fabrics in the Low-lands; whilst we ascend
these eminent high High-lands, that supervise those shady Valleys below them;
which we now relinquish, though beautified with Rivers and pleasant Rivulets.


Th. What little Mediterranian is this?


Ar. The large and spacious Loemon, so generally discoursed for the floating
Island; but it floats not here in these solitary Western Fields as fictitiously
supposed by the ignorant Reporters. But our travel will reform that Error in
time, when we come to trace the Mountains beyond Badanoch.


Th. Is this Lough, as reported, so numerous in Islands?


Ar. Yes sure; however I shall give you but a short Description. This Loemon,
as you see, is immerg'd with the High-lands. On the West it is bounded with the
Island of Luss; but on the East with the barren Fields of Bohanan: Norward it is
begirt with the Pass of Inchcallow; and Southward by Dumbarton, and the Bounds
about it. But the length of this Loemon is twenty four Miles; and twenty four
Islands the Natives will tell you are lodged in the Arms of this spacious
Lough. Her Breadth, in the largest place, not to exceed three Leagues over; and
in the narrowest part, some two or three Miles. This small Mediterrane (as you
are pleased to call it) is surrounded with Woods, Mountains, rockey, boggy,
sandy and miry Earth: and is the greatest inland Sea in Scotland; nor is it
paralleled with any Southward; and all the North inferior to it; excepting
only the Lough called Ness. Now from Loemon under the Bray of these lofty
Hills, we pass to the Kirk of Drummon, that leads to Aberfoil; a more
remarkable Pass than that of Inchcallow, if designing to make Inroads into the
Bowels of the Highlands.


Th. What Place is this?


Ar. Beautiful Bohanan besieged with Bogs, and barrocadoed with Birch-trees;
the Highlanders Landscape, and the Lowlanders Prospect; whose boggy Swamps
incommode the Traveller. However, the Natives in the Winter-Season, employ
themselves only to recreate Swine there, because a People uncultivated in
Agriculture. Where note, the Accommodations of this solitary Country is so
rarely understood by the Natives and Inhabitants, that Strangers for the most
part are left destitute of a Report.


Th. What other Fabrick's that, distant about a Mile from Bohanan?


Ar. That Is Kilmarnock, the only Relic of the Dukes of Lennox; a very strong
Stone House, that stands most sweetly situated on the very brinks of famous
Leven; whose Fields are inhabited by the Clan of the Stewarts.


Th. A Royal Name; but a Loyal poor Clan, as I am told.


Ar. It Is true enough; so let us relinquish the Suburbs of Leven. to trace the
flourishing Skirts of Calvin, whose smiling Streams invite the Angler to
examine them; for here one would think the Stones were steeped in the Oil of
Oespres, to invite the Fish to come ashore: where you may observe every bubling
Stream reflect a Smile on the amorous Banks, covered with Green, and enameled
with Flowers. Here also the Sylvans upon shady Bushes bathe themselves in
silver Streams; and where Trouts to sport and divert the Angler, will leap on
Shore, though with the loss of their Lives: so that if Demonstration be Truth,
and Eyesight Evidence to convince the incredulous, there is not a Rivulet in
Scotland, upon the Angler's examination, superexcels this Calvin, for diversion
with small Trout; whose translucid Streams, because so rich in themselves, and
so numerous in Trouts, make them not overcurious of self-preservation; for
with a Rod in my Hand (but I almost blush to report it, because suspecting the
incredulity of some incredulous Persons) I have ushered to those pleasant and
delightful Shores, ten or twelve brace of Trouts in an Hour.

Distant from Calvin about some two Miles Eastward, stands dull Dunkeeth, upon
the head of a slaty Rivulet, that is replenished with Eel, and plenty of small
Trout: but more Southward yet is craggy Cragbarnoch: from whence North and by
East we discover the ruinous Battlements and unpolished Turrets of sooty
Glorret. It Is true, the Natives call it a Castle, but I fancy the Name of a
House would have served as well: near to which place glides the glittering
Kaldar; a large and spacious rapid River, accommodated both with Trout and
Salmon: but the Access lies too open, more especially amongst her pleasant
gliding Streams, where the Angler, if Lord of his Exercise, may expect
incredible Entertainments: whose Foundations are laid in gravelly Sand, and
interchangably mixed with shining Stones that look not unlike to golden
Granulaes: but were they such, I should fancy Tagus but a Toy to it. Because to
imprint in the Angler's Memory those remarkable Characters of shining Rocks,
glittering Sands, and falls of Water, which it is morally impossible he should
ever forget.

Not far from this dingy Castle of Glorret, stands delectable Kilsieth; in
whose martial Fields, Marquess Montross defeated his Countrymen. North-West
from thence we must top those burdened Mountains of Compsy, whose weeping Rocks
moisten the Air, representing the Spouts; and are a lively Emblem of the
Cataracts of Nile. From whence we descend to the Kirk of Compsy; near to which
Kirk runs the memorable Anderwick, a rapid River of strong and stiff Streams;
whose fertile Banks refresh the Borderer, and whose Fords, if well examined, are
Arguments sufficient to convince the Angler of Trout; as are her Deeps, when
consulted, the noble Race and Treasure of Salmon; or remonstrate his Ignorance
in the Art of Angling. Besides this Anderwick, there are many other small
Rivulets that glide up and down these solitary Parts, omitted in this
Paragraph, because not having time to insert them.


Th. This traveling State ( Arnoldus) reminds me of the old Proverb (viz.) A
rolling Stone gathers no Moss, nor we any Money; which runs somewhat parallel.
But it is all one in time, for time must be untim'd in the Cusp of Eternity;
then shall we be found in an Eternal state: and as Eternity is infinite in it
self, so is it the Ray of the Majesty of God, who created the Heavens, the
Elements and Orbs; and gave unto them perpetual Motion and Rotation,
predestined to the Ends of Time, unmeasurable by any except himself. Whilst
thus contemplating what is Sacred and Divine, we trace along the gliding Streams
of Anderwick, guarded with Trees, and knotty Rocks; as delightful and pleasant,
for ought I know, as were the myrtle Groves, so sonneted by Poets.


Ar. As I am of your Opinion in that, so I suppose you are of mine in this, that
though Sin untune the Strings of the Soul, yet Sin cannot unstring the Soul;
the Faculties are left still, though in such disorder, that all the Wit of Man
can no more tune them, than the Strings of an untuned Lute can dispose
themselves for Harmony, without a skilful Musician's Hand. By this we know God
governs the World, who also rules in the Heart of Man, and makes it a Temple
for the Holy Ghost. So let us pass on with our traveling Design (by the House
of Cardrus) to the Ports of Sterling; where stands a beautiful and imbellished
Castle, elevated on the Precipice of an impregnable Rock, that commands the
Valleys, (as well as the Town) and all those habitable Parts about it: those
are the Turrets that present before us, let us enter her Ports, both strong and
spacious; whose incircling Arms surround a City, (but not a great one) that is
built all with Stone; so is her Castle; and situated close by the River Firth,
as above explained, upon lofty, craggy, and mountanous Rocks, almost
inaccessable. More Southward yet the City spreads it self into many sweet
Situations, that invigorate the Inhabitants, and accommodate the Low-land
Merchant rather than the Mariner with profitable Returns from the Hills, by the
Highlander. The Firth runs here that washes and melts the Foundations of the
City, but relieves the Country with her plenty of Salmon; where the
Burgo-masters (as in many other parts of Scotland) are compelled to reinforce
an ancient Statute, that commands all Masters and others, not to force nor
compel any Servant, or an Apprentice, to feed upon Salmon more than thrice a
Week.


Th. Is there such a Law in force now?


Ar. Yes sure, for ought I know it remains to this Day: and the Reason of it
is, as I conceive, from the plenty of Salmon in these Northern Parts; that
should the Inhabitants daily feed upon them, they would inevitably endanger
their Health, if not their Lives, by Surfeiting; for the abundance of Salmon
hereabouts in these Parts is hardly to be credited. And the Reader I fancy will
be of my Persuasion, when he comes to consider that the price of a Salmon
formerly exceeded the value of Sixpence Sterling, which I suppose no English
Man will grudg, nor think it unreasonable to give at any time; so that the
Danger, in my Opinion, lies most in the Diet: for as Salmon is a Fish very apt
to surfeit, more especially fresh Salmon, when only boiled; which if too
frequently fed on, relaxes the Belly, and makes the Passages so slippery, that
the retentive Faculties become debilitated; so suffers the Body to be hurried
into a Flux, and sometimes into a Fever, as pernicious as Death. Which is much
better prevented by Abstinency, than to stand the Test of uncorrected Physic.

This famous Firth is the most portable River in Scotland, whose Streams
because meandring, make it deep and torpid; so fit it for Navigation: for below
Bridge there are neither Streams nor Sharps: but above Bridge there is enough,
more especially toward the flourishing Fields of Montieth; which I rather
prefer, than Alan and Althrwery, for the Anglers Diversion, except Frith and
Koak; the one for Pearl, but the other for Trout.


Th. What Town is this?


Ar. Dirty Dumblain; let us pass by it, and not cumber our Discourse with so
inconsiderable a Corporation: our itch after Mockeny puts a Spur to quicken our
Expectation: for who knows but the various alteration of Weather may in some
measure frustrate those Expectations we may have of those admirable Streams to
answer our Designs?


Th. Do what you please.


Ar. Truly I think it but Time lost, to survey the Relics of a ruinous heap
of Stones, that lean over the Verge of a River, facing the Mountains. The
Houses it is true are built with Stone, but then to consider them low and
little, it plainly demonstrates there is nothing eminent but narrow Streets, and
dirty Houses; a convincing Argument there is no Scavengers amongst them. And for
their Houswifery, let that alone; for if you touch it, you sully your Fingers.
There is a Marketplace, such an one as it is; but as for Merchants, there is no
such thing in Nature: But a Palace there is, and a Cathedral too, otherwise
Dumblain had nothing to boast of.

But there is one thing remarkable, and that is the House of Domine Caudwel (a
formal Pedagogue) that absolved the Thief, and concealed the Theft, so lost his
Breeches: for you must know the good Woman his Wife was a notable Comer, one of
the first Magnitude; who with two more of her Consorts (as I was told at a
Four-hours drinking) guzled down as much Ale and Brandy, Wine and strong Waters
as amounted to the Sum of forty Pound Scots. But wanting Money to pay her
Reckoning, she liberally pawned her Husbands Breeches; and he like a Fop to
redeem his Wife's Reputation, would never redeem his Breeches, lest suspecting
they should smell of the Tears of the Tankerd. And here, as reported, was
celebrated that famous Union of Doh and Doris, stark Love and Kindness, a
Custom inviolable. Here also resided jovial Bille Sinclear.

Now you are to consider, that this pitiful pedling Corporation of Dumblain,
has little or no Trade amongst them, except now and then a truck with a
Brandy-Man, a Tobacco Merchant, or a Brewster-wife; for Ale, Tobacco and strong
Waters are the Staple of the Town: And so let us leave them to pursue our
intended design for Minever, and Dromon-Castle, that stands distant about some
three Miles from the Bridge of Ardoh; where there runs a small Rivulet of a
rapid Motion, paved with a slaty Bottom; but the Access difficult.

And here we cross the Moor to Mockeny, whose limpid Streams are pleasant
beyond Report, and her Fords generally furnished with Trout, as if Nature had
there designed to entertain the Contemplative Angler, in those liberal Streams:
where the Artist in a storm may shelter himself under shady Trees, elevated
upon lofty Mountains, over the melting amorous smiling Banks; as if the Boughs
were Barnicles, and ready to drop into the silent glittering Streams, that
glide softly along a delightful Meadow; excepting here and there some small
Cataracts of Water that tumble down a Precipice of Rocks, that encircles and
surrounds great Stones in the sandy Foundation of this mystical Mockeny; whose
glittering Sholes are gently moved by the soft breathings of Zephyrus, that
dash the smaller Waves a Shore, and discover to the Angler the intricate Angles
of Mockeny; so that here we assume a Poetic Liberty, in some sort to call
Scotland, Arcadia.


Th. This is a pretty Romantic Notion.


Ar. Call it what you will, you will find it so, when you come but a Mile below
the Bridge, over which we must pass from Dromon to Tillebarn; there you will see a
large and spacious Rock, that surrounds the Water on every side, so makes a Dam
near the Stern of a Mill, on the Skirts of Mockeny; where swiftly, yet sweetly,
the Water glides along those knotty craggy Torrs and Cliffs, till at last
ariving at an astonishing Precipice; where dilating it self, yet as if
unwilling to be divided, on a sudden you shall see such Trepidations on the
Surface, as if the Streams were sensible to apprehend a Fear; and Waters not
separate without Grief at parting.


Th. Now you begin to be Metaphorical.


Ar. There Is no Metaphor in it. Have not you seen burdened Clouds embodied with
the Treasures of Rain, ready to distill? if so, then look on the top of that
craggy Mountain, and there you may see, as if the Waters by a prophetic
Foresight had foreknowledg of a disjunction, expressed by their melting Drops:
Nay, the Rocks themselves are heard to murmur, and the very Winds to whisper
Rebellion. This is the place of those harmonious Descants, which I fancy
musical, and syrenical charming Notes betwixt Neptune and Aeolus. So that I Am
of Opinion Waters make Music; and he that doubts it, let him Angle for
Anchovies.


Th. Surely you fetched this Notion a great way from Home.


Ar. It Is no matter where I fetched it, it is here now. This natural Precipice
shall evidence for me, at the Sun's Declination, when he shades his Beams in
Thetis Lap, and the purple Pavilion of Night overspreads the Creation; then you
may see a chequered rocky Pavement embossed like the Firmament, with spangled
Stars; where those elevated Waters (Emblems of Clouds) no sooner approach this
natural Precipice, but Boreas bustles to curl the softened Streams, with such
surly Salutes as force a separation, so makes obvious Discoveries of Nature's
Artifice, so naturally delineated, that the more ingenious Observer would
conclude it Artificial. Over which Precipice the Waters pass with a swift, but
silent Motion to a Cristaline Fountain guarded with Rocks, and the Ornament of
Trees; at whose descent runs a Rivulet, that divides a Meadow worthy a
Description, could we but describe it, by reason of the Variety it naturally
affords.


Th. I am still in the dark. What mean all these Metaphors?


Ar. You will know the meaning of them by and by. Look up to those solitary
Mountains, situated South, and you shall see them send a pleasant Smile toward
the North. Yet because wanting the beautiful Ornament of Trees, a Sheep in a
Shower cannot shelter her self. But on the North side, there stands
inaccessible Torrs, with Cliffs and Rocks well burdened with Timber,
resembling, as to my Fancy, a Hermit's Cell; or a solitary Reception for the
Rosy-Crucian. But Nature (and not the Native) appropriates them to other Uses,
where a Country seems barren of so great Devotion, I had almost said Charity,
but some will say Humanity; however these Holes serve the Foxes to earth in,
the Rivers for Fish, and the Otter to swim in; the Meadows and Pastures for
Sheep to graze in; the Trees reception for innocent Birds, and the Shrub
Protection for the timorous Hare.


Th. There is something yet behind the Curtain I perceive.


Arnoldus. Mockeny, O Mockeny; must I leave thee when
Thy Banks overflow with Pleasure? Must I then
Be banished from those pleasant Draughts that I
Have often stolen, when as thy Streams stole by?
Besides, those pleasant Sleeps that I have had
Upon thy Rocks, until thy Skies were clad
Almost with Darkness; when the Angler's Art
Expressed a Grief; nay, double Grief to part
And leave such harmless Toils: tell me, Can those
That never knew the Art, the Art disclose?
How shall they know what Patience is, and write
Of Mysteries they never had a sight?
None but the Anglers can; and this I Will say,
None have the Gift of Patience more than they.

Th. Now it is out.


Ar. And now you think you have it; let us relinquish the sweet Streams of
Mockeny, and steer our Course for Dromon; and there you shall see the Majestic
Brow of a Rock, and a Castle inoculated to it.


Th. And what of that, if they are undistinguishable one from another?


Ar. There you will see how the Artist formed this formidable Structure to imitate
Nature, but the Natural Strength defaceth the Ornaments of Art. However let us
step one step further into the Garden (demolished with Age, or rather Neglect)
to view the Curiosities of those remaining Relics.


Th. What must we expect there?


Ar. A beautiful Arbor adorned with primp Hedges; and a sumptuous Dial, to
tell us the Hour of the Day.


Th. A wonderful piece of Curiosity.


Ar. So it is, in this Angle of Scotland; for Dromon lies just at the foot of
the Highlands, surrounded with Woods of Fir, Ash and Elm; but Sycomores grow
here to an amazing bigness, whose spreading Arms shade the Soil about them; and
their Bole and Brisk burden the Earth.


Th. What else is there here remarkable?


Ar. The Rills, Rivers, Loughs and Rivulets that meander not far from Dromon.
And Leadnock, as I take it, is the first small Rivulet, and Rothwel the next;
both of them furnished with delicate small Trout. But continuing our Course, we
advance to Lough Ern; immerg'd with Moors and Mountains, yet it floats on the
Skirts of the Highlands: From whence rusheth forth a violet Torrent, whose
boistrous Streams are suddenly converted into a River, which bears the Name of
the Lough: whose Streams, if well examined, are never unfurnished with Trout,
nor are her more solid Deeps unaccommodated with the Race of Salmon, besides
Pike, and Perch; and for Silver-bellied Eels, Scotland has none better; nor do
I believe any part of the World has. So that the River Ern, for variety and
choice of Fish, is inferior to no other River in Scotland.


Th. Now you say something to purpose; pray go on.


Ar. Here we must cross some of these Fords, if we intend to touch at Lough
Minever, whose flourishing Deeps charm the Angler, and enchant the Fish. Nay, I
must tell you, that this Lough Minever is plentifully stored with Pike, that
contributes to the Artist, the largest Lucit in Scotland; on the Skirts of
whose rotten Foundations, there remain as yet the Relics of an ancient
Castle, but so tattered and torn, and o're-grown with Age, that nothing is left
on it now worthy a Description; nay, probably in its flourishing Times there
was but little to describe.

A little more than a Mile from this Lough Minever, and nearer yet to the Body
of the Highlands, Lough Torret tumbles down her rapid Streams that melt into a
River, and is called Glen-Torret; because, as I suppose, having its Original
from the Glen, and the craggy Clifts and Tors to which it is espoused, where
the Angler may accommodate himself with Eel and Trout: But for more Varieties,
he must fish somewhere else. Beneath the Descents of Torret, are the swelling
Banks of Kelthy, in whose rocky Bowels the Trouts shine yellow.

Distant yet more North, and inclining West, beyond this craggy Kelthy, there
runs a Rivulet which the Natives call Shaggy, the only Rivulet in Scotland for
the Contemplative Angler; not only by reason of the great quantity of Trout it
contains; nor is it because it is so narrowly begirt with delightful Hills and
flourishing Trees, that hang dangling about them; nor is it because of her
rocky Mountains, through which the Waters continually issue, and tumble down
like the Cataracts of Nile, though they make not such a Noise; but here it was
that I found my self surrounded with Fountains, and mellifluous Aviaries of
sweet singing Birds that melted the Air. And here it was above the Kirk of
Moinee, where methought I only envied the rude Inhabitants, because so happily
blessed with such sweet Accommodations. But below this Kirk of Moinee stands a
tottering Bridge, and below the Bridge there is a most pleasant Level, where the
sparkling Sands seem gilded with glittering Streams: And the River so naturally
fretted and beautified with Stone, as if Nature intended there also to
compensare the Contemplative Angler. Here also the Trouts shine with a
glittering Blackness, and swell with Thickness; yet never arrive to that
magnitude of Proportion, as to parallel and vie with those in Pitloyl.

More South from Moinee, runs the River Almont, a Derivative from the
Mountains, and not from the rotten and spungy Foundations of the Moors, through
which it glides: Nor has it any Claim or Title from the Lough Minever, as
superstitiously surmiz'd by the unintelligible Inhabitant. Now besides this
Almont, there is not another River or Rivulet hereabouts worth our mentioning,
except the Poe, in whose little Pools there are Perch and Pike, and now and
then a lusty Trout. But I had almost forgot the Lough called Balloh, at the
Foot of Drumon, wherein there is Perch, but not a Trout; and truly I question
if there be a Pike.


Th. O Arnoldus, who could ever have imagined such charming Temptations amongst
a People so unpolished in Art, and a Country without Cultivation? Here Is all
Miracle of Rivers and Rivulets, and as miraculously furnished with Fish. What
shall I say, or what shall I think, if not to contemplate these solitary
Fields, as pleasant and delightful as Fools Paradise, by Fondlings called
Elysium? Who can deny himself such diverting Associates, (though in a rude part
of a Country) when their Rivers and Rivulets are so liberally furnished with
Trout? What pity is it to leave such Entertainments behind us, to ramble the
remote Northern Tracts of Scotland, where the Eves e're long will hang with
Icikles?


Ar. It may be so, for here we cannot stay to inhabit, nor any longer enjoy
these solitary Recreations; we must steer our Course by the North Pole, and
relinquish those flourishing Fields of Kintire and Innerary; the pleasant
Bounds of Marquess Argile, which very few Englishmen have made discovery of,
to inform us of the Glory of the Western Highlands, enriched with Grain, of the
the plenty of Herbage. But how the Highlander will vindicate Bowhider and
Lohabbor, with Reven in Badanoch, that I know not; for there they live like
Lairds, and die like Loons, hating to work, and no Credit to borrow, they make
Depredations, so rob their Neighbors. But let not Kintire, like an Ignis
fatuus, lead us out of the way, our Stars direct to Tippermore.


Th. Why to Tippermore, is there any thing remarkable there?


Ar. Yes, There Is this Remark as a Monument, (fatal to the Covenanters) for
here again it was that Marquess Montross routed his Countrymen. But our next
Stage is to the Town of St. Iohnston's (very little different from those
Imbellishments of Sterling); East from the Town lie those flourishing Meadows
they call the Ince, where a Citadel was erected and surrounded by the Navigable
Tay, (that washes those Sandy Banks and Shores) which no sooner mingles her
Streams with Dundee, but she loses her Name by espousing with the Ocean.


Th. Is this the River Tay, so much discoursed by the Highlanders?


Ar. They have reason to discourse it, for it leads into the Hills: Moreover,
it supplies them, as all the Inhabitants hereabouts, with fresh Fish, to whom
she contributes all her Accommodations. Now over this Tay, at the North end of
the Town, there stood a stone Bridge that leads to Kennule; a mountanous Place
that tantaliz'd the Tailor with an invisible Stone: it is a pleasant Story, but
I Am unwilling to tell it, lest fearing to draw the Maleson of the Natives upon
me.


Th. Never trouble your self with that; was it my Task, I should venture a
Relation freely, with all the Circumstances, whatever came on it.


Ar. I think I dread their Clamor as little as any body; therefore I Will
proceed, and tell you the Story. In this Town of St. Iohnstons lived a
pragmatical Tailor, (as Tailors you know for the most part are) but here they
call a Tailor Master-fahioner for sooth, and that you must know makes him one
step higher. But to the Story; This infatuated Tailor, with some other idle
Coxcombs, in all respects as conceited as himself, went on a certain time to
these Mountains of Kennule, to search thereabouts for an invisible Stone, that
accidentally slipped from a stranger's Hand, as he carelessly rid along to view
the Country. This strange Accident made a horrible Noise all here about; and
all diligence possible was used by the Tailor and his nitty Companions to find
this Stone; yet the Stone was invisible.

Now amongst the rest of our Admirers, the Lady of Kennule entertains the
Novel; and resolves an adventure for the invisible Stone, who with her Female
Attendants several times surrounded the Hills, and stooped to take up every
shining Stone; so that for the most part they were always in Motion, except at
other times upon the removal of Stones, with Responses to one another in the
Scottish Dialect. I see ye, see ye me, till almost every Body see them all. So
ashamed at length to prosecute the Design any farther, (since stretched so far,
it was ready to break) despairing of their Enterprise, and the recovery of the
Stone, they left their Successes to the indefatigable Tailor, and his
prickear'd Crew; that Day after Day so hounded these Hills, as hitherto no
Churchyard has been haunted with Goblins.

But on a certain Sun-shiny Day (in the Evening) as some Townsmen were
returning from the Ports of Dundee, and espying the Tailor inspecting the
Stones, one of these Townsmen (I Will warrant him a Wag) dismounts from his
Horse, having dealt with his Companions to take him to Town: who the better to
manage his contrived Design, and put a Trick upon the nitty Tailor, kept at a
distance behind him; till at length he calls aloud, as the Lady and her Women
had formerly done. I see ye, see ye me. But the Tailor on a sudden, because
seemingly surpised, replies, in fa Sir I tro I see ye. However, the Townsman
pretends to be serious, (and the rather, because seeing the Tailor all alone)
till at length the Tailor concludes him in Earnest. So that now being freed
from Suspicion on both sides, they jog on together (like Tory and Trimmer) the
uneaven Tracts of these mountainous Ascents; till the Tailor stooping to take
up a Stone, and confidently bleating aloud to the Townsman; I see ye Sir, see
ye me? In good fa Sir, no, the Townsman replied; where are you won Sir I can no
see ye? I am here, quo the Tailor, and can ye no see me? I would you were any
where the Townsman replied, so that I could but tell where to find ye; And
smiling to himself looks another way; then repeats it again, But whar shall I
find ye?

Now for certain, quo the Tailor, I have got the Stone, by which means, beyond
measure, I Will enrich my self, for I have tried all ways to do it without a
Court of Conscience. How many People have sought for this Treasure, but no Man
so happy as my self to find it? I may go where I will, for no Man can see me;
and stand where I please, for no Man can find me; and take what I list, (for
Tailors are thievish) and no Man detect me; and if Fear affrights me, yet no
Man can hurt me. To convince the World therefore, and Mankind in general of
this rare and admirable invisible Stone, I Will strip off my Clothes and go stark
naked through the Streets of the Town, and so mist all the Eyes of the People
about me, that no Body shall see me, nor any Body know me. Know you, says the
Townsman, no Body can see you; then how should they know you. Say you so, quo
the Tailor; can no Body see me? No, says the Townsman, since you made your self
invisible. Why then, quo the Tailor, I may do what I will, and go where I list,
and no Man the wiser. So you may, says the Townsman, since now you are Invisible.
But favor me I beseech you this small Request, that before we depart I may
once again see you.

With that the proud Tailor transported with Joy, discharged both his Hands,
and laid down the Stones. Which his subtle Associate no sooner observes, but
presently he cries aloud, Now Sir I see you. And more to strengthen and confirm
the Miracle, on a sudden the Tailor snatched up the Stones again, lest fearing
his Companion should by some Trick deprive him; and fancying himself, as
formerly, invisible, they both advance toward the Town of St. Iohnston's. But
the Tailor went naked, who no sooner entered the Ports of the Town, but the Mob
and the Rabble having combined together to pelt the poor Tailor into his
Senses, if possible, who run the Gantelop through Thick and Thin, Young and
Old, for every Boy had a switch at his Breech; and those at a distance that
could not reach him, assaulted him with Stones; which so clawed the poor
Tailor, as by the marks on his Buttocks, conviced him at last to believe
himself Visible.


Th. I think the Tailor met with his Match.


Ar. So think I, if he was not overmatch'd. And so let us leave him to lick
himself whole, whilst we return to the Bridge of the Town of St. Iohnston's,
where a Coker-Boat serves now to transport their Merchandise into the County of
Angus, and some other Parts; which looks somewhat odly, but it concerns not us,
for we cannot redress it; those that are compelled may suffer by it. So let her
sleep the Sleep of Oblivion, whilst we direct our Course toward the River
Errit, where we may inform our selves of a Practice amongst the Natives there,
that murder a Salmon without a Rod, Net, or Speer; and cook him almost as soon
as they catch him.


Th. How can that be? pray unfold the Riddle.


Ar. It Is discoursed by every Body, when a Stranger comes amongst them, that
the Inhabitants presently run and fetch a Pot, which they circumspectly place
upon some part of a Rock, and then dexterously convey some live Coals under it,
(or it may be Turf) which is no sooner fan'd by the Breath of Air, but
immediately the Flames fly all about. Now you are to consider that the Race of
Salmon, especially the Female in the Vernon Aequinox, is for the most part
picking and casting against the rapid And in this River Errit it is always
observable, there are plenty of stumpy knotty Rocks, to which the Native,
without difficulty, can pass and repass from one Rock to another; and the
rather to facilitate this mortal Design, they set the Pot on some seeming
floating Rock, to which (as I am told) their Observation directs them; which
Rock, it may be, is almost drowned in Water. Now this Artifice is no sooner
performed by the rude Engineer, but the Salmon, because casting after her usual
manner, often casts away her Life, by leaping into the Pot instead of the Pool.


Th. I cannot approve of this murdering Artifice.


Ar. Nor I neither; but the manner of Action is thus performed. For the Salmon
you must know, by reason of agility of Body, (and considerable Strength) so
bends and contracts her self, by taking her Tail (as supposed) in her Teeth;
then, like a well-tempered Spring that suddenly and smartly unbends and flies
off; even so does the Salmon with a strange Dexterity, mount the Air (out of
the Water) an incredible height; But because unprecautioned how to distinguish
the Elements, and perhaps wanting foresight of this imminent Danger, she
frequently encounters the boiling Water, which no sooner she touches, but her
Life is snatched away by the suffocating Fumes, that immediately strangle her;
and thus the poor Salmon becomes a Prey to the Native, when only in the pursuit
of Nature's Dictates, whose Laws and Rules are circumscribed and bounded by the
Sovereignty of him that made the Creation.


Th. This I must needs say is a barbarous Practice, but a quick way of Cookery.


Ar. Such kind of Cookery will serve a Scots Commoner, as lives on the Bray and
Skirts of the Highlands. But we relinquish these pleasant Streams of Errit, to
patrole the Fields of Cooper in Angus, where Scotland's great General (the Earl
of Leven) was born promiscously of obscure Parents. In this little Corporation
of Cooper in Angus, the chief Magistrate is a Bailiff, Master sometimes of a
Brewster-house; where we may refresh our selves, before we trample the Sands of
Ilay, imbellished with Rocks, and lofty Trees that shade her shining murmuring
Streams, and shelter her numerous Sholes of Fish, especially toward her
Source: where you may observe the Shores shine of a golden Color, resembling
the glittering Sands of Tagus. And the River Dean so famed for Pike (though
unfortunate for Trout) gulphs into Ilay near Mighill-bridg.


Th. What place is this?


Ar. Old Drumkelbo, an ancient supernnuated Castle, that adjoins to a certain
Moor called Tipprosin; which in my Opinion resembles the Stygean Lake, (rather
than the Elysium Fields) whose solitary Bounds are large and spacious, mossy
and boggy, full of Pits and horrid Blackness; a Resemblance (to my fancy) of
the Courts of Death.

Now this Tipprofin got its Name from an unfortunate Priest, that traveling
those unfrequented Tracts, accidentally fell into a Mossy Moorish, Boggy Pit;
which sudden Disaster surpised the Priest, and the rather, because, when to
see himself plunged into the Arms of Death, without any prospect of timely
relief, this made the poor Priest unlock the doors of his Lips, that like
double Diapazons unlocked the Air sooner than the Ears of the obdurate Native,
that inhabited the Verge of this solitary Moor. So that by this time finding
his Complaints insuccessful, only the repetition of his dolorous Cries from
reverberating Rocks and Cavities of Earth, it stirred up a sorrowful Silence in
the Priest, which at last led him into a profound Contemplation; fancying to
himself he lived now in his Grave, and every Object a Caput Mortuum.


Th. The Priest, I perceive, was in a very bad Pickle.


Ar. And so would you, had you been in his Case; but this Meditation no sooner
expires, when the Bogs and Moors ecchoe again with such hideous Shouts, and
dismal Cries from the terrified Priest, as if some Evistre or Apparition had
presented before him the horrible and terrible Apprehensions of Death: but it
happened otherwise (and it is well it did) for some Natives and Inhabitants of the
Fields in Angus (were breaking of Earth, and digging for Turf) who hearing a
Noise, and an imperfect Sound, as they thought, breathing from the Bowels of
the Earth, it dreadfully startled them at first: but after some time,
deliberating among themselves, and resolving, if possible, to sum up the Cause
of these horrible Cries; their Ears were a second time assaulted, by a fresh
supply of miserable Lamentations that sprung from the repeated Complaints of
the poor pensive Priest, who was almost come to a Period, and winding up the
Bottoms of his dolorous Howlings.


Th. But the Priest, I hope, got relief at last, who it may be till then had
forgot how to pray.


Ar. You cannot forbear jerking the Priest, who by this time seemed destitute
of all moral Comforts, and as little hopes of Relief, notwithstanding his
breathings forth of a formal Penance, lamenting his unfortunate, unlucky
Mischance, that threatened his Exit, if no more Priests in Scotland. So in a
fainting Fit, he faintly cries out with an articulate Voice, because his Breath
began now to expire, which certainly had in a very short time extinguished, had
not the Inhabitants pursued the Echoes to that dismal Pit where the Priest lay
bogg'd; imploring the Deity, with Eyes and Hands held up toward Heaven, using
these and the like Expressions, Ex profunditatibus te inclamavi, Iehova. And
though the People understood not his Latin, yet their Lenity and common
Charity, with other requisite Endeavors, brought him Relief, and haled him
sorth out of his formidable Confinement. Since which remarkable Time, to this
very Day, the Natives and Inhabitants that inhabit thereabouts, do call this
Moor by the Name of Tipprofin.


Th. Why then it seems he christened the Moor.


Ar. And you seem here to christen the Priest, for the Priest gave Name to the
Moor of Tipprofin; and the Witches (if there be such) gave name to Pitloil: as
if Priestcraft and Witchcraft were inseparable Companions.


Th. What Is amiss now at the Lough of Pitloil?


Ar. You shall have it when I can come at it, and that will not be long first.
South and by East from these mountanous Elevations, we discover two large and
spacious Loughs; the one of them is called by the Name of Loundy; but the other
Lough is called Pitloil, divided from each other by an Isthmus of Land, or the
interposition of a small Mountain. I frequented them both to fish for Perch,
because to my Experience the largest in Scotland, if twenty Inches and better
can be thought a large Perch: and having to my Curiosity examined them apart,
more especially Pitloil, I declare it as my Opinion from several Examinations
(and approved Experiments) that both of them super-abound with plenty of Perch;
which infinitely augments the Angler's Entertainments: Nor do the Waters mingle
one with another, when each of them find a different Passage, to discharge
themselves into the Streams of Tay. But in this Narrative I thought requisite
to inform you, that Lundy exceeds by much in plenty, though Pitloil to a
Miracle exceeds in largeness.

But Van Helmont tells you, in Fol. 684. That in the Lake of Lemane, a Trout
does oftentimes ascend unto an hundred pound Weight. And the Natives that
inhabit this solitary Part of Angus, will tell you of Trouts of such vast
Dimensions, that I dare not report without being suspected; so render my self
and Relation ridiculous. A Trout also was taken in the River at Ware, and
presented to Charles the First, then King of England, which Trout was of such a
vast Proportion, as would seem incredible for me to report; which for any Man's
satisfaction the Figure of it as yet remains (for ought I know) at the
George-Inn in Ware, to convince the Incredulous, if any be suspicious.

A Pike also Van Helmont tells of, that a Sign hung on him is noted to have
lived three hundred Years, and to have grown to an amazing Bigness; nor then to
have died, but by a vioIent Death. Great Pikes I have also observed to be taken
out of the Lough of Minever, that have measured more than a Yard and a half;
and such were surprised with a Hook and Line. So in the Rivers of Lire (nigh
the Village Rumst) an Eel was taken, which was sent to Bruxels, unto the
Emperor Charles the First; which was observed to have been seventeen Foot in
Length.

Another notable Relation I have from a Gentleman, born in Nottingham-shire;
his Name is Armstrong, whose Grandfather very much affected the Rod: and
Trolling in some River there-abouts, but whether in Trent or the River Soar, he
remembers not; however he encountered a lusty Pike that disarmed him, both of
his Hook and his Hopes at once: so melancholy he left off his Recreation for
that time, but the ensuing Day presented an occasion for our Angler to travel;
and as his Custom was, after dispatch of Business, he mingled some solitary
Recreation with his Employment. So steering his Course to the Waterside, and
viewing the Fords, he observes a Shole of Fish fly to the Shallows for
Sanctuary; by which he imagined the Fry was assaulted: so that presently near
the Deeps, he lets his Bait drop; which unexpectedly was suddenly encountered;
and he like an Artist, gave his Examinant the Law of fair Play, so destroyed
his Assailant: and having by this time landed his Adventure, he presently goes
about to discharge his Arming, but reaching forth his Hand to disgorge his
Captive, he becomes suddenly surpised, because then to find in the late
conquered Fish, not only one Hook, but another also; which he certainly knew to
be his own, that but the Day before was forced away from him; which after
examination, he found it was. Now this Fish was observed to have traveled
fifteen Miles in twenty four Hours. For that end I offer this discourse, that
the traveling Fish never arrives to that maturity of Growth, as does the Fish
that is idle and slothful; for by how much his Motion is in the River, by so
much the better and more nutritious is the Fish.

Now that Witches inhabit near this Lough of Pitloil, I am of Opinion, provided
there be any. But whether there be, or be not, such mortal Demons, I suspend my
Judgment, and proceed to the Adventure.


Th. I long to hear it, and you are loath to come at it.


Ar. Have patience but a little, and you shall have it. Early one Morning
(before the Sun had adorned the Day with his beautiful Beam of Light to gild
the azure Firmament) I set forward, as at other times, to this fatal Lough of
Pitloil; and riding along, observed a large and lusty Hare (but they call her
Maukin) sitting upon a large and gritty Stone, washing and furbishing her Face
with her Feet; and on the bought of her near Buttock (as to my Observation) was
branded a remarkable Patch of an obscure blackish Color, altogether different
from the rest of her Fur; which appeared to the bigness of a five Shilling
piece of new minted Silver: but dismounting my Horse, she discovered me
approach her with my Greyhound-Bitch, which I suddenly slipped; and she as
suddenly forsook her Station, but trusted so little to the nimbleness of her
Heels, as if her Life was but of little Value. On the other hand, my Bitch was
so slow in her Motion, as if they had mutually combined not to hurt one
another. So leaving that pursuit to pursue my first Intention, I left the
Mountains to trace Valleys to this unfortunate Lough of Pitloil; for what
happened afterward will commission me, I question not, so to entitle it: where I
found my Greyhound Bitch, but no Fur in her Mouth.


Th. What of all this? pray be brief.


Ar. I Will be as concise as I can. That very time, I remember, a Peer of the
Realm went (with me) in Company, to this Lough of Pitloil, to which place, when
we arrived, and dismounting our Horses, to imprint our Feet on the Silver
Sands, (it is a liberty I assume to call them so, in regard of their glittering
Whiteness) and searching for the Boat, we found it was removed into a more
remote and solitary part of the Lough: so we sent some Attendants to seek for
the Man that rowed the Boat; nor were they long in their Inquisitions before
they found him, as they unluckily passed by the Doors of some ill contrived
Huts, or obscure Caves, that resembled Dungeons rather than habitable Houses;
where sometimes he usually reposed himself, there, or thereabouts, because in
expectation that some or other would come that Day to visit the Lough: which
happened accordingly to his apprehension.

Now by that time our Attendants were come up with those Female Infernals that
inhabited those Hutts, and enquiring for the Skipper to pilot the Boat, he
makes himself known, that he was the Man that paddled in the Pool with a bad
and crazy weather-beaten Boat. So they desired him to hasten away, with such
Tools and instruments as he had to assist their Design. To all which he readily
seemed to comply with, in hopes of a Gratuity which he afterward obtained. But
before they departed from those ugly Earth-holes, an ill-contrived Urchin, or a
Cur out of shape, and deformed, (as they described him) but we call him a
Tarrier, and they by the Name of a Whitwratch, (bastardbrood of the Fox) as the
Servants apprehended; so might any Man as well as they rationally conclude, as
by the Circumstances given us by their Description.

A beautiful Spannel I had at that time (propined me by the Lady of an eminent
Peer) followed after the Horsemen; which the Elph in pursuit of, had fastened on
him, but was suddenly rescued by my Greyhound-Bitch (formerly discoursed) and
peradventure with some small detriment to this ugly Elph: Which when the Hag
had enviously observed, she hastened in the Elph, and suddenly after was heard
to express unsavory words, very Diabolical, with Charms and Threats; besides
various antic Gestures and Postures, both with her Head and Body; that at
present occasioned abundance of Laughter among them; as it did after their
departure from those sordid infernal Huts or Habitations.


Th. We shall have something on it by and by I perceive.


Ar. Doubt it not; for no sooner the Boat touched the Sands, but as soon I
committed my Person to the Lough, as calm and as smooth as a Sea of Glass; and
so it continued, till the Sun's advance to climb the Meridian: but afterward,
my fortunate Success became unsuccessful, for after his Declination the Scene
was changed; and then my Labors proved all Abortive, for the beautiful
prospect of my Morning's Diversion, was changed and clowded with tragical
Conclusions. It Is true, I went ashore to refresh my self, in regard a cold
Capon, and some other good Provision was provided for me, and this Noble man's
Refreshment; who sat down with me under the Shades of Rocks, not far from the
Brink of this Lough of Pitloil: where we both Eat and Drank together, till
finding our selves sufficiently refreshed; and then I arose, and took leave of
this Honorable Peer; so returned to the Boat again, to steer my former Course;
as also to observe what interest the Lough would now afford me for those Hooks
and Lines I left behind me.

But no sooner I had committed my self to the Boat, and rowed to the Place
where I left my Tackle, but on a sudden, and unexpectedly, I was interrupted by
the loud Acclamations of some on Shore, that shouted and made Signals, by beck
of Hand, (because by this time I was almost out of distance) advising my
return: Which I no sooner interpreted, but hastened to the Shore as fast as I
could; for by their seeming disorder, as I then apprehended, some unexpected
Accident had happened amongst them. So that I forcibly forced my Passage through
the thickest Waves; and being by this time arrived on Shore, I was entertained
with the unwelcome News of my Land-spaniel's Indisposition; but too late I
found to rescue him from Death. So reflecting on my self, that Beginnings have
Conclusions, I directed my Steps back again to the Boat, to recover my armed
Tackle left behind, on purpose to surprise such Fish as were shame-fac'd to
bite before me.

Now this was the third Time I entered the Boat, in order to pursue my Angling
Enterprise: when a fresh Summons alarms me from the ecchoing Shores, to come
back and testify another strange Accident, not inferior to the former; because
to stand by as an Evidence, and see my Greyhound-Bitch lie a dying; whom I
presently found as stiff as a Stake, (or a Stump) whilst as yet her Body was as
warm as Wool: nor could I say she was totally Dead, yet I Am sure she was
altogether deprived of Motion. So I hastened from the Morts, and returned to the
Lough, to draw up my Lines which I left behind me; and though having met with
too such fatal discouraging Accidents (with solicitations from this Honorable
Person) I pursued my first Intention; so brought off my Lines, and left the
Lough in a foming Rage; and now you shall hear what happened on Shore. Not far
from this Lough, stood a small Mountain, whereon some Inhabitants had built a
Kiln; to which Place we directed a Servant for Fire, that presently brought it,
but we hardly knew the use on it, before the Kiln was all in Flames; and burnt
so vehemently, that in a short space the whole Fabric was consumed and burnt
down to the Ground: So I left my Recreation, and took my leave of the
unfortunate Pitloil.

And now give me leave to return to Drumkelbo-Castle, and tho but ill
contrived, and as ill situated, in regard it stands near to the Moor of
Tipprofin; yet not far from thence are the flourishing Fields of Mighill,
beautified and adorned with stately Sycomores; as are her Meadows surrounded
with Rivers and Rivulets. In the midst of whose Plains stands a Parochial
Church, wherein lies interred the Royal Corpse of King Arthur's Consort; with
the Relics of some other weather-beaten Monuments that Age has almost blotted
out; but the Queen's Tomb I observed was surrounded with Martialists, that when
living so, in Death paid Homage at her Princely Sepulcher.

These are those cultivated Fields of Mighill, where King Arthur's Stone stands
to this very Day. It Is true, because Traditional among the Antiquaries, and why
not as true because a Superstition amongst the Inhabitants, who will tell you
with as much Confidence as they mumble their Pater Noster, or with as much
Impudence as you can credit with ignorance, that that very Stone was King
Arthur's Table, when his Royal Campaign encamped in those Fields; which he left
behind him as a Relic to Posterity?


Th. Or rather because he could not take it with him.


Ar. You will have your Joke, I perceive; however I Will proceed to the pleasant
Banks of Ilay, where the Angler, without difficulty, may take a view of a large
and spacious River of translucid Streams; where a Storm seldom invades the
Shores, nor any immoderate Winds much to incommode them, in regard the Water
runs most on a level, and the Banks very blough; more especially when
attempting the Head of Reven, where the Angler may observe most rapid Falls and
stiff Streams, which are seldom or never unaccommodated with Trout, besides the
generous Race of Salmon, the Nature of whose Sex and Species (this Opportunity
presenting) invites me to discover a most admirable Secret.

For as I was angling one time on a Sun-shiny Day, in these limpid and
transparent Streams of Ilay, I was constrained, in regard of the excessive
Heat, to relinquish her inflamed sandy Shores, to seek Umbrage (where I could
get it) from some shady Trees: but none I found there to harbor and relieve
me. However, by this time, I recovered a Meadow, which generously commoded me
with a Hauthorn-bush that Nature had planted by the River side (which served me
for Sanctuary) whose dilating Boughs, spreading as an Umbrella, they defended
me from the scorching Strokes of the Sun, where also I lay closely concealed,
the better to inspect Nature's Curiosities.

For whilst reposing my self under this tiffany Shade of diversified Leaves and
flourishing Twigs, that hovered over the Brinks of this amorous Ilay; on a
sudden I discovered a very large Salmon, leisurely swimming toward the
Leeward-Shore: and having considered the Sun at his Meridian, I thought it
needless to provoke her with Fly, or any thing else, more especially at such a
time when I knew her indisposed to divert her self either with Food or Frolic.
Where note, the more circumspectly I traced her with my Eye to pursue her, the
more and greater still was my Admiration, because to mark her from Place to
Place, till at last I saw her arrive on a Bed of Sand, which scarcely to my
apprehension, covered her with Water; for I am confident it exceeded not the
depth of one Foot; where with her Tail she rigled to and fro, so long and often,
till I visibly discovered a flat slaty bluish Stone; over which she oft-times
contracted her Body; Nature provoking her to eject her Belly, which at last she
accomplished, to my surprising Amazement.

But this was not all; for as soon as that Project was performed by the Female,
with most accurate Swiftness, she lanched her self forth into the more solid
Deeps; which was no sooner performed, when as suddenly I recovered the view of
another, as afterward will appear by the following Circumstances: For out of
that solitary and profound Depth of Water, wherein the Female had concealed her
self, there sprung up a Male (or something like him) that swam directly as if
haled with a Cord, to that very Place where the former Fish had ejected her
Belly, (but some call it Spawn) and there performed such an admirable Office,
as you will hardly believe, though I tell you the Truth.


Th. However, this is remarkable, pray let us have it.


Ar. The Female I have told you, has shot her Belly upon a large and bluish
slaty Stone; and the Male, as by instinct to discharge his Office, dilates his
Fins, and futters about, till at last he directs himself over the ejected
Matter; where with his Nose, as I then apprehended (though I will not warrant
Fish to have a Scent) rooted as a Swine, or something like it, yet were the
Waters at that time undisturbed; when on a sudden, and with a violent motion of
Body, he throws himself about, invading the Calms with such a strong Ebulition,
as if some pondrous Stone had struck the Surface: but it was not long e're I
see him again, though for the present he seemed to me invisible.

And then my Observation led me curiously to observe him direct his Head to the
former Place, and contract himself after the same manner which the former Fish
had formerly done. This I visibly and plainly saw; which, together with his
active and exerting Motion, a spermatick Whiteness of a milky Substance issued
from him, not much unlike to jellied Cream: All which Remarks I signally
notified, and by all the Circumstances my Judgment could direct to, I concluded
him the Milter, because there to shed and scatter his Milt upon the ejected
forementioned Belly; which with my Eyes I then beheld, and visibly saw; and
therefore take the boldness confidently so to report it. Believe it that will,
refute it that can; I know no better Evidence than Eyesight. But lest any Man,
through Obstinacy, or a vain Incredulity, arraign the Truth of this my
Observation; I Will direct him a Precedent, and go no farther than the Brood of
Perch, because both are barrel-bellied Fish; and answerable in some measure to
the Race of Salmon; which if he do, he may rationally conclude that Nature's
Laws are alike to both.

Now the Milter, because having discharged himself with some little Labor, and
as little Trouble, suddenly recovers again the Depth of the Water, with most
accurate swiftness; nor have I rarely seen a more violent Motion: whose absence
in a trice invites the Female Fish, and she no sooner returns to the Place,
dictated beyond dispute by the Mediums of Nature (which I think no wise
intelligent Man will deny) works a Trough like a Cistern in Sand or Gravel, and
as near as I could guess of about her own Proportion; into which Trough with
nothing save the spring of her Tail, she jumbles and tumbles in the prima
materia, according to Aristotle; but proxima materia, if you credit
Sandivogius; who allows, a visibility of the second Matter, but not of the
first: so gently she covered it over with Sand, and then left it to the great
Luminaries for Vivification, and the Seminals, because having a prolifick
Virtue, and Life-quality innated in them. Life inevitably shines forth after
certain Days, Accidents omitted; because the Luster of Life is a thing so
sacred, that the Lubeck of Conspiracy strikes to blot it out. Thus much
therefore as relates to the Progeny of Salmon, I being an Eye Witness, do
boldly testify; and as boldly divulge; if Seeing be a good Basis for any Man's
belief. And this I believe, and confidently assert, and therefore report it to
the World for a Truth.


Th. O how rare and admirable are the Secrets of Nature; who uses no Engine
nor Artificial Prescriptions! Your former Relations seem Prodigies in Nature;
but this, as if beyond her, surpasses admiration.


Ar. Nature made naked is nothign but Wonder, and Scotland is a Kingdom and
Country of Prodigies. Look forward and behold that tottering Bridge, we must
pass over it to the Town of Eliot, a small Country-Village, one would think it
dropped out of the Skirts of the Highlands. And this is the Town where famous
Leven (Scotland's great General) was surpised in his Quarters by the English
Cavalry. Not far from this Bridge of Reven, the Streams being translucid, you
may see under Water irregular Rocks, and knotty broken stumps of Trees, that
stand in the Streams of famous Ilay. Where the swiftness of the Current
undermines the Sand, and delves great Pits that secure the Salmon from the
Sentence of Death, except such as are destinated to die by the Decrees of Age,
or their own extravagant Prodigality, in pursuit sometimes after fictitious
Novelties; as when they relinquish the Rocks in a Bravado, to challenge Death
by a different Fortune. For then is the Time the prejudicate Native consults
his Opportunity to put in execution that barbarous Practice of murdering Fish
by Moonshine, as at other times to martyr them with the blaze of a Wisp and a
barbed Spear.


Th. What, are these Canabals, or murdering Moss-troopers, to surprise Fish by
the Engine of Fire-light? Such dark Conspirators sprung from the Mines in
Florida, Fawks, or Cataline; or some infernal Incubus.


Ar. These are those amorous Banks of Ilay, so famously extolled for Diversion;
for in those solitary Streams you see before you, by industry of Art, and
dexterity of the Rod, I have had Trouts come ashore, and leap in my Hand.


Th. That Is by reason they could leap no where else; But how far have we now to
the Bridge of Dean, discoursed every where for the plenty of Trouts? and if Fame
be a true Oracle, they tumble up and down there, till the Artist pleases to
exchange their Element, and court them ashore by force of Arms.


Ar. That Is the Place, near those glittering Sands, and rocky Foundations;
where you may observe the trembling Streams swiftly, yet sweetly glide along;
but not as Cataracts to terrify the Fish, by reason their Fall is so gently
moderated, amongst those knotty stumpy Rocks. I call it a River enriched with
Inhabitants; where Rocks are Landlords, and Trouts Tenants. For here is not a
Stream but it is furnished with Trouts; I have angled them over from Stem to
Stern, and dragged them forth Brace after Brace, with nothing but a Hackle, or
an Artificial Fly, adapted to the Season, and proportioned to the Life. Humor
but the Fish, and you have his Life; and that is as much as you can promise your
self. O the Diversion I have had in these solitary Streams! believe me,
Theophilus, it surpasses Report. I remember on a Time, when the Clouds let
fall some extravagant Drops, which in a manner discolored the Surface of the
Water, then it was that amongst those stony Cisterns, where you see the Tops of
the Rocks make a visible discovery, a little above that trembling Stream, if
you mind it; there stands a stumpy craggy Rock, peeping perceptibly out of the
Water. From thence, and above those slaty Foundations, I have struck, and
killed many a Brace of brave Trouts; a Reward beyond my Labor and Expense.


Th. I question it not; but what is here, the Arcanum of Angling?


Ar. Yes sure, and the Treasure lies in those trembling Streams that come
tumbling down to wash the Cheeks of those pallid Rocks; from whence they gently
glide along with generous Dews, to moisten the florid marly Banks; and tinged
as you may see with a Rubido, they strike a vivid Tincture into the flourishing
Streams: and thus the Complexion of the Water was changed, (once upon a Time)
when I fished those Streams, where the Trouts, to divert me, and augment my
Entertainment, came ashore to court me; and courteous beyond curiosity, laid
their Lives in my Hand.


Th. Then they gave you handsel I perceive but this is some Aenigma, pray
explain it.


Ar. It Is no more an Aenigma than a Trout is a Trout; for you must suppose him
an active Fish, who no sooner finds himself entangled, but he plunges, and
breaks the Surface of the Streams, thinking thereby to disintangle himself, and
reprieve himself from the danger of Death, that already has laid an Arrest upon
him. Thus by picking and casting, he casts his Life away; so swims ashore to
hear the Angler's Doom, in whose Breast lies the Sentence of Life and Death. On
a certain solitary and gloomy Day, the Face of the Firmament was sullied with
Clouds, that rolled to and fro, but did not melt. I remember I armed with a
glittering Fly, the Body composed of red twisted Silk, intermingled with
Silver, and an Eye of Gold, the Water in temper (as you now observe it) but the
wing of my Fly was the dapple Feather of a Teal; the Day, as prenoted,
promiscuous and gloomy; and the Clouds, as I told you, stained with blackness;
but no noise of Thunder disturbed the Air, nor was there any Symptom or
appearance of Rain, save only some sprinkling scattering Drops that trickled
down the marly Banks, and moistened the Cheeks of the craggy Rocks; so
amalgamizing the mollified Earth with Water (to my Observation) invited the
Fish from their Habitations; insomuch that the Streams were not Charms strong
enough to contain them, for in Frolicks, as I apprehended, they made haste to
meet me; and that was as much as to complement Death: but the Landing, I
confess, was difficult enough, by reason of Distance, and the hazardous
Passages I frequently encountered, because of Rocks; which with difficulty I
evaded. But that I need not recount, when only designing to recite the
executive Part of Angling, in order to which my ensuing Discourse will instruct
you in the Art, and in the mystical Intrigues of the Angler also.


Th. Ingenious Instructions will signalize the Art easy, and impregnate the
Artist. Let the Luxurious furfieit with the Sins of the Age, I Will trace the
Angler's Footsteps, and pursue this inoffensive Life, and silver Streams, to
propagate and cultivate the Art; so complete my self an Artist in this mystical
Artillery: for I can raise my Ambition no higher than the Device, Fashion, and
Form of Flies; with Advice also for their management, together with seasonable
Time and Use.


Ar. That was my Intention, had you never mentioned it: but were it to another,
I should rather refer him to our modern Assertors. For indeed the frequent
exercise of Fly-fishing, though painful, yet it is delightful; more especially
when managed by the Methods of Art, and the practical Rules and Mediums of
Artists. But the Ground-bait was of old the general Practice, and beyond
dispute brought considerable Profit; which happened in those Days, when the
Curiosity of Fly-fishing was intricate and unpracticable. However Isaac Walton
(late Author of the Complete Angler) has imposed upon the World this monthly
Novelty, which he understood not himself; but stuffs his Book with Morals from
Dubravius and others, not giving us one Precedent of his own practical
Experiments, except otherwise where he prefers the Trencher before the
Troling-rod; who lays the stress of his Arguments upon other Men's Observations,
wherewith he stuffs his indigested Octavo; so brings himself under the Angler's
Censure, and the common Calamity of a Plagiary, to be pitied (poor Man) for his
loss of Time, in scribbling and transcribing other Men's Notions. These are the
Drones that rob the Hive, yet flatter the Bees they bring them Honey.


Th. I remember the Book, but you inculcate his Erratas: however it may pass
Muster among common Mudlers.


Ar. No, I think not; for I remember in Stafford, I urged his own Argument upon
him, that Pickerel weed of it self breeds Pickerel. Which Question was no
sooner stated, but he transmits himself to his Authority, viz. Gesner,
Dubravius, and Androvanus. Which I readily opposed, and offered my reasons to
prove the contrary; asserting, that Pickerels have been fished out of Pools and
Ponds where that Weed (for ought I knew) never grew since the Nonage of Time,
nor Pickerel ever known to have shed their Spawn there. This I propounded from
a rational Conjecture of the Heronshaw, who to commode her self with the Fry of
Fish, because in a great measure part of her Maintenance, probably might lap
some Spawn about her Legs, in regard adhering to the Segs and Bull-rushes, near
the Shallows, where the Fish shed their Spawn; as my self and others without
curiosity have observed. And this slimy Substance adhering to her Legs, etc.
and she mounting the Air for another Station, in probability mounts with her.
Where note, the next Pond she happily arrives at, possibly she may leave the
Spawn behind her, which my Complete Angler no sooner deliberated, but dropped
his Argument, and leaves Gesner to defend it; so huff'd away: which rendered him
rather a formal Opinionist, than a reformed and practical Artist, because to
celebrate such antiquated Records, whereby to maintain such an improbable
Assertion.


Th. This was to the Point, I confess; pray go on.


Ar. In his Book entitled the Complete Angler, you may read there of various
and diversified Colors, as also the Forms and Proportions of Flies. Where,
poor Man, he perplexes himself to rally and scrape together such a parcel of
Fragments, which he fancies Arguments convincing enough to instruct the Adult
and Minority of Youth, into the slender Margin of his uncultivated Art, never
made practicable by himself I Am convinced. Where note, the true Character of an
industrious Angler, more deservedly falls upon Merril and Faulkner; or rather
upon Isaac Owldham, a Man that fished Salmon but with three Hairs at Hook;
whose Collections and Experiments were lost with himself.


Th. That was pity.


Ar. So it was, but to thee Theophilus so well improved, if Salmon or Trout be
your Recreation; remember always to carry your Dubbing-Bag about you; wherein
there ought to be Silks of all sorts, Threads, Thrums, Moccado-ends, and Cruels
of all sizes, and variety of Colors; diversified and stained Wool, with Dogs
and Bears Hair; besides twisted fine Threads of Gold and Silver: with Feathers
from the Capon, Partridg, Peacock, Pheasant, Mallard, Smith, Teal, Snite,
Parrot, Heronshaw; Paraketta, Bittern, Hobby, Phlimingo, or Indian-flush: but
the Mockaw, without exception, gives flames of Life to the Hackle. Thus armed
at all Points, with Rods Rush-grown, Hooks well tempered, and Lines well
tapered, you may practice where you please in any River in Scotland; provided
always the Season be suitable. And forget not be sure to purdue your Distance,
always taking the Head of a Stream, and leisurely fish downwards; lest your
Game discover you, and fly before you.

Another Observation, is the various Change and Complexion of the Water,
occasioned sometimes by immoderate Gluts, intemperate and violent Gluts of
Rain, Issues of Landfloods, Soil and Silt from off the Shores. These and the
like Observations ought to be the consideration of every Ingenious and
Practical Angler. And this is the proper Season to exercise with the
Ground-bait; for should any Man, under the pretense of an Artist, remain
destitute of these prenoted Qualifications, proclaim him a Block-head; let him
angle for Oisters.


Th. But what must we do when the Fords are discolored?


Ar. I have already told you, that the Groundbait then is most profitable for
Diversion. But imagine it like this adapted for Fly. Observe those Insects, and
flender Emits that accost the Streams and bubling Fords; not doubting, but with
Diligence, you may easily surprise them; which if it succeed not to your
Intention, traverse with your Eye those Landskips of Rocks, that at a distance
lie buried almost under Water; or from those knotty Brows of broken Banks, that
stand within distance; otherwise clap close down on some Flat or Level, which
equals the surface of the gliding Streams: where it behooves you to condescend
and stoop sometimes to your Knee, or it may be closer Order, if need so
require; always observing the hovering Fly that flutters aloft to allure the
Fish, how wantonly he sports himself with Death, when to court a familiarity
with that that destroys him.


Th. But what if this Design prove Abortive?


Ar. You must then clap down beneath some Rock, or you may shelter your self in
the Cavities of Earth: so with curious Inspection, and diligent Observation,
the brightness or the gloominess of the Day considered, fashion your Device
according to Art; considering the general Cure for Proportion, as also the
Season, by the Rule of Contraries. For the brighter the Day is, the obscurer
your Fly; but the more promiscuous the Season is, by so much the more ought
your Fly to be bright and shining. I also advise you to prepare the Ground and
Body of your Fly with Bears-hair, as at other times from the obscurities of
Wool; but then let the Head be obscure and dark, since generally most Flies
their Heads are blackish. The Wing also you may strip from the Pinion of a
Teal, which above measure allures the Trout to destruction. But if Novelties
affect, as frequently they do, you must then consult your Flies to excel one
another, if provided you design to advance your Recreation. But presupposing
the Day be gloomy, as frequently it happens from melancholy Clouds --


Th. What Is then to be done?


Ar. You must then consult a brighter Fly, which is better understood upon
serious Practice; for I extol no Man a Proficient in the Art, that is
undisciplined in the Academy of Experience.


Th. But some Men I observe are more Ingenious than othersome.


Ar. Otherwise I should allot them an accidental Fate: for convinced by
observation, I am easily persuaded that some Artists gain Experience with
little Difficulty; when as othersome acquire it not without great Industry: for
where natural Endowments accommodate the highest Form in Arts, their Theory and
Practicks seldom justle for precendency. Thus the Day and the Season always
considered, the Artist, I fancy, may sport at leisure, provided he design
Angling his Recreation.


Th. Are there no Mediums set down as a Standard in the Art?


Ar. Yes surely there are, but considering your Capacity, it will add but
little to those Instructions. However I Will discover another notable Secret,
though less practicable, yet probably more advantageous than adventuring a Fly
according to Fashion.


Th. Pray unriddle the Mystery; it is some Aenigma I fancy.


Ar. The Paradox explained; First take a Trout, rip up his Belly, and examine
his Maw to see what remains unconcocted; and if it be in Fly-time, you will
find some there; for he loves to insinuate himself among Insects, (for Flies
are Insects) and are upon the main the Matter he preys on. Procrastinate no
Time, for the Digestions are swift; be quick therefore, and you will find some
there; and as near to the natural Form as your Ingenuity admits of, contrive
such another in Figure and Proportion, which without delay, make an Experiment
by spreading the Streams with your Artillery: and if it answer not what in
reason you expect, take the freedom to proclaim me no Projector. But be
cautious and circumspect in all your Approaches, and be dextrous and diligent
when and how you strike. Fish by direction, but put no Force upon your
Exercise; so that when you observe your Game advance, and raise himself to
encounter his Prey, fix diligently one Eye to attend his Motion and keep the
other on the Point of your Rod; avoiding all silly and foolish Circumstances;
only remember to answer a Foot exactly with that Hand that reaches forward,
beginning always at the Head of a Stream, and so patrole to parsue your Game
downwards; otherwise you may confidently assure your self, the Fish becomes
Fugitive, so flies before you.


Th. I shall mind your Directions, and pursue your Instructions.


Ar. Well then, I Will proceed. A calm Air you know prognostics a Cessation of
Winds; and a Breez being wanting to furl the Deeps, by what Art will you
contrive to raise a Trout in a deep, torpid, and solitary River? Mind what is
said; be sure you stand close, and prudently conceal your self behind some
Rock, or some shady Bush: then, with the hazard of nothing but a Drack, which
if not attainable, then search out some other natural Fly, and dibble be sure
lightly on the Surface of the Deeps, you raise him beyond dispute, and as
certainly kill him; for this natural Novel has no Compeer; and the Artificial
is but the Representation. Where note, the green Drack pleads the precedence,
then the Gray; the former from the issue or product of a Codworm; but the
latter as to observation proceeds from the Straw-bait.


Th. A very significant and proper Distinction.


Ar. Now besides close Order, great Curiosity is requisite in Tackle: for the
more accurate the Artist is, by so much the more will the Art be expressed. For
that end, let your Rod be shaped Like a Rush, the line exactly tapered; your
Hooks well tempered, and as well compassed; not too stiff, nor yet too pliant;
their Points well drawn out, and as sharp as Needles, but their Birbs as stiff
and as strunt as Bristles; the Wing of your Fly also well flourishd, and well
pinioned; and so snug as to carry the Point always downward. These are
necessary Observations in Trout-fishing; more especially to the Contemplative
and Ingenious Artist, rather than to those Paper-scull'd Buffoons, devoid of
Reason, and as indigent of Patience, as the Man that hanged himself, because
the Hangman was not ready; that confront the Art, because Fish will not meet them
halfway ashore, and leap into their Laps before they come near the Waterside;
where you may see them stand like so many Star-gazers, gazing on the Fish, and
the Surface of the Streams; whose Aspect, if possible, would terrify a Grampus,
that seldom or never satisfies their Appetite, till their avaricious Desires
have victualed the Pannier.


Th. These Mudlers shall never merit the Title of Anglers, nor their Arguments
a better Reputation than Affronts; Mercenary Slaves, that murder all they meet
with, and hunt like Otters to accommodate the Paunch.


Ar. Thus our Discourse of the River Dean has diverted us to the Fields on the
North of Reven, which indeed was a considerable part of my Design; because I
might not only be said to convince you, but use you as an Argument to convince
others, that the Trouts in these solitary Streams, are for Largeness, Beauty,
Size and Proportion, nothing inferior to any in Scotland; and such have I haled
out of these purling Pits, with nothing save only a natural Fly.


Th. But the Day declining, what becomes of us now?


Ar. Why now we must relinquish these rolling Streams, and those pleasant
flourishing Fields of Reven that direct to Ingleston, and the Antiquities of
Castleton, formerly inhabited by the English Martialists: But Castleton you
must consider was only a Fort, and Ingleston (as I am told) their assigned
Locality. Distant some two Miles from these Weather-beaten Relics, stands the
House of Glames, and the fair Feneven, situated amongst Rivulets. More Norward
yet we advance upon Forfar, where we may expect as good Entertainment as the
Country is capable of; and that is good enough, since Eating and Drinking is
not the main of our Design: but there stands the Town of Forfar, tell me what
you think on it?


Th. I think it is a Town; what would you make on it?


Ar. Not only a Town, but a Corporation too, how're you approve on it.


Th. I approve on it well enough, Where lies the Objection? here is nothing that
I see presents uncomely: But how goes the Story of the good Man's Cow? and what
became of the Old Wife's Liquor?


Ar. I matter not much if I give you the Relation, as neatly dressed up as the
Circumstances will bear; for there was, I Will assure you, a very hardy
Adventure, happened betwixt the Brewster Wife, and Puggy the Cow of Billie
Pringle.


Th. Pray let us have it, I grow impatient to hear it; I Will remark the
Beginning, and diligently attend the Conclusion.


Ar. Then I Will begin. Once upon a Time (for so I was told) within the Walls of
this little Corporation of Forfar, there lived an ancient Brewster Wife, more
eminent in her Art for brewing of good Ale, than all the Brewsters that lived
about her; who upon occasion of some Solemnity, had boiled up a Cauldron of
stinging Stuff, to hum the Noses of some jolly good Fellows, that by
Country-Custom and Rules of their own, had made an Appointment to meet there to
Morrow; which they punctually performed, but were all disappointed, because not
to meet with what they came there for.

Now you are to consider the Custom of the Country, which in short was this. No
sooner the Alewife brews her Ale, but presently she exposes it to the open
Air, in certain Vessels which the People call Coolers, (always provided it do
not Rain) though not so much to moderate the Heat of the Liquor, as to ripen
and prepare it for a present Draught; which they fancy it does, and Fancy you
must know surpasses Beauty.


Th. Very good, pray go on; I fancy we shall have a pleasant Story.


Ar. But so it happened, that Moggy her Maid, was the Person appointed to attend
this Liquor; whilst the guide awd Wife was cumbring her sen to deft her House,
and put it into Order. Now the careless Lass steps casually aside, (whose
absence was not long) when by accident and most unfortunately a deep-wem'd Cow
of jolly Billy Pringles came straggling that way; who assailed the Liquor, nor
could she well help it; because when so provoked by the alluring Steem, that
sent a Summons to her voracious Appetite: and the poor Cow as if invaded by
some feverish Indisposition, and because knowing no Law of Limitation, seemed
wholly incapable to satisfy her self, so long as any Ale was left in the
Cooler; for she drank, and puffed, and then took Wind, and to it again, so
long, and so often, till at last she surveyed the Dimensions of the Tub, where
the Liquor in a short time was almost consumed; which any Man of Sense might
rationally conclude so, because the Cow could not see her Face in the Bottom.


Th. But here lies the Question, whether or no the Cow's natural Draught was so
large an Allowance? or what unnatural Spark of Heat had then occasioned such
immoderate Exceedings?


Ar. I confess I neglected to examine that Circumstance; but this I remember,
and every one can tell you, because so remarkable, it can never be forgot, that
the Cow when examining the smoothness of the Ale, and finding it, as I
conceive, moderated to her Temper, without a Coag she drank all off: which no
sooner happened, but presently in a rage comes out the awd Wife that brewed the
Ale, and troubled beyond measure at the loss of her Liquor; besides, it
touched, as she thought, her Reputation, because to disappoint the jovial Crew
that had celebrated that Day to solemniate Bacchus, and observing how the Cow
stood puffing and blowing, and her Ale as concluded past all discovery, grows
immediately Horn-mad; so lets fly at the Cow, by thundering on the Ribs and the
Sides of the Beast, with a formidable Bastinado, or a good Oak Sapling, like
John at the Giant; who became extreme angry, because that the Giant would not
run away from him.

At length comes Billy Pringle that owned the Cow; and he forsooth, like an
Advocate, uses Arguments to pacify and moderate the awd Wife, against such
violent and immoderate Proceeds; which nothing availed, for she gave him the
hearing, and that was all. But standing a while to recover fresh Breath, she
presently lets fly at the Cow again, by redoubling her Blows on the Sides of
the Beast, till at last the awd Wife became as weary with cudgeling, as the
insensible poor Cow was at that time with fudling; whose Sides were already so
stuffed with strong Ale, that made her Proof against the awd Wife's Artillery;
which so incapacitated the Cow for flight, nay I might as well have said, not
almost, but altogether incapable of Motion.

All this while Billy Pringle he labors in vain; and though no Provost, nor
Lord of a Manor, yet was he forsooth a venerable Commander, who endeavors
what he may to pacify the awd Wife; but she was so inconsiderate, nothing
balances her Passion; his Arguments, she interprets them all Affronts; and his
Pacifications but Inducements to aggravate her Revenge. Whereupon he resolves
no more Pleadings, but to use Silence as the best Interpreter. Which she
observing, stood still a while; and though out of Wind, and not answering a
Word, yet the Storm was not over; for no sooner she recruits, and recovers
fresh Breath, but lets fly at him like George at the Dragon.

This raised such an Uproar all the Town over, and a general Confusion among
the Spectators, that now my Lord Provost displays his Authority; who to pacify,
if possible, the Bulk of the Rabble, that were at that time all in an Uproar,
came puffing and blowing, almost out of Breath, commanding the Peace; asking
them, If they longed to be hanged for a Riot? Get ye Home, quo the Provost,
every Man to his House; and that quickly too, or I Will send ye packing. But
observing the Tumult make no haste to disperse, he commands the Peace in their
Majesty's Name, whilst he lays about him with a sturdy Oak-Saplin he had in his
Hand; telling them all the while, That if they would not be quiet, he would
make them quiet, and keep the Peace too, and their Houses to boot. And for your
part, guide Wife (quo the Provost) seek your Remedy at Law, it is a Friend's
Advice, and the best Course you can take. And for Billy Pringle, he may do the
like. The Words dropped savourly from his Worship's Mouth, so took effect.

And now the guide Wife arrests Billy Pringle, because that his Cow drank off
her Ale. And he like a Man to purge himself by Law, traverses the Action at the
Court at Edinburgh, where the Case was opened, and Pleadings on both sides. But
the Woman's Counsel pleads hard for Satisfaction; when an Advocate for Billy
Pringle solicites the Judge, that an Award be allowed to his Client Pringle:
For, my Lord, quo he, they produce no Precedent; nor was it ever known in the
Kingdom of Scotland, that a Cow paid a Plack for a standing-Drink: nay, more
than that, she never called for it, and Doh and Doris is the Custom of our
Country; Where note, a standing-Drink was never yet paid for. With these and
the like Circumstances he made the Court merry, because utterly to exceed and
confound their Practice; so that now every Lawyer became a Mute, and every
Auditor a silent Admirer.

During this Silence there rushed into the Court a crew of saucy surly Fellows,
that proffered to swear for the guide awd Wife, that the Cow drank the Ale
brewed for them to drink: and it is thought they would have sworn through a
double Deal-board, they seemed so enraged for the loss of their Ale. This you
must conceive warmed the Woman's Counsel, so that they moved the Court for
Satisfaction, and prayed a more strict examination of the Matter. Upon which
the Records of the Court were called for, but no Precedent was found to punish
a Cow for drinking of Ale, sitting or standing. Besides, it was adjudged beyond
the Practice of the Court to determine any thing wherein the Laws were silent.
Yet notwithstanding all this, and a great deal more; the Woman's Counsel moves
again for Satisfaction, which Proposal was quashed by Sentence of the Court,
almost as soon as it was propounded, because to refer it to the Provost of
Forfar.


Th. Why so?


Ar. Can you think him a Man of that Capacity, to decide a Controversy so
foreign and intricate, that all the Law in Scotland could not then determine?


Th. Why so, was the Nature of the thing so rare and difficult?


Ar. Was it not, think you, to take all the Proofs, to swear all the Witnesses;
and as near as possible to ultimate the Difference, with this proviso to both
Parties Satisfaction?


Th. I confess it was intricate; but how did he behave himself?


Ar. Very well, I fancy, and the Manner on it was thus. First, He calls a Hall;
but admits no Man to speak a word save himself; and as his Gravity directs him,
puts a Question to the Woman; which in short was this. He demands to know of
her how the Cow took the Liquor, whether she took it sitting, or if she took it
standing? To which the Brewster-Wife, after a little pause, answered, by making
this reply; In guide fa Sir, quo the Wife, the Cow took it standing. Then, quo
the Provost, your even words condemn ye, to seek Satisfaction for a
standing-Drink. This annihilates the Custom of Doh and Doris. For truly sike
another ill Precedent as this, were enough to obliterate so famous a Custom, as
stark Love and Kindness for evermare. Where note, guide Wife, ye have wronged
Billy Pringle, for prosecuting the guide Man contrary to Law; and have done
mickle Damage to Puggy his Cow, because to chastise her but for a
standing-Drink.


Th. Is it a Romance, or a real Story?


Ar. Do you doubt the Truth on it?


Th. Peradventure I do, but it serves us to laugh at.


Ar. And will not our Beds serve as well to lie on?


Th. Who doubts it, when summoned by the sweet influence of Sleep?


Ar. Can Men in Dreams whisper Security, when their Eyes are guarded with
Troops of Shades, and separated from the glorious Beam of Light?


Th. Death's a Separation, the Night but a short Privation. It Is true, we grant
Sleep an Emblem of Death* but Death the Solution of complicated Elements.


Ar. How beautifully glorious do the Constellations appear?


Th. So does Aurora, that ushers in Day, and adapts it for Man and Negotiation.


Ar. O the sweets of Contemplation! have you ruminated to Morrow's Journey?


Th. Do Rusticks calculate an early Seed-time, and not prognostic a forward
Harvest, if not unseasonably prevented by malevolent Accidents?


Ar. From whence we may rationally conclude Refreshment after Recreation, as
requisite and necessary to propagate Health, as a salubrious Arcanum is to
retrieve the Body, when invaded or obstructed by preternatural Indisposition.


Th. You paraphrase physically under Metaphorical Tropes.


Ar. And you philosophically, to tell us that the Sun no sooner shades his
Beams in Thetis Lap, but Aurora suddenly begins to blush, and make visible
discoveries of the oblique Lines of Sol impending.


Th. So it appears; for this short Night's Progress, though defeating our
Senses, yet has it in some measure sweetly refreshed us.


Ar. Why then do we loiter, and procrastinate Time?


Th. It Is only till we mantle for a March, and discharge for our Entertainment.


Ar. That Is but reasonable and requisite, otherwise we deviate from the Morals
of Honesty.


Th. Must this Day's Invention be to Morrow's expedition; so arm with our
Artillery to practice at Brechen?


Ar. No, by no means; though Brechen be a Town of very good Accommodation; yet
we must melt these Hills into Valleys.


Th. Here Is another Town presents, what must we call it?


Ar. This is Fetter-Carn; but that before us is Carlisle-Mount, elevated in the
Air, where the People, to my Fancy, dwell in the Clouds, and inhabit, as it
were, another Region, representing Terra Nova.


Th. Yet methinks here is sweet Streams glide up and down this Mountanous
Country.


Ar. And don't you think the Trouts in these Streams naturally high-minded, to
climb such lofty Hills for Preferment. But what think you of these barren
Fields, burdened with Sterrility, where the Inhabitants, to my apprehension,
feed upon Famine, or a morsel of Moss. It represents to me the Suburbs of
Poverty, if when to consider their scarcity of Accommodation.


Th. Come then let us break the Heart of these Hills, and bless our Eyes with a
Landscape of the Lowlands, that serve as a Sanctuary to shelter us against
Storms, and Protection against impetuous Rains. But what Eutopia's this that
dwells below us?


Ar. It Is neither Sir Thomas Moor's, nor Bacon's Atlantas; here we have already
made a fair Discovery, but when you come to trace the Firtility of Dean, whose
flourishing Streams enrich the Shores, then you will tell me of the Angler's
Entertainment.


Th. What Place is that, that directs Northward to the Pole?


Ar. That Is Kinkarn Oneal; beyond which, the Foundations of Pitriffny and
Bovena scout, as you may see, beneath the Skirts of the Highlands; obvious to
any Man that tramples her Moors, that direct to the Source and Beginnings of
Trespey whose boistrous Streams glide along through Murryland; a pleasant and
plentiful part of a Country, that is beautified and adorned with spacious
Buildings, rivited into Rocks, and cemented with Stone.


Th. Must we pass through Murryland, or take it in our way when returning from
Ross?


Ar. We shall only pass by it now, to describe the Country of Reven in
Badanoah, that is totally beleaguered and besieged with Bogs, whose ruinous
Decays are unworthy our Discourse; nor are her Fields so fertile as those in
Feneven, yet are her Valleys surrounded with Rivulets, and every Rivulet
replenished with Trout; beautified and adorned with stately Fir Woods, that
shade the Earth from the scorching Sun; and shelters Man and Horse in impetuous
Rains and Storms: where Nature, but not the Native, is generous and prodigal in
all her Entertainments.


Th. What new inviting Object have we now discovered?


Ar. The famous Lough-Ness, so much discoursed for the supposed floating
Island; for here it is, if any where in Scotland. Nor is it any other than a
natural Plantation of Segs and Bull-rushes, matted and knit so close together
by natural Industry, and navigated by Winds that blow every way, floats from
one part of the Lough to another, upon the Surface of the solid Deeps of this
small Mediterrane: and here it is, in these slippery Streams, that an English
Ship, by curious Invention, was haled over the Mountains to this solitary
Lough; brought hither on purpose reclaim the Highlander.


Th. Do you Romance, or not, to tell me that an Island swims in the midst of
the Ocean, and a Ship fluctuates in the midst of the Highlands; where every
Rock represents a Charibdis, and every Wave threatens an Inundation; where
there is no harbor without hazard of Life, nor Sea enough to promise security
to the Mariner, when the Winds mingle themselves with the Waves, that wash the
pallid Cheeks of the polished Rocks? Now tell me that can, where the Mariner
must have birth (and the Passinger supplies) in this fluctuating Ocean, when a
Storm arises to eclipse his Eye from a Land discovery?


Ar. If Eyesight be good Evidence, there is enough to convince you; behold the
Ship.


Th. How came she here? was she not built in some Creek hereabouts?


Ar. No.


Th. By what means then was she moved into this small Mediterrane? I solicit
Advice, and you can solve the Doubt.


Ar. Art was both Engine and Engineer to invite this Ship into this solitary
Lough.


Th. If so, it is strange that a Vessel of her Force should leap out of the
Ocean, and over the Hills, to float in a Gutter surrounded with Rocks.


Ar. Not so strange as true, for here she is.


Th. Was there a possibility of her sailing from the Citadel, to this eminent
Lough Ness, when a Boat of ten Tun cannot force her Passage half way up the
River? This looks Romantic beyond the ingenuity of Art, or possibility of
Invention.


Ar. Let it look as it will look, I am sure it was so.


Th. You are sure it was so, then pray resolve the Point.


Ar. Why thus it was; In the Time of War betwixt the King and Parliament, this
Navigate Invention was consulted by Maj. General Dean; who to complete a
Conquest over the Highlanders, (in regard hitherto the Law of a Foreign Power
had never bridled them) he accomplished this new Navigation of sailing by Land:
who contrived the transportation of this fair Ship (that you now see) into
these torpid and slippery Streams.


Th. What, without Sails?


Ar. Yes, without Sail, Pilot, Card or Compass; by dividing only the ambient
Air, as formerly she plowed the pondrous Ocean. Nor was she compelled to
encounter Sea or Land in all her Passage; which by some may be thought a
ridiculous Report. On the other hand, for a Ship of this Burden to transport
her self, or suffer her self to be transported without ordinary, nay
extraordinary Means, looks like an Impossibility; however here you find her,
nor is it to be denied that she had a Passage to this solitary Lough.


Th. But how?


Ar. First, you must conclude no Vessel, without a Miracle, could remove her
self so far from Sea; and I Will assure you in this here is nothing miraculous.
Then you are to consider that so eminent a Ship could never shove her self to
reach this Limit, as extends from the Orchean Seas to this obscure Lough Ness,
without probable Endeavors, and very considerable Assistance. Lastly, to admit
of a violent motion, were a kind of madness; because to impose a Contradiction
upon the Design.


Th. Pray explicate the Aenigma.


Ar. A Motion must be had (that you will grant) and Means considerable to move by,
(this you must allow) which to accomplish, the Sailers and the Soldiers
equally contributed. For a Regiment (or it may be two) about that time
quartered in Inverness; who by Artifice had fastened thick Cables to her
Fore-Castle, and then they got Levers and Rollers of Timber, which they spread
at a distance, one before another; whilst some are of Opinion these robust
Engineers framed a more artificial and politic Contrivance: but thus it was,
and no otherwise, I Will assure you; save only they fastened some Cheeks and
Planks to the solid Sides and Ribs of the Ship, the better to secure her from
crushing upon Transportation.


Th. And did she pass in this manner as you tell me, to this famous Ness?


Ar. Yes, she relinquished the brinish Ocean, to float in the slippery Arms of
Ness. But to keep her steady in her Passage, and preserve her from rocking and
rolling by the way; they consulted no other Project than what I tell you: save
only some additional Supplies from Inverness, that with Ropes and Takcle haled
her along to this very place where you now observe her. For you are to
consider, she no sooner got Motion, but by Industry and Art she was steered
without a Compass, to this remarkable Ness; where now she floats obvious enough
to every curious Observer.

For let me tell you, that Strength, Artifice and Resolution, are indisputable
Arguments to reach the Possibility of any thing possible; a threefold Cord is
not easily broken. Motion therefore was no sooner begot, but the whole Mystery
was almost accomplished; the Plover you observe never breaks the Shell, before
the Lapwing is ready to run; nor will the Sailer spread the Sails, until he
observe a Wind presents. Nor got our Ship the Mediums of Motion, but by
Argument of Force (not of Artillery) which forced her by graduate Means, till
arriving in this Ness, obvious to all Men.

And this is that famous and renowned Lough Ness (Loemon excepted) inferior to
none in the Kingdom of Scotland; whose Streams are strewed with Eel and Trout,
whilst her Deeps are saluted with the race of Salmon; whose fertile Banks and
shining Sands are hourly moistened by this small Mediterrane: which I fancy is
besieged with Rocks and Mountains; whilst her polite Shores are forzen in the
Winter, by the frigid Lungs of blustering Boreas, that perplexes her Banks, and
masquerades her Rocks with a Cristalline Hue of polished Ice. Where the Tritons
and Sea-Nymphs sport themselves on the slippery Waves, sounding an Invasion to
her moveable Inmate; supposed by some, the floating Island.


Th. Do these fair Mountains that interdict the Dales, survey the forcible
Streams of Inverness?


Ar. Yes surely, these Torrents, which you now discover, frequently wash the
Walls of Inversness (a derivative from Lough Ness) at the West end whereof
stands a diminutive Castle, about a Mile distant from that magnificent Citadel,
that subjects those precarious Northern Highlanders. This Inverness, or Model
of Antiquity (which we now discourse) stands commodiously situated for a
Highland Trade; defended with a weather-beaten tottering Wall, that is defaced
with Age and the Corruptions of Time, where yet there remains two
Parish-Churches: But I remember a third that was a kind of a Cathedral or
Collegiat-Church, that now like old Troy sleeps in Dust and Ashes, as part of
the Walls do, charging Time and Neglect with their tottering Decays.

North and by East, near the forcible Streams of the Ness, stands the Fortress,
or Pentagon, drawn out by regular Lines, built all with Stone, and girt about
with a Graff, that commodes it with a convenient Harbor. The Houses in this
fair Fortress are built very low, but uniform; and the Streets broad and
spacious, with Avenues and Intervales for drilling of Foot, or drawing up
Horse. I must confess, such and so many are the Advantages and Conveniences
that belong to this Citadel, it would be thought fabulous, if but to numerate
them: for that end I refer my self to those that have inspected her Magazines,
Providores, Harbors, Vaults, Graffs, Bridges, Sally-Ports, Cellars, Bastions,
Horn-works, Redoubts, Counterscarps, etc. Ocular Evidence is the best Judge, and
gives the plainest demonstration; which, without dispute, will interpret this
formidable Fortress a Strength Impregnable; and the Situation, as much as any,
promises Security, by reason it is surrounded with boggy Morasses; standing in
Swamps, on an Isthmus of Land, that divides the Ness from the Orchean Seas.

Yet here is one thing more among our Northern Novelties very remarkable; for
here you shall meet with a wooden Bridge to convoy you over the rapid Ness; but
certainly the weakest, in my Opinion, that ever stradled over so strong a
Stream. However, it serves to accommodate the Native, to those pleasant and
fragrant Meadows, North and North-West, that direct to the demolishments of the
Castle of Lovet, near to which stand the Antiquities of Brawn, planted upon the
brow of a considerable Bank, that hangs, one would think, over a spacious
River, above all in Scotland, replenished with Salmon: whose numbers are
numberless, if not improper to say so; and careless of their Lives, they cast
them away.

I must confess, the strength of such strange Reports, oftentimes meets with a
foreign Faith, that raises more Scruples than Arguments can answer. And so it
happened to me at first, till convinced by some Persons of considerable
Reputation, that when the Fishermen with their Sanes have drawn these Streams,
they have counted many times five hundred at a Draught; the Truth of which
Relation, should any Man doubt of, they are ready to assert and vindicate the
Truth on it by pregnant Demonstration. However it shaked my Credulity at first,
though possibly it may remove the Jealousy of another, if when provided with
Patience he can suspend his suspicion till better informed, or confirm himself
of the plenty of Salmon in these remote Northern Parts. For I grant, others
with my self of a like Persuasion may question this Report, till convinced by
the Truth of Ocular Demonstration; that these Northern Rivers are the Riches of
the Country.

Here the Salmon relinquish the Salts, because by the Porposses pursued up the
Freshes; just so the Shad is chased by the Sturgeon, and so are the smaller Fry
by the revenous Pike: Nature directs Self-security, and nothing stands in
competition with Life. Where note, the Salmon are compelled to desert the
Deeps, and seek sanctuary from the sandy Sholes; as I my self and others have
often observed the Porposses pursue them in the frothy foming Waves of the
Ness, for it may be some two or three Miles together; till their Strength
imparing, which oft-times compels them to court the Shores, though with hazard
of Life. And sometimes they meet with a Precipice of Rocks (as these at Brawn)
which with an impossibility they perpetually attempt, though to no purpose as
to Self-security.

This Oracle explicated, who so incredulous to doubt or dispute the Truth of my
Relation? for no Man certainly was more averse than my self, to affix a Credit
upon a single Report: but when opposed by such eminent Evidence, it forced my
Obstinacy to yield a Compliance: more especially when approaching those frothy
Streams; no other Argument then need to convince me but Eyesight. Truly I
stood amazed to see such Companies of Salmon in these Northern Parts; which
demonstration made such Impressions in my hesitating Breast, that now I Am
convinced; I am ready to publish my Conviction to others, upon manifest
Experience. For what can I do less than certify a Truth so often opposed, and
doubted by my Self. In this Pontus Cambrosia (in the famous Ness) you shall
observe three Tides meet every twelve Hours: and when they meet, by reason of
their interchangeable Streams mingling together, make such Convulsions and
violent Eruptions, as dam up the Shores, and make the Passage exceeding
hazardous; especially for small Boats that cross the Ness, if there do but the
least impetuity of Winds hover in the Air.


Th. This is very remarkable, for the Porposses to pursue the Salmon ashore.


Ar. But so it is: besides, in the midst of Cambrosia is a white Spumation, or
a frothy foming sparkling Spry, that resembles Via lactea; occasioned, as you
see, from luxuriant Tides, and aggravating Winds, that violently contract the
Surff of the Sea, and so amalgamizes them together, that neither the one nor
the other can divide, nor expatiate it self, till inevitably sucked up into the
Bowels of the Ocean.


Th. I fancy this Hellespont of Pontus Cambrosia, a representation of the
chalky Mount in Barbardoes; because of its polished glittering Whiteness.


Ar. I remember as we passed this hazardous Charibdis, the Vessel that conveyed
us was in danger to overset, by reason the Porposses vented so vehemently at
the Stem of our Boat, insomuch that one of them had almost invented his Passage
amongst us; which if he had, there was no way but one; and that way was unequal
to exchange of Elements. But at last we concluded if the Boat should miscarry,
to lanch forth into the Deeps, and Hero it over.


Th. Some then I fancy would have made brave Ducks and Drakes.


Ar. It Is no matter for that, the use of Bladders had been out of Fashion. Now
no sooner we arrived at the desired Shore, but with friendly Congratulations we
saluted one another; discoursing our hazardous Passage, and this pleasant
Country (or Isthmus of Land) besieged with Sea; because having Portus salutis
on the North and by East; Cambrosia on the South; and the Western parts all
guarded with inaccessible Rocks and Mountains facing the Fields of Stranaver.


Th. Here Is another Hellespont; must we cross this also?


Ar. Yes surely, we must cross this rugged Ferry, especially if intending the
Bounds of Innerbrachy, in the cultivated Fields in the Country of Ross; where
the Rocks are undermined by the Sea Quellem, that serves for a Filtre to riddle
the Ocean, and separate her saline brinish Taste, from those more sweet and
luscious Fountains; where the Inhabitants will flatter you with an absurd
Opinion (an old Tradition received from their Ancestors) that the Earth in Ross
has an antipathy against Rats, as the Irish Oak has against the Spider: And
this Curiosity, if you please to examine, you may, for the Natives do; but had
they asserted there were no Mice in Ross, every Tongue had contradicted them.
Now Mice and Rats are Cousin-German, every Body knows that knows any thing, and
for the most part keep House together: But what difference has happened amongst
them here, as to make such a Feud in this Country of Ross, that the Rats in
Ross should relinquish their Country, and give possession wholly to the Mice;
this is a Mystery that I understand not.

Besides this fond Opinion of the Natives hereabouts, some others more remote
(as ignorant as themselves) transport the Earth of Ross into most parts of
Scotland; persuading themselves, that if they do but sprinkle it in the Fields,
Fens, Moors, Mountains, Morish or Boggy Grounds, (all is one as to that) for it
alters not the Property, nor does it diminish the Quality, nor impair the
Virtue, but that still it retains a certain antipathy against that enormous
Vermin the Rat, nay, the very scent on it shall force him to become an Exile.
This odd kind of Creed they had when I was resident amongst them; yet to the
best of my Observation, I never saw a Rat; nor do I remember of any one that
was with me ever did: but for Mice, I declare, so great is their plenty; that
were they a Commodity, Scotland might boast on it. And that they have Owls with
Horns, some favor the Report; yet are they not Horns, but as like Horns as any
thing that are not Horns; nor is it any other than a sort of Feathers, that is
clung'd and twisted so naturally together, that represents the Idiom or Form of
a Horn, if when to observe them at a reasonable distance, which seemingly
beautifies the Ivy-bush, as Horns adorn the Head of a Buffulo.

The next Curiosity to entertain you with, is the Country of Southerland; which
we enter by crossing a small Arm of the Ocean from Tain to Dornoch. So from
thence we travel into Cathness, and the Country of Stranavar; where a rude sort
of Inhabitants dwell, (almost as barbarous as Canibals) who when they kill a
Beast, boil him in his Hide, make a Caldron of his Skin, Browis of his Bowels,
Drink of his Blood, and Bread and Meat of his Carcass. Since few or none
amongst them hitherto have as yet understood any better Rules or Methods of
eating. More North in an Angle of Cathness, lives John a Groat, upon an Isthmus
of Land that faceth the pleasant Isles of Orkney; where the Inhabitants are
blessed with the plenty of Grass and Grain; besides Fish, Flesh, and Fowl in
abundance. Now that Barnicles (which are a certain sort of wooden Geese) breed
hereabouts, it is past dispute; and that they fall off from the Limbs and
Members of the Fir Tree, is questionless; and those so fortunate to espouse the
Ocean (or any other River, or humitactive Soil) by virtue of Solar He^t are
destinated to live; but to all others so unfortunate to fall upon dry Land, are
denied their Nativity.


Th. Can you credit your own Report; or do you impose these Hyperbole's
ironically upon the World, designedly to make Scotland appear a Kingdom of
Prodigies?


Ar. No certainly! and that there is such a Fowl I suppose none doubts it; but
if any do, let him resort to Cambden, Speed, or Gerhard's Herbal, and there he
shall find that in Lancashire, thousands were gathered up, adhering to the
broken Ribs of a Ship wrecked upon that Coast; but these are not like the
Barnicle Geese that I speak of: the like Accident happened in Kent sometime past,
and in many other parts of England, etc. So that few Ingenious and Intelligible
Travelers doubt a Truth in this Matter; and the rather, because it sedulously
examined, it discovers a want of Faith to doubt what is confirmed by such
credible Authority. But if Eyesight be Evidence against Contradiction, and the
Sense of Feeling argument good enough to refute Fiction, then let me bring
these two convincing Arguments to maintain my Assertion; for I have held a
Barnicle in my own Hand, when as yet unfledged, and hanging by the Beak, which
as I then supposed of the Fir Tree; for it grew from thence, as an Excrescence
grows on the Members of an Animal: and as all things have Periods, and in Time
drop off, so does the Barnicle by a natural Progress separate it self from the
Member it is conjoined to.

But further, to explicate the Method and Manner of this wooden Goose more
plainly: The first appearing Parts are her Rump and Legs; next to them, her
callous and unploom'd Body; and last of all her Beak, by which she hangs
immature, and altogether insensible; because not as yet having any spark of
Life hitherto discovered to shine about her. Then, like the Leaves in October
that leisurely drop off (since predestined to fall) even so the Barnicle
drops off from the Twig of the Tree to which Nature had fastened her, and gave
her a Growth, and an inanimate Being. Where note, to so many as providentially
fall into Water, Protection is immediately sent them to live; but to all others
as accidentally encounter dry Land, such I presume are doomed to die without
Redemption. And though some of them are commissioned to live, yet how difficult
is it to preserve Life when hourly sought after by the luxurious Devourer?


Th. However, let not our discourse of Geese discover us ungrateful to the
Inhabitants. For it were Madness more than good Manners, not to acknowledge
Civilities from a People that so civilly treated us.


Ar. Civility wanting, we are wanting to our selves; when too much of Self bars
the Fruits of Society. Now we tread on the Borders of Southerland, that of
right belongs to the Earl of Southerland; whose eldest Son is born Lord of
Stranavar. On the top of that little Hill, stands little Dun Robin; it is a
Castle, though but a small one; where the Earl himself inhabits. But that other
great House, or rath^r some piece of Decays, they call it Skibbo; but there is
yet another ruinous Castle that stands on the brow of a lofty Hill, and that
they call Skelbo. These are all the Castles, and most eminent Fabrics in
Southerland, to the best of my Observation.

The next thing we meet with is the Lough Broroh, that spouts forth a River
into the Bowels of the Ocean. This Lough is deep, but not so large as the Ness,
(elevated in 59 Degrees North Latitude) but very full of Salmon; and though the
River seems to have rapid Streams, yet the Tides influence them every twelve
Hours. I mention this Broroh, for no other purpose, than to reflect on her
plenty of Salmon, where they barrel up for France, and other parts annually,
(as reported) so much Salmon as amounts to three hundred pound Sterling a Year;
and the price of a Salmon (among themselves) seldom exceeds one single Denare.
Where not the Profits of this contemptible Broroh, are farmed by the
Inhabitants inhabiting hereabouts, but the Propriety belongs to the Earl of
Southerland. But Dornoch is all the Corporations in Southerland, of which
Iusticium I have but little to say.


Th. And where are we now?


Ar. On Terra firma, where should we be? and this is the Town of Tayn in Ross,
that equallizeth Dornoch for beautiful Buildings; and as exemplary as any Place
for Justice, that never use Gibbet nor Halter to hang a Man, but sacks all
their Malefactors, so swims them to their Graves. Now the most spacious and
eminent Fabrics in Ross, are Tarbot, situate near the Sea; Mees, bordering
upon Lough Loon; Balnagoon, a strong Fabric on the brinks of Clowd; Fowlds, a
great House not far from Brawn; Innerbrachy, a Manor near Portus Salutis;
Milton, a Castle opposite to Cromerty. These Fabrics are the Strength, and
Ornament of Ross. Besides here are Eagles, Signets, Falcons, Swans. Geese,
Gossander, Duck and Malard, Teal, Smieth, Widgeon, Seapyes, Sandelevericks,
green and gray Plover, Snite, Partridg, Curlue, Moorgame, and Grows; but I
remember no Pheasant in this Bill of Fare.

This is that famous Portus Salutis, accommodated with Fowl to that degree, as
their numerous Covies darken the Firmament; and so replenished with Fish, as no
part of Scotland can boast of. Oysters the best in the North, are dragged forth
with Drags from her Owsey Bottoms. And for Crabs, Lobsters, Perewinkles, etc.
in regard so plentiful and common, are but of little value. But what have I to
do to discourse a Country, where Eggs are sold for twenty four a Penny, and all
other Accommodations proportionable? This I presume is no dear Entertainment;
nor ever expect to have it cheaper when we leave these plentiful Borders of
Ross, to traverse the more Southern Parts of Scotland, as our Gnomen directs to
the fertile Shores of Cromerty.


Th. And why the fertile Shores of Cromerty?


Ar. Because their Shores are incapable of freezing, for no Snow lies here,
though bordering almost on the frigid Zone; nor does Ice incrustate the Earth
near the Shores: for the very Sands are so contempered from a natural innate
Quality of Warmth, occasioned it is possible from the Salinity of the Ocean,
which suddenly dissolves the Snow that falls, preanticipating the formation of
Frost, or any such like Coagulum. And this is the reason her Shores are
enriched with Fertility, were but the People polished with Art and Agriculture;
for were it so, I should then conclude them blessed with a delightful Prospect,
that flows from the fluctuating Generosity of Portus Salutis.


Th. Is this the Castle, and the Coast of Cromerty? How do the People do to
free themselves from the Depredations of the Highlanders.


Ar. Well enough; it is morally impossible it should be otherwise, except Nature
run retrograde: I know no other distinction, than below and above Stairs; but I
should have told you (since a received Opinion) that the greatest plenty of
Fish and Fowl that belongs to Scotland, falls in or near this Portus Salutis;
where Lobsters are sometimes sold for Bodles a piece; but for Crabs,
Perewinkles, and various other Shellfish, as Cockles, and Mussels etc. the
Natives are not nice to share such Entertainments amongst Strangers; meaning
such as cruise all along their Coast, till the Season of the Year compels them
off.


Th. It Is a pleasant part of a Country, I confess, though methinks it stands
almost out of the World.


Ar. Let it stand as it will stand, it stands well enough, by reason it borders
so near the Highlands.


Th. Why then it will look further off from Home. For these Highlands to my
thinking but represent a part of the Creation left undrest: As some great and
magnificent Fabric is erected, you know abundance of Rubbish is left to
remove; so I fancy those Highlands appear to me, because wanting Ornament, and
destitute of Cultivation.


Ar. You shall have it on your own Terms, as void of Form as the Natives are
indigent of Morals and good Manners. However, from these eminent Rocks we
descry the Ocean, and the Ships sometimes as they cruise upon the Coast. But
now the Air that was serene, is thickened, I fancy, and struck with impressions
of Cold; for the Wrack of Clouds begin to roll about, variously intermingled
with a rapid Motion; and the lower Region swells and looks big, but the Nights
direct to an equal Proportion with the Days: so that observing the Summer in a
declining posture, what think you of fixing our Inclinations Southward? And in
our Countermarch, take a breviate of all the Rivers, Rivulets, Cities,
Citadels, Castles and Corporations, that lie in our way, till we face their
magnificent Metropolis of Edinburgh.


Th I approve of the Motion well enough, it comports with my Inclination.


Ar. Let us then proceed methodically, and commence with the Castle of
Cromerty, where the Lord Vrquart lived in his Lifetime; who had twice twenty
Children standing at once before him; but thirty were Sons, and ten of them
Daughters; and all at the State of Men and Women, yet not one natural Child
amongst them (as I was told). Now this venerable Lord of Vrquart lived to the
utmost Limit and Period of Life; whose declining Age invites him to contemplate
Mortality, and cruciate himself, by fancying his Cradle his Sepulcher, wherein
he was lodged Night after Night, and haled up by Pullies to the Roof of his
House; approaching as near as the Roof would let him, to the beautiful
Battlements and Suburbs of Heaven.


Th. Was not this that Vrquart, whose eldest Son writ a Treatise in Honor of
his Pedigree; wherein he describes his Genealogy from Adam?


Ar. It Is the very same, for he traced his Descent from the Garden of Eden.


Th. Why then was his Book domm'd to be stuffed with nothing but fantastical
fabulous Fictions?


Ar. Because his Countrymen thought it too ambiguous for any Man to trace his
Pedigree from Paradise.


Th. Was that all? had they no Antiquaries amongst them? But hold a little,
what Place is this?


Ar. Old Chanery, hung about with Charms, that enchanted a Crampus to come
ashore, whose Bulk (some fancied) burdned the Sands: but he became a Prey to
the English Infantry. Now we trace the flourishing Fields of Murryland; and
thi^ is Old Ern where Marquess Montross engaged his Countrymen, and totally
routed them. This next Town is Forres, famous for nothing except that infamous
Vermin the Rat; because so numerous in these Northern Parts, that a Cat can
scarcely get a living amongst them.


Th. Why don't they send and fetch of the Earth from Ross.


Ar. That I know not; but this I know, that they snatched the Meat off of our
Trenchers, (...) churm'd the Stockins and Apparel of the Soldiers; who
projected Lines to hang their Clothes on, upon which these Vermin would dance
and totter, as if invited by the dull sound of a Northern-Country Bagpipe,
their natural Music, and most congruous to their Kind.


Th. I have been told, that these Vermin politicians storm the Town once or
twice a Year, to the terrifying amazement of all the Inhabitants; and that Cats
durst not be seen to scout abroad, lest hazarding their Lives whenever they
encounter.


Ar. That Is matter of Fact; who doubts the truth on it?


Th. That should I, were I not convinced to the contrary. But what remarkable
Monuments are these like Pyramids in the ambient Air?


Ar. I know not, except some Signals of Victory; it may be some Field has been
fought hereabouts: otherwise I should fancy them unintelligible Mutes, left
only on purpose for Strangers to admire them.


Th. What Town call ye that, that presents unto us?


Ar. The famous Elgin, situated on a Level, and besieged round about with
flourishing Cornfields; whose spacious Ports surround a Cathedral, blotted and
blurred by the Dates of Time.


Th. However it appears that some eminent Characters are left yet to evidence
the Footsteps of superannuated Curiosity, and inform us the Antiquity of her
original Luster.

And that is all; but not Luster enough left to vie with the gaity of those
famous Imbellishments of Westminster-Chappel: that Oracle strikes all
Structures dumb, and is the Nonsuch of Europe, nay, all the World; Models of it
have been transported into Foreign Parts, and equally admired, with Oliver's
Medals.


Th. Elgin was once a Beauty, nor is it now an artificial Deformity; yet such
is the Unconstancy of Men and Times, that this Fabric is defaced, and Prelacy
thrown down: methinks I could almost lament her Ruins; these marginal Notes on
the Frontispiece of Elgin entitle her Cathedral a Northern Beauty.


Ar. But not to parallel that unparalled Curiosity, the illustrious
Chappel-Royal of King's-Colledg in Cambridg.


Th. Yet is there a Beauty in Elgin's Antiquities; therefore it is a Vanity
beyond Ignorance, and a Presumption beyond Pardon, should any pretend to outvie
it in Scotland.


Ar. I must confess that imbelish'd Fabrics are more my Admiration that
perplexed Controversies. What profit is there in unprofitable Disputations?
That Genius to me seems disingenious and turbulent, that is always angling in
tempestuous Streams. Our occasion invites us to Recreation, not Riot. To a
Description of the Country; not to register her Faults, and obliterate her
Favors. What have we to do with Secular Affairs? the Management of Kingdoms
and National Concerns is nothing our Business; nor need our Curiosity inspect
the Artificers of the Law that fleece the Country, whilst Presbyter John writes
his Funeral-Epitaph with Iure Divino.


Th. Our Discourse I perceive, if we be not mindful, will bring us about;
however, the best on it it, here are no Hedges to turn us.


Ar. No, here is an open Passage to the glittering Streams of Trespey, that
generously accommodates the Angler, whilst the Natives frequently consult the
Net, for the Treasures of Pearl, studiously concealed in the gravelly Deeps.
Why should Nature's Ornaments want Admiration, or the industrious Angler the
Fruition of Contemplation?


Th. What fair Fabric is that which stands before us?


Ar. Bogagieth, the Marquess of Huntly's Palace, all built with Stone, facing
the Ocean; whose fair Front (set Prejudice aside) worthily deserves an English
Man's Applause for her lofty and majestic Towers and Turrets, that storm the
Air; and seemingly make dints in the very Clouds. At first sight, I must
confess, it struck me with admiration, to gaze on so gaudy and regular a
Frontispiece; more especially when to consider it in the Nook of a Nation. Nor
do I know any reason, but that every English Man should advance a due
proportion of Scotland's Fame, as freely and heartily as of his own native
Country; provided the Kingdom of Scotland deserve it. I have told you that the
Name of this House is Bogagieth, alluding, as I fancy, to the Nature of the
Place, by reason the Ground appears so Boggy; whose Battlements on a fair Day
display themselves to the Portals of Elgin. But more Southerly yet are the
Fortifications of Straboggy, bordering on the Tracts to Aberdeen; which also
belongs to the Marquess Huntly, the chief of the Clan of the Gordons; as is
Earl Seaforth, chief of the Mackenzies. Now this bulky Straboggy has an
invincible Tower, so large and stupendous that it burdens the Earth, and is
without precedent the largest in Scotland; situated on a Flat, begirt with
Bogs, amalgamiz'd with loomish marly Clay, and cemented into Rocks, makes
prospect by a short interview to the Skirts of the Highlands, whilst the
elevated Tarrasses of beautiful Bogagieth overlook the Ocean, and is as
eminently discoursed for a stately Palace, as Elgin is admired for a sumptuous
Cathedral.


Th. Are these those Savanna's so enriched with Rivulets, and every Rivulet
stocked with Trout? Do these purling Streams proclaim a Plenty, and does not
every Shore shine with silver Sands, whilst the craggy Cliffs stand burdened
with Trees?


Ar. It answers your Description; as the Tower of Straboggy seems impregnable,
yet Marquess Argile once eathed so deep in it, that all the Clan of the Gordons
could not undermine him, notwithstanding their Popularity, and Residence about
it.


Th. What caused the Difference, could not the Law reconcile them?


Ar. No nor the Gospel neither; if when to consider their Difference in
Opinion, for the Gordons you must know are professed Roman Catholics; and
Scotland, nay all the World knows that the Campbels are Presbyterians. Now the
first will not live without a Universal Bishop, and the last cannot live without a
Parochial Priest; what think you now, are they like to agree?


Th. No, I think not, if they hold to the Point.


Ar. Let the Point be what it will, these are the stately Turrets of Straboggy,
where I fancy the Bogs would baffle our Horses, did not a Countermarch toward
our native Country sweeten the Toil. So our delicious Fragrancies, were they
stuck in these Northern Fields, would certainly perfume them.


Th. You have eminent Thoughts of Home; but how will it happen to us here,
coming so unexpectly upon our Landlord?


Ar. Trouble not your self with that Affair, for he is never unprovided of good
Entertainment.


Th. Nor I of an Appetite, for my Stomach stands Sentinel.


Ar. So does mine, to encounter good Commons.


Th. How vainly do we flatter our selves, that in these solitary Fields,
immured with Mountains and besieged with Bogs, where Heath and Haddir are the
height of our Horses, there to expect Moor-fowl and Manchet inseparable
Companions? No no, let a Dish of Sewins serve us for Supper, rather than dream
of a delicious Regalia; and instead of an Olio, a broiled Haddock; or it may be
a Scots Collop, if we can get it. But I Will welcome any thing that comes
seasonably to thaw the Icicles that flatten the edg of my Appetite; so that now
if only to find the People courteous, tho not overcurious, and their Pantries
provided with Meat, tho themselves be destitute of Manners, it matters not. We
are capable enough to distinguish Academies from Alehouses, and Change-Houses
from a Royal Exchange. What matters it then for Cooks, where every Man may
dress his own Commons? and let the Provision of this day's Exercise (if Trout
and Plover be Food fit for Travelers) be my care; and I Will supervise the
Roast, whilst you rest your self, and send you Summons upon the first savory
Scent.


Ar. You have very well contrived to salute our Mouths with a Modicum, lest our
Appetites alienate; for if fasting too long brings equal Danger with a Riot of
Feasting, a Surfeit of either may impare the Mediocrity of Health: for as the
one ushers in Fevers that terminate in Flames, so the other, in regard of its
moist Frigidity, melts all the Members into a Deluge, by extinguishing the
irradiating vital Heat; which insensibly draws on a depraved Ferment,
preternatural to the Archeus or Rector of the Ventricle. Thus we range the
World, by rifling Scotland, to refresh our selves; and blot out those limpid
Streams of Trespey, that glide so smoothly near to the famous Foundations of
Bogagieth; which beyond dispute discovers the Glory of Scotland epitomized in
this short Day's Expedition.


Th. Now should the flaming Steeds of the Sun touch the Cusp of the Horizon
before we rise, would not all Mankind conclude us affected with Ease and
Idleness? and if so, then mark the Conclusion, the Sluggard he is ravished with
Ease and long Nights; and the Epicure in Raptures at a luxurious Table. Now see
what follows; but as Disease is the Child of Intemperance, and Idleness the
Parent of Penury and Want; Disease therefore is the Reward of Repletion, and
Death the final Captivator of Mortals.


Ar. This Discourse I perceive has brought something to bear; for now I see the
World's great Luminary gild the Rocks, and polish the Surface of the smoother
Streams. The Heavens shine their Blessings most propitiously upon us; but the
Earth beyond dispute will prove rugged and knotty, (since reflecting on my
self) that from Straboggy to Aberdeen, there is not a more irregular Path in
Scotland.


Th. We must take it as it falls, and be thankful for it; however we are in our
way for England.


Ar. There Is the Magnet that attracts the Chalybs, the Root of the Matter I
perceive lies there; England is the End, and Scotland the Mean. However we must
pass by the flourishing Streams of Dee, so much discoursed by every Angler,
where the generosity of every Ford furnishes him with Trout; as do her solid
and more torpid Deeps accommodate him with Salmon, had we leisure to experience
them; but Time, like us and our Occasion, rides Post.


Th. If Opportunity and Importunity strike Difficulties dead, then why do we
ramble these rolling Streams, and produce nothing?


Th. Yes but we do, if only to tell the World that the Marquess Montross, a
Peer of the Kingdom, and a General of incomparable Conduct and Courage in these
solitary Fields (though with but a small Brigade of Soldiers) fought with his
Countrymen, and totally routed them. And to make the Miracle yet more
miraculous, this famous Martialist obtained another signal Victory; though when
under those ill Circumstances, as not to reinforce himself; yet with that
Bravery he redoubled his Resolution, and fought them under the very Walls of
this flourishing Aberdeen, from whence he brought off the Trophies. And this is
that famous Aberdeen, whose Western Suburbs are guarded by the Hills; as are
those Levels more Easternly saluted by the Ocean.


Th. Is this that Aberdeen so generally discoursed by the Scots for Civility?


Ar. Yes, and Humanity too; for it is the Paragon of Scotland.


Th. Why do not you call it by the Name of a City?


Ar. It matters not much for that, since the general Vogue of a Town serves as
well: however it is a Corporation, and that is enough; and I Am convinced it
stands in a cultivated Country, that never knew the Force of Sterrility; whose
Banks are bathed with the glittering Streams of Dee, and her Walls shaded with
fertile Corn Fields, promulgates Plenty; for Heaven, by the Law of Generosity,
certainly has blessed her: for here the Sun so moderates the Cold in Winter,
that it seldom or rarely freezes her Sands; whose Increase is multiplied from
the generous Breasts of the Ocean. And from whence both Mariner and Merchant
accumulate Treasure, because to drag it forth from the solid Deeps of the Sea;
when at other times they import their Goods into the Highlands, as they export
Commodities into remote Countries.


Th. But the Harbor, I fancy, that is somewhat too strait; and the Entrance, as
I conceive, much too narrow; however it is examined secure enough.


Ar. Peradventure it is; yet these Rocks at the entrance terrify the Pilot, as
her Harbor, when entered, exhilarates the Passenger. Now the Buildings of this
City are framed with Stone and Timber; facing the Sun, and fronting this
pleasant Harbor: the Streets also are large and spacious, and the Walls
strengthened with Towers and Buttresses of Stone. So that nothing, in my
Opinion, remains defective to complete them happy; for if not to waste by an
Overpluss, they can never pine away by a Want.


Th. I fancy this Place situate in a pleasant part of a Country; and so was
that Relic of Antiquity we but newly past by, when approaching the Suburbs of
this flourishing City.


Ar. You do well to remind me, for I had almost forgot it; that was old
Aberdeen: things that grow ancient, grow out of Fashion; however, it is the
Mother City of New Aberdeen, and a University to boot, wherein stands an old
weather-beaten Cathedral, that looks like the Times, somewhat irregular: but of
that I have little to say, since others before me thought requisite to erect
such public Places for private Devotion, when this present Generation conform
themselves, by contracting their Congregations to lesser now.


Th. Is this old Aberdeen an old University? why then a Sophister may pick up
as much Ethics and Politics as will serve him to stuff out a pair of Lawn
Sleeves. Cathedrals in some Countries influence the Inhabitants, as Planets you
know have government over the Vital Parts.


Ar. You must have a slash at the Gown I perceive; but what think you of the
Church in new Aberdeen, (that is no Cathedral) where the Magistrates sit under
the Sovereignty of the Mace, and every Merchant in his peculiar Pew; where
every Society of Mechanics have their particular Seats, distinguished by
Escutcheons, suitable to their Profession; so that Confusion seldom or rarely
happens amongst them, in quarrelling for Places: where Strangers are
unsuspected for Informers and Intruders, and the Civility of the People such,
that no Man is left destitute of a Seat to sit on, but every one entertained
answerable to his Quality?


Th. This is something like; for it far exceeds the Custom of England, where a
Man may stand in some Churches till his Feet are surbeat, yet no Body proffer
him a Remove, or a Stool to sit on.


Ar. But this is not all neither; for here you shall have such Method in their
Music, and such Order and Decorum of Song-devotion in the Church, as you will
admire to hear, though not regulated by a Cantor or Quirister, but only by an
insipid Parochial Clerk that never attempts further in the Mathematics of
Music, than to complete the Parishioners to sing a Psalm in Tune.


Th. You have concisely characterized Aberdeen, with her Inhabitants; but what
have we here? Cawses uncartable, and Pavements unpracticable, pointed with
rocky stumpy Stones, and daubed all over with dingy Dirt, that makes it
unpassible; and the Fields, as I conceive, are ten times worse, because
o'respread with miry Clay, and encumbered with Bogs that will bury a Horse.


Ar. For better for worse, we must through it, if intending to climb the
Southern Elevations. Now at the foot of this Pavement there is a small little
Harbor, which they call Steenhive, but I take the liberty to call it stinking
Hive, because it is so unsavory; which serves only for Pirates and Pickeroons;
but it bravely accommodates the Highlander for Depredations.


Th. What Fabric is this that peeps out of the Ocean?


Ar. Donnotter-Castle surrounded with Sea, and Waves for recreation dance about
it: it is a House so inoculated and cemented into Rocks, that a Man would fancy
it to swim in the Ocean; and the natural Strength so impregnable, supposes the
Artificial but inconsiderable, whose rocky Foundations, like Atlas's Pillars,
support the bulk of this gaudy Fortress. For Art and Artist are but Nature's
Substitutes; wherever therefore Nature cease to operate, then is the time
for the Artist to begin his Progress. But Nature has finished what she had to
do, and has left nothing for the Artist to practice, save only to adorn the
natural Excellency. After this manner is that artificial Imbellishment, for the
Rock it self is the natural Strength, then the Castle can be but the
Artificial. From when we conclude, that Nature and Art have formed such a
Fabric for Strength and Beauty, that amuzes and amazes every Beholder.


Th. I behold and consider this invincible Castle, lifted up like a Cloud into
the ambient Air. I have also considered the gaity of her Galleries, and those
Ornaments that adorn her gaudy Frontiers. I have also considered those opposite
Mountains, whose formidable Aspect are no pleasing Prospect to those
imbellish'd Battlements, that seemingly float in the Arms of the Ocean.


Ar. You have hit the Key, and now let me tune up the Instrument; those
Mountains mar all: yet in this fair Fortress they conceal the Regalia's of
Scotland, from such sacrilegious Hands that would steal Diadems to adorn their
Ambitions; so rob their Prince to enrich themselves: for here it is in this
solitary Rock besieged with Sea, that Scotland has concealed both Ornament and
Treasure; and what greater Ornament to a Prince than a Crown?


Th. That I can believe as an Article of my Creed, yet all is not Gold that
glisters; for should all Reports pass muster for Realities, Truth it self might
be brought into the Scandal of Suspicion. That the Crown has been lodged in
Donnotter, I dispute not, yet Dumbarton I should think in all respects as
secure, and Edinburgh-Castle as secure as either, to conceal that Treasure from
degenerate Mercenaries, that would violate their Trust though they venture to
hang for it.


Ar. You are in the right on it, but the Road I fancy runs not so rough as it
did; nor are my Apprehensions of England so remote as they were: both the Way
and the Weather favor our Designs in this Southern Expedition: for England's
our Prospect, now propound you the Object: and as we ride along to the Town of
Montrose, signify your Opinion of the flourishing Aberdeen.


Th. You impose a little too hard upon me, I can scarcely express my Opinion of
a Place, but I must be sentenced too much to commend it. On the other Hand,
should I lessen or impair their Civilities, then you challenge me to reflect on
our civil Entertainments. This Dilemma I am driven to. However you cannot deny,
but acknowledge, that Aberdeen is sweetly situated, and under the Government of
well-regulated Magistrates: No complaint of Poverty, nor luxurious
Supersluities; where the Houses are filled with Hospitality, not with
Profaneness; their Streets and Allies cleanly swept and paved, and their
Church and State-house very curiously kept, after the best Methods of the
Scottish Mode. But how Montrose will represent unto us, that I suspend to
determine till farther examination.


Ar. Trouble not your self with that Affair, for Montrose will murder all your
Suspicions. Her generous Entertainments in every Angle, like radiated Beams of
the Sun that invigorate the Earth, so naturally do the Inhabitants influence
their Civilities amongst Strangers; which remonstrates Montrose a Beauty that
lies concealed, as it were in the bosom of Scotland; most delicately dressed up,
and adorned with excellent Buildings, whose Foundations are laid with polished
Stone, and her Ports all washed with the Silver Streams that trickle down from
the Famous Ask. This is Montrose in the County of Angus, anciently known by the
Name of Caelurcha. Tell me how you like it, whose Gaity and Gallantry springs
from the Nobility and Gentry; but the Wealth of the City, from her Merchants
and Manufacture: and though you see not her Harbors decked with delicate
Shipping, yet she contents her self with a pleasant River, that commodes the
Inhabitant with the Blessings of Plenty, and that is enough. So to sum up all in
a Compendious Narrative, we entitle Montrose, the Mount of Roses.


Th. What Encomium more elegant, or what Character more eminent for these sweet
Situations, than the Rosy Mount of our Northern Latitude? Nay, what expressions
could be added more compendiously significant to characterize the Beautiful
Elevations and Imbellishments of Montrose I know not: then let this short
Derivation answer all Objections; whilst we enter her Ports, and use Arguments
of Refreshment to our hostile Appetites, in regard so famous a River as the
famous Ask salutes her Banks and flourishing Shores with daily supplies, to
relieve her Inhabitants, and accomodate Strangers.


Ar. Now our next Advance is to the Town of Dundee: but give me leave to call
it Deplorable Dundee, and not to be expressed without a Deluge of Tears; because
stormed and spoiled by the rash precipitancy of Mercenaries, whose rapinous
Hands put a fatal Period to her stately Imbellishments, with the loss of many
innocent lives, altogether unconcerned in that unnatural Controversy.

Ah poor Dundee! torn-up by the Roots; and thy Natives and Inhabitants picked
out at the Port-holes. Can Honor shine in such Bloody Sacrifices, to lick up
the lives of Inhabitants, as if by a studied revenge? Can nothing sweeten the
Conquerours Sword, but the reeking Blood of Orphans and Innocents? Blush O
Heavens, what an Age is this! There was Wealth enough to answer their
Ambitions, and probably that as soon as any thing betrayed her. Could nothing
satisfy the unsatiable Sword, but the Life of Dundee to atone as a Sacrifice?
English Men without Mercy, are like Christians without Christianity; no
Moderation nor Pity left, but parcelling out the lives of poor Penitents in
cold Blood? Who must answer for this at the Bar of Heaven, before the Judge of
all the World? but he that doomed Dundee to die, is dead himself, and doomed
e're this; and Dundee yet living to survive his Cruelty.


Th. Is this Dundee! Disconsolate Dundee, where the merciless Conqueror stuck
down his Standard in Streams of Blood?


Ar. Yes, this is that Unfortunate and Deplorable Dundee, whose Laurels were
stripped from the Brow of her Senators, to adorn the Conquering Tyrant's Head.
Here it was that every Arbor flourished with a Fruitful Vine; and here every
Border was beautified with fragrant Flowers. Yet her Situation seems to me none
of the best, for if bordering too near the brinks of the Ocean proves
Insalubrious, or stooping too low to salute the Earth, incommodes Health by
unwholsom Vapors; then to stand elevated a pitch too high, suffocates with
Fumes, that equally offend and infect the Air, by blotting out Sanity with the
Sovereignty of Life.


Th. This somewhat answers my former Opinion, that neither Honor nor Riches,
nor the Ambitions of Men, stand in competition with the Mediocrity of Health;
nor is there any Blessing under the Sun adequate to the Sovereign Sanctions of
Sanity on this side Eternity, but the Radies of Sanctification from the Sun of
Righteousness. The World's a Fool, and none but Fools admire it: Yet not that I
profane the Beautiful Creation; when only censuring that fictitious and
imaginary World in Man. Go on with Dundee, I overflow with Pity; and could wish
my Reluctance Penitency enough to weep her into a Religious Repentance, but not
with Rachel never to be comforted. Hark Arnoldus! Don't you hear the Bells?


Ar. Yes I hear them, and what of that? Bells and Bonfires are two Catholic
Drumsticks, with which the Church beats up for Volunteers only to debauch them.
For what end were Bells hung up, if not to Jangle; and Bonfires kindled, if not
to Blaze like an Ignis fatuus? Thus People uncultivated are like Land untilled,
and Arts unimprov'd print the footsteps of Penury. But Arts are improved by
industrious Ingenuity; when through want of Ingenious Industry they slide into
a Nonentity. As no Man can be truly Religious without good Morals, so no Man
without good Morals can be in any measure Religious. Not that I assert Religion
is Morality; but Morality is the Porch that lets into the Temple.


Th. You paraphrase upon Bells; I wonder how you missed Bag-pipes, since the
one has as much the root of the matter in it as the other. By these mystical
Metaphors, if I hit the Mark, you present England an Emblem of Canaan, and
Scotland but a piece of English Imitation.


Ar. You don't hit the Key right, but I perceive England lies close siege in
your Bosom; however there ought to be some charity for Scotland, that so
generously entertained you withal sorts of Varieties.


Th. Scotland'tis true has variety enough, to confuse and confound all the
Cooks in England.


Ar. All this I Will grant.


Th. Then you must grant their Butter but little better then Grease we usually
grease Cartwheels withal; which nauseates my Palate if but to think on it, or
remember the Hand that made it up. I know there are Men that have Maws like
Muck-hills, that can feed as freely upon tainted Flesh, as you and I upon
Pheasant and Partridge.


Ar. What then?


Th. Why then you argue as if you had lost your English Appetitie, and I would
not for all the Varieties in Scotland, that the resentments of England should
expire in my Palate.


Ar. Does Hunger make any distinction in Dainties? if not, then why should
Scottish Kale blot out the Character of English Colliflowers?


Th. I shall not dispute the point, but the very thoughts of England sweetens my
apprehensions, that possibly e're long I may taste of a Southern Sallad:
However, this I Will say in the Honor of Scotland, that Cold and Hunger are
inseparable Companions, but their Linens are fresh; and were not their Beds so
short, they would serve well enough for weary Travelers.


Ar. Then I fancy they will serve well enough for us, whilst we trace the
fragrant Levels of Fife. For now we relinquish the beautiful Ports of Dundee,
to transport in Boats that are steered with a Compass of Straw, by reason of
the embodied Mists, to which Dundee is as incident as any part, because
standing in a bottom that is besieged with mucky miry Earth; from whence there
insurrect such pernicious Vapors, as nauseate the Air; whereby it becomes
almost infectious.


Th. Why so?


Ar. Because it debilitates both the Native and Inhabitant, and would certainly
incapacitate them of Health and long Life, did not Custom and a Country-Habit
plead a prescription, both as to Physic and Diet: Insomuch, that neither Gass
nor Blass, nor any nauseating suffocating Fumes, nor hardly Death it self can
snatch them from Scotland; where some Natives have lived to a prodigious Age.


Th. But to the Country of Fife, I fear you will forget it.


Ar. No, no, doubt it not, nor would I have you startle the Mariner, who
because destitute of a Card to pilot us over by, is compelled to make use of a
Compass of Straw.


Th. A very ingenious Invention; pray tell us the manner on it.


Ar. Don't push too hard upon me; and I Will tell you this new way of Navigation.
When Cloudy Mists arise that darken the face of the Firmament, and threaten
danger without any Disturbance, you shall then see the Seamen stuff the Stern
with Straw, as now they do with little Trusses, which they successively expose
one at a time; and so supply it time after time from the Stern of the Vessel,
till at length they arrive at the desired Shore, as now we do: And thus have I
past and repast from Dundee. Nor is there any difficulty nor danger to any Man
more than hazarding his Carcass in Timber. Now welcome ashore to the Fields in
Fife; where we must exchange our Navigable Horses for Hackneys.


Th. What must we call the name of this Town?


Ar. Cooper in Fife: it is a Corporation.


Th. And what other Town is that yet more Eastward, that seems to lean on the
Skirts of the Ocean?


Ar. That Is Ancient Saint Andrews, their Metropolitan University. Upon the same
Coast lie Creel and Petenweems. More Southerly yet lie cockly Carcawdy facing
the Ocean, and the Frontiers of Leith: we shall only take a view of the Palace
of Faulkland, though her fair Imbellishments outlustre Dumfermling.


Th. What Is our next Stage?


Ar. Brunt-Island: But I must remind you of the Magnificent Palace of Scoon,
forgot as we past by the Ports of Saint Iohnstons, near whose elevated Turrets
there stands a Kirk, that stands upon all the Land in Scotland; which Kirk is
immured with a fair stone Wall; and in that Kirk they Crown their Kings, and
perform the Formalities of all other Royal Duties; which Regalia are the Sword,
Spurs, Purse, Crown, Globe, Scepter and Bible. Now he is a Dunce that knows not
this duty, because it is incumbent on all the Kingdom of Scotland.


Th. But how stands the Kirk upon all the Kingdom?


Ar. There Is not a Royalty in the Kingdom of Scotland, but has sent some part
of Earth (from every Angle) to this place called Scoon; which Earth was
dispersed by Laborious Industry; upon which the Foundations of the Kirk were
laid. So that now you are to consider this Variety of Mould represents but one
Uniform and Compact Body of Earth: Which Earth represent the great Volume of
Scotland in a Breviat, or as I may term it, a little Compendium.

Thus our Discourse of the Kirk of Scoon has accompanied us to a view of
pleasant Carcawdy, a little pretty Maritime Town (built all with Stone) that
stands in the face of the Ocean, and the Frontiers of Fife. But the time and
our occasion constrains us to pass by Carcawdy, where the Inhabitants live more
upon Fish than Flesh; from whose slender Ports we must hasten to Brunt-Island,
otherwise we endanger losing our Tide, which will much incommode us; nor can we
stay there to examine their Curiosities.


Th. What Is this that so naturally represents the Ocean? And what are those
Ships, under Sail? Or must I fancy them a Landscape of moveable Mountains?


Ar. If you fancy them Ships fluctuating to and fro on those solid Deeps to
attempt that Harbor, you are not much mistaken.


Th. Is there any Town on those rocky Foundations?


Ar. Yes surely there is; for we now discover the pleasant Shores of Beautiful
Brunt-Island guarded with Rocks, that front the Harbor and the Pier of Leith;
over whose rubified Sands we must plough the Ocean, to those delectable
flourishing Ports; provided the Vessel be tite and unleaky, as questionless
this is, designed for our passage.


Th. However I Will remind you of our hazardous passage from Innerbrachy to the
famous Ness, as at another time our personal hazard, when fording over Forres,
and the rapid Trespey; besides other great Rivers and Rivulets in our march, of
very swift and violent motion; which we often discharged without the Artifice
of Boats: and yet I cannot help that natural Antipathy and Aversion, that I
find against Timber Fortifications; nor can I think them such sovereign
Security, but that sometimes they are accompanied with difficulties and danger.
It Is true, I grant that no Man has an infallible Protection for Life; nor a
Pre-knowledg of Sickness, nor sudden Solution.


Ar. Well then, if so, transplant those Fears into Foreign Parts; for we must
certainly, and that suddenly, expose our selves to the Mercy of the Sea, by the
Providence of God. Nor is the Danger more than Imagination; for the fear of
Death to some Men is more dreadful and terrible than Death it self; which great
Sea we must all sail through, before we cast Anchor in the Port of Eternity.


Th. You have sodred the Breach, and salv'd the Wound, that now I itch to be
floating on the Ocean. However before we embark for Leith, let us give Nature a
Philip in the Arms of Brunt-Island.


Ar. All this we may do, and view the Situations too, which stands on a flat
and flourishing Level, backed by Fife, and the Mountains of Mirt, whose
Foundations are laid in Rocky Stone, and beautified with the Regularities of
Art, where there is a small but secure Harbor, to rescue the retreats of the
terrified Passenger, when pursued with the furious Hostility of Neptune, whose
Waves storm the Shores, insinuating themselves into every Creek. But the Beauty
of Brunt-Island lies most in her Marketplace, which serves for an Exchange,
fronting the Harbor, and facing the Ocean; where all or most of her Merchants
Houses stand gazing on the beautiful Pier of Leith.


Th. Is this the Vessel designed for our passage? I fancy the Waves begin to
work, for my Belly I Am sure begins to wamble. See how the wrack of Clouds
thicken the Air, and the unlimited Winds rend the Sky. Who can judge the result
of these surly beginnings, or hope a good issue in the Conclusion? The very
body of the Sea divides, and opens like a Sepulcher to swallow up the Rocks, in
whose Concealments lie the Terrors of Death. The Deeps to my fancy are broke
up; for my nauseating Stomach ebbs and flows with as strong irritations as the
Ebulitions of the Ocean.


Ar. Those Tides I confess must run violently swift, that are hurried along by
such furious Agitations; but for two Tides to meet in one Sea together, one
would think them enough to make an Inundation. Yet how soon these lofty Winds
are suppressed by a Calm, and every Mortal preserved to a Miracle. So that the
results of this impetuous Storm, proves only a Fresh and Flourishing Gale,
occasioned by the Conflict of Winds and Water; which forces the Sea in some
measure to be sick, and compels her to vomit, as now she does those neuseous
Ejectments, which for ought I know constrains your stomach to lower and strike
Sail; so keep time it may be with the trepidating Ocean; whose irritations
quickened by the Universal Motion, measure proportion with the rest of the
Creation. So that this kind of Physic, if I calculate right, may protract your
tampering with Physicians in the fall.


Th. Of what I Am assured, there is no need to doubt; you talk like a Physician;
but not that I think you a Plagiary, that robs the Dead to adorn the Living:
Nor a Medicaster upon whose good Deeds the Sun always shines, but the Earth
covers all his bad ones.


Ar. You have nick't it now I think; however there is the Pier of Leith, and the
Beauty of Scotland in a little Epitome; let us enter her Ports to refresh our
selves.


Th. Shall our Pinnace drop Anchor here, and the Seamen refresh, whilst we step
ashore and accomodate our selves?


Ar. Will you close up the Orifice of your relaxed Stomach with a Glass of
brisk Claret? So mingle some Liquor with your Maritime Labors, and thank
generous Neptune to act the part of a Physician, to shave off the foreign
Ferment from your crude and indigestive Ventricle.


Th. I think it not amiss to recall those Spirits, whose continued absence would
enervate my digestions, which now I perceive begin to feel warmth; and my
stagnated unactive Blood grows more Vigorous and Active in Circulation. My
Pulse also that beats with an equal motion, and my Body begins to summon
Supplies, to gratify and satisfy a craving Appetite.


Ar. As these are certain Symptoms of Health, you put a delay to what you
solicit.


Th. If I do, what then? There Is a superanuated Custom kept up among the
Ancients; that to gratify the Appetitie violates the Creation. This was of old
the Brachmans Creed, and is to this day the Banians Alcoran, except of late
they have changed their Opinion: for they assert, that Nature would be
unnatural to her self in the destruction of any thing wherein she favorably
had breathed a Life.


Ar. Was this the Primitive Practice of our former Ancestors?


Th. I don't say it was, I discourse the Brachmans that offer this Argument. No
Man has a Commission to create Life, no Man therefore by any Law or Custom
ought to take Life away; which if he do, he makes himself an Instrument of
unnatural Cruelty, and his Body a Sepulcher to bury dead Carcasses in.


Ar. But had they consulted our great Oracle Moses, and considered the great
Ends of the great Creator, they would speak I fancy another Dialect, and render
unto us a different Interpretation.


Th. Why so?


Ar. The Jews you may read had a Sanction among themselves, to celebrate
Sacrifices according to the Law: and the Christians have a Sanction among
themselves also, to celebrate their Devotions according to the Gospel. But the
Banians comply with neither of these Sanctions, because placing a Sanctity in
Custom and Opinion, not well considering that the World was made for Man, and
not Man for the World; Meats for the Belly, and not the Belly for Meats. This
in some measure might reform their error, and undeceive deluded Posterity,
hudled under the false gloss of Custom and Opinion. On the other hand, as every
Man has a Natural Right and Creational Privilege, as Lord of the Creation; so
no Man has a Creational Right, nor Natural Privilege to make his Appetite the
Rule for Destruction. Providence allows due supplies to every Man; but no Man
can warrant or justify his Riot.


Th. Were this Argument approved of, it would, I suspect, overthrow our design
of Angling.


Ar. Not at all; for my Opinion is, the Argument it self manifestly strengthens
it. The Text calls to Peter, Arise, kill and eat; and Peter objects against
what is common and unclean: But Peter was answered by a Voice from Heaven,
Nothing was unclean that God had cleansed. Sacrifices and Oblations were under
the Seal of the Law, but the last Supper and Miracles shined under the Sunshine
of the Gospel. Adam stood unlimited, the forbidden Tree only excepted. Nature
was unconfined, and the Creation blessed with multiplicity of Blessings, till
Adam's Transgression. But as Nature operates the Will of the Creator, so the
Nations shall bow to the Son of God.


Th. So let the Argument drop; only give us a Description of the Situations of
Leith.


Ar. Leith stands, as you see, situated on a Level surrounded by Sea on the
North-East; and guarded on the South with Neals Craigs, and Arthur's Seat, that
hangs over Edinburgh. But the Fabrics of Leith are built with Stone, hovering
over the Pier, and fronting the Ocean, almost drowned under Water; and that
which is worse, if worse can be, those nauseating Scents sucked greedily from
the Sea, bring Arguments of Disease, and sometimes Summons for Death. On the
other hand, Scotland cannot present you with a more pleasant Port; for here the
Houses and Structures are large and lofty, and the Pier like a Gnomen directs
to the Tolbooth. Here also stands a substantial Cawsey that leads to the Bridge,
that brings you to a Citadel that was, but now is not, because hudled in dust,
and ruinous heaps; yet not ruined by Age, nor torn with the scars and
impressions of War; but Policy, and not Piety, laid her Surface in the Sand.


Th. What Merchandise does she trade in?


Ar. For the most part she trades in Foreign Commodities; except some
Manufactures of their own; as Ticking, Bedding, Tartan, Pladding, Scots-Cloth,
etc. So that Leith for Trade, with her Merchandise for Treasure, excels most,
if not all the Maritime Ports in Scotland.


Th. Pray what other Accommodation has she?


Ar. She has Fish and Flesh in abundance, viz. Oysters, Cockles, Muscles,
Crabs, Craw-fish, Lobsters, Soles, Plaice, Turbet, Thornback, Cod, Keeling,
Haddock, Mackrel, Herring, etc. Then there is Salmon, Trout, Pike, Perch, Eel,
etc. but their Flesh are Beeves, Veals, Porks, Veneson, Kid, Mutton, Lamb, etc.
And their Fowl are Eagles, Signets, Hawks, Geese, Gossander, Duck and Mallard,
Teal, Widgeon, Cock, Pidgeon, Heath-game, Moorfowl, Curlue, Partridg, Pheasant,
Plover Gray and Green, and many more that I cannot remember. So great is their
Plenty and Variety, that did not the popularity in Edinburgh render things more
chargeable than other Parts more remote up the Country, a Man might live almost
without Expense. And now we relinquish the flourishing Ports of Leith, whose
Foundations are daily saluted by the Ocean. O how sweetly the Weather smiles,
the Horizon looks clear, the Sky is serene, and the Birds you may see them beat
the ambient Air with their tunable Notes. Come Theophilus, let us mount our
Horses, and lift up your Eyes to behold those lofty Imbellishments of Edinburgh.


Th. They are obvious enough, half an Eye may see them.


Ar. Welcome to these elevated Ports, the princely Court of famous Edinburgh.
This City stands upon a mighty scopulous Mountain, whose Foundations are
cemented with Mortar and Stone; where the bulk of her lofty Buildings represent
it a Rock at a reasonable Distance, fronting the approaching Sun; whose
Elevations are seven or eight Stories high, mounted aloft in the ambient Air.
But the Length, as I take it, exceeds not one Mile, and the Breadth on it
measures little more than half a Mile; nor is there more than one fair Street,
to my best remembrance. But then it is large and long, and very spacious, whose
Ports are splendid, so are her well built Houses and Palaces, corresponding
very much to complete it their Metropolis.


Th. What Fabric is that on the East of Edinburgh?


Ar. Hallirood House, the Regal Court of Scotland.


Th. But there is yet another great Fabric, that presents Westward.


Ar. That Is Edinburgh-Castle, elevated in the Air, on an impregnable Precipice
of rocky Earth, perpendicular in some Parts, rampir'd and barrocadoed with
thick Walls of Stone, and Graffs proportionable, to contribute an additional
Strength. So that you are to consisider this inaccessible Castle shines from a
natural as well as an artificial Product; because part of it you see contiguous
with the Rock; but the other part, because affixed by cemented Stone, which
inoculates and incorporates them so firmly together, that the whole mass of
Building is of such incredible Strength, that it is almost fabulous for any Man
to report it, or sum up the impregnable Luster and Beauty of this fair
Fortress, that defies all Attempts, except Famine, Disease, or Treachery be
conduct; so that Culverins and Cannons signify but little, without Bombs and
Carcasses. On the other hand the Defendants must not be too liberal, lest their
Water forsake them sooner than their Ammunition; so inevitably draw upon them
the foregoing Consequence, and incommode them with a thousand Inconveniences.
True it is, many Arguments of Art and Artillery have been sent to examine this
impregnable Castle, but none were ever found more successful than Hunger and
Disease, or the golden Apples of the Hesperides. Such kind of Magnets muzzle
Mercenaries, and make them a golden Bridge to pass over.


Th. Is this fair Fabric the Parliament House, where the Grandees sit on
National Affairs?


Ar. Yes, this is their Palace where the Parliament sits to accommodate the
Kingdom; whose famous Ports we now relinquish to take a review of the Bars of
Musselburg. But that on our right Hand is delicate Dalkeith, surrounded with a
Park; and that on our left Hand is Preston-pans, where the Natives make Salt
from the Brine of the Ocean. That other Town before us is the Corporation of
Haddington; and this is the Brill; but the Bass you may see is a prodigious
Rock, that makes an Island on the Skirts of the Ocean.


Th. Is this the Place where the Solon Geese breed, that are Flesh in Hand, but
Fish in the Mouth? a Mystery I fancy not inferior to the Barnicle.


Ar. You say true, it is a great Mystery, if seriously to consider the Footsteps
of Nature; which I shall explain without a Paradox. Do but observe that
elevated Rock that breaks the Air, in that seeming solitary floating Island;
it is upon that Rock, and only there, that she hatches and initiates her young
Ones into the World, by exposing her Egg to the open Air, and the utmost
extremity of stormy Winds; and those Eggs, or the Squirts (with other Fowls)
are so fixed by contact of a glutinous Specimen to the remote Points of the
Rocks, that they seem conglutinated, and so entirely inoculated, as that no
extremity of Weather can separate them asunder, and where the Female never
hatches more than one single Egg at once: and that Egg she plants so evenly in
the Web of her Foot, by placing her Body exactly over it; that when she
relinquisheth the Rock for Relief, with admirable Circumspection she raises her
self, by cautiously dilating her Web, as the Aspry does to circulate the Air,
who after the same Method as when she leaves her Egg, so she falls by
circulating the Air, and dilating her Web in the same order and decorum as
above; with such an exact poize and evenness of Body to cover her Egg, that no
Art nor Industry can imitate or accomplish. So that the Egg no sooner sprits,
but it tumbles down into the brinish Ocean for Nature to nourish it. After this
manner she hatcheth her young Ones; and after this manner I am authorized to
publish it.


Th. So much for Geese, this was a Rarity indeed; but not so eminently
remarkable as the six great Patriots of the English Nation.


Ar. You push too hard upon me, however I Will name them and no more: there were
four great Harries (viz.) Ireton, Vane, Nevill and Martin, and one marvelous
Andrew, or Andrew Marvel.


Th. Still here is but Five, what is become of the Sixth?


Ar. You will find him at Dunbar swaddling the Scots.


Th. What! England's great General, the most renowned, valorous, and victorious
Conqueror, Oliver Cromwell.


Ar. Yes, that was he that swing'd off the Scots in those solitary Planes, and
swelling Hills, near the Ports of Dunbar: there it was that Cromwell and Lesly
disputed by dint of Sword, and the formidable Terror of Gunshot, in which fatal
Engagement the Scots were routed, and fled the Field; whilst the Conqueror's
Army sprinkled the Earth with bloody Sacrifices; converting the green Meadows
into purple Planes.


Th. And did not that great General then take in Tamtallon-Castle?


Ar. Presently after he did; and that is the Place; how do you like it?


Th. Not at all, I fancy it a Place but of little Strength.


Ar. However it covers the Pass of Copperspeth, that we now pass through to
ascend these dirty miry Moors, which direct to the beautiful Battlements of
Berwick, an English Town upon Scottish Ground, whose Banks are bathed with the
sturdy Torrents of Tweed, that descend from a mountainous Elevation, in or near
to Erricksteen; distant about some eight or nine Miles from the famous Tintaw,
whose eminent Ascents face the English Frontiers, standing on the Borders or
South Marshes of Scotland. So that from Erricksteen, though some alledg from
Tintaw, runs the glittering and resolute Streams of Tweed.

However Tintaw is a prodigious Mountain, whose lofty Broaches break the
burdned Clouds. And such is Errick, if Fame be a true Oracle, that spouts forth
three large and spacious Rivers that wash the pleasant Banks of Scotland; one
of them is Tweed (as above expressed) that runs East directly to the Town of
Berwick, and espouseth her self with the Ocean there; gliding along the English
Promontories, and is the Original of Tweed's Dale. Another River is Annon, that
bathes the fertile and florid Banks of England, and creates a Dale, called
Annon's Dale; so glides along toward the quaking Sands; and not far from
Carlisle lancheth forth into the Ocean. But the third is Cloyd, and is the last
mentioned; yet is it nothing inferior to any of the former. This River directs
her Course North and by West, toward the lofty and domineering Turrets of
Dumbarton; near unto those famous Elevations she mingles her Streams with the
profound Depths of the Ocean, and is the Author of Cloyd's Dale.

Now all these spacious and peremptory Rivers, are derived from the Springs in
the Mountain of Errick; but some alledg from Tintaw, on whose Top stands a
Capsula, on the Front of the Hill directing Southward; from whence those
smaller Streams separate themselves, through craggy Passages and Cavities in
Rocks; so trickling down, they sprinkle the moorish Meadows, admitting of many
other small Rills and Rivulets to mingle with them, in their more resolute
Passage.


Th. What have you there?


Ar. An Aenigma of the famous Tintaw; which with much difficulty I procured
from the Collections of a Scots Antiquary, that lived sometime in the Town of
Kilsieth; who to answer my Solicitations concerning Tintaw, gave me, as you may
read, this following Paradox. On Tintaw Top thar dwells a Mist;
And even that Mist thar is a Kissed.
Spear in that Mist, thar stands a Cop,
And even that Cop thar is a Drop.
Take up the Cop, drink oot the Drop;
Than put the Kissed intul the Mist,
On Tintaw Top.



Th. What stuff's here; Riddle me Riddle me, what is this?


Ar. It is a Riddle, and stuffed with Varieties; and so let it remain till
explicated by such as travel those solitary Tracts; or solicit Acquaintance
with some of our solent Society. And now Scotland I bid thee farewell, to
advance Great Britain's Southern Territories, (the Magnet) only Berwick upon
Tweed we select for this Night's accommodation, where we need not doubt of
English Entertainment. That Is the Town that discovers it self by those lofty
Turrets; let us sleep there this Night, and bid Scotland farewell to Morrow.


Th. Rest and Refreshment seem Relatives to Travelers.


Ar. So Discourse and discovery of Objects and Prospects claim a like
Privilege, to plant the sweets of Diversion in Anglers and others.


Th. Yes surely, otherwise I had lost my Expectation; and this Day's Journey
broke the Heart of a Traveller.


Ar. Then to cement it again, what if I proceed to instruct you of all those
eminent Rivers and Rivulets, in our passage Southward, till we arrive at the
beautiful Streams of triumphant Trent; whose florid and fertile Banks, with a
Majestic Brow, smile on the amorous Fields, and England's Elysium, the Forest
of Sherwood; whose shady Trees, as a Pavilion, shelter and solace the
Contemplative Angler: there it is that Philomel melts the Air in delightful
Groves; there the Hills will shelter us, the Rocks surround us, and the shady
Woods relieve and retrieve us, whilst Nottingham, that Non such, does sweeten
our Ears with delicious Consorts, and our Eyes with variety of Buildings, that
stand in a serene and wholesome Air. But their Cellarage, beyond compare, is the
best in England, and most commodious, and the whole Town situated on a pleasant
Rock; where the Streets are adorned with beautiful Houses, the florid Fields
filled with sweet Aroma's; and the exuberant Meadows enriched with fragrant
Perfumes, that will ravish the Angler, if when to trace and examine the gliding
silver Streams of famous Trent.


Th. Rome was not built in a Day, nor are my Resolutions so precipitant to
build without Materials; for if rash Results reap Repentance, it is good and
wholesome Advice, to look before we Leap; an old Proverb is a good Premonition,
and a timely Premonishment prevents a Premonire. I cannot say where to settle,
but am desirous my Lot may fall in or near to the Forest of Sherwood, that
mingles her Shades with the florid Meadows that adorn the beautiful Streams of
Trent; on whose polite Sands and murmuring Streams, I could freely espouse my
vacant Hours.


Ar. In the mean time as we travel these Northern Tracks, give me leave to
inform you of the Names of those flourishing Rivers, and gliding Rivulets, till
our Eyes make a discovery of the beautiful and solitary Shades of Sherwood,
whose amorous Bowers Nature her self has curiously dressed up to adorn the
delightful Meadows, and translucid Streams of the famous Trent. Where we may
gratify and satisfy our selves with the Rod, and enrich our selves with the
sweet Progress of Peace: for having the Forest of Sherwood on the North, the
Vale of Belvoir on the South, and the transparent glittering Streams in the
Center, what can we propound to sweeten our Recreation more, than to mingle our
sober Thoughts with the Divine Prospect of Contemplation?


Th. I approve of your Contrivance for a solitary Life, which gratifies and
compensates both Labor and Study.


Ar. And will it not furnish us with Arguments against immoderate Excess, and
the violent pursuit after Recreation? Besides, it will sweeten our Lives with
the life-touches of Virtue, and the property of such things as may best conduce
to the present Occasion; as also for our future Advantage. As for example; when
returning from Trent triumphant with Spoil, what hinders us to refresh with
Rhetoric from Apollo? I know that you will grant Piety the best Expositor of a
holy Life; and if so, it gives us the most lively and amiable prospect of
Eternity, whilst the World, and malicious Men, like ravenous Vultures,
unnaturally tear out one another Bowels.


Th. It Is true, I acknowledge that Sin, like a Cart-rope, draws down Destruction
on every Generation: And is not that Generation ripe enough for Destruction,
where the Streets are stormed with Oaths and Impieties; and the Houses blackned
with blasphemous Imprecations; not a Sin cruciated, nor a Lust mortified?
Surely that Nation stands a tip-toe that leans upon the rotten Props of Pride;
and will not Pride (think you) sink it self, so inevitably fall with its own
Weight? Look but upon the Foundation of National Piety; and you will see how it
lies in the arms of National Polity. Will this suppress the Vice of the Times,
and work a Reformation in Religion and good Manners, such as cruciat Christ
every Day, vilify Christianity, by putting Christ to open Shame, and a rape
upon Conscience to gratify their Luxury. So not only endangers themselves, but
that Nation, and those Natives so unhappy to live with them.


Ar. Though a spark of Fire shine bright, yet every shining Spark is not a
Star; nor does the orderly laying the Sacrifice on the Altar, merit the descent
of Fire from Heaven to kindle it: that Man that acts by the Law of his Lust,
imprisons his Faith, and murders his Reason. There is a Generation of Men that
call the sacred Scriptures a Scarecrow of Religion, to frighten People from
the Duties of Christianity; nay they will tell you, that Faith, Hope and Charity,
are useless Instruments and Arguments to explain the Mind of God: but such Men
approve themselves Proficients of Hell, that run besides the Text to become
disobedient to all the Commandments. Man blown up with the blast of Ambition,
makes it a Rule of Faith to study Revenge; so puts a Sword to his own Throat,
and yet cries out some other hurts him. Hypocrites of all Men are dipped in the
deepest Die, and doomed to a lower Hell than either Scribe or Pharisee: whilst
the more Religious contemplate Vision, and seek the Seraphick Life of Angels,
which inclines me to an Hermetick Life, that speaks more Piety than Pageantry;
more Religion than Profaneness; more Services than Sacrifices; more Adoration
to God, than to Temples built with Hands. But where are we now? see here
Theophilus.


Th. What shall I see?


Ar. Beggarly Belgrade, the first Post-stage in England.


Th. Indeed I took it for a Remnant of Scotland, but am glad to discover my
Native Country in any Dress: I fancied I felt English Air, before I touched
English Earth.


Ar. Here Is another Object.


Th. What Is that?


Ar. The Ruins and Remains of an ancient Castle, whose beautiful Impressions
are almost blotted out, by the shady Strokes and Impressions of Time, that
writes marginal Notes on her tottering Battlements. And such is the Town, crazy
and weather-beaten, standing upon Stilts; and because besieged with an unweildy
Wall, makes it look not unlike a Pilgrim; or rather an infirm Penitent, that
moves slowly and creeps to his Grave; so do her ancient Ruins slide into Dust:
these are her Ports, if you please let us enter. Near to this Alnwick runs the
River Aln, or rather a Rivulet. Distant from hence about some seven Miles
Southward stands Felton-Bridg built all with Stone, under which there glides
most limpid Streams that accommodate the Angler.


Th. Shall we touch there?


Ar. Not now, Time will not permit us; but as we descend these Mountains, we
discover Morpeth, whose Banks are bathed with the River Mor, where as yet
remain the Relics and Ruins of an ancient Castle, whose Beauty is almost
blotted out with Age, or some other Irregularities, that prognostic Time or
War the fatal Instruments to deface her Battlements.


Th. What fair Object is that before us?


Ar. This eminent Object that we now discover, is the Town of Newcastle, rich
in Merchants, and many other Gentlemen of valuable Estates; the wealthy Walls
of this Town are washed with the profitable Streams of Tine; a River that is not
only considerably deep, but proportionably large and spacious, whose Banks and
Shores are sullied with Coal; whose Product supplies all the Southern Parts,
and accommodates England, which otherwise would be all Ice, were not Newcastle
Sun enough to thaw it; and London I persuade my self would be but a cold
Constellation, did not this Ignis fatuus shine in every Corner of her beautiful
Palaces. Nay most of our Maritime Towns, and all her Cinque Ports, would
coagulate into a Concression, did not this blazing Comet shine in every
Chimney. But I must relinquish this Mundane Star, to climb up the South, to
those most pleasant and beautiful Galleries of Albion.


Th. What Town is this?


Ar. This is Durham (and a Palatinate) where you may see an eminent but ancient
Cathedral, begirt with the self-same Wall that encircles the Town; whose
Foundations are washed with the Streams of Weer; and where the Palaces are
pleasant, and in some parts Beautiful, because shadowed with Art, and polished
with Industry. Nay the whole Country presents a Scene of Pleasure, because
plentifully stocked with Corn and Cattle. Moreover it is very well supplied
with Coal, but not to balance with the stock of Newcastle.


Th. Whereabouts are we now?


Ar. Our Course directs us to dirty Darlington, and that is a Town that stands
in stiff Clay, yet centred in a plentiful part of a Country. More Southward
yet, and about some three Miles off, glide the glittering Streams of the River
Tee, whose Fords are furnished with incomparable Trout, as are her Deeps with
the race of Salmon. But our next Post-stage is the Town of North-Ollerton, (a
Northern Situation) famous for nothing that I know of, except a weather-beaten
Castle, demolished with Age, and the Ruins of Time; which serves as a Reception
now for Bats and Buzards, Owls and Jack-daws. However the Town stands sweetly
situated in a rich Soil, and fertile Fields; witness her plenty of Corn, and her
fair and large-headed Cattle. More Southward yet, and about some seven Miles
from hence, stands the Town of Topliff; but at the South end of the Town stands
a Bridge of Stone, that straddles over the sullen Swale. There is little
remarkable here besides the River, except the Soil and solitary Meadows.


Th. Whereabouts are we now?


Ar. Why now we are come to Burrough-Brigs; at the North end thereof runs the
River Yor, into which falls the trembling Streams of Neid; so incorporating
together, they gulf into Owse. In these solitary Fields, there stand seven
great prodigious Stones, elevated like Pyramids in the ambient Air, of such
vast Magnitude (and regular Proportion) that they strike deep Impressions into
the solid Body of Earth. I curiously enquired after the meaning of these
Relics, but no Man was found to answer my Inquisitions: from whence I
concluded these signal Remembrances might remain as Trophies or Monuments of
Victory; and that the Natives and Inhabitants that dwelt thereabouts, but
little busied themselves to rifle into Records. Further than this, I can give
no account.


Th. Whereabouts stands York?


Ar. The City of York stands distant from these pleasant Fields, about some
seven or eight Northern Miles: the Foundation of whose flourishing Ports are
washed with the mild and moderate Waves of the Navigable Owse; whose owsy
Shores, and silent sullied Streams mingle themselves with the more resolute
Torrents of Trent, and so gulf into the spacious Arms of Humber. In this City
you shall see a sumptuous Cathedral, imbellished with Art and polished Stone:
every one that sees it, admires and commends it; and so do I for a rare Piece
of Art, and a beautiful Fabric.


Th. And what then, is it ever the better for your admiring on it?


Ar. It Is never the worse, nor is Weatherbee neither, through which runs Warff;
where there stands a stately Bridge of Stone, over those rocky Foundations that
secure her scaly Inhabitants, viz. the Trout and Salmon. From hence we fadg to
Ferry-Brigs; but in our Passage, we meet with a knotty stony Cawsy that
accommodates the Traveller, when the Banks overflow those florid Meadows. About
three Miles Southward there runs a Rivulet, but I call it a Rill, that gives
name to the Town; where note, the Inhabitants call it Went-Bridg.


Th. Whereabouts are we now?


Ar. On the Skirts of Doncaster, so called from the River Dun, portable
sometimes to the Verge of the Town; at other times hardly Water enough to turn
a Mill, or float a Cockboat. It Is a Corporation, and a Manufacture; if weaving
and knitting Stockings, and Wastcoats will warrant it: Now you must know that
this Town stands in the Post-road* where a Man may be welcome that brings
Money; otherwise he may step by the Borders of Bawtry, and consult the
melancholy Streams of Idle, whose Banks are burdned with Segs and Bulrushes.
But these glittering Streams over which we now pass, flow from the Sharps of
merry Merial.


Th. Why then we touch on the Skirts of the Forest.


Ar. We have passed through the Heart on it; for now we discover the
weather-beaten Walls, and the ruinous Battlements of the Town of Newark, whose
flourishing Fields are bathed with the slippery Streams of silver Trent, that
glides along through the fragrant Fields, to wash the Foundation of her florid
Meadows; so tumbles down, but with a soft and murmuring Noise, from her more
remote and Westerly Fountains. Thus Trent slides along through diversified
Mixtures, and various Soils, (besides polite and glittering Sands) amalgamiz'd
with marly Oakry Earths, Alabaster Rocks, red and discolored Clays, and
polished Pavements of transparent Stones. So that from the West, with a strong
and swift Current, Trent drinks up the torpid surly Sow that floats near the
Walls of the Town of Stafford. And then the timorous Tame falls in, that glides
below the Town of Tamworth: the silent Dove also, that melts the smiling Banks
of Tidbury, mingles her Streams with Trent below Monk's Bridge. And the resolute
Darwin that salutes the Ports of Derby, falls into Trent below Wilden-Ferry. So
the sullen Soar that leads through Leicester, glides into Trent near to Red
Hill. Besides, the little Leen, whose limpid Streams wash the beautiful Rocks
and the Shores of Nottingham, she also pays Tribute at Trent-Bridge, and the
smooth faced Snite that scours the Vale of Belvoir, slides into Trent near the
sandy Foundations of Newark. But nearer the Marshes falls in the Merial; so
does the Idle in the Isle of Axholm. The portable Streams of Owse also salute
the Torrents of Trent, before her espousals with the spacious Humber; for till
then Trent retains her Original Name, notwithstanding the various and
complicated mixture of Streams, which are many more that glide into Trent, and
would swell my Volume if but to name them.


Th. If they be nameless, let them alone; and proceed if you please with the
Corporation of Newark.


Ar. Newark, you may see her Ancient Ports stoop with Age, and her Bulwarks lie
buried in sandy Earth, and amalgamiz'd together with the surface of the Soil,
whose Banks are saluted with the Torrents of Trent, and whose sandy
Foundations, and cultivated Fields sweetened with the Fragrances of her Florid
Meadows, adorn the North; but most pleasant and delectable Pastures adorn the
East, whilst her Southern Fields are filled with the Treasures of Corn; besides
the Fertility of the Flourishing Vale of Belvoir supplies her Granaries; as her
Western fragrant Meadows reach up to Nottingham. So that upon the matter this
Town of Newark (but not Noahs-Ark) is besieged with Plenty.

In the Center of this Town is an exact Pavement, Quadrangular, Regular,
Uniform and Spacious; and in the Center of this Center stands a Market-house,
piazza'd or bolstred up with Wooden Props, commoded with a Roof of Lead and
Tile; but the general scope of this fair Pavement requires a more exact method
of Pen than mine is, to describe it. For that end I proceed to some other
particulars, as their Gates; because when to consider that this Town of Newark
(to my Observation) has but one fair Street, which is called by the Name of
Todman-Street; but the Gates are Miln-gate, Middle-gate, Kirk-gate,
Castle-gate, Nor-gate, Appleton-gate, Barnby-gate, Bolderton-gate and
Carter-gate. There is also Beamont-Cross, Potter-Dike, Hell-end, and
Cotes-Bridg.

From the South-West end of this Maiden Garrison, stood the Queen's Sconce,
facing the Trent, but the King's Sconce (or Sconce Royal) was to the Eastward.
So that the whole Town seemed almost Invincible, (as it was Defensible) because
so well defended with Men, Arms, Ammunition and Artillery, besides such deep
Grafts, Bastions, Horns, Half-Moons, Counter-scarps, Redoubts, Pit-falls, and
an impregnable Line of Sadd and Turff, palizadoed and stockaded, and every Fort
so furnished with great Guns and Cannon, that this bulky Bulwark of Newark
represented to the Besiegers but one entire Sconce; and the two Royal Forts,
the formidable Flankers: Nor was there a Tree to hinder her prospect.

At the North end of Newark, supervising the Trent, (and her redolent Meadows)
stands to this Day the Relics and Ruins of a fair Castle, whose solid
Foundations were cemented with Stone; and all the Walls, Buttresses and
Battlements with the same Material; whose imbellished Front overlooked the
fragrant Meadows of Trent, and was the last reception for King John; who after
his return from Swinsted-Abby (where the Monk poisoned him) lodged within the
Portals of this fair Palace. There it was that he sealed the Decrees of Death
that compelled him to take leave of the World. Another Curiosity is their
Collegiate Church, beautified and garnished with fair Freestone. The Quire or
Body, and the Isles, very large and spacious; the Roof covered all over with
Lead, but the Broach and Tower excels in height, because to vie with most
Parochial Churches in England. This Maiden Garrison had her Ports guarded with
Artillery (as above expressed) and was made equal in success with the most
fortunate Garrisons relating to the Royal Interest.

Here are four Fairs quarterly proclaimed every Year by the Mayor and Aldermen
of the Town of Newark; besides the Weak-day Market, and a running Trade with
the Country round about them. From the North come those large and fair fronted
Cattle, that fill Newark Folds; and on Wednesday every Week their Market is
duly observed, where you may see this large Pavement as 'twere overspread and
crowded with Corn, and the Shambles, as any Market in the County, furnished
with Flesh: Besides in the very front of this general Exchange, the Stalls are
as well burdened with Fish. Moreover, Fowl, with Fruits, and many other
Entertainments, they have in abundance. But now I think it high time to
relinquish the Ports of Newark, to scale the famous Ascents of Trent, whose
generous Streams invite us Westward.


Th. This Corporation (I perceive) by your relation, has been a Fortress almost
impregnable.


Ar. There was none beyond it Northward, and I Am sure Southward there was none
comparable to it. So that above and beneath this Town of Newark, as we ride
along, you may observe mighty blough Banks, and incomparable Deeps, with
pleasant slaty and secure Fords, polished with Gravel, and enameled with Sand;
but in some other parts, you shall observe but little disproportion betwixt the
Surface of Earth, and the Level of Trent; when on a sudden again, some knotty
Coagulum of incrustated Earth (sometimes Rocky and sometimes Marley) steps up
to secure the Continent, and rebuke her swelling murmuring Streams, seemingly
discontent to leave the amorous Shores in their more rapid and violent
precipitation.


Th. What Town call you this, about some two Miles from Newark?


Ar. This is Farnton, which fares very well from the benevolent Breasts and
amorous Arms of Trent; whose Shores are saluted with her silent Streams, as her
Meadows are enriched with the sovereign Soil of Trent, that makes glad her
Inhabitants. So that from Farnton about a Mile or two stands Stoak in a sweet
Soil, whose Banks and shady Bowers are perpetually bathed with the solitary
gliding Streams of Trent, that smile on her florid Fields, whilst the beautiful
fragrant Meadows are constantly courted with soft Salutes and Embracements from
the mild and moderate Streams of our Western Fountain.


Th. What a pleasant part of a Country is this!


Ar. Pleasant do you say! do but propound what Pleasure is, and see if any
place in England excels it. This is the place that is called Hazelford-Clift,
from a stately imbellished flourishing Wood, that borders South on the side of
Trent, that climbs up a Rocky and Mountanous Elevation, facing the North, and
the delectable Shades of the Forest of Sherwood; whose beautiful Banks and
delightful Shores, are celebrated to the pleasant Amors of Trent, defended on
the South by the Vale of Belvoir, and guarded from the North by the shady Trees
of the Forest: but her East is refreshed by fragrant Meadows, cultivated
Fields, and delightful Pastures, adorned with most excellent Rills, Rivulets
and Fountains. This is our inamouring Northern Prospect, the Anglers Arcadia,
the greatest Aviary, and the most mellifluous Consort in Nottingham-Shire. Nay,
it is England's Elysium, if Elysium be any where. Of which if any doubt to trace
or find out, it is here to be found, if any where in England; otherwise he may
conclude that Elizium's but a fiction; for if not understood in these fragrant
Fields, pardon me to think, nay I dare to assert it is no where else.


Th. Indeed it is a sweet place, I have never seen the like before; but what
Town is that?


Ar. This Town we call Knieton; it stands yet more West, elevated on a Rocky
Precipice of Albaster, and red Marly Earth, hovering over the Streams of Trent;
and borders on the skirts of the Vale of Belvoir, facing the Forest; and
Bridgeford lies much on the same Level, West South-West, guarded with Rocks and
stately Mountains, opposite as I take it to the Inundations of Trent. But the
Town of Gunthorp stands directly North, blessed with flourishing and florid
Meadows; whose Fragrancy oftimes perfumes the Shores, as Trent's proud Waves
besprinkle her Sands. Shelford you may see inclines yet more Westward, whose
Foundations I have considered lie so low and flat, that they level the very
Surface of Trent; but Burton and Bulcoat stand North of her Ruins, and are
shaded by the flourishing Trees of the Forest.


Th. What have we here?


Ar. Gedlin and Carleton, these lie yet more West, and incline, if I mistake
not, two Points to the Northward; but the Palace of Holm-peirpoint adorns the
South: From whose beautiful Elevations we discover the Battlements, and some
part of the Situations of famous Nottingham; whose odoriferous Gardens perfume
the Air; and whose florid Fields, and fragrant Meadows, glut the Scickle, and
satiate the Sith.


Th. Grant my Allowances, and I Will give you my Opinion; and not stick to tell
you, that Trent surpasses Tagus, notwithstanding the boast of her Golden
Sands; whose transparent and translucid Streams, strike deep Impressions, and
ravishing refreshing Resentments, inviting the Contemplative Angler to consider
the plenty, and the great variety that are daily dragged forth out of her
bountiful and well furnished Streams, enough one would think to cause
Admiration, which formerly I could never believe: But now I Am convinced beyond
opposition.


Ar. Nay it is true, and I can tell you more; that Speed and Cambden, both of
Authentic Authority, will also tell you, that the swelling breasts of admired
Trent, hourly relieve thirty sorts of Fish; and that her Arms embrace as many
Market Towns, and as many Castles are implanted on her cultivated Suburbs; and
that thirty Rivers also mingle themselves with Trent's more resolute and sturdy
Streams, and with the loss only of their Virgin Names: Which report if any one
question it, you shall find recorded in Voluminous History. But had they
practically and experimentally consulted Trent, as my self (and some others)
have done, they had without dispute met with more variety of Fish than they
inserted, or modestly included in their public Impressions.


Th. That Is strange; pray untie the knot.


Ar. What great difficulty is it, think you, to prove that, that every Angler
frequently experiments, if he but take pains to examine her Fords, or seriously
peruses this Catalogue of Fish; where he shall find twenty two sorts of edible
Fish that daily accost the Silver Streams of Trent. Now the rest you are to
consider, especially some of them are never to be dealt with by the trembling
Rod, nor the feeble force of a slender Line. Such Fish, I must confess, as are
more than ordinarily resolute, are doomed to die by the Law of the noosy Net.


Th. You have the Catalogue I presume, pray accommodate me with it.


Ar. That I Will freely do. Here --


Hold forth your hand, and take this little Book;
And when you fish, on your Directions look;
Till Theory speak you Master, then you may
Complete your self in Practicks day by day.
So understand the various change and season,
How to catch Fish, and after give your reason.
There Is few that fish these Streams know all the Fish
The Trent affords to Anglers, and their Dish:
Here Is Pickrel, Barbel, Burbolt, Rud and Roach,
Graylin, Flounder, Cheven, Perch and Loach,
Bream and Tench, Carp and Gudgeon, Dace and Ruff,
Eel, Lampre, Bleak, Minue, some Silk, some Stuff.
Twenty in number I have here expressed,
Some daily taken; season for the rest.
There yet remain two nobler sorts behind,
To make them twenty two; but then their kind
Are Trout and Salmon, those are Fish that waste
In time of Travel, besides they lose their Taste
And sweet Complexion; chiefly at such time
When out of Season; what remains in prime
Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn flees:
The blooming Leaf drops from the fading Trees.
Nature appropriates each thing to its kind,
As well in Fish as Flesh, this Truth we find
By daily Observation; provide we
Search but the Records, and the Mystery
Of Mother Art, by Nature first instructed,
From whence all finite beings are producted.
Th. Now I Am convinced.


Ar. Then it is your duty to labor to convince others.


Th. So I will, if the Anglers Catalogue can do it.


Ar. And if that will not do it, let it be undone: However it may serve some
Iuniors for Diversion.


Th. Ay, and Seniors too, had we but your Additional Supplement of the residue
of Fish; which being wanting, will in my Opinion render the residue of your
Discoveries imperfect.


Ar. That I resolve against, though we drag them forth from their holds and
fastnesses by violence. And first, I Will begin with the Sturgeon, then the Shad,
the Porposs, the Congar, Lampern, Fluke, the Aromatic Smelt, Sandeel,
Craw-Fish, Bulhead, and that little supernumerary the Bant or Stittlebag; which
needs no Net to drag him out.


Th. Nor an Arithmetician to sum them up, for my Calculation compleats them to
thirty three; besides some Foreigners, to most unintelligible. Now as we trace
the beautiful Banks, and the amorous Shores of famous Trent, that invites to
Solitudes and Experience, we may mingle Rewards among our Recreations, and
sweeten our Labors and Industry with Divine Contemplation; a Study the
indigent World is ignorant of. What are these! the stupendous Fabrics of
Nottingham, whose Foundations are laid in Rocky Sand, and so firmly rivited
into the Bowels of the Earth, that neither Age nor Time can hardly decay them?
And was this that impregnable Castle, elevated on a Rock, and lifted up so high
as to storm the Air, and supervise the bordering Inhabitants that dwell in the
florid Vale of Belvoir? Was this that great Ornament that adorned the Country,
that sleeps now in dust?


Ar. These are the Relics of that famous Antiquity, where Art and Industry
discovered themselves inseparable Companions. Let us approach her beautiful
Ports, enriched with three Parish Churches; but one of them of late was torn in
pieces with Martial Treats. But to speak the Truth, it was by provocation: For
the Pulpit you must know vied with the Peerage for Superiority; and that made
the Soldiers commit Sacrilege, and undress this beautiful Relick, that lies
now in silence, and hudled in ashes becomes her own Sepulcher. Now the
Cellerage in these Situations of Nottingham, are the most commodious that I
know in England; whose descents you may trace twenty or thirty Foot from the
surface of the Soil. But there are other Cellars that almost court Day, where
they make their Malt, and lodge Commodities either for a Domestic or Foreign
Trade. For so great is the Plenty she draws from the breasts of the Country,
that were she wanting in her self, they would want themselves in wanting her.
Another Rarity it behooves the Reader to observe; and that is, upon examination
her Wells will be found as deep, if not in some places deeper, than their
Cellars. Yet amongst all her stately Imbellishments, we petrole as I remember
but two fair Streets; the rest are Gates, Allies, Rows, Lanes, Marshes, etc.
But the Prospect as we advance, presents to the South, and the generous Streams
of Silver Trent, directing to the Leen-Bridg, facing the hollow Stone; or
rather, as I may term them, habitable Rocks, through which we ascend to consult
those splendid Inhabitants, that live under a well-polished Government, and
those other Circumstantials of Civility and Ingenuity.

Now this Avenue of Fishergate, we leave on our right hand; and that on our
left, is the Marshes, as we ascend to climb up the hollow Stone, and mount the
Elevations of a large and spacious Street, called the High Pavement: but
Stony-Street and Pepper-Street, are all the Streets in Nottingham. The rest are
either Lanes or Gates: as Mary-Gate, Pilcher-Gate, Fletcher-Gate, Well-Gate,
Boyard-Lane, Swinegreen, Saint-Iones's, and Hockly in the Hole, etc. But the
Weekday Shambles we leave on our right hand; and on our left, those sandy
Foundations that face the South; whose Skirts are moistened with the generous
Leen, and there live the Tanners, Tawyers, Fell-mongers, Parchment and
Vellum-dressers, besides the Glutiners, that dwell in Houses contiguous with
the Rocks; but the Buildings are not underground, though stooping so low as to
level some part of the very surface, refreshed with fragrant Aromas, sent from
the florid Meadows of Trent. But this Terra Nova, or Terra Incognita, they
generally call it the Narrow-Marsh.


Th. Whereabouts are we now?


Ar. Now we descend to the lower Pavement, by dividing the Town Hall from the
Leaden Well, near unto which the Weekday Cross is frequently crowded with
Country Curiosities: but advancing forward in a direct line, we encounter the
Fronteers of Castle-gate, and leave the broad Marsh, and Grayfrier-gate on our
left hand. Toward the upper end of which, and not far from Hungate, stood the
Imbellishments of Nicholas Church, associating with some inconsiderable Lanes,
Allies and Caves; but inclining yet more Westward, and nearer the Castle,
remain the Bogholes, and the Brewhouse-yard. But I forgot to tell you, that in
the very Center, or Division of the Pavement, there stands a Bow (or a fair
Port) opposite to Bridle-smith-Gate; adjoining to which, is Girdle-smith-Gate;
and next unto that, is Peter-Gate, a derivative from the Church that fronts the
West Angle, and directs into Hungate. But presupposing your Station at the
North end of Bridle-smith-Gate; immediately then you face Hen-Cross, which in a
direct line leads on to Cow-lane-Bar; but if otherwise you incline to the Left,
then you leave the Saturday Shambles, the Fruiterers and the Cage on your right
Hand, and Peck-lane that directs to Peter's Church, on your left; but if
pointing your Passage toward the Western Angle, you then enter the Sands, and
also the Sheep-Market, which is commonly kept upon Timber-hill.

Now advancing more Westward, you enter the Friars, but on the left Hand of
your Entrance, is Wheeler-gate; and on your Right, is the Beast-market that
fronts the Long-Row, into which, and from the Skirts of the Forest, there
presents a small Avenue, some call it Sheep-lane; opposite to which is Saint
Iohn's-Lane, but that descends in a direct Line, either from the Castle, or
Boston-Bridg; so that the Ornament, Gaity and Beauty, is the Long-Row. Beauty
did I say? all the Town is a Beauty, if you consider her stately Buildings. Now
as you pass through the Long-Row, it directs to Bar-gate. On the left Hand of
whose ruinous Antiquities, and upon a rising Elevation of Ground, the Standard
Royal was advanced by Charles the First, near to the Relics and Remains of
that sumptuous Castle, not far from the obscurements of Mortimer's-hole. I must
confess there needs no great Noise to trumpet the Fame of this Non-such
Nottingham, whose plenty, if I mistake not, fills every neighboring County;
and whose generous Breasts recruit not only Travelers and Foreigners, but send
supplies to all the Villages that border about her; whose Granaries commode the
British Continent; and whose liberality extended to adjacent Parts, interprets
Nottingham to be no Town, but rather the inland Mart and Storehouse of
Great Britain.


Th. But how will the Reader descant upon all these eminent Encomiums?


Ar. It matters not a rush how any Man resents it, since Nottingham of it self
so well deserves it. For if with freedom I may declare my own Opinion, I must
confess my Fancy too flatulent, my Strain too torpid, my Pen not elegant, nor
my Style polite enough to illustrate the Beauty of such stately Inbellishments,
the admired Subject of every Man's Praise; which more worthily deserves the
Applause of an ingenious Historiographer, rather than the Character of so weak
a Surveyer. However, I have done what I was able to do, and shall now leave the
Scenes for some other to decipher, that is more intelligible, and capable to
perform such a Work than my self. Yet give me leave once again to drive the
Nail a little further; when to evince the Dissatisfied that Nottingham (as
prenoted) is no Town, but rather a beautiful and imbellish'd Seraglio, where
every Street, nay every Port, represents as it were the new Face of a Court.


Th. Or a Comet.


Ar. Then what if I call it our Northern Star, to influence and reflect on the
Southern Elevations, and because being blessed with the Blessings of Trade and
Fertility; but could I say she lived without the Vanity of Prodigality, then
would I style her a Virtue as well as a Beauty; where Art and Invention have
supplies and encouragement; and where new Fabrics are hourly lifted up into
the ambient Air. So that a Man would think her to sprout and vegetate, by the
daily Progress she makes in her Buildings. So that when you come to fee her
Arbours and Aviaries, so naturally dressed up in the Shades of the Forest, and
perfumed with Fragrancies from the redolent Meadows of Trent; besides the
pleasant Prospect it has into the cultivated Fields in the fruitful Vale of
Belvoir, then would you say that Nottingham is the Magazine for Cheshire and
Lancashire; and the daily supply of those Mountainous Parts in the Peak of
Derby-shire. These are those Ports, where the Angler (and Ingenious) never yet
entered without sober Accommodation, let us therefore first consult the
Virtuoso's of the Rod; afterward sweeten our Ears with Rhetorique from Apollo.


Th. As you have given us a fair and large Character of Nottingham, so have you
been as copious in your practical Experiments of Angling, and brought to Test
the undeniable Assertions of Truth, not imaginary Fragments, nor Romantic
Fictions, stolen or suggested by plundring Plagiaries. Now every one knows that
Ignorance emulates Art; and Impiety above all things abominates Devotion.
Tradition also that truckles under Forms, and Hypocrisy and Flattery are Time's
Apostates: But Science and Experience are the confirmation of Eyesight; and
Truth the Standard of Divine Speculation. By these we proportion the Measures
of Virtue, which is found by him that treads the Tracks of Wisdom, and wades
through the profound Depths of Patience: for as he that devotes himself to a
solitary Life, lives a Life most congruous to Devotion; so he that devotes
himself to Piety, lives a Life analogous to Contemplation.

For what signifies the Court, but to remonstrate the Prince his Magnificence;
and the Palace, but to heighten his Enjoyments? On the other hand, where
Humility is celebrated to Piety; there Content dwells everywhere in an humble
Breast; and Humility and Penitency, like Links concatinate, content themselves
with the garb of a Cottage. Thus we may read the State of the World: but that
which I always approved of as the best State, was to seek the Blessings of
Content in every Condition. Then welcome Woods, Rocks, Rivers, Groves,
Rivulets; nay it is possible the very Shades of a Forest, in some measure answer
to the Comforts of Life; and Life answers to the Ends of the great Creator.
Consider therefore that the Soul's great Diadem is Christ; and Christ, by
Wisdom and Sanctification every Christian knows, is God. And who but God
created this stupendous Creation, and dressed up this imbelish'd Fabric of
Heaven and Earth, when he made the Majesty of his Invisibility visible, and
placed Man in this sublunar Orb, to conduct and manage his Fellow Creatures.
But Man imprudently transgressing, in not answering the glorious Ends of his
Divine Creation, in Obedience to the Commands of the Sovereign Decrees of God,
the Almighty discharged him the Sovereignty of Government; so exiled him from
the glorious Sunshine of Paradise. Of whom if you please, let us have an
account. But I wonder at one thing, to me it is a Paradox.


Ar. What Is that?


Th. You writ your Book in 58, and spread the Net to 85.


Ar. What if I do; I lived in the Reign of five Kings, and in the Time of four
great Worthies.


Th. Was O. P. one?


Ar. I leave that Bone for you to pick. But this I assert, that great English
Hero was exemplary in Piety, eminent in Policy, prudent in Conduct, magnanimous
in Courage, indefatigable in Vigilance, industriously laborious in Watchings,
Heroic in Enterprise, constant in Resolution, successful in War; one that
never wanted a Presence of Mind in the greatest Difficulties; all the World
owns him for a great General, that influenced all Europe, gave Laws to all
neighboring Nations, and disciplined France with English Arms.


Th. These are great Encomiums. Was the Lord R. one?


Ar. That great Man of Worth and Honor, was truly Virtuous; the Patriot of his
Country, and the Glory of the Court, beloved of the People, and a lover of
Piety; who left Legacies of Love to the surviving Natives, when he sealed his
Death with noble English Blood.


Th. Was Col. A. S. one?


Ar. That great Soul was too great for the World, whose Life in a manner was a
continued Death, signified by those Trophies of War he carried about him. He
died but to teach his Countrymen the easy Methods of honorable Dying, to the
astonishment of Mankind, and foreign Ambassadors.


Th. Was Alderman C. one?


Ar. That brave and worthy Citizen, to his eternal Praise, sealed London's
Magna Chart a with a Christian Exit, and a Voice from Heaven. Therefore put no
more questions, for the Aenigma is explained, but begin where you left off, so
let us conclude.


Th. Then I Will only desire a Description of Man.


Arnoldus his Meditation.
Ar. Adam as an Angel in the Shades of Paradise, typified his Creator: then it
was that this mortal State seemed Immortal; and Man, because a Signature of
this admirable Creation, was made to live by that Life that made him; for it
was the Will of the Supreamest that made him, to shine a Ray of the Majesty
upon him, and generate in him the glorious beauteous Ray of Himself. But this
was done when the Divine Majesty made Man absolute Lord, and commissioned him
Conduct over all the Creatures. So that Adam was now a Divine Substitute,
because the Divinity had divinely inspired him, and stamped the Impress of his
Royal Signet upon him, the lively Emblem and Character of Himself; whereby to
demonstrate in him a Sovereign Power over all the Families of Creatures that
God had made, and by Wisdom blessed in this stupendous Creation. So that you
may read, Adam was made in the Likeness of his Maker; but he begot in his own
Likeness.

This was once the blessed State of Adam, and a regenerate State (to be born
again in Spirit) is the same with us now: for Primitive Purity can never be
blotted out by National Impiety. Nor shall Age, nor Time, nor Death it self
vacate the Luster and Glory of Christianity: for as the Donation of Purity is
the Royal Act of him that is pure, and lives for ever; so the Piety of
Christianity shall outlive all Ages, to the utmost Limit and Period of Time.
Where note, the Primitive Times have lived till now; and that that begot Time
in the Bosom of Eternity, is Christ in us the Hope of Glory. Why then do
Christians violate their Faith? Does it become us to enslave it by Lust? A
proud Faith is as great a Contradiction, as an humble Devil. The glorious Hope
we have of Paradise, incites and invites Believers to the Duty of Repentance;
and Repentance leads on to a humble Submission, to cruciate our selves and this
temporal State, that naturally resigns upon every Assault of Death; for all
complicated Elements melt into Obscurity.

Shall the Clay rebel against the Potter that moulds it? Shall Man resist his
Maker that made him? Shall the Vice of the Times vote against Heaven? and
Impiety provoke us to mutiny against the Deity? Must we learn no Language but
Oaths and Imprecations? and denounce no Dialect but the Rhetoric of Hell? Can
no bounds be put to luxurious Ambition? nor any Limit to the impudent Impostor?
who has not considered the Body sometimes diseased, and how Death stands ready
to blot out the Character of Life? so that if ill Symptoms but happen to invade
us, the Grave immediately stands gaping to devour us. Nor can our Limbs any
sooner be touched with the Cold and icie Finger of Death, but our vital Fires
begin all to extinguish; and the glorious shining Sparks of Life look languid
and dim; and so by degrees lose their sparkling Luster. Then it is that the
natural Artifice of Men and Means suddenly forsake us, and the secret
Subtilties of our deceitful Hearts basely and cowardly renounce and desert us.

And then it is, that our truckling Faith prostrates a false Heart on the cold
and frozen Altar of Despair, which formerly was the common Factorage, and
Receptable of impure Flames, where we used to offer up adulterated Sacrifices,
with impious Adorations, as the Athenians did to unknown Gods, prophetically
Prognosticating our merited Destruction. So that now in a Clod, or lump of
Clay, the luster of Life is silently sealed up, and secretly conveyed to the
Sepulchers of Death; and because translated from the beauteous Creation, is
made to cease from a natural State, and embrace Corruption, and the putrid
Grave in eternal silence; where we shall never see Light nor Day any more, nor
with Sorrow or Reluctance look back upon the anguish and anxiety of those we
formerly persecuted by unjust Sentences; when as Judges we sat and perverted
Judgment, yet would seem to appear as Angels of Light. But stripped and stark
naked the World now inspects us, and all those Graces that naturally adorned
us, discover themselves but personal Deformities. So that Disease finds as
little difficulty to attempt us, as Death to encounter and overcome us. For
have not our sensual Guards all declined us, and the Arguments of Sense and
Reason revolted from us? Every Instrument and Organ has reclaimed its natural
Function, whereby we perceive our selves deserted by the active shining Motions
of Life; and doomed to Death by the Law of Sin, we subscribe to the fatal
Decrees of Mortality.

O fatal flattering Impiety, where is all those specious Pretenses of Purity
that linked and entailed our suborned Inclinations to the gaudy Temptations of
luxurious Honor? What if every Man had the Wealth of a Monarch, and as great
as Alexander in Empire and Dominion; and suppose his Domestics as numerous as
the World, yet Death would arrest him, and send him Summons to appear before
Heaven's high Tribunal, where he must answer for himself, and not another for
him; whilst Conscience, as a bold and daring Accuser, will accuse him for the
Deeds done here in the Body. So that as our Work was here upon Earth, such also
will be our Reward in Heaven. But how sad will it be, when to behold the
Portals of the New Jerusalem firmly bolted and barrocaded against us; when to
hear the dreadful and irrevocable Sentence of eternal Excommunication pass upon
us, to be utterly secluded Society with the Saints, and denied Community with
the blessed Angels, that perpetually triumph with Seraphick Hallelujahs, as the
Seraphims and Cherubims with heavenly Ejaculations, whilst we are made to grope
in Darkness unutterable, and to lament there the Impiety of Life; and debarred
Repentance after Death, because to reject it when proffred unto us: for in the
Grave there is no Contrition; nor after Judgment is there any Revocation.

This is a sad and deplorable Sentence, beyond the reach of Sorrow to
contemplate: for if but to consider the Janglings in Hell, and the murmuring
Complaints of the Damned in Torments, that belch out Blasphemies to confirm
their Impieties; and by spiritual Pride profane the Beauty of Holiness; and
would, if possible, corrupt the Creation, prostituting to Idols, and the Ides
of Time; and as much as in them lies, pervert and poison the Sacred Oracles of
Judgment and Justice. But what Tongue can express the glorious Raptures, and
beatifical Visions the Saints enjoy, with the Seraphick Harmony of the blessed
Hierarchy; whilst Penitents pass by the Gates of Hell, to the heavenly
triumphant Joys of Eternity.

O what Love so convincing and stupendously manifest, as a Savior to die for
unregenerate Sinners! to affix himself to the Cross of Death, to fasten our
Souls to Eternal Life! to load his Body with the Burden of Sin, to purchase for
Sinners the Seal of Redemption! This is that great and sublime Elixir, that
transmutes our Nature into Divinity, Time into Eternity, and our Souls into
Himself; from which supereminent Heavenly State, there is no relaxation, but an
entire Unity and Community with God, for ever and ever to all Eternity. For as
Light is inseparable from it self, nor can Darkness co-mingle or incorporate
with it; such is the Soul that is truly sanctified and sprinkled with the Blood
of this Miracle of Mercy, that never for the future can be separated from its
Savior: but as Sin hates the Light, because the Light discovers its Darkness;
so Light, because it is the Standard of Truth, not only discovers but dissipates
the Darkness. The Lamb of God is the Light of the World, that for ever shines,
and for ever frees the penitent Soul from the Shades of Darkness. How great
therefore must that Light be, that enlightneth the World, and every Man that
comes into the World?

Now the true State of Felicity is only attainable by Faith in Christ; and
Faith directs to the Portals of Humility; Humility to Piety; and Piety leads on
to the Duties of Charity, by a religious resignation of our inglorious Will, to
the Glory of his Will that bore our Burden of Sin on the Cross. Here let us
sigh down, if possible, the Sins of the Age, as Christ by the virtue of his
pure Divinity depressed those Mountains of Sin in the World: then in obedience
to this great Example, let us cruciate our selves, the better to enable us to
triumph over Death: for to conquer Self, forces the Devil to recoil; and to
render the Vanities of this World contemptible, is to lead Hell and Captivity
captive; which none but Christ can do, and has done: yet ought we to imitate
our Leader, as true Volunteers of the Cross, if we hope to embrace the Royal
Sanctions of him that bore his Cross in a bloody Shower, for the Redemption of
Mankind. This I recommend to the Christian Reader that follows the Lamb the
Captain of our Salvation.


Th. By this most excellent Description of Man, he labors, I perceive, under
great Anxiety, till Christ affix him by his Sovereign Ray of Light, whereby to
illuminate and sublime his immortal Soul into the everlasting Arms of himself,
the glorious Being of his all-glorious Father, where Time shall be no more: for
Time is but the Child of Eternity, as is Generation the Child of Time.
Generation therefore devolves in Time, and Time results in the Arms of
Eternity. But Eternity is the Beam of the Majesty of God, whose Divine Center
is Love essential; and Love is an Attribute so divinely connected to the
infinite Wisdom and Goodness of him that never had beginning, by whom all
things were begot in Time. whereby he made his Invisibility visible, which he
eminently did when he manifested his glorious Inside, by the Excellency and
Beauty of the external Outside of this stupendous and most admirable Creation.


Ar. You have sum'd it up right, and said nothing but Truth; and Truth is the
Alpha and Omega; the Beginning of all Beings, and the End of all Times; the
infinite Invisibility made visible; the immaculate Humanity clothed with
Divinity; the Glory, Beauty and Wisdom of the Father, the beatisical Vision,
the Light of the World that now is, ever was, and for ever and ever will remain
so to be, when Death and Time shall be no more. And now give me leave to
recommend unto you (most worthy your observation) these general Rules for Fish
and Fishing, with Directions also for Baits and Seasons.


Th. Be you my Tutor, and I Will be your Pupil.


The SALMON.
Ar. As the Salmon is a Monarch and King in the Freshes, so he is the ultimate
Result of the Angler's Conquest. This Royal Game (all the Summertime) has his
Residence in the rapid and forcible Streams in Rivers; but the Sea is his
Sanctuary most Months in the Winter: So that a Man may rationally conclude,
without a Parenthesis, that he is always to be found, though not always in
Season. Besides, the Salmon is incident, as other Fish are, to various
Accidents; more especially if we consider the female Fish, who in the Spring
(as other Females do) drops her Eggs (but some call it Spawn) which makes her
infirm: and if it so happen that she lags behind her natural Mate in the fall
of the Leaf, she is then prohibited the benefit of Salt Water to bathe her
Fins, and carry off her slimy Impurities, which is the natural Cause of her
kipperish Infirmity, that alters her delicate Proportion of Body, and blots out
the beautiful Vermilian Stain and sanguin Tincture of Blood, which vividly and
transparently shines through her rubified Gills; so that now she begins to look
languid and pale, her Fins they fag, and her Scales by degrees lose their
natural shining Brightness; as also her regular and well-compos'd Fabric of
Body, looks thin, lean, and discolored: and her Head that grows big, and
disproportionable, as if distempered and invaded with the Rickets; over whose
Chaps hangs a callous Substance, not much unlike to a Falcon's Beak; which
plainly denotes her out of Season, and as plainly as any thing demonstrates her
Kippar.

Now I come to nominate some eminent Rivers in England, that accommodate the
Angler with the Race of Salmon. First therefore I prefer the River Trent,
because of her rapid and Oriental Streams; that never sully themselves, till
arriving near to the Shores of Gainsborough, where Trent often washes her Banks
with the Eagre, so glides immediately into the Arms of Humber. Next unto Trent,
we present you with the translucid glittering Streams of Severn, that not far
from Bristol mingle themselves with the Ocean. Nor shall we omit those torpid
and melancholy Streams of Owse, that gulf themselves into Trent-fall. But of
all Rivers that glide through the cultivated Fields in England, the bountiful,
beautiful, and most illustrious Thames has the Sovereignty of the rest; because
her Streams influence not England only, but all the Banks and Shores in Europe;
and is without Precedent, because of the excellency and delicacy of her Fish,
more especially below Bridge; where the Merchants turn Anglers, and throw their
Lines as far as both Indies, Peru, the Ganges, Mozembique, Barbary, Smirna,
Alexandria, Aleppo, Scandaroon, and all the wealthy Ports in the Universe.
These are the Fish that feast the Nation; otherwise England would be unlike it
self, if unhappily wanting such provident Anglers.

But Scotland has already received a Character of most of her eminent Rivers
and Rivulets, that wash and moisten her sandy Shores; nor have I nominated more
than four Metropolitan Rivers in England, that bathe her fertile and florid
Banks; because having a mind to step into Wales, or the Suburbs of it, to
discover there a singular Curiosity, which probably may puzzle the Opinion of
Artists and others. Now one of these Rivers in called Wye, but the other is
known by the name of Vsk: both which Rivers, as I am told, incorporate
themselves on the Southside of Monmouth. But the reason why I mention these two
eminent Rivers, is only in regard of their various entertainments, by reason
the Salmon there are always in Season; for the one supplies the Defects of the
other. As thus for example; If when to consider Wye flourishes with Salmon,
Vsk as if no River, is rarely discoursed of. On the contrary; when as Vsk sends
her Supplies to the bordering Inhabitants, then is Wye as little as any thing
thought of. By this Contrariety and Diversity of Nature, the Natives may
conclude that Winter and Summer give not only the Season to Salmon, but rather
that they have Laws from the Streams they glide in; or Wales differs from all
the World.

The next thing that falls under the Anglers Consideration, is the Bait or
Charm for the Royal Race of Salmon; which I reduce under the Classis of two
generals, viz. the Fly for Frolic, to flourish and sport on the surface of the
Streams; and the Ground-bait for Diversion, when designing to drag at the
bottom. But what if I direct you a central way, that in my Opinion upon
approved Practice will entice him ashore in Mid-water. Now if the Angler design
that for his exercise, (in such case) let him make provision of fair and large
Minews, small Gudgeons, or a diminutive Dace, (with the artificial use of the
Swivel to flourish his Bait) the Brightness or Gloominess of the Day
considered: But if the Ground-bait be intended, which always succeeds best in
discolored Waters; then in such case, prepare for him a wellscoured Lob-worm,
or knotted Dew-worm, dragged forth of the Forest, or any other sterril or barren
Soil, which as soon as any thing (with dextrous management) will compel him
ashore though it cost him his Life. I write from Experience, for I am not
unacquainted with the multiform variety of terrene Animals; as you may read
more at large in my following Appendix: more especially of those Worms, that
are taken and dragged forth out of a hard and skirrous Earth, which ought to be
well depurated (or scoured) two or three days in the finest, cleanest, and
sweetest Moss that fastens it self to the root of the Ash-tree; sprinkling it
first with new and sweet Ale; afterward remember to squeeze it forth, so
operate like an Artist: but that which is better, and more concordant to my
approbation, is fleeted Cream, from the benevolence of the Dairy; which to
admiration makes your Worm become viscous and tough; and that which yet is more
to be admired, they also become bright, and almost transparent: for that end I
counsel and advise the Angler, when designing to approach the Deeps for
Diversion, that he take some always with him to heighten his Exercise, or
influence and inamour his Game. It is not so difficult to put some in a Box
made of Wood called Lignum Vitae, perforated with Holes, besmearing or
anointing it over first with the Chemical Oil of Bays, Sulphur, Barbados Tar,
Ivy, Cornu-Cervi; or indeed almost any other Oil that has but a strong and
foetid Empyruma, will serve well enough, where the Oil of Oesprey is generally
wanting.

With these requisite Circumstantials we approach the Deeps, and the strongest
Descents and Falls in the stiffest Streams; the like we do in Eddies, and turns
in back-Waters; for the Salmon you must know loves a solitary Shade. Arm well
be sure, and fish as fine as you can, ( Isaac Owldam used to fish with but
three Hairs at Hook) and forget not the Swivel, as above precautioned; and the
running Line be sure you remember. Stand close I advise you, and keep your
distance, especially when approaching the rapid Fords, because there, for the
most part, the Streams run clear, and you with design come on purpose to
destroy him; as it is probable you may, provided your Art, Skill and Ingenuity
do but serve to manage so eminent an Encounter. Now give me leave but to step
from the Waterside to numerate and describe the various Brood of Salmon; so to
distinguish them according to Mode, or as some will have it, the Custom of the
Country. Where note, in the South they call him Samlet; but if you step to the
West, he is better known there by the name of Skeggar; when in the East they
avow him Penk; but to the Northward, Brood and Locksper, so from thence to a
Tecon; then to a Salmon.

Now to recreate with the Fly, (meaning the Artificial) that is another sort of
Exercise for the Angler's Diversion; which ought to be considered, and diversely
consulted, in regard of so great variety of Form, Luster, Beauty and
Proportion. For that end let me advise you, that the ground of your Fly be for
the most part obscure, of a gloomy, dark and dusky Complexion; fashioned with
Tofts of Bears-Hair, blackish or brownish discolored Wool, interwoven
sometimes with Peacocks Feathers, at otherwhiles lap'd about with Gray, Red,
Yellow, Green, or Bluish Silk, simple Colors, or Colors sometimes
intermingled. For instance, Black and Yellow represent the Wasp or Hornet; and
a promiscuous Brown the flesh Fly; so of the rest. For that end consult the
Humor of the Fish, who to humor your Exercise puts himself out of Humor,
chiefly and principally when he parts with his Life. These requisite
Precautions ought to be the study of every studious and ingenious Angler,
together with the knowledge of Time and Season, when to resort to the River for
Recreation. The next thing necessary is the shape of your Rod, which ought in
all respects to represent the Rush in its growth; for that end we call it
Rushgrown: and be sure it be straight and plient. Your Line also that must be
accurate and exactly taper'd; your Hook well compassed, well pointed, and well
barbed: and be mindful that your Shank exceed not in length; I mean not so long
as when you drag with the Ground-Bait. Nor is it proper for the Artist to court
a Stream, except he be always provided of his dubbing Bag, wherein are
contained all sorts of Thrums, Threads, Silks, Moccado-Ends, Silver and Gold
Twist; which are of excellent use to adorn your Fly, and in a great measure
quicken the sight of your Game; provided the Day be promiscuous and dark,
occasioned by smooty and discolored Clouds.

Now should I enumerate the multiform variety of Animals, the various Colors
and Proportion of Infects, with the diversity of Flies, it would but redouble
my Labor and Trouble; since already I have discoursed them in another place;
where the Artist also, if he be ingenious, may consult and examine the Methods
of Experiments, so make himself Master of this solitary Mystery: otherwise let
him remain silent among Proficients, and a professed Ignoramus among
Practitioners. And among the variety of your Fly-adventurers, remember the
Hackle, or the Fly substitute, formed without Wings, and dressed up with the
Feather of a Capon, Pheasant, Partridg, Moccaw, Phlimingo, Paraketa, or the
like, and the Body nothing differing in shape from the Fly, save only in
ruffness, and indigency of Wings. Another necessary Observation, is the Wing of
your Fly, which ought to proceed from the Teal, Heron; Malard, or Faulcon. The
Pinion and Wing thereof ought to lie close, and so snug as to carry the Point
exactly downward. But the last thing material is, the moderate Stroke; which
always proves Mortal, and best succeeds if used without Violence: the Line
also, keep that straight as occasion requires, so that nothing be remiss, nor
any thing wanting; and the necessity of the Wheel be sure you remember.

The Salmon loves those rapid Rivers, where
The craggy Rocks above the Streams appear.
In deepest Waters, and in strongest Streams
He lives; yet like a Martyr sometimes dies in flames.

The TROVT.
I have already told you that the Salmon is King in the Freshes: And now I must
tell you that the Princely Trout has his residence and principality in the same
fluctuating Element, partaking very much of the Nature of Salmon, admiring
stiff and rapid Streams in the Vernon Ingress; but he accosts the solitary
Deeps most Months in the Winter. In the Spring, you shall observe this active
Animal scud to the Fords, where he flutters his Fins at every silly Fly; for
that is his Rendezvous, and there you will find him, picking and gliding against
Stones in the Bottom, to scour off, if possible, the slimy Substance and Scurf
from his sickly Sides; frequently occasioned through want of Motion. So that
when the Sun vegetates and invigorates the Creation, then is he invigorated
with Motion and Activity, which argues a very great and unpardonable Absurdity
in the ignorant and incredulous Angler, to fancy that Peregrination debilitates
and weakens him; when apparently it adds an additional Strength* not well
considering they were only told so; or peradventure they had read it in some
printed Book, concluding from thence an Infallibility in the Press.

But as I intend not to burden you with Circumlocutions, for brevity sake, I
shall range the Trout under the consideration of the first Classis of Fish. For
that end, I must signalize his Vivacity and Vigor, his Activity and Courage,
how naturally they spring from the Nature of this Fish, till Age or Accident
indispose and deprive him, not only of Activity, but of natural Ability; who
struggles with himself to outdo Motion, and outlive, if possible, the Law of
his Life. So that to prohibit him Travel, you totally destroy him; since he is
a Fish that cannot live under Confinement. And thus it happens to the Race of
Salmon, for Nature's Laws are alike to both. In the Summer's Solstice he
accosts the Fords, making inspection and inquisition after the variety of
Emmits and Insects, hovering his Fins in every murmuring purling Stream in
Rivers and Rivulets, which not only puts a Spur to the Angler's Exercise, but
his Expectation also: and this, if any thing* is the Angler's Elysium; which I
shall not insist upon here, because having enlarged upon it sufficiently
already. In this place I shall only treat of the Ground-bait; which most
commonly is a knotted or budled Dew-worm; much of the Nature and Kind of the
former, but not usually so large as that we procure for the Salmon.

Now as every Angler concludes the Trout a delicate Fish for Diversion, so
others, as Artists, consult him a delicious Entertainment. But the Trout to
entertain himself, as eagerly sucks in a well-scour'd Red-worm, as the
wide-mouthed Humber swallows up a full Springtide. For that end, grudg him not
what he loves, and give him time to digest it. Your Business is only to stand
Sentinel, and to keep a vigilant Eye and a diligent Hand over him; for Patience
is not only an Exercise but an Excellency in Anglers, provided they fall not
asleep at their Exercise; especially when Angling or Troling with the
Ground-bait, which upon probate proves most profitable after gluts of Rain and
discolored Waters. Nor is this Ground-bait otherwise than a Worm, variously
discoursed by me at several Times, and in sundry Places. For that end (to avoid
repetitions) where the Worm fails of Success, make trial of the Minew, in
Sharps or Scours, by dragging at the bottom, or in mid-water; which if
dexterously performed (with the Swivel) by the Hand of an Artist, he shall
seldom or rarely fail of Success.

But for the Fly-fishing, if that be the Artist's Intention; let me soberly
advise him to solicit moderate Winds, rather than intemperate and violent
Gusts. Rally my Reasons, and sum them up; you will find them more copious in my
former Conference, where at large I discourse and decipher both the Shape,
Color, and the Proportion of Flies; for I hate Tautologies, because hateful in
themselves; and there is nothing more troublesome to an ingenious Artist, than to
be glutted by telling a Story twice. The Trout therefore judicially considered,
his Mouth is not by much so large as the Salmon's; nor requires he so copious
nor so large a Hook, nor need his Tackle be so robust and strong. But for the
Rod and Line, take care, that they in all respects be exactly tapered. And to
hit the Mark as near as may be, let care be taken that the Line in every part
be equally stretched, and the Steel of your Hook of an even Temper; nor matters
it how light you are armed at the Hook; so that on the Surface, when you
flourish your Fly, be sure that you gain the Head of the Stream; and if
possible, the Wind, to facilitate your Cast. But if the Ground-bait be your
Exercise, then let the length of your Line seldom or rarely exceed the Rule of
your Rod: whilst the Fly-Diversion grants a larger Charter, Distance and
Dimension also come under the consideration of every Artist that is mindful to
measure exact Proportion, by concealing himself from the Streams he sports in.
So that if at any time the Fly fails of success, as frequently it has happened
to my self and others, let the Angler then have recouse to the Ashtree-Grub,
the Palmer-worm, Caterpillar, green or gray Drak, the depinged Grasshopper; or
that truculent Insect, the green Munket of the Owlder-tree. But if none of
these Baits presented, succeed to profit; and the Water as we apprehend to
remain discolored; let him then assault the Trout at the Bottom, with that
mortal Allurement which I call the Gild-tale: for that of all Worms allures him
ashore.

The generous Trout to make the Angler Sport,
In deep and rapid Streams will often resort.
Where if you flourish but a Fly, from thence
You hail a Captive, but of Fish the Prince.
The PIKE.
The Pike is a voracious ravenous Fish, that frequents the Waters, and lives
always upon Spoil: for Moss-Trooper like, he murders all he meets with. And as
it is impossible to find him without an Appetite, so is it as improbable to
proffer him any thing that he will refuse. One would think him a Graduate by his
various Appellations; as that of Jack, Pickerel, Pike, and Lucit; which makes
him look big and swell with Titles, as Westminster Hall looked blough with
Dunbar Trophies. Now the Angler that consults this formidable Desperado, must
search him in the Spring by examining the Ditches, narrow Grips and Gullies,
where probably he may find him poaching after Mice; and in the Avenues in
Marshes hunting after Frogs, with which he trucks his Life for a Trifle. But
the yellow Frog, of all Frogs, brings him to Hand, for that is his dainty and
select Diet, wherein Nature has placed such magical Charms, that all his Powers
can never resist them, if fastened on the Hook with that exactness, that his
Life may shine, and the Bait seem undeprived of natural Motion. Which if
dexterously performed, the Angler will be convinced, that a Ledger of all Baits
is the most truculent destructive Morsel in the World.

But March expiring, and April on the Ascendent, his Eyesight clears up, and
his Appetite too, for a brighter Bait; and then a small Roach, or a Bream will
down; so will a Bleak, and a small young Dace, or for Variety the Head of an
Eel. But if a Junior Perch be stripped of his Fins, or a fresh plump Gudgeon
neatly linked to the arming be but laid before him, he shall never refuse it,
when so greedy of a Worm that he will hazard his Life for it. But then I prescribe
it no approved Bait, rather a fortunate Accident in my successful Adventures.
But his Winter Quarters are the sullen Deeps, where he burdens himself with
Clouds of Water, as aged People do that heap on Apparel; when in the Spring he
is all Gaity, and like the Prodigal, scorns that his Life should outlive his
Patrimony. But the Summer approaching, we then consider him more circumspect,
more cunning, more cautious, and under better Guards; for then in a Deep you
may search him, and probably find him; but then you must have it at the Tail of
a Ford: when in Autumn you shall find him lap himself in Candocks, at other
times in Bullrushes; and wherever the Fry is, there is he, if not in the
midst, yet he is never far from them. I have known this Fish deluded with a
Trout; a Trout did, I say? there is no Fish that swims in the Freshes is such an
alluring Temptation; nor can the Pike any more resist this Charm, than he can
resist his natural Disposition after Diet. The consequence proves true upon the
Angler's Examination; for the Pike has strong Inclinations after any thing that
swims; who as seldom as any Fish wants an Appetite, and by his good Will would
always be eating.

After this manner we discourse the Pike; who dwells almost every where, except
in the Ocean, or in brackish Waters; but in the Lough, you shall find him there
o're-grown, sometimes to an amazing bigness; when in the River, and translucid
Streams in Rivulets, his Taste is from thence transchanged to a more excellent
Sweetness, and upon proof will be found much more nutricious. But his way of
germinating is the same with the Salmon, to answer the Ends of Procreation, as
for the most part all barrel'd Fish do, who rises early in the Infancy of the
Year, and admires all Changes that the Season presents.

The Pike or Lucit, is a Mercenary;
Or Anglers seem among themselves to vary.
He loves no Streams, but hugs the silent Deeps:
And eats all Hours, and yet no House he keeps.
The CARP.
The Carp is a Fish complicated of a moross Mixture, and a torpid Motion, one
that loves to live in melancholy Calms, rather than to ramble in the rapid
Rivers and translucid Streams. Ponds and Pools are generally his Palaces, where
he loves good Eating, but seldom or rarely travels far to fetch it: who as
seldom as any Fish exceeds the compass of his Colony, nor ever attains to that
maturity of largeness, where there is rapid Rivers, and swift gliding Streams,
as he does in the Lake or solitary Lough. The Ancients were of Opinion, and so
am I, that Travel extenuates and lessens Growth; and that in the Rivers and
spacious Rivulets, every Master Fish pleads a right of Possession; whereby Acts
of Hostility are hourly commenced, with the loss of Life to the weaker sort; at
least of his Habitation, when a stronger than himself claims a right of
Possession: for when to consider the antipathy in Fish, as the secret animosity
that lurks under the Flesh, it is no wonder that the great Ones eat up the
little Ones. And this our daily Experience, as a Monitor, discovers unto us,
the Antipathy and Animosity Fish have in the Ocean; for Antipathy will be
Antipathy as certainly as Sympathy is Sympathy, notwithstanding the Nature of
Climat, Constitution, or Element.

Since therefore we have signified the Residence of the Carp, it is but
requisite to proceed to tell you what he loves; and that is soon done, if you
cast but your Eye on the blooming Hauthorn; for then your Carp-angling begins
to commence, which terminates in August, as the Vulgar would have it: but this
Rule admits of too many Exceptions; for all the Summer-season, more especially
in a dropping and moist Air, he bites without dispute, if he likes his Commons,
and you but cautious enough to conceal your self, who as rarely as any Fish
quarrels with the fineness or coarseness of your Tackle; which deserves a
serious Consideration, in as much as Neatness and Fineness are requisite and
necessary accomplishments in any thing of Art, more especially that of Angling:
and the Bait to surprise him is less difficult than any thing, because by every
Angler so generally understood; which will shorten my Discourse, and invite me
to a Conclusion. But before I close, let me tell you what he loves; and that is
the Unctuosity of the purplish Dew-worm, provided you depurate him from all
Impurities, to remonstrate his Beauty and Luster of Life. Examine him but with
this Bait to free me from Suspicion, and remove the Censure of clamorous
Anglers, that oft-times repine at their own Undertakings; but that I cannot
help, they may use the Lob-worm if they please, which if they rightly order,
will (I Will assure them) turn to good Account, more especially if perfumed with
the Oil of Annis.

But my Observation leads me to another Curiosity, and that is Paste. But of
Pastes (let me tell you) there are as many sorts among Anglers, as there are
Saints-days in the Pope's Calendar: but this hinders not but that Pastes may be
effectual, more especially when commix'd and compounded with fine Bean-flower,
English-Honey, and poudred Sugar, amalgamized or mingled with the Yolk of an
Egg; and if the Fat of an Heron be supperadded to it, it makes it not the
worse; but the Marrow of a Heron makes it much more the better. Besides,
sometimes he loves a taste of the Dairy-Maid; as at other times he affects the
smell of the Shambles, because a great admirer of clotted Blood; or almost any
thing when he is in Humor.

Now as Operation in Artifice is the Corona of Art, so Demonstration in Science
is the ultimate End of Experience. I forfeit neither my Reason nor Opinion in
this Assertion: nor do I in my Arguments undermine those Artists that
practically and experimentally understand the right use of the Worm; though
some with Honey and other Dulcids have sweetly allured him, and some others
with Tar (supposing him a Tarpolin) have summoned him ashore; yet I declare
upon practice, that if the Worm do not pleasure him, the Angler may mingle
Despairs with his Sports. But then let him consider the Complement of Licorish,
or the homogeniety of the Oil of Annis, Cummin, or Assafetida to furnish it
with a Hogoe, which in my Opinion surpasses the camerial Oil of Oespres: yet
not that I altogether doubt the truth of so famous a Secret, celebrated by the
Ancients, but rather the rarity of so admirable a Discovery; such another some
fancy is that of the Phoenix.

The Carp's no Courtier, nor a Country Guest;
Yet answers both, all after as he is dressed.
He loves the silent Deeps, in Ponds and Pools;
A Dish for Statesmen, or a Mess for Fools.
The PERCH.
The Perch is a well-disciplined martial Fish, of much more Mettle, Gallantry
and Courage than the Carp; though not almost, but altogether of as slow a
Motion; and though as free from the taint of Controversy, as the Wax is free to
submit to the Impression of the Seal, yet he never enters the List but he
always arms himself. It Is true, he is a Volunteer that lives above fear; nor
dreads he that any thing of Art can invade him: nay though he see himself
surrounded with Danger and Difficulties, and immured with Rocks and ruinous
Decays; yet he will show himself as prodigal of his Stock of Life, as any Fish
living that floats in Water. It is true, I must confess, that he is a great
admirer of smooth Rivers, but the rapid Streams in Rivulets he seldom or never
frequents, notwithstanding him so bold and daring a Fish; Nor is he of any
great Activity in the solitary Lough; and would to his liking use as little
Exercise in the River, did not the Streams sometimes invade him, which makes
him more active than otherwise he would be, because of Self-preservation. Which
still strengthens my Opinion of preferring the River-Fish in excellency to
exceed those in the Pond: though peradventure Travel mitigates Growth, (as we
formerly discoursed) yet it most generously compensates the Gusto; for every
Fish that comes cautiously by his Commons, is by so much the more confirmed
delicious, and if I mistake not as nutricious also.

Now would not any Man think those Conceptions very sordid, to prefer the Goose
to the Gossander; and vie the Hog with the Hind? It Is true, some hug and
embrace the Vision of remote Novelties, because to fancy that Distance and
Difficulty make things rare; so it may well enough, for it makes them dear. And
what would it signify to a rural Palate, was that Palate by foreign Curiosities
daily imposed upon? Besides, it is Treason in the abstract, against the Law of
Bounty, for any Man to imagine Partiality in Nature, since every thing is
destinated by an immutable Decree, to answer the primary Ends ordained. The
great Work-master needs no contribution from the Mine to enable him to infuse
Virtue into the Creation; nor needs he to borrow any thing from the Creature,
since the Creature is only the marginal Note of the Universe; the Creation it
self being the stupendous Volume. But as every thing naturally adheres to its
own Like, and Semblances partake of their own Properties, Stars then were not
made merely to gaze at, nor Elements but as Vortrices for corporeal Reception;
otherwise how could Birds divide their ambient Air, or Fish force a Passage
through the fluctuating Ocean, where sometimes the treacherous Net betrays
them? yet so resolved are they with contempt to Cruelty, that they scorn to
petition a Reprieve for Life, but rather submit themselves to be tortured to
Death, by the tormenting Hand of the scarifying Cook, that dispenses with Art
to elevate the Appetite, if when only to make it pleasant to a generous
Acceptance.

But to look for the Perch, you need not go far to seek him that is to be found
almost any where, if you please but to step to the Suburbs of the Streams of
Trent, or the solitary Deeps near the rapid Streams in most Rivers and Rivulets
in the Circle of England; if examined at the Bottom, for you may search and
find him under hollow Banks, Eddies, Pools, Miln-Pits, Turns of Streams, at the
Tales of Sluices, Floodgates, and back-Waters, near to the Stumps of Trees,
Wier-heads, Stanks, Candocks and Bull-rushes; but if there be any ruinous
Decays, there you will certainly find him that is to be found: Indeed one would
think him a piece of an Antiquary, because he loves to be rifling among Ruins.
Now presupposing you have found him, what is next to be done? that ought to be
considered, in regard it is the Angler's Care and Study to accommodate him like
an Artist, with what he loves. But you will ask me what that is? And I readily
answer, and tell you, not with coarse Tackle, nor a slovenly Bait: for though
the Carp is not squeemish, nor the Perch shame-faced, yet he hates Rudeness,
coarse Tackle, and slovenly Commons; greatly admiring Dew-worms if well
depurated, Cankers, Caterpillars, Cod-worms, Grubs, Brandlins, Minews, and the
junior Fry of small Fish; these Novelties affect him to a change of Element,
who lays down his Life for what he loves. But the Charm of all Baits that
invites him ashore (as Fancy is seldom unfurnished with Invention) is that
truculent Mortal the Gild-tail; which sooner than any thing sends him a Summons
of Death; for which at any time he shall give you his Life, and that is as much
as the World has to part with, nor has he any more than himself to give.

Now let the Angler that would fish for Perch,
The Turns in Rivers, and back-Waters search.
In deepest Lakes the largest Perch you will find:
And where the Perch, is Kind will answer Kind.
BREAM.
The Bream, though we grant him a phlegmatic Fish, and a Fish as naturally as
any Fish addicted to Ease and Idleness, yet he enjoys himself as much in limpid
Streams as other Fish do that seek Sanctuary in solitary Lakes. And as he hates
rambling far from Home, so he abhors Correspondency with those that do;
contenting himself with torpid Streams, and hugs his Fancy in solitary Deeps.
Trent I have observed for the Race of Bream, may challenge all England, nay all
Europe for ought I know, more especially near those Streams that wet the Ports
of Gainsborough; where sometimes he washes his Fins with the Eagre, and
arrives there to that amazing bigness, that I blush to report it, lest the
Reader should suspect me. Indeed the Bream is an excellent Companion, if you
can but get him into humor to bite; which may easily be done, if you do but
treat him with the compost of Paste; for that will insinuate him into the Pie,
where his Bones will absorp, and his Flesh amalgamize with fresh sweet Butter;
which being dissolved, will entertain you with a nutricious Liquor, that for
phlegmatic Humors is both Physic and Diet.

I never knew any Angler (except it was one) that singly devoted himself a
whole day's Diversion, in order to court and entertain this Fish; nor do I
remember him enrolled in the Angler's Catalogue, among the first Classis of
dignified Fish. For that end therefore, as I intend brevity in his Description,
so give me leave to show you the readiest way how to surprise and take him. But
then you must consider him no constant Companion for all Constitution of Rivers
and Rivulets, though our Southern Streams frequently enjoy him, except
otherwise they prove too rapid and forcible; for if so, then he takes up his
Residence in calmer Streams, that enamour him with Bull-rushes, at other whiles
with Candocks: whose Recreation is little more than the limits of his
Confinement; from whence he seldom extravagants himself, until compelled from
thence by the Mediums of Art, as at other times by Inundation, or Deluges of
Water, that send him sometimes a Jail-delivery.

But the variety of Baits to allure this Fish being so numerous and various, I
shall confine my self only to a few; which upon examination will be found
effectual. Compound therefore a Paste as formerly described, of Honey,
intermingled with a little Brandy, Bean-flower, and the Yolk of an Egg; which
you may, if you please, tinge with Gambogium, Vermilion, etc. This Bait
sometimes, as soon as any thing, entices him ashore. But in regard he is a Fish
inconstant as to Diet, some therefore feed him with Gentles, and not without
good Success* some others with Grubs, and othersome with Caterpillars; but
better is that of Cod-worms: and sometimes any thing will do, if he be in
Humor. But then you are to consider he loves early rising, and is ready for
Breakfast by break of Day: so that if his Commons affect him, and you so
fortunately happy to meet with a cloudy gloomy Morning, you may engage him for
ought I know, to keep you Company till the solitudes of Night; which a
well-scoured red Worm will sometimes do, and so will Cheese, for he loves the
Dairy: but all the World cannot make him Fly-proof; yet a Brandlin makes his
Teeth water. But the Gild-tail, as above, is such an invincible Charm, that all
his Powers cannot withstand it; but he will come ashore in despite of Death.

Now if the Angler fish in Thames for Bream,
Or famous Trent; never let him search a Stream:
Deeps most allure him, so do Eddies too;
For near to Banks and Stanks he lies purdue.
TENCH.
The Tench of all the Families of Fish is both Physic and Physician; of a
balsamic, nutricious and medicinal Nature, that fortunately Cures when others
Kill; and distributes more Good than Hurt in his Colony. It Is true, he is
Sought for by every Angler, though obtained by few; and the diseased Fish that
finds him, finds a Cure, and that is a reward answerable to Diligence. Now as
every Stream courts this physical Fish, yet but few Rivers in the Nation enjoy
him, who for the most part inhabits the Pool; yet are not the Rivers denied him
for a public Good. I cannot deny that he loves deep Waters, more especially
those that are of a torpid and slow Motion; such upon examination he greatly
admires: nor shall any Man overrule him, nor at any time persuade him to be out
of conceit with Flags and Bull-rushes. I have already told you that he is
Medicine and Physician; and now let me tell you he is a delicious Morsel.

That Angler that knows any thing of Angling, must of necessity know that the
Tench of all Fish is no Fish of Prey, and one that lives upon as little Food as
any Fish that wags a Fin; but then he must have it choice and delicate, wholesome
and juicy; and truly he well deserves it, since so little serves his turn.
Search well therefore in the solitary Deeps, and there as soon as in any Place
you will find him, as if by Nature destinated to a cynical Life, which the
Ignorant impute to a want of Exercise; not well considering it is no part of his
Business to ramble in the Rivers, to expose himself to Ruin: which makes me
fancy that but a few junior Piscatorians have thoroughly consulted this
Aesculapian, who beyond dispute is of a Balsamic Nature; whose slimy Sides
administer Relief, if when but to glance upon his Fellow Creature. So that I
think it worthy my Management and Undertaking to draw forth some Directions how
the Angler may surprise him with our innocent Artillery of Hook and Line; which
will be enough, as I conceive, to convince him, if in Season he please but to
make a trial.

In the South of England, where the Fields are fertile (so in the North, though
more uncultivated) this piece of Curiosity is frequently discoursed among
Anglers, meaning such as out of a Fancy, or foreign Curiosity, have undertaken
to feed him with Tar and Rye-bread, supposing him a Tarpollin; and not without
success, whilst some others have diverted him with various Pasts, using 'em as
an Argument to make him Pie-proof. Then again some have fed him with English
Honey, the Yolks of Eggs, and the Oil of Annis, commassated and mingled with
fine Bean-flower; this Bait is better approved of than rudely to choke him with
toasted Cheese. I own I must confess there be many ways to feed him, though to
my certain knowledge (except in the Pond) there are but few places to find him
in. He therefore that solicites a sight of this Physical Fish, and impatiently
longs to hear him rumble in the Panier, let him follow my Advice, with
well-scoured Dew-worms, kept very sweet in cleanly Moss; and if that prove
ineffectual to answer his Design, then let him provoke him with the Flag or
Dock-worm, which will certainly answer the Angler's Intention; otherwise let
him blame both me and my Directions.

The Tench best loves those torpid Waters, where
The Deeps are shaded well with Reeds; and there
The wounded Fish that could not long endure
The Smart and Pain, finds him, so finds a Cure.
BARBLE.
The Barble, though experienced a resolute Fish, yet is he as shame-faced as
any of his Fellows: And as he hates to quarrel, so he abhors an Affront; but
reserves his Strength, Activity and Agility, till the Rod or the Net prove his
Examinant; whose Belly or Spawn may be eaten as Diet, but then it proves in
operation but churlish Physic; not that I assert it my Opinion only, let
Experience upon Examination better instruct you. Now when the Angler comes to
the Waterside, and brings what he loves, he courts a Familiarity, though his
Credit of late has been much impaired in the Cook-room: which possibly may
proceed from the ignorant Order of such as study rather to gratify their
voracious Appetites, than the curious Methods of the Art of Angling. However,
Isaac Walton has provided a Cook, that in his Opinion can dress him well
enough, whose Arguments beyond dispute, had indubitably miscarried, had not his
Wife had a Finger in the Pie. Thus he, and some others, dress Fish before they
catch them; but I approve it requisite to catch them first, and then at your
leisure dress them afterward.

The Barble, so named from his Barbs or Wattles, most passionately admires the
depth of the River, at the tale of a Stream: where you shall usually find him
sucking of Soil, and lying purdue for Worms and Insects, or any thing else that
is sweet and edible. And by how much the stronger you observe the Stream, by so
much the more strength has the Fish that inhabits therein. And if there be
Rubbish, or any sort of Lumber, for his part he likes it never the worse; and
if ruinous Decays, or great Stones in the Bottom, so much the better for his
Security, whose Provision is rarely any thing else, save only what Nature daily
provides him. Nor is he numbered among the Fish of Prey; nor is he a Glutton,
yet he knows how to eat; nor is he overcurious to court for Varieties, though
some feed him with Paste, and their Liberality he retaliates; and some proffer
him Cheese to close up the Orifice of his Stomach, them he also gratifies: and
some give him Worms well depurated and scoured, for which Modicum he
contributes his thanks: but he that would feed him to death with a Dainty, must
bring him a dish of Salmon spawn.

The Barble courts the rapid Torrents more
Than solid Deeps: strong Streams remote from shore
Oblige him most; because the strongest Streams
Bring him supplies, the Rod brings only flames.
CHEVEN.
The Chub or Cheven is a Fish of a supine Nature, yet of a robust and rural
Disposition, had he but a Heart to manage his Strength; who upon examination is
by every one understood better for Diversion by half than Diet: a coarse
feeder, and himself as coarse to be fed on; yet of such a voracious Appetite,
that he scorns to see any thing that he cannot eat, if another Fish can; but my
Modesty constrains me to forbear mentioning it. Now the Spring approaching,
every thing inamours him, for then he haunts the Fords for fashion. It Is true
he is an early riser, that will sport the Angler at break of Day, provided he
furnish him with Codworms, Cankers, Caterpillars, Cow-dung-Grubs, Gentles,
Pastes tinctured with Cambogium, etc. But then you must cautiously obscure your
self, and appear like an Angler least in sight. Yet still there is another way
much better to surprise him, that is by dibling on the surface of the Water, if
circumspectly you conceal your self behind a Bush, or the more private and
solitary shade of Trees. But your Engine for this encounter, is a Natural Fly,
either the Flesh Fly, the Bank Fly, the Gray or the Green Drake; but the Green
Munkit of the Owlder-Tree excels all the rest, as the Sun in Excellency
outlustres the Stars. Moreover you shall find him gaping after Grass-hoppers,
or any other Insect that presents in season. And since nothing comes amiss, so
nothing distastes him; and where the Locust is, there is he; which if well
examined to the Center of the Calms, he shall recompense the Examinant with the
reward of his life; always provided he but separate the Body from the
Leatherish Wing, which by reason of its Viscuosity is rarely digested; nor is
it otherwise by him well accepted.

It Is true, with green Cheese some Anglers do treat him, but then it succeds
best at the tale of a Stream; at the fall of Fords, into the solitary Deeps.
And that you may know he affects variety, let the Artist at discretion exchange
the Dairy Maid's Commons, for the beauty of a bright and well-scoured Red-worm,
or the head of a Frog, in April or May, or a black Snail sometimes in a dewy
Morning. These invitations make his Teeth stand a water. But for Salmon-Spawn
if you bring him that Novel, you do your Business, and his too; and shall have
no cause I Will assure you to repent it, when upon so fair an exchange, he trucks
away his Life for a trifle. But September approaching, you must bring him Beef
Pith, for which he shall sacrifice all he has, and give you his Carcass in
exchange for his Commons. What Is more to be desired by the rule of Discretion,
except the Angler be so indiscreet as not to accommodate him?

The Chub of all Fish in the Silver Trent,
Invites the Angler to the Turnament;
Where near a Stream you will always find him ready
To meet the Bait before it meets the Eddy.
GRAILING.
Umbar or Grailing is an amorous Fish, that loves a frolic as he loves his
Life, whose Teeth water after every Wasp, as his Fins flutter after every Fly;
for if it be but a Fly, or the Product of an Insect, out of a generous
Curiosity he is ready to entertain it. Smooth and swift Streams more than any
thing enamour him, notwithstanding he declines the force of a Torrent: Nor
shall you persuade him to quarrel with the gliding Streams, provided they be
sweet, clear and shining. It is from these translucid Streams that the Hackle,
and the artificial Fly court him ashore. But of all natural Insects that
accommodate the Art, the green Drake is that sovereign Ophthalmick that opens
his Eyes, and shuts them again, with the hazard of his Life, and loss of his
Element. Yet for this Fly-admirer, there is another Bait, and that is the
Munket, or a Seagreen-Grub, generated, as I take it, amongst Owlder-Trees. The
like Product issues from the Willow, so does it from the Sallow; nor is the
Primp-fence denied this vegetable Animal, save only they are different in
Splendor and Color, as also as different in Shape and Proportion. Take then
this Insect from the Owlder-Tree, to refute the Hypothesis of the incredulous
Angler; which if ingeniously cultivated by the Art of Angling, will upon proof
of a well-manag'd Examination, invite Umbar or Grailing from the top, or
mid-water, to kiss your Hand, or I Will break my Rod and disclaim the Art.

Well then, as we consider the Umbar not overcurious of Deeps, we must
consider him also not over-cautious of Shallows, contenting himself with a
middle Fate, that directs him to the smoothest and stiffest Streams, dedicating
and devoting himself to Motion, because a great admirer of Peregrination; and
though not so generally understood as the Trout is, yet give me leave to tell
you, if you fish him finely, he will keep you company, either in Darwin, so in
Dove, or in the glittering silver Streams of Trent: Pray therefore when you
fish him, fish him finely, for he loves Curiosity, neat and slender Tackle;
and, Lady-like, you must touch him gently, for to speak plain English, he is
tender about the Chaps, otherwise perchance you defeat your self, so lose your
Design. A Brandlin, if any thing, will entice him from the Bottom; but the
Gild-tail, of all Worms, upon change of Water, will invite him ashore, tho it
cost him his Life.

Vmbar or Grailing in the Streams he will lie,
Hovering his Fins at every silly Fly.
Fond of a Feather; you shall see him rise
At Emmits, Insects, Hackles, Drakes and Flies.
BVRBOLT.
The Burbolt is a Fish so rarely discoursed, and of so little conversation with
other Fish, that it is as difficult to find him, as it is to describe him, who
differs in Nature from most other Fish; so that if the Angler be not very
ingenious, well educated and disciplined in the Rudiments of Angling, he
undertakes a Task he can hardly perform, either to describe his Nature or his
Haunt. I know there are some Rodomontadoes of the Rod, that wilfully and
extravagantly will arraign their Faith, and rest it upon the moldy Records and
frothy Opinion of slippery Authority, whereby to confirm themselves in the
vanity of Tradition, as also to gratify the Zeal of Putationers. For that end I
must tell you, and you may tell others, that the silver Streams of triumphant
Trent, as frequently as any Streams, stroke the scaly Fins of this famous Fish,
who loves to live by them, but cares not to live in them, rather absconding
himself in Eddies, and sometimes in Arches, not far from Streams and Torrents
of Water, where he is frequently found by the industrious Angler: for to search
him striving against a Stream, is like to Q Elizabeth's Scogen, that at the
Sun's Meridian (with a Candle and Lanthorn) sought up and down for an honest
Man: So to rifle the Streams in Trent, or any other River for this incognito,
is but labor in vain, to seek for him that hides himself from the rest of his
Associates in solitary Recesses; a lively imitation of Diogenes in Dolio.

The Burbolt therefore we are to consider him a Fish, that as rarely as any
Fish travels far from Home to fetch his Food; from whence we conclude him not
over-cautious, whatever it costs him, that values not his Life to purchase what
he loves. And Fashion he affects not, nor the Formality of Novels; who contents
himself with Country-Commons, rather than to ramble up and down for Varieties;
yet would have it constant, though not over-costly: who betters every thing by
his own Delicacy, because himself is a delicate Morsel; but seldom tasted, and
as rarely consulted. Which makes every Angler desirous of him, since he that
takes him gets a Reward; which a wellscoured Red-worm certainly accomplishes,
as soon as any thing except the Gudgeon, for that is a Charm that compels him
ashore.

To write the Burbolt's Epitaph; he dreams
That baulks the Calms, to search him in the Streams.
That Angler that will court him to his Dish,
Must bring him Gudgeons to obtain his Wish.
FLOVNDER.
The Flounder is a Fish that bites before any Man's Face, not dreading the
Aspect of an Invader. It Is true, he is a Fish that is as bold as a Buccaneer; of
much more Confidence than Caution, yet nothing more curious; one that loves
good Meat, and is good Meat himself; whose Appetite is open as early as his
Eyes, and contemplates Day before Sunrise, frequently busying himself about
Breakfast, half an Hour sometimes before break of Day; and delights, I must
tell you, to dwell among Stones, so does he among Stakes and gravelly Bottoms:
besides he is a great admirer of Deeps and ruinous Decays, yet as fond as any
Fish of moderate Streams, and none beyond him except the Perch, that is more
solicitous to rifle into Ruins; insomuch that a Man would fancy him an
Antiquary, when to consider him so affected with Relics, yet of that
undaunted Courage, that he dares to feed before any Man's Face, provided there
be but Water enough to cover him, though not to conceal him. Moreover, he
adheres so close to the Bottom, that a Man would think him inoculated to it, or
at least an Inmate in another Element.

For that end let us consider the Flounder a resolute Fish, and one that
struggles stoutly for a Victory with the Angler, and is more than ordinarily
difficult to deal with, by reason of his Built, which is altogether flat as it
were a Level; so that if it happen your Tackle be fine, and the Bottom, as it
sometimes falls out, to be foul, you run the risk of your Adventure and
Artillery. Now some Folks, beyond measure, admire this Fish, because
opinionated he is so nutricious: And truly he is good Food, which makes him so
desirable, though seldom or rarely not over-cautious to come by, if the Angler
be industrious but to bring him a Bait that he likes, and that is but
reasonable. Present him with a Lob-worm, he will retaliate your Courtesy; or in
exchange, a depurated Dewworm, he will not be ungrateful, for he loves variety of
all sorts of Worms, the Tag or Tagil, besides Bradlins and Gild-tails, which
will at any time entice him to die for what he loves; for you must know he is a
Fish so fond of a Worm, that he will go to the Banquet tho he die at the Board.

He that intends the Flounder to surprise,
Must rise betimes, and fish before Sunrise.
But if the Sluggard cannot rise so early,
Let him nod on, perhaps at Noon he will parley.
EEL or CONGER.
The Eel insinuates himself into all sorts of Waters, and can live in a Stream,
or without it; in the deepest Pit, or the shallowest Rivulet; in dirty muddy
Ditches, and silty owsy Bottoms; or in rocky Cavities in any Rivers, wetting
his Fins sometimes with the Ocean. Now some are conceited that Eels are
Insects, and content not themselves with the Law of Germination: And if so,
then it seems that Nature was more unactive about the Race of Eels, than other
Animals committed to her Conduct; because to protrude and thrust them forth as
Inanimates, after the manner of Vegetation. Such are the ignorant Conceptions
of Gesner, and the unthinking Rabble of his ridiculous Proselytes; who, because
to suck in such pernicious Principles, have tainted, nay poisoned themselves by
infecting others: For had they but considered that Eels have Eggs, (tho not so
long as other Fish to bear them about them) without dispute it would expose
some of them to a Blush, if when to reflect on their erroneous Rashness, that
causes the Artist to laugh at their Ignorance. But that Eels do germinate, is
past dispute; for if the Roe, or Spawn, be the Product of Germination, then
Eels, as other Animals, may germinate in specie, because furnished with all the
Qualities for Germination; as is observed by the female Fish, whose burdened
Belly in the Spring (if examined) will sufficiently convince the Incredulity of
such as would by Advice be better informed, whilst permitting others to content
themselves with the vanity of Ignorance, that Eels are Insects.

The Eel therefore, you shall find him in Caverns, and the Cavities sometimes
of hollow Rocks, Grips and Gullies, devised on purpose by Engineers for the
draining of Grounds: Or else you may observe him in Holes or hollow Banks, the
Flaws in Bridges and broken Breaches, occasioned sometimes by Inundations of
Water; out of which Abscondments any Man may angle him, that contrives but a
Worm neatly on the end of a Wand; which Artifice is Probing, and some call it
Proking; but we dispute not the Term. Now a more expeditious Invention, though
not half so genteel, is that Engine or Artifice some call a Gleave, but some
others the Eel-spear. Then there is Bobbing with a bunch or cluster of Worms,
strung upon Threads, non-commissionated by Anglers: Yet Night-hooks were never
prohibited, nor need they, since the Eel bites in the heat of the Day. You must
therefore consider him a Fish of an odd Humor, that the sight of a Worm shall
tempt him ashore, though he sacrifice his Life to the Lust of his Adversary.

The Eel and Conger lies in sandy Bays,
On gravel Beds, and sometimes in Decays.
In hollow Banks or Stanks, in Bridges there
You Will find this Fish as soon as any where.
LAMPRE.
The Lampre (or Suck-stone) frequently accosts the Streams in Severn, and is
conversant also with many other Rivers in the Kingdom of England. A Fish that
makes more sport in the Pie than the Pool; but of no great acquaintance nor
familiarity with Anglers; and that is the reason he is so little discoursed, as
if there were no such thing in being: But assure your self there is, and the
plenty of such in the River Came, and some other Rivers, as Thames and Trent;
that I dare to assert and divulge them numerous: But as torpid Deeps do not
always delight him, so transparent Streams do not altogether transport him; nor
admires he the Torrents of rapid Rivers: And because no constant Housekeeper,
we have considered him as unconstant to Diet. It Is true, I have no Commission
to assign him a Traveller, and yet he is seldom or rarely at Home. At Home did
I say? surely I mistook my self, because he has no Home to go to, who lives
like an Intruder, insinuating himself into all sorts of Company, and puts a
Foot under every ones Table: for we find him a Fish altogether in suspicion;
therefore seldom admitted among the scaly Society; who prefers Sand and
Gravel-beds infinitely before muddy Recrements; and loves to be casting and
sucking Stones, because it is a great part of his Life and Maintenance; except
otherwhiles he stumbles upon Offil or Garbage, which if he do, he feasts
himself like a Country-Farmer; when at other times, like a shotten Herring, he
is forced to take up with shorter Commons; and such are the roots of Segs and
Candocks, which assign him a suitable Sauce to his Diet.

I never yet knew an Angler with the Rod, that designed a Day's Diversion with
this piece of Suspicion. It is true, I have heard him variously discoursed, and
perhaps as often as other Men, have seen him make Circles in his own Element,
but irregular ones out on it; for I have been at his Death sometimes with an
Instrument, and sometimes without it; but never at his Destruction with the Rod
and Line. The next enquiry will be, how we shall surprise this Argos, and
reduce him, in some measure, to the Angler's Designs. In order to that, some
court him with Loaches, some with Minews, some with Dew-worms, a small Gudgeon,
or toasted Cheese: but the Maw of a Beast best pleases him of any thing; and
truly I fancy it the most natural Bait for such a kind of a nasty Fish, that
nothing can surprise but the noosed Net; except he happens to meet with the
berbed Speer.

The Lampre loves a gravely Bottom best,
And's famed for Pie-meat more than all the rest.
I needs must say the Angler takes a Prize
That takes this Argos; or this Fish All-eyes.
ROACH.
As the Roach is no costly Fish, so is he not over-curiously enquired after. He
that seeks him, without difficulty finds him as early for breakfast, as the Sun
salutes the Creation; whose habitation is found bordering upon Banks, in
Eddies, small Turns, and meandring Streams; and where there is a Bush in the
Suburbs of the Streams, there you shall find him sheltring himself; when
recruits of Rain force down the Freshes, and drive the Soil from off the fertile
Fields; for then you may fish him, and not go far to find him: when at other
times, more especially near the approaching Winter, he houses himself in the
more solitary security of Candocks and Bull-rushes, in Depths of the Water. but
whilst we paraphrase and discourse the Roach, we but decipher and interpret the
Rud; since Nature's Laws are alike to both, for both have but one Fate and
Period, though of different complexion in Fin, having natural Inclination to
long and warm Days, to small and trilling Streams, yet neither of them lovers
nor admirers of Travel: by which you may guess, that seldom or rarely they are
found far from Home; for placing a Content in their little Confinements, shows
their unwillingness to examine the extent of their Confines.

Now you are to consider the Roach a great Fly-admirer, who examines the Season
by the Sun's distribution of Heat, that generously warms and nourishes the
Creation, by giving a new Life after the Death of an expiring Winter. And since
we observe him so inamoured with Flies, care must be taken to bring him what he
loves; and that is the Ant, when Insects come in, for which servile Gratitude
he recompenseth the Angler. Or if in the mean time he be accommodated with
Bank-flies, small Flesh-flies, or a well-scoured Gentle, he doubly retaliates,
when he gives you himself. I have given him Brandlins, Bee-grubs, Cow-Grubs,
Cabbage-Grubs, Cankers, Caterpillars, Pastes of all Compounds, and of various
Tinctures; for which he never was ungrateful: but he that brings him the yellow
Cod-worm, brings him what he loves, for his Patrimony can never purchase the
Prize, but submits to the Charm, and proffers himself to the Angler.

The Roach (or Rud) not greedy of promotion,
Loves Ponds and Rivers, better than the Ocean.
In solitary Pools they spend their Time;
And Travel hate as an immortal Crime.
DACE.
The Dace or Dare is the Fresh Water Herring; a Fish that is common and
constant; one that loves to divert himself, and is the Angler's Diversion: for
it is rare to come to the Waterside, and find him out of Humor to bite. Now to
tell you where he lives, I need not; for you shall find him in most or all the
Rivers and Rivulets in England; and to acquaint you with what he loves, is
needless, for there is nothing that is edible he will at any time refuse. Hot
Weather allures him forth of Deeps; for warm Days invite him abroad for
Recreation, because then he bathes himself in the glittering Streams; but when
affected with Cold, he dives into the more solitary Deeps, as most or all other
Fishes do, that burden themselves with Water, as Age is burdened with Diseases
and Infirmities. But at the Period of bright Cinthia's Progress, when the Sun
and long Days have consumed the Recrement of the expiring Winter; then you
shall find him sporting, and picking among the gliding silver Streams of Trent:
so in most Rivers in the confines of the Kingdom; where you may recreate your
self, and refresh him with a Bank, Stone, or Flagfly; as the Opportunity of the
Place, and the Season of the Year presents.

For in the Vernon Ingress, if you proffer him Drakes, either the green or the
gray Drake, he will never refuse them; or should you invite him with their
Shadow ( viz.) the artificial Resemblance, you complement him with a Curiosity:
But the natural Fly, more abundantly than the Artificial, contributes to his
Humor. But his Ground-bait is the Brandlin, if well purged in delicate sweet
and new Moss; or a fair large Gentle, well depurated and scoured in Bran: but
the yellow Cod-worm excels all the rest (as a Flame in Bowdie excels all
Colors) provided it be adorned with the Head of a Fly. This is the Charm that
invites him ashore, and as soon as any thing brings him to Hand.

The Dace of all Fish is the daring Fish
To sport with Flies, and after in the Dish
He Is not to be despised; because his end's
To sport the Angler, and to feast his Friends.
RVFF.
The Ruff, some call him Pope; but call him what you will, for I suppose he
obtained that Title from his infallibility of biting; which he seldom fails to
do, if the Angler happens to come where he is, and that is almost every where.
This little Desperado, tho he wants Conduct, yet has he Resolution and Courage
enough to encounter Death; who seldom as any Fish gives an Affront, yet rarely
or never refuses the Combat. It is true, he is Cautious, but not Contentious;
more a Hero than a Hector; who never flies, except at the Face of his Enemy;
and is for the most part constant in Victory, save only when encountering the
victorious Angler. This little Buckaneer armed at all Points, consorts the
Angler, and entertains him at all times, provided he seek for him near the
solitary decays of broken Bridges, ruinous Foundations, and the Roots of Trees.
Besides, he loves Bull-rushes, Beds of Segs and Candocks, where frequently you
may find him. So in Eddies, turns in Water, but in meandring Pools you will
rarely miss of him; and where Stumps, Stakes, and hollow Banks are, there is he
to be found; otherwise conclude he is not in that Colony.

This little resolute Animal, his Stature considered, is of as great resolution
as any Fish that wags a Fin, and as generous and profuse of his Life as his
Lordship: not unlike the Prodigal, that hates to outlive his Estate and
Patrimony. The Angler therefore that would civilly treat him, ought to bring
him what he loves, and that you know is but requisite and reasonable; and
wherever you find him, it is a hundred to one that the whole Armado is not far
from him; since for the most part they move all in a Body. One would think them
Mutineers, because all of a Piece; for if you hang but one, all the rest are in
danger. Nor will they revolt, or retreat from their Diet, since every one
resolves to eat till he die. I fancy them somewhat of the Nature of Negroes,
that expect after Death to return back to the Goldcoast; for if you bring him
but a Brandlin, or a well-purg'd Gild-tail, he shall show you his Face, and
leap into the Pannier.

The Ruff, or Pope, inhabits little Holes,
Betwixt the Artick and Antartick Poles:
Who seldom quarrels; yet cannot well dispense
With an Affront, who arms for his defense.
GVDGEON.
As the Gudgeon is a most delicious Fish, so ought he to be most delicately
dressed; and because the Angler's, and every one's Entertainment, therefore he is
preferred before many other Fish that make not so fine a show in the Platter.
It Is true, there is no fear to surfeit of a Diet that is so naturally nutricious,
and converts all into Nourishment, without the Law of Physic. This piece of
curiosity is a curious admirer of limpid, clear and cristalline Streams, more
especially when surrounded with gentle turns in Rivers and Rivulets, that have
sandy Bottoms; and if paved with Gravel, it is never the worse; who almost to a
Miracle affects Cleanliness in eating; and as he loves his Life, loves that his
Meat should always be well washed before he eats it. This fresh water Smelt
seldom or never roves abroad as other Fish do, to recreate himself with Insects
and Flies; but contents himself at home with a Gentle, rather than to ramble
abroad for Varieties: for to speak plain English, his Life is in danger, and
Sentence of Death pronounced at the sight almost of every master-Fish. But the
Brandlin he adores as his select Modicum, and the Gild-tail sweetens all his
Diversions: so that if either be brought him to sport and play with, he would
have it vivid, but not livid; and sweetened and adorned with an odoriferous
Perfume.

Now some Anglers have been pleased to write various Encomiums on this little
curious piece of Mortality; and they do him right: for he is a Fish, that not
only entertains the Angler with the Rod, but as if there were a familiarity
betwixt them, nibbles at his Toes, whilst he muddles in the Streams; diverting
not the Angler only, but the Salmon also. Besides, the Perch admires him, and
the Eel, and the Burbolt adore him. So do many other Fish, but the Pike above
all Fish no sooner sees him, but his Teeth water till he taste of the Dainty.

The Gudgeon loves the Water, sweet and clear:
In freshest Streams, and smallest Turns, he is there.
Lock till you find him; then you find your Wish,
If for a Banquet, or a Bait for Fish.
BLEAK.
The Bleak or Whitlin is the Summer Intelligencer, and more of a Masculine than
a Feminine Nature; that conceals himself (Ladylike) all the Winter, till long
Days and a warm Sun invites him forth to purchase Flies, which are sold him
sometimes at the rate of his Life. This Fresh Water Sprat is of most accurate
Motion, and feeds not much unlike the Swallow, partaking very much of his
Nature and Quality, as near as Fish and Fowl can do, or as near as Fish and
Flesh can have, and that is as near as the Elements can admit of: which
certainly is a Secret, yet very observable, if the Angler but consider their
coming in, which is in the Vernon Ingress; their natural Food, and their going
out together, in the Autumnal Equinox. You must also remember that he loves not
a Stream, yet would he by no means dwell far from it; and bites aloft at the
Race of Flies, yet gratifies himself with the Soil of the Earth. At Mid-water
if you seek him, he is solicitous after Gentles; and if at the Bottom, he
desires a Brandlin: but he that would court him to death with a Dainty, must
bring him a parcel of Ant-flies.

The Bleak or Whitlin, floats in silent Deeps
In Summertime; but all the Winter sleeps;
For then he is seldom seen: this curious Dish
Implicit Walton calls the Swallow-Fish.
MINEW.
The Minew or Penk is, in my Opinion, but a very small Banquet for Fish or
Fisher. But a little discourse shall serve for this little Fish, that is no
ways difficult to find, nor is he overcurious to catch, provided the Artist
but come where he is, and that is almost every where: nor need you search him in
rapid Streams, for there he is not, yet dwells not far from them; but in Rills
and Rivulets, in their small Turns of Water, with a bit of a Worm, or a
Brandlin, if you please, you may turn him out as soon as with any thing.

The Minue lives, I need not tell you how;
Examine Trent, and there you will find enough.
The Salmon, Trout, and Perch, sliely he will cheat
Them of their Lives; and yet's their daily Meat.
Th. And must this be our Exercise to trample the beautiful Banks and the
florid Meadows of famous Trent, to rifle her Fords for Diversion, and sweeten
our Senses with fragrant Odorates that perfume the Air? blessed beyond
expectation, to imprint on her silver Sands the lively Character of the
Angler's Footsteps, whilst we flourish our Artillery over the trembling
Streams, as they silently glide through the redolent Fields, with a soft but
sweet and murmuring Noise.


Ar. Thus we may divert our selves with the Streams of Trent, until the radiant
Zenith strike us with Heat, and then consult Umbrage under the shady Oaks;
where not to be idle, we may there form Flies, and keep out of Sunshine; where
the Rocks and the Woods will invite us to contemplate the imbellished Creation,
the variety of Creatures, and the All-glorious Creator.


Th. This I confess is Sovereign Advice, and if I mistake not, the shady Trees
of Sherwood will conduce to moderate the fiery Strokes of the Sun, whilst
Phaeton with his Chariot careers to the Western Fountains.


Ar. Nor till then is it needful to return to our Exercise, and make inrodes
with our Art and artificial Artillery; for to practice the Ground-bait in the
Heat of the Day, is a piece of Industry without any Ingenuity; since the true
knowledge and disquisitions of the Ground-bait, if sedulously consulted, will
sufficiently compensate the Toil of the Artist, because when to afford him a
due poize of Profit, with solitary Pleasure. Moreover, it is less difficult to
calculate the constant Commons that Fish themselves frequently acquire, than to
enumerate the various and multiform Classes of Emmits, Insects, Worms and Flies.


Th. I believe no less.


Ar. Then cast back your Eye on those solid Foundations of Earth and Rocks, and
consider with your self the Ornaments of Nature; how Concretions are linked
together, and Earths and Clays amalgamiz'd and coagulated into Minerals: How
Animals and Insects are lodged and concealed in the Surface of Soils and
stagnated Pools; meaning such as compensate the Art and Industry of every
Industrious and Ingenious Angler. Nor is it difficult to procure this mortal
Entertainment for Exercise and Recreation; since it is nothing more than a
knotted Earthworm, of which there are several Sorts, and diversity of Sizes;
consequently various Kinds, and variety of Colors.


Th. Pray explain your self.


Ar. Thus I explain my self; as the Nature and Quality of the Earth is, such
also are the Generations and Productions of Animals and Insects engendered there
in. Some Products we observe them to be naturally leprous, and such are usually
struck with morbifick Deformities. Some again are Prolifick, and animated with
Life; as some others are designed for Vegetation. Some Earths are cold, frigid
and moist; on the contrary some others by reason of the salinity of Sand, are
fortified with Heat almost to excess. There are also various Complexions of
Earths and Soils, which calify and indurate by the Sun's Reflection, so
incrustate themselves by Contact and Connection, that with little difficulty
facilitate a Warmth: so that whilst some are accidentally Cold, as ardent are
othersome because influenced by Callifaction. But as some are naturally Cold,
by Northern Influence, destinated to a marly spungeous Clay; intemperately Hot
are othersome, by confluence of bituminous and sulphurous Mixts cooperating
with them. Some are boggy, some gravelly, some naturally fertile, othersome as
naturally sterril. All which demonstrate the various Modification and Methods
of Nature, and the Divine preordinate Wisdom of God the Creator, whose Decrees
are inviolable, and whose Laws are irrevocable; and from whom Nature in all her
Operations copies to the Life from the first Original. When therefore seriously
to consider the various Families of Insects and Animals, naturally protruded
and thrust forth into the World, for the supply of themselves and their
Fellow Creatures, it demonstrates a Benevolence, and not a Prodigality in
Nature to stock the Elements with such a numerous Increase, as my self and
others have curiously inspected. So that sometimes one Animal, and sometimes
another, infinitely excels as to the Anglers Recreation.

But the Classis of Worms are multiform and various; manifestly the Lob, or
more properly the Dew-worm, Knob or knotted Worm; Redworm, Brandlin, Gild-tail,
Marish-worm; Flag and Dock-worm, Tag and Tagil, Spotspere, Munck and Muck-worm;
Cod-worm and Straw-worm, etc. But it is impossible to enumerate the innumerable
Sorts and Varieties of Worms, and the Texture of Insects, (different also in
Shape, Color, Beauty and Proportion) except prophetically instructed beyond
the due mediums of Art, or otherwise inspected by natural Observation: As when
to imagine some of them smooth, of a contrary Quality are those that are ruff,
fretted, and knotted. The various like we read of Color, Form, Beauty,
Proportion and Complexion; as when to inspect some of them Red, some others
Green, some Red and Green with a greenish Cast; and some Green with a reddish
Tincture; and some affected with a glance of both: Some again display a
brownish bluish and purplish Rubedo; some others shine forth a Citrine Color;
so that some are Yellowish, and some again Orange; some are Gray, some Livid,
some Veril, some Azure, and some more obscure, impressed with various Signatures
and remarkable Observations. Nature generously provides multiplicity of this
animal Race, whereby to furnish her Commonweal, and accommodate her solicitous
Admirers. But of all the Worms that move in the Earth, the Gild-tail alone is
the Angler's Corona.


Th. Now I conclude the Fish as good as half caught, had we but Cooks to order
and dress them, and our Appetites in effect moderately refreshed; had we but
patience to pick out the Bones. After this manner Recreation brings a Reward,
when proportioned to propagate the Sovereign Ray of Health; but not that I
extol the luxurious Angler, that prefers the Platter by the pentiful Pannier:
for he that imitates generous Nature, must when he puts a Period to the
Progress of the Life of one Fish, charitably endeavor the multiplication of
Thousands; otherwise he that voraciously pursues his Exercise, either spoils
the Creatures to gratify his Luxury, or sports away their Lives for the vanity
of Excess.


Ar. I approve of your Morals and modest Conceptions, that direct the Angler to
furnish himself with such convincing Arguments, as invite him only to fish for
Recreation. How few Pretenders to the Rod then, would covet the Death of Fish
for Fancy? Nay, who would not study to prolong their Lives, were it for no
other End than to furnish the Fords, to relieve the Necessitous, and divert the
Angler? Were not the Ends of the Creation made answerable to the Means of
Preservation? Who disputes it? Then if so, let me tell you that immoderate
Exercise (in all or any one) puts a damp to Pleasure; and if the End of
Pleasure can be adjudged Destruction, then no Man can be satisfied without
Excess. And what is Excess but inordinate Riot, that makes a breach in the
Royal Commandments, in opposition to Life, so results in Death? Where note,
this Distinction is necessary to be understood; that as Rods and Nets are
different Means, so they also answer to different Ends. The first, if when to
consult rapid and roling Streams; but the latter results in such Parts of
Water, where no Line nor Rod claims a right of Privilege; or with such a Fish
whose invincible Strength, nothing but the Net can encounter and overcome.

Thus armed at all Points with our innocent Artillery, and resolved to trample
the redolent Fields, and the florid Meadows of famous Trent, we shall there
encounter with murmuring Streams that invite to Exercise and Contemplation:
whilst the shady Forest, and solitary Groves advance our Speculation to the
Suburbs of Paradise; where all the Trees stand in such a beautiful Order (to
admiration) and divinely dressed by the Royal Hand of him that made this
stupendous Creation, denotes Mortals immortal, and Time eternal: which true
Felicity no Man attains to, by the study of Morals only, and the Beauty of the
Creation, but a Crucified Savior, and the Piety of Christianity; and then I
know not but the Streams of Damascus may as effectually cleanse as the Pool of
Bethesda.


Th. Your Discourse seems too intricate, and ambiguous for the Vulgar.


Ar. Not at all, for it neither violates Humanity, nor opposes the Piety of
Christianity; it only points to those destitute of Devotion, that would, if
possible, enervate the mystical Ray of Discovery, assassinate Piety, and
silence the Oracles of Truth, to strike truth dumb; so bury and entomb it in
the Sepulcher of Oblivion. But Truth's bright and illustrious Star will
convince the World of the Truth of this Hypothesis, that neither Envy nor
Emulation (nor studied Art in opposition to Truth) though formented by the Sons
of Zoilus, shall never darken it so, as totally to deface it, but will shine
forth a Light to discover their Shame, with the Vice of the Times, and
Exorbitancy of Life. I write to the Intelligent, and not to Alphabet Anglers,
that wander up and down besides themselves, to lick up the spumous Froth of
Fiction, and rally the Records of fabulous Pamphleteers, to swell their
impoverished empty Volumes, on purpose spread abroad to amuze the unwary: but
this I resolve against, by exhorting Ingenuity to consult Experience,
notwithstanding my Rudiments and laborious Directions; for without due
observation in the Exercise of Angling, besides Speculation in the Progress of
Theory (in this, or indeed in any other Art) no Man shall level a right
Foundation.


Th. Such signal Remonstrations (like a ingressive Spirit) strike deep
Impressions into my thoughtful Breast. It must be a Master; and what Maste^ but
Experience must we have, to induct us i^^^ the Methods, Mediums and
Regularities of Science? Does Experience any more obliterate Theory, than
Rudiments rip up the Foundation of Art? which they do not, nor cannot: then
ought the Rules of Practicks to be the solicitation of every Artist, which
Analysis of necessity I cannot but comply with; or let the surviving Ages
engrave on my Tombstone, Post est occasio calva.


Ar. To complete a Scholar therefore, we are to consider that every Pedagogue
that initiates his Novice into the Rudiments of Grammar, gives him Literature
first. After the same manner, and not altering my Methods, I have laid down the
Rules and Hypotheses of the Ground-bait. Where note, I prefer the Worm for the
Angler's Exercise (if artificially scoured) as a general Bait before any other,
and upon all Occasions (inordinate Seasons excepted) if purposing thereby to
consult the Bottom (as also the innumerable families of Fish:) and so farewell,
for it is almost Sunset.


Theophilus. What tho the Night's dark Scenes and Shades display
The bright Sun's absence; cannot the Stars make Day?

Arnoldus. Can those obscurer Tapers light the World,
Whose Lights are from the Sun's bright Furnace hurled?
Motion they have, it is true; that causes wonder:
But God that joined their Rays, takes them asunder.

Theophilus. From what bright Influence then do Comets borrow
Their radiant Beam?
Arnoldus. The Stars, they strike them through.

Theophilus. Must we conclude the World all Vegetation,
Humane Race excepted, by Generation?

Arnoldus. The slippery Womb of Earth, in time sent out
A thing incapable to walk about:
Till God in love, out of a pure Compassion,
Made Man the Margin of this great Creation.

Theophilus. Why then do Mortals fight against Superiors;
And pull down Angels to advance Inferiors?

Arnoldus. Man may attempt it; but his slender Arm
Has hardly warmth in it for to keep him warm.

Theophilus. No, why then presumes he by force to raise
His Fires so high to make the Heavens blaze?

Arnoldus. That Is a mistake, Man's but a Minute's Breath,
Blown out of Doors but with one puff of Death.

Theophilus. And yet immortal too! strange Prodigy,
That Man the Lord of all, should live to die!

Arnoldus. It Is true, a Star fell on a Shrine of Earth,
That touched Mortality, and gave it Birth,
Conduct and Reason, and a Soul immortal,
Lit by the Lamp of Heaven's glorious Portal.
Made all Miraculous, yet this will not please:
Heaven must die, to cure the World's Disease.
And yet this mortal Wonder we call Man,
Is still averse e're since the World began.

Theophilus. Ungrateful Creature, who by Heaven's Decree,
Was made to live, and had the Sov'raignty
Of the Creation. What to say I know not;
Nor what to think, for Thoughts are things that do not.

Arnoldus. Since Days and Nights all terminate in one,
And Stars made Emblems of their Sovereign Sun:
Then to be Loyal, each a Star must be;
But to be Royal, claims the Sov'raigntie.
The Gordian Knot's so knit, none can unty
But he that made the World's great Harmony.
For God with Nature such sublime things blended,
That Man nor Dev'ls, Angels themselves cannot find it.
We can but climb the gradual Steps of Sense;
And they are but Motives to Intelligence.
But those sweet melting Cords in a Saint's Breast,
That lives by Faith of things yet unexprest,
Invigorate the Soul; and lends her Eyes to see
That Earth and Heaven, all is but Harmony.

Theophilus. Then Rocks are Organs, and the ambient Air
But the harsh sound of Heaven's softer Quire.
Waters make Music; so all things by Art,
Where Nature freely her free Gifts impart,
Speak Harmony, and divinely shows
That from another Fountain this thing flows.

Arnoldus. Consider but the Chaos in Creation,
When the Divinest made a Separation:
How that the Earth stood still, whilst he raised higher
The Sun's bright Torch, or all had been on Fire.

Theophilus. Amazing Wonder! see, Aurora now
Strips off the Sables from Night's shady Brow!
That Sol no sooner peeps to gild the Skies,
But all the Mists before his Presence flies.

Arnoldus. It Is true they do; and he that sees their flight,
Sees Darkness gradually transformed to Light.
Yet let him not mistake himself, for Day
Is but Time's Copy-Book: cast that away,
And what presents? Death more obscure than Night,
Through whose dark Pilgrimage we creep to Light.

LAUS DEO.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
RABBI MOSES; or,
A Philosophical Treatise of the Original and Production of Things. Writ in
America in a Time of Solitudes. By R. Franck. And are to be sold by the Author
at his House in Barbican.


