A DEFENSE OF THE SCOTS Settlement at DARIEN. WITH An Answer to the Spanish
MEMORIAL against it. AND ARGUMENTS to prove, That it is the Interest of ENGLAND
to join with the SCOTS, and protect it. To which is added A DESCRIPTION of the
Country, and a particular Account of the SCOTS Colony.

Printed in the Year, M. DC. XC. IX.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
SIR,
THE Interest you have in the flourishing of Your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
whose Crown is transmitted to You by an Hundred and eleven of your Ancestors,
without ever having been on the Head of a Forraigner, emboldens the Author to
lay the following Sheets at your Majesty's Feet.

The design of them is to vindicate the Settlement of the Scots in Darien, and
Your Majesty's Justice in protecting them, against the Oblique Aspersions which
are cast upon it in the Spanish Memorial.

The Sovereignty of the Crown of Scotland has alwise been held Sacred by our
Ancestors, who never were sparing of their Blood to defend it either from the
Invasion of Foreigners, or the mean Compliance of some few of our Princes that
were unworthie to wear it; and therefore were either totally excluded from it,
as the Family of Baliol, or obliged to reassert its Right when rescued out of
the Hands of their Enemies, as happened to our William I. and James I.

Providence having now placed it on the Head of Your Majesty, whose Heroic
Courage is known to all the World, our Nation should be unjust to Your
Character to expect any thing less than that our Crown, which You received free
and independent from Your Ancestors, should be transmitted by You with greater
Advantages than ever to Your Successors.

Therefore it is, Great Sir, that a private Subject of your Ancient Kingdom
takes the holdness to vindicate the Sovereignty and Dignity of Your Crown as
Kings of Scots, and to put such as are Enemies to it in mind, that when Edward
I, and II. of England invaded it, the Scottish Nation did gallantly defend it,
advanced Robert Bruce to the Exclusion of Baliol the nearest Heir, and
acquainted the Princes of Christendom that they did so in defense of their
Independency; adding that they would expel Robert Bruce, if he offered to
betray their Liberty, and would never subject their Crown to that of England,
whilst there were 100 Scots men alive.

This being the fundamental Constitution of our Government, and the Condition
on which that Prince and his Successors were admitted to Our Crown; they can in
no wise be looked upon as Friends to your Majesty's Dignity as King of Scots,
who call in question what You enact in the Parliament of that Kingdom, or that
offer to traverse it by contrary Proclamations.

We are Your Majesty's Subjects as well as our Neighbors, and have an equal
Right to share your Protection, which its hoped they will at last be convinced
it is their Interest to agree to in relation to our American Settlement.

Your Majesty's Paternal Affection to the Kingdom of Scorland, has discovered
it self in many Instances: nor is it to be desired or expected by our Nation,
that it should any way interfere with the like Care and Affection, which is
owing to our Brethren of England; but there is no reason that they should enjoy
a Freedom of Trade throughout the World, and that we should be denied it.

^our Majesty in your Gracious Proposals os an Union, gave sufficient Evidence
of a Fatherly Concern for both Nations. Thereforo as it has pleased GOD to
make You the Glorious Instrument of our Common Deliverance* that He would also
make you the happy Instrument of our Inseparable Union, and after a long Reign
here, Crown You with Everlasting Glory hereafter, is the sincere and ardent
Prayer of

Your Majesty's Loyal and Affectionate Subject, Philo Caledon.

A DEFENSE of the Settlement of the SCOTS on the Isthmus of DARIEN in America
With Arguments to prove, That it is the Interest of England to join with them,
and to protect them in that Colony.
THE Heads proposed to be insisted upon in the following Sheers, ar^, The
Legality of the SCOTS Establishment, The Advantage or Disadvantage that may
redound from it to England: Whether the Scots without the Assistance of the
English may be able to maintain their footing in America; and what, may
probably be the Consequences, if the Scots should be opposed therein by the
English, and miscarry in the Undertaking.

The chief Objections against the Legality of their Establishment, ari^e from
the Memorial delivered in against it to the King, by the Ambassad or
Extraordinary of Spain, May 3, 1699. O, S, as follows:

THE Under-Subscriber, Ambassador Extraordinary from his Catholic Majesty,
finds himself obliged by express Orders, to represent to your Majesty, that the
King his Master having received Information from different places, and last of
all from the Governor of Havana, of the In^ult and Attempt of some Scots Ships,
equipped with Men and other things requisite, who design to settle themselves in
his Majestres Sovereign Demains in America, and particularly the Province of
Darien. His Majesty received those Advices with very much difcontent, and looks
upon the same as a Token of small Friendship, and as a Rupture of the Alliance
betwixt the two Crowns (which his Majesty has observed hitherto, and always
observes very religiously, and from which so many Advantages and profits has
resulted both to your Majesty and you^ Subjects) as a Consequence of which good
Correspondence, his Majesty did not expect such sudden Insults and Attempts by
your Majesty's Subjects, and that too in a time of Peace, without pretext (or
any Cause) in the very heart o^ his Demains.

All that the King desires, is, That this may be represented to your Majesty,
and that your Majesty may be acquainted, that he is very sensible of such
Hostilities and unjust Procedures, against which his Majesty will take such
Measures as he thinks convenient.

Given at London, May ^. 1699.

It were easy to make proper Remarks upon the Weakness, Insolence and
ingratitude of this Memorial, but it is not worth while; all the World knows
what the Crown of Spain ows to his Majesty of Great Britain; and therefore a
more civil Application might reasonably have been expected to a Prince, who
has not only saved the Netherlands, but prevented his Catholic Majesty from
being insulted on his Throne at Madrid. But these things we pass over, and come
to the chief point in the Memorial, which is, That the Scots have posted
themselves in the King of Spain' s Demains in America, contrary to the Alliance
betwixt the two Crowns. If this be proved to be ^alse, then the cause of the
Complaint ceases, and his Majesty of Great Britain has reason to demand
Satisfaction for the Affront offered thereby to his Justice and Sovereignty.

To prove the falsehood of the Allegation, That the Province of Darien is part
of the King of Spains Demains: It is positively denied by the SCOTS, who
challenge the Spaniards to prove their Right to the said Province, either by
Inheritance, M^rriage, Donation, Purchase, Reversion, Surrender or Conquest;
which being the only Titles by which they or any other People can claim a Right
to those or any other Dominions, if the Spaniards cannot make out their Right
by those of any of those, their Claim must of consequence be null and void.

It is evident that the Spaniards cannot pretend a Tittle to that Country by
Inheritance, Marti^, or the Donation of Prince and People; and as to Conquest
it would be ridiculous to allege it; since the Dariens are in actual
possession of their Liberty, and were never subdued, nor received any Spanish
Governor or Garrison amongst them. Nay, they were so far from it, that Wafer,
Dampier, and others that have wrote of that Country, do all agree that they
mortally hate the Spaniards, were in War with them, and that the Spaniards had
no Commerce with those Indians, nor command over them in all the North side of
the Isthmus a little beyond Porto Bello. (...) New Voyag^ and description o^
the (...) of America. p. 11. 6^, 149, 150, 151.


Capt. Sharp in the Journal of his Expedition, published in Cap^ Hacke's
Collection of Voyages, gives an account, that in 1680 he landed at Golden
Island with 330 Men, and being joined by one of the Darien Princes, whom they
called Emperor, and another to whom they gave the Tittle of King Golden* Cap,
with some hundreds of their Men, took Sancta Maria, attempted Panama, and made
prize of several Spanish Ships; which is the more remarkable, because Capt.
Sharp was afterward tried in England for Robbery and piracy on this very
Account, but acquitted because of his Commission from those Darien Princes:
which is a plain Demonstration that the Government of England did then look
upon Darein to be no way subject to Spain, whateve^ some who are Enemies to the
SCOTS, do now say against the Legality of their Settlement in that Country.
This same Expedition against the Spaniards by assistance of the Darien Indians
is confirmed by Mr. Dampier in his Introduction to his New Voyage round the
World. And the ^p of Chiapa a Prelate of their own, in his Relation of the
Spanish Voyages an^ Cruelties in the West Indies. p 217. owns that the
Spaniards had no Title to the Americans, as their Subjects, by right of
Inheritance, Purchase, o^ Conquest.

We have likewise a large Account, and a full Confirmation of the War and
perpetual Enmity betwixt the Dariens and the Spaniards in the History of the
Buccaneers of America, Vol. 2. Part 4. wrote by Basil Ringrose, who was one of
their Company. There he in^orms us that the Indians of Darien, and the
Spaniards are commonly at War with one another; and that the Buccaneers were
invited into that Country, and joined by the Darien Princes, Capt. Andrea^,
Captain Antonio, and the King of Darien, who assisted them in the taking of
Sancta Maria, au^ their Attempt upon ^anama; and the King whose Daughter the
Spaniards had stole away, promised to join the Buccaneers with 50000 Men. This
is the more remarkable, because those very Princes, or their Successors are now
in League with the Scots, and have joyfully received them into their Country.
So that it is the strangest Imposition that can be put upon any Nation, and one
of the most audacious affronts that ever was put upon so Great a Prince as K
William, for the Spaniards to pretend a Right to Darien, and accuse him of a
B^each of the Peace, because a Colony of his Subjects have settled themselves
there; when it is so well known to the World that the Crown of Spain has no
manner of Title to that Province.

Then as to any Claim by virtue of Possession, the Spaniards have no^ the least
gr^und of Plea: All they can allege on this head is, that they were once
admitted by the consent of Capt. Diego, another of the Darien Princes, to work
on some Golden Mines, within 15 Leagues, or thereabouts, of the SCOTS
Settlement: But it is plain that this makes nothing for their purpose. That
Prince admitted them only as Laborers, but not as Proprietors; and when they
broke the Con^itions on which they were admitted, viz: to allow the Dariens
such and such Shares of the Product, they were expelled again by forc^; and
ever since that time the Dariens refuse to have any further dealings with the
Spaniards, who made themselves odious to them by their Treachery and Insolence:
So that Mr. Wafer tells us page 133. they allow a distinguishing Mark of Honor
to him who has killed ^ Spaniard: and page 179. that Lacenta one of the chief
of the Darien Princes, did in his converse with him, express his Sense and
Resentment of the havoc made by the Spaniards in the West of America, at their
first coming thither.

It remains then that the Spaniards can lay no other claim to Darien but what
they plead from the Pope's general Grant of America, its being bounded by their
Dominions, and the Treaties with England. which shall be considered in their
Order.

To urge the Pope's Grant amongst Protestants is ridicolous, and amongst
Papists themselves but precarious: but adm^tting it were sufficient to justify
their Title, it is easy to prove that the Spaniards have forf^ited all the
Right that they can claim by virtue of that Grant.

The Church o^ Rome will not publicly own her power to grant a Right of
Conquest, but in order to propagate the Faith, and not that neither, except the
Infidel Prince or People be guilty of a breach of Treaty. So that the Pope's
Grant with these Restrictions is so far from establishing the Title of the
Spaniards, that it plainly overth^ows it.

That the Indians were committed to the Spaniards by Pope Alexander the VI. on
condition that they should teach them the Christian Religion, is proved by Don
Bartholomew de las Casas Bishop of Chi^pa, iu his Account of the first Voyages
and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in America, and the Relation of their
unparallel a Cruelties, p. 165. and there he likewise owns, that their
acquitting themselves so ill of that Commission, they ought to make Restitution
of all they have taken from them under this pret^xt. And page 200, he charges
them with breach of the Terms prescribed by the Apostolical Brief, tho Queen
Isabella* to whom it was granted earnestly entreated them to keep exactly to
it. P. 218. he says that the Title of the King of Spain to the Indians* is
^ounded only on the Obligation he h^d taken upon himself to instruct them in
the true Faith, as appears by the Apostolic B^ief: which they were so far from
performing, that instead of converting their Sou^s, they destroyed their
Bodies, having in those early days, viz: In the time o^ the Emperor Cha^les V.
mu^dered above 40 Millions of them; and ^ook so little care to (...) them in
the Christian Religion, that they perfectly obst^ucted their Conversion, and
sold those very Idol^ that some of the poor people had (...) away with
abhorrence, to other of the Indians; ibid* p* 194. which, together with their
(...) horrid (...), c^eated an aversion in those poor Infid^ls for Heaven it
self; according to the known Story of Hathwey an ^ndian Prince, ibid. p. 21.
wh^ being fast'ned to* a S^ake* by the Spaniards in o^der to be burnt, ^or no
other Crime but (...) to defend himself and his ^ubjects against their (...),
ask't a Fria^ that was discoursing to*him of Heaven, promising him Eternal
Happines^ there*if he would believe, and threatening him with Hell if he did
not, whether Heaven was opened to the Spaniards; answered that it was to such
of t^em as were good, replied immediately that h^ would not go thither, for fear
of meeting such Cruel and wicked Company as they were, but would much ^ather
choose to go to Hell, where he might be Delivered from the troublesome sight o^
such kind of People. So that their forfeiture of all Right or Title to Darien,
by the Pope's G^ant, if it were of any validity, is plainly demonstrated.

Their next Plea is, that Darien is bounded or enclosed by their Dominions,
Viz. by Portobello and Carthagena, with their Territories on the No^th, and
Panama and Sancta Maria on the South. To this it is Answered, that Darien is
bounded only by ^he Sea on both sides, without so much as a Spanish Fort or
Garrison, from Nombre de Dios, to the Gulf of Darien on the North Sea, or from
the River of Chepo, to the River of Cong^ on the South Sea. The Territories of
the Spaniards confining on bo th end of the Isthmus are not unlimited, but are
restricted on both sides by the Dariens, who, as has been already said, were
never subject to Spain. Nor is it any new thing in the World, for independent
Sovereignty s to ly enclosed within the Dominions of other Princes, to instance
in no more than Orange and Avignon in Europe, Ceuta, Metilla. etc. possessed by
the Spaniards themselves in Africa, which lie in the very bosom of Morocco,
and yet the Spaniards don't think their Title to them e're a whit the worse.
The Dutch and Portugueze have both of them Settlements on the Coast of Brasil,
to which the Spaniards pretend a Right. The French have settlements in
Hispaniola and Guiana, notwithstanding the Neighborhood of the Spaniards. The
English and French have both of 'em Plantations in Newfoundland. The Dutch in
time of Peace settled in Long Island, in the middle of the English Plantations,
yet no War ensued upon it. The English Plantations themselves of Bahama
Islands, tho the Spanish Fleet passed betwixt them and Florida: And the English
have several times settled at Port Royal in Campechy Bay, to cut Loggwood, etc.
and removed and settled as they found Convenient. K. Charles II* in time of
Peace granted a Patent to Mr. Cox, to settle a Colonie in the Bay of Mexico,
which was never Questioned by the Spaniards: And the French have now since the
Conclusion of the last Peace, planted a Colony on the River Mississipi in that
same Bay; against which we hear of no Complaints from Madrid* So that the Plea
of the Spaniards from this Topic is perfectly overturned by Common Practice,
the Law of Nations, and their own Concessions in parallel Cases.

The next Plea of the Spaniards is from the Treaties betwixt them and the Crown
of Great Britain, of which they allege the Settlement of the Scots at Darien
to be a Breach, But that there is no Ground for this Allegation. will appear to
those that peruse the said. Treaties, viz. That of May 23 1667. and that of
July 1670, wherein there is not the least Mention of Excluding either Party from
enlarging their Dominions in Ameriea, upon Wastes, or by consent of the
Natives, in such places as have never yet been possessed by Spain or Great
Britain. So that all that can be infe^'d from those Treaties, is, that they
were a mutu^l security for the peaceable possession of what each Crown enjoyed
in that Country. and no more; which is sufficiently confirmed by the Patent
granted to Dr. Cox, and the settling and removing of the English in Campechy
Bay, etc. without Control, as before mentioned.

Having thus made it evident that the Spaniards have no manner of Title or
Right to Darien, it is Natural in the next place to show that they themselves
are guilty of the Breach of Treaty by proceeding in this Affair as they have
done.

By the third Article of the Treaty between the Crowns of Great Britain and
Spain* concluded at Madrid May 23. 1667. it is provided, That if any Injury
shall be done by either of the said Kings, or by the People or Subjects of
either of them, to the People or Subjects of the other, against the Articles of
that Alliance, or against common Right, there shall not therefore be given
Letters of Reprisal, Marque or Countermarque, by any of the Confederates, until
such time as Justice is followed in the ordinary Course of Law. Yet the
Spaniards without any such Procedure, or offering in the least to prove their
Title to Darien, present a virulent and huffi^g Memorial, at the very first
charging the King with want of Friendship, and a Breach of Alliance, and
threatening to take such measures as they shall think meet: when their sickly
Monarchy has not yet had time to breath, since rescued from the common danger,
wherein Europe was involved, by the Arms of that very Prince whom they treat so
ungratefully.

But this is not all; for contrary to the express Words of that same Treaty,
they attack the Scots by Sea and Land, who had done them no Injury, but
acquainted them that they came peaceably, without any hostile design against
them or any other People; And were so generous as to reject the Motion of Capt.
Andreas, one of the Darien Princes, and their Ally, when he offered to make
them Masters of Panama, if they would but join him with 500 of their Men.

The Spaniards have also, contrary to the 10th and 11th Articles of the Treaty
concluded at Madrid. July 18 1670, concerning America, detained the Scots and
English Prisoners who were forced ashore at Carthagena by Shipwreck, tho all
such practices be expressly provided against by the said Articles; and they have
also violated the 14th Article of that Treaty, which forbids Reprisals, except
in case of denying or unreasonably delaying Justice, From all which it is
evident, that the King of Great Britain has just reason to demand Satisfaction
of the Spaniards sor attacking his Subjects contrary to Treaty; and that the
SCOTS being thus injuriously treated, may very lawfully, not only make
Reprisals upon the Spaniards for themselves, but join with the King of Darien
in taking Sancta Maria, Panama, or any other place helonging to the Spaniards
in that Country, of which the Dariens are Natural Lords, and the Spaniards
Tyrannical Usurpers, as is pleaded by the King of Darien himself; and therefore
he invited the English Buccaneers to assist him to retake it: and by this Capt.
Sawkins justified his proceedings in a Letter to the Governor of Panama,
asserting that the King of Darien was true Lord of Panama, and all the Country
thereabouts; and that they came to assist him. History of Buccaneers, Vol. 2.
part 4. p. 32. And we have mentioned before that Capt. Sharp, who was accused
of Piracy, for that same Expedition, and succeeded Sawkins in his Command, was
acquitted in England, because he had that Prince's Commission.

Having fully proved that the Spaniards have no Title in Darien, it remains to
be proved that the SCOTS have as good and just a Title to their Settlement
there, as any People in the World can have; which may easily be demonstrated
thus:

They were authorized by an Act of Parliament, and the Kings Letters Patent, to
plant Colonies in Asia, Africa, or America, upon Places not inhabited, or any
other Place by Consent of the Natives, not possessed by any European Prince or
State. Being provided with this Authority than which there cannot be a Greater,
or one more duly and honestly limited, they equipped their Ships, and landed on
the North side of the Isthmus of Darien in November School. where the Spaniards,
as has been fully proved, never had any possession, and no other European
Prince or State pretends any Claim to it. Being arrived there, they fairly
obtained the Consent of the Princes and People of the Country, and particularly
of Captain Andreas, who is the chief Man in that Tract; And after a solemn
Treaty and Alliance deliberatly made, and wrote in Spanish, because the said
Prince understands that Language, they peaceably enter upon their new Colony,
without either Force or Fraud. So that they have religiously kept to the
Conditions of the Act and Patent, which is a plain demonstration hat they have
a just and legal Title to their Settlement. and a Right to the Protection of
the Government, against the Attempts of the Spaniards, or any other People
whatsoever.

The next Topic to be insisted upon. is the Advantage or Disadvantage that may
redound to England from this Settlement. We shall begin with the Disadvantage
which consists in the supposed Damage it may do to the Trade of England, and
that it may, as is pretended, occasion a Rupture between them and Spain. To
this we may easily reply, that being a distinct and independent Nation, we are
not obliged to consult their Interest, any further than they consult ours; and
that we have as much Reason to maintain this Colony, because of the Advantage
it may bring to our selves, as they have to oppose it, because of the
Disadvantages that they fancy may arise from thence to England. But withal we
deny that it can be any damage to their Trade, which from that part of the
World consists chiefly in Sugar and Tobacco, neither of which are yet to be
found in New Caledonia. But that which we look upon to be a complete Answer to
the Objection, is this, That they may be sharers with Us in the settlement if
they please, and by consequence Partners in the Profits and Trade, and lay it
under such Regulations as may prevent its endamaging the Commerce of England.

And whereas it is further objected, That by the great Immunities and freedom
granted to the SCOTS Company for so many Years, we shall be able to undersell
the English Company forestal their Markets, and lessen his Majesty's Customs;
we answer, that this Objection is in a great measure obv^ated, since we do not
now pretend to set up an East India Trade; but admitting it were true, it will
be to the general Advan^age of the English Nation, since the Buyers are always
more than the Sellers. It must certainly be better for the Kingdom in general,
that every one who has occasion for Musl^n or Indian Silks, etc. should have so
many shillings per Yard or piece in their Pockets, than that some two or three
Merchants should once in an Age get Money enough to make a Daughter or two a
Countess or Duchess. No^ can it be denied but it is better for England, that
Housekeepers in general should save that Money to buy Provisions for their
Families, which consumes our own Product, than that a dozen of Merchants should
be enabled by the extravagant prices of those commodities to keep their
Coaches. Add to this, that the English if they please by joining with the
SCOTS, may have an equal share of all those Immunities; and if there should be
for some time a lessening of the King's Customs, of which there is at present
no manner of prospect, it will be sufficiently made up in time to come by a
large Addition, if that Colony prospers; so that the King's Bounty in that
respect, is but like the bestowing of charge to improve barren or waste Ground,
which will return with treble Interest to him or his Heirs.

There Is another Objection made against the SCOTS Company, that by their
Constitution, such Ships as belong to them must break Bu^k ^o (...) but in
Scotland, which will diminish the number of English Ships and Se^men, and make
Scotland the only Free Port of all these Commodities. ^o which it is ^eplyed,
That tho ou^ own Ships are obliged to break Bulk no where but at home, they
don't lay same Obligation upon others, but allowing them a free Trade to
Darien, they may ca^ry their Goods where they please; or upon fair Proposals,
there is no doubt but the Parliament of Scotland will give ^he English all
possible Liberty as to that matter.

Then as to the haza^d of a Rupture with Spain, we reply, Tha^ the Spaniards
are in no condition to break with England, when they are not able to maintain
themselves against the Insu^ts of the French by Sea and Land: and the only way
to secure them in the British Interest, is to have a powerful Colony in Darien,
which lying in the very Center o^ their American Dominions, and within reach of
their Silver and Gold Mines, will be an effectual Cu^b upon them, and not only
prevent their own Host^lities, but their joining at any time with our Enemies;
or if they do, being Masters of their Money, we shall speedily cut ^e sinews of
their War.

In the ^ext place we u^ge that it will be very much for the In^rest and
Advantage of England to encourage and support us in ^his Settlement.

1. Because by this means the SCOTS will increase their shipping, and come in
time to have a Naval Force, capable of assisting the English in the common
Defense of the ^sland, in maintaining the Sovereignty of the Seas, and
convoying their Merchant Men in time of Wa^; the necessity of which is obvious
enough, since they and the Du^ch* both have been scarce able to secure their
T^ade, maintain their Dominion in the Seas, and defend themselves from the
Invasions of the French during the last War. Nor can the English always promise
to themselves the Amity of the Dutch, who are their Rivals in Trade, and dif^er
far enough from them both in T^mper and Interest, there is nothing to cement
them but the Life of our p^esent Sovereign: Whereas the SCOTS being united with
the English under the same Government, and inhabiting the same Island, must of
(...) have the same interest as to Trade, and to defend the Coun^y against all
Foreign Invad ers, as they constantly did in fo^mer times, against Romans,
Danes, Saxons, and Normans, (...) their living then under a separat Prince, and
their frequent Wars with England. No^ is that brave Resistance which a few of
them made to the Dutch at Chattam to be forgotten, which did in a great measure
repair the Honor of England, and make amends ^or the Ignominy and disgrace
which that Attempt put upon the English Nation*

2. As Scotland increases in shipping, they will increase in Wealth and by
consequence be able to bear a greater share of the Burden of any Foreign War,
which will save Men and Money to England, and lighten their Taxes.

3. The Success of the SCO^S in their Americ^n Colony* w^ll be an additional
strength to the English (...) in the West Indies, as well as an Advancement of
their Trade, by consuming their product, and giving them theirs in Exchange.

4. The success of the Scots at Darien will be o^ great advantage to England;
for the more Mon^y the Scots acquire by their Trade, the more they will spend
in England, which being the Seat of the Government, must frequently be visited
by their Nobility and Gentry, who generally furnish the^seves in England with
their best Apparel, Household-(...), Coaches and Horses etc. besides the Money
that the young Noblemen and Gentlemen spend in their passage through that
Nation, when they go and come from their Travels. These things occasion their
laying out vast Sums of Money annually in the City of Lon^n, which being the
Seat of the Government, will as certainly draw Money from Scotland, as the Sun
draws Vapors after it.

5. The success of the Scots in their Foreign Pla^tation will not only ease
England of a great number of their P^dlars, so frequently (...) of in (...), by
Country Corporations and (...), but it will occasion the return home, and
prevent the going o^t of v^st numbers of their Youth, who follow the (...) sort
of (...), or betake themselves to the Sword in Denmark, (...), (...)* M^ovy*
Germany, Holland, and (...); By which me^ns the Government of Great Brit^in,
may fu^nish t^ir F^ts and Armies at a much Cheaper and easier Rate than
fo^merly, and with as good Mariners and Soldiers as any in the Worl^.

6. The E^glish by joining with the Scots, and supporting their Colony at
D^rien, may have their Plate brought home in their own Bottoms, and from their
own Mines, with which we are assured that Country abounds, without being
obliged to touch at Cadiz, or any (...) Port, being liable to the Vexatious
Indu^os of Foreign Princes, or in such hazard of being Intercepted* as they
many times were du^ing the late War.

7. The English may by joining with the Scots, render themselves more Capable
than ever of keeping the Balance of Europe in their H^nds; a Trust which
Nature and Providence seems to have assigned them, since their Situation and
Naval Force, not only mak^s it propper for them, but they have had an
opportunity put into their han^s in l^ttle above the Revolution of ^ne Century,
of twice breaki^g the Chains of Europe, when threatened with Slavery; first by
the Spaniards, and then by the French. This is so much the more evident, that
by being possessed of Darien, they will be able either to prevent the uniting
the Spani^h and French Monarchies; or if not so, to render that Union so much
the less dangerous, when it will be in their power to s^ize their (...) a^
Dominions in the Indies, without which that bulky Mona^chy, must fall by his
own weight. This is likewise of so much the greater importance, that it may
very probably* either (...) a Religious War, ^owards which the Papists discover
so much (...), or at least bring it to a (...) Conclusion: For we have as good
Reason to look upon the Spanish Mines in the West Indies to be Antichrist's
Pouch, by which he maintains his War against the Church, as the old Taborites
had to call the Silver Mines in Bohemia by that Name. It is ce^tainly the
surest Method of destroying Antichrist, to seize his Purse; for if he once be
deprived of Judas's Bag, he will quickly drop St. Peter's Key^. It Is by the
Charms of her Gold, that the Babylonish Whore has made the whole World to
wonder after her, and the Kings of the Earth to be Drunk with the Cup of her
Fornication.

8. By this means the English may be better able to prevent the ruin of their
Trade in the Mediterranean and West Indies, if the French should possess
themselves of the Kingdim of Spain: and they will likewise be the better able
to prevent their possessing themselves of the Netherlands; which if once they
should do, and get Ports there capable of holding a Fleet, they would also ruin
their E^stland Trade, and put a period to the Liberties of Great Britain.

9. It will effectually unite the Scots to England by an inseparable Tie, if
the English join us in this Undertaking: Their Ancestors would have gladly
purchased this Union at a much dearer rate, but were al^ise out bid by France:
and the want of which Union made the English not only an easy prey to their
successive Conquerors, but lost them all the large Provinces that they enjoyed
beyond sea, which were their natural Barriers* gave them a free Access to the
Continent, and made the English Name so glorious in the days of their Ancestors.

10. It will be of general advant^ge to the Protestant Interest, and contribute
to the advancement of pure Christianity, without any of the Romish
sophistications: which certainly ought to weigh much with all true Protestants;
and so much the more, that the Pope and the Conclave of Rome have espoused the
Quarrel of the Spaniards in this Affair as a Cause of Religion. Doubtless the
poor Americans will be more i^ clinable to embrace Christianity, when they find
the difference of the Morals and Doctrine betwixt Protestants and Papists, and
see ^t the former treat tbem with Humanity, and seek their Welfare both in Body
and Soul; whereas the Spaniards have rendered (...), and the Religion ^hey
profess* odious, by the inhuman Cruelties and brutish Lusts, wbich they have
exercised upon so many Millions of the Natives. This is so far from being a
Calumny, that an unexceptionable Author of their own, Don B^tholomew de las
casas Bishop of Chiapa, f^rmerly mentioned, who was an Eye witness of their
Cruelties, gives an account that they had in his time destroyed above 40
Millions of the poor Indians; tho they received them with the greatest kindness
imaginable, were ready to do 'em all the Friendly Offices that one man could
desire of another, and testified their great Inclination to have embraced the
Christian Religion. But the Spaniards aimed at the destruction, and not at the
Conversion of the In^ians; and are avowedly charged with it by the said Bishop,
who in many places of his Book decl^res, that after they had sent for the
Chiefs of the Countries to meet them in an amicable manner, which the poor
^armless Creatures did without suspicion of any ^d, these merciless (...)
murdered them wholesale, on purpose to make themselves terrib^e to them. This
was a Practice so inconsistent with Humanity, that all the People of the World
ought to have re^ente ^ it; as having m^h more reason to declare the Spania^ds
to be Enemies to Mankind, than ever the Roman Senate had to declare Nero to be
such.

But this sort of Treatment, compared with what they made others to suffer, may
well be called Mercy: for tho it was death, the Indians were hereby quickly
delivered from their Misery; whereas they put mul^itude of others to li^ing
deaths, that they might ^eel themselves die gradu^lly; and yet this is not so
intol^ble neith^ as to the condi^ion of those poor people, tha^ had the
misfortune to survive that Cruelty; for the whole time of the Lives under that
miserable Servitude, i^ but Death prolonged, or making his attacks upon 'em by
intolerable Labor, and continual hunger, the most insupportable o^ all plagues;
these poor Creatures that ^oil in the Mines, and are employed in Pearl fishing*
etc. having no more Sustenance allowed them, and that (...) of the (...) so^t,
th^n is just enough to keep the Soul and Body together, in order to prolong
their Misery. Then let any M^n, who has bu^ the least remains of Humani^y left
him, judge whether the Sco^s could be criminal, if ^hey should have actu^lly
l^nded upon a Spanish Settl^ment, and have seized the same, ^n o^der to deli^
their Brethren the Sons of Adam* from such hellish Se^vitude and Oppression ^s
the above me^tion'd Bishop describes; and i^ any man tha^ has any Bowels of
Compassion within him can s^y they could, what shadow of Reason is there to
b^ame the Scots for ^recting a Colony where the Spaniards never had any footing?

The ne^t thing to be considered is, whether the Scots without the assistance
of England, may probably maintain their footing ^here* which th^re's no doubt
may very well be d^termin'd in the affi^mative*

1. Because the whole Kingdom of Scotland being more zealous for it, and (...)
in it, than they have been in any other (...) for forty or fifty ye^rs past,
it is not to be doubted, but they will use their utmost Efforts to support
themselves in it by their own strength; or if that will not do, by making
Alliances with other Nati^ns that are able to assist them with a Naval force.

2. If they me^t with no other Opposition but what the Spaniards are abl^ to
make t^ them, it will be ^asie for the N^bility, and Gent^y, and Roy^l
Buroughs of Scotland* to raise Money upon their Lands, etc. to increase their
Stock for the American Tr^de, and buy Ships of fo^ce to protect it; Nay,
without that it is but giving Commis^ion to the Buccaneers ^o* become an
Overmatch for the Spaniards*

3. Supposing the Frenc^ should offer to join with the Spaniards, and assist
them to drive the Scots from Dar^n, a some ^ay they have already proffered; we
are no^ to imagine that the Spaniards will accept their Proff^rs in this case,
when they (...) ^ed them as to ^he d^ving the M^rs from before Ceuta. The
Re^sons are obvious: They declined the accepting their Proff^rs as to Ceuta*
because they would not thereby give the French an opportunity of possessing
themselves of any of their Towns in Africa, as it is but too common for
Foreign Auxiliarys to do in such cases. Then ce^tainly they have much greater
Reason to refuse their Proffers as to Darien, America being of infinitely mo^
(...) to them than some African Towns: and if once the French should get
^ooting there, it would be in vain for the Spanish G^andees any further to
dispute the succession of France to t^eir Crown; for they wo^ld immediately
seize upon their Mines an^ Treasures in the WestInd^es, without which the
Spanish Monarchy is not able to support it self.

O^ supposing that the King of Spain should live for many years, and by
consequen^e keep the French out of possession; ye^ having once got footing at
Darien, which they will certainly do, i^ the Scots be expelled by their
assistance, the Spaniards will quickly be convinced to their cost, that they
ar^ more d^ngerous (...) th^n the Scots; not only because of their g^ater power
to do them mo^e mischief, but because o^ their (...) Temper, which all Europe
is sensible of; and being of the sam^ Religion with the Spaniards* and havi^g
of late years set up for the Champions of Popery, they will by the Influence of
the Cl^rgy, bring all the Spanish settlements in America to a depen^ence upon
them, and a love for them as the great Protectors of the Catholic Faith; which
will at once destroy the Interest of Spain in America.

This will appear to be no vain speculation, to those that consider the Tempe^
of the Popish Clergy, and the In^olence of the Spanish Inquisitors, who so
da^ingly reflected upon the late Alliance of Spain with P^otestant Princes and
States, tho absolutely necessa^y to preserve that Nation srom being swallowed up
by France.

Whereas the Scots being zealous Protestants, and for that very Reason hateful
to the Popish Clergy and L^ity, they are under a moral Impossibility of having
so much Influence to withdraw the American settlements from the Obedience of
Spain: and be^es, being under an Obligation by the Principles of their
Religion, and their fundamental Constitution, not to invade the Property of an
other, the Spaniards have no Cause to tear any thing from them* provided they
forbear Hostilities on their part; but on the contrary may find them true and
faithful Allies; and useful to assist them in the defense of their Country. if
attacked by the French as in the late War: it being the interest of the Scots,
as well as of the Spaniards, to prevent the accession of the Crown of Spain to
that of France.

These things, together with the known Endeavors of the French to pro^uce an
Interest amongst the Natives of that Country, and especially with Don Pedro and
Corbet. in order to a Settlement, make it evident enough that it is the
Interest of Spain the Scots should rather have it than the French, who have
already been tampering with the Spaniards, as well as with the Indians, and
doubt not to have a large share of America when ever the King of Spain dies.

But admitting that the Spaniards should so far mistake their Interest, as to
accept of the Proffers of the French to expel the Scots, it is not impossible
for the latter to find other Allies than the English to assist them with a
naval Force to maintain their Possession.

The Dutch are known to be a People that seldom or never mistake their
Interest: They are sensible how useful the Alliance of Scotland may be to them,
both in regard of their Liberty to fish in our Seas without control, and of
being a Curb upon England, in case the old Roman Maxim of delenda est Carthago,
should come any more to be applied by the English to that Republic, as in the
Reign of K. Charles II. They are likewise sensible of the Advantage it would be
to their trade to be partners with the Scots at Darien; and how effectual it
may be to disable the French to p^sue their Cl^im to Sp^in, and by (...) to
(...) the old Title of that ^own upon their own Seven, as well as to swallow up
the other t^n Provinces. Th^se things, together w^ ^ lon^ con^inu'd Amity and
Trade be^xt Scotl^nd and Holland and their Union in Religion and Ecclesiastical
Disciplin^ are sufficient to evince that the Dutch would become ou^ (...) in
America with little (...). That they ^re able to as^ us in that Case with a
(...) Force suffici^* is be^ond contradiction; and that they would soon be
convinced it is the (...) to do it, to prevent that monstrous I^crease of the
Fren^ M^chy, is obvious enough from the part they acted in the l^ W^.

But admitting that none of those (...) should pre^il with the Dutch, and that
they should likewis^ abandon us; it is not impo^ble for us to obtain a^
Alliance and Naval Force (...) the Norther^ Cro^ns: It Is well en^gh k^ that
(...) (...) abound ^ith Me^ and Shippi^g, and that they (...) (...) (...) (...)
a^ their hearts to m^ke an Exchange of (...) for the Gold (...) Silver of
America, which they might ea^ily carry from To^ to To^, (...) from Market to
Market. (...) the trouble of a W^l-barr^, as they are now obliged to do ^ith
their ^per. Fr^ all ^ich it is evident (...) that it is not imp^ble ^or (...)
(...) (...) maintain themselves i^ Darien wi^out the A^ance of England.

The next thing to be discoursed of is, what the (...) may probably be, if the
E^glish should oppose us in this Settlement.

We could h^ily wish the^ ^d ^ever been any ground for this suggestion, and
that the Opposition we have met with from England had been les^ National ^han
that which we h^d from both their Hous^s of Parliament, af^ the p^ssing an Act*
for an African Company, etc. in ou^s* a^ it (...) to be wish*d (...) so many of
the English had not given us such proofs of an alienated mind and (...) to our
Welfare, as they h^ve done sinc^ by their Resident at Hamborough, and their
late Proclamations in their West* India Plantations; and we could have wished
above all that his Majesty of England had not in the least concu^'d, or given
his Countenance to that Opposition; for as King of Scots it is ^ain he could
not do it: he ha h confirm*d what we have done by the Touch of his Scepter,
which no private Order or (...) can revoke. And we could wish that his English
Counselors, who put ^m upon those things, would remember that Strafford and
Laud lost their ^eads, ^or giving K Charles the First, that fatal Advice in
oppressing and opposing the Scots.

We di^ verily think that the suffering of our Crown to be uni^ed with that of
England, in the person of K James their first, and our Sixth; our seasonable
coming to the rescue of their expi^ing Libe^es in the Reign of K. Charles I.
our being so instrumental to rescue them from Anarchy and Confusion* by the
Restoration o^ K. Charles II. and above all, our Generous and Frank Concurrence
with them in the late happy Revolu^ion, and Advancement of K. William III. We
did verily think that all these things deserved a better Treatment; and to
evince that they did, we shall beg leave to ^nsist a little upon the first and
last.

The English have no cause to think that we were ignorant of the Reason why
their Politic Henry VII. Chose rather to match his Eldest Daughter with the
King of Scots, than with the King of France, because he foresaw, that if the
King of Scots should by that means come to the Crown of England, he would
remove the Seat of his Government thither, which would add to the Grandeur and
Riches of England: Whereas if the King of France did by that means fall Heir to
the English Crown, he would certa^nly draw the C^t of England to Paris. ^his
the Scots were so (...) from being ignorant of, that many of the Nobility and
Gen^ry did express their disl^ke of the Union of the Crowns, as well knowing
that it would reduce our Kingdom into a Subjection and Dependence upon England,
and drain us of what Substance we had; and theresore some of them expressed
themselves on that occasion, that Scotland was never Conquered till then: Yet
such was our Zeal for the common Welfare of the Island, the Interest of the
Protestant Religion, and of Europe in general, which were then almost in as
much danger by Spain, as they have been since by France, that we quietly and
freely parted with our King, and suffered him to accept the English Crown,
rather than the Nation should be involved in War and Confusion, and the
Protestant Religion endangered by another Successor, as it must necessarily
have been, had the Infanta of Spain, whose Title. was then promoted by the
Popish Interest, Succeeded. And all the reward we had for this Condescension
and Kindness, was a contemptuous and disdainful refusal, on the part of
England, of an Union of the N^tions when proposed, tho the same would visibly
have tended to the Benefit of the whole Island, the general advantage o^
Europe, and the security and increase of the Protestant Interest. And our King
was so little thankful on his part, that tho he promised solemnly in the Great
Church of Edinburgh before his departure, that he would visit his Ancient
Kingdom, once in three years, he never saw it after but once, and that not till
14 years after. And by the influence of that same Faction in England, who are
still our Enemies, he made Innovations both in Church and State, contrary to
the Laws of the Land, and his own solemn Oath; which laid the foundation of all
those Disasters that ended in the fa^al Exit of his Son, and the subversion of
the Government of both Nations. These were the first Advantages we had by the
Union of the Crowns.

His Son King Charles I, had scarce ascended the Throne, when we had new Proofs
of the Disadvantages we labored under by that Union; For he by the Advice of
some Enemies to our Nation, did in an Imperious and Arbitrary manner, send for
our Crown, tho the only Monument almost left us of our Independency and
Freedom; but was generously answered by him that had it in keeping, That if he
would come and be Crowned in Scotland, he should have all the Honor done him,
that ever was to his Ancestors; but if he d^d not think it worth his while,
they might perhaps be inclined to make cho^e of another Sovereign, or to that
effect; as record^d in the Con^uation of S^r Richard Baker's History. Another
(...) we had by that Union of the Crown, was this, That that unfortunate Prince
being inspired with an Aversion to the Constitution of our Country, by his
Education in the Court of England, he made an unnatural War upon us, to bring
us to a Conformity with England in Church Matters. We shall not here offer to
debate, which of the Churches was best const^uted, or most agreeable to the
Scripture-Pattern: It suffices for our Argument, that we were injured in having
a Foreign Model offered to be obtruded upon us, which was ^he Cons^quence of
the Union of the Crowns, and of having our King e^ucated in another N^tion; but
that was not all, another mischievous effect of the Union was this, that
whatever K. Charles had deserved at our hands. ^et out of natural Af^ection,
Conscience and Honor. we were obliged to do what we could to prevent his
illegal Trial and Death, and to defend his Sons Title, which threw us into
Convulsions at home occasioned us the loss of several Armies, and expos^d our
Nation afterward to Ruin and Deva^tation by our implacable Enemy the Usurper,
which together with the Ungrateful Retributions made us by the Government after
the Restoration, were enough to have wearied any Nation under Heav^n, but our
selves, of the Union of the Crowns.

Yet such was our Z^al for the Protestant Intrest, the Welfare of the Isl^nd,
and the Liberty of Europe, that tho we had a (...) oppor^ity of providing
otherwise for our (...) and the Advancement of ou^ Trade, and of forming our
selves into a Common wealth, or or bringing England to our own terms, yet we
frankly and generously concurred with them to settl^ our G^vernment on the same
Persons, and in the same manner as they did theirs, and all the Reward we had
from them is, that an Union of the Nations, tho twice proposed by his Majesty
in Parliament, has been (...) rejected, our King questioned by Parliament of
England ^or an Act of his Parliament in Scotland, which is a manifest
Impeachment of our Sovereignty; a Compliance with which excluded Baliol and his
Heirs for ever from our Crown* and to this they have added an opposition to our
receiving foreign Subscriptions at Hamburgh and elsewhere, refused us a Supply
of Corn for our Money* to relieve us in our Distress; and discouraged our
Settlement a^ Darien, by forbidding their Subjects to Trade with us there. If
these continued Slights and Injuries be not enough to make us weary of the
Union of the Crowns, let any Man judge.

To discover a little of the unreasonableness of this sort of Treatment, we
dare appeal to the calm thoughts of such of our Neighbors in England, as
prefer the Interest of the Public to private Animosities, and foolish
ill-grounded Piques, either as to Church or State; whether at the time of the
Revolution, and before we declared our selves, they would not have been willing
to have assured themselves of our Friendship, at the rare of uniting with us as
one Nation? Had we but demurred upon for^eiting the late K. James, or made but
a Proffer of renewing our ancient League with France, and joining with that
Crown to keep that Prince upon the Throne of Great Britain; they know we might
have made what Terms we pleased with the late King and Louis XIV. on that
condition, and might have been restored to all the Honors and Privileges that
our Ancestors enjoyed in France, which were almost equal to those of the
N^tives; and yet that gallant Nation thought it no disparagement to them,
however we be despised and u^dervalued now by a certain Party in England.

Had we but seemed to have made such Overtures, the English must needs have
foreseen that the natural Consequences of such a design, i^ it had taken
effect, must have been these, viz the late King's Adherents in England would
certainly have joined us and our Nation would have afforded them a safe
retreat, in case of any Disaster, till they could have concerted Matters to the
best advantage; the late King would not have yielded himself such an easy
Conquest, nor disbanded his Army in such a manner as he did; Ireland had
certainly never revolted, since every one knows that the Revolution was begun,
and in a great measure perfected there by the Scots of the North; so that
England must have become the Theater of War, been liable to an Invasion from
France on all occasions, would only have strengthened her Fetters by struggling
with them, and exposed all the Patriots of her Religion and Liberty to Butchery
and Destruction.

These must certainly have been the Consequences os our adhering to the late
King, and the English would have thought they had had a very good Bargain if
they could have bought us off in that Case with uniting both the Kingdoms into
one, and granting us a joint Trade to their own Plantations; whereas now they
will not allow us to settle a Foreign Colony of our own, and treat us as
Foreigners in theirs.

To show that this is not a mere Conjecture, that has no other ground but a
Vision of the Brain, they may be pleased to consider the honorable Privileges
granted US by their Ancestors, and some of the greatest Princes that ever
swayed their Scepter, viz; King Edward and William the Conqueror, who by the
Consent of the States in Parliament assembled, enacted, That the Scots should
be accounted Deniz^ns of England, and enjoy the same privileges with
themselves, because of their frequent Intermarriages with the English, and that
they did ever stand stoutly as one Man with them, for the common Utility of the
Crown and Kingdom, against the Danes and Norwegians, fought it most valiantly
and unanimously against the common Enemy, and bore the burden of most fierce
Wars in the Kingdom. This they will sind in a Book called Archaionomia,
translated from the Saxon by William Lambard, and printed at London by Jo^n Day
in 1568.

It must be granted, that the Reasons of such a grateful Retribution are
redoubled now: Intermarriages betwixt the two Nations are more frequent than
ever; the Union of the Kingdoms under one Crown for almost 100 years; the
generous Concurrence of the Scots in the last Revolution; their loss of so many
gallant Officers and brave Soldiers in the common Cause during the late War,
and the preservation of Ireland, which has been twice owing to ou^
Countrymen, might reasonably entitle us to the same Privileges now, that our
Ancestors were formerly allowed by K. Edward, and William the Conqueror. We
need not insist on another sort of Obligati^n, that we have put upon England,
twice within this 60 years, viz: the delivering them from their Oppressions in
the time of K. Charles I. the Anarchy of the Rump, and several Models of Armies
and Juntos. by encouraging General Monk' s Undertaking; for it cannot be denied
that we had the Balance of Europe in our hands, at the time of the last
Revolution, and that we turned the Scale to the advantage of England in
particular, and of Europe in general, which must be allowed to be as great a
Service, as that which was so thankfully rewarded by Edward, and William the
Conquero; whence it is evident that those Englishmen; who at present oppose our
Settlement in America, don't inherit the gratitude of their Ancestors, when
they not only will not allow us to trade in Conjunction with them, but
withstand our doing any thing that may advance* a Trade* by our selves.

If they object that what we did in all those cases, was no more th^n our duty,
and what we owed to our own preservation as well as to theirs: it is easy to
reply, that admitting it to be so, yet by the Laws of GOD and Men People are
encouraged to perform their Duties by Rewards; and their Ancestors were so
sensible of this, that tho they knew we were equally coneern'd to defend the
Island against foreign Invaders as well as they, yet they thought themselves
obliged in Policy as well as Gratitude, to reward us; which they not only did
by that Honorary Premium of allowing us to be Denisons of England. as
abovementioned, but sometimes gave to us, and at other times confirmed to us
the three Northern Counties of Northumberland, Westmorland, and Cumberland, to
be held in Fee of the Crown of England.

It is likewise very well known with how much honor the Parliament of England
treated us, when they courted onr Assistance against K. Charles I. and what
large Promises that Prince made us, if we would have but stood Neuter; which
tho we had reason to think many of those that opposed him had no great kindness
neither for our Civil nor Ecclesiastical Constitution, yet the sense that we
had of the common danger that our Religion and Liberties were in at that time,
made us proof against all those Tentations; so that after all Endeavors for a
Reconciliation betwixt the King and Parliament of England proved unsuccessful,
we sent an Army, which cast the Balance on the side of the latter, who before
that time were reduced low enough by the Kings Army, as is very well known to
such as are acquainted with the History of those times, and is owned by my Lord
Hollis in his Memoirs lately published.

But to return to the last Revolution; Tho we must own that we owe our
Deliverance to his present Majesty, and were obliged in Conscience and Honor
to concur with him; Tet who could have blamed us to have stood upon Terms
before we had fallen in with England, Especially considering how ungratefully
(nay villanously) we were treated by Cromwell and his Party, after we had saved
them and the Parliament of England, from the Scorpions that the Cavaliers had
prepared to chastise them with; as is owned by the said Lord Hollis. Not could
we have been any way Calpable, if we had stood upon higher and surer Terms with
his Majesty, Considering how unthankfully we were abused and enslaved by our
late Kings, for whom we had acted and suffered so much. And tho we must own
that no less Present than that of ou^ Crown, was sufficient to testify our
Gratitude for what the Prince of Orange had done for us, yet we were under no
necessity of gratifying him in that manner, since our Deliverance was effected
before hand, and that he himself in his Declaration, expres'd it to be no part
of his design to come for the Crown, so that our Re ward was as frank and
generous as his Service.

Then as to England, we were under no manner of obligation to continue the
Union with them; We might have insisted upon having our King obliged to reside
as much amongst us, as amongst them: that we should be governed without any
Consideration or respect to their Interest, any further than it fell in with
our own. We might have insisted upon an Act, that we should not be obliged to
attend his Majesty at any time at the Court of England, about our Affairs; but
that he should either attend upon our Administration in person pro re nata, as
he does now upon the Affairs of Holland, or lay down Methods to have his
Pleasure signified to us at Home in such cases as it was required; which would
save a vast deal of Money annually to the Kingdom of Scotland. Then as to the
Succession, we were under no Necessity of settling it in the same manner as
they did in England; for since they had made a Breach in the Line, they could
not handsomely have blamed us to have made an improvement of it, and either to
have limited the Reversion after his present Majesty's Death, or otherwise as
we should have thought best, for the Security of our Civil and Religious
Liberties; or we might have settled it upon the Prince of Orange, and his Issue
by any other Wife, there being cause enough then to conceive that he was never
like to have any by his late excellent Princess. Had we taken any of these
Methods, it must be owned that England would have been considerably weakened,
and lessened in the Esteem of the World by it; that we should have thereby had
an opportunity of making such Foreign Alliances with France, as formerly, or
with any other Nation, as would have made England uneasy, and perhaps unsafe on
occasion; and therefore it must be reckoned highly impolitick, as well as
ungrateful, in our Neighbors to treat us continually at such a rate, as if
they had a mind to bring us under Subjection, since we have so many open Doors
to get out at.

They must not think that we have so far degenerated from the Courage and
Honor of our Ancestors, as tamely to submit to become their Vassals, when for
2000 years we have maintained our Freedom; and therefore it is not their
Interest to oppress us too much. If they consult their Histories, they will
find that we always broke their Yoke at long-run, if at any time we were
brought under it by force or Fraud. The best way to assure themselves of us, is
to treat us in a Friendly manner: Tho we be not so great and powerful as they,
it is not impossible for us to find such Allies as may enable us to defend our
selves now as well as formerly.

None of these things are suggested with an ill design to raise Annimosity
betwixt the Nations, or to persuade to a Separation of the Crowns, but merely
to show those of our Neighbors, who use us os unkindly, that they are bound in
Gratitude, Duty and Interest to do otherwise, and particularly to support us in
our American Settlement, and not to lay our King under a necessity by their
froward Humors in Parliament or otherwise, to discourage us in that
Undertaking, as they have hitherto done, and continue still to do in their
American Colonies, by their Proclamations against having any Commerce or Trade
with the Scots at Darien; Tho they be settled there, according to the Terms of
his own Patent, and an Act of Parliament in Scotland.

We are not insensible that the present Juncture of Affairs obliges the Kingdom
of England to carry fair with Spain, and may admit that in part as an Apology
for some of that Opposition we have met wi^h from them; but the questioning our
Act of Parliament at first, and their hindering our Subscriptions at Hamburgh
afterward, before ever they knew what our design was, make that excuse of
little weight: but allowing it all the Force they would have it to bear, it may
be worth their while to consider whether it be more their Interest to encourage
the Spaniards in an unjust Opposition to our American Settlement, or to support
the Scots in maintaining their Right. It is certain that the Spaniards are in
no condition to break with England; or if they should, it is in the power of the
English to reduce them speedily to reason: whereas if the Scots should miscarry
in their Undertaking by the Discouragements from England beforementioned,
which exposes our Ships to be taken and treated a Pirates by any Nation that
pleases, the infallible consequence of it will be, that the Ruin and utter
impov'rishment of Scotland, which must necessarily follow such a miscarriage,
will immediately affect England both in her Trade and Strength: The City of
London and the Northern Road will soon feel the Effects of it, when the Money
spent by our Gentry and Merchants continually for Clothes, Provisions, and
Goods, ceases to circulate there: England must unavoidably become an easier
Prey to any foreign Enemy; since it will not be only the loss of a Tribe, but
of an entire Sister-Nation. Or supposing that Scotland should be able to bear
up under the loss, it will lay the Foundation of an irreconcilable Feud, and
perhaps issue in a War betwixt the two Nations; which did never yet terminate
at long run to the advantage of England, and is as unlikely to do so now as
ever: For in such a case they would find us unanimous as one Man against them;
whereas we are sure that all those who wish well to the Protestant Interest,
and their present Constitution, would never join in any such War against us;
and therefore those who are Enemies to the Peace of the Nations, being aware of
this, labor to Effect their design by another Method, and endeavor as much as
they can to dash the Government against one another. But they are mistaken in
the People of Scotland: we are so sensible of our obligations to K. William;
and know so well what is due to our Deliverer, that it surpasses all their Art
to create in us the least ill thought of him; it is not in the temper of our
Nation. The World knows that however frequent and successful we have been in
reducing our bad Kings to reason, yet there never was any People under the Sun
more Loyal and affectionate to good Princes than we have been; and is, when we
have been forc'^ to oppose our Monarchs, private Persons have sometimes carried
^eir R^tments too high, yet the public Justice of the Nation was alw^e
governed with Temper. We could multiply instances to prove this, but need go no
higher than the three last Kings, who tho a^ o^ them Enemies to our
Constitution, as appeared by their Principles and Practices, yet it is very well
known what we both did and suffered for them, and particularly for K C^arles I.
tho the Malice of a Faction in our Neighboring Nation six'd a ^ous Reproach
upon us, as if w^ had sold ^im; (...) which Ref^ection we are sufficiently
vindicated by the Lord Hollis's Memoirs beforementioned; wherein that
exc^llent Person makes it Evident, that tho our War against that Prince was
just, yet we had all possible respect for his Person, made the (...) Conditions
^e could for his Safe^y and Honor. and to avoid greater Misch^fs, and the
playing of our Enemies Came to the (...) of our s^lves and his Majesty, we were
(...) to (...) him in England, Memoirs p. 68.

Then since we carried it so to a Prince that had been no (...) kind to us, it
will be impossible to create a Breach (...) ^s an^ a Prince, to whom, under
God, we owe all that we (...) as Me^ and (...): But at the same time our
Neighbors w^o (...) ^o dri^e (...) N^il as far as it will go, would do well to
(...) that ^e never b^liev d that Doctrine in Scotland, that it is (...) to
resist a King, or (...) that has a Commission under him, upon any pretense
whatsoever: we (...) that Doctrine in Scythia, (...) wh^ce some A^ors derive
our Origin, and think it only fit to be ^nt back to Turkey, from whence it
came. We know very well how to distinguish betwixt a (...) (...), and the abuse
of it; And our Ancestors rightly understood how to obey the lawful Commands of
their Princes* when Masters of themselves, and how to govern by their
Authority. and in their Name, when ^ey were not; tho they did not think
themselves obliged to o^ey their personal Commands. when the Fortune o^ War, or
other Accidents had put them into the hands of our Enemies. Thus we refused
Obedience to K. James I. when detained prisonet in England, contrary to the Law
of Nations, and carried over into France, to command his Subjects there, not to
bear Arms against the English Army, where he was in person. We told him we knew
how to Extinguish betwixt the Commands of a King, and those of a Captive: And
that most of the Kings of Scots have been such in Relation to us since the
Union, we could heartily wish were not too demonstrable.

To return to the point of what may probably be the Consequences, if the
English should proceed to any surther degree of of Opposition; Or if the Scots
should misearry in the Design. It Is reasonable to believe, that the English
will be so wise as to forbear Hostilities, tho we are very well satisfied,
there is a Party in that Nation, who bear ours no Good Will; but they being
such as are either disaffected to the present Constitution, or acted by a
sordid principle of private Interest, it is to be hoped they will never be able
so far to leaven the sound part of the English Nation, as to occasion a Rupture
betwixt them and us, Yet we must needs say, that we look upon their way of
treating us to be a very unaccountable thing, and that it was no small surprise
to us, to find that an English Parliament should look on our taking
Subscriptions in England, in order to admit them Joint-Sharers with our selves,
in the benefit of the Act to encourage our Trade, to be no less than a high
Misdemeanour. We have reason likewiwe to complain of their constant practice of
pressing our Seamen in time of War, as if they were their own Subjects, and
that they should treat us in other respects, as if we were Aliens; and
sometimes confiscate Ships, by reckoning Scots Mariners as such: So that the
English have not only deprived us of our Government, and the warm influences of
our Court, the want o^ which is a considerable addition to the Natural coldness
of our Climate, but they likewise oppress us on all occasions, and do (...)
endeavor to prevent our Application to Trade. We know there is a Party in that
Nation, who think we sustained no great loss by the removal of our Princes; but
we would wish them to consider what a murmuring they themselves make when the
King goes annually to the Netherlands (tho the safety of Europe requires it)
because of the damp it puts upon Trade, and the Money it carries out of the
Kingdom. Let them consider then what our Nation has suffered in that respect
now for almost 100 years, besides the lessening our Esteem in the eyes of the
World, so that our Honor and Substance are both swallowed up by the Kingdom of
England; and yet they will neither admit us to the privileges of
^ellow-Subjects with themselves, nor suffer us to take such measures as may
enable us to stand on our own bottom. Certainly this is not the way to
establish the Peace, no^ to increase the Wealth of the Island.

We know that it was a Maxim in some of the late Reigns. That it would never
be well, till all that part of Scotland on this side Forth, were reduced to a
hunting Field: but we were in hopes the bitterness of those days had been past:
yet it seems that Party have still so far the ascendant amongst our Neighbors,
as to procure a public Opposition to all our Endeavors for raising our Nation
by Trade.

It will upon due Examination be found as bad policy as it is Christianity, to
urge, as some of our Neighbors do, that it is the Interest of England to keep
the Scots low, because they are an independent and free Nation* and were our
ancient Enemies; and therefore may be dangerous Neighbors if they grow rich
and potent. Nothing but Rancor and inveterate Malice can suggest such sour
thoughts as these. It were fit that sort of Men should be purged of their
Choler. The Scots to obviate all dangers from that h^ad, have, tho they be much
the ancienter Nation, condescended so far as several times to propose an Union,
which the Gentlemen of that Kidney have hitherto prevented; and therefore we
would wish them to look back into their Histories, and upon casting up their
Accounts, make a true Estimate of whatever they gained by a War with Scotland.
They will find that their Ancestors, as well as the Romans, have been sensible,
as Tacitus expresses it, Quos sibi Viros Caledonia seposuerit; and that as it
was true what ou Histo^ian says of the unjust and treacherous War made upon us
by Edwa^d I. that Scotor^ nomen pene delevit; it was also true what he says on
the other hand, that Angliam vehementer concussit: So that those Gentlemen take
the direct way by opposing and oppressing us to ^un into those dangers they
would avoid: for they may assure themselves that if the English Opposition to
our American Settlement should once break out into Hostilities, the Scots will
find some Allies, ancient or new, that will be glad of the opportunity to join
with them. O^ if, which is most probable, tho highly ungrateful and impolitick,
the English should so far neglect the Scots, as to suffer them to be ov^power'd
by the French, they may be sure that the Scots, when put to their last shift,
can always make an honorable Capitulation with Fran^e. It Is not to be doubted,
but that Crown would be very willing to renew their ancient Alliance with us;
and besides allowing us a share at least in the Trade of Darien, would on
condition of giving them the possession of New Caledonia, restore us likewise
to all our ancient Privileges in France. They would think it a very good
purchase if they could secure themselves of that Colony by doing so, granting
us what security we could reasonably desire for the uninterrupted Enjoyment of
the Protestant Religion, and a Freedom of Trade to all places of the World,
where it did not actually interfere with their own Settlements and Colonies. So
that if this should be the Case, we leave it to our N^ighbours to judge what
would become of their East and West India Trade and Plantations, and whether
they would be able to stand out against France and US, now that they have no
footing on the Continent, ^nce formerly, when they had so many Provinces of
that Kingdom in their possession, and could not do it, and at last lost every
foot of their French Dominions: Whereas had they been in Union with us, they
might certainly have retained them, and by consequence have prevented the great
Calamities that Europe has since groaned under by the prodigious Increase of
the French Monarchy.

This we think sufficient to convince those angry G^ntlemen in our neighboring
Nation, that are so very much disgusted with our American Settlement, that it
is the Interest of England to join with us and support it, and that it may be
of dangerous Consequence to them? either to oppose or neglect us: Whereas by
joining cordially in this Matter, they may unite us inseparably to themselves
for ever, enrich their own Nation, secure and advance the Protestant Interest,
keep the Balance of Europe in their Hands, and prevent the returns of its
danger, their own Expense of Blood and Treasure to save its being threatened
with Slavery any more, either by the House of Bourbon or Austria. Therefore we
cannot believe after all, but our wise and Politic Neighbors will at last see
it their Interest to protect and encourage us in this matter* that we may
mutually strengthen and support one another against the French, who are loudest
in their Clamours against our Settlement, because if encouraged and improved,
it will defeat all their ambitious and Antichristian Designs; And thereby we
shall also be in a condition to assist the English Plan ations in the West
Indies, who as we find by the proceedings of the Earl of Bellomont and the
Assemblies of New England and New*York, are su^iciently sensible of their
danger, from the incroaching temper of the French, which increases every day;
and it is evident, that their new Designed Colony in Mississipi River looks
with a dangerous Aspect upon all the English Plantations in America, and may be
(...) justly esteemed an Incroachment upon Spain, as being in the Bay of
Mexico, than our Plantation in D rien: Which argues the treacherous Humor of
that Nation, to make such an Ou^cry against the Scots who have envaded no Man's
Property, when they themselves are so notoriously guil^y of it; and therefore
it would seem to be the Interest of England rather to strengthen themselves by
our Friendship, and to look after the French, than to provoke us to look out
^or other Allies by their Opposition and Neglect.

We shall conclude this matter* with one or two more Arguments to prove, That
it is the Interest of England to join with us in this Affair; by which also it
will appear that there is nothing advanced in these Sh^ets out of any ill
Design against the English Nation, or to persuade to a disu^iting of the
Crowns* but on the (...), that a stricter Union is absolutely necess^rry, that
both Nations may have but one Interest, which will render us less liable to
Convulsions and intestine Commotions at home, and put us out of danger of being
atrack'd by Enemies from abroad.

The first Argument is this; That by Encou^ging ou^ Settlement at Darien,
English Ships that have occasion to pass by those Coasts, will there be certain
of a plac^ of Retreat, in case of attack either by Enemy or Tempest, without
danger of being Confiscated by the Spaniards, and having their Men condemned to
be perpetual Slaves in their Mines.

2. I^ we be encou^aged in ou^ American Colony, it will Contribute much to
heighten the Consumption of the English Product; since what we have not of our
own, or wherein we are wanting, either as to quality or quantity, we shall
suppl^ ou^ selves, ^or the use of our Plantation, in England; which may be of
great benefit to the Northern Counties especially, whence we may conveniently
furnish our selves with B^eves ^or Victualling our Ships, ou^ own Cattle being
for the most part too small* for that use; besides many other things that we
shall have occasion ^o export to England, for the use of the Plantation, and to
maintain a Commerce with the Na^ives.

3. By joining with us in this Colony, and securing a Post on the South Sea,
which the Princes of Darien will no doubt very readily ag^ee to, they may
shorten their Voyages to the EastIndies* and by that means be able to Outdo all
their Rivals in that Trade; But if they will be so far wanting to themselves,
as to suffer those advantages to fall into the hands of others, who are Enemies
to our Religion, and common Country; They cannot blame the Scots, who have made
them such fair Offers: And if ou^ Nation should miscarry in the Attempt, they
themselves cannot expect to stand long, but must be buried in the common
Ruins, and fall unpitied.

4. If after all the English should continue obstinate in their Opposition to
us, as their late Proclamations in America, and other Passages would seem to
imply they have a mind to, the World cannot blame the Scots to provide for
themselves, by such other Alliances as they shall think meet, since the English
are so unkind, and have been constantly growing upon us, especially since the
Restoration of King Charles II. to which we did so much contribute, that
without our Concurrence, it could never have been effected. This will appear to
be incont^overtibly true, i^ we consider that in the time of K. ^ames I. we
were under no Restrictions, as to matters of Trade more than they, except as to
the Exportation of Wool, and a few other things of English Product; and so we
continued till the Restoration, when King Charles II. and the English did very
ungratefu^ly lay such Prec^usions and Restrictions upon us, contrary to the
Laws, relating to the Postnati, by the 12th of Car: 2. for the encouraging and
increasing Shipping and Navigation, and the 15 Car: 2. for the encouraging of
Trade; by which we are put in the same Circumstances, ^s to Trasfick with
France and Holland, and in a worse C^ndition than Ireland, that is a Conquest;
which is so much the more unreasonable* since we are always invol'd and engaged
in the Wars betwixt England and other Countries: And those with whom they have
most frequent Wars, being Holland and France, the only two Nations with whom
the Scots have almost any Commerce, our Trade must of necessity sink* during
such Wa^s, whereas England has still a great Trade to other parts of the
World; and by this means we are forced to be sharers in their Troubles, tho
they will not allow us to partake of their Profits, nor suffer us to take any
measures to procure such as we may call our own.

It is plain from the Instance of Darien, and the Proclamations in the English
American Colonies, against their Subjects Entertaining any Commerce with our
Settlement there, that by the Union of the Crowns, upon the present footing, we
are in a worse Condition than ever; For when any thing happens wherein the
Interest of England seems to be contrary to Ours, it is certainly carried
against us, and we are left without Remedy: So that in this respect, we are in
a worse Condition than any Foreigners, with relation to England; ^or if a
Foreign People discover any thing that may be of advantage to them, they are at
Liberty to pursue it by themselves, or to take in the Assistance of others; And
if they find themselves aggrieved by England, they have their Respective
Governments to make application to for Redress. But we are the most unhappy
People in the World; For if Endl^nd should oppose us, we have no King to appeal
to, but one that is e^ther an Alien and Enemy to us, as being King o^ a great^r
People who are such, or if he be inclinable to protect and do us Justice as
King of Scots, he is a Prisoner in England, and cannot do it: If they Question
him in the Parliament of England, for any thing relating to his Government of
Scotland, as in the case of our late Act for an East India and African Trade
his Interest as King of England, obliges him to submit himself as King of
Scotland; By which means our Crown, which we desended so gallantly for so many
Ages, and which the English could never make subject to theirs by force, is now
entirely subjected by a false step of our own, in suffering our King to take
their Crown upon him, without making better Terms for our selves: So that
instead of having a King to fight our Battles, we h^ve made a Surrender of our
Prince to the Enemy* who arm him against us; and which is worst of all, we have
satisfied our own Proverb, as to our selves, That Scots men are wise behind
hand: For tho we sufficiently sma^ed for it in the four last Reigns, yet we had
not so much foresight or Care of our selves, as to prevent the Consequences of
it in this Reign, when it was in our power to have done it.

Then if we make Application to our ancient Allies, or any other foreign Power
for our Assistance, when we groan under Opp^ession, then we are treated as
Rebels: Thus our whole Nation was proclaimed such for but offering to make
Application to the King of France, as our ancient Friend and Ally, when a
certain Party in England had armed our natural Sovereign K. Charles I. against
us. And that which is still worse, tho our Crown from the time of the Uni^n has
been for the most part on the head of an Alien or Enemy; yet it has iufluence
enoug^ to divide us amongst our selves against the Interest of the Nation; as
in the Reign of K. Charles II. those that complied with the Court of England,
were bribed with all the chief places in our Administration, whilst those who
were Patriots to their Country (as for Honor sake to instance in the late
Great Duke of Hamilton, and our present Lord high Chancellor) were exposed to
all manner of Dangers and Vexations. This we think sufficient to convince our
Neighbors that we have no Reason to be fond of having the Union of the Crowns
continued, except the Interest of the Nations, be more closely united then ever
they have been hitherto. And to let them see that it is their Interest as well
as ours it should be so, we shall only desire them to consider how fatal it may
be to them, if by any Emergency we should be forced to break off the Union of
the Crowns, and enter again into a F^ench Alliance. It ^ in vain for them to
object that in such a case we should betray o^r Religion; for we see the
persecuted Hunga^ans were protected in that ^y the Tu^ks, tho sworn Enemies to
it; nor is it less impossible but there may be a Change as to that matter in
France, L. XIV. is not immortal: and even Julian the Apostate himself found it
his Interest for some time to protect the Orthodox Christians, whom he mortally
^ated. But supposing (as indeed there is no great likelihood of it) that no such
Alliance as this should ever happen: yet howev^r, if these two Nations be not
more closly united; it may be of ill Consequencc to England, if any of their
Kings at any time should be so far disgusted with their Proceedings, as to
leave them, and betake themselves to Us. What a Field of Blood and Slaughter
must England have become, had we carried off K. Charles I. when he came to our
Army, or if we had join a him against the Parliament of England? What great
Efforts did a Party of our Nation make to inthrone King Charles II, when
England was against him? and how did our Concurrence afterward with General
Monk effect it? How soon did our espousing the D. of York' s Interest turn the
Tables upon those that opposed him in England? And if our Nation had likewise
espoused his Cause before the Revolution, the Viscount of Dundee gave a
sufficient Proof what we could have done for him. There Is a strong Party in
England at present against allowing the King a standing Force, for fear, as
they pretend, of losing their Liberties; but all their Opposition in that
respect would signify little, if in case of a Rupture) ou^ Nation should take
part with the Court, and bring in 22000 Men. with 6 Weeks Provisions and Pay,
as we are obliged to do by Act of Parliament; for his Assistance. This makes it
evident that it is not the Interest of England to slight an Union with US so
much as they have done* so^ so long as we remain divided, any King that is so
minded, may make use of us to inslave one another; and any envious Neighbor,
whose Interest it is to keep this Island low, will be sure to blow the Coals.
If they would but turn the Tables, and make our Case their own, they would quickly
be satisfied of the truth of what we advance. Supposing that the Government of
Scotland should traverse the Actings of the Government of England in relation
to their Trade, etc. as they have done ours; and supposing that a Parliament of
Scotland, when the King were there, should question him for the Navigation Act,
and that for the Encouragement of Trade in England by King Charles the Second.
Which lays Us under such hard Circumstances and Restrictions, the English would
certainly very much resent it, and speedily tell us we meddled with what did
not belong to us: Then why should they deny us the like Liberty in re^erence to
their (...) against us, seeing we are a free Nation as well they?

They cannot think that Scotland will look upon the English Proclamations in
the West Indies, against having any Commerce with our Colony at Darien, to be
the Act and D^ed of a King of Scotland, sinc^ it is not only contrary to his
own Act o^ Pa^liament there, and his Patent under the Great Se^l of that
Kingdom, but contra^y to the Interest of that Nation; but being the Act of a
person who is really King of Scots, we can look upon it to be no other than the
esfect of a ^orce put upon him by a Nation which in this matter thinks it their
Interest he should do so. Now suppose, which GOD forbid, our Colony should be
starved by virtue of these Proclamations, or that our Ships going and coming
from Darien, should by reason thereon be attacked, and treated as Pirates by
the English, French, Dutch, or any other Nation* who may take the opportunity
to do it, and say ou^ King has d^clared against us: to whom should we make
application sor redress in this matter? The King of England he is our Enemy,
and e^itted these Proclamations; the King of Scots is detained in England, and
not Master of himself, but is forced to act thus contraty to the Interest of
his own ancient Crown and Kingdom; as a former K. William, John Baliol, and
James I. were (...)'d to do, when in the power of the English. ^n such a (...)*
if our in^ant Colony should by this means bed stroy^d, ou^ (...) must needs
think that we should look ^or a Compens^tion (...). resume the Government into
our own hands, and strengthen our selves by new Alliances; which perhaps might
be little ^o their advantage, This is not suggested as a thing that is ever
likely to be practiced, or to which the Kingdom of Scotland is any way
inclined: Our whole Conduct since the Union is a continued evidence of the
uprightness of Our Intentions toward England; and the Offers we did make, and
do still continue to make, of admitting 'em as Partners and Sharers in our
Settlement, are enough to stop the mouth of Calumny it self. But if in return
for our kindness we meet with Neglect and Contempt, have our Sovereignty
trampled under foot, our Settlement in America by an Act of Parliament in
Scotland reflected upon as unjust by Proclamations from England, the World
cannot blame us to complain of the Violence done to our Independency and
Honor, which is not to be salv'd by any politic Considerations whatever, that
our Neighbors pretend for this Treatment.

Nor can any thing less than joining with us, and protecting that Settlement
against all opposition in case of Attacks by the French, or others,
sufficiently atone for what is already done, or heal the Wound those
Proclamations have given to the common Interest and Honor of the Island.

WE Come in the next place to give a Description of the Isthmus of Darien. It
lies betwixt the 8th and the 10th Degrees of Northern Latitude* and in the
Narrowest place is betwixt 60 and 80 Italian Miles over. We shall not trouble
our selves with the Description of any more of it than is in the Possession of
the Natives, which is in length from E. to W. on the North side from the Mouth
of the River Darien to Port Scrivan, above 140 Italian Miles; From Caret Bay to
the River of Cheapo on the South side* it is about 160 in length. It is
supposed to take its Name from the great River of Darien, that bounds its
Northern Coast to the Eastward. It is bounded on the North and South with the
vast Oceans that carry the Names of the North and South Seas. Its Situation is
very pleasant and agreeable, and very commodious for a speedy and short
Communication of Trade betwixt the North and South Seas, and preventing that
vast Compass that must otherwise be fetched round either of the Extremes of
North and Sout^ America. By this means also it lies convenient for a speedier
Communication of Trade betwixt Europe and the East Indies than any that has
hitherto been found out. Mr. Dampier says, that from Cheapo, or Santa Maria
River, a Man may pass from Sea to Sea in three days, and that the Indians do it
in a day and half. There are abundance of valuable Islands on both sides the
Isthmus, which prevent the breaking in of the Ocean upon it at once; and
besides the Conveniences of Wood, Fish, Foul, and Water, afford good and safe
Riding in all Weathers, to any number of Ships, especially those called the
Sambaloes, that lie along the Northern Coast. The Continent is ag^eably
intermixed with Hills and Vall^ys of great variety, for height, depth, and
extent. The Valleys are watered with Rivers, B^ooks and Springs, which take
their rise from a great Ridg of Hills that run along the Isthmus, but nearest
to the Northern Shore, from which it is seldom above 15 miles distant, and from
whence the Sambaloes Islands, and the various makings of the Shore, and the
continued Forest all along the Country grati^y the Eye with a very fine
prospect.

The Rivers of the Northern Coast are generally small. because their Course
from the abovementioned Ridg of Hills is but short; yet the River of Darien is
very large but the depth of its entrance not Answerable to its width* yet
further in it is deep enough, and has a good Har^our in Caret B^y which is
some Leagues up the River, has two Islands of pretty high Land, Cloath*d with
a varie^y of Trees lying before it and two or three slreams of ^resh Water
falling into it. From this Bay to the Promo^tory near Go^den-Island, the Shore
is indif^erent fruitful: and the S^il (...) (...) Northern Coast is generally
good, but swamp^ here and there to the Sea.

To the West ward of the Promontary, at the E^trance of the River. is a fine
sandy Bay with three Islands, one of them Golden Islands lying before it, which
make it an extraordinary good Harbor. Golden Island is rocky and steep all
round. except at the la^ding place on the South side. so that it is naturally
forti^y'd. The Land o^ the Isthmus over against it to the S. E. is an excellent
^ruitful Soil. West of this Island lies the largest of the three, b^ing swam^y
and covered with Maingroves. To the North of these lies the (...) of Pines,
covered with tall Trees, sit for any use. From the point against these Islands
for three L^agues W^stward, the Shore is guarded with Rocks, so that a Boat
cannot La^d; but at the N W. end of the Rocks, there is a very good Harbor, and
good Riding, as has been faid, in all Winds, by some or other of those Islands,
which with the adjacent Shore, make a lovely Landscape off at Sea. The Channel
betwixt them and the Isthmus is two, three and four miles Broad, and navigable
from end to end; and the Ground opposite to them within Land an Excellent Soil,
and a continued Forest of stately Ti^ber trees.

On the South side there is the River Sambo, that falls into the Sea by point
Garachina. This is a large River. Th^n there is the Gulf of St. Michael, made
by the Outlet of several considerable Rivers, as those of Santa Maria and Congo
and the GoldRiver, so called because of the great plenty of Gold Dust it
affor^s to the Spaniards. The River Congo may be entered at high Water, and
affor^s a good Harbor. The Gulf has several Islands in it, and afforcs good
Riding in many places. The Country on this (...) as one the other, is one
continued Forrcst; and forms a Bay called the Bay of Panama, abounding with
fine (...)* and a^fording good Riding for Ship^. The Soil os the Inland
Country, is for the most part a black (...) Mold.

The We^ther is much the same as in other places of the Torrid (...) in this
Latitude, but inclining to the wet Extreme, for two thir^s o^ the year, the
Rains beginning in April.

The most remarkable of their Trees are the Cotton Tree, which bears a Cod as
big as a Nut^meg fuil of short Wool or Down, and affords Timber for Canoes and
Periagoes: they abound with stately Cedars and Macaw Trees-, which bear Fruit
as big as a small Pear, of a tart but not unpleasant Taste; Bibby Tree, the Wood
hard and black as Ink, and being tapp'd, affords a Liquor call*d Bibby, of a
pleasant tart taste which the Indians drink. They have abundance of Plantains
set in Walks, which make very delightful Groves, and yield an excellent Fruit,
and being green and sappy, are cut down with one stroke of an Ax. They have
also plenty of Bonanoes another sort of Plantain, which eats best raw as the
Plantain does boiled. They have great store of that excellent Fruit called
Pine-Apples, which tastes like a Mixture of all delicious Fruits, and ripens
at all times of the Year. They have also Prickle-pear, which is a very good
Fruit; and Sugar* Canes. of which they make no other use but to suck out the
juice. The Maho Tree, of which they make Ropes, Cables for Ships, and Nets for
Fishing. The Calabash whose Shells serve for Cups and other occasions, is
curiously painted; the sweet sort of 'em is eatable, and the bitter sort
Medicinal. They have also Gourds of the like nature. There is a plant called
Silk Grass, which resembles ou^ Flaggs: this they beat nto strings like fine
Flax, much stronger than our Flax or Hemp; of these they make Ropes, Cordage of
all sorts, Nets ^or small Fish; and the Spaniards and others use it for
Shoemakers Thread, Stockins, and a sort o^ Lace. They have a Tree called
Lightwood, as large as an Elm, but so light, that a Man may carry a great
quantity of it on his back. It is in substance like Cork, and made use of bv
the Indians for Rasters to go to Sea, or pass Rivers. They have a Tree called
Whitewood, of a finer Grain, and whiter than any European Wood and fit for
inlaying. They have Tamarind, Locust-Tree, Bastard Cinnamon, Bamboes, and
Maingrove Trees in plenty. They have Shrubs that bear store of Pepper, of two
sorts, called bell p^pper, and bird Pepper.

Mr. Wafer, to whom we owe this Description, takes notice of a Redwood, whereof
there grow great quantities on the Northern Coast; the Indians make use of it
for dying, and mix a kind of Earth they have with it. It makes a bright glory
^ively Red, which no washing can ^etch out again This we suppose to be the
Ni^ragua Wood. Their Roots are Potatoes. Yams, and Cassava; of the last of
which they make Bread. They have likewise Tobacco, but don't understand the
planting and manuring of it; it is not so strong as that of Virginia.

Their Beasts are the Peccary, and Warce a kind of wild Hogs, which are very
good Meat. They have considerable store of Deer, and Rabbits, and great Droves
of Monkeys, which are extraordinary fat and good to eat. They have an Insect
called a Soldier, somewhat resembling a Crab, which feeds upon what falls from
the Tree, is a delicious Meat, and yields an Oil that is an excellent Salve.
They have no European Cattle.

Their Birds are the Chicaly Chicaly, which makes a noise somewhat like a
Cuccoo, is a large Bird, has Feathers of diverse Colors very beautiful and
lively, whereof the Natives sometimes make Aprons. This Bird keeps mostly on
the Trees, feeds on Fruit, and is pretty good Meat. The Quam feeds in the same
manner, his Wings are dun, his tail dark. short, he is much preferable to the
other for Meat. There Is a Ru^et-colour'd Bird, resembling a Partridg, runs most
on the ground, and is excellent Meat. The Corro^ou is a large Fowl as big as a
Turkey, and of a black color. The Cock has a Fine Crown of yellow Feathers on
his Head, and Gills like a Turkey, they live on Trees, and eat Fruit. They sing
very delight^ully, and are so well imitated by the Indians, that they discover
their haunts by it. They are very good Meat, but their Bones make the Dogs run
mad, and are therefore hid from them by the Indians. They have abundance of
Parrots, for size and shape much like those of Jamaica, they are very good
Meat; their Parakites are most of them green, and go in large flights by
themselves. They have Macaw Birds; which are as big again as Parrots, and
resemble them in shape, they have a Bill like a Hawk, and a bushy tail wi h two
or three straggling feathers, either red or blue; but those of the Body, are of
a lovely blue, green and red; the Indians tame those Birds, and teach them to
speak, and then letting them go into the Woods amongst the wildones, they will
return of their own accord to the Houses: they exactly imitate the Voice and
singing of the Indians, and call the Chicaly in its own Note. It is one of the
pleasantest Birds in the World, and it is Flesh sweet and well tasted. They have
also Woodpeckers which are pied like our Magpies, and have long Claws that they
climb up Trees with; they are not pleasant to eat. They have plenty of Dunghill
foul resembling those of Europe, and their flesh and Eggs as well tasted as
ours. About the Samhaloes they have great store of Sea foul, and particularlv
Pelicans, which are large Birds, having Legs and feet like a Goose, and a Neck
like a Swan, the feathers are gray. It has a bag under its throat, which when
filled, is as large as a Man's two fists; and when dry, will hold a pound of
Tobacco; they feed upon Fish. and the Young ones are good Meat. They have
Cormorants resembling Ducks for size and shape, are of a black color, have a
white spot on the Breast, and pitch sometimes on Trees and Shrubs by the Water
they are too rank to be eaten. They have a^undance of Sea* gulls and Pyes,
which are pretty good Meat, but eat fishy, which is cured by burying 'em eight
or ten hours in the Sand with their feathers on. They have flying Insects too,
and among others Bees, which form their Hives on trees; and its observed, that
they never sting any Body: the Natives mix the Honey with Water, and so drink
it, but know not the use of the Wax. They have shining ^ies, which in the night
time resemble Glowworms.

Their fish are the Tarpum, which ears like Salmon; some of 'm weigh 50 or 60
pound, they affo^d good Oil. They have Sharks and another Fish that resembles a
Shark, but much better Meat. The Cavally is much of the size of a Maccarel, and
very good meat. They have a fi^h called Old Wives, which is also very good
(...) eat Their Paracods are as large as a well grown Pike, and very good Meat,
but in some places poisonous, which a^e distinguished by the Liver. Their Gar
fish is good Meat, they have a long bone on their Snour, with which they will
sometimes pierce the side of a Canoe. They have also S^ulpins, a prickly fish,
which when stripped, is very good Meat. They have likewise String-rays,
Parrot-fish, Snooks, Conger-eels, Conchs, Perr^winkles, Limpi^s, S^a-crabs, and
Craw-fish, and other sorts whose names we know not, that eat very well.

The inhabitants are most numerous on the North of the Isthmus; the Men usually
five or six Foot hight, clean Lim'd, Big-bon'd, handsomely shaped, nimble,
Active, and Run well. The Women are short and thick, and not so lively as the
Men, the young Women Plump, well shaped, and have a brisk Eye: both Sexes have
a round Visage, short Bottle Noses, large and gray Eyes, high forehead, while
even Teeth, thin Lips, pretty large Mouths, well proportioned Cheeks and Chins,
and in g^nerall Handsome, but the Men exceed the Women. Both Sexes have stre
ght long lank black Hair, which they generally wear down to the middle of their
Back. All other Hair but that of their Eyebrows and Eyelids they pull up by
the Roots, cut off the Hair, of their Heads, and paint themselves black by way
of Triumph, when they kill a Spaniard. Their natural Complexion is a Copper
Color, and their Eyebrows black as jet. There are some among them of both
Sexes, which bear the Proportion of two or three to a Hundred, who are milk
white, and have all their Bodies covered over with a milk white Down; their
Hair is of the same Color, and very fine, about six o^ E^ght Inches long, and
inclining to Curl. They are less in stature than the other Indians, and their
Eye lids point downwards in form of a Crescent: they don't see well in the Sun,
their eyes being weak and running with water if the Sun shine upon them,
therefore they are called Moon eyed. They are weak and sluggish in the day*
time, but in Moon shiny nights all life and activity, and run as fast through the
Woods by night, as the other Indians do by day. They are not so much respected
as the other Indians, but looked upon as monstrous. The Natives go naked both
Men and Women, only the Men have a thing like an Extinguisher of Silver or gold
plate tied round their middle to cover their. Yard, and the Women tie a piece
of Cloth before them, which comes as low as their Knee; but they use none of
these Precautions till they come to the years of puberty: the Members that have
not those Extinguishers, make use of a piece of Plaintain Leaf of a Conick
Figure. They are in general a modest and cleanly People, and have a value for
Clothes if they had them. The better sort have long C^tton Garments shaped like
Carmens Frocks, which they use on solemn Occasions, as attending the King or
Chief, and c for an Ornament to the face, besides their general painting and
daubing, the Men wear a piece of Plate hanging over their Mouths, and the Chief
of them have it of Gold. It is of an Oval form, and gently pinching the Bridle
of the Nose with its points, hangs dangling from thence as low as the under
Lip; and instead of this the Woman wear a Ring through the Bridle of the Nose:
they lay them aside at their Feasts. They likewise wear Chains of teeth,
Shells, Beads, or the like; the heavier they be, they reckon them the more
ornamental. Their Houses ly mostly scattering, and always by a River side. but
in some places they are so many as to form a Town or Village. Their Walls are
made up of Sticks, and daubed over with Earth: The Fire is in the middle of the
House, and the Smoke goes out at a hole in the Roof, they are not divided into
Stories or Rooms, but into Hovels; every one has a Hammock for a Bed in one of
these Hovels. They have no Doors, shelves, or ^eats, other than Logs of Wood.
Every Neighborhood has a Warehouse of 130 foot long, the sides and ends full
of Holes, w^nce they shoot their Arrows on the approach of the Spaniards. In
their Plantations they set so much Plantain, Maiz, etc, as serves their
occasions: They likewise make Drink of Maiz. which they forment by Grains of
the same chewed in their Mouths. They have also another sort of D^ink, which
they make of Plantains. Most of the Drudgery is per^ormed by the Women with
great cheerfulness, being very well conditioned and d^tiful to their Husbands,
who are otherways very indulgent to them* and their Children The Women wash
the Mother and Child in a River within an hour after their Delivery. The Boys
are bred to the Bow, Hunting, and Fishing, etc, in which they are mighty
dexterous; and the Girls help the Women in dressing their Victuals, weaving,
m^king Cotton Cloth, Cordage, Nets, etc. and the Men make Baskets very neat,
dying the Materials first with lively Colors. They allow Poligamy, but punish
Adultery with Death of both Parties: They punish Theft also with death; and
Fornication with thrusting a Briar up the Man's Tard, whereof they commonly
die; the Facts must be proven by Oath, which is a swearing by their Tooth.

When they Marry, the Father or nearest Kinsman keeps the Bride privately in his
own Appartments the first seven Nigbts, and then she is delivered to her
Husband: All the Neighbors for some M les round, are Invited to a great Feast,
and bring Provisions with them, The Fathers o^ the young Couple bring them
forth in their hands, and the Bridegrooms Father makes a Speech; then he dances
about in Antic Gestures, till all on a sweat, when he kneels down, and gives
his Son to the Bride, her Father also having danced himself into a sweat, and
presenting her to the Bridegroom in the same manner; then they take each other
by the Hand, and so the Ceremony Concludes. After this all the Men take up
their Axes, and run shouting to a Tract of Wo^d-land to prepare a Plantation
for the new Couple. That being done, they have their Feast, and afterward
Drink hard, all their (...) being first put out of the way, to prevent danger
in case of Quarrelling. They divert themselves sometimes by dancing, and piping
on a small hollow Bamboe, but without distinction of Notes: The Men and Women
never dance nor feast together, but apart. The Women accompany them likewise in
their hunting Expeditions, which sometimes last 20 Days: They tie their Hamocks
betwixt two Trees cover them with Plantain Leaves, and have Fires all Night by
their Hammocks: Such of their Prey as they take a Hunting, and design to keep
for Future use, they Barbecue in the Woods; and what they make use of for
present Sustainance, they mix with Roots, Plantain, Bonanoes, and Pepper, and
stew it together till it be brought to a Pulp; which they take up with the two
foremost Fingers of their Right Hand bent hookwise, and put into their Mouths.
They travel by direction of the Sun, or the bending of the Trees, according as
the Wind is. None of the English Authors take notice of their Worship or
Religion, but give an account that they Pawaw, or consult the Devil to know
Futurities; And it would seem they are as ignorant in matters of Physic and
Chi^gery, since when they would set a patient Blood, they set him upon the Bank
of a River, and with a little Bow, and small Arrow, gagged that it may enter no
further than our Lancets, they shoot as sast as they can at all parts of the
Patient' s Body; and if they chance to hit on a Vein, that the Blood spurs out
a little, they testify their Joy by antic Dances.

WE Come next to give an Account of the Settlement of our Men there; how they
were received by the Natives; wh t Indian Princes there are in their
Neighborhood; in what state they found the Affairs of the Country; and of the
Situation of our Colony.

On the 27th of October School. our Ships came to an Anchor in a fair sandy Bay,
3 Leagues W. off the Gulf of Darien; upon which two Canoes, with several
Indies, came on Board, were very free with our Men, told them they had been
long Expected, and were very welcome: Our Men gave them some old Hats,
Looking*glasses and Knives, with which they were extremly well pleased, and
ue^t off. When our Ships stood further into the Bay, they saw about 20 Indians
drawn up on the Shore, being Armed with Bows and Lances; upon which a Boat
being sent a^hoar, and making a signal of Peace, they unstrung their Bows,
talked Familiarly, and told our Men that two great Captains would in a little
time come on board our Ships. Acco^dingly on November 2d in the morning Capt.
Andreas, on of their Princes accompained by 12 Men. came on board, and asked
their bussines; He was Answered, that we came to live among them and Trade with
them, and would afford them your European Commodities, Cheaper then any other
People. He asked if we were Friends or Enemies to the Spaniards; and was
answered that we were at peace with all men, and would make war upon no man,
except they injured us. He took us for Buccaneers, and told us he knew Capt.
Swan and Capt. Davis in the South Sea, and commended them as men of (...). We
heard that part of his Discourse with very much couldness, and told him we came
on no such design as those men did, but had Authority for what we undertook.
We treated him civilly, gave him a Hat laced with Gold, and some Toys: and so
he parted, promising in a little time to come again; which he accordingly did,
and brought Don Pedro, another of their Princes or Captains, with him. Captain
Andreas was freer with us than at first, plainly owned that he took us for
Buccaneers, and complained that some English men of that sort, had after great
pretenses of Friendship, carried off some of their People, and therefore Don
Pedro would not come aboard us, till he had further assurance of us.

Captain Andreas is a person of small stature; he affects the Spanish Gravity,
as having been often among them at the Mines of Santa Maria, Panama, etc. and
formerly had a Commission under them as a Captain, upon which he values himself
above others. The French hate him Mortally, because of something he did against
some of their Nation formerly. When he came on board us, he had a sort of a
Coat of red loose Stuff, an old Hat, a pair Drawers, but no Stockings nor
Shoes; and the rest that came with him were all naked, excepting their Penis,
which was covered by Extinguishers, as formerly mentioned.

Upon further communing, Capt. Andreas was very well pleased with us, offered
us what part of the Country we would choose, and accepted a Commission from us;
and at the same time we gave him a Basket hiltted Sword, and a pair of Pis^ols:
upon which he promised to defend us to the last of his Blood.

Some of the Princes on this side the Isthmus had been in Peace with the
Spaniards for several years, and suffered a few of them to reside amongst them,
to give notice to Panama of what Ships came upon these Coasts; but upon some
fresh disgust, about two months before we arrived, Capt. Ambrosio, who is the
most noted Prince among'st 'em, had obliged them to enter into a common
Alliance against Spain, and cut off ten Spaniards, who lived upon Golden-Island.

The Place where we are settled is 4 Miles East of Golden-Island, within a great
Bay. We have (...) excellent Harbor, surrounded with high Mountains, capable
of holding a Thousand Sail Landlock'd, and safe from all (...) and Tempests.
The Mouth of the Harbor is about (...) Cannon-shot over, formed by a Peninsula
on the one side, and a point of Land on the other. In the middle of the
Entrance there is a Rock three foot above water, upon which the Sea breaks most
terribly when the Wind blows hard; and within the Points there is a small Rock
that lies a little under water. On both sides these Rocks there is a very good
wide Channel for Ships to come in: That on the South Side is three Cables lon,
and seven Fathom depth; and that on the North two Cables long. From the two
outermost points the Harbor runs away East a Mile and an half; and near the
middle, on the Right hand, a point of Land shoots out into the Bay: so that by
raising Forts on the said Point, on the Rock in the middle of the Entrance, and
the two outermost Points, it will be the Strongest Ha^bour, both by Art and
Nature, that is in the known World. The Bay within is for the most part 6 Fathom
Water, and till you come within a Cable's length of the shore, three Fathom and
an half: So that a Key may be built, to which great Ships may lay their Sides,
and Unload. The Peninsula lies on the left hand, is a mile and an half in
length, very sleep, and high toward the Sea: so that it would be very
difficult for any Body to land, till you come to the Isthmus where there is a
small sandy Bay that little Ships may put into, but is easy to be secu^ed by a
Ditch and a Fort. There are several little Rivers of very good Water that fail
into the Bay; and it abounds so with excellent Fish* that we can with ease take
more than it is possible for us to destroy, having sometimes caught 140 at a
Draught: amongst others there be Tortoises, which are excellent Meat, and some
of them above 600 Weight.

The Peninsula was never inhabited, and is covered all over with Trees of
various sorts, as stately Ced^rs, Brasil-wood, Lignum Vitae, Box-wood,
Fustick-wood, Yellow Sanders, Manshinel, etc. and the like sorts, besides
others whose Names we know not. grow on the Continent; and we doubt not of
finding out the Nicaragua Wood: We have found Cabbage trees, the Fruit of which
eats like Collyflowers. The Natives have no Plantation wit^in t^o Miles of u^.

We have a Watch Tower upon an high Hill adjoining to our Plantation, about a
mile South of the Bay, from whence we can see the Ships in the Bay, the Fort we
have raised on the Mouth of the Bay, and as far as the Mouth of the River
Darien: We can see above thirty Miles Southward, and have a fine Prospect of
Golden-Island, and the Isle of Pines, Westward toward Portobello, and
Northward toward Jamaica. The Hill is about a Mile in height; so that we can
see any Ships before they come within some Leagues of the Harbor. We Compute
our selves to be about 50 Leagues North of Ca^thagena, and as much South of
Portobello. The four Indian Kings or Captains on this Coast, visit us
frequently in their Canoes: and the N^tives are very kind to us, and sell us
Plantains, Fowls, etc. ^or Toys or old Shift A French man who has married one
of the Natives, informs us, that the Spaniards have Silver and Gold Mines on
the I^thmus which we might make our selves Masters of with a 100 Men; So that
if they commit Hostilities upon us, as we hear they threaten to do, it is not
unlikely that we may visit them. We found some French Refugee^ in the Country,
who are willing to settle under us, and having been several Years in these
Parts, and understanding the Language of the Natives, are very useful to us. We
have seen some Sand in the Rivers, which looks as if it were mixed with Gold,
and in some places the Earth seems to be very much mixed with it: So that it is
concluded, there is more Gold-dust here, than in any part of Guinea.

The Indian Princes or Captains on this Coast, do somewhat resemble our Heads
of Clans in Scotland; and by their Converse at times with the Spaniards, and
other European Nations, affect Christian Names. The first of these Princes we
shall Name, is Captain Diego; he commands from the bottom of the Gulf of Uraba
on this fide Caret Bay, and has 3000 Men under him; he has been at War with the
Spaniards several Years, occasioned by an Insult his People had received from
them, when they came to demand their share in the Mines, which they had
discovered to the Spaniards in their Country, on condition of being Partners
with them: But when they came to demand it, the Spaniards treated them
Villanously, beat and abused them, upon which they attacked the Spaniards, cut
of 20 of their Men, and three Priests that belonged to the Mines.

The next is Capt. Pousigo. He is an Indian Clergyman, and Brother-in-law to
Capt. Andreas. The Peninsula that we possess, lies betwixt his Territory and
that of Capt. Andreas, who together with his Brother, commands from Golden
Island to the Rive^ Pinas. Their Command is greater than that of Pousigo* but
not so great as that of Diego. These Princes are very useful to us, because of
their Neighborhood and Consa^guinity to one another.

Capt. Ambrosio commands from the River Pinas to the Samballo^s: He is a man of
about 60 years of age, but strong and vigorous, well limbed and of a stern
Countenance: he is a mortal Enemy to the Spaniards, with whom he has had a
long War* he is esteemed the bravest of all the Indian Captains. His Son*
in*law Don Pedro having been taken by the Spaniards, and kept by them as a
Slave at Panama, he can never forget no^ forgive it them: This young man is a
great Friend to the French, who they are made to believe design to come and
settle among them. Ambrosio and his Son in Law pressed us much to come and settle
in their Dominions, and join with them to make war on the Spaniards: We gave
them fair Words, and promised to come and view their Coasts; which we
accordingly did, and in our Way thither, four Leagues Westward of our
Settlement, we found an excellent Harbor, capable of 10000 Sail; but it cannot
be defended without many Forts: Here the Privateers used to come and careen.

Capt. Ambro^io's House lies about a L^ague from the Water side, on the bank of
a River, having 12 lesser houses about it: When we drew near it, he advanced 50
paces to meet us, being attended by 20 men in white loose Frocks with Fringes
round the bottom, and armed with Lances. He saluted us kindly, and gave us a
Calabash of Liquor almost like Lambs-wool, made of Indian Corn and Potatoes.
His house is 90 foot long, 35 broad, and 30 in height, curiously thatched with
Palmetto Royal, and over that Cotton leaves, the floor is of firm Earth like
Tarras, very smooth and clean the sides are composed of large Canes, as thick
as a Man's Leg. In this House live Ambrosio and his Son in Law Don Pedro, with
both their Families, consisting of about 40 Persons. We saw Ambrosio's
Grandmother there, who is 120 years old, and yet was very active in getting
things ready for our Entertainment, she has 6 Generations deseended from her
now in the House with her, the People live here to 150 and 160 years of age;
but those that converse much with Europeans, and drink strong Drink, don't live
so long.

From the Samballoes to the River of Conception, the Country is commanded by
one Corbet; who is altogether in the French interest, he having contracted a
Friendship with their Privateers seven years ago, and done them many good
Offices. They promised to reward him ^f he would go to Petit Guavus, and in his
way thither he was taken by an English Privateer, and carried to Jamaica,
whence the Governor of Petit Guavus got him released. He was with Pointi at the
taking of Cartagena* and has a Commission from the French to be General of all
the French and Indian Forces on that Coast, and to take, sink, and destroy
Spaniards or any other Enemies. Yet the French themselves, and the sensible
part of the Indians, don't put any Confidence in him; and Ambrosio who is the
bravest of all those Indian Captains, keeps him in aw and within bounds.

Next to Corbet, there is another of their Captains called Nicola, who is said
to be a wise, brave and good natured Prince, insomuch that the Indians had a
mind to have s^t him up instead of Ambrosio, who is of a rugged military
temper: But Ambrosio's Authority and Power is so great, that they did not find
it practicable. Nicola is a mortal Enemy to the Spaniards, and can never
entertain a good thought of them* since the Governor of Porto Bello robbed him
of a curious Fusee that had been presented him by some of the Buccaneers; and
being out of Order, he sent it thither to be mended; upon which the Governor
taking a liking to it, kept it to himself; and sent Nicola another sorry piece
instead of it.

Since we came hither, there have been an English, a Dutch, and a French Ship
in our Bay. The English Sh^p was Capt. Long in the Rupert Prize; he had been in
the Gulf of Uraba, but he himself and his Men owned, that they had not then
been ashore there. He has some way or other disobliged the Captains Ambrosio
and Diego. Tho we treated him with all possible Civility, yet we are since
informed that he has been a days Journey into the Gulf, and endeavored to
incense the Indians against us, telling them that we were Privateers, and that
the King of England would not protect us. He left some Men in the Bay, who have
since killed some Spani^rds, and came to us for Arms and Ammunition, but we
told them we could not grant them any, and that they had done what they could
not justify. We gave them however what was necessary for fitting up a Boat; and
as a reward. they (...) away the Carpenter and Mate of one of our Ships called
the Unicorn.

The Dutch Ship that came hither was afraid of the Spanish Barlavento. Fleet,
and put in here for protection, that Fleet having made prize of another Dutch
Ship of 32 Guns, and of two English Sloops for Trading on those Coasts.

The French Ship that put in here, was that which was ordered to carry back the
Church-plate, etc. to Carthagena, did afterward bulge on a Rock, and was cast
away in our Harbor. We saved all their lives, and Capt. Pennicook our
Commodore endangered his own Life to save that of the French Captain. He
informed us, that the French had 4 Men of War of 50 Guns each, who thinking we
had a design on the River Mississipi, were gone to the Gulf of Mexico in quest
of us. The French have been very industrious in cultivating their Interest,
both with the Natives and Spaniards in this part of America, and doubt not of
having a good share in those Countries after the King of Spain's Death.

They have got a great Interest with Captain Ambrosio. by means of his Son-in
Law Don Pedro, whom they Carress extremly, and designed to have carried him to
Petit Guavus, and from thence into France, to aquaint the French King with the
favorable Sentiments the Indians have en^ertain'd of the French, and of their
design to surrender themselves into his Majesty.

This has been projected by the French a long time, but the King of Spains
indispositio^, and their pretenses to that Crown, made them refer it; and its
no doubt but our Settlement will quicken those Resolutions. Captain Andreas
Capt Pedro his Brother, Capt. Diego, and Capt. Pou^igo. our Neighbors, have no
manner of Correspondence with the French. The Letter has acquainted us, that
there are several Gold Mines within two Miles of our Settlement, which he has
promised to show us; and he has actually let us see several Samples o^ fine
Gold.

This being the Substance of several Journals, that were sent from our Colony
in Da^ien, upon their first Settlement there, we hope its sufficient of it self
to satisfy our Neighbors in England, of the Justice of our Cause, of the
equity of our Proceedings, of the true Reason why the French are so much our
Enemies in this matter, of the greatness of the providence that has put us in
Possession of that post, and that it is Englands Interest to join with and
protect us, by which the Designs of the French against Europe in general, and
Great Britain^ in particular, may be Defeated, and the English West Indies
Trade secured. But since by the Proclamations before mentioned, which treat us
as Rebels and Pirates in America* for what we have done according to Act of
Parliament in Scotland, our Ships may be in danger of being attacked by other
N^tions as Pirates, and our Colony discountenanced and opposed on that account
by the Natives; there is no reason that our Neighbors should think strange i^
we complain of that unkind usage, and endeavor to lay before them what may
Probably be the Consequences of such Proceedings, without being Construed
either to threaten or to wish, that any ^uch thing should happen.

It being evident that by offering to admit the English as joint. sharers in
our Trade, we entertain no Sentiments but what are Friendly toward that
Nation, being satisfied that all those who wish well to the Protestant Religion
and true Liberty, are Enemies to any thing that may occasion a breach of the
Union and good understanding betwixt us. Yet it must be owned that we have but
too great reason to complain of the Hardships we suffer by the Union of the
Crowns, which it is in the power of England to remedy, by complying with the
gracious Proposals of uniting the Nations, repeated in Pa^liament by his
Majesty, who-like a true Father of his Country. has exposed himself to the
greatest of dangers to procure the Welfare and Peace of his Subjects, by which
he has made an absolute Conque^t of the Hearts of all good men who are
unanimous to join in the like Prayer for him, that the Israelites of old put up
for their Kings, viz. That he may live for ever.

FINIS.

