Honest, Upright, Faithful, AND PLAIN DEALING With Thee O ARMY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND (So called) Without flattery, in true unfeigned Love
to thee.

With something more particularly unto the Officers of the ARMY, and those that
join with them in the outward Government of this Nation.

Wherein Truth, Uprightness, and Equity is declared for, and Deceit,
Wickedness, Oppression, and Tyranny is declared against.

By one who loves the prosperity of Truth, and the good and well-being of all
creatures, GEORGE FOX the younger.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

Honest, Upright, Faithful, and Plain Dealing, with thee O Army, etc.
AT your first going forth, there was a true honest Principle which stirred in
the hearts of many of you, which convinced you of sin in the particular, and it
also showed you the desperate wickedness, cruelty, tyranny and oppression which
was upheld by unjust and unrighteous Laws and Rulers, whereby the honest people
were much oppressed, and in several of you there arose a true zeal against this
abomination, and then I know your lives, and what you had was not dear to some
of you, but was freely given up to do your Nation service in breaking down that
oppression and tyranny which was brought upon it by the Enemies of God, and it;
and then a mighty courage and boldness arose in many of you against oppression
and oppressors, and the Lord appeared with you against them, because they were
his Enemies, and sought to destroy the very appearance of truth; and then many
of you were low and tender, and the hearts of such people as had honest desires
in them, and breathed for liberty, they were much affected with you, and the
cause you declared for, and vowed and engaged to be true and faithful unto, and
then the Lord appeared with you in the field, giving you mighty Victories over
your Enemies, that so he might make way for his living truth to be spread,
which was then stirring in his people; and the Lord weakened his Enemies before
you, and ye savv his mighty hand therein, and his mighty Work (in overturning
those his Enemies) prospered in your hands (for he made you instruments
therein) until he had scattered his Enemies, and then he gave you power and
opportunity to accomplish that you had vowed and engaged to do, and which his
light in your hearts had showed you, that you ought to have done.

But you not keeping to that which first appeared in you, and made you sensible
of the oppression that was upheld by the unrighteous Laws, Lawyers, and Rulers;
an earthly selfish spirit, got up in many of you, which exceedingly increased
covetousness and pride in you; and then the greatness of your pay, and the
spoil of your enemies, and idleness, and the fullness of the creatures began to
be more delightful to many of you, then the liberty you once declared for; and
then some among you began to see how deceit and hypocrisy crept in amongst
you, and appeared against it; but you whose hearts went after your covetousness
and self-seeking, soon stopped them, either by threatening them, or by advancing
them into greater places, or by turning them out of the Army; and thus you
began to back-slide, and then deceit began to wax strong among you, and several
of you began to settle your selves in the earth, and in your Enemies Estates,
and then you little regarded the oppression that others suffered under, you
being at ease your selves; and thus the Enemy beguiled you, and deceit wrought
in you, even as it did amongst some of the Sects and Opinions; for in many of
them there was a true Principle of God stirring once, which convinced them of
their own sins, and also showed them the cruelty, wickedness, and deceit of the
Bishops and Prelates, and others, and caused them to witness against such; but
they not keeping to the measure of God in them, a worldly, carnal, deceitful
spirit increased in them, and then they soon began to settle themselves in
another form, (without the life and power of God) which was as bad in the
nature and ground of it, as that they had witnessed against, only it had
another Name.

And in the same manner have ye acted; for ye going from the measure of God in
you, which showed you the cruelty of the oppressors, which ye had fought
against; ye soon began to settle the same thing in the nature and ground of it,
among your selves, which you had fought against in others, only (in deceit and
hypocrisy) you gave it another Name.

And then truly great Wickedness increased among you, (which made the heart of
the righteous sad) even the same as abounded among your Enemies, (which God
overthrew for their Wickedness) yea, for then many of you ran into hunting,
hawking, bowling, Horse-racing, drinking, and other vain Games, and Sports, and
Lusts, and Excess, and Pride, both in your Diet and Apparel; and your behavior
was grown so lofty, (many of you) that you became a burden to all
honest-hearted people, who once had an honest love going forth toward you; but
this your Wickedness caused their love to wax cold toward you, and many who
were your true friends, became ashamed of you because of your backslidings.

And you raised up the spirit of enmity and bitterness in your Enemies more and
more against you, by these things which you ran into; yea, you gave them great
advantage by your backslidings, and some of you saw these things many times
with Gods Witness; but ye not keeping to Gods Witness in you, deceitful fears
arose in you, which stopped the mouth of truth in you, when you should have
witnessed against the Wickedness that was amongst you; and your fears was, lest
you should have been turned out of your places, and upon this account deceit
was grown so strong among you, and treachery, that ye durst not speak your
minds one to another, for fear ye should be betrayed one by another, and so
turned out of your places: And thus deceit and a slavish spirit possessed ye,
even till you had lost your Dominion and Authority over your Enemies, and then
many of you became afraid to do that which was just (many times) lest your
Enemies should be more displeased with you; and in deceit ye bowed, (many of
you) even to your Enemies, and sought more to please them, then to do that you
had engaged to do; and then you turned out many of your friends, and took in
many of your Enemies, and mixed your selves with them; yea, you turned out many
of your faithful friends, only for coming into the life and obedience of that
which many of you professed in words, and pretended once that you fought for
the liberty of.

O ARMY! this is plain truth to thee, without flattery; and thus falsehood
overspread you, until the honest principle that once stirred in you, was almost
destroyed, and then ye little regarded the sufferings of the innocent, nor the
oppression that was in the Land, but ye rather sought to establish yourselves
in the honor and fullness of this World; but (poor creatures!) ye could not
settle your selves in a peace there, for your Enemies daily plotted against
you, and had it not been just with the Lord to have suffered your Enemies to
have destroyed you, because of your grievous backslidings and wickedness? O
consider it, consider it while ye have time, and prize the Lords loving
kindness that he should yet spare you, and yet give you time to repent.

And seeing the Lord has showed you your backslidings, with his eternal
Witness in you, and has begun to frustrate the designs of those that would
have cut you off in your backslidings; and ye confess (some of you) that you
are vvilling to take shame also to your selves wherein you have back-slidden;
therefore seeing it is thus, all mind that of God in you, which shows you
your backslidings, and believe, and wait in that, to feel that nature judged
and destroyed in you, wherein all this Wickedness and Deceit has lodged; and
keep in the fear and dread of the Lord God, that so ye may receive his pure
Wisdom, whereby ye may be ordered in the particular, and that ye in Gods Wisdom
and Fear may come to rule (in your places) for God, to be a terror to
evildoers, and an encouragement to them that do well.

And take heed of a selfish, earthly spirit in the particular, and of the
honor, and glory, and gain of the World, (for that the Lord is against;) Oh!
there is a strong, deep root of it in many of you, which the Spirit of
Judgment and burning, and the Ax of God is to destroy; therefore wait to feel
its Work in you.

O ARMY! in thee was I several years together, in which time I saw the mighty
appearance of God with thee, even in the time of the outward War; and when the
War was ended, I left thee, in obedience to the appearance of the living God
unto me, who called me out of thee by his powerful Word in my heart, through
which he has sanctified me, and has brought me into the life of that truth,
which I, and many of you in the Army professed in Words.

And I can truly say in the fear of the Lord, That my love has been, and yet
is tender toward you, for the good of your souls; and I have seen your
conditions, and has considered them in the spirit of the Lord, and I cannot
flatter any of you, but must deal plainly and and truly with you and all people.

Truly in many of you there is an exceeding lofty, proud, covetous, deceitful
nature; and in others of you there is a lofty, proud, lustful, devouring,
wanton, vain nature; though many of you I know have felt a measure of the power
of God, yet verily ye have so back-slidden, that iniquity has gotten a strong
hold and root in most of you; that so ye must keep down to the Witness of God
in you, which searches your hearts, and will let you see what is there, that
so the Lord's righteous Judgment ye may all feel it, and own it upon that
nature in you which is contrary to the living God; for if ye keep not to the
spirit of Judgment, I know whatever ye have declared in words, that a selfish
spirit will get up more and more to act in you; and verily friends, if you keep
not your minds to the measure of the pure God in you, a secret boasting will be
ready to get up in you, of what you have done, and then you will soon forget
where you are, and your minds will run further and further into your
Commissions, and into your great Houses and Lands, which many of you have got;
and others minds will run into your Soldiers places, and ease, and idleness,
and these things will beguile you if you take not heed, and you will soon
forget the oppressions, then, that others suffer under; and if ye should do
thus, verily the Lord God would soon overturn you, and break you to pieces.

Therefore all wait in the light which shows you sin and evil, that so by it ye
may be brought to deny your selves, and to come out of the loftiness that ye
have been in, into the true humility, (which goes before the true honor) and
come into moderation both in your Diet and Apparel, and in all things, and this
would answer the Witness of God in people; and that being answered, it would
beget again a love in them toward you, which you lost when you went into the
excess. Therefore be sober, and watch in the light of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which he has enlightened you withal, and believe in it, that so ye may be
preserved by it, out of the deceitfulness of this World, and that ye may be
kept faithful in your places for the preserving of the outward peace and
liberty of the Nation, while ye feel a freedom in that which convinces you of
evil, for the bearing a carnal Weapon; and know the manifestation of God's
Spirit in you, and wait to feel the motions of it, and be obedient thereto, and
this will bring you to do violence to no man, nor to accuse any falsely; but it
will bring you out of all such things, if you keep to it, and it will make you
to be content with such wages as may find you food and raiment, and things
necessary and convenient for your places, and this you would then be worthy of.

So know the Lord has a mighty Work to do, therefore wait in his light, that
ye may be kept truly sensible of your places, and go not beyond them, but keep
in the fear of the Lord, and wait to know what God requires of you in your
places, lest the Lord cast you out. So remember you are warned, and it is in
tender love to your souls.

This following, more particularly concerns the Officers of the Army, (...)
the Rulers of this Nation, then the Army in general.
Take heed of raising or continuing War with other Nations (in your own wills)
for to get your selves a Name, and to get their earthly Treasures, as some of
you have been instruments to do, for the Lord's hand has been, and yet is
against that, and he will not prosper you therein; therefore be you warned, and
know that this is a warning unto you from the Lord God; and seek peace, and
eschew evil, and learn to do well, that the blessing of the Lord ye may come to
feel, and that this destroying of creatures about Religion, and the honor and
gain of this World may cease.

And take heed how ye meddle with Religion, for that has split and broken many
Rulers before you; therefore set not up one sect, and throw not down another by
an outward law and force, for that is wrong, and the Lord is against that; but
wait in his light to receive his counsel, that so ye may be kept in Gods
Wisdom, and that therein ye may be instruments in the hand of the Lord, for the
keeping of the outward peace of these Nations which are under your command.

And take heed of hearkening unto such who in the kings time cried him up, and
ran to him to give them a law to settle them in their Worship; and then again
in the Parliaments time ran to them and cried them up, begging a Law to settle
Church Government, (as they called it) and then in the late Protectors time
cried them up, and petitioned unto them with many feigned flattering words, and
begged a law of them to settle them in their Worship; now these are the
deceitful workers, who teach for filthy lucre, and are time observers, who
through covetousness and feigned words, makes merchandise of the people; and
these quench the spirit, and despises prophesying, and changes with the times
and Governments, let them be never so contrary, and these are neither true to
God nor man, but are men pleasers, and such serves not the Lord Jesus, but
their own bellies; and these wanting the power of God, runs to the Rulers for
an outward power to uphold them; these are whored from the life of God in their
own particulars, and these seek to stop the life of God wherever it appears;
therefore take heed of upholding or setting them up by an outward Law, lest you
become the beast [mark that] which carries the Whore, which is to be taken
with the false Prophet and the old Dragon, (the Father of all unrighteousness)
and cast alive into the Lake.

Now the true Worship and Religion which stands in the spirit, and in the
truth, must be set up, and established, and upheld by the Power immortal, and
not by an outward Law.

But let your Law stop that in all (wherever it appears) which wrestles with
flesh and blood, and fights with the creature about Religion; for this spirit
could never make manifest the true Worship and Religion, neither would it
suffer others to do it who had the spirit of God, if it could stop them by an
outward Law or force; so that which fights, wrestles, and strives with the
creatures about religion, is not for Christ, but is ante against Christ and the
Apostles, who wrestled not with flesh and blood, but with the power of
darkness, and with the spiritual wickedness in high places, that so wickedness
and deceit might be destroyed in the creatures, and that the creatures might be
preserved; and their Weapons were not carnal, but spiritual.

But they that cries out to the Rulers for an outward Law to uphold their
worship and religion, they war not with the spiritual Weapons, but with the
carnal, and these destroys the creatures, but cannot destroy the wickedness;
and these have quenched the spirit in their own particulars, and these would
quench it in others, and will not suffer him that has something revealed unto
him, to speak, but cries to the Magistrates, or to the rude multitude, for
help, and so flees to their carnal Weapons, and those being stirred up by their
Teacher, some of them often times beats those that have the truth to declare in
their Synagogues, and hales them out, and railes on them, and spits upon them,
and sometimes buffets, stocks, whips, and imprisons, and mangles the creatures,
and so mars and defaceth the workmanship of God; and this has been the work of
Antichrist in all ages when Truth has appeared against deceit; and such cannot
truly say, truth has prevailed on their parts, when they have thus beaten, and
haled, and stocked, and whipped, and imprisoned the creatures; but violence
there at that time has prevailed, by which they that have had the truth to
declare, often times have been stopped from speaking it.

So let none do violence to one another persons or estates, but let your Law
take hold on them that would do so but let them alone in their profession, and
then it will soon appear who is in the truth, and who are Ministers of Christ,
and of the spirit; for those that are in the spirit of truth, will assuredly
prevail over them that be in the spirit of deceit; and this will be manifested
soon, if there be no violence done to them who be in the spirit of truth,
thereby to stop them from speaking the truth, and then the truth will reach unto
the Witness of God in peoples consciences; and then many who could not discern
the Truth whiles there was such strivings and fightings with the creatures, will
come to see and feel it; and then Truth shall prevail, and deceit shall fall
where ever it be* and what covering soever it have got, it shall be ripped off,
and he that is in the Spirit of Truth, and abides in it, shall overcome all
false spirits.

Now I know ye are not altogether ignorant, how that the lives and goods of
several in this Nation has been made a prey upon by the Priests, who has
robbed and spoiled both the fatherless, Widows, and others; and has prisoned
several unto death by a Law made by the Popish Kings, and since strengthened by
those that are called Protestants, concerning tithes, and these
beforementioned has suffered thus for not paying tithes. Now tithes in the
Law given by the command of God unto Levi the changeable Priesthood, (who was
to have no inheritance among his Brethren) was for the maintenance of that
Tribe, and also for the Fatherless, the Widows, and the Strangers; but Christ
being come after the order of Melchisedech, he is the everlasting unchangeable
High Priest, not made by a carnal commandment, but by the power of an endless
life; he offering himself up once for all, put an end to the changeable
priesthood, who were made by a Law which gave them tithes; so this Priesthood
and this Law was changeable, this Priesthood could not continue by reason of
death; so this Priesthood being changed and ended by Christ the unchangeable
Priest, made by the power of an endless life, there was a necessity also of a
change and end of that law by which the changeable Priests (who could not
continue by reason of death) were made, which gave them tithes; then Christ the
everlasting High Priest, made by the power of an endless life, by the same
power he made Ministers, and freely gave them gifts for the work of the
Ministry, which was for the perfecting of the Saints; and in the power of an
endless life sent he them forth, saying, Freely ye have received, freely give,
and into what house soever ye enter, and they receive you, ye may eat such
things as are set before you, for the workman is worthy of his meat. These were
Workmen, and they first planted a Vinyard, and then eat of the fruit thereof;
first gathered a flock, and then eat of the milk thereof; sowed spiritual
things, and reaped of their carnal things unto whom they had sown spirituals;
preached the Gospel, and lived of the Gospel; these were not made Ministers by
the will of man, nor by an outward Law, neither received they their maintenance
by an outward Law, nor compelled or forced any to pay them; neither robbed, or
spoiled, or imprisoned they any that would not give them maintenance; but they
had a necessity laid on them to preach the Gospel, and they did so, and coveted
no man's gold, nor silver, nor apparel; and these sought not peoples goods, but
them; and their diligence and care was not to make the Gospel chargeable, for
having food and raiment, they were therewithal content; and they received it
of such also (mark that) as did receive them and their testimony, and so
oppressed no man.

But Paul foresaw that after his departure grievous and ravenous Wolves should
enter, that would not spare the flock; and Christ prophesied of them also; and
these entered before John's departure, and he warned the little children (who
had the anointing abiding in them) to take heed of them, for they were the
Antichrists, and went from the anointing in the particular, and so from those
that were in it; and then the murdering spirit got up in these, and the World
went after these who spared not the flock, but killed those that had the
testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of Prophecy; and these Antichrists
having lost the spirit, being ravened from it in their own particulars, and
having killed those that were made Ministers by the spirit, who had freely
received, and freely gave; then they set up their Schools and Colleges, there
to make Ministers by the will of man, and then made a carnal Law, whereby they
had tithes given them; for these had not freely received, neither would they
freely give; so tithes among the Gentiles was set up by the devouring,
murdering spirit by a law by which law they are yet upheld, (and not by God)
and they that yet receive the tithes, are found in the devouring, murdering
spirit, (many of them) who have devoured many peoples goods in this nation, who
could not for conscience sake pay tyths, and has caused several others to be
kept in prison until death for the same: And this has been the work of
Antichrist, who has the sheeps clothing, the good words, but inwardly is the
ravening Wolf.

And in this Work many of the Priests of England has been found of late, as is
manifest by their fruits; and they have the same unjust law to oppress and
destroy the innocent still, notwithstanding some of you have pretended and
declared much to the contrary long.

Now many of the Priests when we tell them of this their cruelty and oppression,
they will say, They are Ministers of the Gospel, and he that preaches the
Gospel, God has has ordained that he should live of the Gospel. Well, we say
so too, That we are Ministers of the gospel, and he that preaches the gospel,
ought to live of the gospel (which is the power of God) and ought not to have
any outward Law to compel any to give him whereon to live. So this is that
which we (who have learned to do unto all men, as we would they should do unto
us) would have, that he that preaches the gospel should live of the gospel, and
not on that which comes by the force of an outward Law; but the Priests
maintenance is contrary to the maintenance of the Ministers of the Law or
Gospel.

Therefore, first let there be no outward Law to hinder or restrain any people
from hearing any whom they believe is a Minister of the Gospel, nor yet to
compel any to hear any one whom they believe is not a Minister of the Gospel;
for an outward Law can but restrain or compel the outward man, but the heart
none can restrain from evil, nor compel to the good, but the Law and Power of
God only in the heart; therefore let there be a free liberty for all people to
meet concerning their Worship, provided that under pretense of meeting to
worship, they meet not to plot for the overthrowing of the outward Governors by
an outward power, for if that can be proved and made manifest, truly then let
such suffer by an outward Law.

And likewise, let there be no law to compel any one to maintain any Teacher,
neither let there be any law to restrain any one from giving any thing to their
Teacher, (for this is but equal) so let the people have liberty herein, that so
this oppression about the maintenance of Teachers may cease; And then it will
soon appear whether these Priests be Ministers of the Gospel, and whether their
Gospel will maintain them, yea, or nay.

But many of the Rulers have said, If we should not provide maintenance for our
Ministers, then preaching would soon fall, and then many people would become
heathens.

I answer, He that is a Minister of Christ, the Power of God, which is the
everlasting Gospel, necessity is laid upon him to preach the Gospel, and woe be
unto him if he preach not the Gospel: And he that is sent forth by Christ, is
not to take thought what he shall eat, or what he shall drink, or wherewithal
he shall be clothed, for his heavenly Father knows that he has need of all
these things, and provides them for chose that he sends forth, (without an
outward Law to compel it) that so they lack not any thing.

Now that Ministry which the forcing an outward maintenance for it, will uphold
it, and the not forcing an ou^ward maintenance for it, will cause it to cease,
[mark] this Min^^try never did any good or service for God, not never can (that
is God's truth unto you) at the furthest; this Ministry has but brought people
to draw near unto God with their mouths* and to appear to honor him with their
lips, when their hearts have been afar off; but this Ministry could never bring
any into the true knowledge of God, and Christ, whom God has sent and freely
given for a Covenant of light; and without this knowledge, all people upon the
earth are without the life eternal* and so are heathens, whatever they profess
in words, though they may make long prayers, and think to be heard in their
much speaking, as the pharisees and hypocrites did, whom Christ called
Heathens; therefore consider what a Ministry you have upheld, and do uphold.

So let that Ministry fall which cannot stand without an outward Law for to
compel an outward maintenance for it, for the Lord regards it not, but his hand
is against it, and against that which would uphold it, and both must fall
together.

So what is here declared concerning Religion, and the maintenance of Teachers,
and the like, it is in the equal royal Law of liberty, which is, To love thy
neighbor as thy self, and to do unto all as we would be done unto.

And so if the spirit which we are led and guided by (who are called in scorn
Quakers) be not able to prevail over that which we oppose in others as error,
then let us be manifested to be in the error, and let us fall; only let there
be a fair trial, and let there not be such beating, and haling, and tearing,
and mangling, and stocking, and imprisoning of the creatures as has been; for
where these things have been acted, many have been stopped at that time for
speaking the truth, yet notvvithstanding the truth has prevailed over all, and
shall prevail. And if that can be proved against us truly, that we plot at our
Meetings, or at any other time against the outward Governors, to overturn them
by an outward power or force; then let us also suffer (as I said before) by a
just Law.

And if he that sends us forth, will not provide food and raiment for us, then
let us want; and if we cannot live of our Gospel which we preach, without an
outward Law to compel us an outward maintenance, and if our Ministry will not
stand without it, then let us want whereon to live, and let our Ministry fall.

And let none be compelled to uphold another's Meeting Place (concerning their
Worship) for that is oppression; but let every one uphold their own; and that
sort of professors that will not uphold the place where they meet to worship,
let their house fall, and then it will appear where the earthly spirit lodges;
for they that compel others to uphold another's place of Worship, does but
cover and strengthen the earthly spirit; therefore let there not be such havoc
made of peoples goods as has been of late upon many who could not give to the
upholding another's Meeting House; for this is out of the equality, in the
oppression and tyranny.

So come into that which is equal, and keep in that, and that will bring you to
act that which is equal and just, unto all, and to break all outward Laws that
are not equal and just, but tends to tyranny and oppression; and truly there
are many Laws and Customs in this Nation, whereby the innocent are oppressed; so
wait to feel the power of God, that ye may rule and govern in that, (for the
Lord,) and feeling the power of God, and keeping to that, it will bring you out
of all deceit and transgression in the particular, and so to stand over all
deceit and transgression in the general; and it will also bring you to judge
righteously, without respect to persons; and this will reach to the Witness of
God in all consciences.

So wait to feel the higher power to rule over the evil doer in the particular,
and to know and feel the Authority of God there, and then ye will come to rule
over all evil doers in the higher Power, even in the Authority of God, and then
that of God in all consciences where ye come to rule, shall answer to your
government.

But if ye give way to the evil-doer in the particular, and let him have the
liberty there, [mark that] then that will cause the Just to suffer in the
particular, and then the same will give way and liberty to evil doers without,
whereby the Just without will come to suffer also.

Therefore keep to the power of the Lord in your own particulars, (you who have
felt it) and that will bring ye to do Justice unto all without partiality, and
this will make you honorable in the hearts of the people and then shall
righteousness, Truth; Equity, Mercy, and Justice, prosper over all, and be
exalted, and all deceit unrighteousness, and unrighteous vvays shall be
confounded. So remember, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God.

Something after.
AND all ye that are Officers and Rulers now, who have tasted of the pure power
of the Lord God, and has felt it stirring in you against all oppression and
tyranny, whereby also ye were made to witness against the back slidings of
others, even to the losing of your places, (some of you) some being turned out,
and others that could not stay for conscience sake.

Well, keep to the power of the Lord which ye have felt, and do not abuse it,
but wait in it, that ye may be kept low in his fear, that so those who are come
to see their backslidings, and do repent them, may come to have unity with
you, and you with them, in that which kept you in any measure out of the
backslidings, and which has also brought them to see theirs, and to repent of
it; for that is but one in you both, it is even the measure of the pure God
which is given you to profit withal; therefore in that all wait to receive the
wisdom which is from above, that in it ye may all be preserved and kept in
enity together, and that therein ye may be instruments for the settling and
preserving the outward Peace and just Liberties of the people of these Nations,
which are under your charge.

But verily, much of the wars which has lately been entered into, has not
been for the peace, safety, and well-being of these Nations, (for the power
being lost, pride and lust was the ground of them;) Therefore all mind the
Lords wisdom and counsel, that peradventure ye may find, and see a way how to
stop them, least ye bring enemies upon heaps both upon your selves and these
Nations; for yet verily, breaking, breaking, overfurning, and yet overturning
will be among all those that will not submit to the counsel of the Lord, and
wait in his light, to be led and guided in his wisdom; for he will be known to
rule in the kingdoms of men, and he will exalt his own Name over all.

Many are your Enemies within and without, therefore be not high-minded, but
fear, least they prevail over you.

The Lord is near unto all those that fears him, and trusts in his Name, to
deliver them; but those that go out of his fear, and trusts in the wisdom or
arm of flesh, they shall be broken; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Given forth in the former part of the 3d. Month, 1659.
THE END.

