TO THE PEOPLE OF UXBRIDGE.
Friends,
YOur Conditions is grieved and lamented over, your want of the life of God,
and barrenness of his power amongst you, whose lean souls are seen, whose
barrenness, and ba^re^ womb appears, who little thirsts after the living God,
whose wildness, wantonness, and negligence of the everlasting salvation
appears; yet full, like Sodom and Gomorrah, being full of that which is wicked
and profane; the streets of your Town will manifest it. O people, where is your
salvation, and what assurance have you of that, and of your Eternal
Inheritance, where nothing that does defile, enters? O are ye come to examine,
and see whether Christ be in you, or no, that wickedness, profaneness,
unrighteousness, ungodliness, filthiness, might go out of you? For if Christ be
found within you, the strong man goes out that has kept the house, and defiled
the heart, and the body, and the mind, and that prisoned the soul; If Christ
be felt within, there is the souls Bishop. O people, I am grieved with your
abominations, and filthiness, and unsavouriness, and untowardness, and your
unsubjected state to the life and power of God; If you do not repent, and that
your minds be not changed to serve the living God in Spirit, which mortifies
sin and corruption, the Earth will vomit you out, who has cumbred it, and
destroyed the Creatures of God on your filthy ungodly lusts, and that you have
served and pleasured. O I am weary of mine adversaries says the Lord, I am
weary of your abominations, ye have loaded the just, and pressed it as a Cart
with sheaves, your hearts are gross and fat; with your tongues, you have talked
of God, but your hearts has been far off, after your own ends: your younger
children, boys and people are full of lightness, wildeness, folly, and vanity,
and envy, and mocking, scorn and derision, (which is not a good savor in your
streets) stubborness, and untowardness, and profaneness, and wildeness, more
like Esau's and Ishmaels stock, then Isaack's and Jacob's; your old men are not
sober, nor solid, nor grave, and so they are not good patterns to the younger:
so ye are all more like Heathens then Christians, empty of the good, full of
the forgetfulness of God, and out of his fear, as though there was no God, as
though ye had never heard talk of God, nor Scripture, nor Christ; But this
saying is fulfilled, The Teachers have not profited the people at all, Jer. 23.
But like people, like Priest. But what a Teacher is he that must serve this
people? who must be the Prophet, or the Priest, that must fit such a people?
Surely he must be such a one as teaches for filthy lucre, and bears Rule by his
means, that will devine for money, that will preach peace to them, while they
put into their mouths, such as minds Earthly things, who serves not the Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, that has such fruits in the streets: But
such as seeks for their gain from their quarter, and the price, never lead
people to the Lord, but lead them into the Earth, and to be like themselves,
and they live like beasts and swine, as you may read, Jer. 5. Mic. 3. Ezekiel. 34.
Esai 56. Jer. 23. Romans 13. Matthew 23, whose fruits declares it. And away with
the profession of God with your lips, while your hearts are far off; and away
with your making a trade of the Scriptures, Christ's and the Prophets and the
Apostles words, which many suffered death for giving them forth; and away with
your lukewarmness, and away with your carnal formality, and away with your
Doctrines and Traditions of men, which perishes in the using of them; and away
with your singing of David's Quakings, and tremblings, and fastings in Meeter,
and come to sing in the spirit; and away with your hourglass preaching, and
hypocritical praying, and your old Mass-house worship, which is called
Steeple-house or Church, and come to the Church in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. and to
worship God in spirit; John 4. and the Lord is come to teach his people
himself by his Spirit, and to bring them off from all the worlds Teachers, and
Churches, and ways, to Christ, the way to himself, and he does enlighten every
one that comes into the world, that all through the light might believe; and
every one believing in the light which has enlightened them, they shall become
the children of the light; But they that hate the light that does enlighten
them, they hate Christ, and that condemns them: and that is the light that lets
the Drunkard see he should not be drunk, and the curser that he should not
curse, nor swear, and the thief, that he should not steal; and that the
cosiner should not cosen, nor cheat, nor wrong, nor defraud; and lets the
profane see he should not profane; and lets the envious man see he should not
envy, nor fight, nor quarrel, nor lie, nor commit adultery; that is the light
which discovers that: not to look after a woman to lust after her, that is the
light that says so, which if ye love the light, it will let you see all your
evil thoughts, words and actions which be wrought out of God, and turn you
from them; and coming into the light, your works will be wrought in God, and
your words will be from him, and so good: that is in every one of your bosoms
that will judge you, and condemn you acting contrary to it, and reprove you;
which if you consider it, and hearken to it, it will turn your minds to the
Lord God; But if you hate it, it will be your condemnation. Therefore now while
you have time, consider and prize it, for this is the day of your Visitation,
and Salvation proffered to you: and with the light, with which you see your sin,
which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, with the same you may see your
salvation, Christ Jesus, from whence it comes, to save you from your sin. And
people, that which may be known of God is made manifest within you, which God
has showed unto you, that when you do the thing which is not convenient, not
righteous, but worthy of death, by that of God in you ye can tell; and while
your minds is reprobate from that, ye are all strangers from the life of God,
and the covenant of Promise. And Friends, the light ye must feel in your own
hearts, to give you the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. and all the children of the Lord, shall be taught of the
Lord; Esai. 54. and ye must come to know the anointing in you, to teach you, 1
John 2. and the Kingdom of Heaven ye must know within you, Luke 17. and that is
it which never consents to sin. And ye must come to know the New Covenant, the
Law in your minds, and in your hearts, by which ye need not say to one another,
know the Lord, But that all might come to know him, from the greatest to the
least, that witness the Law of God put and written in your minds and hearts,
that you may come to witness the Lord is your God, and ye his people.

Repent, lest you come to say you had time, when it is past; so from a lover of
your souls, and your eternal good.

G. F.
COme, away with your self-rghteousness, and your feigned Humility, and your
Will Worship, and your Carnal-security, and take heed of drunkenness, and
filthiness, and profaneness, and scoffing, mocking, scorning, and derision, for
such who lives in such things, and acts such things, shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God; and away with that you call your Sacraments, and your
sprinkling infants, and come to Christ the substance, and come to the Spirit,
that you may be baptized into one body, that you may come to possess the things
the Scripture speaks of.

The very Mist of the Air is among you, and so are so light, and vain, which
are the Prince of the Aires fruits, and the Priests who has long preached for
his mouth; But if ye put not into his mouth, see if he turn not against you,
and you shall not keep him long: so look unto Christ Jesus to teach you, who
said, Learn of me, who is the way to the Father, who has enlightened you, that
with the light you may see him, who is the bread to feed upon; but if you hate
it, then you feed upon Husks.



This is to be read among the people of Uxbridge
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate,
1659.


