A SERMON Preached in Christ's-Church, DUBLIN; On the 23d. of October, School.
Being the Anniversary Thanksgiving for putting an End to the IRISH REBELLION,
which broke out on that Day, 1641. BEFORE THE House of Lords. By NATHANAEL Lord
Bishop of WATERFORD and LISMORE.

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
for Samuel Adey, Bookbinder in Copper-Alley; and are to be sold by the
Booksellers of Dublin, School.

Monday the 24th of October, School. By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled.
Ordered,
ON Motion, that the Lord Viscount Loftus of Ely, the Lord Viscount Charlemont,
and the Lord Baron of Strabane, do give the Thanks of this House to the Lord
Bishop of Waterford, for his Sermon Preached at Christ's-Church Yesterday,
being the Anniversary of the Three and Twentieth of October; And that his
Lordship be desired to Print his said Sermon.

Jo. Smyth, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Acts, Chap. 19, ver. 28. And when they heard these Sayings, they were full of
Wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.
THAT Ephesus was the Metropolis of the Lesser Asia, and one of the most
Celebrated Mart Towns of all the East, seated on the Shore of the Archipelago,
renowned for its Riches and Antiquity, as having been founded (as it is said by
many of the Ancients) by the Amazons, not long after the Trojan War; but for
nothing more Famous than the Worship of the Great Goddess DIANA, with her Image
which fell down Ver. 35. (...) ver. 826. 827, 828 829, cum Notis Doct.
Philologi. Guil Hill. p. 216.
from Jupiter (as 'twas Superstitiously believed) and the Incredible Structure
of her Temple, as having from time, to time, been no less than Two hundred and
twenty Years a Building, at the general Charges of the whole Province; and for
that Reason, called by Pliny, Admiratio Graecae Magnificentiae, The Wonder or
Astonishment of the Greek Magnificence, and ever reputed One of the Seven
Wonders of the World, is unknown to none who are any thing conversant in
Heathen Story.

To this City, Proud and Insolent; to the highest Degree Superstitious, and
Idolatrous, and hugely addicted to the Study of Magical or Infernal Arts, St.
Paul in his Apostolical Travels, about Fifty two Years after our v. 1, to v. 9.
Lord's Birth, comes to Found, or rather Establish a Christian Church; The
Rudiments of which seem to have been Imperfectly laid, in the Chapter before:
And Cap 18. v. 19. 20, 21.
here he continues by the space of Two Years Baptizing, Disputing, and Working
Miracles of all sorts, not only when personally present, but by Touching the
Handkerchiefs, or Cap. 19, v. 1, to v. 11. v. 12.
Aprons of such as were Sick, or Possessed; so that the Diseases departed from
them, and the Evil Spirits went out of them.

Upon this, certain Vagabond Jews, Exorcists, or Conjurers, who had improved
themselves in these Arts of Magic and Incantation, whilst they were at Ephesus
(as being a City particularly under the Jurisdiction of the Devil) perceiving
how that no sooner St. Paul called upon the Name of the Lord Jesus, but the
Evil Spirits flew like Lightning from the Bodies of Demoniacks; they thought to
do the like; and the Experiment being made by no less than seven Sons of one
SCeva a Jew (not being willing it seems to trust themselves singly) all
Students of the Black Art, in this Form of Words; We adjure you v. 13, to 17.
by Jesus whom Paul Preaches, i. e. to depart: The Evil Spirit answered and
said, Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? And the man in whom the
Evil Spirit was, leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them,
so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

So Remarkable an Occurrence as this could not but be soon Noised abroad in so
Populous and Inquisitive a City; and the event was answerable; For, Fear fell
on all dwelling at Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks; and the v. 17. 18 19, 20.
Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And many that believed came and
confessed and showed their deeds. And in farther token of the reallity of their
Conversion, and utter Abhorrence of their former Life; many of them who had
practiced these Magic Arts, of their own accord, brought their Books, and
burned them publicly; which, had they been sold, would have yielded no less
than Fifty thousand pieces of Silver. So mightily grew the Word of God and
prevailed.

But Demetrius, a crafty Tradesman, and Master of the Corporation of
Silver-Smiths, who made Silver Shrines for Diana, or little Temples with her
Image in them, and had all this time been a Spy on the Words and Actions of St.
Paul, finding that his Religion and Fortune were both at stake, and would
certainly be lost, were not some timely stop put to his Preaching, and
Miracles; he calls together the Workmen of like Occupation, and in a Riotous
Assembly (for Tradesmen are no proper Reformers) he tells them,

There was one Paul who had not only at Ephesus, but verse 24. to 27.
throughout all Asia, perverted much People; Broaching a most Unreasonable and
Heretical Doctrine; That they be no Gods, which are made with Hands; That the
Divinity of the Great Goddess Diana, had been Universally Acknowledged by all
Mankind, and that her Worship had been Established upon the Universal Consent,
and Practice of all Nations, whom not only all Asia, but the World Worshipped.
But if what Paul said was true, both the Temple, and the Goddess would soon be
despised, and her Magnificence destroyed.

This, had he said no more, must be acknowledged to have been a good sort of
Metaphysical Argument; but Demetrius knowing that Trades-mens heads lie not
much that way, was too wise to venture the Worship of his Goddess, and along
with it his All, upon such a nice Speculation, and therefore to make Sure work
of it, he first prepares the way by a right faithful Argument, which he knew,
amongst such Auditors, would never fail him; Sirs, Ye know that by this Craft
we have our wealth, which now is in danger to be set at naught. And when they
heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out saying, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians, the Uproar continuing, about two hours, the Beasts of
Ephesus all that time bellowing nothing out, but Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, Great is, etc.

So that the Words are a perfect Inference from a heap of Arguments which went
before; Demetrius. Argues stiffly for his Goddess, the People repeat his
Arguments, and infer the Conclusion. Does Paul say they be no Gods which are
made with hands, and is the Ruin of our Goddess involved in this single
Assertion? Has her Divinity been Acknowledged and Adored by all Nations, and by
the Romans themselves, received into the number of the Deae Majorum Gentium,
and is our whole Fraternity supported by her, and do we and she fall together?
Why then, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

From the Words thus knit together, we have these Three very Observables.

First, That there is no Evidence of Sense, Reason, or I.
in consequent thereto, Scripture, so plain and undoubted, against which
Education, and Interest are not of force enough to bias and carry the Judgment.

Secondly, The exact Harmony, or Agreement betwixt II.
the Religion of the Heathens, and that of the Romish Church at this day.

Thirdly, The wonderful Force of a misguided, or illgrounded III.
Zeal, which usually is fiercer, and more impetuous than a true one.

First, There is no Evidence of Sense, Reason, etc. Of the truth of which,

First. The whole Heathen World is an undeniable Evidence, who before the
coming of Our Blessed Lord, were sunk, and degenerated into such gross sottish
Opinions and Practices relating to God, and Humane Nature, as were altogether
inconsistent with either, and did thereupon Impair and Endanger the whole Law
of Nature, which as to the Moral World, is no other than a System of Opinions
and Practices appertaining to God, our selves, and one another. But to keep to
the particular instance in the Text; what can be more evident to Sense and
Reason, than that the Goddess the Silver-Smith made, did not make the
Silver-Smith? Notwithstanding which, and though the whole Corporation of
Silver-Smiths got their Livelihood by doing Work about her; nay though perhaps
these very individual men had mended, or adorned her Goddesship, when Ruinous
or Rusty; yet Saint Paul must be exclaimed against, and brought in danger of
his Life, for saying, They are no Gods which are made with Hands. To this may
be added, that inhumane Practice which did of Old, and does at this time
prevail amongst some Heathen Nations, of Sacrificing the Wife, the dearest
Friends, and most faithful Servants, at the Funerals of their several
Relations. And what renders this Practice more wonderful, is, there is nothing
of Interest in it, beyond the avoiding Shame and Disgrace, which by long Use
and Practice, is clearly of their own making. The like may be said,

Secondly, Of the Jewish Church, which would not believe that Jesus of Nazareth
was the Savior of the World, but Crucified him as a Malefactor, though the
Prophecies of the Old Testament foretelling him to come, joined to, and
explained by the History of Our Lord's Life and Death, did so plainly Describe,
and Point out his Person, that it was not possible any thing to a Nation which
acknowledged the Divine Original of them, as the Jews did, should be more
Evident to Reason, or more Convictive of the Judgment. And yet alas, all these
signified no more, against the Education and Principles which then prevailed,
by which they were taught to expect a Temporal Messiah, nor against the sensual
Interest, and worldly Grandeur of that Church, than Bullets shot against a
Marble stone.

Nay, when these forcible Weapons were afterward managed by an Omnipotent Arm,
and received an Additional Strength, and a New Edge, by the Accession of the
Miracle of the Resurrection, yet made they little or no Impression on the
Jewish Church, but a very Fatal one upon the Publican, and Fishermen, with
their Followers, who were the Preachers of that Divine Doctrine. Of all which
Our Lord has given a most Wise profound Reason. How can ye Believe, that
receive Honor of Men? That is, it is Morally impossible ye should. But beyond
these, and all other instances in the World put together,

Thirdly, The Romish Church is the fullest proof how much it is within the
Power of Interest and Education, to warp the Judgment against the clearest
Evidence of Sense, Reason, and Scripture. Of a great heap of Opinions, to
single out but a few.

What can be more against the clear Evidence of Scripture, than half Communion?
What more against Sense and Reason, than that Popes, and Councils, who for
these many years have been doing little, but contradicting not only one
another, but themselves, should set up for Infallibility? Reason tells they may
be deceived, Sense and Experience tell that they are so, and they have not yet
been able to urge the least plausible Argument, to prove their Exemption from
the common calamity of Humane Nature. What more against the common Reason of
Mankind, and the Evidence of Scripture, than, that since Prayer is a lifting up
of the Heart to God, giving Thanks for what we have received, and imploring
what we need, men should not be permitted to pray to God in a Tongue they
understand?

Or what more against the Evidence of Sense, Reason, and Scripture, than the
Monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation? Which to go about to confute, would
be to abuse the Auditory. A Doctrine, which if any thing in Sense, Reason, or
Scripture be true, is certainly false. A Doctrine which as one has most
ingeniously observed, if it be true; it is the most ill natured truth in the
World, for 'twill permit nothing else to be true besides it self. A and Lastly
a Doctrine, in favor of which were a Miracle wrought, it could not prove it
true, in as much as after such a Miracle wrought, we should have the same
Reason to believe the Doctrine to be false, that we had to believe the Miracle
was true.

And yet to the Eternal Disgrace of the Romish Church, they have laid the
greatest Wits of Europe, both of our Church, and their own, under an absolute
necessity of spending the Flower of their Years, and the Strength of their
Parts, in Reading and Writing great Volumes, for, and against this portentous
Doctrine; though after all their Labors and Study, they can arrive to no more
knowledge in the whole matter, than what every Child of Six years of Age has;
viz. To know that Bread is Bread. Thus much Interest, and Education, is able to
do against the strongest, and most uncontested Evidence; of the latter of which
I think the World has not a fuller proof than the gross body of this Nation in
which we live affords us, who have not the least imaginable shadow of Reason,
why they are rather Papists, than Protestants, but that 'twas the Religion
their Fathers professed before them; pleading nothing in their Defense, but this,
as it is notoriously known to all who converse with them. And now 'twere to be
wished these were all that are concerned in this imputation: but

Fourthly, Every Sect or Sept, has a share in it more or less, as 'twere easy
to instance in the several Factions which of late years have prevailed amongst
us, well nigh to the utter desolation of one of the most Flourishing Kingdoms,
and Apostolic Churches in the World; whose Wounds are yet Green and Gaping; so
that the Romish Church is more Catholic than we Protestants think of;
extending it self not only to Rome, and other Places subject to the Papal
Power, but to Geneva likewise, and those who value themselves most for having
no Communion with her. I say 'twere easy to instance in the Opinions and
Practices, but I forbear; this being a day hallowed by the Blood of many
thousand Innocents to the Romish Church, and upon that account, it is great pity
but it should be all their own.

Secondly, The exact Harmony, or Agreement betwixt the Religion of the
Heathens, and that of the Church of Rome. And now we are Engaged in a Sea of
Matter, where Plenty makes it difficult to choose, and time will not permit to
insist on all that offers. But I discourse before an Auditory that knows how to
supply Defects, and to go before the Preacher; and truly it is well it is so,
since it is the great Unhappiness of Discourses of this kind, that being
measured by a short scantling of time, nothing can be handled as it ought to
be. And therefore to lay the Proof of this Doctrinal Observation in these
following particulars only; some of which I shall mention rather than insist
on. The exact Harmony and Agreement betwixt both Religions.

I. As to the sottish Idolatrous Worship of both.

II. As to the Arguments upon the strength of which, both Religions have been
received.

III. As to the same Ends, for the Promotion of which, both are continued.

IV. As to the same Methods of Propagation; Artifices of Imposture to prevail
over the Weak and Simple; and Practices of Blood, and Cruelty over the more
Understanding and Resolute.

In the Assigning of which particulars of Agreement, we have not ransackt the
Body of the Heathen, and Romish Religion, (which would furnish us with many
more,) but have kept our selves strictly to the Letter of the Text; all these
being formally contained in the Words we have read to you, as will even now
appear.

First, As to the Sottish Idolatry of both, in the Worship of Images: For what
can be more Sottish than it? Since they are but Silver and Gold, and the work
of men's Psalm. 135. ver. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Hands. They have Mouths but they speak not, Eyes have they but see not. They
have Ears but they hear not, neither is there any Breath in their Mouths. They
that make them, are like unto them, so is every one that trusts in them. And
they that make them, and put their trust in them, are the Heathen, and Romish
Church.

The Trade of making Images is not less gainful to the Romish Church, than
'twas to Demetrius and his fellow Crafts-men, or rather much more; for amongst
the Heathens one Household God many times served a whole Family, but now each
single person abounds with great variety of Images, and the Worship that is
paid to them, by both, is the same; nor can any thing be said in the Defense of
the one which may not reasonably be urged in the Defense of the other. If St.
Paul had been a Roman Catholic, (as they of that Church tell us he undoubtedly
was) and had come to a personal Debate with Demetrius, touching the Worship of
Images and departed Souls; with what Forehead do we think he could have
Objected Idolatry to him, and his Companions; or if he had been so
unreasonable, do we think Demetrius would not have been as ready with his Dulia
and Hyperdulia, his Terminatively and Transitively, wherewith the Romanists
incrustate their Idolatry as they themselves are.

Where Saints themselves are not Worshipped, there their Images are not; and we
have the Confession of Cardinal Perron, that in the earlier Ages of the Church,
Saints were not invoked, for which he gives this Reason; for fear the Heathens
might Judge the Christians were Guilty of Idolatry: An ingenuous Confession,
how like the one is to the other.

And one would think this Charge against them, of Symbolizing with the Heathens
in their Image Worship, is not very unacceptable to them; for a Jesuit who has
Corn. a ^apide in (...).
Written Large and Learned Commentaries on the Bible, and this Chapter, tells
us; that these Shrines were little Chapels, or Images of Silver, made in
Imitation of the greater Temple of Diana, in, or upon which, was the Image of
Diana, and these, they either offered to Diana in her Temple, or wore about
their Necks, or in their Caps, and Clothes, as our Pilgrims do the Image of the
Blessed Virgin of Loretto. Another authentic Testimony how nearly they
Symbolize with the Papists, in their Worship.

Nay, the Jesuit goes yet a pitch higher, for he contends stiffly with the
Heathens for Diana her self; saying, that their Diana (meaning the Heathen) was
False, and Supposititious, but the true Christian Diana, was the Blessed Virgin
Mary, (risum teneatis) which he endeavors to prove in Six particulars, three
whereof I shall lay before you.

The Heathen Diana was the Daughter of Jupiter and Latona, but Blessed Mary is
the Daughter of the Eternal Father, who has brought light to the World, and
shows the way to Heaven. Again, in the Temple of the Heathen Diana, Kings used
to lay up their most precious Treasures, which no Enemy when they Sacked and
Plundered a City, would be so profane as to touch; but Mary is the faithful
Preservatrix of Virtue and Safety, so that it is impossible for him to perish,
who does but diligently commit himself, and his Goods to her Care and
Protection; as the common experience of every one shows. And lastly, the
Heathen Diana had many Breasts, as being the Nurse of all living Creatures; but
Mary is the second Eve, the Mother of all living, who gives the Milk of Grace
and Consolation, to all that Worship her; which things are little less than
Blasphemy; but I forbear to insist upon these Follies.

To conclude, whatever Cob-web distinctions may be Cum fruges Cererem, vinum
Liberum dicimus; genere nos quidem utimur usitato, sed ecquem tam amentem esse
putas, qui illud quo veseatur deum credat esse? Lib. 3, de Natura Deor. Sec.
16. Edit. Fol. Land. 1681.
Invented (which Wise men see through, and Fools are consounded with) to
Palliate their Image Worship, if the Eucharistical Bread be not turned into the
Body of the Son of God, some of their own Writers acknowledge, nothing can
defend the Worship of the Host, against the imputation of the most sottish,
unaccountable Idolatry the World; much worse than that of the Heathens: one of
whom, and he no mean one neither, Cicero de Not. Deorum, speaking of Ceres, by
which Bread Corn was denoted, says, Do you think we are so senseless to believe
that we eat to be God? A Sareasme (would but the time, and Religion of the man
admit) one would say was designed on purpose for the Romish Church.

Secondly, As to the Arguments upon the strength of which both Religions have
been received; Universality, and Antiquity; Diana whom all Asia, and the World
Ver. 27. 35
Worshippeth, and whose Image fell down from Jupiter.

Touching the former of which, Universality, as it is observable, that were the
matter of Fact true, as to both Churches, as it is certainly false, it would
conclude nothing for either, since Error is many times more spreading than
Truth; so is it likewise, that the Heathens pretentions to Universality are
much better grounded, than the Romanists, it being well nigh literally true
what Demetrius said of Diana, that all Asia, and the World Worshipped her. But
for the Romish Church to call themselves the Catholic Church, when there are
so many Churches besides themselves, is just such a piece of Nonsense, or
rather contradiction, as to say the half is the whole; an Error which as it is
of the greatest Magnitude, so has it been particularly derived to them from
Transubstantiation, or at least hugely strengthened by it, which assures us
when once the Bread is Consecrated, every Crum is as large as the whole Loaf,
every part being the whole Body of Christ, and the whole can be no more; and if
this be true, by the same reasoning, why may not a handful of Christians be as
numerous, and diffusive as the whole Christian Church.

Secondly, As to the Antiquity of Diana's Worship, it is proved by the
Town Clerk by this Argument, that her Image fell down from Jupiter, i. e. time
out of mind; for we must know, that the Scene of all the Actions of the Heathen
Gods, and Goddesses, were laid at a vast distance of time, so that there was
nothing of yesterday in that Religion; as we see most of the Miracles of the
Romish Church as such, are wisely laid in such Times, and Places, as no one can
enquire into them. Now touching these Pretenses to Antiquity, these Four things
are observable,

1st, That the Heathen, and Romish Church do both pretend to them alike.

2dly, That both their Pretenses are Ill Grounded.

3dly, That the Heathen Church bids fairer for it than the Romish.

4thly, That both the one Church, and the other, do alike unjustly Charge their
Adversaries with Novelty; the Heathens the Christians, the Papists the
Protestants.

5thly, That the very same Answer which the Primitive Christians returned to
the Heathens, when charged with Novelty, I say the very same Answer we
Protestants return to the Romanists now. All which, do beyond measure show the
exact agreement betwixt the Heathen, and the Romish Religion. To insist on the
latter only, which virtually comprehends the rest.

The Jews and Christians were by the Heathens called Up-starts, and Mushrooms,
the growth of a single Night, and in consequent thereto, 'twas said their
Religion was false. The Substance of the Christians Reply to which heavy Charge
was, That tho some Errors are ancienter than some Truths, yet the first Truth,
was ancienter than the first Error. That God is the Fountain of Truth, and
before all Error. That the first Religion in the World was that which Adam
professed in Paradise; That Adam's Innocence was prior to his fall, upon which,
God immediately Instituted the Christian Religion; The Seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpent's head; That the Heathen Religion, whose distinctive
Character was Idolatry, and multiplicity of Gods (neither of which were heard
of before the Fall) grew up by little, and little, after Mankind had departed
from God; That tho all men fell, yet some part of Mankind did Worship God in a
purer, and more natural manner than another; That the whole of the Heathen
Religion was but a Schismatical, Heretical Separation of a Wickeder part of
Mankind, from the purer and more uncorrupted Religion, which was professed by
Godly Seth, and the Antediluvian Patriarchs which sprang from his Line; That as
Adams Religion before the Fall was the first pure natural, so, the Christian
Religion was the first Instituted Religion in the World, in the design of God,
as being virtually contained in that first Prophesy, The Seed of the, etc.
which is not looked upon as a different Religion from Adam's, inasmuch as
Christianity is no other than a Wonderful Wise Means, or Dispensation of God's
Providence, to bring Humane Nature back again from whence it fell.

And do not we now, mutatis mutandis, make the very same reply, when we are
Recriminated in point of Novelty by the Romanists? viz. That the Religion we
profess is the True Apostolic Religion, That we have added nothing new to it,
That they are the Innovators, we having only cast off the Corruptions they
super-induc'd; And that the Design of the Protestant Religion, is but to bring
them back from whence they have departed. The Inference from all which is, That
the Arguments, as well as Errors of both Churches, being the same in their
Original Formation, one and the same Answer serves them both.

Thirdly, The Agreement is great, and very exact, as to the same Ends for the
Promotion of which both Religions were contrived, and afterward maintained.
That is, Sirs, ye know that by this Craft we have our wealth, which now (by St.
Paul's Preaching) is in danger to be set at naught. And certainly, if ever
there were any exquisite Silver Smiths, with a Crafty Demetrius at the head of
them, besides these mentioned in the Text, they are the Pope and Clergy of the
Church of Rome; most of their Doctrines, and Practices consequent thereto,
which are truly theirs, having no other tendency than to Enrich, and Aggrandise
the Priest. To Enrich him; of which nature are such as these.

Purgatory, that Inexhaustible Fund of Riches, with Indulgencies the Daughter
of Purgatory, as Rich as the Mother; and their Prayers and Masses for the Dead.
The Worship of Images and Relicts of Saints, with Pilgrimages undertaken to
their Shrines, Counterfeit Miracles wrought at them, and huge Oblations made to
the Tutelar Saints, Works of Supererogation, and Dispensations with Vows,
Oaths, and Matrimonial Contracts. For all which they have the pretenses of
Universality and Antiquity, to blind the Vulgar; tho all Ancient Authors are as
profoundly silent touching them, as the Holy Scriptures are, which are
undoubtedly the most Ancient Books in the World; whilst to the Romish Clergy,
the true Stream that turns the Mill is, Sirs ye know that by this Craft we have
our wealth. So that it was not ill said of a certain Pope, That that Pope was a
Fool that was poor, whilst he could hold a Pen in his hand.

But before we dismiss this Argument, I cannot but observe to you, with what
Elaborate Art the rest of the Romish Doctrines are contrived to support this
one of Purgatory, and render it a Doctrine prodigiously Gainful to the Romish
Church. For by their Doctrine of Attrition, Confession, and Sacerdotal
Absolution; no man can miscarry in his Way to Heaven, that can but secure
himself one single Sensible hour before death. By their distinction of the
Temporal punishment remaining, after the Eternal is remitted, they send the
best as well as the worst, i. e. all to Purgatory, unless the Virgin Mary, and
some few very Eminent Saints, and Martyrs. And by making the Flames of
Purgatory as intolerable as the Flames of Hell, save in Duration, they make
that Place too hot for any one to continue in it. So that the sum of all is
this; They Damn none, neither do they Save any immediately (otherwise than has
been said) but all Mankind passing through the Flames of Purgatory, pay their
Tributes to the Romish Coffers, before they can be delivered thence.

Thus much for the Thriving Arts of the Church of Rome; but there are other
Doctrines, and Practices, tending to Aggrandise the Priest's person, by fixing
such a necessary dependence of the people on him, and subjection to him, in all
they say, know, or do, as gives him a Despotick Power over their Consciences,
which is the main point they design to gain by most, if not all of them; to
Instance only in a very few.

The Intention of the Priest, as to the validity of the Sacraments, which
leaves them wholly at the Priest's mercy; locking up the Scriptures from their
Laity, by which he Governs them in all they know; Praying in an Unknown Tongue,
by which they are not permitted to think what they say; and Auricular
Confession, by which he becomes Master of all they know, think, say, or do.

Fourthly, They exactly agree as to the Methods by which both have been
propagated; Artifices of Imposture to prevail over the weak, and simple; Blood
and Cruelty, over the more understanding and resolute.

Artifices of Imposture. The only one mentioned in this Chapter, is, That this
Image of Diana, fell down from Ver. 35.
Jupiter, which was a Grand Imposture, this Image having Suidas in Voce.
been made, as other Images were, but being very old, or the Artificers that
wrought it, to prevent discovery, being made out of the way, (as at some times
(...)
they were,) the Priests persuaded the credulous Multitude that the Image fell
down from Heaven.

And this was a frequent Practice, not only amongst the Greeks, those
Architects of Fraud, but the Trojans, and Romans likewise. Thus the Palladium,
or Image of Pallas, was Kept and Worshipped with great Veneration, first by the
Trojans, afterward by the Romans, as believing it to have fallen down from
Heaven, and by them kept in the Temple of Vesta; where, if we have a Faith
strong enough to believe them, the Wooden Goddess frequently shook her Spear,
and roul'd her Eyes in her Head; which the Romanists have much outdone; the
Virgin Mary not only moving her Eyes, but Weeping likewise upon Solemn
Occasions. And thus the Roman Ancile or Buckler, is reported to have fallen
from Heaven, with a Voice, that whilst it was preserved the City of Rome should
Flourish; which was therefore kept by the Priests with great Religion. But to
give one Instance for all, Numa Pompilius the Roman Lawgiver, as to what
appertained to the Worship of their Gods, and Goddesses, to gain the more
credit to his Law, gave it confidently out, that he had received it from the
Goddess Aegeria, in personal Conversation he had with her.

And now, who can forbear observing that the Romanists have with great
exactness written after this Copy? Many of whose Superstitious Doctrines,
particularly Purgatory (which is taken out of Plato) have been obtruded upon
the people, from Voices, and Visions of Saints, and Angels in Heaven, of
tormented Souls from Purgatory, Conferences with the Blessed Virgin, and
Miracles wrought by her; so like Christian is to Heathen Rome, that it is
difficult sometimes to distinguish one, from the other.

The agreement which hitherto has been manifested, has been made only at the
cost of Men's Souls, and those, of their own Communion; but not content with
this, and since God in his Wonderful, and never often enough to be remembered
Mercy to these Kingdoms, Infinitely exceeding the Mercies of this Day, has
hindered them from destroying our Souls, they have been resolutely bent to
destroy our Bodies, which brings us to the last Branch of this particular.

Secondly, Their agreement as to the Practices of Blood and Cruelty. A single
Instance of which as to the Heathens, we have in this Chapter (and many in
after Ages of it) the Ephesians having decreed St. Paul to be thrown to Wild
Beasts to be devoured by them, as is more than probable, nay, well nigh evident
from some places of Scripture compared together, had we but time to insist on
them. And to this it is he relates, when he tells us, he fought with Beasts at
Ephesus; i. e. was condemned to it, and had certainly done it, had not God
wonderfully delivered him.

And this their Barbarous usage of St. Paul, who came in the Endearments of
Love to show them the way to Life, and Immortality, gives an occasion a while
to Reflect on, and compare the Cruelties of the Romish Church with theirs,
which they have been pleased to exercise us with, for no other Crime save that
the same Doctrine which he published to the Ephesians, we preach amongst them.

Which whilst we do, Good God what Numbers, (Numbers which well nigh surpass
every thing but Thought and Figures) do we see of Souls under the Altar, that
were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, Crying
aloud, how long O Lord holy and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood
on them that dwell on the earth! Blood spilt by Inquisitions, Croisadoes,
Burnings, and Massacres! Amongst which the Massacres of Paris, and Ireland, the
horrid Gunpowder Treason, as black and hellish in the Contrivance, and
designed to be as bloody in the Execution as the rest, are yet reeking and
fresh in our Memories.

So that if in other things, there has been sound such an exact Harmony betwixt
the Heathen, and the Romish Church, that they may in some sense rather be said
to be the same, than to agree; in this of Blood and Cruelty, it is to be feared
the Romish Church will be found to have much surpast it. In proof of which, if
all the Annals, and Records of Time were Canceled, all the Monuments of Papal
Cruelty defaced, save the Memory of this day, this single day were sufficient
to convince all Mankind, that have not abjured their Sense, and Reason, how
much the One has outdone the Other.

A Day, the sorrowful Relation of which, may be begun by several here whose
Eyes are now intent upon me, in the same Doleful Strains, wherewith Aeneas is
said to preface the sad Story of his Ruined Country.

Quanquam animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit
Incipiam. -- quaeque ipse miserrima vidi,
Et quorum pars magna fui. Quis talia fando
Myrmidonum, Dolopum-ve, aut duri miles Ulyssis,
Temperet a Lacrymis? --
A Day which shall appear in Bloody, and Frightful Characters in all Calendars
of Time, a Day which nothing the World has yet seen, can equal, nothing that is
yet in the Womb of Time, we hope, shall go beyond, a Day which shall give
Reputation to Jews, Heathens, and Turks, and the Religion they profess; but fix
a lasting Reproach upon the Son of God, the Meek, and the Holy Jesus, and his
Peaceful Doctrine, amongst them who judge of Christian Principles, by Roman
Practices; and lastly, a Day which all Good Men of that Communion shall
silently in secret lament for ever, all Bad Men deny it, whilst they only who
have quite degenerated into Wolves, and Tigers, shall glory and triumph in it.

This is the Cruelty, which nothing that we know of either in Jewish, or
Heathen Story (abating the Butchery of our Blessed Lord, with which 'twere
impious to compare any thing, as being beyond compare) has yet equaled; but
that which seems to bid fairest for it, is, the Murder of the Innocents by
Bloody Herod, and the Ten Bloody Persecutions by the Roman Emperors. But how
far both these have fallen short of this Day, as to the Aggravating
Circumstances of each, will appear.

In that Herod's Cruelty extended it self (as it is evident from the Design of
that Massacre) to Males only, and those but of Two Years of Age, or under, and
within the Confines only of a little Village, and the Territories. of it, which
could not but exceedingly lessen the Numbers, and abate the Horror of the Fact,
whilst the Cruelty of this Day was confined within no bounds, but ravaging over
a whole Spacious Kingdom, spared neither Age, nor Sex; against which neither
Piety, Innocence of Infants to invite Compassion, nor the Infirmity of Age to
beg it, no nor the Strength of Valiant Men, gave the least Security, as being
unarmed, and asleep, but all were alike involved in the same miserable Ruin.

Again, that which must be acknowledged to turn the Scale exceedingly in favor
of Herod, was, that what he did was purely upon principles of State, to secure
the Crown to himself, and the Succession of it to his Family. And truly no
wonder such a petty precarious Prince as Herod, was jealous of his Crown, since
the great Lords of the Universe, the Roman Emperors, were not free from
Jealousy, that they who should Govern the World, were to come out of Judea, of
which they had been admonish't by a Prophetic Oracle, Ex Judea profecti rerum
potirentur, Recorded by Tacitus, Suetonius, and other Heathen Authors, which
became matter to them of great Apprehension. Whilst we were Murdered purely to
show us the way to Heaven, and to advance the Gospel of Jesus Christ; though he
himself died to save the Blood of this day from being spilt, i. e. to plant the
Doctrine of Peace and Charity, but the Romanists have Defeated his Passion of
that end.

Amongst the Heathen Cruelties, the greatest were undergone by Christians, in
Ten Bloody Prosecutions, under the Roman Emperors, and are handed down to us in
the Martyrologies of the Church; but even these as to many circumstances of
aggravation, fell short of what this miserable Nation suffered.

For what the Primitive Christians suffered, was by force of an Established Law
of the Empire, which though unjust, yet they had a fair Trial, and many times
great and effectual Arts were used not only to save them upon their Trials, but
to hinder them likewise from being Tried; as may appear by Trajans Rescript to
Pliny, in favor of them. But we suffered not only without, but against the
force of all the Muncipal Laws of the Land, which were in favor of us, and not
only against them, but also against the Laws of Friendship, of Mutual
Obligations, and Hospitality, which used to be so Sacred in this Nation.

The Primitive Christians had time given them to prepare for Death; had their
Friends about them to minister Comfort to them, were Executed in the Face of
the Sun, were permitted to call upon their God, and allowed a decent Burial;
whilst we fell Sacrifices to the insatiable rage of our professed Friends, in the
dead silence of Night, had not time to prepare for Death, nor to cry to God for
mercy, but were hurried before the Tribunal of another World, before we well
knew we were leaving this, and our mangled Carcasses exposs'd to the Birds of
the Air, and the Beasts of the Field.

To conclude, what the Primitive Christians suffered, was from the professed
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, not inlighten'd by the Gospel, but under
strong, and inveterate prejudices against it; whilst our Blood was spilt by
Christian Hands, and Offered up upon Christian Altars; and what carries the
aggravation yet higher, that very Order of men, which beyond all other
Christians, profess themselves to be of the Society of Jesus, were the
contrivers of all these mischiess; they Decreed us to Death, nay, were the
Supervisors in many places, to put the Sentence in Execution.

To add the last finishing and master stroke to all which, all these
Barbarities are laid upon the most Righteous, the Meekest, the Mildest, and
best of Princes; a Prince who (abating the inseparable Infirmities of mankind)
had no Crime beyond good Nature and Modest; a man who by Nature was so inclined
to Forgive, and by his Enemies so used to it, that he had quite forgotten that
Resentment, which is so inseparable from other Princes, and so necessary in
all; one who was ever jealous of his own abilities, though wonderfully great; had
no defect in Wisdom, but that he was willing to Learn, where he was able to
Dictate. It is of this Prince, they say (though with a far different intention
from that of Pilate's) John 19. ver. 5.
Behold the Man, that they might at once Murder his Reputation, and his Person.
But it is the peculiar of the Romish Church, to attempt nothing but what is
Great and Monstrous in its kind, horrid and affrightful, against Sense, against
Reason, against Experience, and against Humanity.

But the highest Aggravation remains yet untouched; the Romish Church is not
yet glutted, no not so much as satiated with Blood; but like the Grave and
Barren Womb (those only Hieroglyphics of it) cry Give, Give. The Babylonish
Furnaces do yet rage, and we must never expect they will be permitted to go
out, whilst the Host, the golden Image of the Pope, is every where Erected, and
there be any Children of the Captivity found who refuse to bow down to it. And
of such, we hope (if ever a sad occasion shall be offered) there will always be
great numbers amongst us, who for the Word of God, and the Testimony of a good
Conscience, will not only patiently, but chearsullay suffer, whatever the rage
and fury of our Enemies, shall think fit to expose us to, or lay us under.

And now we proceed to the Third and Last particular.

Thirdly. The wonderful force of a misguided, and illgrounded Zeal, which
usually is fiercer, and more impetuous than a true one: Of which much need not
be said (were there time for it) since what has been already offered, is a full
proof of it; and of which we have two more very plain ones in this Chapter,
viz. St. Paul before his Conversion, compared with himself afterward; and the
Behavior of Demetrius, with that of the Town-Clerk's. Of St. Paul before his
Conversion, we have this, and a much larger account of the same Nature: That he
h^led Christian men and women to Prison, breathing out threatenings, and
slaughter against them, consenting to their Death, and sometimes assisting at
it. None of which we hear of him after his Conversion, when he had a better
Cause and a well grounded Zeal; and I Judge no one will say St. Paul was a less
zealous Christian, than he had been a Jew. He with the rest of the Apostles
could peaceably lay down their Lives in Defense, and Proof of what they said;
but they knew nothing of taking away the Lives of other men, because they would
not believe them. They told their Hearers, that Christ was a Heavenly-born
Person, and they endeavored to convince them by Reason, Scripture, (where it
was proper,) and Miracles that they spoke truth; but we never find them
sharpning their Arguments, nor driving them in with Fire and Sword; no nor so
much as crying out for two hours; Great is Jesus of Nazareth, great is Jesus of
Nazareth.

The same difference is most Remarkable in Demetrius's, and the Town-Clerk's
conduct of themselves; the former of whom, had all the marks of an intemperate,
illgrounded Zeal; a salse Worship to advance, and a righteous one to oppose, an
evil intention to promote gain, and an unlawful means, a riotous Assembly; and
the want of a lawful call, neither the Law of the Empire, nor of Ephesus (nor
as I believe of any well Governed Commonwealth under Heaven) permitting
Mechanics to Assemble the Emperors Subjects at pleasure, and Harangue to them
about Religion.

Whilst on the other hand the Recorder, an honest judicious person, and a most
Excellent Orator, who was more zealous for his Religion, and argued better for
it than Demetrius had done, kept himself with in the bounds of his lawful
calling, was a Friend to St. Paul, saved his Companions from being torn in
pieces, and by a pithy concise, and most swasive Speech (than which I think
there is not a better any where extant) appeasing the multitude, did more real
Service to the Empire, than all the Mechanics of Ephesus, Silver-smiths and
others put together; Evil being the result of weak minds, but Good the effect
of strength.

And now my Christian Brethren (to draw near a period) what can better become
us as Disciples of the Holy Mat. 5. ver. 44.
Jesus, Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, who has taught us by
precept, and example to bless them that curse us, and to love them that hate
us, to do good to them who persecute us, and despightfully use us; or as
grateful Votaries to God, for the great Deliverance of this day; what can
better become us as Loyal Subjects to a tender, and most magnanimous Prince,
who has so generously exposed his Person, to Reseue us from the Cruelty we
lately suffered, or as grave Senators Assembled to consult the public safety
of the Nation, than by all means imaginable (except Persecution) to endeavor
the Conversion of this miserable Nation? A Nation which after the endeavors of
above Fourteen hundred years Preahing to make them Christians, Five hundred
years to reduce them to Civility, and upwards of a Century of years, to bring
them back to pure Christianity from whence they had departed, are at this day
well nigh as Heathenish, as Barbarous, and as Popish as ever.

And this, with what is gone before, I thought sitter to lay before you, than a
tedious History of the wonderful Discovery, the sudden breaking forth, and
particular Cruelties of this Horrid Rebellion with the evident proofs of the
whole; which in effect would be no more than to tell you the Sun shines; I
could acquaint you with nothing, which you know not as well, most of you, much
better than my self; the Cruelties of this day are recent in your Memories,
your Wounds fresh, and bleeding, and all proofs of these matters as to
Protestants are needless, and to Papists who deny them, none are sufficient.

Since therefore the profound Wisdom of his Majesty, in Conjunction with that
of both Houses, has already made such large, and noble steps, toward that
Great and Glorious End, the Conversion of this poor Nation: Give me leave
therefore, Most Noble Lords, to follow though with trembling steps, the great and
good Example you have set me, and in all Humility to lay before you some few
Expedients tending thereto; not to make you wiser, but to Re-mind you of your
own Power, and Intellectual abilities for so great an undertaking. Amongst
which it is humbly offered to be determined by your Wisdom.

First, Whether to Increase the number of the Protestant Clergy, and to
Decrease the Popish, or at least to prevent a superfetation of them for the
time to come, may not mainly conduce to this end. This in a great measure has
received the Sanction of your Wisdom already, in Excluding the Regular Clergy
from this Kingdom, and it must be left to you to follow the Blow, and to finish
what you have begun. For otherwise, since the Regular Clergy have ever been
hated by the Secular, it is to be feared, that the absence of the former, will
invite the latter, who not being altogether of so Male an Influence as the
other, they will supply the Defect, by doubling their numbers; and so the
Superfetation will be more dangerous, than the Original Birth. The Clergy are
Mortal, but become Immortal by Succession; and if no care be taken as they dye,
to supply their places, by persons approved on by the State, nor to limit their
numbers, but both these main points, be left to be determined at their
Election; they may if they please become Infinite, as well as Mortal, and as
mischievous as they will.

The Romish Clergy, what by reason of the active Malignity of their Principles
to do mischief, and their Numbers, have acquired in most Countries a sort of
Artificial Ubiquity; and since our Religion will not permit our Clergy to equal
them in their Principles to do hurt, we ought to be much superior to them, in
our Numbers to do good.

Nor can it be said, this were to hinder them from answering the Spiritual
necessities of their Church; since considering the little, or no pains they
take with their people, half the Romish Clergy of this Kingdom, is sufficient
to perform the Cure of it. So that by decreasing their numbers, we hinder them
not from performing their Cures, but only from doing mischief, which certainly
ought to be no part of their Spiritual Cure.

That is, when any desperate design has been a brooding, we hinder them from
hatching it; when any secret Rebellion has been contrived, we hinder them from
setting fire to every corner of the Kingdom at once. In which practices how
Successful they have been of late, how little the Authority of an Unfortunate
Prince did signify to restrain them, in such matters as he was willing, and it
was their Interest they should be restrained; what Dispotick Power they had
over their People, what Incendiaries they were not only in their Oratories, or
place of public Worship, not only in great Towns, smaller Villages, and
private Houses, but in the Camp, at the head of Armed men, and in a word how
the whole affair was contrived, managed, and in a manner Executed by their
Heads and Hands, our own late bleeding Experience, to well nigh the utter Ruin
of this Nation, has informed us.

Secondly, To reduce from time, to time, as much as may be, the Irish Nation
into Towns and Villages. If this point be not secured, it is to be feared all
other means whatever, will tend but little, and opperate very slowly toward
their Reformation. It Is manifest to a considering person, that most of their
Barbarous Usages and Customs, their Depredations and Outrages, their profound
Ignorance, gross Superstition, and foul Idolatry, are all owing if not as to
their Original, yet as to their long continuance amongst them, to their wild
savage way of Living in single Cottages, and dismal Unhabitable places, at
great distances one from another.

And no wonder it is so, since this is an unnatural State, Nature inviting to
Conjugation, and Society: And what can be expected from a Nation who have spent
so many Ages in an Unnatural State, but that they should be guilty of Unnatural
Crimes.

And this, in a great measure, may be brought about, by Encouraging
Agriculture, and Discouraging every thing, that discourages it. Of what
infinite Advantage to the State in point of Riches, and Civil Emolument this
would be, how much it would tend to the Improvement of a Country, at this day
as little Improved, and as capable of it, as most in Europe, I shall be silent;
not desiring to thrust my Sickle into another Man's Harvest, but to keep my
self within the bounds of Conversion and Reformation.

Thirdly, To Erect Schools, and to Oblige the Natives thus reduced into
Colonies, under heavy Mulcts to send their Children to learn to Read, and be
otherways Instructed at them, at the Public Charge where it is necessary. I
say thus Reduced, for otherwise the greatest Care in Erection of Schools, and
filling them with Able Industrious Masters, will avail little; inasmuch as
without this, the Natives can neither be Instructed if they would, neither
would they if they could. For what do the Labors of the most Industrious,
Conscientious Minister, or Schoolmaster signify toward the Conversion of the
Natives, if his Parishioners live several miles from the Church, or several
miles from one another: Or if being reduced into Colonies, he have all or most
of his people together in a heap, they be not compelled by severity of Law, to
send their Children to be Instructed by him.

There was a Design set on foot many Years ago, and lately renewed, by persons
Eminent to the highest degree for Piety and Learning, now with God, of
Instructing the Irish Nation by Preaching to them in their own Tongue, and the
Design was so far advanced, as to cause the Testament, with the Common Prayer
Book to be Translated into it. But certainly this Expedient is as little fitted
to promote the Conversion of the Irish, as the Piety of the Design is highly
laudable; for it will not only not answer the end, but, as it is to be feared,
produce an effect quite contrary to it, and be a means of continuing them in
their obstinacy.

1st, To furnish the Nation with Irish Testaments, as in some measure it has
lately been, will not answer the end, because there are not perhaps five
hundred persons in the whole Kingdom who can read, and write the Irish Tongue,
nor is it fit they should be taught.

2dly, If they could, their Religion will not permit them to read the Bible,
and the same Authority which hinders them now from reading it in the English
Tongue they understand, will certainly hinder them from reading it in the Irish.

Again, 2dly, It is to be feared it will produce the quite contrary effect.

First, For supposing in favor of this Pious Design, that the Natives were
willing to learn to read the Irish Tongue, and that their Spiritual Guides
would permit them to read the Scriptures in it, both which are very
unreasonable; this would cause a Corrupt Translation of the Scripture to be
made in it, which would be of more evil consequence, than if they had none.

And this I think cannot be questioned by any who know any thing of the Corrupt
Principles, and Practices of the Romish Church, in relation to Translations of
the Bible. A most notorious Instance of which, we have lately had from this
very Pulpit, when the (...) the Abomination of Desolation (I mean the Worship
of the Host) was seen standing in this very place, where a Romish Priest in the
presence of the late King before whom he Preached, and to whom he was
Confessor, and of a numerous Auditory of Great Persons, taking for his Text
these Words; But now God commands all men every where to repent, because he
has appointed a day in which he will judge the World, had the Confidence to
read them thus, and likewise to Print them so, before his Sermon; But now God
commands all men every where to repent, and to do penance, because he has,
etc. And this to no other end, than to Countenance the Doctrine of Sacramental
Penance.

Secondly, Such a Translation by encouraging two Tongues in the same Kingdom,
will retard the Conversion of the Natives. It is readily granted that to unite
us in Religion, is a good Expedient to unite us in Speech; but then this must
be done by uniting them to us, not us to them; by setting up one Tongue, not
encouraging two. And this is the method our wise Lawgivers have governed
themselves by, in endeavoring to make the Natives in all things conformable to
our Customs and Usages, and forsake their own.

Fourthly, To prohibit the Importation of such Books, as do manifestly tend to
nothing but Superstition, and Idolatry. Of such, to mention but one, The Lives
of Saints, a Book which is the very Gospel of the Irish Nation, and Calculated
for the Meridian of their Superstition and Idolatry; a Book which is of far
greater Authority amongst them than the Bible, which in comparison to it, is
but as a Legend with them, and upon these accounts may reasonably be presumed,
to have done more mischief, than any other Book whatever, unless that of the
Mass.

This is the Noblest end we can propose to our selves, the most acceptable to
God, to our selves the most advantageous; which if by your Zeal for God's
Glory, and Wisdom in compassing things Great, and Difficult, we shall obtain,
we shall make our selves, and our Enemies happy; but if we heartily endeavor
it only, God will bless us, and we shall Entitle our selves to the Divine
Protection; and when ever these Bloody Spirits shall be again Conjured up, and
let loose upon us, as (unless by Gods Blessing upon your Pious Endeavors, the
Nation be Converted to the Protestant Faith) we must expect, then every day
shall be to them as this Day, or worse; for tho ye Associate your selves O ye
people, ye shall be broken in pieces; give ear all ye of far Countries: Gird
your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Gird Isa. 8. v. 9. 10.
your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Take counsel together: and it
shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand. For God is with
us.

FINIS.

