VIALS OF The Wrath of God, Poured forth Upon the seat of the MAN of SIN, And
Upon all professors of the WORLD, who denies the light of Christ which he has
enlightened every one withal, and walk contrary to it; with it they are
condemned.

AND A WARNING from the LORD to all who are walking headlong to destruction in
the lusts of the flesh, and deceits of the world, that they may repent and turn
to the Lord, lest the overflowing scourge sweep them all into the pit.

By him who is called George Fox.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. 1654.

The Worlds PROFESSION without Foundation. With Several precious Notes to Great
men, and Rich men.
ALL profession of the world is without ground, and the foundation; for the
light is denied of the world, and hated: professors, Priests and people, and
all who hates the light, their deeds are evil, and they will not bring their
works to the light, lest the light should reprove them, they know their deeds
are evil, thou will not bring thy works, lest the light should reprove them:
drunkard, thou know thy deeds are evil, thou will not bring thy works to the
light, lest the light should reprove thee, there thou have learned thy
condemnation, which is the light. Liar thou know thou should not lie,
there thou have learned thy condemnation, the light, and swearer and railer,
thou know thou should not swear nor rail, the light within thee lets thee
see thy deeds are evil, and it makes thee confess thy deeds are evil, there
thou have learned thy condemnation, the light; Ye devilish minds who are
hatching mischief, plotting together to do mischief in Alehouses and upon your
beds, something in your consciences tells you, You should not do so, there you
have learned your condemnation, the light; ye cursed speakers, envious ones,
quarrellers, fighters, stoners, wrathful malicious ones, there is something in
your consciences tells you, All this to be of the devil, there you have learned
your condemnation, the light that Christ has enlightened you withal, which lets
you see your deeds are evil when you are sitting in Alehouses, drinking,
carding, shovelboording, swearing by God, or your Soul, or your Faith, or
cursing and provoking one another to wrath, fighting and abusing one another,
so you are them that defiles the flesh, there is something in your consciences
tells you, All this to be of the devil, there you have learned your
condemnation, which is the light which lets you see all the works of darkness.

Now therefore hearken to the light which may lead you up to God the Father of
light, it lets you see, you should not lie, not steal, not commit adultery, you
should not walk in unclean act ons, and all you that do, you know your deeds
are evil by the light in your consciences, which is your condemnation, the
light in your consciences which should exercise it, and all you wanton lustful
ones, sporting your selves, who gather your selves together to spend your time
in vanity, there is something in your consciences tolls you, All that to be
fally, foolishness and madness: Laughter is madness, faith the prophet, and who
is grown solid and civil, and denies such practices that is counted madness
with you, who live in folly, there is that in your consciences lets you see
your deeds to be evil, you have learned the condemnation the light, which when
the book of all consciences is opened you will all witness what I speak. To
that in your consciences do I speak, then the time will come that you will wish
you had not been born into the world.

Now you easeful ones are at ease, and you professors Priests and people, have
set you nests so high as though none could reach you; and all you conceited
ones, who rest in your conceits; and you worldlings, who are drunk with the
cares of this life; and you covetous ones, who devour one another, for the
creature, for the earth, the time is coming when the poor despised ones shall
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and a cry will be among all you, and an
howling, a wishing you had never been born.

Liar, thou are for the lake that burns; unbelievers, you are for the lake;
drunkards and scorners, you are for the lake that burns, and shall never
inherit the kingdom of God who act such things; drunkard, thou have cast the
Law of God behind thy back; and you that mind earthly things, your end is
destruction, whose God is your belly, who glories in your shame, who live (...)
the lust, drunkenness, gluttony devouring the creation, a time will come that
you will wish ye had never been born, for you have all known in your days,
that your deeds have been evil, and that you have done contrary to the light in
your consciences, there is your condemnation, the light, for you wicke will be
as the chaff which the wind drives away, and all you proud will be as the
stubble, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

This is to be scattered among the ignorant, simple and blind people, led by
the God of the world, and drunkenness, and lust, that the witness may arise in
them, against these ungodly deeds, that they may be left without excuse, who
have had a time, and a visitation to call to repentance. Now you have time
prize it, you have light which Christ has given you, to it I speak, which lets
you see all your dees to be evil, hating it, it will be your condemnation. To
all manner of people I speak, it will eternally witness me, and condemn you.

Some are drunk with drink, sitting together to invent mischief, to shed blood,
to destroy the innocent. Another company, Priests and people, are got together,
drunk with rage and persecution, as drunk as the other are, in rage and
madness, plotting and inventing together against the righteous, to shed
innocent blood, some you get into prison: and you are worse then common
drunkards, for you stock, and cause the innocent to be imprisoned. Therefore
awake all drunkards, and sear God, and turn unto the Lord while ye have time.

Pharaoh thou oppressor, pharaoh thou taskmaster, Pharaoh thou proud one which
lays heavy burdens upon the innocent and righteous seed, and opresleth the
just, plagues and woe is thy protion, as was Pharaoh's, who taxes, and
oppresses, and causes the just and righteous seed to labor under thee, who
binds with oaths, and compels to swear by that which is a declaration of
Christ, who says, Swear not at all; and, He that does not abide in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God, but is of the devil.

O ye earthly minded men! give over oppressing the poor, exalt not your selves
above your fellow creatures; for ye are all of one mold and blood; you that set
your nests on high, join house to house, field to field till there be no place
for the poor, woe is your portion. The earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof. And you that have not so much of the earth, give over your murmuring
and reasoning, fretting and grudging, for all your want is for the want of God:
the righteous God is coming to give to every one of you according to your
works: now the works of ye all must be tried, you that have appeared unto men
beautiful outwardly, will be found in the generation of murderers, and ye that
have pretended to worship, your sacrifice will be found to be Cains, which God
has no respect to.

O ye high ones which spread your selves, appear fair, tall and strong! you
know not God, nor your selves to be oaks. O ye tall Cedars! ye know not your
selves to be so, the Lord is sent to look for fruit in his vineyard among you,
it is full of wild Olives, and their wild Grapes, that many are drunk with
the juice of the wild Grapes; and so the vineyard is full of briars and
thorns, that the lambs and sheep cannot pass, but they are tangled among the
briars and the thorns; and the Land is as a wilderness; that part full of
Serpents; and the earth is overgrown with with weeds and nettles, that there is
no feeding for the lambs till the earth be dressed and overturned.

Howl ye vinedressers! a day of howling is coming among you, who have been
pretenders of the dresser of the vineyards, which is overgrown with weeds, and
nettles, and thorns, and crooked ways, the lambs and sheep has been
scattered and devoured amongst the briars and the thorns, and no discerning
you have had betwixt a lamb, a goat, a sheep, a wolf. Now the Lord himself is
gathering his lambs and his sheep where they have been scattered this cloudy
dark day, and some are torn, and some are trampled upon with the horses of
Pharaoh; but the Lord his hand against you, and his sword drawn, the battle is
begun, and the sword drawn, which must not be put up till it has made a
separation in hewing down, and the Lord himself will have the praise, and the
honor and the renown, and all, who rules.

O how beautiful has thy Harlot been? O how full is the land of Inchanters? O
how full is the land of Sorcerers and witchcrafts! the mystery of her has
deceived many through her whoredoms. Green was the grass, and fresh was the
flowers, the bay tree spread it self, and the haw-thorn, but the time is coming
of fading; the flower will fade, and the grass will wither, and the whoredom
and the inchanter must come to judgment; the Lord is risen and rises as a
swift witness against the inchanter, against the sorcerers, against the
whoremongers and the covetous. The glittering sword is drawn to hew down you
fruitless trees which cumber the ground, ye lustful fleshly ones, you have not
seen your selves to be these trees which cumber the ground: ye heady
high-minded ones, you have not seen your selves to be these trees which cumber
the ground: ye who live in the flesh, ye do not see your selves to be these
trees which cumber the ground: ye scorners, ye liars, ye dissemblers, false
hearts, ye do not see your selves to be these trees which cumber the ground:
but the Lord is risen against you; the earth stinks with the dead that is upon
it, and the pollution of the polluted. The Lord is risen with power, and
sending forth to bury the dead, and to raise up the dead: all who are immortal,
this may see, may receive.

Repent, for the day of the Lord is coming. Awake ye worldlings, hearken to
that in your consciences, which shows you sin and evil, that will guide you
unto God, loving it. Awake ye drunkards and lustful ones, who follow pleasures,
consider the ways you walk in, for you who act such things, must never inherit
the kingdom of God; for you act contrary to that in your consciences, which
will be your condemnation, pride, and ambition, selfishness, and self-will,
stands up; which the plagues of God are due unto: silence all flesh, who lives
in your conceit and deceit, thieving and stealing in the night, what the Saints
spoke, making your selves drunk with it, and then sells it to drunkards, and
then are jovial, eating and drinking with drunkards. Howl ye drunkards, for ye
shall want the staff of bread; a day of howling is coming upon you, lay aside
all deceitful merchandise.

And all ye Star-gazers, who are gazing among the Stars, wondering after your
imaginations, doing the works of darkness, in whom lodges the Spirit of
witchcraft.

Silence, and come down all ye that ride so high, that do bestir ye as Jannes
did, and Jambres, at the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt:
through the fire and the sea, ye cannot come.

Silence all presumptious talkers of God, who sees him not, but are
presumptious boasters, who live in envy, crossness, and perverseness, and vain
contention, which proceeds from corrupt minds, who minds the earth and
earthly things, who are enemies to the cross of Christ, who glories in your
shame, whose end is destruction, whose belly is your God, who do not see God,
are not come so far as Moses; for Moses saw God face to face; and death reigns
from Adam to Moses, and all that sees not God, death reigns in you. To that in
your conscience I speak, which Christ has enlightened you whithal, which calls
you to repentance, which shows you your evil deeds, which will be your teacher
owning and loving it, your condemnation hating it. Now you have time, prize it,
this is the day of your visitation.

George Fox.

A Warning from the LORD to all Hawkers and Hunters.
THe word of the Lord to all you Hawkers and Hunters, who are carried up in the
flesh, vapouring, vaunting up your selves, swelling in your vanities,
boisterous, glorying in your strength, lifted up, exalted, puffed up, lofty and
high minded.

This all is contrary to the way of God, and all such they that dwelt in the
life of the Scriptures declared against, and all this which is acted out from
the nature, which is contrary to the light, is to be condemned with the light,
and all that will fade and wither away. Lament, and repent, and turn unto the
Lord God, all ye that follow such courses, actions and practices, while you
have time.

Esau was a Hunter, he despised his birthright, and after fought it with wars,
and there was no place of repentance found. To you all Hunters, who are lifted
up, who are profane, as your father Esau was: he became a place for Dragons,
and a Wilderness, and desolate, and barren, Dragon is a devourer. Therefore O
take heed and be warned.

Now to that in your consciences I do speak, which he has enlightened you
withal, it will let you see your profaneness, your hunting ravening mind, your
destroying mind, which destroys the creature, and destroys the creation upon
your own lusts, and the whole creation groaneth with that bondage of
corruption: nay, you take pleasure in destroying the creatures, and make your
selves sport in destroying them, running to Alehouses, drinking healths, and
tempting one another with beer, and he that does not pledge him, does not love
him, and all this love is in the lust.

O! woe, woe is your portion, what will become of you in the end? O consider
whither ye must go. Remember Dives, remember Esau your father, the Hunter,
remember Nimrod the cunning Hunter, the beginner of the building of Babel, whom
God confounded into many languages which your teachers tells you, Is the
original; but he that comes before Babel was, comes before many languages was,
and before Nimrod was.

Here you and all your languages are raced out; and all ye Hunters which turn
from the light which Christ has enlightened you withal, which devours the
creation, and you are to be hewn down with the word, which was in the
beginning: In the beginning was the word, as you may read in John, the word was
before Babel was.

Therefore to the light in your consciencess I speak, which Christ has
enlightened you withal, that with it you may see your filthy minds and
filthiness, and profaneness, and with it all may be judged down, and out: for
from God it is judged all, and from them who are of God, and from them who love
the light of God, and so all profaneness and cunning Hunters which are turned
from the just, which devours the creation upon the lusts, and burdens and
grieves the creation, profane persons, all you who are profane, Esau is your
father, you cunning Hunters, and not Jacob, who was a perfect man, and dwelt in
tents, he was not profane; but it was Esau that was profane, the cunning
Hunter, which despised his birthright.

So to you all which turn from the pure in you, the just, which choose the earth
before the pure, you are the Esaus, you are the profane, you despise your
birthright.

To that which is just in you all I speak, that with it you may see when you
minds go forth, and what they go after, after your dogs, your hounds, your
hawks, glorying and taking pleasure in the creatures, more then in the Creator.
You are such as the Apostle speaks of, and with that in your consciences, it
will let you see the judgment from God is upon such things.

Therefore to the light in your consciences I speak, that with it your minds
may be guided to God, that you may come to know the right use of all creatures,
and to be used in their place and service, as servants, to the glory of God,
who has created all things to be used in their place, and to praise him.
Therefore whatsoever you do, let it be done to the praise and glory of God.

Now when you swear, and curse, and drink healths, and quarrel, and fight, and
are deboist, and devours the creation upon your lusts, your sports, which God
has created to be used in their place and service to his glory, where will ye
appear before the Lord?

O ye devourers of the creation, fear the Lord God, and turn from all your evil
ways and wickedness.

To that in all your consciences I speak, that you may all see what ye have
acted, and do act; there is your teacher to God if ye love it, and your
condemnation from God if you hate it. To that in you shall I be made manifest
when your condemnation is come.

You are them that cumber the ground, profane persons, cunning hunters,
drunkards and losty ones, which exercise Lordship one over another, you are out
of the doctrine of Christ, you are them that stains the earth; but the Lord God
of might and power is coming, the sword of the Almighty is drawn, to hew you
down fruitless trees, that cumber the ground, and to sweep and cleanse the land
of evil doers, that the earth may enjoy her Sabbaths.

All ye that are profane, are in the nature of Esau. And all you that are
proud are in the nature of proud Haman, who was out of the truth from God, and
you are abomination to the Lord, though you may profess Christ in words, and
yet are workers of iniquity; to you I say, Depart from iniquity, that names his
Name. And all ye that are scoffers, you are of Ismael, Isaac did not scoff, nor
Jacob was not profane.

Therefore to all you that are turned from the light, and are scoffers and
profane, you are to be condemned with the light from God, from Christ, and all
the holy men of God. And to you all this is the word of God.

And to you all that love the light, walk in the light, that it may lead you
from all such actions, contrary to it, up to God the Father of light, and to
condemn all that is contrary to the light.

CUmber not the ground ye fruitless trees; ye proud ones, ye scorners, cumber
not the ground; ye drunkards, ye cumber the ground; ye cumber the ground, ye
liars, cheaters and cozeners; ye cumber the ground, who use deceit; ye mockers
and lustful ones, which devours the creation, ye are the fruitless trees that
cumber the ground; you fair outside professors and teachers, you cumber the
ground, who lives in high swelling words, but in pride and oppression, and you
are the trees that bear leaves, but no fruit; so ye are they that cumber the
ground.

The Lord is coming in power to sweep the land of evil doers, and to hew you
down you fruitless trees which cumber the ground.

The fields have been overgrown with thistles and nettles, and the vineyard is
spoiled for want of dressing and laborers; but now the Lord is sending forth
laborers to dress the vineyard. A day of howling amongst you.

The mountains, and hills, and great ones must be threshed and beaten down, the
Lord has spoken it; she has sent into his vineyard, to gather fruit, And
every tree that brings not forth good fruit must be hewn down and cast into
the fire. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil tree
bring forth good fruit, such as the tree is, such is the fruit.

Drunkard, swearer, cursed speaker, thou art this corrupt evil tree,
whoremonger, envious one, fighter, quarrellers, malicious ones, scorner,
mocker, reproacher, thou art this corrupt tree, that cannot bring forth good
fruit, thou who live in pleasures and lustful ways, lofty and highminded,
thou art this corrupt tree, thou cannot bring forth good fruit; dissemblers,
cheaters, cozeners, thou art this corrupt tree which cannot bring forth good
fruit; scorner, scoffer, who lives in the dissimulation, and with craft and
hypocrisy, thou art the corrupt tree which cannot bring forth good fruit; and
all that profess God, and Christ, and Prophets, and Apostles, and lives in sin
and iniquity, you are the cursed tree, which cannot bring forth good fruit; for
says Christ, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

All you that pleads for sin Priests and people, are this tree which cannot
bring forth good fruit, and pleads for your own master, whose dominion you are,
and the blood of Christ does but serve you to talk of; all you corrupt trees
have but boughs, a fair show you make, but when fruit is sought, there is none
found on you, you are they that cumber the ground. The Lord is coming into his
vineyard to hew you down, all you lustful ones, you drunkards, all you railers,
and false accusers, all you covetous oppressors cumber not the ground.

The glittering sword is drawn, it is fourbished for the slaughter. The Lords
eye is opened, and his hand is stretched out against his enemies.

Now woe, woe unto ye wicked, ye have despised trembling and quaking.

Tremble, tremble, tremble and quake, O all ye nations; for the whirlwinde is
gone forth, that you shall be scattered as chaff, the day of the Lord is
appearing that shall burn as an oven, that you shall be consumed as stubble:
and the trumpet is sounding out of the holy mountain, that all the inhabitants
of the land shall tremble; and the Lord is uttering forth his voice before his
host; and the day of the Lord is grown very terrible, who can abide it?

Drunkard, swearer, liar, thou cannot hide thy self; witchcraft, sorcerers,
scorners, cheaters, dissemblers, the Lord will find you all out; all your
pretense of God and Christ, shall stink heavy in your faces, you dissemblers,
for God will not be mocked with words; woe and misery, a day of howling amongst
you lofty ones, a day of howling among you lustful ones, your throats will be
be dry, parched; and woe is thy portion, thou lustful one, thy lust shall not
be fed, who has devoured the whole creation. A day of howling amongst you
covetous oppressors, taksmaster, who has devoured the creation, and does
devour it: some creatures are destroyed for want of ordering, and upon your
lusts; some creatures are destroyed for want of creatures.

You are them that cumber the ground, and the Lord is coming with his
whirlwinde to sweep you away, and the earth shall yield her increase, and come
to enjoy her Sabbaths, and the righteous shall inherit it, and the land shall
be cleansed of evil doers, Sion is threshing, and a fan is come to fan, and the
Lord is at work in his vineyard, and the arrows of of the Almighty are shooting
forth against the wicked, and hell has opened her mouth to receive all you
workers of iniquity, and hell gapes for you.

Tremble and be astonished you heathen that knows not God; for you are all
heathens that know not God, and the land is full of crooked ways, the land is
full of rough places, the land is full of hills and mountains, the land is full
of briars and thorns, dogs and swine, fighting and barking, snarling and biting
one another, for the husks, and for the earthly creatures.

Therefore all people repent, repent while you have time; for the mighty day of
the Lord is coming* therefore hearken to that which shows you sin and evil,
there is your teacher loving it, there is your condemnation hating it.

THe word of the Lord to all ye fruitless trees, ye dry trees, ye oaks, ye tall
cedars, ye fat bulls of Bashan, ye thorns, ye briers, ye wild asses which
snust up your noses in the top of the mountains and the Forests, ye
high-way-ground, ye stony-ground, ye goats, ye wolves, ye dogs, ye swine, ye
serpents, ye vulterous ones, ye beasts, ye lions, ye strong horses neighing up
and down, walking after your lusts: this is not railing, this is the
Scripture Language. Own your names every one in your place, with the light ye
are all seen, and your names comes to be known; so every one bears, your name
according to your nature; ye are them that cumber the ground, ye are them that
are not of the light, ye are them that are to be condemned with the light; ye
that are unjust ye cumber the ground. Woe unto you drunkards, ye cumber the
ground; woe unto you hypocrites, ye cumber the ground; woe unto you liars, ye
cumber the ground; woe unto you scoffers, ye cumber the ground; scorners and
backbiters, ye cumber the ground; dissemblers, ye are them that cumber the
ground; the hand of the Lord is against you.

To that in your consciences I speak, which shall witness me eternally; ye
drunkards ye cumber the ground; ye rotten hearts, ye false-hearts, and
dissemblers, ye cumber the ground, ye oppress the creation, the land mourns
because of such; ye devourers, ye murderers, ye are they that pollutes the
earth, ye cumber the ground.

Fear, fear the Lord God, tremble before him, ye that make a profession of
Christ and God, and live in deceit, ye are liars ye cumber the ground, ye are
of the devil, ye abide not in the truth; for you do not abide in the life that
gave forth the Scripture; so you are not what you profess, in life and power;
but has the words, the form, and makes a trade of them.

Woe unto you devourers, that devour the people, and make a prey of them; ye
lustful ones which follows pleasure, rioting, feasting, sporting, drunkenness,
guttony, hawking, hunting, Elau-like, ye cumber the ground, ye are the place
for the dragon, ye are as the wilderness, fruitless. And to you this is the
word of God.

To that in your consciences I speak, as you love it, it will arise in you, and
you will see your selves, and see the Scriptures, ye ungodly ones, ye covetous
walk after your ungodly lusts; ye vain talkers, ye cumber the ground; ye are as
the caterpillars, ye are as the locusts that go without a King, which are
turned from the light; ye are for the sword to be slain; ye which minds
earthly things, whose minds are turned from the light, which walk after your
own ungodly lusts, ye defile the flesh, ye cumber the ground; ye careless ones,
the hand of the Lord is against you, ye which follow foolish boasting, foolish
talking, foolish songs, and spends your time in such ways.

O woe and misery is coming upon you! how do you spend your time? and how have
you lost your time? hell gapes and opens her mouth to receive you, where all
the wicked are turned into. Stand still a while and see whither all ye must go.

To the light in you I speak, that with it ye may see your selves, and remember
your selves, and with it you may see, no unrighteousness must enter the kingdom
of God, and this which shows you it, is the light of Christ within you; and
loving it, it will lead you from all such actions and practices as are contrary
to it; and with it all such things are to be condemned.

This is your teacher the light; this is it will bring you to witness Christ,
who is the way to the Father; and this is it that will bring you to yea and nay
in all your communications; and this will teach you good manners, to deny all
evil communication; and this will bring you to lay aside all deceitful
merchandise, all lusts, pleasures, filthy practices, which the world lives in;
and this is it which is pure, and teaches pureness and holiness, without which
none shall ever see God.

You that are proud and lofty, cumbers the ground; ye are abomination to the
Lord God, with the light you are seen, with the light you are comprehended,
with the light you are judged. To the light in you I speak, which will let you
see vainity, one vanity upon another

To the light in all your consciences I speak everywhere, which will let you
see all that is contrary to it. To that I am made manifest, the light, which if
you love it, it will guide your hearts together into unity; for the unity is in
the light, and up to God the Father of light, and there is your teacher present
always whithersoever ye go, or lying in your bed, this light does not change,
to which I speak, thou that changes, acts contrary to it, and with this light
which changes not, art to be condemned from God who changes not, and to be
the itching ears, and in the doctrine of the devil, and amongst the fables.

THe word of the Lord to you all, who are turned from the light which Jesus
Christ has enlightened you withal, and do hate it, who follows pleasures, who
are such as the Scriptures speaks of, who are sporting your selves in the day
time, living in wantonness; you are such as the Scripture speaks of, which the
Apostle that dwelled in the light cried against, spoke against and judged; you
are scoffers and scorners glorying in your strength; ye are such as the
Scripture speaks of, which were ever judged with the life that gave forth the
Scriptures, and are to be condemned with the light. You that follow
drunkenness, fighting and adultery, and idolatry, pride and envy, you are such
as defiles the flesh, you are such that the Scripture speaks of, that were
judged with the life that gave it forth, and which it ever declared against.
You that follow bowls, and cards, and shovelboord, and drinking healths, and
have music, the Harp, the Viol, the Lute; ye are such as the Lord sent Isaiah
to cry against, and you act contrary to the light, and you are in the works of
the flesh, in that nature out of the light; and with the light you are to be
condemned, and all your works are for the fire, who casts the law of God behind
your backs, which is perfect according to the light in your consciences, which
judges down all that which is not perfect, with the light all those actions are
seen, which are in that nature contrary to the light; so with the light all
such are condemned from God.

You that follow foot-bal-playing, cudgel-playing, fencing, exercising your
selves at back-swords or rapiers, you are glorying in your strength, ye are
boasting, ye are vapouring, ye are disdaming, ye are despising, you are
envying, you are in pride, you are in ambition, with the light which Christ:
has enlightened you withal, you are to be condemned from God, and all these
practices I see them all, that manhood, and all that fame, and all that renown,
it must be laid down in the dust.

And you that follow wrestlings, and leapings, and dancings, you are such that
live in the flesh without the fear of God, you are inventing with that mind
which goes from the light, and with the light you are to be condemned from God,
who lives in the lusts of the flesh, and these actions of the flesh.

And ye that delight in songs, in tunes, and jesting books, and ballads,
rhimes, themes, inventing verses, you are in the fables, you are such as the
Scriptures speaks of, acting in that nature which is out of the truth, which
with the light, all such works of the flesh are to be condemned; this will
wither, this will fade away and pass away.

And all you that follow horse-racing, you are in the boasting, you are
idolaters, and adulterers, and you are covetous, you are they that oppose the
creation, you are chalenging and envying when you cannot get your will, and
when you have your will, this is in Cain's way, which is for condemnation, who
walks in the way which is ungodly.

Ye that follow merchandise, buys and sells, and makes a trade of it, and buy
the creature at one town, and sells them at another market; It Is naught, it is
naught, you say, when you come to buy, and, They are bad, they are bad: and
when you have bought them, then, They are the best in the market, and then you
set up that which you said was naught. So with the light which shows your
lying, your deceit, your false-hearts, are you with it to be condemned, who
lives in these customs of sin, which has taken away the sense, you are in the
thievish nature that do so, that buy and sell the creatures to oppress them,
and say it is naught for your own ends, and then say it is good for your own
ends.

To the light in all your consciences I speak, which will witness me, and will
let you see what dissemblers you are, and how far you are out of the doctrine
of Christ, which is yea and nay in all communication; who when you come to
cheap a thing or buy a thing, you say, You will give no more for it, not a
penny; and the seller says likewise the same, he says, No, be will not take a
penny less, then they presently yield one to another, out of the yea and nay to
be, and with the light which bring to yea and nay to be condemned, to it I
speak, and it shall witness me against all the deceits of the world, and all
deceitful merchandise, who act without the fear of God.

And all you that follow feastings and weddings, your Priests acted in that
nature out of the light, with the light is to be condemned; yet marriage is
honorable in all, where the bed is not defiled.

And you that turn from the light, which invent pictures, idols, and set them
up, you are in the nature turned from the light; ye and all your images is to
be condemned, and ye that are turned from the light of Christ, which is
eternal, that mind invents crosses, forms a cross, imitates a cross, which
dwelling in the light it self, is a cross to the ground, which forms these
crosses; and to you this is the word of God.

And so, here both the image, and the image-maker, and the founder of the
image, dwelling in this cross must be destroyed.

Good and bad manners distinguished.
COrrupt communications corrupts the good manners. Now if you love the light
which Christ has enlightened you withal, it will bring you to yea and nay in
all your communications; for whatsoever is more, is evil. And you that turn
from this light which Christ has enlightened you withal, then in your
communications ye are not yea and nay; and so you are in the evil, and out of
the doctrine of Christ; and so in that nature you may be taught to bend, to
bow, to cringe one to another, with cap and knee, and hand and foot, (and so
calls that civil and and good manners, and he that does not, with such is
judged not to be not civil, who lives in the pure communication yea and nay,
and can bow to none but the Lord,) yet full of envy and pride, and where there
is pride, there is envy, and wrath, and rage, and sury, Cain-like in your
communications, some are mocking, some striking, and some are railing to the
face, and backbiting, and yet when they meet, they flatter one another with the
cap, and struck with the foot, and bow with the hand and knee, and yet full of
envy.

To the light of Christ in your consciences I speak, which if you love it, it
will bring you to bow to the Lord, and let you see these things, and bring you
to yea and nay in all your communications, and then nothing shall reign but
Christ Jesus; for the light will condemn all things which is contrary to it,
and which has been bowed down to, which is contrary to the light, and that
which would respect the persons of men, comes to be judged; for it is the
trangressor of that which is pure, transgresses the pure law of God, and with
the pure that comes to be judged, and if you love the light of Christ which he
has enlightened you withal, it will bring you to put away all vain
communications out of your mouths, and keep you to yea and nay in all
communications, and it will teach you the good manners; for all you who live in
your vain communications from yea and nay, all your profession, which the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles has spoken, you having their words and the
form, and gone from yea and nay, out of the doctrine of Christ, with the life
of the Apostles, and the light of Christ, you are to be condemned, and the end
of your profession is woe, as Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees.

So you that are turned from the pure light of Christ within you, you are in
your vain communicaitons, and do worship the beast; for that which turns from
the light of Christ, it sets up that which is out of the truth which is the
beast, so the plagues of God proceeds upon who are all turned from the light of
Christ, such are in the vain commuications and corrupt manners, and are to be
condemned.

But to you all that love the light of Christ, and your minds guided by it, it
will teach you the pure and good manners, and all the corrupt manners will be
judged and condemned with the light which Christ has enlightened you withal,
which light will teach you to walk with God and men, and there is all your
teacher, loving it; and there is all your condemnation, hating it.

You that live in filthineis, pride, in lust, in cursed speaking, in
wantonness, sporting your selves in the daytime, and foolish jesting, and
drunkenness, and gluttony, and all the corruption that are in that nature which
is turned from the light, are in the evil communication, and the corrupt
manners which is to be condemned with the light, which light every one in
particular loving it, which Christ has enlightened every one withal, it will
teach you and bring to yea and nay in all your communications, and it will
teach you the good manners.

It is the eye which will let you see Christ the head, and there is your
teacher the light which Christ has enlightened every one of you withal in
particular, which will let you see your evil deeds, and when you act contrary
to it, which if you hate it, it will be your condemnation.

To the light of Christ in every one of your consciences I speak, which will
witness me when the book of conscience is opened, which light will teach you at
all times, walking up and down, and lying in bed, in all your actions; this
light will teach you when you are in your merchandise, if you do not justly the
light will let you see it, it will check you and secretly condemn you; that is
the light which shows you your evil deed; which if you love it, it will keep
you to yea and nay in all your communications, it will bring you to few words,
and bring you into the fear of the Lord, and The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom.

This is to be set upon all Crosses, that all may see the good manners, and the
corrupt manners, and the corrupt communication, which corrupts the good
manners, and the pure communication which is yea and nay, according to the
light of Christ in every one of your consciences. To the light of Christ in
every one of your consciences I do speak.

From them whom the world calls Quakers scornfully; but Moses who quaked and
trembled, said, To him reproaches was great riches.

FINIS.

