SCOTLAND's Present Duty: OR, A CALL TO The Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, and
Commonality of this Land, to be duly affected with, and vigorously to act for,
our Common Concern in CALEDONIA, as a Mean to Enlarge Christ's Kingdom, to
Benefit our Selves, and do Good to all Protestant Churches.

Printed in the Year, 1700.

Right Honorable, much Honouored, very Reverend, and dearly Beloved.
LET it not divett any from a serious Perusal of what is here offered to your
Grave Consideration, that you know not the Author; For here, if ever, you are
called to mind what is said, not who says it: Yet I shall tell you, That I own
none for my Master but Christ, none for King of Great Britain but King
William: I have no Share in the Stock of Caledonia, nor probably will ever
have, so that it is no worldly Interest prompts me up to make this Address, nor
any Disaffection to the King or Court, but pure Conscience, if I know my own
Heart.

There is none who love Our Lord Jesus Christ, but must with pleasure Remark,
how the outmost ends of the Earth are become the Possession of Zion's King, and
poor Scotland among the rest. This is Ground of Rejoicing unto Us who sat in
Heathenish Darkness, that Light has sprung up, and the day Star from on High
has visited Us! So that we may well say, few Nations have been so signally
owned of God as we, with respect to a Pure and Glorious Dispensation of the
Gospel: Yea of all the Churches reformed from Popery, we had attained to the
greatest Hight of Conformity to the Scriptures of God, not only in Doctrine, but
in Worship, Discipline, and Government; Yea, notwithstanding the various Essays
of our Enemies, and false pretended Friends to enslave us, and the Faintness
and Dispondencies of our weak but real Well-wishers in a dark and evil Day, yet
we are alive, and have our God to Magnify, who has never suffered our Haters
to gain the day, but gave us occasion to set up our Ebenezer: hitherto has the
Lord helped us, and to remark some places as 1 Samuel 23. Chap. 28 Verse.
Sela hamma-lekoth, our Enemies being diverted from bringing upon us utter
Ruin, when they were about to have swallowed us up. But among the wonderful
Providence of God for our Good, the late Revolution is indeed surprising, and
calls for our constant Acknowledgments: Instead of Impendent Slavery and
Popery, we by it enjoy Calmness and Freedom in Church and State, our banished
Ministers restored, the Imprisoned delivered, the whole followers of Christ
made to lif^ up their Heads, and our very Enemies astonished with Gods Love to
his People, while they had no great Reason to complain of any Severity for
their former Cruelties. Thus we have had Halcron Days at Ho^e, when Armies were
encountering one another Abroad. And whatever we felt of burdensome Taxations;
yet it was not much, while we our selves were not af^ighted with the Sound of
the Trumpets, nor the Alarms of War. Now it was, that our Wise Patriots of all
sorts (whatever speculative Differences they might have, about the
Eclesiastical Government) were practically c^nvinced of this, That we had now
that Government, which might give Ease to the Nation, and none could complain
of Force put upon their Consciences; and all the former Reflections against a
Parity in Christ's House, were hushed, and no more discoursed of, except in
drunken Cabals of Men, who had no Religion at all.

In this time of Quietness, wherein Truth and Peace met together, did several
of our most Knowing Nobility and Gent^y, encouraged by diverse Acts of
Parliament, and Royal Grants, sorm a Design to plant a Colony in America;
considering that of all Nations in Europe bordering upon the Sea, Scotland
alone had no share of Foreign Plantations, and were more than any other People,
excluded from the Advantages of Trade; and this would be a Mean for Enriching
the Nation, and Curing ^hese two evil Diseases amongst us, of Beggary and
Idleness. And all who had a Love to the propogating of the Gospel, looked upon
this as a most probable and hopeful Mean of Enlarging the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Accordingly the Project goes on; and maugre all the Opposition it
met with at London, Holland and Hamburg, Five Ships were sent out* and Two
worthy Ministers with them; who at length land in Darien, a Place inhabited by
a Free People, the Circumstances and Advantages of which, are well known, as
being set out by others. Here our Country Men meet with good Reception, and
seemed for a time to Prosper; till want of Correspondence from Scotland, and it
may be some hired Traitors among themselves, and Proclamations of a strange
Nature, put forth in the West Indies against them, do quite Dishearten them,
and force them (except a ver^ few) to Relinquish the place: And as the first
Ship sent after them, miscarried on our Western Islands; so we have no pleasant
News of the Company which went forth in the following May with Provisions to
Relieve them; nor have we any Account as yet, of the Four Ships that went
thither in (...) l^st, and others since. But in all this Business, both abroad
and at h^me. God seems to frown upon us. And whatever Sentiments some may have
concerning this sad providential Stroke, yet certainly the Land is afflicted,
but few are afflicted with it as becomes. It is for this cause, that I would
endeavor to Excite all in the Land to join in an Address to the King of Heaven
for his Help, when we a^e so much at under. And this is our Comfort, that no
Courtiers there, will hinder our Address, but rejoice in it, if we approach
that Throne with humble and penetent Hearts; and the Majesty of Heaven commands
us to call upon him in the day of Trouble, and has promised to hear us.

That I may the better manage this my Errand unto you.

I. I shall show you that we are all called to seek the spreading of the
Gospel, and the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom.

II. That our Settlement at Caledonia, would be a likely mean for that end.

III. That this design seems to be almost crushed and born down.

IV. How discouraging this will be to the Church and State if the Lord help us
not.

V. What are the procuring Sins of this so^e and lame^ table Stroke.

VI. What is now our Duty and Work with respect to this great Concern.

VII. Lastly, I would earnestly plead with all to cry mightily unto God, and to
use suitable Endeavors for retrieving our loss; and so shall this my well
meant Address, under which no bad design is hid, be committed to Gods Blessing.

I. That we should all pray earnestly for the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom,
can be doubted by none, who own the Lords Prayer to be part of the Holy
Scriptures. Thy Kingdom come, is a Petition repeated by many, but understood by
few. To think that the Gospel shall be still confined to a little corner of the
World as it is now, is to forget the Promises of Increa^e and Prosperity that
are made to Zion in the Old and New Testament, and which shall doubtless be
accomplished in the Latter-days. We cannot mistake, in expecting the down fall
of Antichrist, the ruin of the Turkish Empire, the National Conversion of the
Jews, and the fullness of the Nations; and what a Glorious time will it be,
when all these things shall be fulfilled; then Holiness shall abound, and be
the Motto engraven on our smallest Enjoyments; War shall Cease throw all the
Earth, Kings shall no more contend about Clods of Clay, but shall be employed
in bringing their Glory to the New Jerusalem, and they shall be indeed nursing
Fathers to a Church. I hope these days are not far off, though some have too
boldly pretended to know the Times and Seasons which the Father has put in his
own Power, and keept up from us, that we may pray the more Ardently; yet he who
has promised to come, will come* and will not tarry. Christians therefore are
not only called to keep up Communion with God as to their own Souls, but they
ought with great Vigor to mind the case of Zion: And it is certain, That one
Reason why many have ground to complain of their Souls Leanness, is, because
the Churches Condition is not more minded by them, and their present Case at
home, makes them forget the Afflictions of Joseph in the persecuted and
oppressed Chu^ches abro^d; Nor are they duly melted to think of the Blindness
of the Jews, the Mohammedan Delusions, and the Heathenish Idolatry. It is not
said that we pray no more to have the Mountains removed which stand in the
Gospels way? Is not God the hearer of Prayer? And how many precious returns
might we have at the Throne of Grace, if we were Jacob-like, wrestling the
break of the Day? How did Daniel Fast and Pray, when the time drew near of the
long looked for Liberty? The Promise put Life into his Prayers, and the
assurance of being heard made him the more Fervent. O that God would pour out a
Spirit of Prayer on the Reformed Churches, that they may set a part, Days of
Humiliation and crying unto God, both for themselves and for the Jews, who were
once a peculiar Treasure, but are now called, Lo-ammi, that they may be
Conve^ted to the Messiah, and for the poor Pagans, that the ends of the Earth
may see the Salvation of God. There is a Restlesness amongst us, about wordly
Concerns, to compass Sea and Land to get some wordly Pelf; but we are not
Earnest and Keen to Trade for Religion, and to acquaint poor perishing Souls
with their need of Christ. How will the Memory of worthy Mr. Eliot the Apostle
of the Western-Indians, be fragrant to all the Godly, who was so Instrumental
in bringing the poor Idolaters in America to Know, and to Adore the Supreme
Majesty; and what a Stain will the Slackness of others, when fair Opportunities
have been ossered them, be upon their Names? Yea, shall Papists signalize their
Zeal in Training and sending out Men for this Service, or rather for drawing
deluded Creatures blindfold from one Error to another, and Protestant Churches
do nothing for bringing them into the light of Truth and way of Salvation? I
verily think, if there were many pleading with God, we should yet see the
Waters of the Sanctuary begin to swell and overcome all Opposition. Neither
High nor Low should confine their Prayers to themselves, and their own
Families. The greatest in degree, and the meanest Believer, should cry unto the
Lord to pity the dark Places of the Earth; but especially Ministers should be
the Lord's Remembrancers, and plead fervently, That the Kingdoms of this World
may become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and that Heralds of
Peace may be sent into Satan's Camp, to bring over poor Souls led Captive at
his Will.

2dly, If it please the Lord to grant us a Settlement in Caledonia, it would be
an excellent Mean to spread Christ's Kingdom. Which may be evinvinced from
these Considerations. 1. A new Colony of professing Christians might be planted
there, who would own God, to be the God of that Land, and so become a
Covenanted People, and would proclaim the News of Christ and set up his
Worship. 2. It Is hopeful, that Colony should be among the best in all the
World, were once a Pious praying People sent thither. For, 1st. Our Doctrine is
most agreeable to the Scriptures. 2. Our Worship most Pure. 3. Our Government
most Adapted to advance the True ends of Government in Christ's House, beyond
what Prelacy or Independency can pretend to. 4. Our Discipline (if Rightly
Managed) the most effectual to bear down Sin, and encourage Piety. Now, all
these Meeting together in the hands of Zealous Ministers in a New Colony, must
render Zion in that place Beautiful as the Morning, clear as the Sun, fair as
the Moon, and Terrible as an Army with Banners. 3. It might be expected, that
there the many faults which have spoiled our Civil Policy here should be
avoided, which would exceedingly tend to the keeping out of many Evils that
^ine Justice, and destroy Love amongst us* 4. It would be a Place to which many
Nations would resort for Trade, and so have occasion to behold the comely order
of Gods House. It was frequent Converse with the Jews, that gave occasion to
the Nations to know Isreal's God, and so proved a Mean to gain many Proselites.
How much more may we expect this from Caledonia, since Christians will not
keepup such distance from the Heathen as the Jews did? 5. We may justly expect,
that this Colony shall not be confined to Darien, but shall spread to more
Places; and so the Lords In erest daily gain Ground; when a People please God,
their Co^ds (...) be lengthned, as well as their Stakes strengthened. 6. This
might p^ove a (...) Mean to Convert even Papists. But 7. Especially ^o g^in
^ouls ^o Christ among the poor He^thens. I know Conversion is God's Work* but
he works ordinarily by Means; and there is great appearance, that this People
would become Docile, and p^iable to the Gospel of Christ. For, 1. They are
naturally a Kind, well conditioned and tractable People, and have many good
Moral Virtues among them. 2. The great Aversion they have to the bloody
Spaniards, would induce them to love our people, and our Religion the more. 3.
Our People would ^e favorable ^o them, and instead of Enslaving, or otherwise
wronging them, would seek their Good, and endeavor to Civilize them, and
acquaint them with many useful Trades, to render their Lives more Comfortab^e.
4, They will instruct and train their Children in God's way, and when they see
our Care of their Young, they will trust us the more, and love us the better.
5. Some of themselves may in time be in case to ins^ruct their own Friends in
the way of God, and teach them to Read, and let them see in their own Language,
how it has been foretold, That the whole Earth shall be filled with the
Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. 6. The many Prayers put up
for them will not want their Effect. And 7. It will encourage them when they
find that none are treated the wor^e, but the more freindly for becoming
Ch^istian. All these put together, give ground to think, that we might look for
much good to be done to these poor People who are at present without God, and
without Hope in the World. 8. This would excite greater Flames of Devotion in
our Brethrens Spirits there, when they should behold the Gentiles turning unto
the Lord, and renuncing their Idols, their Vanities and Lies. 9. This will draw
over many good People to that Place from this Land, which is not able to
sustain its Inhabitants for want of Industry, and good Policy, in providing
Sustenance and work for the Poor, and where many are crushed by racked Rents
and other Oppressions that keep many Godly People very low, and marrs the
Exercises of their Grace and Christian Duties. They would go to their Brethren
abroad to enjoy the Gospel with better outward Accommodations. 10. This Co^ony
would prove a Bulwa^k against Antichrist, and a secure retreat to many
distressed Protestan^s of other Churches, a Mea^ to Check the Spanish
Barbarity, and curb the Popish Interest. But,

3ly, This great Enterprise is now, alas! sadly born down, and seems for the
present, to be almost crushed. For, 1. Our People who went thither first, are
scattered, some are in Bondage among c^uel Enemies, many of them dead throw
Want and Distress, with vast Loss and Expenses and Labor, which cannot but be
greatly afflicting to us. 2. We have another sad Calamity, in the loss of a
Ship with Provisions in Darien; and the scattering of the Second Company,
except a very few, which may put the Third Company sent out, to very great
Ha^dship and Uncertainty in their Resolutions. 3. The West India Proclamations
against us, have disheartened our Friends, and strengthened the hands of our
Ill-wishers, both upon a Religious and Civil account, especially those of
Jamaica, who have showed much Unfriendliness and Hatred. I think it is a
needless Debate, whether our own Mis-managements at Home and Abroad, have been
the Cause of our Disaster and Distress, or those Proclamations: I think it is
very evident, that Both have concurred toward it; and that neither of the two
(morally speaking) could have done it alone, though where the Effects of such
strange, and unexpected Proclamations might have terminated, were the
Management never so exact, is what I confess few can tell. But it is evident,
that both these are of the Lord, and that we ought to consider them as Reproofs
for, and Punishments our Sins; and that by these Proclamations, which in some
Places have been renewed again in September last, we are brought under a most
heavy and discouraging Blow, since none must relieve our People, more than if
they were abominable Pirates, tho they acted under the Protection, and
according to the Terms of an Act of Parliament, and have not Forfeited it: And
so long as these continue in Force, what can we expect but the total overthrow
of our Colony, since Scotland can never be able to furnish them Supplies till
they get Sustentation of there own, especially in such years of Scarcity as we
have felt of late, wherein many at home wanted Bread. 4. As the Pope and his
followers were mightily alarmed with this intended Colony; so they now no less
rejoice at its present Distress; and how much Power our deadly Enemies have, is
evident, and that they will employ it as far as they get Permission, and and
vent their Rage and Hatred against the Reformation as much as they can. I doubt
not, but if Ame^ica were out of the Papists Possession, their Pomp and Tyrrany
would cease; and therefore, they are greatly afraid, lest Protestant Colonies
get footing there. It may be, that before the ruin of A^tichrist, their Golden
Mines shall no more uphold their accursed Dig^ity, and persecuting P^ide. I^
the mean time, how greatly do our Adversaries prevail, especially when, 5. We
are but little Encouraged by our resormed Brethren at home; and it would seem
the States of H^lland do all they can to crush us, and some of our Brethren in
England envy us the freedom of Trade, which could not but prove many ways to
the Advantage of that Nation, tho it may be some private Men might g^in less
than they do now. But truly, it is strange, and sad, that any ^eformed
Pro^estant should for Selfish and By-ends prove our Enemies. 6. Our King, the
happy Instrument of our Glorious Deliverance, seems to be Misinformed
concerning us, whether by Dutch or English, or both, I cannot say; But it
appears very plain, that His Majesty does not throwly know our Circumstances,
and is not so ready for our Relief as our C^se requires; This is the most sad
of all that has yet b^fallen us. Lord turn our hearts to Thee, and our Kings
heart toward Us, save Lord and let the King hear Us when we call. 7. We are not
ONE amongst our selves ^n this Affair, some have nothing of a public Spirit,
where their own private gain is not immediately concerned; others basely give it
out that the King is against us, and bears ill will to our Colony, for which
they deserve to be signally punished. Others to serve a Foreign interest and to
divide and betray the Nation, have invented false Stories, and fomented
Jealo^sies, as if all this zeal for Caledonia had some ill design under it
against the Government, which no sensible Man can give a Name unto: And which
is plainly contrary to the very nature of the thing, Those wicked, but weak and
silly surmises had discouraged many, and I was I confess, my self somewhat
in^luenced by them; I hope well meaning Peoples Eyes begin to be opened, and to
see the falseness of many wicked insinuations and lying Stories that have been
spre^d, which have discouraged and Dis^racted some at home, and cannot but
prove a disheartning damp to those who are gone abroad, when they hear how
little their Case is suitably minded by u^: And do not such mischievous
practices give occ^sion to our Neighbors t^ say, that we are false Scots,
Betrayers of our Country. and Ruiners one of another? What can be done to
repair our ^osses, if those who are honestly Zealous ^or Caledonia, both
Ministers and People, be traduced as Enemies to the Government? tho we have all
pos^ble assurance of the Governments Protection, and Act in an u^questionable
legal way. Who could have thought, that any would have been so aspersed for
owning the just Rights of a free People? Tell it not in Gath publish it not in
Askelon, that any who call themselves Members of a reformed Church and Nation,
should so stand in the way of their own Mercy, both Religious and Civil, or
that a National and Christian design should have met with such Opposition
amongst us. The Publick-spirited Heathen, who generously preferred their
Countries Good to all private Considerations, shall one day rise in Judgment and
Condemn the Cowardice, Selfishness, and Treachery of many called Christians
among us; and if any be so unhappy, as to seek to enrich themselves ^y
betraying their Country's Cause, they shall find it is but the Wages of
Unrighteousness, and the gains of Iniquity, a Moth and Consumption to all the
rest of their Substance.

4ly. What a sad Loss it will be to our Nation and Church, if the Lord should
crush us altogether in this undertaking, will appear by considering. 1. That it
will be the Nations Dishonor, if throw our want of Courage, Conduct or
Honesty, we slavishly Succumb in the present Exigence, without setting about
both Religious, and lawful Civil Means of Redress, we must ly under the
perpetual Infamy of Fools, or Traitors to our Country, or Both. Some are soon
enough kindled upon what they call point of Personal Honor: And shall we be so
mean Spirited, as to have no Sense of the Bleeding Honor, and Sinking
Reputation of our Country? 2. Great also will the Nations loss be in the Wealth
and Treasure expended upon this noble design, if it should all come to nothing,
this with the hard years have brought us very low; but thus we must fall still
lower, and under the contempt of our Neighbors, and so much the more that the
thriving of our Colony would have given us a very considerable figure amongst
them. 3. This breach and ruin, will creat many Jealousies, Heart-burnings, and
Animosities among our selves, which will not be easily quenched, and will leave
a lasting stain on the Memory and Posterity of some, who will be thought to
have betrayed their Country, if we shall continue to cross one another in the
honest and necessary means of Relief. 4. We shall never be fit for any project
hereafter, the Nation will never Center so Universally and Heartily in any
Enterprise; who will regard us or trust us after this? We may despair of ever
being famous, except for Infamy, Weakness and Meanness of Spirit, if we now
break having a Parliament, the Laws of the Nation, the claim of Right, we hope
too our Kings heart, and Fatherly Affection, and all imaginable Motives on our
side; whereas if we go throw with this, as fairly and honestly we may, it will
render u^ if successful, as much respected, as we a^e now contemned in the
World; or at worst if we fail, we shall be pitied, and not despised. 5. If we
tim^ly look on till (...) be bu^ied against all Law and Right as well as
interest, then we encourage some other Faction hereafter to deprive us of other
privileges, by terrifying us with odious N^mes o^ Disaffection to the
Government or the like; till we be divested of all that it is dear and precious
unto us, whether Civil or Religious, as was the practice of the late evil
Reigns, the Slavery of which we ought not to forget, and wherein the least
squint look to a Curate was called disaffection to the Government. We have
reason to bless God that th^se times are past, and to Pray that they may never
(...) upon us and that we may not Act as if we were still under the Dread and
Terror of them, in not daring to assert and plead for our just Rights. And we
ought to Remember, that Presbitery is upon the same bottom of Civil Right with
this Interest, and if the one be shaken, the other may in process of time come
to be endangered. 6. This will bring horrid Sin upon the Land, if after such
Encouragements given us to Honor God, do Good to the Souls of poor Heathens,
and bene^it our own Nation; we shall stand by and be Silent, while all this
Enterprise is crushed. 7. This will weaken the Protestant Inteterst in America,
and grieve the Hearts of Gods People, in New England and the Neighboring
Plan^ations, who Rejoice to see a place of so much Importance in the hands of a
Colony from Scotland, and as they Hoped, under the Religious Conduct o^ the
Church of Scotland, of the same Principles and P^ofession in Discipline and
Government, as well as Doctrine with themselves; so that they were ready to
contribute their outmost, for supply of ^rovisions to Caledonia, evenafter the
publishing of the West India Proclamations, though, alas, our people knew it no^.
8. It will bring a very foul Blot and Reproach on the Ministry, if they should
be found faint and remiss in contributing so far as i^ competent to them, to
the support of this Christian and profitable Under^aking. It will be said,
where is their Zeal for advancing Christ's King dom, and for the good of their
Country, how Zealous would Popi* Priests be to prop^gate their Superstition
and stir up their Country Msh to Erect such a Colony and Plantation as this.
It is said that some M^nisters have been abused and imposed upon in this
matter, and that many does not consider its importance and weight, but suffer
themselves to be misled into prejudices by the false Surmises and groundless
Insinuations of others. And that such Advantage is given against this Inter^st,
to the Representations of ou^ Enemies in the neighboring Nation, from the
Carriage of Ministers, as may appear from this one Instance, if it be true what
I have heard was spoken by a Worthy Pee^ in the English Parliament concerning
it, to wit, That the Design of Caledonia could not be the Interest of Scotland,
and ^he Address; for it wa^ only a C^mbination of Villian^ and Jacobites, since
the Presbyterians, who were always known to be the great Asserters of their
Count^y's Rights and Liberties, were against it, and the Commission, who
represented the Church of Scotland, had rejected it; and Glasgow, ^he second
Town of the Kingdom, had refused it. This shows how little that Noble Lord was
obliged to his Mis-in^rmers, for putting so ignorant a Speech in his Mouth: But
it shows also, how the Backwardness of Minis^ers from doing their proper Duty
is improven by our Enemies, to the trampling upon, and mis-representing of this
highly valuable and National Interest. 9. If this Place be lost, what shall we
do with our Poor, who might have partly been transpo^ted thither as Workers,
and partly employed at Home in Manufactures, for the Service of those Abroad?
Shall not Poverty, Beggary. Idleness, and Sta^ving increase? 10. Have not many
Prayers of the Godly been put up for Caledonia? all have seemed to wish it is
prospering, and some have been earnest in pleading for it; some Ministers died
in the Voyage, others since have ventured their Lives to serve God and the
Nation, when they were acceptable at Home: Will it not be Confounding if; throw
our own Breakings and Divisions, all be lost? Will not profane (...) scoff at
Prayers; and Papists say, where is the Protestants God? And will not weak
Christians be made to stagger, when they see God frowning upon such a Design?
It is true, Faith can see throw all this; but should we not fervently plead,
that the Ruin may not fall under our Hands? 11. How can we expect but that we
shall be Contemned and I^sulted by the Nations about us, in our private
Negotiating and Tra^ique; yea, almost made ashamed to own our selves for Scots
Men, and our great Attempt that has made so much Noise in the World, shall
become every where the public Jest? Is their any Man of Sense, but mu^ be
af^ected at these fore Evils, which we have just cause to fear, as the
Consequents of our giving up Caledonia?

5. Let us then consider a little theseSins which we ought to look upon as the
procuring Causes of the said Stroke we have already metwith, and which may
prove yet more Afflicting, if Mercy prevent not. We ought to deal Impartially,
and not spare our Sins; when God's hand is upon us, we are called to search
them out narrowly, and to hide none from the Lord. 1. This Nation has never
yet been duly humbled and exercised with Sorrow and Mourning for the Sins of
the Land, which have been of a deep Dye, we have been still mincing our
Iniquity for fear of offending of some late Actors, without minding how God is
offended with us. We have not to this day made a full and free Confession of
our National Sins; amongst which, our Covenant Breaking seems to me to cry
loudest, and stare us in the Face; for whatever may be said of the Politic and
sinister Ends of some, in contriving and carrying on the Covenant, of their
mingling and thrusting some things into it to serve a Turn of its being
Calculated for these Times and Circumstances; and so in its Complex form, not
so proper for the present State of things of its being a League with other two
Nations who have thrown it off as such, and the like. Yet, it cannot be denied,
that in the Main, it was (as well as the National Covenant that went before it
throw the Land) a most serious and awful Engagement of the Nation to
Christianity and Godliness, with uplifted hands to the most High God, and the
highest and most solemn piece of Reformation that ever this Church and Kingdom
attained unto, and performed by the bulk of the People, with the greatest Moral
Seriousness. And how can our resiling from, and shameful Breach of these awful
Vows, but draw upon us dreadful Guilt and Iniquity, not to be forgotten till it
be bitterly Mourned for. How much Innocent Blood has been shed? what horrid
Aversion to Purity and Holiness, and fearful Blackslidings have been found
amongst us, in which our Kings, our Priests and People have been deeply
involved; and yet to mention these things, renders a Man suspected of Schism:
But how can we Thrive, till we be more explicit and full in Confessing, and
bitterly bewailing these and all our National Sins before the Lord. 2. We are
guilty of black Ingratitude to God for the late happy Revolution, for the
Singularity, as well as the Greatness of that Deliverance, when we were upon
the Brink of being swallowed up; nor did we improve it as we ought to have
done. 3. Gospel Ordinances and public Worship are more despised amongst us
than any where: All People in the World do attend more reverently upon their
several ways of Worship than we do upon ours. Heathans and Jews, Mahometans and
Papists, Heretics and Schismatics, are at much more pains in their erroneous
Courses, than the professing People in Scotland are generaly upon the Service
of the living and true God. Any Triffle, mere Laziness, Prejudice, Contempt
Hatred, keep many of our great Ones from Gospel Ordinances: How then can God
prosper us in our Undertakings? 4. Gross Injustice and Oppression, Envy,
Malice, Backbiting, Self-seeking,, narrowness of Spirit, Worldly-mindedness,
Lying, and Treachery, Uncharitableness and want of Brotherly Love, are our
Epedemick Distempers? How then shall we think to be Blessed in our Designs,
especially since all these Sins are aggravated in us, by their being against
Light and daily Warnings. 5. We did not seek the Lord, and plead for his Favor
in a due manner, in the beginning of this great Enterprise, with serious
Resolutions to reform our Hearts and Lives. Time was, when the People of God
upon such a weighty occasion, and when the Nation was setting about so
important a Work, would have been fervent in putting up their Suites to Heaven,
and had remarkable Returns of Prayer. It was very comfortable to see what
impression and frame some Reverend Ministers of the Commission were under in
Summer last, when Mr. Shield was engaged in this Service, with what Affection,
Warmness and Weight, they observed how our Forefathers would have embraced and
improven so signal an Opportunity of Spreading the Gospel, of bringing Honor
to God, and to the Church of Scotland, and doing Good to Souls, if it had been
in their offer: And what an edge was upon the Spirits of all in their Meeting
at Glasgow, and the solemn Day of Prayer held there, upon the account of our
dear Brethren and that Interest. And it is no less discouraging to observe, how
far that Zeal and Fervor that then appeared, is now abated; that we have not
hitherto set apart a Day of Humiliation, upon account of this sad Distress, and
of Prayer for these who were sent out with so public and solemn a Blessing
from this Church; that we are now turned so slack and remiss, and that we began
no sooner, is more formidable and threatening than all the Opposition of the
Devil, the Pope, the Spaniard, or any other Enemy, and ought to be heartily
bewailed by us, with admiration of the Goodness and Patience of God, that we
are not yet worse smitten for our ill-deservings. 6. Our vain pride and
Confidence at the beginning of this Affair, our Carnal Expectations from it,
our trusting not in God, but in an Arm of Flesh: If we had succeeded without
Rubs in our way, we had burnt Incense to our own Drag, we had waxed fat, and
kicked against the Lord, and forgotten that the Earth is the Lord's, and the
Fullness and Riches thereof, and forgotten what weak silly Creatures we are
without him. 7. There may be many Sins both of Omission and Commission to be
confessed and mourned for, in the management of our Expeditions, both with
respect to persons employed, and Methods followed, which I cannot undertake to
condescend upon; but these ought to be searched out, acknowledged and amended.
Tho ill Men may have outward success for a time; vet the Favor of God cannot
be toward them. The Six Hundred Danites sent to take in L^ish, did succeed;
yet their Posterity went first into Captivity of all Israel. In a business of
this nature, Men should be more considered according to their worth and real
usefulness, than the Moyen of their Friends, and such as they depend upon,
recommending them. 8. Great care should have been taken to set up a strict
discipline over those who were sent to punish Vice, and set up Morality and
good Order amongst them* And tho the Directors are not free of this Neglect;
yet it cannot be denied that much of it lies upon the Ministers score, who were
too slack in providing Able, Zealous, and faithful Men to send with every Ship
to Excite Directors to their Duty, yea to furnish sit Men for the Service in
proportion to the encouragement agreed unto by the Directors, which might have
been a mean to have prevented both much Si^, and much wrath. 9. It is also to
be considered by these immediately concerned in this Company, whether much of
the Money employed in this Undertaking, was not sinfully acquired; many got
their Riches by Deceit and Oppression; and is it any wonder, that the Lo^d
should let them know, that his Eyes are upon all their* Paths, that he ponders
their Goings and their Doings; and that he will not bless the Revenues of the
Wicked* 10. and lastly, Our bad Lives at Home, is a great Cause of the B^sling
and Disapponting of our Undertakings Abroad. Some even of our Great Men eng^ged
in this Affair, given over to all Lasciviousness and Uncleanness, to work
Wickedness with Greediness; yet neither State nor Church check their Impieties:
And can we expect that God will bless their Designs, who so Dishonor him? or
the Nations, that bear not Testimony against them? or that so long as we in
this Nation continue in so defiled and unreformed a State, there can ever
proceed from us any pure Stream, any happy Colony, or any Undertaking
acceptable to God?

6. What is now to be done to retrieve our Loss? What is the Duty that both
Ministers and People are called unto, with reference to this great Concern? I
shall not here speak of Addresses to the King or Parliament; that belongs to
others; no effectual Legal Course ought to be omitted. But my work is the
Religious part, and our Addressing to the King of Heaven in a due manner. I
think we should cry both to our King and our God: If some Men got their Will,
we should be allowed to cry unto neither: But that which I would humbly
propose, is what no Christian can oppose, unless he be under a dreadful
Infatuation* 1. Let Church and State solemnly Renew their Covenant with God, to
be his, and to Serve him, in opposition to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh:
Whatever may be Men's various Sentiments about speculative or disputed Points;
yet none can deny but it is our Duty, to embrace from our Souls, and consent
unto God's Covenant of free Grace, not only as it offers to us Salvation throw
Christ; but as it contains our Duty to God, regulated in his Word. Now if we
are by our Baptism entered into this Covenant, and must renew it after
Backsliding, or else turn Apostates and perish: Why should not the Nation do
that which Israel did of old, when the Lord convinced them of their Folly and
Sin^ I know the mixing of things Civil and Religious in Covenants, and pressing
them on people, and treating the Refusers as Enemies, has been much disliked
by the Godly who were free of Faction, but to renew our Baptismal Covenant
Nationally, is what no Christian can disclaim. And I think all should be
content to join in this till we be more unite in our Sentiments as to
Government. I am apt to think, that a blessed change would follow upon the
right and solemn managing of this most necessary and singularly useful Duty.
The General Assembly may with due deliberation draw a plain Formula, which
being Printed, that People may gravely ponder it; a day of Fasting and
Humiliation may be appointed throw the Kingdom, for confessing our iniquities
and lying low before the Lord in the sense of our Provocations: And the Lords
day thereafter, People having been instructed by their Pastors in the nature of
this Duty of yiedling themselves in a pe^petual Covenant never to be forgotten,
then at the close might Minister and People avouch the Lord to be their God
with uplifted hands. If this were conscientiously gone about, I am hopeful
there should be a loosing of Bonds, and somewhat of Heavenly influences
Communicated to this poor withered Church and Nation, and that our Covenanted
God would not refuse us a Token of Good. It were also desirable, that each
Presbitry would keep a Day by themselves, and each Family apart (and no doubt
each serious Person would follow the Example) for confessing Sin, and wrestling
for a blessing upon this Noble, but long slighted Duty, in the performance of
it by the whole Nation. 2. There is great need of a particular day of pleading
with God for his favor to the great National undertaking of settling our
American Colony: I wonder how any that wish the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom,
or have any Knowledge or Impression of the importance of this Design, can
oppose it. Some have looked with a Squint Eye upon this Duty. And I shall touch
their Objections against it. 1. They say it is a Monopoly, a few only
concerned, and why should the Nation be called to Fast and Pray upon its
account. I Answer, 1. The Parliament in their Address to the King declared it
their own and the whole Nation's Concern, as indeed it is; and the General
Assembly had no narrow thought of it, when by their Act they appointed all the
Ministers of this Church to pray for its Success: And we cannot imagine, that
ever they would have refused a Solemn Fast for its distress. 2. Neither had the
Commission so mean thoughts of it the last Summer, when they came to Glasgow
upon its service, as does appear from what they did there, and by the Letter
they wrote to the Colony. And I heartily wish, that the leading Members of that
Commission, and all others influenced by them, may think of timely and suitable
Measures to prevent, or rather wipe off, the unbecoming Imputation of being
Time servers, by having showed so Universal a Zeal for the Caledonian Interest,
during its seeming Prosperity; and changing their Note so meanly when they see
it in Distress, and frowned upon by the Favorers of a Foreign Interest for
selfish Ends. 3. The Commission in December last, tho they refused a Fast, for
which they have their account to make to the Assembly, yet acknowledged the
importance of Caledonia, by their Letter to all the Presbyteries of this
Church. And though they should happen to escape Censure here for a time, yet how
can Ministers of the Gospel of Christ (which is all Truth) answer before His
Tribunal; for Trimming and Juggling thus, in a Case of so great Importance, as
the Caledonian Interest is to both the Religious and Civil Concerns of this
Nation? To refuse a Fast, to gratify the Unaccountable Backwardness of one
Party; and to tell the other Party, who Addressed for a Fast, that though they
did not appoint a Nominal Fast, yet they appointed a Real One, by Recommending
Prayers, etc. Is this that plain Simplicity and Singleness of Heart, which we
pretend to, and preach to others? If the Prelates and Curates of the late
Reigns were always said to be a Dead Weight upon the Nation in all State-Games,
as too assu^edly they were, and full of their (...) Distinctions, upon all
Occasions, to palliat their Sinister and Double Meanings, what Blessed
Re^ormation can we now justly boast of, if we Trace their very Footsteps under
a different Name? I wish the Worldly Mi^dedness, Vain Ambition, and Double
Actings of some, may not Endanger the whole Ministry, to be brought under such
a Stain and Contempt, as will not be easily wiped off, if they take not up in
time; and especially, if such as are yet Untainted, take not upon them, to
Admonish their Erring Brethren roundly, and become more Diligent and Serious in
the Work of the Lord, and in making the People delight much more, than, alas!
they now do, in Gospel Ordinances: Otherways Silence, upon such an Occasion,
must make us at least Connivers at, and consequently Partakers of their Guilt
4. A small part of the Kingdom in distress, will obtain a Collection from the
whole, how much more should we Sympathize in this concern. 5. The gain of any
one Person by bringing Wealth into the Nation, or the loss of any one by the
perishing of what is exported out of the Kingdom, is the gain or loss of the
Nation; much more that of so eminent a Society, must affect the whole. But, 6.
Nothing but brutish Ignorance or Malice, can entertain mean and diminishing
Thoughts of this Noble Enterprise, which is beyond all debate, the Greatest and
Worthiest that ever this Nation did attempt, and upon the Success or
Miscarriage of which, so much depends, as I have already hinted, and shall not
here repeat. So that this Objection deserves to be exploded, and can be made by
none who have a drop of Scottish or Christian Blood. 2. Some say this would be
a Fasting for Strife and Debate. But it is a grievous perverting of Scripture,
thus to apply it. Shall our keeping a Fast for our Brethren in Caledonia, and
to plead with the Lord for a Blessing on our Trade, and for making his Gospel
more known in the World, be compared with the private Contests and Oppressions
of the Quarrelsom Israelites. --? We know the Papists and Spaniards will be
offended, we cannot help that; but we are for Peace. And if the Objectors can
secure themselves from that Scripture, Isa. 22. 12, 13, 14. We need not be
afraid of the Prophets Words brought against us, in following and pleading for
our Duty. Beside, if there should be any Debate, or appearance of Division in
this Matter, it is all upon the Objectors side, who have departed from us, and
from these very Principles and Practices, which themselves but very lately
owned. 3. But Persons disaffected to the Government are pressing for a Fast,
therefore we should not gratify them; and it is for some bad design they seek
it, and not from Love to Religion. To this I answer, 1. I am far from
vindicating any who have opposed the Government, either in Church or State. I
believe there are very many bad Men both for, and against the Government, at
this day: But this I would say, Let none heighten Jealousy, and invent false
Stories; for God will punish even our Lying against the Wicked. 2. It is plain,
these Men whom they intend, are not Fools, but Men who understand their worldly
Interest, as well a^ others, and whom we have not seen to venture any Loss in
that for King James, or in opposition to the present Government, but are
desireous enough of Calm and Peaceable Living: And were some profane Ruffians,
idle Talkers, and profligate Desperado's removed, who are a burden to all
sides, and generally complained of, (but so Insignificant, as to deserve no
Notice, except that of Punishment for their Profanity and scandalous Lives) I
believe there would be little need to talk of different Parties or Interests in
Scotland. But besides ^ know, that Persons as Active in the late happy
Revolution, as any in this Kingdom have likewise pressed for a Fast; and shall
good Men forsake a good. Thing, because perhaps some bad Men in other respects
may join with them in that Good. 3. Bad Men love to cry to God when their Lives
or Interest are in hazard: Did not the Heathen Mariners pray when Jonah was a
Sleep, and had even the Prophet himself to awaken? Why may not quick sighted
Men with a Natural Conscience be Sensible of the need of Prayer? Yea, are there
not Zealous and honest Ministers and Godly People, pressing for a Fast as much
as they. 4. What ill Design can be under the craving of a Fast? Is it to
overturn the Government? How then shall Caledonia stand? which is an Interest
all over contrary to that which is called Jacobite or French Interest; yea, it
is plainly the Interest of France to have Caledonia broken; and I know nothing
more likely or proper to Unite our Interests at home, and chain them to the
Government, then their centering in Caledonia. Or are they onl^ pretendedly
Zealous for it, that they may carry on their bad Designs? Then I would ask,
shall we give up with Caledonia altogether? No, says the Objectors, by no
Means. Is not this strange? that we may still carry on this D^sign without
hazard to the Government, but if we pray for it, then the Government is in
Danger. Is not this to assert, that prayerless Purposes are safest, and thrive
best? But surely, if there were any ill Design in hand, one would think, that
honest Men have the more need to Pray for the discovering, and the defeating of
it. 5. But, if there be no bad Design, if from the very Nature of the Thing it
appears there can be none; Then, are not they greatly to blame (and by their
Practice bring a reproach upon Religion) who accuse Men of what they are
innocent of, or surely, must be so to them, till they can give Documents of
their Guilt. Truth needs no Lie to defend it, and Calumny is very inconsistent
with a Gospel Pro^ession. 6. Suppose their Designs to be bad, this ought not to
hinde^ our Duty, unless the Surmisers can show us, that our Duty at this time,
will forward the bad Design, and that it is our greater Duty to forbear, which
they can never do. Ought not we then to set about our necessary and
unquestionable Duty, without siding with Factions, or amusing our selves with
the Whispers and Insinuations of either Sycophantry or Malice: 7. The Humor of
some who have opposed this Fast, seems strange, one day they Plead, we must not
renew our Covenant, because the disaffected will not join with us, and our
Ancestors were too rash in dealing harshly with the Nobility and Gentry, we
must be more Calm and Sober, and wait till they comply. But then they call to
us to Fast and Pray for Caledonia; O, no, say these Objectors, Tho we know we
should do it, yet we will not do it, because you design no Good thereby. How
shall the Persons objected against, ever come over to the Government with us,
since we will not go to God with them? It may be some will tell us, The Jews
would not sing a Song of Zion when desired by the Babylonians; but they
required it to sport at: He^e Men are, at least, morally Serious and Sincere,
and smart under the Common Calamity. The Jews would not incorporat with the
Samaritans; but these Objectors were willing enough to have dealings with these
same Samaritans, and some did Trafsique and bestir themselves not a little to
engage these to ^oyn in the Company's Stock, with whom they have since refused
to humble themselves upon the account of the Company s, and Nations loss. 4.
Some pretend the King and Court would have been offended had the Commission
appointed a Fast, and therefore it was delaved. I answer, 1. It seems these who
so pretend, would have prudently de^ayed to pray at Darius's Command, since it
was but for a while, and positive Duties bind not ad semper. 2. They are highly
injurious to His Majesty, who make so undutiful and false a Suggestion* For, 1.
The King required our Prayers for himself when engaged in foreign War. 2. He
has testi^ied Regret for our Loss; and to say we may not express our Grief
before God, ^or what the King Declares himself sorry, without offending His
Majesty, is to talk at a very insolent rate. 3. Wherein has the King showed
any dis-like against us? By the West India Proclamations, say they. But, 1. How
know they that these Proclamations were emitted by His Majesty's positive
Command. 2. Do these Proclamations discharge us to carry on the Design of
Caledonia? by no means. Since then all agree, that without reflecting on these
Proclamations, we may continue our Trade: May we not also pray to God for its
Help? 3. Would Darius have been ofsended at any for crying to God for Daniel,
when he was drawn by his Courtiers to sign that severe Decree against him,
since he himself was much greived for it all Night. Then, sure our King will
not be Angry with us for seeking to God, since we have the greatest reason to
believe that the King bears us fatherly Afsection; and that these Proclamations
were not the effect of his Inclination. 5. Some will tell us, there is a
Ferment in the Nation, and we must not Fast till that be allayed. But, does not
the present Necessity, and our Brethrens distress call for it as a present and
necessary Duty? Has it not been sadly and shamefully delayed? Does not this
delay increase the Ferment, which is not like to be removed without Fasting and
Prayer? And if all shall be lost, wh^t Peace can we have in these Delays and
refusals? And how must it amaze our Brethren abroad? and discourage others from
ever engaging in the like Services, that we would not Compassionat their
dolorou, Condition. If it be found, that a Foreign Interest, and Man-pleasing,
and Pensions prevail against this Duty more than all other Objections. To this
indeed I cannot answer essectually (for Silver and Gold have I none) unless we
could be persuaded to take the Lord's Word for an esfectual Answer; only deal
courageously, and the Lord shall be with the Good. 3. I add by way of Advice in
the third place* be harmonious i^ your actings for Caledonia, if some draw one
way, and some another, the whole Design will pull into pieces. Act deliberatly,
and with real^ ove to your Country, and then the means to accomplish your End,
will not be hard to find out. But if under shadow of the Public, Men pu^sue
private and base ends, all must fall into ruin. 4. Let every one of us mind the
Duties of our Station, and not stand accusing this or that Mistake, Error, or
Miscarriage in others, as the Cause of this Distress, lest all be found to have
had a hand in drawing it on. Let Ministers mind their special Work of praying
and wrestling for Caledonia, and sending it Gospel Supplies; and let Nobility
and Gentry do what is proper sor them in their Civil Stations, and not standing
Idle blaming one another. 5. Let all Care be taken to amend former Errors; and
pa^ticularly, to transport ^or the future, good Men so far as is possible, with
Ministers to take Care of their Manners and of their Souls; and let these be
Active and Prudent, Men of Authority as well as serious and Godly Pastors.
Next, to our obtaining the favor of God. This is the most likely way to be
blessed of the Lord, and come into respect, instead of being turned into an
Astonishment and Reproach throw the World. Now by Good Men, I do not mean of
such or such a Denomination amongst us: For tho I am as much in my Judgment for
a Nationally Covenanted work of Reformation as any; yet truly I love a Good
Man who differs from me in Speculations, before him who is Impious, be his
Principles what they will. Yea, the better a Man's Principles be, if the Man be
Bad, he is the worse Man. And sure, if due pains were taken, with a single eye
to the prosperity of the Colony, good Men might be had. We all know what
services Angus*s Regiment did at Dunkel, and none denied them to be at that
time the best Regiment in Britain, perhaps in the World, for Religion and
Sobriety. I know they were not all Saints, but had we such a Company to go to
Caledonia, I should not question, but God would be with them. A praying People,
are very likely to be a successsul People.

7. I come in the last place, to press all to be concerned, and to act
vigorously for Caledonia in Prayer, and by all other lawful Methods. You are
not to expect Rheto^ical Flourishes from such a blu^t Pen as mine. I will not
say, Ornari ^es ipsa negat contenta doceri; for not only is the Subject capable
of Embellishment, but the Unconcernedness of many, requires Excitement by the
most moving Discourses, that they may have a just view of, and be suitably
affected with this excellent Design. But this must be the work of others, whose
Accomplishments and Zeal are equal. It is enough for me, who can attain no
more, plainly to point out a few of these Things, that may invigorat, and stir
up the Nation to a due Sense of their present Duty. And, 1. To get our Coasts
enlarged by Praver, as Jabesh did, is to attain to Honor in a more eminent
degree than hitherto. Let Saracens and Turks, the Monarchies of old, or the
Spaniards of late, and other modern Ravages of the Earth, enlarge their
Conquests by Blood and Treachery, by Pillaging and Devastation their Names
shall be Infamous for ever; but for us to get a Rehoboth by Prayer and fervent
Supplica^ion to Heaven, will be an Evidence of the Favor, Good Will, and
Kindness of the Possessor of Heaven and Earth to us. Let us then be stirred up
to plead fervently for a Blessing to this great Work from Heaven's King. 2. Go
on resolutely in this Affair; for the Lord has much encouraged you in the way
of his Providence to proceed. You have lawful Authority on your side, King and
Parliament have given you Commission, and are bound to Protect you, as we hope
they will against all Opposers. You have the Generality of the Nation, and all
true hearted Scots Men to stand by you, none can oppose you without being
Enemies to the Good of their native Country. Whatever they may pretend, they
serve a foreign Interest: You have been born up under many Difficulties and
Discouragements already; The Lord wonderfully directed and preserved the first
Adventurers, and brought them safe to their desired Port, few of them, all
things considered, dying by the way. They came into a Commodious place,
abounding in many Advantages, and were asfectionatly welcomed by a Kind,
Harmless, and Obliging People. In all which we see, how favorably the Lord
treated us, and made plain paths before us: And it deserves a grave Remark,
That whatever Distress has since come upon our Countrymen; yet the Lord has
hitherto kept possession for us; the Place has never been totally abandoned,
tho others would gladly have seized it for themselves. And as our just Right
cannot be taken away, and the place is so impregnable, that if we were but
willing, we may keep it against all the World; so the Lord now invites us back,
and has kept it for us, by hindering any of our Enemies to settle there. It
may likewise be encouraging, that however distant we are in some things from
one another; yet this Interest seems to be the Center wherein we will all
agree, and if followed closely, may prove a blessed Mean to remove different
Sentiments, and unite us to God, and to one another in the way of Unity and
Love. 3. All our Chastisements in this Matter are such, that we are the more to
be excited by them, and not to ^e cast down, or turn faint in our Duty. It is
the Lord who is trying us, to cause us trust in himself the Living God, more
than in all Human Wisdom, Power, or Wealth, and drive us near to himself, by
Humiliation and Reformation by searching and trying our ways, that we may turn
again unto the Lord. The Removal of the two worthy Ministers was grievous, but
their Names shall be precious to posterity, when others who withstand this
design shall leave no good savor; their Death (...) the Company more then many
days Preachings could have done. God was kind to them in taking them away
before they saw the sad Disaster that befell, which would have crushed them. The
Proclamations seemed to awaken us to cry to God, the less encouragement we had
from Men; but alas! this fervor ^oon relented and turned aside unto a wrong
course. The news of the Colonys Dissipation did grieve, but not overwhelm those
most nearly concerned: Activity has appeared in speedy supply and application
to proper means Greater for remedy. Now when all our Troubles and Difficulties
have not hitherto totally defeated us. Let us not despond, but come with
penitent sorrow for our Povocations, and cry unto God for his Help and
Assistance, who can make crooked things straight, and the Mountains a plain
before his People; who knows but that yet he may cause us to sing that Song
Psalm 66. from Ver. 8 to the close. 4. Let us be quickened to (...) duty from
this consideration, that the Lord frequently makes way for his extraordinary
Kindnesses, by some Humbling Dispensations; Israel must encamp between Migdol
and Baalzephon, while the Sea is before them, and a bitter Enemy behind them;
yet this Difpensation must precede the final Overthrow of the Adversary, and
furnish Matter to the first triumphant Song we have upon Record in Scripture:
And indeed, none should despair of Events, who are found in the Lords way, when
we see Israel meeting with such Obstacles, many Years before their Deliverance
was completed, and their Divinely Authorized Colonies fixed. What have our
Troubles been in comparison of what some have met with, and overcome in doing
great things for their Religion and Country; were not our first Reformers
surrounded with other sort of Dissiculties, which they Mastered by Ardent
Prayers and Restless Endeavors. Did we pray more, and Believe more, we might
yet expect Success, notwithstanding* standing all that has befallen us; For,
5. If we would reflect what Promises God has made to his People under their
Troubles, we would not st^d onl^ looking to Human Prob^bilities, and forget the
Encouraging Com^nds and Promises of God. It Is from these, Faith gets Strength,
and puts Vigor into the Soul* as the Trumpet excites a Martial Spirit. For God
not only Displays his Goodness in making the Promises, and his Fait^fulness in
bringing them about, but also his Power Shines in the Way of his A^ting. Apply
then by Faith, the Promises made to the Church, and to a Distre^ed People, and
God will not cast you off. 6. The Necessity of the Nation requires you should
go on with Vigor. The Poor are many, and their Straits increase: Now if ever we
be relieved, Trade and Labor must be one great Mean of it, and nothing can be
done to purpose in this, without a Colony Abroad and Manufactures at Home,
otherwise we shall be still Exporting Money for what we want, and Earning none.
7. The Deplorable Case of the poor-Pagans Souls cry aloud to us to come over
and help them; I wish this Motive had prevailed more with us at first, and that
we had sent them more Effectual Spiritual Relief: But let us now mind their
Conversion by our Prayers and Endeavors, that they may be our Brethren in
Christ, this would tend to the Honor of our Church, and our Peace in the Day
of the Lord, and the Blessing of these who are ready to perish should come upon
us. Neither ought it to be forgotten, that these poor People by their Kindness
to us, have exposed themselves to ^e outmost Resentments of the Cruel
Spaniards, who if they be left Naked, and destitute of our Defense, will with
the greatest Keenness essay to Butche^ and exti^pate them. 8. It is seldom that
ever a Nation and Church has had such an Opportunity for doing Good, put in
their hands, or been called to so great a Wo^k. To God we must be accountable
how we imp^ove it. And if we do not actively now bestir our selves, and
fervently apply to him, without whose Help we can do nothing; with what
Confidence can we ever go unto him in National Straits again? 9. Let us
remember the Condition of these who were last sent from us, and what need we
have to pray that they be not discouraged and quite sunk under perplexing
doubts, when they find a deserted place in stead of their Friends, and prepared
accommodations: The thoughts of what am^zement must possess them* and
difficulties they will be under, ought to m^ke our Hearts bleed with Sympathy
for them. Are not our Friends and Contrymen, Gentlemen of Note, and
Ministers sent thither. I must say, if we forget our Caledonians, we must be
cruel like the Ostriches in the Wilderness. 10. There are private Christians
wrestling with the Lord for this Interest, and their Cry to all, but especially
to Ministers, is Dear Countrymen and Pastors, lend us the ^elp of your Prayers
in this weighty Concern, that we may all jointly together go into the Throne of
Grace, and give our God no rest till he appear for Caledonia, and make her
Walls Sal^ation, and her Gates Praise. Satan surely, and his followers of the
Romish Interest, hate your Prayers; but all the lovers o^ our Lord and his
Kingdom will heartily join in them, both in a private and in a public National
way; and we are persuaded, that Our Lord will not ^o far d^sert his Servants as
to suffer you upon so pressing an Occasion, and after so earnest beseechings to
be so far by assed by s^nistrous Insinuatious, or any Considerations
whatsoever, as to remain unconcerned in your Masters Glory, His Churches
Honor, and your Countries Interest. I shall but add one word unto such as may
be suspected of bad Designs, touched under their Zeal for Caledonia, I would
beseech them not to have too harsh Thoughts of simple Honest People, who by the
Surmises of designing Persons may be influenced to suspect them. Some of these
suspected have showed no great Friendship to Godliness, and therefore it is no
great wonder that bad Impressions of them, do the more easily take. I would
entreat such to evidence the more signally to the World, by sincere and upright
Actings, that their true Motive, next ^o a Christian regard to the Glory of
God, is a generous Concern for their Country: And I must add, That if any have
indirect Views or sinful Designs, God will testify his Displeasure against
them. The Pit they may be thinking to dig for others, under specious Pretexts,
may be filled with their own Carcases; and tho he is no honest Man who shall
refuse to assist and concur with them in that which is Just and Good, yet if
they turn aside to perverse Ways, all honest Men will relinquish them, and they
shall be Contemned in the Earth. But I hope all our Mistakes and Jealousies
shall be removed, and that we shall all cordially agree to carry on Caledonia's
Interest, with Ha^mony, Love and Zeal, which the Lord of his infinite Mercy
grant. I rest,

Your Faithful Monitor, Philo-Caledonius.
Postscript.
WHilst the foregoing Discourse is under the Press, it has pleased the Holy
and Just God, to visit this City of Edinburgh with a most Formidable Desolating
Fire, whereby he speaks unto us Terrible Things in Righteousness, and seems,
amongst our many other Transgre^ions, particularly to point at our Remisness
and Neglect of the Duties of Humiliation and Fasting; and that notwithstanding
the Pressing Calls we have had thereto, and the Applications likeways that have
been made for the same, yet the Duties have been hitherto, it is feared, both
Shamefully and Sinfully Baulked. Causes of Fasting are heaped upon us, by
Burnings at New-Edinburgh, and Burnings in Old-Edinburgh, one Judgment on the
back of another, which seems to say, That it is more than high time, to lay
aside our Mistakes and Jealousies, and Carnal Politics, and take Shame to our
selves, and redeem former Neglects, by doubling our Diligence in called for
Duties, lest the Lord be provoked to consume us, by yet more Astonishing and
Confounding Blows. And it is hoped, the Venerable Assembly, to whom this
Dreadful Conflagration, as Trysting with their first Meeting, and Day of
Prayer, has a very Special Language, will make a Grave Remark upon it, and a
Wise Improvement of it, by paying the Debt they owe to God and the Nation, in
Exciting the whole Kingdom to Repentance and Amendment, First, Upon the Account
of the said Rebuke given to the Land, in their Noble and Christian Undertaking
Abroad: And then, Upon Account of the other Moving and Afflicting Providence
we Groan under at Home.



FINIS.

