THE TREATY AND ALLIANCE Between the COMMISSIONERS of the most Christian King
OF FRANCE and NAVARRE, On One Part, AND THE EXTRAORDINARY AMBASSADORS Of the
STATES GENERAL Of the United Provinces of the Low Countries On the Other.

Concluded and Signed at Paris the 27. April 1662.

London, Printed in the Year. 1662.

The Treaty and Alliance, etc.
THe affection, which the most Christian King has always had for the good and
prosperity of the State of the united Provinces of the low Countries, following
the Example of the Kings his Predecessors; and the passion; which the Lords the
States General of the said Provinces have always preserved for the Grandeur of
France, together with the sentiments of acknowledgment for the considerable
obligations and advantages, they have received from thence, have in such a
manner maintained the good Understanding between His Majesty and the said Lords
States, and such a free and perfect Correspondence between their Subjects for
many years passed, that it might be hoped, that the same would be continued by
it self, without need of confirming the precedent Confederations by any new
Treaty: yet notwithstanding, since His Majesty will omit nothing of what may
strengthen and perpetuate the Ancient Bond, and the said Lords the States
General wish to make it straighter, having for that end besought his said
Majesty by their extraordinary Ambassadors for a renovation of Alliance, to the
maintaining of the Peace, which his Majesty and the said Lords States have at
present with all Potentates and States of Europe, and to the regulating the
Interests of particular Subjects of the one and the other, as to commerce,
Navigation and Sea affairs, by such Laws and Conventions, as are most proper to
prevent all Inconveniences, that might alter the good Correspondence; the
Lords, John Baron of Gent, Lord of Osterweed, Lieutenant of the Fiefs and
Primat of the Country of Foquement; Conrard of Buningen, Counselor of the
City of Amsterdam, Justus Huybert Counselor and Pensionary of the City of
Zricksee, and William Borreel Baron of Vrenhove, Vrendie, Lord of ^tel and,
Duinb^ke and ^ere^^m, etc* Extraordinary Ambassadors of the said Lords States
of the united Provinces of the low Countries, have to this effect exhibited to
the Ministers of His Majesty their powers, whereof a Copy is here beneath
inserted, for the Negotiation and conclusion of the said Alliance; whereupon
His Majesty having been pleased to nominate my Lord Peter Seguier Count of
Gien, Duke of Villemur, Peer and Chancellor of France, and the Lords, Nicholas
of Neufville, Duke of Villeroy, Peer and Marshall of France, Knight of His
Majesty's Orders, and Chief of the Counsel Royal of the Exchequer, Henry August
of Lomenie, Count of Brienne and Montbrun, and Michel Tellier Marquess of
Louvoy, Lord of Chavigny, both Counselors, Ministers and Secretaries of State
and of his Majesty's Commands, and Commanders of his Orders; Huge of Lionne
Marquess of Fresne, Lord of Berny, and also Counselor and Minister of State,
and Commander of the said Orders, and Louys Henry of Lomenie, Count of Brienne,
and Baron of Pongy, Counselor also and Secretary of State and of His Majesty's
Commands, and John Baptista Colbert, Counselor of His Majesty in all his
Counsels, and Intendant of his Treasury, for Commissioners on his part, with
power. (whereof they have presented the original, and whereof a Copy is here
beneath transcribed) to confer and treat concerning the said Alliance, and to
conclude it with the said Ambassadors: It has been agreed upon between the
said Lords Commissioners in the Name of His Majesty on one part, and the said
Lords Plempotentiaries of the Lords the States General on the other, as follows:

I.There shall henceforth be between the King and His Successors Kings of
France and Navarre and his Kingdoms on one part, and the Lords the States
General of the united Provinces of the low Countries, and their States and
lands appertaining and their Subjects on the other, reciprocally a sincere,
firm and perpetual Amity and good Correspondence, as well by sea as by land, in
all things, and every where, as well without as within Europe.

II. Moreover, there shall be between His Majesty and his Successors Kings of
France, and his Kingdoms, and the said Lords States General and their States
and Lands appertaining, a straight Alliance and faithful Confederation, to
maintain and preserve mutually one another in the tranquillity, peace, Amity
and Neutrality by Sea and Land, and in the possession of all the Rights,
Franchises and Liberties, which they enjoy or have right to enjoy, whether they
are acquired to them, or may be acquired by them, by the Treaties of Peace,
Amity and Neutrality, that have been formerly made, and that may be hereafter
made jointly and by a common Concert of the other Kings, Republics, Princes
and Towns, yet all within the extent of Europe only.

III. And so they promise and oblige themselves to warrant to one another not
only all the Treaties, which His Majesty, and the said Lords the States General
have already made with other Kings, Republics, Princes and States, which are
to be exhibited from both sides before the exchange of the Ratifications; but
also all those, they may hereafter make jointly and with common endeavors; and
to defend, assist and keep one another reciprocally in the possession of the
Lands and places, that belong at the present, and that hereafter shall belong
as well to His Majesty and his Successors Kings of France, as to the said Lords
the States General, by the said Treaties, or within which the said States
General have their Garrisons, in what part of Europe soever the said Lands,
Towns and places be situated, in case that in all, what has been before
mentioned, His Majesty and the said Lords the States General come to be
troubled or attackt by any hostility or open War.

IV. The reciprocal Obligation of mutual assistance and defense is also
understood for the preserving and maintaining His said Majesty, and the Lords
States General, their Countries and Subjects, in all their Rights, Possessions,
Immunities and Liberties, as well of Navigation, as of Trade and Fishing, and
others whatsoever, by sea and by Land, which shall be found to appertain unto
them by common Right, or to be acquired by Treaties made or to be made in the
manner abovementioned, toward and against all Kings, Princes, Republics or
other Sovereign States, in this sort, that if to the prejudice of the said
tranquillity, peace, amity and neutrality, present or future, His Majesty or the
said Lords the States General, come to be hereafter attackt, or in any other
way whatsoever troubled in the possession and enjoyment of the States, Lands,
Towns, Places, Rights, Immunities and Liberties of Trade, Navigation, Fishing,
or others whatsoever, which His Majesty or the said Lords the States General do
at the present enjoy or shall have Right to enjoy, either by Common Right, or
by the Treaties already made or that may be made, as above, His Majesty and the
said Lords the States General, being advertised of it and required one of the
other, shall jointly do what possibly they can, to make the trouble and
hostility cease, and to repair the wrongs or injuries, that may have been done
to either of the Allies.

V. And in case the said attacking or trouble be followed by an open rupture,
He of the two Allies, that shall not be attackt, shall be obliged to break,
four months after the first requiring made by him, who shall be in a rupture
already: during which time He shall use all endeavors by his Ambassadors or
other Ministers to mediate an equitable Accommodation between the Assaylant or
Disturber, and the Assailed or troubled; and yet notwithstanding shall give,
during the said time, a puissant succor to his Ally, such as shall be agreed
upon by separate Articles between His Majesty and the said Lords the States
General, which, though no mention be made of them in the present Treaty, shall
be kept and observed, as if they were there inserted or written; it remaining
notwithstanding, after the said time of four months expired, at the choice of
him of the Allies, that shall be in rupture, to continue to enjoy of the fruit
of the same succors, in case the conjuncture of the time and the constitntion
of his affairs might make him to prefer the effect thereof before the open
rupture of his Ally.

VI. The reciprocal Warranties being in this manner established and promised,
when one of the Allies shall be attackt or troubled, if the State of the united
Provinces should come so to be, and should find themselves obliged to enter
into open War, His Majesty shall likewise be obliged to break with the
Aggressour or Troubler, and to employ all his power and all his forces, when it
shall be judged fit, to reduce the Common Enemy to an honest safe and equitable
Accommodation with France and the said united Provinces.

VII. And in this case, the Forces of His Most-Christian Majesty and of the
said Lords the States General, shall act jointly or separately according to
what shall be then more particularly agreed upon between His said Majesty, and
the said Lords the States General, who are to advise and resolve together about
the most proper means to discommode the common Enemy, by way of diversion or
otherwise, to the end, as has been said, the sooner to reduce him to an
Accommodation.

VIII. The like to what is contained in the two immediately preceding Articles,
shall be done by the said Lords the States, in case France be attackt or
troubled in the manner above mentioned.

IX. When once open War shall be found with the two Allies, according to the
present Treaty, there may not afterward, by either of the two Allies, be made
any suspension of arms with Him, that shall have been declared and owned a
common enemy, but jointly and with common consent.

X. But if it fall out, that a negotiation be entered upon, for the treating of
peace or truce of some years, the same shall not be begun by one of the Allies
without the participation of the other, and without procuring for him and at
the same time, when for himself, the power and security required and necessary
to send his Ministers to the place of the said Treaty; and without giving
successively from time to time a communication of all that shall pass in the
said negotiation, and neither one nor the other shall pass to the conclusion of
the said peace or truce, without comprehending his Ally and making him to be
restored, if he so desire it, into the possession of the Countries, Lands and
Places, and enjoyments of the Rights and Immunities, which he held and enjoyed
before the War; and without stipulating from the common Enemy for the Ally the
same immunities, exemptions and other prerogatives, as for himself, unless the
Allies agree about it otherwise.

XI. It shall be permitted to Him of the Allies, that shall be attackt, to
Leavy all sorts of Soldiers and Mariners, within the State of the other Alley,
yet so that it be done in due form, and that it may be done without a
considerable prejudice of him, in whose State the said Leavies shall be made.

XII. If there should fall out by inadvertency, or otherwise, some
non-observations or contraventions to the present Treaty from his said Majesty,
or the said Lords the States General, and their Successors, or others, that
shall also hereafter have entered into this Alliance, it shall nevertheless
subsist in its whole force, without coming for that cause to a rupture of the
Confederation, Amity and good Correspondence, but the said contreventions are
presently to be repaired, and if they proceed from the fault of some particular
Subjects, they alone shall be punished and Chastised for it.

XIII. And the better to assure for the future the Commerce and Friendship
between the Subjects of the said King, and the said Lords the States General of
the United Provinces of the low Countries, it has been accorded and agreed
upon, that in case hereafter there fall out an interruption of Amity or a
Rupture between the Crown of France and the said Lords the States of the United
Provinces of the low Countries (which God forbid) there shall always be six
Months time, after the said Rupture, given to the Subjects of either side to
withdraw themselves with their Estates, and to transport them where they shall
think fit: which shall be permitted them to do; as also to sell and transport
their Goods and Movables with all freedom, without any bodies power to give
them any hindrance, or to proceed, during that time of six months, to the
making of any seizure of their Estates, and less to the arresting of their
persons.

XIV. And forasmuch as His Majesty and the said Lords the States are at the
present in Peace and good Correspondence with all the Kings, Republics,
Princes and States of Europe, they have thought fit expressly to declare, that
they understand not, that this Alliance obliges them to break at the present or
to enter into War with any of the said Kings, Republics, Princes and States.

XV. In virtue of the present Alliance, as well his Majesty, as the Lords the
States General, shall faithfully procure and advance the good and prosperity of
one another, by all support, aid, Counsels and real assistances, upon all
occasions, and at all times, and they shall not consent to any Treaties or
Negotiations, that may bring damage to one or the other, but shall break and
divert them, and give reciprocally with care and sincerity notice of them as
soon as they shall know of it.

XVI. The Subjects of his said Majesty, and those of the said Lords the States
General, shall not exercise any kind of hostility, nor violence, for the time
to come, one against the other, as well at Sea as Land, or upon the Rivers,
Roads and sweet waters, under what name or pretense soever. And so likewise the
Subjects of his Majesty shall not have power to take any Commissions for being
private Men of War, or Letters of Mart, from Princes or States, that are
Enemies of the said Lords the States General, much less to trouble or any way
annoy them by virtue of such Commissions, or Letters of Mart, nor so much as go
out with them, under pain to be pursued and punished like Pirates. Which shall
reciprocally be observed by the Subjects of the United Provinces in reference
to the Subjects of his Majesty: and to this end, as often as it shall be
required, by either part, there shall be in the Territories under His Majesty's
Obedience, and in the United Provinces, most express and most strict ^
prohibitions published and renewed, by no means to use such Commissions or
Letters of Mart, under the beforementioned pain, which shall be severely
executed against all Offenders herein, besides the entire restitution and
reparation, to which they shall be obliged toward those, to whom they have
caused any damage.

XVII. All Letters of Mart, that heretofore may have been granted for what
cause soever, are delared null, and there shall hereafter none of them be given
by either of the said Allies to the prejudice of the Subjects of the other,
unless it only be in case of manifest denial of Justice, which shall not be
counted to be verified, if the request of him that demands the said letters of
Mart, be not communicated to the Minister, that shall be found upon the place
of that State, against whose subjects they should be given, to the end that
within the term of four Months, or sooner, if possible, he may inform of the
contrary, or procure the fulfilling of Justice, that shall be due.

XVIII. Neither shall the particular Subjects of His Majesty be sued or
arrested in their Persons and Goods for any thing, that His Majesty may owe;
nor the particular Subjects of the said Lords the States General, for the
public debts of the said States.

XIX. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries under the Obedience of His
Majesty, and the said Lords the States General, shall live, Converse and
frequent one with the others in all good Amity and Correspondence, and shall
enjoy amongst them the liberty of Commerce and of Navigation in Europe, in all
the limits of the States of either, of all sorts of Merchandises and
Commodities, whereof the trading and transportation is not generally and
universally prohibited to all, as well Subjects as strangers, by the Laws and
Ordinances of the States of either.

XX. And to this effect, the Subjects of His Majesty and those of the said
Lords the States General may freely frequent with their Commodities and Ships,
the Countries, Territories, Towns, Ports, Places and Rivers, of either State,
to carry and to sell there to all Persons indifferently, to buy, Traffic, and
transport all sorts of Wares and Commodities, whereof the coming in or going
out and transporting shall not be forbidden to all Subjects of His Majesty or
of the said Lords the States General, without that this reciprocal freedom
shall be limited and restrained by any Privilege, Grant, or other particular
Concession; excepting only Oils of Whales, which the Subjects of the said Lords
the States General shall not carry and sell in France, to the prejudice of the
Privilege granted to the Company established for the catching of Whales and
the selling of the said Oils, as long the time, expressed in the said
Privilege, by the King already given, shall last: In the meanwhile, the
Subjects of either shall notwithstanding pay all what is due by Custom, and
other impositions, that may be laid on by His Majesty and his Successors, or by
the said Lords the States General, within the Countries under their Obedience
in Europe, without that the said Subjects of either side shall be obliged to
pay greater or other dues, Charges, Customs or Impositions whatsoever upon
their Persons, Goods, Commodities, Ships or Fraights thereof, directly or
indirectly, under what Name, Title or pretext whatsoever, than those, that
shall be paid by the proper and natural Subjects of either.

XXI. The ships of War of either, shall always find the Roads, Rivers, Ports
and Havens, free and open to enter, go out, and ride at Ancher as long as they
shall need it, without being visited; yet with this condition, that they shall
with discretion cease to do so, and shall not give any cause of Jealousy by a
too long and affected stay, nor otherwise, to the Governors of the said places
and Ports, to whom the Captains of the said ships shall give notice of the
cause of their arrival and of their stay.

XXII. The ships of War of His Majesty, and of the said Lords the States
General and those of their Subjects, that shall have been armed as Men of War,
shall with all freedom carry the prises, they shall have taken from their
Enemies, whither they shall think good, without being obliged to any dues
either by the Admirals, or the Admiralty, or any others: without also that the
said ships or the said Prises, entering into the Havens or Ports of his Majesty,
or of the said Lords the States General, may be arrested or seized upon, nor
that the Officers of the places shall take notice of what the prises are worth,
which may go out and be most freely brought to the places expressed in the
Commissions, which the Captains of the said ships of War shall be obliged to
show: And, on the contrary, there shall not be given any refuge or retreat in
their Havens or Ports to th^se, that shall have taken prises from the said
Subjects of His Majesty, or from the said Lords the States General; but being
therein entered by necessity of storm or danger at sea, they are to be sent away
as soon as it shall be possible.

XXIII. The subjects of the said Lords the States General shall not be reputed
Aubains in France, and shall be exempt from the law of Aubaine, and have power
to dispose of their goods by Testament, Donation or otherwise, and their Heirs,
subjects of the said States, being in France as well as elsewhere, shall obtain
their successions, even ab intestato, though they have not got any letters of
Naturalization, without that the effect of this Grant shall be contested with
them, or they hindered therein under the pretense of any Right or prerogative of
Provinces, Towns or private persons: and the subjects of the said Lords the
States may likewise, without the said letters of Naturalization settle
themselves with all liberty, in all the Towns of the Kingdom, there to drive
their Commerce and Traffic, yet without having power, there to acquire the
right of free Denizons, unless they have obtained letters of Naturalization
from his Majesty in good form: and those of the United provinces shall
generally be treated as his own and natural subjects, and not be counted
strangers. And all what is contained in the present Article shall be observed,
in respect of the Kings subjects, in the Countries under the obedience of the
said Lords the States.

XXIV. The ships laden by one of the Allies, passing before the Coasts of the
other, and staying in the roads or ports by storm or otherwise, shall not be
constrained there to unload, or to sell their commodities, or a parcel thereof;
nor obliged to pay any customs, unless they there discharge any of their
commodities voluntarily and of their own accord.

XXV. The Masters of Ships, their Pilots, Officers, Soldiers, Mariners, and
other Seamen, the ships themselves or the Commodities and Wares, they may be
laden with, shall not be seized nor arrested by virtue of any general or
particular Order of whomsoever, or for what cause or occasion soever, nor even
under the pretense of the Conservation and Defense of the State: and generally
nothing shall be taken from the subjects of either side, but by the consent of
those, to whom it shall belong, and by paying ready money for the things, that
shall be desired of them: wherein notwithstanding it is not understood to
comprehend the seisures and arrests, made by order and authority of Justice,
and by the ordinary ways and course thereof, and for legal debts, contracts
and other legitime causes, for the sake whereof it shall be proceeded according
to law and the forms of Justice.

XXVI. All the subjects and Inhabitants of France shall with all safety and
liberty exercise their navigation and traffic in all the Kingdoms, Countries
and States, that are and shall be in peace, amity or neutrality with France,
without that they shall be troubled or disquieted in this liberty by the Ships,
Galleyes, Frigots, Boats or other Sea-vessels, belonging to the said Lords the
States or to any of their subjects, upon occassion of the hostilities, which
hereafter might fall out between the said Lords the States General and the said
Kingdoms, Countries and States, or any of them, that are or shall be in peace,
amity, or neutrality with France.

XXVII This Transport and this Traffic is to be extended to all sorts of
Commodities, except those of Contrebande.

XXVIII. By this kind of Commodities of Contrebande is only understood to be
comprehended all kinds of Firing Arms and other assortments thereof, as Canons,
Carriages, Muskets, Mortars, Petards, Bombes, Granado's, Saucidges, Forks,
Bandiliers, Powder, Match, Saltpetre, Balls, Piques, Swords, Morions, Casques,
Curasses, Hallebards, Javelins, Horses, Horse-saddles, Pistols, Pistol-cases,
Belts, and other assortments serving for the use of War.

XXIX. There shall not be comprehended in this kind of Commodities of
Contrebande, Corn, or other Grains, all manner of Pulse, Oils, Lents, Salt,
nor generally all what belongs to the food and sustentation of a Town; but they
shall remain free as all Wares and Commodities, not comprehended in the
precedent Article, and the Transportation of them shall be permitted, even to
the places, that are Enemies to the said Lords the States, except to the Towns
and places that are besieged, blocked up or surrounded.

XXX. For the execution of what is abovesaid, it has been agreed, that it
shall be done in manner following: that the ships and boats with the Wares of
the subjects of his Majesty, being entered into some Havens of the said Lords
the States, and willing to pass to those of the said Enemies, shall be obliged
only to show to the Officers of the Haven of the said Lords the States, whence
they shall depart, their Pastports, containing the specification of the charge
of their ships, attested and marked with the ordinary sign and seal, and
acknowledged by the Officers of the Admiralty of the place, whence they go
first, with a declaration of the place, whether they are bound; all in the
ordinary and accustomed form; after which exhibition of their Passports in the
form aforesaid, they shall not be molested, searched, detained nor retarded in
their voyages, under what pretense soever.

XXXI The same shall be observed in respect of the French ships and boats, that
shall go into any roads of the lands under the obedience of the said Lords the
States, without being willing to enter into the Havens, or in case they enter
there, without being willing to disembarque or to break their charges; which
shall not be obliged to give account of their Carga, but in case there be a
suspicion, that they carry to the Enemies of the said Lords the States,
Commodities of Contrebande, ashath been said above.

XXXII. And in case of apparent suspicion, the said subjects of his Majesty
shall be obliged to show in the Ports their passeports, in the form above
specified.

XXXIII. That if they were entered into the roads, or were met at sea by some
ships of the said Lords the States, or by private men of War, their subjects;
the said ships of the united Provinces, to avoid all disorder, are not to
approach nearer to the French, then at the distance of a Canon shot, and they
are to send their little boat or Chalupe aboard of the French ships or boats,
and to cause only two or three men to enter, to whom the pass-ports and
sea-letters are to be shown by the Master or Patron of the French Vessel in the
manner before specified, according to the formul of the said sea-letters, which
shall be inserted at the end of this Treaty: by which pass-ports and
sea-letters it may appear, not only what is his lading, but also the place of
his abode and residence, and the name as well of the Master and patron, as the
ship it self; to the end that by these two means it may be known, whether they
carry commodities of Contrebande, and it may sufficiently appear, what is as
well the quality of the said ship, as that of the Master and patron: to which
pass-ports and sea-letters entire faith and credit is to be given; and to know
the better their validity, and that they may not in any way be falsified and
conterfeited, there are to be given certain marks and contre-seals of his
Majesty and the said Lords the States General.

XXXIV. And in case the said French Vessels and boats, bound for the Havens of
the Enemies of the said Lords the States, there be found by the forementioned
means some wares and commodities of those, that are above declared to be of
Contrebande, and prohibited, they are to be unloaden, denounced, and
confiscated before the Judges of the Admiralty of the United provinces, or
other competent Judges, yet without seizing or confiscating in any manner the
ship and boat, or other goods, wares and commodities, that are free and
permitted, found in the same Vessel.

XXXV. It has further been accorded and agreed upon that whatsoever shall be
found laden by the subjects of his Majesty in a ship of the Enemies of the said
Lords the States, although they be not wares of Contrebande, shall be
confiscated with all that shall be found in the said ships without exception or
reserve; but on the other side also, all shall be free, what shall be, and be
found in the ships appartaining to the subjects of the most Christian King,
though the loading or part thereof belong to the enemies of the said Lords the
States, except the wares of Contrebande, in reference to which, it is to be
regulated according to what has been ordered in the precedent articles.

XXXVI. All the Subjects and Inhabitants of the said United Provinces shall
reciprocally enjoy the same rights, liberties and exemptions in their Traffic
and Commerce, in the Ports, Roads, Seas and States of his said Majesty, what
has just now been said, shall be enjoyed by the Subjects of His Majesty in
those of the said Lords the States, and in the open Sea: it being to be
understood, that the equality shall be every way reciprocal on either side; and
even in case, that hereafter the said Lords the States should be in Peace,
Amity and Neutrality with any Kings, Princes and States, that should become
Enemies to His Majesty; each of the two parties being reciprocally to use the
same conditions and restrictions, expressed in the Articles of the present
Treaty, that regard Traffic and Commerce.

XXXVII. And the more to assure the Subjects of the said Lords the States, that
no violence shall be done to them by the said Vessels of War, prohibition shall
be made to all Captains of the Vessels of the King, and to other Subjects of
his Majesty, not to molest nor to annoy them in any thing whatsoever, under
pain of being punished and engaged in their persons and goods for the damages
and interests, suffered and to be suffered, to the last restitution and
reparation.

XXXVIII. And for this cause, shall hereafter all Captains and Armed Men be
obliged, every one of them, before their depart, to give good and solvable
caution, before competent Judges, of the sum of fifteen thousand livers
Tournois, to answer every one of them in solidum of the ill Deportments, which
they may commit in their courses, and for the breaches made by their Captains
and Officers, of the present Treaty, and of the Ordinances and Edicts of His
Majesty, that are to be published by virtue and conformably to the disposition
of the same, under pain of a forfeiture and nullity of the said Commissions and
Leaves: which shall likewise be practiced by the Subjects of the Lords the
States General.

XXXIX. If it should fall out, that any of the said French Captains should take
a Vessel laden with the said Commodities of Countreband, as is said, the said
Captains shall not cause to be opened or broken, the Trunks, Mails, Balls,
Budgets, Tonns, or Chests, or to be transported, sold or changed, or otherwise
alienated; but that first, they shall be set on shore in the presence of the
Judges of the Admiralty, and an Inventary be made by them of the said
Commodities, found in the said Vessels, unless that the Goods of Countrebande
making but a part of the Carga, the Master or Patron of the ship should think
good and agree to deliver the said Countreband-goods to the said Captain, and
to pursue his Voyage; in which case the said Master or Patron shall in no wise
be hindered from persuing his course and the design of his Voyage.

XL. His Majesty desiring, that the Subjects of the said Lords the States
General may be treated, in all the Countries under his obedience, as favorably
as his own Subjects, shall give all the Orders necessary to make all Judgments
and Decrees, that are to be given upon the prises, that shall have been taken
at Sea, to be rendered with all Justice and Equity, by persons un-suspected and
dis-interest in the matter in question; and His Majesty is to give precise and
effectual orders, that all the Decrees, Judgments and Orders of Justice already
given or to be given, may speedily and duly be executed according to their
forms.

XLI. And when the Ambassadors of the said Lords the States General, or any
other of their public Ministers, that shall be at the Court of His Majesty,
shall make complaints of the said Judgments, that shall have been given, His
Majesty shall cause a review to be made of the said Judgments in his Counsel,
to examine, whether the orders and precautions, contained in the present
Treaty, shall have been followed and observed, and to provide for it according
to reason: which is to be done within the space of three months at most; and
yet notwithstanding, neither before the first Judgment, nor after that of the
revision, shall the Goods and Commodities, that shall be reclaimed, be sold or
unladen, unless it be by the consent of the interessed parties to avoid the
spoiling of the said commodities.

XLII. When a process shall be made in the first and second instance, between
those, that shall have taken prises at Sea, and those that are interessed
therein, and that the said interessed persons shall come to obtain a Judgment
or decree favorable, the said Judgment or Decree is to have its execution
under Caution, notwithstanding the Appeal of him that shall have taken the
prise, but not on the contrary. And what is said in the present and precedent
Articles to cause good and speedy Justice to be rendered to the Subjects of the
United Provinces concerning the prises taken at Sea by the Subjects of His
Majesty, is to be understood and practiced by the Lords the States General in
respect of the prises made by their Subjects upon those of His Majesty.

XLIII. His Majesty and the said Lords the States General shall have power at
all times to cause to be built or fraighted, within the Countries of one and
the other, such number of Ships, whether for War or Trade, as they shall think
good; as also to buy such quantity of Ammunition of War, as they shall need;
and they are to employ their authority, that the said bargains of Ships and
buyings of Ammunition be made bona fide and at a reasonable rate: But neither
His Majesty nor the said Lords the States General are to give the same
permission to the Enemies of one another, in case the said Enemies be attacking
or invading.

XLIV. It happening that the ships of war, or of Merchants, be east away by
storm or other accident upon the coasts of either of the Allies, the said
ships, tacklings, goods and wares, and what shall be saved, or come of it, if
the said things, being perishable, have been sold, all of it being reclaimed by
the Proprietors, or others, charged and empowered by them, within a year and a
day, shall be restored without form of process, paying only the reasonable
charges, and what shall be ordered between the said Allies for the duties of
saving; And in case of contervention to the present Article, His Majesty and
the said Lords the States General promise, effectually to employ their
authority to cause with all severity to be chastised those of their subjects,
that shall be found guilty of the inhumanities, that have been sometimes
committed, to their great regret, in the like rancontres.

XLV. His Majesty and the said Lords the States General shall not receive nor
suffer their subjects to receive, within any of the Countries under their
obedience, any Pirates or such as go with one or more false commissions,
whosoever they may be, but they shall cause them to be pursued, and punished,
or driven out of their ports: and the ships robbed, as the goods taken by the
said Pirates and false-commissionated Men, that shall be in being, are to be
presently and without form of process freely restored to the proprietors that
shall reclaim them.

XLVI. The Inhabitants and subjects of one and the other part, shall have
power, every where within the lands under the obedience of the said King and of
the said Lords the States, to cause themselves to be served by such Advocates,
Procters, Notaries, and Sollicitors, as shall seem good to them: unto which
also they shall be commisionated by the ordinary Judges, when need shall be,
and when the said Judges shall be demanded it. And it shall be permitted to the
said subjects and inhabitants on either side, to keep in the places where they
shall make their aboade, books of their traffic and correspondence, in that
language which they shall think good, without being, for this cause, disquieted
or searched.

XLVII. The said Lord King, as also the said Lords the States General, shall
have power to establish, for the convenience of their subjects, trafficking in
the Kingdoms and States of one another, Consuls of the Nation of their said
subjects, which shall enjoy the rights, liberties and franchises, that
appartain to them, for the exercise of their employment: and the establishment
thereof shall be made in such places, where by common consent it shall be
judged necessary.

XLVIII. His Majesty and the said Lords the States General shall not permit,
that any Vessel of War, nor any other, set out by the commission and for the
service of any Prince, Republic or Town whatsoever, come to make any prise
within the ports, havens, or any rivers belonging to them, upon the subject of
either. And in case this happen, his Majesty and the said Lords the States
General, shall employ their authority and their forces to cause restitution or
reparation to be made according to reason.

XLIX. One of the Allies shall not assist the attacking Enemies of the other,
present or future, neither by sea nor by land, neither with men, nor money,
victuals, ammunition, ships, or other things, that might strengthen them,
conserving notwithstanding the free course of trade and navigation between the
subjects of one Allie with the Enemy of the other, conformably to the precedent
Articles.

L. And to the end, that as well his said Majesty, as the said Lords the States
General, may be wholly assured of the effect, and real and vigorous Execution
of the present Confederation, they declare, that they have no treaty nor
agreement contrary to this Confederation, that may hinder them in any wise from
a sincere executing the present treaty in all its points and Articles.

LI. The present treaty of Alliance as well, as of Commerce, Navigation and sea
affairs, shall last twenty and five years, beginning from the day of the
signature: yet so to be understood, that if peradventure an entry were made
into an actual performance of the warranty, by rupture or assistance in favor
of one's Ally, by virtue of this Treaty, before the expiration of the said
twenty and five years; the treaty shall continue and subsist in its force and
vigor in all its points, until an end be made of the war in the manner above
specified.

LII. The Ratifications of this Treaty are to be given in good form, and
exchanged by one and the other part, within the space of three months, to
reckon from the day of the Signature.

CAesar Duke of Vandosme, Mercaeur, Beaufort, Pentbieure and Estampes, Prince
of Anet and Martigues, Peer and Great Master, Chief and Surintendant General of
the Navigation and Traffic of France and the Countries reconquered:
To all those, that shall see the present Letters, Greeting:
We give notice, that We have given leave and permission to............ Master
and Conductor of the Ship, called.......... of the Town of........... of the
burden of........ tonnes or thereabout, being at present in the port and
Haven..........., to go to......... laden with............ who, after that
visitation shall have been made of his ship, before his departure shall take
oath before the Officers, that exercise the Jurisdiction of Maritime causes,
how that the said vessel belongs to one or more subjects of his Majesty,
whereof the Formul shall be set down here beneath; as also, that he will keep,
and cause to be kept, by those of his Equipage, the Orders and Rules of
Sea-affairs, and cause record to be made, signed and certified, containing the
names and Sirnames, the birth and aboade of the men of his Equipage, and of all
those, that shall embarque themselves, which he shall not take on board without
the knowledge and permission of the Officers of Marine affairs: and that in
every port and haven, where he shall enter with his ship, he will show to the
Officers and Judges of the Sea affairs the present leave, and give them a
faithful report of what shall have been done and passed during his Voyage: and
that he will carry the Flaggs, Arms and Colors of the King, and Ours, during
his Voyage. In witness whereof we have set down our Sign and Seal to these
present, and cause them to be countersigned by the Secretary of Marine
affairs.......... Act......... the day...... One thousand six hundred......

It was signed Caesar de Vandosme; and lower, by My Lord; signed Matarel, and
sealed with the seal of the Arms of the said Lord Admiral.
A Formul of the Act concerning the Oath.
MORICE........ of the Admiralty of...... we certify that....... Master of the
ship named in the pasport above mentioned, has taken the oath therein
expressed. Act....... the......... day of......

A Formul of the Letters, that are to be given, in the Sea Towns and Ports of
the United Provinces, to the Ships and Boats, that will go out to Sea,
following the abovementioned Article.
TO the Most Serene, Most Illustrious, Illustrious, Most Potent, Most Noble,
Noble, Honorable and Prudent Lords, Emperors, Kings, Republics, Princes,
Dukes, Counts, Barons, Lords, Consuls and Sherieffs, Counselors, Judges,
Officers, Justiciaries and Regents of all good Towns and Places, as well
Ecclesiastics as Seculars, who shall see or read these Patents;
We the Consuls and Regents of the Town......... give notice that...........
Master of the Ship........... appearing before us, has declared by a solemn
Oath, that the ship named......... big of about............... Tonnes, of which
he is at the present Master, belongs to the Inhabitants of the United
Provinces, as God should help him, and as we should gladly see the said Master
of the ship assisted in his just affairs, so we beseech you all in General and
in particular, where the said Master with his ship and commodities shall
arrive, that you would please to receive him beningly, and to treat him as it
ought to be, suffering him, upon the usual rights of customs and expenses,
in, through, and near your Ports, Rivers and Domaines, letting him sail, pass,
frequent and traffic there, and where he shall find it for his purpose; the
which we shall willingly acknowledge. In witness whereof we have here set to it
the seal of our Town.

LS

The Copy of the Letters of Plenipotence of the Most Christian King for the
Lords Commissioners of his Majesty for this Treaty.
LOuys, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre,
to all, that shall see these present, Greeting.
The affection and respects, which our Dear and Great Friends, Allies and
Confederates, the Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the low
Countries, testify unto us upon all occasions, having made them resolve to
depute to us the Lords, Jean Baron of Gent, Lord of Osterwede, Lieutenant of
the Fiefs, and Primate of the Country of Fauquement, Conrard de Buningen,
Counselor of the City of Amsterdam, Justus de Huybert, Counselor and
Pensionary of the Town of Ziricksee, all Deputies in their Assembly from the
Provinces of Gueldres, Holland and Zeland, their Ambassadors Extraordinary, for
jointly with the Lord William Borreel Knight, Baron of Vrenhove, Vrendie, Lord
of Steeland, Duinbeke, Peer-boom, etc. their Ambassador Ordinary, upon the
occasion of the Conclusion of the peace between Us, and our Dear and Most
beloved Brother and Uncle the King of Spain, and of our Marriage, to give us,
by their Congratulations and Civilities, marks of the sense they have what
concerns Us; they have also given them Order, to make Overtures to us of
Uniting themselves with us anew, by Treaties of Amity and Confederation and
Commerce, suitable to the Constitution of the Time and of affairs, that may
assure the lastingness of the peace, by a good and firm Union between our
States and Theirs, and establish a mutual Correspondence between our Subjects,
to make them taste the fruits thereof with advantage. Whereof the said
Ambassadors having made Declaration, we are very willing to hearken thereunto,
and desirous to bring to it, what can be expected from us in this Occurrence,
we have thought fit, for the negotiating of these Treaties to commit it to
Persons recommendable for their Dignities, their sufficiencies and their own
merits, and for this end, we have believed, we could not make a better and more
worthy choice, then of the persons of our Dearly-beloved and Trusty, the Lord
Seguier Count of Gien, Knight, Chancellor of France; of our Dear and
well-beloved Cousin the Marshal Duke of Villeroy, and of our Beloved and Trusty
Counselors in our Counsels the Lords Counts of Brienne and Tellier, Ministers
and Secretaries of State; and of the Lord Marquess of Lyonne, Minister also of
State, all Commanders of our Orders, and of the Lord Count of Brienne the son,
Secretary also of State and of our Commands; and of the Lord Colbert Counselor
in all our Counsels and Intendant of our Treasury, of whom the experience and
dexterity in the management of the most important affairs, and the fidelity and
affection to our service, are equally known to Us. To them, for these causes
and others moving us thereunto, by the advice of our Counsel, where were the
Queen our Most Honored Lady and Mother, our Dear and Most beloved only Brother
the Duke of Orleans, and other Princes of our Blood, Great and considerable
Personages of our Counsel; and by our certain knowledge, full power and Royal
authority, have given, and by these present, signed with our hand, do give full
power, Order and Commission to hear, confer, negotiate, and treat in our Name
with the said Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary and Ordinary of the said Lords
the States General, instructed with powers sufficient for the same, of the
conditions of a Treaty of Alliance and Confederation, Commerce, Navigation, and
Marine affairs; such as they shall judge to be most beneficial and suitable to
the common good of our States and Affairs, to agree about them, to resolve,
decree and conclude them, and to sign the Articles of them; promising upon the
faith and word of a King, to hold for agreeable, firm and stable all, what by
the said Lords Seguier Knight, Chancellor of France, and by our said Cousin the
Duke of Villeroy, and by the said Lords the Counts of Brienne, Tellier, Lyonne,
Brienne the Son, and Colbert, all together, or by the greatest part, in case of
absence, and sickness or lawful impediment, of any of them, shall have been
agreed upon and signed, and to ratify it in the best form, that may be, and
to deliver of it the Letters of Ratification, in the terms and the manner, that
shall have been prescribed and regulated by the said Treaty. For, such is our
pleasure: In witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be annexed to these
present:

Given at Paris the tenth day of April, in the year of Grace, One thousand six
hundred and sixty one, and of our Reign the eighteenth. Signed, Louys,and lower
upon the turning in of the paper, by the King, Philippeaux,
and sealed upon the double fringe of the great Seal of yellow wax.
The Copy of the Letters of Plenipotence of the Lords the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, for their Ambassadors extraordinary for
this Treaty.
THE STATES GENERAL of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
to all that shall see these present, Greeting.
Having given proof of the affection, we have for the tranquillity of
Christendom, in the peace, that has been lately concluded in the North, we
think we ought to make it firm, by treating with the Most-Christian King a
straight, good, sincere, lasting and mutual Amity, Union and Alliance, for the
reciprocal defense and conservation of the States and Subjects of one another,
of their Liberties, and Franchises, particularly in the matter of Sea-affairs,
Navigation and Traffic, and generally of all their common Interests against
all those, that would trouble or hinder them in it, by sea or Land. To which
being willing to bring all what can be expected from Us, We have resolved to
send into France an Extraordinary Ambassy, composed of persons of quality, to
treat in our name with the said King, or with the Commissioners, which his
Majesty shall please to name for this purpose. And knowing, that for this end
We can make no better choice, then of the Lords Jean Baron of Gent Lieutenant
of the Fiefs, and Primate of the Country of Fauquemont, Conrard de Beuningen
Counselor of the City of Amsterdam, and Justus de Huybert Counselor and
Pensionary of the Town of Ziricksee, all Deputies in our Assembly from the
Provinces of Gueldres, Holland and Zeeland, as well for the great knowledge,
they have of public affairs, as of that, which we have of their sufficiency,
prudence and fidelity, We, for these reasons and others moving us thereto, have
given and do give by these presents, full power, authority, commission and
special command, to the said Lord of Gent, Beuningen, and Huybert, and to every
one of them in particular, in case by reason of sickness or other impediment
they could not all be present at the Treaty, for, from Us and in our Name, in
the Quality of Ambassadors Extraordinary, Jointly with the Lord William
Borreel, Lord of Duinbeke, etc. our Ambassador in Ordinary at the Court of
France, to make and conclude the said Treaty of defensive Alliance, Marine
affairs, Navigation and Commerce with the said Most Christian Majesty,
separately, or jointly with the King of Great Britain, and for that effect to
confer with his Majesty, or with the Commissioners, which he shall please to
name; as also to agree, promise, resolve, conclude and decree together all what
shall be thought fit and necessary for the common good of France and this
Republic, yea and to compose and sign a Treaty of it, to make and pass such
Instruments, Acts and promises in good and due form; and generally to do all
what we should do, if we were there present, even when a more special command
should be necessary: promising sincerely and bona fide, to hold for good and to
keep firm and stable all what the said Lords Ambassadors shall promise, agree
upon, Act, resolve and sign in the said Treaty, to observe, accomplish and
execute it inviolably, and never, whether directly or indirectly, in any wise
whatsoever, to go against it; but to cause our Letters and Ratifications of it
to be expedited in the most Authentic form that can be, and when it shall be
necessary.

Given at the Hague in our Assembly under our great Seal, of our Secretary of
State, the fifth of October, in the year of our Lord, one Thousand six hundred
and sixty. Signed P. Swanenburg, and lower upon the turning in of the Paper, by
Order of the said Lords the States General Mr. Ruysch,
and sealed upon the double fringe of the great seal of yellow Wax. In Faith
whereof, We, the Commissioners and Ambassadors above said, in virtue of our
respective powers, have in the said names signed these presents with our
ordinary seals, and have caused the Seals of our Arms to be put to it. At
Paris the 27 of April 1661. L S Sequier. L S Villeroy. L S De Lomenie. L S
Tellier. L S De Lionne. L S De Lomenie. L S Colbert. L S J. van Gent. L S C.
van Beuningen L S J. van Huybert. L S W. Borreel.


Articles agreed upon, between the most Christian King of France and Navarre,
and the Lords the States General of the United Provinces, serving for
explication of the Fifth Article, as also of the third and fourth of the Treaty
of Alliance of his Majesty with the said Lords the States General, Concluded
and Decreed this Day.
I.THe case of the above said fifth Article happening, the said Lord King and his
Successors, shall be obliged to assist the said Lords the States General of the
United Provinces, all and every time they shall be attackt or troubled, as it
is more largely expressed in the said Treaty, with a succors of twelve
thousand foot, well armed, under such Regiments, Companies, Colonels and other
Officers, as his said Majesty shall think fit, and judge most proper for such
an assistance, and he is to deliver and entertain the said succors at his own
charge, for the service of the said Lords the States General, all the time that
he shall not be obliged to enter into rupture, according to the Treaty and the
said Article of the same. Also the Lords the S^^^^s General shall be obliged
reciprocally to assist the said Lord King every time he shall be attackt or
troubled in manner aforesaid, with a succors of six thousand foot, well armed,
under such Regiments, Companies, Colonels and other Officers, as the said
Lords the States General shall think fit, and judge most proper for such an
assistance, and they are to deliver and entertain them at their own charge, for
the service of said Lord King, all the time that they shall not be obliged to
enter into rupture, according to the Treaty and the said Article of the same.

II. He that shall openly be attackt in manner abovesaid, shall have the
liberty to take the succors either wholly in Soldiers, or wholly in Money, or
a part of it in Soldiers, and a part in Ships, Arms, Ammunitions of War,
Money, or other things proper for the use of War; so that a thousand soldiers
shall be rated at ten thousand livers a month, according to the course of the
bank of Amsterdam, counting twelve months in a year: and the payment thereof
shall be made in the beginning of every month by equal portions; in this
manner, that in case the payment be made partly or wholly in Money, the money
is to be delivered at Paris or Amsterdam respectively: but in case the
performance be made partly or wholly in Ammunitions of War, ships or other
things proper for the use of war, the assisted shall be obliged to go himself
and demand and receive the said Ammunitions of war, or ships in the Country of
him, that is to assist or to furnish the succors.

III. When the succors shall be delivered in Souldies, they are altogether to
be submitted to the command and order of him to whom they shall be sent, to
serve himself of them and to transport them to the places, he shall think good,
by water and land, into the Field, to seiges, to the guarding of places, and
wherever either necessity or advantage shall require it. With this reserve
notwithstanding, that these Companies shall not be altogether separated from
one another, but that they shall remain together under their Ensigns; at the
least to the number of two or three hundred soldiers of every Regiment.

IV. After that the formed succors of soldiers shall be sent by the
assistant, and received by the assisted, it shall be in the power of the
assisted to supply the vacant offices, unto that of Ensigns inclusively,
beginning from the chief; provided that the persons, upon whom the vacant
offices shall be conferred, be chosen out of the Troops of the succors.

V. When the necessity of affairs shall make it to be judged and known that the
promised and accorded succors ought to be augmented, the said Lord King and
the Lords the States General shall labor to agree together concerning it.

VI. Though in the Treaty of the defensive Alliance, accorded and concluded
this day, between the Commissioners of the most Christian King, and the
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Ordinary of the States General of the United
Provinces, it be agreed upon, that the Warranty, stipulated in the third and
fourth Article, shall extend it self to the whole State of the said United
Provinces, and to all the places, where they have their Garrison, his Majesty
notwithstanding, in confideration of the Alliance, which he has with the
Lords, the Elector of Collen, and the Duke of Newbury, understands not to be
obliged to the said Warranty, in case that the said Elector or Duke, each a
part and separately come to attack first the Town of Rhynburg, and the other
the Town of Ravestein, with his own Forces only: but, in case he there make use
of the aid or assistance of any other Potentat, Prince, or State, whether in
Men, Money, or other manner whatsoever, directly or indirectly, or in case they
act both jointly, that in that case of assistance or Conjunction the aforesaid
Warranty shall be obligatory in respect of the said Princes, as it is against
all others, without that the present exception shall be understood to extend it
self to any case not expressed therein, to the prejudice of what is agreed upon
in the said Treaty.

VII. Forasmuch as the Treaty of Peace made between the King of Portugal and
the Lords the States General of the United Provinces is not yet ratified, and
the Warranty is not to be extended but to such Treaties, as are passed in good
and due form, it has been agreed upon, that His Majesty shall not be obliged
to any Warranty toward the said King of Portugal, but after the said Treaty
made, or other, that may be made to finish the War, which they are at the
present engaged in, be ratified as the other Treaties, according as it is
agreed.

Which Articles shall have the same force and vigor, as if they were in serted
in the body of the said General Treaty passed this day. Given at Paris the 27.
of April 1662. Signed. L S Seguier. L S Villeroy. L S de Lomenie. L S Tellier.
L S de Lyonne. L S de Lomenie. L S Colbert. L S J. van Gent. L S C. van
Buningen. L S J. van Huybert. L S W. Borreel.


An Article a part, touching the Imposition of fifty sols per Tonn upon the
Strangers-Ships going out of the Ports of France.
IT has been stipulated on the part of the most Christian King, and consented
unto, by the Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the low
Countries, that the Equality, that is to be precisely observed in regard of the
Subjects of either Ally with the Natives, in matter of Customs, Charges,
Impositions, according to the 20th. Article of the Treaty of Alliance, this day
concluded, shall not derogate from the Imposition of fifty Sols per Tonn,
established in France upon Stranges-Ships; and that the Subjects of the Lords
the States of the United Provinces shall be obliged to pay the same, as all
other Strangers, unless his Majesty, upon the Remonstrances, which hereafter
may be made unto Him from the said Lords the States, in examining them with
that great affection, wherewith His Majesty is pleased to honor them, dispose
otherwise thereof: But from this time forth necessary Orders are to be by his
Majesty issued, to this end that the said Imposition of fifty Sols shall not be
exacted from the Ships of the Subjects of the said United Provinces but once
for every voyage, in going out of the Ports of His Kingdom, and not in entering
into it; and that the said Ships laden with Salt, shall not pay but the half of
the said fifty Sols, on condition, that the said Lords the States, thinking it
fit to put the like imposition upon the Ships of Strangers in their Country
(which shall remain free unto them) are not to exceed, ^^ regard of the
Subjects of His said Majesty, the Tax of what their Subjects pay in France: the
said 20th* Article remaining as to all other Customs, Charges, and Impositions
present or to come, in its entire force and vigor, without its being to be
limited or exceeded by any other exception or restriction, but what is here
above expressed.

Which Article apart, is to have the same force and vigor, as if it were
inserted in the Body of the said Treaty General passed this Day. Given at Paris
the 27. of April. 1662. Signed. Sequier. Villeroy. De Lomeny. Tellier. De
Lyonne. De Lomeny. Colbert. J. van Gent. C. van Beuningen. J. van Huybert. W.
Borreel.


FINIS.

