A Philosophical TREATISE OF THE ORIGINAL AND PRODUCTION OF THINGS*

Writ in AMERICA in a Time of Solitudes.

By R. FRANCK.

LONDON, Printed by John Gain, and are to be sold by S. Tidm^rsh at the King's
Head in Cornhill: and S. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1687.

WHereas several Literal Errors have passed the Pr^ss: The Reader is d^sire^
either to Correct, or put a favorable Censure upon them.

TO THE SEDULOUS SONS OF Science.
Gentlemen,
THIS Epistle directs you a Prospect of the Original, and Production of things;
where, if in any thing I dev^at from the truth of Philosophy, Natures Progeny,
and Scriptural A^thority; I stand at the bar of every man's censure: but if
otherwise, as I Am conscious I have offered no violence; let me hope and expect
a generous Approbation. h'^^ true, the sublimest speculations I can raise, are
but faint, uncultivated, and unpr^fitable endeavors, when presenting them to
the shrines of clearer judgments. For as ridling of water through a serce or
sieve, makes no decisional separation of the recrements, and impurities, nor
the holding up a taper at the Sun's meridian, add any luster to his luminous
brightness; such peradventure some will interpret these ^y Suggestions upon
th^s admirable subject, when so slenderly to approach, and attempt a survey
upon such sublime, and divine Discoveries: and because not raising my scenes
high enough; they will doom me to encounter their uncharitable Opinions, when
modestly, and piously, I come to present them with my Notion^, and Speculations
of this imbellished Creation.

H^aven is Gods Throne, and the Earth h^s Footstool; from whence I conclude,
that the property and quality of every individual devolves in him that gave it
a being: otherwise, how could the benignity and bounty of the Donor so
splendidly shine in the Fabric of the Creature? and because to contribute a
ray of his Essence-Royal, Adam was dignified Viceroy of the Creation. Let no
man therefore oppose himself to the Divinest by sacriligious Oblat^ons, and
impious adorations; le^t he profane the Altar, and make void the Offering, when
to send up his Orisons to an unknown God.

Hermes in his Book of the Divine Pimander, has pointed out unto us a prospect
of Heaven. So Rabbi Moses in the deserts of Arabia, by divine inspiration, had
a vision of the Creation. Nor was Job ignorant of Seraphick intelligence, when
to range himself sublimly above the most sedulous Mathematicians; who with an
angelick style left unto us such Lectures, whereby to read in the frontispiece
of H^aven. The Jews also, so did the Talmudists by M^saical Ord^nation, find
the tracts to Jerusalem; whiles divine Paul, and the Primitive Christians by
spiritual Revelation, became illuminated with the Go^pel. But Nature all this
while by H^avens permission went on in Operation, and the Sophi as amazed stood
gazing upon her, till the Divinest in his Son discovered himself, which struck
amazement, and astonishment amongst them; because when to shine on them the
Majesty of himself in the glorious mystery of the blessed Incarnation; the
sublime Divinity assuming Humanity: which in parallel lines directs us to
inspect this visible World so miraculously dressed up, the beautiful outside of a
more glorious inside.

This invited me to contemplate, and seriously consider, how that every
creature, and created being by a fermental law radicated in Nature, makes
progress to the act of Germination, and Vegetation. Nor can the law of
necessity (I speak of the Creation) impose any other Doctrine upon the Classes
of Individuals, till the final Exit, and the periods of Time. This great World
it is true represents unto us a large and copious volumn of Intelligences,
sprung up in the beginning from the divine Fiat. And because the Divinest
divin^ly (...) with such admirable varieties as the Orbs, and Elements; those
beauteous, shining, luminous bodies; for such are the Stars stuck round to
adorn it: it denotes unto us every C^eature God has made, as Animals, and
^nan^mates to replenish the Earth; was made to explain the excellency of
himself, that so divinely dr^st up this stupendous Creation.

Thus Moses our Prophetic Oracle, in the first Chapter of Gene^^^, makes
obvious unto us the Creation in general; when in this Philosophical Treatise,
if sedulously examined, you will find it parce^^'d out into many Particulars; yet
not so as to profane, or diminish Holy Writ, whereby to expose it to sale, or
sacrilege; but rather to elucidate, and illustrate to every Man the more
glorious mysteries, and Seraphick Discoveries of the sacred Scriptures; pointed
out unto us by the Patriarchs, and the Prophets; and impressed on us by a Divine
impression, to legitimize us heirs of the glorious Eternity, by the mys^^cal
Union betwixt Christ and his Church; and the admirable Effects of his
invincible Love, when to lay down his Life for an Unregenerate Generation.

To contemplate therefore this imbellished Creation, is to study the tracts and
the high way to heaven: and led on by such eminent and convincing Authority as
Moses, the Patriarchs, the Prophets and Apostles; confirms it beyond dispute
our Christian Duty devoutly to implore, and seriously admire the Creators
bounty and goodness in creating; his infinite and superlative Wisdom in
preserving: but above all his works, his unparalleled love to inspire Life and
Virtue into the humane Race of degenerate Mankind; because when to restore him
to a more Regal ^'state than Adam our Protoplast enjoyed in Paradise. From
whence I conclude all visible Beings that are made obvious, and perceptible to
us, were designed also by the Maker intelligeable; however the envious and
malicious misinterpret, and would every way if possible mascarade the Truth,
thinking thereby to make things less discoverable, than they really and trully
are in themselves.

For were it as some Sciolists fictitiously imagine, what benefit could any man
expect from his Studies, more than the Knowledge of Insects, and Animals; when
omitting the superior Dignity of Celestials. Such with their Admirers only
gaze upon them as the ignorant, and the arrogant too frequently do, that amuze
themselves only with foreign curiosities. Nor do I strain my charity when to
assert such Men think the Ornaments of the Creation an unprofitable Study: who
by their Arguments endeavor an Arrest of judgment, since reputing them dull,
and insipid contemplations; endeavoring thereby to dissuade the more ingenious
simply to consider them as impoverished Effects. But God that made them, and
still maintains them; because willing that Man above all created Beings should
read daily Lectures in their glorious frontispiece, inspired him to contemplate
their internal purity; which indubitably points some of them signa^^y out as
Guides, and Landmarks to light us up to his more sublime, and superlative
Habitation.

To consider things therefore as they are in themselv^s, what matters it if any
Man oppose my Ass^rtions, and call them it may be Imaginary Presumptions; if
when because to dive into the mysteries of the Creation: Surely such Men have
not well considered that what God in his wisdom has made legible to us, that
thing by his clemency was intented intelligible. The superscription of a
Monarch any Man may read, but none except of Council dare examine the contents.
So God assigns it our duty to study the Creation, since discovering things to
us by invisible Mediu^^s; but not that we by a foreign faith pay our Orisons
and our Adorations unto them: No, rather as Christians, we must learn God in
them, and in knowing him admire his Operations.

But our Prophet Moses seems to some ambiguous, when undressing the Hoil of
this admirable Creation, wherefore some spare not with their Proselytes
profanely to decry him, and such others as himself studious in the Creation;
who resolving among them elves nev^r to labor due m^asures of Knowledge
whereby to convince their own Incredulities, makes them incapable, and
altogether unserviceable, when attempting to enform the Understanding of
others. So that such Sciolists as these do but darken the luster of the History
of God in this stupendous Creation, yet propound to themselves to know the
Divine Mysteries of the Holy JESUS in the Miraculous Incarnation, Glorious
Crucifixion, and Divine Ascension: which to mortal astonishment is the Te^esm
of Wisdom, and Miracle of this World, locked up in the Bosom of GOD, and
Eternity.

So that should this Generation level Arguments against me, it will little
avail; for the Standard of Truth will defend it self, and the Authority of
Scripture vindicate my Assertions. If therefore you but privilege me farther
to proceed, I assume to entitle this imbellished Creation the Almighty's Common
place-Book, wherein we may read h^s Divine Operations; And si^ce he himself has
made things visible, as also leg^ble, and ^ntelligible to our capac^ties; his
s^cred Sanctions, and Divines Oracles, ought always to be our daily
Contemplation.

I also consider that Angels as Mess^ngers are m^de Ministering Spirits, to
administer to us the Revelation, and Manifestati^n of the Vision of Truth: that
the Sun, Moon, and Stars are the Or^inanc^s of Heaven; that Elements and
Prin^^pl^s are Marg^nal Notes; and the glorious Prospect of this ^ivie (...):
that the Con^onants and Vowels of this Blessed Creation are the particular
Indiv^duals contained therein. Otherwise how were it p^ssible such a p^rpetual
Harmony should con^inue betwixt the great, and the ^^sser World; were th^re not
a contiguity, and continuity of par^s, whereby to c^ntract a Correspondency
betwixt them. For invisible things when clothed with Matter, become obvious,
and perceptible to every one; consequently visible. Every thing therefore is
most certainly governed by the Divine Wisdom of Him that made it; who made
Nature a so by his Praeordinate Counc^l, and adapted her Substitute to operate
in the Universe. But to Adam only, and his Humane Race were committed the
distinct Classes, and Families of the Creatures; as also the Dignity of a
Universal Monarch.

This none will deny, yet perhaps some will say my Suggestions are invaluable,
and confusedly mixed; so was the Chaos if to consult the B^g^nning. It may also
be alleged that Im no Grammarian, however from my Youth I venerated Learning;
yet the Scriptures I always preferred before Grammar: but I Will struggle no
longer about Grammatical Preference, since so learnedly controverted by Men in
most Ages. Give me leave therefore to conclude my Epistle, and in the
Conclusion assert, and affirm, that without for^^l hypocrisy, or a foreign
Faith; I am, and have been since truly to know Virtue, devoted to subscribe my
Name,

Philanthropus.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
FOrasmuch as Wisdom, and Divine Knowledge (preexisting Time) had its Original
from God the Father of Light, and immaculate Fountain of all pure Beings;
resplendent from the glorious Ray of himself, that holds the Po^ze and Balance
of the Periods of Life, and Death, by a Sovereignty of Right to govern the
World. It becomes us therefore, and the rather as Christians, to solicit this
admirable Corona of Wisdom, since woven in the Web of the Eternity of Life; and
by how much it concerns us to acquire this Secretum Naturae, by so much the
rather ought we to hope, and expect it, that offer up our Orisons with the
pious Adepti that expose their Charity in this modorn Age. Since many such are,
and I doubt not were in former Generations, as in this of ours; tho modestly to
conceal themselves, under a pleasant taciturnity. Whose generous protection of
Hermetick Philosophy has amuz'd, and astonished most part of the World; since
to breath forth in this, as in former Ages, Mysterium Magnum.

Rabbi Moses was a Student in this blessed Science; and so was his Sister, the
fair Mirian: Medea and Experience tutilaged them both. And Moses we read was
morally educated in all the Skill and Knowledge of the Egyptians; thank Hermes
for that, formerly King of Egypt, and entitled by the Magi, Prince of
Philosophers. Who also laid the Rudiments, and Foundation of Science, several
Generations before Moses was born, and yet notwithstanding the Antiquity of
Hermes, Moses was inspired by a divine permission, to talk with God in the Holy
Mount Horeb.

Job also that famous, and most accurate Mathematician; whose Library was the
Firmament, and every Star an Author, whereby he mentally inspected the Orbs;
consequently the Constellations, and Machine of the Creation. And who
personally discoursed his Creator, as did Moses; but confused, and astonished,
as appears by his Writings.

So Paul, that devout, and divine Apostle, taught only of God, and bred up by
Gamaliel; he exceeded in Rhetorical Learning and Knowledge: Who also had a
Glance and a Vision of Heaven, as appears by those elegant, and most excellent
Epistles, Exhortatory to the Romans; when to the Corinthians, most profoundly
Philosophical.

And such were the Lives of the Holy Men of God; which piously to trace, what
is it other than a heavenly Progress. And the Soul that inhabits in this mortal
Tabernacle, any other than the correspondent God himself converseth; which in
Clarity displays such a beauteous Brightness, from the sovereign Beams of the
Son of God, that divinely shining in the inward parts, influenceth the Altar,
and beautifies the Temple.

The Soul therefore, could she but content her self with divine speculation of
Ideas only, what need she travel beyond the Map? But as excellent Patterns
commend their own Mines, Nature because so fair and beautiful in the Type,
could not dispense with sluttishness in the Anagliph: and who, whiles more
strictly she examines the Symetry; Models and Forms it into various Figures;
whose Descent to describe, promulges her Original: but the frailty of matter,
and because hovering about her (and impendent on the Elements) is excluded
Eternity.

Ignorance therefore to delude the Unwary, intitles this Release by the Surname
of Death; which more properly to describe is the Magna Charta of Life; that has
several ways to break up House, but her best, if duly considered, is without a
Disease; and, who when she takes air at this Avenue or Port-hole, is much
without detriment or prejudice to her Tenement. Nor does she only exerc^se her
Royalty at the Eye, as having some blind Jurisdiction in the Pores: For this
were to measure Magical Positions by the Superficial Strictures of common
Philosophy. Whose Assertors, too confident of the Principles of Tradition,
labor not to understand what others speak; but to make others speak what they
themselves understand. For it is in Nature as appears in Religion; some are
still hammering and fashioning of old Elements, but seek not the Eutopia that
lies beyond them.

This Body therefore let us consider it the Temple, and the Soul that is within
it the Sanctum Sanctorum, for the Majesty to dwell in. Which if so, this Earth
must be rarefied, to make a pure Heaven; and Heaven must be purified, before
the Divinest will inhabit within it. Great and Just therefore is the Original
Good, whose Incomprehensible Beauty and Divine Majesty, neither the Heavens,
nor the Earth, nor the Orbs, nor the Ocean, nor the expatiated Abyss, can any
ways contain him: Which certainly to know, is Speculum Sapientiae, scraw'd out
in the fair Frontespiece of the beautiful Creation; as also in that Divine
Manuscript of Holy Writ, where the Patriarchs and the Prophets are Marginal
Notes; and the Holy Men of God, with our pious Ancestors, the lively Records
and divine Remembrancers of the Sacred Oracles of the Majesty of Truth. Thus
far the Ark of the Covenant traveled, and thus far the Talmudists transported
themselves; but some of the Cabalists went some degrees farther, when they met
with Christ and his Twelve Apostles; yet could they not see the great Messiah.

But Gabriel the Angel salutes the Blessed Virgin with Hail Mary, full of
Grace; blessed art thou among the Daughters of Women: For the Holy of Holies
shall overshadow thee with Beauty, and thou shall conceive, and bear a Child,
and he shall be called the Son of God. John Baptist also he confirms the
Miracle; who, when Jesus with him coming forth of the Water, the Heavens
themselves most gloriously opened, and the Holy Ghost divinely descending (
like a Dove) rested the Glory of the Majesty upon him; and then was there a
Voice heard from the Divinest, This is my Son, my beloved Son; let the Nations
hear him. Now to the Jews this became a stumbling block, as to some of the
Rabbis a Rock of offense: but to the Gentiles that sat in the Suburbs of
Darkness, and, the Scriptures tell us, in the Shadow of Death, the most
glorious Mystery of the Revelation of God, and the everlasting Gospel was
preached unto them.

So that from these two eminent and most sacred Primordials, the one of the
Law, and the other of the Gospel, Religion, or something like it, took its
native Original: yet so strangely masqueraded, disfigured, and disguised, that
were not a Man well assured what it was, it would be found difficult to resolve
what to call it. And thus the Sun, Heavens major Luminary, when because at once
falling upon several Angles, represents the Light in various forms: So
Christianity, though a familiar Appellation, yet admits it of such Variety in
its progress, and peregrination, because when to mingle it self with all sorts
of Professions, that Professors themselves have been puzzled how to rate it;
whiles the noble Berean searches the Scriptures, and as the Scriptures
manifestly testify of Christ, so Christ himself says, they testify of him.
The great Oracle therefore, and the Miracle of Faith, is Christ himself; and
Christ is God: From whence the Mystery of our Eternal Salvation, the blessed
Regeneration, and the spiritual Birth, that internally breaths in every pious
Believer, is, Christ in us, the hope of Glory; the Sovereign Revealer of the
Wisdom of God, whose Light is the Beauty of the Majesty of Light, that
enlightneth every one coming into the World; and is our saving and our
sanctifying Light, before Time had a Being, God blessed for ever.

Thus in brief I present you with a Sacred Summary of my pious Conceptions of
the Scriptures of Truth, divulged to the World as a Treasure of Mysteries,
calculated for the Assiduous, and only such whose Integrity and Fidelity
internally shine forth, as their Faces externally in a Glass respond, and
answer a due and exact Proportion. From whence I conclude this Philosophical
Axiom, As are the Writings of Moses the Standard of Truth, that God the Creator
has by a Royal Law imposed upon Nature eternally to operate, the Universal
Spirit therefore is but One in all her Operations, ( viz.) in the Fire, to
influence; in the Air, to impregnate; in the Water, to germinate; and in the
Earth, to vegetate. Where note, The Elements, consequently the Principles were
divinely preordained by the Sovereign Power of him that is Supreme, who
constituted Nature to conserve the Creation; or solemnly I declare, I
understand it not.

Nor would I be thought either rash or unreasonable, to reassume a Privilege
in what I distribute: but as Words are my own whiles yet in my Mouth, and every
bodies else when unconfined; so let them be, and have a charitable Reception,
when to run their Risque in the Worlds great Lottery; because, when to fall
under various Conceptions, yet, if so happy to meet with the Ingenious in
Science, meaning such as dread and honor their Creator, and imitate Nature in
her solitary Operations; which every expert Artist, and experienced, will do,
provided his Inquisitions be after the Truth; to such, and such only I dedicate
my Labors, together with my Endeavors to Wisdoms elaborate Shrine, that with
virtuous Inclinations they may seek after Discoveries, and the abstruse Tracts
of their Friend,

Philanthropus.

RABBI MOSES.
IN the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. Which directs me to
contemplate this World is a great Machine, or an Engine-royal, adapted for
Motion by the Power of Him that created the Creation; that not so much as an
Atom can move or stir, save only by a derivative Virtue from him that through
Wisdom and Providence gave a Being to the Whole; who knows all the Parts and
Particles of his Work. How can he then be thought ignorant of its Motion, or in
any thing be deficient? when he that made the World, knows how to influence the
hidden Springs and Parts thereof; he knows for what End and Duration he
designed its Motion, and the time when all things shall pass away: So that when
the Divinest withdraws the Springs of Life, ( viz.) his supporting Providence,
from any Creature in the Creation, or from the Elements, or the whole World it
self, it must sink into a state of Inactivity, consequently become a mere
Annihilation.

Now, That Heaven and Earth are Corelates, who doubts it?

That they sprung spontaneously from one Principium, who disputes it?

And that they had in themselves (by Divine Ordination) Ends and Beginnings
most properly adapted and insinuated into them, who so Impious and Atheistical
to suspect it?

That the World had a Beginning, is manifest.

That Eternity preceded Time, is most manifest.

And that every End terminates in its own proper Beginnings, nothing more
manifest.

Every End therefore, separable from its native Principium, is subject to
Mortality: but Death is the Destruction of all Elemental compounded Mixts: All
Compounds therefore are subject to Mortality; which Nature endeavors with all
her might to preserve, if possible, from the Periods of Death, and whose
Champions to purchase this heroic Victory, Fire and Water are instituted and
appointed the most proper and immediate Agents and Instruments; the last to
discharge by immersive Calcination, all exterior and superfluous Adustion,
whiles the first by Sublimation claims a Superiority, because when to separate
by the intense Action of Fire whatever Recrements and Impurities adhere to the
Center.

These, and no other, are the lineal Tracts that Nature has trod in since the
nonage of the Universe; whose Seeds, void of Form, and confusedly mixed in a
Hoil or Chaos, were dissolved in Water, but rarefied and sublimed by pure
Argument of Fire. Calcination and Sublimation therefore were purposely invented
to purge and separate the Pure from the Impure; as is Solution and Distillation
the more terrestrial Dregs that stiffly adhere to the Parts extraneous.

Now whatever remains without any beginning, that Subject is altogether
incapable of end: But all Beginnings sprung up from Eternity, as is Eternity
the Ray of the Majesty. Eternity therefore is the Parent of Time, from whence
Generation lineally descended; and Generation, because the Infant and the Child
of Time, has its Periods locked up in the Prisons of Death: and doomed and
predestined by the Law of Sin: the Apostle tells us, is Death in the
abstract; yet improperly the End of any thing save Elements, whereby to
remonstrate their true Beginnings but now to bud, and to blossom forth, because
directing toward an eternal State; which I call the new Breathings from a
State of Corruption, precedent to Putrefaction; the immature Offspring and
imperfect Birth of infirm Ancestors and Elementary Principles.

For the Body no sooner dismantles it self of the exterior Form, and
Elementary Faetor, when the indivisibility of the more purer Parts begin at
once to display themselves: for the Treasures of Life are most strictly locked
up, and which also begins to perspire and breath forth by the glorious Ray of
God's Sovereign Power; whose refulgent Beam illuminates the World, and stirs up
the hidden Life therein, which before seemed to sleep passively perdue in the
silent Sepulcher of Divine Contemplation.

If therefore debasing our selves by Sin, be Argument of Death, and God's
eternal Displeasure; a Regenerate state implies the Sanctity of Renovation,
which is a clear Demonstration of a real Conversion. Otherwise, how comes it to
pass, that the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband? Now if
Husband and Wife are constipated one Flesh by the Conjugal Celebration and Law
of Matrimony; why not Heaven and Earth under the like Divine Ordinance, since
by a Supreme Law from the Sovereign Legislator (whose powerful Edicts are for
ever irrevocable) made and established Synonima Regalia.

Thus the Celestial Sun in the clarified Firmament influenceth and impregnates
this embellished Creation; as does the Supercelestial Son of the Majesty of God
most illustriously shine in every Believers Soul, and is the true Light that
illuminates the Universe, and every Man that comes into the World. So that in
this short and compendious Paragraph you may read the Divine Progeny of the
whole Creation; the Exaltation and Dignity of the Micro, as the Macrocosm; the
great End why the World and Man was made; the Reason also why the Divinest made
Man, and dressed up so beautifully this stupendous Creation: All which was only
but to see himself and Sovereign Majesty by way of Reflection; wherefore he
built up a Tabernacle in Man for his Divine Residence, and Man's Redemption.

Now Adam was made this Supreme Monarch, whom his Maker dignified with such
eminent Qualifications, as not only to see, because having the faculty of
Sense; but to inspeculate and admire the Majesty of his Maker that hung up
aloft in the Firmament of Heaven, so many Luminous and Beauteous Bodies,
impregnating every one with the Blessings of Vegetation: but Moral Reason (and
barren Apprehension) because incapable to exalt it self to these eminent,
sublime, and superlative Elevations, of necessity sinks under them.

And here Moses tells you, That in the beginning, the Divinest created both the
Heavens and the Earth: Now creating or making, what implies it more than
manifesting Invisibles by Visibles; or discovering such things as lay hid in
the Chaos, occultly concealed from occular view; which in time appeared, but
not until such time as the Waters, by the Fiat, were separated from the Waters,
and then the purer matter ascended upwards, because disintangled from its
impure Fecula; which Celestial, Clarified, and Pure Crystalline Body, is by the
Scriptures interpreted the Firmament?

And Hermes tells you in his Smaragdine Table, That the likeness of that which
is placed above, is also beneath, coinhabiting below, to work the Miracle of
one single thing. There must therefore of necessity be some assimilation in
Earth, Soveraignly qualified with the same existence of Celestials; otherwise,
pray tell me, where is the harmony betwixt them? And why should God select the
little World, called Man, for his Divine and Glorious Reception, rejecting, as
I may so say, the more copious or great one, as the more commaculate and impure
habitation; had not he divinely dignified the less by Sovereign Wisdom for his
Royal Entertainment?

There is therefore not only the likeness of Superiors; but the same Virtue,
Beauty, and Excellency also in Inferiors: Christ in you the hope of Glory.
This is that Magnet of Virtue and Swavity, whose illustrious Ray attracts the
Soul to those transcendent Mansions of Beatitude and Immortallity; For the
Kings Daughter is all glorious within, because made glorious by the King of
Heaven; where note, by way of Digression, when to admit of a faint comparison;
the Anima, or Sulphur of Sols beauteous inside, when duly examined by a
sedulous Adept, a Celestial Corporiety displays it self, whose glorious
appearance gratifies the solicitous with Wisdom's Oracle, and the Treasures of
Art, by every one acquirable, and by most admired.

But the Hoil or Chaos presents unto us a subject matter as yet indigested,
when macerated, mingled, or jumbled together; and such we are to consider it in
the Act of Fermentation; when nothing but darkness had its Region in the Deep,
nor did any thing appear upon the Face of the Waters, until Darkness by the
Divinest was utterly separated by the glorious Beam of the Majesty of Light;
for till then the Stars rolled not in their Orbs, nor did the Fluctuating Ocean
move its Vital Pulse, till actuated by the Law of its Sovereign Maker, which
daily remonstrates the Flux of the Ocean. Nor till then did the Earth, nor the
Barren Mountains know any thing of the Law of Life, and Vegetation. Nor was
there any Prolifick Virtue, or propagating Quality hitherto as yet incorporated
into them; when at once the Fountains of the great Deeps broke up, out of whose
exuberant and miraculous Womb, not only those innumerable and inexhaustible
Treasures, as the Principles, and Elements, but also whatever besides them was
made visible, was by Wisdom drawn forth out of this immense Deep: And to
whatever had Sense by Life and Motion, Nature by Ordination gave it a
beginning; but Light and Life she had not power to give; for that sprung
spontaneously from the Divine Fiat; which great work with the great Creator
took up but seven days, tho seven times seven is adjudged too little; nay, had
I said Months, are supposed little enough, if when attempting to complete a
Philosophic Operation.

So that now the Darkness because disappearing, the glorious and beautiful Ray
of Light suddenly and at once invades all the Universe; for after Separation by
Divine Ordination, every individual as to Virtue and Purity in its innate
Quality arose up from obscurity: And because relinquishing its Earthy fecula,
elevated it self according to Dignity, correspondent also with the Purity of
Matter. The Sun therefore with the Moon, and the Stars exalted themselves; and
surmounting the Ether, were supreamly ranged in a Divine Order. The Elements
also they separated themselves into four Divisions, or distinct Classes,
whereby to illustrate this imbellish'd Creation; and the Principles because
locked up in every individual, whereby to make permanent by the Law of
Perfection, began to ferment, which the Vulgar understand not; for should they
be separated, purified, and reconjoyned, a new Creation would inevitably ensue
in the Microcosm, or the little World; as by Divine Appointment it never ceases
daily to influence and operate in the Macrocosm.

From whence all Celestials appear immortal; most fiery, luminous, subtle and
bright; and by the Divinest made distant, and remote, were separated from all
impure and immund dregs: and because excavated into Rotundity, they elevated
themselves, and flew up at once; for which cause also Nature of her self
desires a round form for things Eternal, as being most perfect, permanent, and
indeficient.

On the contrary, it follows, that Terrestial things are subject to corruption,
mutation and death; because contrarieties are joined in their elementary
Composition; and wherewith the dreggs, and impurities of matter were mixed, as
at first with what was impure; otherwise the produce that had proceeded from
them, would have been beyond dispute Subjects immortal. Nor could there ever
have been any Generation; for without contrariety of qualities in Elements,
there had never been alteration, nor mutation of form; and all would have had
but one Face without distinction, remaining equally in purity and subtilty: And
tho clothed with its own Ornament of Beauty and Swavity; yet wanting matter
whereon to impress formation, would become deficient, indigent, and destitute
of Creation.

It was necessary therefore to mix subtilty of substance with the gross and
impure faecula of matter; for where nothing but Clarity and Purity remains,
there of necessity can be no Action; and where no Action is, there can be no
Patient, seeing what is pure wants act of Power over that also which is as
pure; and this End and Operation is Natures Work of Separation for preservation
of its Essence, and Vital Increase; For if the Earth and her Fruits were as
pure as the Heavens, all Animals would live as long as Celestial Incholasts.

But Nature by the Divinest has ordained a Law, that whatever partakes of
Matter, or Corporiety, should dwell about that which is also Corporial; and
that which is most corruptible and inquinate, about that which is also likest
unto it: but the Earth, as subordinate, is the most precipitant of Bodies;
consequently most gross, and of all things most corruptible: nothing therefore
can proceed, or be deducible from it, but what is naturally most agreeable unto
it; wherefore its Corruption, Sordities and Impurities must also be rarefied by
progress of Separation. When therefore its more pure Substance is extracted,
and exalted by a true and Magnetic Philosophical Medium; Nature of necessity
begins there all her Actions, and in separation all is found.

And the Spirit of God moving upon the Face of the Waters, was by Incubation
(or supreme Act of Power) by the determinate Wisdom and Counsel of God, the
immediate and proper cause of Separation; for here you may read, that the
Spirit of God divinely moved upon the Face of the Waters: And here also you may
consider, and deliberately understand, that the Spirit of God inspired them
with Vegetation; otherwise of themselves how could they bring forth? For the
Chaos had a Passive, but no Active Spirit in it, till God by Wisdom roused up
the Ferch, or the hidden Life therein concealed; and illuminating or kindling
the Commassated Matter, by the Ray and Majesty of his Divine Spirit that
separated the pure from that that is impure, which could be no otherwise, since
no impure thing can enter, nor center where the whole is pure.

And thus the Angel Gabriel salutes the Blessed Virgin with Hail Mary, full of
Grace, God is with thee, the glory of Females. Now this Virgin was a Native and
true Israelite, and had not hitherto known her Husband; which Virgin conceives
by the Holy Ghost, and was a Miraculous and a Spiritual Birth; so that we may
consider, there is nothing impossible with God the Creator that made the World;
when in love to incarnate himself to redeem it.

And Moses he tells you, That when God had breathed into Adam, our Protoplast,
the breath of Life, he then became a living Soul; not that Adam was destitute
of a Natural Soul, but of a Divine and Spiritual Life, which also implies a
supernatural state; in which excellent state our Protoplast stood, when God had
transformed his Earth into Heaven; and in which pure state he for ever had
stood, had he stood in simplicity, and the Will of his Maker; for what we sow,
that shall we reap; and nothing is quickened except it die. Mortification
therefore precedes Regeneration; we must all die to Sin, to live to
Righteousness.

But the Spirit of God moved upon the Waters; which Act of Power was no sooner
performed, but the Waters of themselves incessantly brought forth; and every
created thing that God had made by a Divine and Sovereign Act of Power, began
to Operate, Vegetate, and Fructuate; who surrounded the Constellations with a
Crystalline Firmament; and clothing the Principles which stood naked before
him, with a Body suitable to their necessity, gave Laws and Ordinances to
Nature, as Substitute, immediately to let loose the Universal Spirit, whereby
to vegetate, increase, and multiply; to form also, to animate, and impregnate
Bodies; but Nature of her self, because bounded with periods, admits Death
inevitably to invade all Compounds; for were it otherwise, there needed no
Separation; and Nature, preadventure, would become sloathful, and idle:
Consequently the Fabric of the whole Creation would again redact, and result
in a Chaos.

Separation therefore is of absolute necessity, whereby to distinguish the pure
from the impure; the fair and immaculate from the most pollute and unclean;
which after Purgation to rectify and conjoyn, and then advance, if it could be,
to a plusquam perfection, whereby to imitate Nature, as she by president
imitates the Creator; what admirable thing would the Operator bring forth?

Wherefore the Apostle he bids you be perfect, as your Heavenly Father is also
perfect: And what can advance to a state of Perfection, but that which
separates from Sin and Impurity? Thus the Heavens are pure, and infinitely
clarified; yet much more pure is he that created them; which state to know, is
never to know Death. Wherefore as by imitation some Bodies are made always to
live in the Phylosophick World, which the Adeptest intitles and superscribes
Transmutation; but the Theologist in the Super-celestial, that of Regeneration.
And as one is the period of Principles and Elements; such also is the other of
Corporification, leading Death into Captivity, and transforming every impure
Being into a Celestial Clarity and Purity; and the Souls of Righteous Men into
endless Glory; but this Operation is performable only by the Heavenly Arcanum,
or Medicament of Life: which Sacred, Sovereign, and Divine Elixir, is the
Christ of God, the Wisdom of the Father: to whom devoutly be everlasting
Praises.

And as Christ is called the Light of the World, etc. Light may properly
therefore be asserted the Manifestation of God, and the Oracle of his Truth;
for if what visible Light is, or appears unto the Bodily Eye; the same, but
infinitely more glorious, is the invisible Light that illuminates the
Understanding in the Eye of the Mind: The want of Light, it is true, makes Man
deplorable; so is Ignorance of the Mind to be lamented: And as Generation that
sprang out from Corruption of those things which were esteemed the best, so the
Light that shines in Man when it becomes eclipst by the shades of Sin, how
dreadful and dismal is that Darkness? As Light therefore of all things is
accounted most desirable, the want of it to the Mind makes the Man most
miserable: So of all Ignorance, that Ignorance is the worst which has
reference to the most Noble and Sublimest Object, and by how much the subject
of Knowledge is better, by so much is the deprivation of that Knowledge
intolerable: As any one therefore, by putting out a Man's Eyes, whereby to
intercept him the enjoyment of Light, is reputed cruel; so he that prevents the
means of Knowledge, is no less, if not infinitely more (by a Scriptural
Authority) adjudged condemnable.

Light therefore, because exalted above all Created Beings, it confirms it the
Standard of Wonder and Admiration, whose beauteous Beam displays it self, the
uncreated Being before the Creation, consequently superexcelling all the rest
in Dignity; but the created luminous Ray of the Sun, that strikes the Poles
from East to West, nay farther its possible, could we apprehend it; is sacredly
held forth as the Almighties Taper, whereby to illustrate the Visible World, as
does the Light of his Sovereign, All-glorious Son invisibly shine in the Souls
of Saints, to convince the World of Sin and Unbelief: And tho Laban usher Leah
unto Jacob's Bed, by introducing her instead of his beautiful Rachel; so every
designing Imaginarist does, when describing only exterior things, but states
nothing essentially. Such I may say dwell merely in the Face, or at the best,
on the superficial parts of the Body; never aspiring after the fullness of
Beatitude, which Philosophy in my Opinion looks like to a Church that is dressed
up with Discipline, when wanting sound Doctrine.

So that if when to consider the exterior form of complicated mixts shall melt
away, probably we arrive at the fiery principium, whose Elevations lead on to a
state Immortal, co-uniting us to that invisible Nature, that admits not of any
thing save Purity intense, by the continued ardency of a Pious Devotion. As in
Operation it is evident, and egregiously true, that the Elements themselves
assume all Colors before the Beauty of those colors egrede; wherefore they
begin with Blackness first, because the Antecessour and Parent of Putrefaction;
after it passes through other middle Colors, till at length it arrives at a
Celestial Whiteness, which then is Air, from whence it ascends to a fiery
Complexion, in which the Power of Art, and Dominion of Fire, when to speak
Aenigmatically, is completely terminated, and beyond which, in my Opinion,
there is no natural progress.

And God no sooner divinely said, Let there be Light; but immediately there was
Light, so that his Commands were in a moment answered; for how soon did the
Light spontaneously spring up, and amounting aloft, fill the Universe with
Splendour? So that now the Creation became altogether visible, and every
concealed Treasure that lay hid therein, exposed it self unto occular view;
whereby to discover the Chaos commaserated, and Water and Earth by previous
digestion (without contention, or strong ebullitions) began of themselves
distinctly to separate; and the Earth as rejected to precipitate downwards, by
reason of its Gravity, and solid Ponderosity; so that these two Elements were
only made visible, but the Fire and the Air, they fled our sight, which by
reason of Purity became also invisible; whose Sublime Bodies by the Creators
Will, elevated themselves to influence the Earth, whereby to impregnate it with
Prolifick Virtue.

This was, and is that beautiful Order, wherein the Divinest so divinely placed
things, when the Earth as an Embrio lay hid, and concealed in the Exuberant
Womb of the unweildy Waters: And this is that great and stupendous work of
Separation, which Act or Operation was fit only for God, who separated the
Light from the mists of Darkness; which glorious Operation the Prophet Moses
points at, as a thing principally to be minded and considered, if provided any
one would imitate the Creator, when in the beginning he created the Universe;
but the end of the Creation stands still in the Ternary, of which, more at
large in its proper place.

Christ therefore is our Sovereign and our Saving Light, that comprehends the
Darkness, yet the Darkness knows him not, whose beauteous brightness
illuminates the World, and is that Glory and Majesty of Light that was from
God, that never had beginning, which Incomprehensible Light shined before the
beginning to illuminate the Throne of the Majesty of God, and is the true
Essential Word of God, and the Word is God, the Wisdom of the Father, as is
manifested to us by Moses and the Prophets.

But the created Luminaries, as Sun, Moon, and Stars, these are but Elementary,
subject therefore to corruption, when God shall please to extinguish their
Light, by withdrawing the Beauteous Ray of himself; and as the Light of the Sun
is the Beauty of the Creation, how much more beautiful is the Son of God, the
All-glorious Beauty of the Majesty of God? The Created World therefore was made
to discover visible Objects, and things Corporeal; but the Increated and most
Sovereign Being, to make obvious to us things Invisible; the Natural, to
inspect both Elements and Principles; but the Supernatural, to reveal the Glory
of the Father, in the Face and Fullness of Jesus Christ.

And God saw the Light, and behold it was good; the consequence follows, for
God he made it, and God divided the Light from the Darkness, as by his Wisdom
the Day from the Night: Separation therefore from adust impurity, makes it
Sublime, Immaculate, and Pure: So Divine out of a Moral, and a Celestial out of
a Terrestrial State, is a transmutation by the Grace of God; for if nothing
that is impure can subsist in his presence, whatever comes there must be
spiritually pure: and such are Invisibles separated from Elements, the Waters
above the Firmament of a pure Nature, existent with Life, but the Waters
beneath, Elementary and Fluctuating: The Universal Spirit therefore inspiring
Life and Motion, the whole Creation began to breath, and bud forth.

And God after separation of the Light from the Darkness, of the pure and
sublime from that that is inquinate, of Heaven from Earth, of the Waters from
the Waters, of the Translucid and Diaphanous Bodies from Corruptible
Recrements, and Sordid Impurities: Then was there a Noble and Divine
Separation, because when to raise an immortal Seed out of the Principles and
Rudiments of Elements. And such also is the Regenerate state in Man, when born
of the Royal Seed from Heaven; for Flesh and Blood, because Transient and
Elementary, are inconsistent with the Eternity of God, incapable therefore to
inherit the Kingdom: This is that Divine and Heavenly Transmutation, by which
Christ Jesus, the Wisdom of the Father, with one regal grain transmutes our
Nature, and our Mortal Bodies, into an Immortal State; and is that Elixir of
Life and Virtue that defends it for ever from torture and destruction, and
eternally delivers it from the periods of Death.

But some will object, What Body is this? And Paul solves the Doubt by a
Scriptural Explanation, telling us, its a Body increate and incorruptible,
consequently incapable of any mutation, and because impregnated, and animated
with Life, is under protection, divinely blessed, absolved, and acquitted the
assaults of Death. What Body then, some will say, must it be? and he tells you,
It Is a Body as it pleases God. But this you will object is also insufficient. To
speak more plainly then, it is a Regenerate Body, born from the Spirit, and not
from Elements, but of a pure and immaculate nature, that never knew nor
consented to Sin: Such a Birth will triumph over Death, because it can never be
made to die, nor subject it self to the periods of Death, since bound up in the
Volume of the Infinite Eternity.

But Darkness is the Vmbra, or promiscuous shadow of the beautiful and amiable
Glory of Light: And because separated from the Beam of Light, and gathered to
its self, is the Representation of Death. Where note, we may call it the Mantle
or Covering of some solid Substance, or some material thing; and such is the
Night by Earth's Interposition, retirements of Light, or the Suns bright
absence: Corpulences also are Stellat Ecclipses, because from Globical Bodies
intermediating; for Night is only the Suns bright absence, when deprived the
beautiful Beam of his Light; and the Day (as I may so say) the Infant of Light,
because it sprung up from Light Original. The created Light therefore pray tell
me what is it, if not the beautiful Aurora of Eternity, as is Eternity the Ray
of the Majesty? Thus the Light, as appears, shines still in Darkness, and yet
the Darkness comprehends it not.

Now what is this Darkness but the shades of Death? and what is Death but a
separation from Life, and Life it self the amiable Infant, that sprung from
Eternity, as Generation from Time? But Darkness abhors the luster of Light,
lest peradventure fearing the Light should inspire it. Gold therefore, like the
Salamander, lives eternally in Fire, without detriment, destruction, or
diminution of parts; whiles imperfect Metals, when examined by the test,
evaporate and vanish, so become imperceptible which displays some impurity in
their natural Composition; for were they of a regal stamp and condition, no
force of Fire would be Argument strong enough to make in them the least
separation; so Darkness, when made pure by the Beam of Light, it then becomes a
natural brightness; and Mortality, transchanged by the Grace of God, becomes
Immortal by Divine Transmutation.

The Day therefore sprung natively from Light, as a Legitimate Heir from the
Loins of his Parents; nor could it do otherwise, because by the Divinest
destinated and determinated to such an end by the Counsel of God. And thus the
Beam, or Ray of the Sun, as its Integer Light, can be no otherwise, because the
proper Effect from that efficient Cause; for the Celestial Sun, if sedately to
consider it, was kindled by a virtual spark of invisible Light: And this
invisible Light, the Son of God, is the Essence, Wisdom, and the Beauty of the
Father, and is that Sovereign and Saving Light of the Divinity and Majesty of
God himself.

As pure Religion therefore is such in it self as it pleads Precedence long
before Error; consequently it is a bright and most illustrious Taper that
directs to the standard of Divine Truth, in whose Frontispiece Devotion
displays Christianity, and which truly is the most Eminent, and Divine Encomium
that ever was attributed to Men, as Mortals, and is in a Scriptural sense the
new way of Conquering, because through Christ we are more than Conquerours, and
fight in this Field without Carnal Weapons; for no Gladiators arm here to
Combat, nor is there any Banner but the Cross of Christ, and whose Enemies are
Abaddon, and the Hierarchy of Hell; and whose Engines are Sin, and the Toils of
Death, endeavoring therewith to obstruct our passage, when attempting the
triumphant Joys of Heaven.

But a Nominal Christian (with grief I speak it) which signifies no more than a
formal Professor, if when wanting the Vital Power of the living Act of Faith,
such a profession makes no Man a Christian any more than reading the Alcharon
compleats a Saint; nor is every Professor a true Minister of God, except of God
ordained to preach: For the Gospel is free, and the love of God free, and it
was the free Act of Christ to give himself freely for the Sins of the World.
Christ's Redemption therefore was a free Act of Grace, to blot out Sin, and
usher in Repentance; and all that is required for so great a suffering, is only
conformity to a Holy Life, and sanctified Obedience to that Living Power, in
whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells: He therefore that prays, and pays not
his Orisons to this great Oracle the Wisdom of the Father, stands still
indebted for his Life and Freedom, and proclaims himself an Alien to the Court
of Sion, as also a Stranger to the New Jerusalem.

Now in opposition to Light stands this formidable Darkness, a Figure of a
Creature that was found folded up after the Divine Act and force of Separation;
not improper therefore to entitle it Darkness, since separabel from the
beauteous Beam of Light: and such is Sin, and such also is Death, since by
Adam's Transgression, who consenting to Sin, violated Gods Divine and Regal
Command, so wounded himself with his own Sting. Death and Sin therefore, Van
Helmont calls Accidents, or some impious malignity that lurked about the
matter, whereby to lessen Light, and abscond or eclipse its beautiful Luster;
which when removed by the Divine Grace of God, the Body then seems to appear
Celestial: Nor can it be otherwise, since if when to consider there is no
difference, nor distinction betwixt Heaven and Earth, save Clarity of the one,
and Impurity of the other: and this is a State we daily discourse of, nay, we
hourly wish for it, and long to enjoy it; yet so great is our Zeal to these
ambiguous uncertainties, that we dare not trust our selves to entertain it.

And because so adhering to the World, and its allurements (kind answering
kind) whose Luscious Breast seems sweet and pleasant, and whose surprising
Charms luxuriously satiating, we gulp down Avarice, and drink down Oppression:
so like Diana with the Ephesians, cry, Gain is sweet; thus tainting our selves,
become infectious to others; for a stinking Breath, tho loathsome to the
Company, yet is it to it self a natural perfume; so Sin and Impiety in its
habitual dress, tho ugly, seems amiable; and tho faetid, smells fragrant, and
knows no impediment. Thus Paul by Faith fought with Beasts at Ephesus; and
Philanthropus with Monsters in the Deserts of America.

It Is true, and as true as the Sun's the great Luminary, whose luminous Body
illustrates the Creation; yet is not the Sun that Sovereign Light that adorned
the Throne before the Creation, when the Divinest said, Let there be Light, and
immediately the Light of it self sprung up; which Light by his Wisdom he called
Day, and dignified it also with the Title of Good; nor could it be otherwise
than good in the Abstract, since the Divinest had called it Good, and because
proceeding from the Fountain of Good, its Original can be no less than God.

Now the Day had its Original, as has the Sun its Aurora; and the Sun, tho the
Major Luminary of the Universe, whose refulgent Ray illustrates the Creation,
by Rapidity Circulating and Patrolling about it; yet is it by Wisdom and the
Guidance of God another Aurora of the increated Light, which never cease
invisibly to shine, when the Sun withdraws from our occular view, as
imaginarily supposed toward the Western Fountains, whiles this pure Light
never cease to shine in the Heart of Man, and the Throne of the Majesty, tho
to the World and ignorant it appear invisible: and because too sublime for the
weak Vision of Sight, whereby a dimness seems to overshadow it, as gazing too
much at the natural Sun, in some measure astonisheth the Purlue of Sight; so
the Sovereignty of the Glory of the Son of God, whose excessive brightness
seems to cause a blindness, when as indeed it is the Purity and Sovereignty of
Light, we are therefore to reduce it under this consideration, that nothing
that is impure can behold what is pure, nor Carnality partake of what is
Spirituous.

There is therefore this difference betwixt Natural and Supernatural; as also
betwixt Celestial and Terrestrial things; that all Spirituous Bodies can pass
the Purgatory of Fire without any detriment, or diminution of parts; when as
Corporeals, if but to touch the Flames, are at once in a Moment destroyed and
consumed. Purification of Bodies must therefore necessarily precede, whereby to
dignifie and make them Celestial. Natural things therefore are in one distinct
state, but Spiritual things are found in another: and by how much our Nature is
made more spirituous, by so much are we nearer to the Nature of God. And as the
Sun shines naturally more bright and distinctly, more pure than our Culinary
Fires; how infinitely brighter, and much more pure is the Majesty of that Light
that invisibly shines from the Son of God: But our new Philosophers (or Erra
Paters) are much of the Cast with Figure-flingers, that presume to step into
the Prerogative of Prophets, and antedate events in Configurations, which is a
Consequence I persuade my self of as much Reason, and for ought I know, to as
great Satisfaction, as to see the Auxiliaries draw out and exercise, and the
Spectators to read their designs by their postures.

But I proceed to discourse the Firmament of Heaven, the Fluctuating Ocean
also, and the Waters in the Creation, which presents to our consideration
matter of Admiration, consequently a suitable Subject for every Philosopher, if
sedately to contemplate their admirable separation, when God divided the Waters
from the Waters, and the Firmament of Heaven stood stationary between them;
which denotes those rarefied and invisible Waters Moses points at above us, are
an Act of Faith, because of Invisibility, whilst these below us are
demonstrable to us: which Argument as formerly confirms our Philosophy, that
the likeness of that which is remotely above, is also beneath, co-inhabiting
below, to work the Miracle of one single thing, so that the same Act of Power
and Providence that made them separable, made them also invisible, as by the
Law of demonstration these are made visible to us.

But what are these Waters, these invisible Waters, that surmounting the
Ether, and because above us perpetually fly our sight, what are they, and what
were they in the Fiat of the Creation, more than the pure and spirituous part,
separated from impurity and all aquosity, whiles the pinguous moist faecula,
and indigested Vapors stiffly adhere to the visible form, which by reason of
inconcocted crudities and indigestions, when celebrated to warmth, lie
fermenting in themselves, and are the daily cause of Natural Production,
animating and exerting the Earth to Vegetation.

These Invisible Waters therefore above the Firmament, must of necessity be a
Rarefaction of Air; and the Firmament, because intermediating betwixt them,
remonstrates it Celestial, and a clarified Earth. For if to consult the
Creation and created Beings, we are to consider them in a two fold Capacity;
the Visibility of the one, and the Invisibility of the other; Elementary
Bodies, and Bodies Celestial; where note, sublunar things are influenced by
Celestials, as are Celestials governed by super Celestials. As the Sun in his
progress, because ruling the Day, is by Divine appointment the Parent of
Vegetation. So has the Moon her Nocturnal Government, whereby she also operates
the Ocean, influencing Fluidity and the Female Sex: Nor are the Stars and
Constellations deficient or destitute, whereby not to effect and influence
Inferiors; so that a perpetual motion is continually maintained, and a constant
rotation perpetually continued, otherwise the Compound would admit of decay,
and a defect in any one part of the Creation would inevitably draw on an
inconveniency upon the whole.

Thus the great Frame and Fabric of the Creation was ranged into a most
excellent and beautiful order, which the Creator foresaw in the Idea or
prospect; nor rested he there until the final Complement of his Divine Counsel
and Determinate Purpose: And then it was that Adam was made, which the Divinest
created no less than a Monarch, and entrusted by the Creator with the Creatures
in the Creation, enraged Lucifer, that infernal Prince to emulate the Dignity
of this new Favorite, who reflecti^g on his Ambitions that so lately dethroned
him, which obliged him to forfeit his Regal Possession, he therefore undermines
to blow up this Favorite, who tainting our Protoplast, infects his Posterity.

And thus the bright and beautiful Morning is sometimes sullied with a louring
Sky: For did not the Sun's early blazing smiles shine upon Sodom, and her
accursed Inhabitants that soon after ended in a fatal Tragedy: what must we call
this if not a dismal Eclipse? nay, altogether a deprivation of life, save only
to Lot, and his preserved Family, on purpose kept alive by the means of
Miracle, when all the rest were made most miserable Morts. Whiles therefore we
live here in this Natural State, we only reap supplies of Aliment from
Elements: but when we shall be discharged the Manicles of Sin, and releast from
the horror and amazements of Death; we shall then appear under a more
spirituous form, and where we shall see things as they really are in
themselves; by which we may know till then we knew nothing: Nor are these Moral
Beings, or Natural Apprehensions any other than signitures or the deliniated
Figure of that super-excellent Beauty we shall see hereafter.

And God by Wisdom divided the Waters from the Waters, the Celestial from the
Terrestrial, Heaven from Earth, the Invisible from Visible things, and so
disposed them by the Law of Providence, appointing to every one Dominion and
Operation, in order to bring about his determinated Creation. And who knows but
that these elevated and invisible Waters, are the Waters Moses speaks of that
Bathe the Banks of the New Jerusalem; and that the spangled Firmament is the
Pavement of Heaven, or the solid part thereof, if not improper to say so; nor
is it impertinent to think so, when Invisibles are pointed at by Visible
Objects, otherwise I understand not the design in the Text, which supposing I
do, I am unwilling to be refuted, if when only to hear another Man's
contradiction.

But that there was, and still is a Division or an Interposition betwixt
Superiors and Inferiors is past dispute; Moses asserts it, and the Text
affirms it; where note as a Christian it concerns me to enquire, and as a
Philosopher as gladly desire to be advised, and informed the Nature and the
Quality of these divisional Waters; the Virtue and the Office of that that is
Elementary, as the Dignity and Operation of that that is invisible: the first,
because Elementary we daily converse with, and frequently apply it unto servile
uses; but the latter, since invisible we assign that to Moses, except otherwise
the Divinest by Oracle from Heaven be pleased to inspireus as the Prophet was
inspired.

Faith therefore is the evidence of things invisible, as is demonstration of
visible things. The Waters above the Firmament we have supposed them Celestial,
because of Sublimity, Purity, and Rarification, which in the great and
admirable work of this stupendous Separation, the Chaos no sooner felt the
Examen of Heat, but Water began immediately to operate, and presently became
convertible into Air, and this I call Aetherial Rarification, by reason its not
only separated from Aquasity, but apparently becomes to the World invisible.

Why not then by the same Argument all the Fountains and Aquoducts (nay the
Ocean it self by the Law of Necessity evaporate into Air, since minutely it
operates without intermission, (this is obvious to every one) but the Sours of
the Sea you will object is so deep; her Springs and Supplies so manifestly
numerous, that it is almost impossible to exhaust her Treasures, whereby to
render her barren or impoverished; to that I answer, God has placed such a
Magnet in the very Bowel and Center of the Waters, of that attractive and
magnetic Virtue, that were not the Waters bounded by the Law of Limitation,
the Earth peradventure would soften and melt; consequently become convertible
into Water, and for ought I know, resolve at last into a moist, and a soft thin
Air.

But God the Creator has placed such a Bar betwixt the Visible and Invisible
Waters: He, I say, it is, that by Wisdom and Providence hung up a Spangled Vail
or Covering betwixt them, and calls it the Firmament, which intersects, or
divides betwixt Celestials and Terrestials; yet so, that a sympathy and
continued harmony is by the Divinest correspondent betwixt them; and the Text
tells us, that Heaven it self forbears not to sigh, if at any time the Sinner
be sadned to mourn; but is filled with Alacrity and Heavenly Joy, even at the
Conversion of one single Penitent: Nay so great is the triumph among the Saints
and Angels when a Sinner becomes victor over Sin and Impenitency; that all our
Faculties as if Divinely exirted, muster up themselves in open Hostility, to
oppose the Invador of our everlasting Tranquillity: but I intend not to common
place upon this Divine Subject, otherwise than to elucidate the Mysteries of
the Creation: And where Rabbi Moses has drawn the Curtain, I shall modestly by
permission endeavor to withdraw it (provided it be thought neither Sacrilege
nor Impiety) since to confider behind this Mystical Interposition the Magi have
concealed the Sanctum Sanctorum, nor Profane I, when to say, The Beauty of
Holiness.

So that we may read, and begin to understand the Firmament by Interpretation
is called Heaven, which certainly is the Basis and Celestial Superstructure of
this most admirable and stupendindious Creation; tho to us and our Ancestors
seemingly invisible: wherefore let us resort to Heavens great School, where
Christ himself is Dictator and Pilate to conduct us, and chief Rabbi to
instruct us, for the Divinest himself will become our Interpreter; so that God
in due time will certainly manage us to that Seraphick Society of Saints and
Angels, where we shall Daily be Divinely taught, and by Jesus Christ the Son of
God made so Prophetical and Evangellically Intelligeable, that the Alphabet of
Heaven will be the Christ-Cross-Row, whiles about these Sublunar Orbs, our
Modern Didacticks and Learned Academicks are hourly so impinged that they sore
no higher than Custom, and President of Professed Arts; and if without offense I
may freely speak it, rather of Litteral than Liberal Science.

Where note, some Anti-Scripturist's have been lately so Profane as to imagine
God like to a Country Mechanic that builds up with Stone, and finishes with
Timber, without any Infusion of Life and Motion; as if the whole Creation was a
Creature inanimate, when the voluminous World which is Gods great Library, is
filled full of Life, Activity, and Motion, which Life is Spirit, and the cause
of Multiplication, and the natural Production of all created things, that by
Copulation are engendered, or otherwise by Putrefaction have received a new
State through Fermentation; all which Productions are manifest Arguments of
Life and Spirit, as also of Vegetation.

The Texture therefore of this great World clearly discovers, and demonstrates
its animation; where the Visibility of Earth manifestly represents the Impure,
Gross, and Natural Basis; and the Elemental Waters because circulating about
it, assimilates also the Venal Blood, actuating and fermenting in every Body,
where the vital Pulse also operates as is seen in the admirable Flux and Reflux
of the Ocean; and the Air of necessity the Vehickle for Spirits, wherein this
vast Creature (meaning the Creation) breath's invisibly; tho peradventure not
altogether, nor in any part insensibly, and the Interstellar Skies, and
Aetherial Waters, the Vital Parts; whiles the Sun, Moon, and Stars are the
animating Spirits, and supersensual Fires that warm the Creation.

But this kind of Philosophy will puzle the Putationer, as the Primitive Truth
of the Apostles confounded the Romans. So Moses's Philosophy in the Rudiments
of the Creation, will be as little understood as the Tracts of Hermes, the
T^^mudist's, Cabalist's, Caldeans, Egyptians, and Arabians, if when to consider
the possibility of Nature, which is impossible without supernatural
discoveries; and should we otherwise conclude than by Divine Authority, we lick
up the Froth of every sottish Generation, so usher to posterity that
Atheistical Opinion calculated by Imaginarist's, that the Creator slept whiles
the Chaos of it self without Divine direction fell into this beautiful Order,
as we now behold it; which, if but to think so is a Sin of Impiety, and an
Error so enormous never enough to be lamented.

But all such Inquietudes we remit them to their destiny, since to carry such,
and so many Furies in their own Bosoms whereby to hurry and torment themselves;
whose unwholesome Principles, because nautious to themselves would stamp their
impression on those that suck them in; so that one would think such Souls
mingled with Clay, and because in the limit and circumstance of Time are i^
some measure confined to Earth's sublunar mixts, and by the World so severely
entangled, that like Birds in Limetwigs, the more they flutter the faster they
find themselves entangled; in such a state I persuade my self there is no Divine
Speculation, nor Visional Faith whereby to see the invisible state of things as
they stand nakedly, simply, and purely in themselves, of which these Visible
Objects are but Natural Representatives. This persuasion directs to me an
unregenerate state, because when not to partake of a Supernatural Birth: the
Soul therefore that is immerged with Sin, Darkness conducts it to a dismal
destiny, deeply shadowed under the decays of Elements, and impossible without a
Miracle to make a flight above the World, since by innate inherency its
partaker of the World.

But the Stars if when to consider them the Almighty's Library, where every
Star is the Volumn of a World, and every World a sumptuous Globe, divinely held
in the Hand of its Maker, for such they were, and such they are; not that these
sublime and eminent Elevations were only made for Mortals confusedly to gaze
at; no, I Am persuaded rather to excite and stir up admiration, whereby to
elevate and quicken our Devotion above our selves, when to behold such Majesty
fixed in the Creation; for are not these Luminous and Illustrious Bodies (which
we behold hung up in that great Vortrice of Heaven) Celestial Lamps, to
illuminate the Universe; and not only to illuminate, but animate and vegetate,
so in conclusion, influence and impregnate the Creation.

It Is true, that Heaven is a Paradise for Souls, and a Divine Reception for the
Divinity it self; but not that I profane to term it a Habitation, when
alluding that Heaven contains the Divinest, since Heaven is every where where
ever God is, whose Holy Presence institutes it Immutable, Immeasurable, and
Eternal like himself: whose Nature transmutes it into his own likeness, and
puts it into such a Divine Capacity, that for ever its incapable of the periods
of Death. Heaven therefore is the Divine Habitation of God, and the Light of
Heaven the Divinity of God; the blessed Society there, Saints and Angels; and
there it is that the Prophets and Prophetesses, with Apostles and Evangelists
daily Prophecy; for there every Day is a daily Sabbath, and Elohim betwixt the
Cherubs is the Lord Jehovah.

But the Evening and the Morning were the second Day, so that twenty four
Hours, nor more nor less, do but complete a Natural Day; when as the whole
Tract of Time in its Natural Progress, appears to me but one Day Supernatural,
of which our Ancestors, as also our selves from Sacred Authority had these
Divine Speculations: so that if to consider that two Days natural could operate
such a change in the great Creation; we may rationally conclude, and as
modestly determine the residue an Argument to evince the Generations: For could
I but seriously point out to the Creature the Blessed Creators mystical
Operation (which is altogether impossible) I might then peradventure prove an
Instrument to some whereby to moderate and disintangle Passion, pursuant only
after perishing Objects, and for ought I know, blot out the Prejudice and
Animosity of others, meaning such as seditiously sow Discention among the
Brethren, endeavoring thereby to reap the fruits of their own conjectural
Imaginations; which to do, but undoes one another, by violating the Sacred Laws
of God, as that also of Nature, and of true Religion, since the Scriptures by a
Divine Authority require that every one examine himself, and seriously and
sedately study a Reformation.

Then were the Waters beneath the Heaven by Divine Appointment gathered
together; and those Invisible Waters above the Heavens rallied themselves, and
separated apart; which admirable and wonderful Act or Operation occasioned a
trepidation all over the Chaos; for till then the Waters intermingled with the
Waters, and the Elements as Inmates spread themselves among them, till God in
his Wisdom stirred up the Magnet, and then the Waters immediately attracted, so
by Collision broke the Bond of Unity; for when so great a change happned in the
whole, of necessity every individual separated apart.

In which admirable progress every one had its station, yet was it by
appointment, and the Providence of God; so that the more sublime the matter
was, by so much the higher it ranged it self, removing more remotely from its
own Faecula: when on the contrary, to admiration, the more Gravity it had, by
so much the closer it adhered to its Recrement; and in this Operation the Fire
claimed the Precedence; but next the Fire the Air pleaded Succession; so that
these two Elements become as it were invisible, and which also by reason of a
Spirituallity, administered only to the Vital parts: But Water and Earth, when
to consider their Corporiety, their Gravity, their Unity, and more
Consubstantial Parts; and because also Synonimous with the Creature, it
clothed and fed it with Prolifick Virtue: for whatever any thing is of it
self, of the same likeness it naturally produces; and such as are the
constitution of Elements and Principles, such also are our Native and Corporial
Constitutions.

To consider things therefore as they are in themselves, we need not to borrow
Spectacles from others: for if when to consider the Sun universally shines,
notwithstanding the Blind Man he sees it not: and so of Eclipses, tho some
have seen them; what then, their natural Reason and Understanding cannot reach
them, however Credit go's a great way in the case. The Blind-man perhaps he
swallows a Fly, and if he do and feel it not, what prejudice is there in it,
when a Fly in the Glass to him that has Eyes, is not only disturbed, but in
some measure terrified, because fearing to surfeit if not to suffocate.
Circumspection therefore, and the Virtue of Temperance circumscribe to us the
Mediums for long Life, when excess of any thing overthrows the whole, and would
even do so to this stupendous Creation, should it in any thing exceed with
intemperance.

The Virtue therefore, and the Office of Water is to cleanse, to moisten, to
mollific, and dissolve; to wash also and purific the the outside. And this
peradventure was John Baptists Ordinance, when only to blot out the Character
of Circumcision, which indeed was then prevalent among the Jews till the
Baptism of Jesus, of more Energy and Virtue took place to purge out Sin by
Internal Purification, and which also is that Baptism of the Holy Ghost which
John proclain'd was the Baptism of Fire; so that these two Ordinances and
Divine Operations were vastly different, and distinct from one another, for the
one only washes, but the other purifies; the first to brush off the outward
defilements; but the latter to blot out Internal Pollution. Consider it
therefore, you Christian Professors, and live not by Profession, but the life
of Christianity.

And the Divinest said, Let the dry Land appear; which was no sooner said but
it immediately appeared. Now dry Land which is the solid and fixed part of the
Creation: all Interpreters agree that its literally Earth; and properly is
such, and generally so received, as is by Expositors and others concluded. And
this dry Earth I have also considered was that only which was left after
separation of the Elements: to which also was added the dignity of an Element;
and because ranged and superscribed in the fourth Clasis of the Macrocosm, is
confirmed the most solid, and most fixed part of the whole, concentring it self
upon its own proper Basis, and impending on nothing by a Divine Ordination, but
its own equal Poize and the Will of God; so that neither upwards nor downwards,
Extension nor Demension can any ways remove, displace, or unlodge it; because
God through Wisdom has inspired into it the Magnet of Fixation, Gravity, and
Station which confirms it a central and fixed residence, and the Waters to roll
perpetually about it. The Air also to incircle and surround it; and the Fire
above all to surmount above it, yet every of them is restricted by Providence,
within the Circular Globe or Firmament of Heaven. But where are we now, got
above the Elements? no probably, but as far as our Eyes will carry us; no
mortal sees farther.

Our Basis I perceive then will be understood the Earth, and Earth and Water
complete but one Globe; so that of the whole, and visible appearance, here
seems to remain but one moity left: and the rather to confirm it, it is obvious
to every one, that the Firmament of Heaven intersects betwixt them; for the
Elements of Fire and Air disappearing, they become invisible; so that what
remains now save only Earth and Water, which are Subjects most solid and
visible to us: Not that I impose this Doctrine upon any Man, nor do I offer it
as a noval of my own: since therefore of it self it is so demonstrable, let it
carry its evidence in the Frontispiece of Time.

Earth therefore and Water are constipated Corelates, as hitherto we have
observed them visible Elements; and the difference betwixt them is easily
reconcilable, when to consider the Gravity of the one and Fluidity of the
other; yet both impregnated with Vital Faculties, and to each is super added a
Prolifick Virtue: and because daily influenced by Stars and Planets, are by the
Divinest inspired with Life and Vegetation. But Earth is the Nurse and Supply
of Elements, as is Water the Sister and the Mother of Earth: and because both
filled with Vertual Production, they fail not to send forth their daily
increase; whose Prolifick Breasts minutely sprung up, naturally replenished to
supply the Universe. But I must caution my self what I say now, least
peradventure there are some will decry any Hypothesis; and what if they do, I
matter not much, since to leave behind me Proselites enough after my Death to
assert and maintain,

That the World had a beginning, this is undeniable.

That Time sprung from Eternity, this is also indisputable.

That Generation succeeded Time, this is beyond all dispute unquestionable.

And that Generation terminates in Death, is altogether infallible.

That the Elements and Principles were lodged in the great Mass of the Chaos,
is true.

That Fire because of its Dignity superceeded the rest, is most true.

And that Air because of its purity climbed up after the Fire, is certainly as
true: leaving the Waters rolling too and fro, fluctuating, incircling, and
inspiring the Earth; and the Earth as Central to all the rest, by Wisdom and
Providence was concentrate on its Basis. Now tell me (if you please) what false
Doctrine's here? and I Will tell you, that our Modern Philosophers will allow it
Orthodox, as the precedent Generations and Philosophers before them, so
governed themselves as to assert and vindicate it. So that as I design no
Captivity by my Discourse, nor intend I any Conquest or Triumph over others;
only the exercise of every Man's Reason, compelling no Man to the dictates of
my conclusions: Give me leave therefore, such to advise as converse with
Scripture, or correspond with Reason, and the possibility of Nature; such I
mean as profligate those Fictious Notions of Heathens, and Infidels, and
Atheistical Antiseripturists, whose suggestions are only of an imaginary Being
of that Superlative Being, whose real Essence is existent in himself,
pre-existing Time, and is the God of Nature. God blessed for ever.

And the Earth brought forth Grass; Here Is Natural Production, and this Natural
Product spreading it self abroad, in a very short progress run into
multiplication; and because the Creator destinated it to the Creatures use, it
became Nutritious and Salubrious to them; consequently agreeable and
convertible to their Nature. But the Apostle tells us, That all Flesh is Grass;
and as the Grass fades and withers away, so Flesh and Blood, our daily
Morts, prognosticate them also in a state of Corruption; and in process of time
to admit of Solution: Every thing therefore that is in a capacity of being
dissolved, that thing most certainly becomes invisible; and such a posture
stands the whole Creation in, since daily to admit of Transmutation.

And the Herb yielded Seed, and the Fruit-tree his Seed, and the Roots and
Fruits also, after their kind, which are radicated and impregnated in every
individual; nor are they found in another Specie. And Sandivogius tells us
before the separation of Elements, that every individual had then in it self
Vertuality but one single primordial Seed, yet denies not that this primordial
Seed had the Specimen Virtue of all the rest, vertually and primarily radicated
in it. However there be some that will oppose this Doctrine, and lead by a
perverse Biass, would gladly refute it; but blessed is he that receives and
believes it; for it is a secret, and the gift of God sealed up from ignorant
and obstinate Men; not only in this, but in every Generation.

Nor can any Man, I persuade my self, know God in the Abstract, except
otherwise by the Work of God in the Creation; which Commissions me also to say
in the Creature as Paul says, Christ in you the hope of Glory. If therefore
another Man's knowledge profit me nothing except he enforms me the Measures he
knows; he but exposes my Faith to a rambling search, to find out the truth by a
dubious Examine: How miserable therefore, and much to be lamented is that
implicit Putationer, whose Zeal truckles under every form of Religion, and bows
his Knee to every new model of Conformity.

Let us therefore but examine this stupendous Creation, wherein God has made
himself obvious to the Creature, and which ought to be the Study of every
Enquirer, when because to read Lectures in the Stars and Elements: The copious
Volumns, and visible Folio's of God the Creator, that gave then a Being, and
are his Oracles, that by Divine Interpretation are made visible, conspicuous,
and intelligible to us: For here we may read, that Generation it self presents
unto us the Marginal Notes; and Genus and Species, the Vowels and Consonants,
the Magi of old learnt us to spell by; so that the Letters and Syllables of
this blessed Alphabet, points out unto us the Manuscript of the Universe; over
which great School, God himself is chief Rabbi; whose Students and Prosolites
are Nature and Religion; and their daily Lectures, and solemn Declamations, the
Visibility and invisibility of this Voluminous Creation, wherein God makes
manifest himself in the Creature, which teaches us to live by the Vertual Act
of Faith, whereby we may hope, what at present we cannot enjoy; so labor to
find out the hidden Mystery of Truth, and the unfrequented Tracts of Wisdom and
Experience; which is, or ought to be the study of every Man born into the
World; more especially to Christians: For truly to know God is to know Life
Eternal; for he that knows him but as he is told, I can hardly persuade my self
he knows him at all. Search well within therefore, peradventure thou will find
him; and if thou look without, there is he also to be found. So that in every
thing, and in every place, is his Mercy, or his Justice: where his Power is
also, and the Majesty of his Presence; for nothing is, nor can subsist without
him.

Is not this enough to enamour the Creature, whose dependence is wholly upon
the Creator; for if when to inspect Heaven by Divine speculation, with
confidence we may assure our selves, his habitation is there: and if we dive
into the Center of the Earth; there also is his Instrument, by which Nature
operates. The Superficial parts also, and the Soil of Earth; visibly, and
manifestly declare his Vegetation: and the celestial Incholists, as Planets,
and Constellations, do not they influence this blessed Creation. So that the
whole, and every part thereof declare him admirable; therefore to be admired,
till led by admiration to the Corona of Beatitude, which to the Religious seems
a pleasant short Stage; since the Life of Man is measured but a Span. Earth
therefore must to Earth, and Elements to Elements; and all compounded mixts
submit themselves to solution; which properly terminates in the periods of
Death; but Eternity, stands for ever in the presence of God; and is therefore
most permanent, durable, and everlasting.

But the Earth budded forth, because filled with Vegetation; and every Tree,
from the Cedar, to the Shrub; so the Oak, the Asp, the Poplar, and the Ash, had
its Seed radicated, and inated in its self; Plants and Herbs also in due time
producted, and variously multiplied to adorn the Creation and not so only to
the praise of him that made them; but to sustain, refresh, and gratify the
Creature: the mighty God, the Lord Jehovah, his mighty Arm has wrought this
Creation; and who shall compensate for so Divine a Work, if when to consider
that we are but Earth, and our earthy Ornament but the blossom of Vegetation;
and Vegetation it self, what is it more, than the antecessor, or forerunner of
Mortification; and Mortification what is it but the prospect of putrefuction,
which leads on directly to the prisons of Death.

Every thing therefore that is naturally produced; results, and terminates in
its native beginnings: For whatever thing is Elemental, or had inicience from
thence; falls under the same predicament, and destinated to die; whose ends
because fliding into the periods of inactivity, partake of the common destiny
of all compounded mixts. For such are the Elements, and all Elementary Beings,
ever since they had a Being, and Birth in the Creation: But here to
Philosophize, when duly separated, and afterward counited, and re-conjoyned
again; it represents the invisibility visible to us; which then resulting in an
Astrum, or Quintessentia, is in a capacity to dignifie other Bodies, and make
them glorious, as it self is transcedent.

But who has considered this great Conservator, besides him that reads daily
lectures in the Orbs, and makes it his business to consult the Creation: that
makes the Host of Heaven his daily Common-place-book, and he that made Heaven,
his hourly Contemplation: which privileges me to say, he that made Man, made
not Man for himself, but to admire his Maker: till then we shall never be
truly devoted, nor know what God is, nor what is his truth, notwithstanding so
often by others reminded: but like to the World, and prattling Parots, talk to
others those things we understand not our selves. In this kind of Zeal I was
morally Educated, and sucked my Religion in with my Learning, too copious Theams
to be taught in one Academy, when the Universe it self is too compendious for a
University. I grant its true, that the Press made a noise, but you must grant
me the Pulpit made a greater, till to me there seemed a defect in both: the
first because I found in a great measure impractible; and the latter
peradventure as unexperiental.

This conducted me to search after the wisdom of him that alone is the Divine
Miracle of wonder; and my daily Speculations were animated with discovery, when
every Signature unfolded it self; and every Classis brought forth a Clavis,
wherewith to unlock the Meanders of Nature. Diana in this Vision seemed almost
unvailed; and every thing naked, in its native simplicity: This represents
somewhat an Admical state, but unsatisfied in mind as to these discoveries, I
was led to contemplate the Mysteries of the Incarnation; how the Divinity when
clothed with Humanity, took not only our Nature, but our Infirmities upon him;
and was a bright and shining Light, illuminating the World, and every thing
therein, and is that Light which saves the World; that shines in darkness, yet
the darkness knows it not: a Light of that Beauty that illustrates Eternity,
and regenerates us Plants in the Paradise of God, to legitimize us Heirs of the
New Jerusalem: which if duly considered, here is a prospect of Life; when at a
distance stands hovering the issues of Death: So that Good, and Evil seem to
stand in a Poiz' till Earth be found lite by the counterpoiz of Heaven; and
here it was also I see my self naked, waiting for a change, for God is all.

This leads me on to a farther consisideration, if when to contemplate what is
more visible than Earth; and Earth, and Water to complete but one Globe; whilst
the Air is dressed up with the blessings of Vegetation, whereby to enrich and
impregnate the Earth: As may be seen in the very front and surface of the Soil,
since dekt, and adorned with such beautiful Greens; as Ornaments of Superiors,
illustrating inferiors: So that the Earth was spread with prolifick Virtue,
and production from thence immediately ensued, by discovering the prodigious
plenty of Grass; a word large enough to express it universal, had not some
labored though to little purpose, because when to shroud it under the
denomination of Herbage.

Grass therefore admits of a large extension, when because to comprehend both
Animals and Vegetables: and is peradventure the Original word, notwithstanding
the various interpretation of Expositors, because directing it self to the
level Paul speaks of, as two intersecting Angles direct to the Center of one
and the same single gnomen. So that we need not to cavil about the word Grass,
where the property of the thing is so well understood. Herbage therefore is
Grass, and Paul tells us, Flesh is Grass: and Grass by interpretation is the
most universal Vegetable.

Trees and Plants also are of the same Lineage, save only from a larger size of
more maturated Grass. Stones, and concressions also what must we call them, if
not coagulated, and petrefied Grass. So that Grass in one respect is every
thing that Earth vegetates, tho modified after various Formations, and Figures;
differently dressed up by the hand of Nature. And because having respect to
time, and place; by supplement of Air, and moist sovereign Vapors, causes it
to grow, and spreading It self on the Superficies of Earth, spires out into
Grass. Which when otherwise concealed in subterranean Cavities, grows up into
Metals, and the race of Minerals. As for Example, have not all Trees their
Roots in the Earth, when their laden Boughs hang burdned with Fruit. And are
not all Metalline Roots radicated in the Air, when the Center of the Earth is
burdened with their Fruits; what is more intelligible.

Now there is but one universal Spirit in Nature, from whence things Originally
have all their supplies; and the three Clauses also of Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals; are they not so many Marks, Sigels, and Characters, which the Creator
has imprinted, and stamped upon them, whereby the Creature might read, and know
them. But Man above all, because Lord of the Creation, is made most
intelligible, whereby to understand them: wherefore he calls them by Names, for
distinction; when as the rest of the Creatures know them only by instinct. And
this vegetating Spirit has its Seed in its self, and the Air is plentifully
replenished with it; which Seeds scattered, and spread about the Universe,
furnishes the Creatures in all parts of the Creation.

The Americans can tell you that Trees grew naturally where the Native Indians
never had a being; and were it not for Europes agriculture, and industry; her
florid Fields, and flourishing Pastures, would soon feel the fatal stroke of
disorder; so become Forests, and barren Deserts, fit only for beastial, and
salvage inhabitants. For God never made nor sent any thing into the World that
was either indigent, defective, or imperfect; every Creature, nay, the Plants
themselves were furnished with prolifick, and seminal qualifications; sterility
was a thing utterly unknown, till disobedience disinherited our royal
Protoplast; which had for ever so remained to the periods of time, had not the
Cross obliterated the Curse.

Our Ancestors often labored to strike out the Eyesore, which the succeeding
Generations have thought no impediment, because to study new Modes of Sinning,
whereby to improve impiety by consent; which has rarely ceased to follow every
Generation, as naturally (in my opinion) as Rust attends Copper; fretting, and
corroding the natural Body, till time, and other comodes blot out its
Character; so permits the compound to slide into Atoms, and yield it self
Captive to the Prisons of Death; waiting from the Artist a Resurrection. But
such Bodies as these we call imperfect, because of a Leprosy impendent on
them; when as indeed there are other dignified Bodies, that fear not to die,
because incapable of Death: whose peluced anima like Stars in the Firmament,
make glad the Adepti, and solicitous in Art.

In the next place, I purpose to speak something of Light; and since Light by
the Text is the Oracle of God, it was by his Wisdom apparently made manifest,
when undressing the Hoil of this beauteous Creation; which Light also leapt out
of the bosom of Eternity into the Vision, and perspective of Time; and because
expatiating it self in the Chaos was the Cause of this admirable Separation of
the Waters, when by Divine Ordination they divided themselves; and then it was
that dry Land appeared: Nor could it be otherwise because then the purer parts
immediately began to feel the force of Separation, so let the recrements
subside to the bottom, because of their feculent and impure Center, and thus
by the Fiat were all impurities Separated, from that which of it self was
altogether pure; and this Act of Separation we attribute to God, who
substituted Nature daily to operate: For should there happen but the least
Cessation, the whole Compound would annihilate, so become invisible.

But every Separation of separable Things creates the Unity, and perpetuates
the Harmony; since the Life of one Element is dependent on another; nor lives
the one without the breathings of the other. The Waters perpepetually
moistening the Earth, whiles the Earth inspires, and ferments the Water; but
the soft sweetnings, and breathings of Air impregnates both; as do the Stars in
their station, and Celestial Rotation, actually influence, and penetrate the
whole. From whence we morrally and rationally conclude that Earth made
dissoluble converts into Water; and Water by heat is ra^ified into Air. Air
consequently by circulation is convertible into Fire, and this I call Motion,
and the perpetual rotation of this admirable and imbellished Creation,
notwithstanding Copernicus asserts the Contrary, when to tell us that the Earth
of it self has a motion: however, I know none, except that of Vegatation.

And now the great Creator that made the Light commands that Lights appear in
the (...) Number; and divinely ranging them in the Frontispiece of Heaven, it
denot^s unto us the aforesaid Separation of that which is pure from that that is
im^ure. For (...) Firmament at once (...) with (...) whose Bodies were
innumerable, (...), and luminous, and (...) made to shine all over the
Universe^ ^hey also illuminate and impregnate the Creation* and that to
admiration, he hung the^^ ^word in his sublime Sanctuary, to discrim^ (...) Day
from the obscurities of (...) and to mark out the Winter (...) Summer Season:
For they (...) made Signs, and Expositors of Seasons to remonstrate days, (...)
^imes to prognosticate: Thus we ^^ad, and as constantly we observe the Heavens
adorned with these beautiful Bodies, so that their operations we feel, and
sometimes their effects; but their ends as hitherto are not generally
understood, tho frequently th^^ght (...) and descanted by putatio^^rs; who
fancy it Sacriligious when to mediate on them, or if but to enqui^^ into the
order of the Creation; supposing the Creator like thems^^ves but nigardly, when
to conceal such an excellent and admirable (...); least peradventure every
(...) should p^^ into the Model, so (...) Maker by the Mediums of Art^

But Gods divine Oracles surpasses man's reason, (...) wisdom instructs us the
^^^^ods of the Creation; nor was (...) ignorant of these Celestial (...) who
pointed out to us the Divine (...) of Stars, how some of them (...), and how
some move themselves: who cites to us the motion of (...) Constellations; the
forms, and ^^nfigurations also of the Signs of the Zodiac; with the blazing.
Meteo^s, and formidable Apparitions; the beauty of Orion, and the splend^ur of
the Pliades: the luster of Boots ^ubulus, or Arctophylax: the celerity of
Mercury, and the Rotation of Ursa Major, incircling Ursa Minor, in opposition
to the Crosiers, Directors to Artick, and the Antartick Poles. But what edifies
all this to an illiterate Person, any more than a Clerum at the Commencement in
Cambridge: ignorance I must confess is an o'rgrown Infant, and the greatest
Enemy and Opposer of Art, which ought to be shunned as a Monster in nature; and
above all things abhorred as some mortal Contagion; or thing worse, could worse
be supposed: For ignorance, and impudence they poison our Faith, and of future
hope would have us to suspect the enjoyment of the excellency of those divine
things whereof now we know little more than part.

For to read in the beautiful face of the Firmament, we discover the
invisibillity of things made visible, which manifests to us the end of the
Creation: So that I profane not, nor would I be thought erroneous, when if
only to assert that the Stars made visible are Angels only explicated (and the
Saints shall shine as the Stars in Glory) consequently that Angels are Stars
complicated; and as the Star Hesper is the Suns Aurora, so the day Star of
Regeneration is the Son of God, to light us up to his glorious habitation: it
is true, that as the Night is opposite to the Day, so Sin interposeth betwixt
God, and the Creature; we must carry the Cross to purchase the Crown, and
divide the Day from obscurities of the Night: which without a Metaphor is the
Light from Darkness, Sin from Sanctity, Death from Life; and which indeed are
sublime operations, fit only for him that divinely operates.

The frontispiece therefore or visibility of the Firmament, God noted out to us
for Signs, and for Seasons; so for Days, and for Years; whereby to prophecy of
those fatal Events, frequently impendent ore impenitent people: but the Seasons
declaratively make demonstrative of heat, so do they of cold; as at other times
of rain, and ^lso of fair weather; because visibly read in the face of the
Stars, Exhalations, Corruscations, and Embodied Clouds. The days also numerate
the date of the Creation, and the Nights direct us to read Lectures in the
Heavens. Thus we see that we see nothing, except we see and understand by the
Wisdom of God, the excellency and beauty of those sublime things, pointed out
to us in the mysteries of the Creation, viz. how the Ray of Light profligates
Darkness; and the Glory of the Majesty mortifies Death; the consideration
whereof sweeteens all difficulties; but the blessed fruition ravishes the Soul,
and makes it infinitely more pleasant and dilectable, than temporal sweets
affect the sense.

And God the Creator made two great Lights, the Sun and the Moon; whose
different progress directs unto us a different appointment: the Sun as
abovesaid, to rule the Day, but the Moon by reflection to govern the Night. So
that the Sun by Divine ordination, and the Providence of God superceeds the
Moon; but the Moon by a peculiar virtue influenceth the Ocean, and adorns the
Universe: The Majesty of the Sun is admired by the Persians, so is that of the
Moon adored by the Indians. Now the Suns warm body moderates the Earth, and
would peradventure in some measure callifie it, did not the moist Air
generously intermediate. And the Moon perhaps would frigidate the Ocean, did
not the Suns sovereign warm Beams mildly, and sweetly by influence nourish it.
What illuminates the Orbs, and what inspires the Ocean, if not Sun, and Moon by
the Providence of God* that vegetates, and impregnates the Creatures in
Creation.

So that if when to consider the Majesty of the Sun, that incessantly moves
without intermission, in the Central Orbs, and every Angle of the Universe;
whose defused Ray spreads upwards, and downwards; and every way to influence
with heat and motion: and because enricht, and adorned with such eminent
qualifications, as the majesty of Light, and the excellency of Beauty; it might
probably invite Sandivogius the Philosopher to superscribe him the Vehic^lum,
or Tabernacle for God: which Hypothesis is refuted by Basil Valentine, and
contradicted by Scriptural Authority. For I will build my Tabernacle, and dwell
among men; and the Saints they shall shine as the Stars in Glory. But the Sun
beyond dispute is the most glorious Creature that God has Created in this
stupendous Creation, because of its purity, and superlative Clarity; since
totally separated from all its dregs: whose inside and outside we made
Synonimous, formd out of pure Principles of Life and Heat; whose rapid motion
gives action to the Orbs, and clothes all the Stars with his Luster, and
Splendor; making them show beauteous by the luster of his brightness: and
because by the Divinest decked, and adorned with Glory; he lives without
compeer, nor has he any Corival; where note he is a Monarch, and the Parent of
Vegetation.

And such is the Moon, tho a faint flattering Ray (if when compared with the
Sun) yet she illustrates unto us from the same Original: and because adapted
from adequate primordials, in her occidental Cressant she naturally displays a
Lunar clarity; when in her Oriental purity an incomparable brightness: and though
by reason of distance She wants a natural warmth, yet in her Progress she
spreads forth of splendor, whereby she sends Beauty to the ends of the Ocean.
The Tides themselves also are a Lunar flux, and such is the frail imbicility of
Females: For the Moon has a Monarchy within her self, yet directs She by the
generous Beam of her Sovereign, who by Wisdom and Providence of the Supreamest
Good that governs the whole, and also the parts; is made to nourish, and
refresh the Creation: so that to make things plain, by explaining my self,
peradventure, may bring my Discourse into suspicion, were the Vulgar my Judges;
who, I fancy by this have already doomed, and brought me under the calamity of
a Lunatic.

The residue of the Stars, the Divinest also he placed them in order by
particular classes, and gave to every one by a grant from Heaven, a peculiar
virtue, and different operation: one to dignifie Earth into the purest Gold,
another to make Silver shine in the Mines: a third to scatter Iron Stone,
underneath the Surface; a fourth to discover Quick^silver fluid; a fifth lays
open the Mines of Tin: and a sixth the beauteous Mettalline Copper: but the
seventh creates the Earth into Oar, which by smelting at the Mills, is
convertible into Lead: but there are Other, and various coagulations, besides
these seven; as allowed by Philosophers, the product and progeny of Erratick
Stars: and such is Cat-silver, Mine Oars, and Minerals; mixed Metals also, with
various complications. Then their's Talk, and Realgar; with Zink, Bismuth, and
Cobolt; and the regal Cements of Hal, and Malk, besides Markasites, and
Pierites; with innumerable concressions of opacous Bodies, enough to astonish
the Reader, if to name them.

Precious Stones also are of the same progeny, and legitimate heirs of Stars
and Constellations: and though some coagulations out-lustre one another, as the
Cristal, because having a polite and shining face; so has the Crisolite a
Diaphinous-body: but the Saphir, the Hyacinth, the Smaragdine and Emerald,
together with the Amethist, Diamond, Ruby, and the Carbuncle, are all
gloriously tinged with a Mettalline Tincture: but there are other, and Opacous
Bodies, directing to the Topax, beside the Turchas; and such is the Onix, and
admired Granat; with the Cornelian, needless to nominate, in regard by the
Mobile so generally understood. All which have their Officine, and Shops in the
Earth, where Illiastes, and Archeus, are Rector, and Operator; the one to find
stuff and the other labor: but Demogorgan assists both by the help of Vulcan.
Thus in brief I have given you a short view of Celestials, and how they are
adapted Parents of Terrestials.

Now these glorious and luminous Lamps, the Stars, were kindled by the Divinest
to illuminate the World: and God lifted them up, and set them in the Firmament
as Oracles, and Ornaments to adorn the Universe: whose signature and
impressions are perpetually impressed upon Earths soft Table, to influence and
impregnate it with prolifick virtue: For the Sun and Moon, shows us Heaven and
Earth in a lesser Character than most men dream of: and because having a
magnetic virtue, and principle in themselves; the first fills the World with
heat, and activity, but the latter because immerg'd with passive
qualifications, influenceth fluidity, and the race of Females. The Sun
therefore we superscribe him Masculine, but the Moon every one intitles
Feminine: where note, as these Luminaries are made to move, consequently so
moves the Wheels of Generation and corruption, which mutually dissolves all
compounded Bodies.

But the Moon most properly is the Organ of Transmutation, as is the Sun the
Parent of Generation: and these two Luminaries multiply and fructify every
individual as to generation, and multiplication; for what compound ever was, or
is there to be found in whole nature that holds not in it self some proportion
of the Sun, and so of the Moon, whereby to confirm it with life, and motion; so
that what Offices soever are performable by these two Luminaries, either for
preservation of the whole, or conservation of part; as is the performance for
one, such also and after the same manner is the like office for all. Since
therefore such Virtue shines from Celestials, what may be expected from
Super-Celestials is not Christ the Wisdom, the Beauty, and the Glory of the
Majesty, whose admirable amazi^g and astonishing brightness shines in the
Tracts to the new Jerusalem.

The holy men of God in former Ages read daily Lectures in this Divine
Manuscript; and the same Starry Folio since the beginning of the Creation, has
lain unfolded to this very Generation: So that wanting Solomon's wisdom, and
Jobs inspection; very few, or none do read in it now. Surely our Rabbis have
lost the Clavis. Hermes its true, and the Egyptians before him understood, and
styled God, Minos Solitaria; but our great Prophet Moses; Jehovah, and Elohim;
so the Cabalists entitled him Aleph Tenebrosum, from whence some conjecture the
Delphians in their inscriptions direct their Orisons to the unknown God. But
the Arabs -- their Orisons: but the Arabs and the Caldeans marks him out Aleph
Lucidum. So that doubtingly the Key of Knowledge in some measure may be lost,
otherwise the Alphabet would not seem so unintelligeable; unless we have made
new Heavens of our own, so study them only, and forget the old one. But the
Creation of Harmony who can forget, and not forget him that adorns the
Universe: so fill up his Lamp with Foetid Oil, whose stinking Empyruma instead
of Aroma's, infects the Altar, and offends the Omnipotent.

But man by the Divinest was Created twofold, Visible, and invisible:
Corporeal, and Celestial: his Elementary Body, or visible part of a pure fixed
Earth; or a deep red Clay: but his Soul or Invisibility of an Essence Royal,
not to be found in the Texture of the great World, more intellectual therefore,
and more supernatural; from whence Montanus that great Pantheologist, calls Man
a small or little Incarnation, in which work God was pleased to multiply
himself.

Nor was Man the primitive Work in this blessed Creation, but the great World
was, out of which Man was made: whose Principles, and Practice ought to be well
examined; should we resolve to take part for the whole; so guess at the frame
by a regular proportion. And as Man was taken out of this copious World, so was
the Woman also taken out of Man. For God in his Eternal Idea foresaw that
whereof as yet there was no material Copy. The Goodness and Beauty of which
invited him to Create Man like unto himself; and beholding that divine and
lively Image of his own, inwardly to shine in the Tabernacle of Man; he became
therewith enamoured with divine Ardency; and so loved the Creature, that when
Sin had defaced it; he again restored it by the suffering of that Power by
which Man at first was made and created.

But the Sun and the Moon were made to operate, and man in a sense was made to
imitate; whose Masterpice is Invention, and whose Study should be that to
repair which Nature because interrupted left somewhat imperfect: but not that
Nature cannot perfect her Operations; rather we are to consider all
scientifical Artists but dull Operators, and Imitaters of Nature, who works by
her own Copy, slighting all Artifice, and artificial Presidents; since such
seem useless, and altogether improper to her, that of her self, can perfect the
whole.

Health craves no method for Physic, nor Diet; it is Disease only that claims
the privilege of Medicine: then why so preposterous to seek sickness in
health, and daily enquire the state of new Worlds, when the old one by
Providence is still so good, and upheld by his Power can never die. The wise
Creator has put therein such a renovating faculty, that of it self by
attraction and repercussion, it receives what is suitable, and agreeable to its
nature, rejecting whatever is unagreeable to its resentments, as a thing that is
loathed by a disdainful appetite: let every student therefore study the
knowledge of that which God in his Wisdom has already made; since Man with all
his Art can make nothing like it.

And now since the Stars are commissioned to Rule, Saturn as Superior, and
Lord of the Universe, assumes the precedence: and who because of his ancient
and paternal Dignity, claims a prerogative above all the Planets; exalting
himself in the supreamest Orb: whose Wife by allusion of Poetical Fixion was
surnamed Ops, the Daughter of Caelas; of whom is begot the fair Androginas, as
also the beautiful and the Florid Vesta: to whom the Votaries, and the Vestal
Nimphs in the days of Numa Pompilius, offered up their Orisons. Of Metals,
therefore Saturn is Lead; of Minerals Antimony, but of Stones the Granate.

Next unto Saturn's Superior Orb, benevolent Jupiter assumes the Throne; who
sways the Scepter in a peaceable Dominion, and himself as his Government is
also peaceable: a Monarch that is surrounded with Senators and Statesmen; made
happy in his choice when celebrated to Juno, had not his Royal Consort been
wounded with jealousy. Now this fair Goddess as the Poets have conceived
sprung from the loins of Saturn, and Ops: whose Metallic progeny was only Tin:
and of Minerals Zink, but of Stones the Iacinth.

Now Trinus Magnus or Valorous Mars, he mounts the Chariot; who by Poetical
Fixion is the Son of Juno. This great Martialist and Champion of the Gods,
ascends his triumphant Throne next unto Jupiter, and Rules by the Sword: whose
Law as is asserted, is the force of Arms: however the Poets have prescribed him
no Wife, but inamoured with Venus, some suppose her his Paramour: rich in no
Child but Iron, and Vitriol, save only the Sovereign and Medicianal Heliatrope:
whose Markasite is Bismuth, and whose Minera is the Magnet.

Most illustriously adorned, Sol himself advances: whose dazzling Ray ^ills all
the World with Luster: but his Consort is known by the name of Lune, whose fair
beauty some say equalizeth his brightness; yet no Child he had but Gold, and
the Carbuncle; excepting the Ruby, and Lapis Luzuli, with some Minerals, and
Markasites tinged with his Luster: otherwise of themselves they could never
shine.

But Venus succeeds, and because the Queen of Heaven, She Is reputed the
Speculation of all the Philosophers. Who was thought as by Fiction the fair
Daughter of Caelus but her Mother the Ancients have prescribed the Ocean: if
so, this fair Goddess she sprung from the Sea, and was the supposed Wife of
Vulcan, Master of the Cyclops: she had no Child indeed excepting Copper, yet is
she rich to excess in Vitriol, wherein lies her Treasure: whose nativity of
Stones is the beautiful Emerald; but her Markasite is Cobolt.

Mercury next to Venus he ranges himself, and among the Planets is styled
Intelligencer: a universal lover of Metals, and Minerals; principally all those
of a regal condition; we read of no Wife that ever he had, because an
Hemaphrodite, and complete in both Sexes; whose progeny is Quicksilver, and
the sparkling Diamond.

Next to Mercury the Empress of the Orbs Lune's Silver Horns they polish the
Sky. But we have told you already whose Wife she is, though some among the
Philosophers superscribe her Masculine: whose native Child is the burnisht
Silver, and the beautiful Saphir: but her Artificial, as hinted by Basil
Valentine; is the first born Daughter of all the Philosophers.

But the Stars, I have considered, ought not to be thus discourst, nor ought we
to discipher them after this manner; nor was it indeed my primitive intention;
however since so bluntly to blab it out: let it serve only therefore to commode
the ingenious, and direct the Sons of Science into the Tracts of Philosophy;
making the Elements Natures Common-place-book; in whose legible Index if well
examined, you may there find all that ever she did, or for the future intends
to do. And in this thin tiffeny she wraps up her Principles before she embark
them into coagulation: and which also retains the Species of things, and is the
immediate receptacle of Spirits after solution of their natural Bodies: from
whence, and through which the good ones pass to a Superior Limbus, or
Emperoeal Heaven; where all pure Essences have their eternal Residence.

And thus we have determined by a Philosophical Liberty to liken Nature to a
beautiful Lady, shaded sometimes under a Cyprus Vail; metaphorically
interpreted a thick Mettallick Mantle: or rather a complication of Elements,
and Principles: which when it shall please the Divinest to unvail, and draw it
off from before the Creation; we shall not only see Nature really naked; but
the very beauty of things themselves, whereof these we now behold are but
representatives: when on the contrary should ignorance invade us; how an
outward dimness, and an inward darkness would presently ensue: from which we
pray, Libera nos Domine. But all complicated Bodies are Elemental, and
Spiritual; which by medium of Celestials become magnettically united: and is
the true, and the only cause of Production, and also Vegetation: Natures
Fundamentals, and the Philosophers Speculation.

And the Evening and the Morning were the fourth Day, but every day since the
beginning of Time is Gods Day only, and properly his; and so will remain the
whole progress of Time; and will be so when Time is no more. But the Divine
harmony of things in the Creation were manifest in Time, in which all ends and
beginnings have their natural period. The beginning therefore was in creating;
and creating was an act of making things manifest. The periods also, or results
of which, are manifestly discovered, by solution of parts. Thus the World and
all therein had a beginning in Time, when the Divinest undrest the Hoil or
Chaos; and then invisible things were made visible to us: which by Reason of an
Elementary composition, are in time locked up in the periods of death. This is
all the Philosophy hitherto I have known; or it may be shall ever be known by
another.

In the next place we discourse the Element of Water, imagined by some a
solution of Earth, or a moist coagulum of ambient Air, made fluid only by an
internal flux; which surrounding the Earth compleats but one Globe: and which
aquous fluidity separates only the impurities from the more extraneous and
superficial parts; but cannot reach to the Core, or Center, whereby to examine
the internal impurities; which an intence Fire naturally purges forth, by
reason of its ardent activity (and not improper to say its vulcanick nature)
where the Waters of themselves can never reach.

Two Elements therefore are destinated to putrification; and as the matter to
be purified is visible, or invisible; consequently such are the Agents for
purification. Since the Fire therefore is an invisible Agent, and that other of
Water most obvious and visible; the visible and invisible parts of things are
therefore so mended, and cleansed by subtle Operation; whereby they seseparate
the more inquinate impurity, that stiffly adheres to the immaculate nature, and
prestine state of Virgin purity.

But as the Soul within the Body is not bett'red by the Corporiety of all, or
any of the natural composition (or impendent matter hovering about it) but is
rather stained, poluted, and infected with noxious Sapors arising thence from:
So you are to consider that the Vessel has its honor from the dignity of the
Arcanum (or glory of the Subject matter) therein contained. And as the
Scripture instructs us, that Gods surprising Light illuminates every pious act
of the Creature; it obliges us to consider that the Goodness of God is as
great to forgive; as by his Clemency and Bounty he is just to pardon. Where
note we observe God made things proportionable, and in all respects, suitable
to himself. The great World he made therefore to contain the less, but the
lesser World he made to contain himself that contains the greater. And thus you
have the Mystery of the Creation, the Majesty of Reason, the Divinity of
Scripture, and authority of Philosophy.

But the Waters brought forth every moving Creature, because in them was the
Spirit of Life: For the Spirit of Life by Divine incubation made ingress into
them, filling them with a prolifick virtue: and the first formed Creature that
the Waters brought forth, was the great and unweildy body of Earth; most
recluse, and solitary, because inwardly concealed; which till then never felt
the operative fo^ce of Fire. Nor did the luminous Ray of the Sun, nor the
vertual influence of Stars, nor the Divine order of Constellations, nor the
treasures of Hail and Rain, of Lightning and Thunder; nor the Seasons of Heat
and Cold, Frost and Snow (besides innumerable living Creatures to whom Heavens
plentiful Breast daily administered) till then none of them knew the potency of
Life, nor the force and energy of the universal Spirit which God by Wisdom
inspired into them.

But some will object, and peradventure say, how, and after what manner does
the Earth vegetate. Show us also the rationallity and probability whereby the
Earth and the Water become living Creatures: to which I readily and briefly
answer; the Soul of the Divine World is God himself; but that of the Created
the universal spirit of Nature: and this Soul lives by virtue of the Divine
World, but acts by imagination only in the Created, whereby the Earth
conceives, vegetates, and buds up; so does the Waters protrude, and bring forth
even to the period and perfection of its predestined end. Nor can they
otherwise do; because the Law of Providence and Necessity is by Divine
ordination imposed upon them. And that which enriches them are the sublime
treasures of Elements, and Principles. For wanted they those active, and
ingressive instruments, they were of all things in Nature most imper^ect; and
would be altogether void, and unprofitable; so become as it were a mere
annihilation; and not improper should I call it, a Caput Mortuum.

For it were impossible that any Created Being, if when wanting the Vital
Faculty of Life, could be any ways at any time in a capacity to live;
consequently to move, vegetate, and protrude. But the great and the lesser
World is filled with animation, whereby it daily and hourly buds forth: All
which are signal and demonstrable tokens of the Spirit of Life that animates,
and actuates in every Creature. Life therefore is that active and universal
Spirit of Nature wherewith she infusseth, the whole Creation, impregnating
every individual therewith; whereby the Character of Life is no sooner stamped,
infused or impressed upon any material Subject, but it inwardly lives, as does
the invisible World; which no sooner appears to move forward into act, but the
model and frame of the Subject matter at once admits of exterior Motion.

Life therefore as it is the Radix of every thing, so it acts demonstratively
in every Body. The motion of the Sun we daily observe is necessarily occasioned
by this active spirit of Life. And such is the vital pulse in Man, as also that
large and greater pulse of the Ocean. Earth vegetates only from this operating
Spirit, and the Air is replenished, and filled full of it: Every thing that is,
lives not without it; nor can any thing subsist deficient of it. O wonderful
Nature the Miracle of the Creator, how intelligeable art thou in all thy
Operations; and though so simple, naked and demonstratively plain, yet how
difficult is it for the Artist to find out.

So that were we minded to imitate Nature in her solitary Operations, and
Fermentation of Elements; we ought first to consider in order to what Nature in
her daily progress points out unto us, whereby to manidge and introduct us:
whose mediums because primarily separation, and solution of parts; therefore
from thence begins manual Operation. Let solution therefore be the first step,
since in separation all is found. Then proceed to Filtration, Evaporation,
Congealation, Cristalization, Distillation, Digestion, Putrefaction, Ceration,
Albification, Rubification, and Fixation. Then will Diana appear from under her
Vail, which none but the Eyes of a true Philosopher, since the beginning ever
yet saw.

But now I suspect I Am beyond the Paraphrase of the Text, when only designed
to discourse the Creation; so of Elements and Principles, Natures own
Rudiments. How that Elements subsist not without previous Fermentation of their
complicated com^xture of invisible Parts; so that a complete separation is no
where found whereby to unlock, and disintangle the unity of Bodies, without a
Philosophical Clavis to display their Principles; which otherwise are limited,
and by Nature confined to submit to the law of coagulation. Of all which I
cease farther to disclose; lest peradventure this secret be already too
manifest, when because to devulge it to the root of ingratitudes: so we leave
that Subject to discourse the Leviathan.

And, God made great Whales, etc. Job calls him Leviathan, who after his
Creation by the permission of God, rolls to^ and fro the fluctuating Ocean:
Whose unctuous Scales pollish the Sea, that ^o amaz^ment it shines like a Pot
of Ointment; and whose magnitude amazes his fellow Creatures. Whose Empire is
the spacious and bottomless Ocean, but himself a Monarch over all in the deeps,
whose Subjects are the several Clases of Natatiles, that pay tribute to him
with the loss of their Lives. So that what to say of this prodigious Creature,
I know not; nor is any Pen capable to discourse his concealments, or fathom the
unfathomed depths that conceal him. Is not he one of the wonderful Mysteries of
the ways of God? Whose shining paths discover his ways, and whose motion
terrifies the eyes of his beholders; ^ Creature he is that lives void of fear,
and is as Job says, a King over all the Children of Pride.

Leviathan therefore if thought requisite to describe him, I shall rally him
under three several distinctions; and the rather because to make him yet more
obvious, give me leave to rumidge the Ocean, and dress up my method whereby to
illustrate him in the following order. First, then by Tradition we entitle him
Grampus, when because to consider him in his prestine Minority; but
successively in his Peregrination he assumes to himself that dignity and
magnitude, that some call him Iubartas. When in process of time, and becoming
yet more formidable, some are pleased to superscribe him the Whale or
Leviathan; whose motion upon the slippery tracts of the Ocean, represents him
as it were a floating Island. And whose excessive bulk, and incredible bigness
is enough to astonish every beholder: when otherwise to consider him on the
silty Owse, his own weight peradventure hazards to sink him; whereby he becomes
a prey to the Merchant, or otherwise must lie till death release him.

But of this admirable and eminent Subject, there are some so precipitant to
preconjecture Job too copious; whiles othersome of a contrary opinion have
determined him too brief, and altogether concise, when because as to their
apprehension not to enlarge enough upon him: wherefore to reconcile them which
is not without difficulty; the ignorant and unlearned think he has said too
much, when by reason of their ignorance they cannot understand him: but to the
Wise and more Judicious he has said too little, and the rather in regard they are
desirous of knowledge; for Wisdom is always known of her Children.

But Job that humane Oracle of Learning and Eloquence; and as learnned as any
man in the study of Astronomy, has given such eminent and convincing Encomiums,
with such solid Arguments of this admirable Creature; that every description
save that of his own strikes a Discord in the Readers ear: whose Mute I confess
my self to be, and am unwilling therefore to attempt to encounter what neither
my Language nor Experience can boast of, otherwise, than that I have seen this
formidable Creature sporting himself in the vast wide Ocean; yet this wont
privilege, but rather precaution me (with reverend submission) to a sedate
taciturnity, and to affix no more Arguments upon this invincible Subject: But
rather with my Author lay my hand on my mouth, and remembering the battle, do so
no more.

Since therefore to consult him without any compeer, and a Monarch of such a
magnitude, and vast Dominions; should we rumidge all the Elements for a Mate to
match him, none but his own is found to contain him. Wherefore we represent him
the Majesty of Mortals, whose search we relinquish to correspond with
inferiors; such are the Porpus, the Bottle-Nose, and the Shark, the Selk,
Boneto, and the Albicore, the Moura or Sea Serpent, with the Conger, Bass,
Remora Torpedo, and the American Snite. There is also the Turbet, Scate,
Dolphin, Grooper, and Cavalla; besides the Sturgeon, Salmon, Trout, Lucit,
Mullet, Umbar, Barble, Tenche, etc. and thousands more in Salts and Freshes.
Moreover there are Shellfish, as the Turtle or Tortoise, Conct, Lobsters,
Oysters, Crabs Cockles, Mussels, Crawfish, Prawns, and Shrimps; but these are
armed all over. Another Brigade are Alegators, Crocadiles, Guianas, Bevers,
Otters, and Manitees, with many other, but such are Amphibious, whom I care not
to converse with.

Living Creatures therefore, and such as move, and have their motion by the
mediums of Water, are our Subject matter. And that God created every invidual,
made it to live, and gave it motion, is the strength of my Assertion; And that
the Waters were the cause of their Life and Motion, is the Argument of the
Text: but that God gave Life and Motion to the Waters that gave Life and Motion
to the Creatures therein, is my positive and final Conclusion. Life then as
naturally attends the Creation as the Ray of Light follows the Sun. Nor can any
Life issue but what flows from Light, as Light it self flows from the Divine
Fiat; which immaculate Light sprung up from Eternity, as Eternity it self
shines from the Majesty.

But since the determinate and original end of Water was not generally
understood, its nature and office but imperfectly considered, its wonderful
Virtue and Operation intelligeable only to such whom Wisdom and Nature have
duly Educated in God's great School, where nothing is taught without wonder and
astonishment; so that all I can offer relating to this admirable Subject, is
little more than to say nothing, since if I speak any thing, I say too much;
and silence peradventure would better become me, rather than so publicly
declame, and devulge to the World these my Notions, and it may be by some
thought barren apprehensions, that like a Chase in Arra's figurates only the
design, but wants real power of Life to prompt forward into Motion. Which
implies, such Phaenonima's discover nothing where the genuine truth of any
thing admits of a doubt; and who will be so presumptous to determine possitives
by his own own hesitant and imperfect Conclusions.

But the Sea as one great and copious Body is acted only by the spirit of Life,
that in the beginning inspired the Creation: and all the Rivers and Rivulets
that fluctuate in Islands, consequently all those that spread themselves on the
Continent, what are they but such and so many Meanders running up and down in
every Angle, representing the Arms, Boughs, and Branches of this prodigious and
Miraculous Creation; whose Trunck or Bole is the Ocean it self: whose Radix or
Root in the Nonage of Time lay concealed among the admirable Mysteries of the
Creator. So that after what manner the Fountains and the Rivers, with the
Springs and Rivulets became incipid, whiles the Ocean it self is impregnated
with Salt; is another Mystery, till serioussy to consider the Quellem or Sand,
and the multiform variety of Soils in the Earth, as also to examine the Bottles
of Heaven, the burdned and impregnated Clouds that fall, and daily distill to
replenish the Earth, with Aerial Spirits, and Prolifick Virtue. These also were
once one Saline substance; when in the great Mass or Volumn of the Ocean; whose
Texture was alienated in the act of Separation because rarefied and purified by
Mediums of Air; which more properly admits of an explanation, directing to a
ra^efaction and transposition of Elements: whiles we direct our intention to
the Progress of multiplication, by Divine grant and praeordinate Council.

And now the Heavens shine a blessing upon the Creation, as also upon all
Elementary Constitutions; for God himself looked down upon the Ocean, not only
to bless it, but all her Inhabitants. Thus were they blessed, and all that was in
them were also blessed, when God bid them fructify, grow up, and increase. Now
how can they otherwise than propagate and multiply, since his Divine Word has
already commanded it. We therefore conclude the Creation blessed, and the
Creatures in the Creation, because being blessed, become a blessing to every
partaker. For the Bounty of the Creator can know no limit, though the Creation it
self is bounded with limitation. He therefore that made it had power to confine
it, but being himself eternally unmade, neither Art, nor Power, nor can any
thing confine him.

Where Is Peter's objection now to raise a scruple, because when to eat what is
common or unclean, since what God has cleansed is undoubtedly clean: but this
was a Trope or Type of Religion, whereby to denote God no respecter of persons;
nor relates it to any thing if I Calculate right than variety and distinction
of judgments and opinion: For probably Peter thought none but the Jews were
worthy the dignity and honor of Christianity, when God thought otherwise;
because having chosen the Gentiles as a people approved more worthy than the
Jews; who not only betrayed the Lord of Life, but barbarously and inhumanly
they murdered their Messiah.

Be fruitful, says the Word, increase, and multiply; here is a Commission large
and great enough, Sealed and Signed under Heavens great Charter: So that now
the Rivers, the Lakes, and the Rivulets, nay the Ocean it self is filled with
variety. And every Classis strives to exile sterility, and obliterate if
possible the fate of barrenness. Can any Element in the Creation excepting the
Ocean proclaim such multitudes as there are of Fish, which surpasses the Art
of Arithmetic to number them. For who has not seen that the Belly of one
Female was enough of it self to accommodate a River, and has not also
considered that if every individual had the Ray of Life shine in it, and common
Providence attend it for its natural preservation; to admiration so great would
be the increase, that the Waters themselves would even suffocate.

But as there is a magnetic quality, and a sympathetick harmony in the
Creation; so is there a natural antipathy in the Ocean, as there is the like in
other Elements. The Falcon in the Air, the Shark in the Ocean, and the Angler
to bait with a Fish, when designed to catch a Fish (but such we call Troling)
so some sets Fellons to ^rapan Thieves. Its usual for the great ones to prey
upon the little ones, as the Grampus upon the Surai, the Shark upon the Boneto,
the Sturgeon upon the Shad, the Porpus upon the Salmon, the Pike upon the Dace,
and the Perch upon the Minue, etc. This I call Antipathy; but Simpathy if I
mistake not is the mutual Concordance, and Harmony among the Creatures.

I have read in Helmont of a prodigious Pike, that lived as he says to an
amazing bigness, and not then to have died a natural death; when if to consider
the whole progress of Life, what tribute would such a Smelter (supposing this
to be such) bring to the Waters. But lest I fall into a Piscatorian Error
(which vanity since my youth I can hardly withstand) let me therefore commend
you to my Contemplative Angler, where at large you may read the Historical part
of Angling. For in the high Sea there is no soundings, what Art then must be
used to catch Fish? And so profound is this Subject that I plough but the
Surface, whiles others more Mathematical measure out the Circumference, and
dive into Natures more hidden Mysteries by a secret and pious profound
Speculation, the Eye of Faith and Reason introducting.

But we shall put ashore now, to tread on Terra Firma. And God said let the
Earth bring forth the living Creature after his kind; Cattle, and creeping
things; and the Beast of the Earth after his kind. Then the Earth brought forth
in great abundance, since by the Divine grant of Wisdom and Providence it had
now in it self the three distinct Clases of Vegetables, and Minerals; besides
innumerable and various forms of Insects, and Animals, surpassing the Art of
Numeration. Every Cave now was filled with Concressions, and the Surface of the
Soil was covered with Herbage. The Florid Meadows also were performed with
Odorates, and the flourishing Fields were scattered with Corn. The Banks also
that bounded the murmuring Streams, were strewed with Arbories. The Mountains
with Mines, the Valleys with Herds, the Plains with Flocks, and the Pastures
with Cattle; but the moist and more boggy Swamps in Valleys, were crowded and
covered with Amphibious Creatures: besides innumerable Fowl of all sorts, and
kinds hovering in the Air, under the Canopy of Heaven. Fish also they floated
in the brinish Streams, whiles some others contented themselves with freshes;
so that every place, and every thing was filled with plenty whereby to enrich
this stupendous Creation. Nor was any part of Earth, as well as the Ocean,
exempt or denied those primary blessings from her great Benefactor that had
blessed every thing: who not only made her, but such provision for her, that to
the periods of time she can know no want: Who commissioned Nature also by an
eternal decree, as a Supreme Governess not only to govern; but also to labor
the Elements accommodation.

The Lion and the Lioness roared then in the Desert; and the Ass with the Mule
brayed in the Common; but the Heart with the Hind bellowed in the Forest: and
the Leopard with the Panther, besides the Wolf and the Tigre were heard to howl
in the barren Wilderness. But the Gray or Badger he yelpt in the Earth, whiles
the subtle Fox in his obscure Den lay Barking concealed in cavities under
ground: The Horse he neighed in the open Field, and the Cattle lay lowing in
the Florid Meadows: But the Sheep and the Lambs, true patterns of Innocence
(poor Animals) they lay bleating in every Pasture. Chantecleer in those times
he rose with the day, and the early Lark took Wing with the Morning; who
admiring the beauty of the rising Sun, mounts the fair Welkin to partake of his
splendor; whiles the Blackbird and Thrush, with the Winters intelligencer
(little Robin-red-breast) manage the Consort till almost evening; and then
pretty Philomel or the Summer Oracle, closes up day with sweet Epithalamiums.

Thus the Creation in a perpetual harmony melted the Air with melodious
Consorts of unterrified Quires of innocent Birds, that as well as they could,
expressed their gratitude, for the bounty and generosity of their great
Benefactor; who gave them a being, and the blessings of accommodation; the
Earth to nourish, and gave them food; but the Windows of Heaven were set open,
to refresh and gratify their thirsty appetite. And thus the Creation was
unacquainted with fear, whiles our Ancestor stood in a state of Innocence; and
had for ever so remained without contradiction (by authority of the Text) had
not Sin struck out the Character of simplicity.

The timorous Hare fled not then for fear, nor did the Cunney shelter her self
in the borough. The Hind calv'd naturally without corruscations; claps of
thunder were then no help to disburden her. Nor did the Bear lick her Cubs into
shape or form, for in the beginning was no deformity. The Pelican in those
days I persuade my self picked not those wounds in her tender breast infeebling
her self to relieve her young ones. Nor did the Ostridge conceal her Eggs,
dreading or fearing the crush of the Elephant. Nor can I hardly persuade my
self in these halcion days that the Swan as now sang a lacrimy to her Funeral;
nor the Phoenix fire her Vrn to generate her Species. Aligators surely in the
minority of time were not so ravenous as to prey upon Passengers. Nor did the
Crocadile dissemble his tears to moisten the Funerals of his fellow Creature.
The Plover I discover flew then with the Tassel; and the Pheasant I fancy kept
flight with the Falcon. Nor did the Partridge know Engine, nor Noosie-thread;
nor dreaded nor feared he the flight of the Goshawk. Nor can I think otherwise
than to say in those days the Lark was any time dared with the Hobby

Surely Nature in those days was divinely exercised to preserve in Unity, and
unite in Harmony the Creatures God had blessed, in this blessed Creation; because
then to know no other Law but that of Sympathy, which is naturally of kind: but
so alienated now, and in a sense so degenerated as if no other Law was ever
established. Now the Generations past, and our worthy Ancestors; as the
virtuous in this Age will labor to abolish this unnatural antipathy, if when
mutually to strengthen one another in the doctrine of Christianity, which ought
to be the standard among the pious in profession; lest peradventure we
relinquish our sovereign health, so draw on our heads the Curse of Disease: For
to fly from Sanity to seek a cure in Sickness; is to run headlong into the
Water to preserve our selves from drowning.

In the beginnings of time (as it was of old) no noise of oppression alarmed
the Land, nor dreaded any man the sense of invasion. Then it was that
privileges were as sacred as life, and the whole Creation seemed all in
common. Ianus I fancy lived not in those days when the inside was made legible
and intelligible by the outside. Modesty and innocence were then alamode, and
simplicity with piety the newest dress. For Heaven was pleased then to dwell
upon Earth, but Earth must now be rarefied into Heaven. God then immediately
converst the Creature, as by Mediation Christ interceeds the Father. And were
it not that Christ is our Savior and Advocate, we should be left without a
Plea, and Sentence denounced beyond dispute against us. But Christ is risen, in
whom we hope to rise; and lost Adam is restored by the Redeemer of the World:
So that what Adam lost on the one hand in Paradise: Christ our Mediator has
redeemed on the other.

Thus was the Beast and the Cattle made; and thus every Creature made after its
kind, knew no other Law than the Law of kind: for instinct of kind was
naturally inated and ingrafted into all, as into one: and if so, it were
impossible for the Creature to degenerate, where a command as hitherto was
never violated. Then it was that the Divinity of the Majesty of God most
splended and gloriously shined on the Creation; for how could it be otherwise
when the beauty of the Creator like a new risen Star reflected on the Creature

In Edens fair Field no Brambles grew, nor was sterility known in her borders:
The Trees then looked big because burd'ned with Fruit, and their blushing heads
bowed down themselves to the courteous hand that endeavored to reach them. The
Earth knew nothing but fullness and plenty, since every thing was supplied with
prolifick Virtue; and nourished in it self by the primar cause, Nature directs
the ends of Germination. No Cankers nor Caterpillars bred out of putrefaction,
nor were Northern blasts injurious to any thing; nor was there any fatal stroke
of Diseas, for every thing stood in its primitive purity; and Death was
outlawed, and Sin an Exile, or at leastwise a rerrour unknown, or unthought
of; nor do I err when to say at that time uncreated.

O blessed Creation, because God had blessed it from the beauteous Ray and Beam
of Himself. Whose radient Morning could scarce raise a blush before Titan was
ready to unvail his face. Whose pleasures were boundless because then
unlimited, for excess and intemperance were strangers in her Courts. And whose
Garden full frought with Flowers and Aroma's, flourished with increase since
hitherto the Serpent had not tainted the Fruit. And the Earth of it self
brought forth in abundance, whose Womb was the Storehouse, and Factory of
Treasures. Gold grew in Ophir as naturally in those days, as Lead is drawn up
in the Peek of Derby-shire. And Cattle by kind were raised and increased, as
putrefactive Excrements convert into Insects. But I cease not to wonder since
thy Works are so wonderful and to admire thy ways because so miraculous.

Thus Heaven and Earth were seemingly united; and the Creation bended no Knee
to any Government, save that of its Sovereign Lord and Maker. Nor was any thing
made that knew any Lord, excepting the Lord of Heaven and Earth. Nor had the
Creator as yet made man a King or Viceroy of the Creatures in the Creation.
All the World all this while was but one Commonweal, and the Tree of Life in
the midst of the Garden: and nothing as hitherto that God had created, had
tasted the bitter effects of Death. Oblessed and sacred Government upon Earth,
when Governed by the Royal Law of Heaven; which certainly had remained in that
blessed State, had not Sin by consent eclips't and defaced it, almost to
extinguish this beautiful Aurora.

But let us tack about now, and begin to examine the genuine nature and
complication of Animals; together with the natural composition of Man, whom we
find at this day complicated of Elements; of all which he consists if when to
consider his material parts. And as Adam was abstracted from the Womb of the
great World; so was Woman her self an abstract from him: whose Soul as an
Astrum, or an Essence Royal is no where to be found in the Texture of the
Universe. Wherefore we have considered Adam supernatural, whose Creation to me
seems a small incarnation (as Montanus says) as if God in this Work had
multiplied Himself. And though Adams Original keep not time with the Creation;
however we are Children of Adams Generation.

But the World because daily filled with revolution ever since the fatal Act of
Sinning; and that every Man because subject to Sin, and the slavish Law of his
lustful Appetite, becomes captivated by the man of Sin; so yields himself
captive to the Prisons of Death: whose outward progression is actually moved by
irregular motion of the desires inward.

But the Heavens we see, and the Celestial Incolists, how they never since the
Creation consented to Sin: and as they were, so are they still carried about
with a rapid motion. The reason whereof must necessarily spring from an
internal cause, and intrinsic principle (since intelligences are so ambigious)
and what is this principle if not the Soul of the World; or the Universal
Spirit God has put into Nature, whereby as a Magnet it retains the matter;
which laboring to reassume its former liberty, frames to her self a
habitation in the Center: and branching into the several Members of the Body
makes more room to act, and bestir her faculties. No wonder therefore that
natures are compounded, since nothing but the Almighty is without composition.

Nor is it the great or the lesser World that which transmutes nutrition into
blood; but the active Spirit of Life, and transmutation is that which is indeed
the Life of the Body. Since material principles therefore are only passive, and
can neither alter, nor purify the parts; we find them in a state to be
altered, and purified; tho not to communicate or dispose themselves to another
substance beyond their native intention. Wherefore we have considered them
altogether finite, and therefore have concluded them also determinate. Now if
this be a secret, you may call it so; but, as truth needs no voucher its a
substantial truth. Wherefore to conclude this philosophic Hypothesis; let us
throw away if possible those two celebrated crutches of pretended modern
sanctity, and the solemnity of Ceremony: and what results but primitive purity,
which since the Creation has known no deformity.

And God said (in the Text) let us now make Man; in our own Image let us make
him, and after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the Fish in the
Sea, the Fowl in the Air, (over the Cattle also) and over all the Earth; and
over every creeping thing that creeps upon the Earth. By this the Creation
seemed to want a Head, and less than a Prince is too little to govern it. Adam
must therefore be a Universal Monarch, and sway the Throne, and the Regal
Scepter. And Adam must not only wear Heavens Livery; but personate the King of
Heaven himself. Here the Divinest seems to Summons a Council, and God said in
himself let us now make Man, not like to any thing already made; but let us
make him in likeness like our self: in our own similitude and likeness let us
make him; and enlarge his Empire by giving him dominion over all the Fish that
swim in the Sea, and over all the Fowl that fly in the Air, over the Cattle
also that move on the Earth, and over every living creature that creeps and
moves; the Wisdom of God so divinely ordered.

This was a large and copious Commission that God entrusted a single Subject
withal; yet such was the good opinion the Creator had of the Creature, that God
intrusts Adam with the Stock of the Creation, and all the Creatures, and every
complicated Being that was made, comprehended, and contained in it. And Adam
drew all his supplies from above, since enricht with the Stock and the
Treasures of Heaven; nor converst he with any inferior Subject, nor any thing
in any respect unsuitable to himself; whereby he might indignifie or diminish
his Authority. In the cool of the Evening he walked with God, and in the heat
of the day the Aquaducts refresht him. Aurora sent him Summons of approach of
Day: but the Night, nor was darkness dreadful to him. The Celestial Sun was his
daily Tapour, and the Catalogue of Stars his hourly Contemplation; but the Son
of God his perpetual Lamp. So that his outside was bettered by his inside, and
because richly adorned and divinely beautified, he saw no darkness, nor the
shadow of Death; whiles he stood in this innocent State of Perfection.

For God in the Idea beholding a shape, or as I may so say a representation of
himself, became therewith enamored; and extremely loving it, would cohabit
with it: when immediately upon the resolution the operation ensued; and then
was this great Image the beautiful World (or rather the representative of his
Maker) brought forth, and created. And God said to himself (or the holy Word)
increase in increasing, and multiply in multitudes. But to Man only because
Lord of the Creation, I have endowed him with mind, and made him immortal. So
that if he die, the cause of death must necessarily proceed from excess of the
body, and inequallity of Elements; and pray tell me what death is? if not a
cold icy touch, or a dismal darkness of the compounded moist nature, adhering
only to the sensible World.

Let no Man wonder therefore that the light of God which illuminates the World
is unlike the Beam or Ray of the Sun, that by reason of its fiery, and
excessive brightness, immediately and at once strikes the eye with blindness:
but rather to the contrary, Heavens brighter Glory never at any time dazles the
mind, since the mind is the Souls ingressive eye, that soars up aloft to those
elevated Mansions, where that light shines that enlightneth every Man, already
come, or to come into the World: and is the beauty and glory of light, and our
saving health, that influenceth, illuminates, and beautifieth the Creation; and
every Creature, and created Being. But Man above all, because made a Monarch;
and capable to receive this blessed influence proceeding from God, the Majesty
of Light, and superexcellent brightness, that diefies the Soul whiles yet in
the Body: its he that is only blessed to contemplate this divine beauty; and live
up to the Virtue of Piety, and Holiness. So that Adam in a state of innocence
represents (as Montanus says) a Mortal God; and our Heavenly Redeemer an
immortal Man, if when to consider the blessed Incarnation.

And thus the things that are, were made manifest in time; but the things that
are, and not yet made manifest; lie hid, and concealed in the Divinest himself;
who is all things in all, yet subsists without them: manifest only in the mind
of Man, but invisible to the World, and the visible eye, except in the act of
creating only. And as the eminency of all appearing beauties are in the Essence
much more pure; so great and greater is the disproportion of beauty betwixt
this of Earth and the Beauty of Heaven. All things therefore subject to the
Eye, represent to us only things subject to sense! or more fully to explain it,
visible operation; whiles the Fabric of the Body needs and requires those
similar things that it cannot with convenience live well without them. But the
Beauty, and Majesty of invisible Beings, are inspected only by intellectual
Converse: since the Angles of God are made ministering Spirits; and the Spirit
of God the Divine Comforter that leads us spiritually into the Vision of Glory.

And Adam was the favorite God only converst with, in whom the Divinity
divinely shined, when our Protoplast stood in a State of Innocence; then it was
that no impure thing could approach unto him, because then in the favor, and
presence of the Majesty, our Progenitor, in Paradise was admitted to stand. For
Adam was constituted with a Divine Soul, like to the likeness of him that
infused it; which was the likeness of God himself, whose glorious Aspect shined
then on the Creature; otherwise the Creatures had never contributed so great
humility, and veneration to Adam; when flocking about him as some sacred thing,
whereby to honor and give them protection: so that to what place Adam was
pleased to direct, his Lifeguard of the Creatures continually went with him.

But Adam too remiss in this great concern, becomes negligent and careless to
examine his affair, notwithstanding Emulation follows at the heels of
Prosperity; for can favorites be without the peoples frowns, though under the
umbrage of their Princes smiles? No surely, the Hierarchy of relapsed Angels
had an ambitious Emulation against his present State; that if not counterploted
by the Wisdom of his Maker, they will conspire his ruin, and perpetual
overthrow. For revenge against the Will of God carries a kind of sweetness with
it ( solamen miseris) and thus sorrows seem to extenuate sorrow, when others as
our selves are in a suffering state. It is true that Adam was adorned with more
inward Luster than the outward beauty of the whole Creation. For in his Temple
the bodily Fabric, the Holy of Holies inhabited therein. For it is the
residence of the Divinest himself, in whom alone dwells the Beauty of Holiness.
Let us stand in this station, we shall see our Salvation: for he that made us,
knows how to deliver us. Then shall we find a holy Guide to direct us the
Tracts to the Paradise of God.

The Soul therefore whiles yet in the Body, represents a Candle concealed in a
Lanthorn; or a glance of Fire in a manner stifled, when because wanting the
benefit of Air. Who in extremity strugles with her Elemental Chains, yet spans
the World with a single thought; and enjoys that inwardly she is dismissed of
outwardly: that in a moment flies to the uttermost parts of the Earth, and what
ever is absent she at once makes present; and dead things by imagination she
restores to life: nothing can conceal or hide any thing from her, who in an
instant surmounts the Stars.

Thus Adam by his Maker was made a Monarch, and one of the Creators holy
Senators; who read Lectures in the Heavens, the Almighties Commonplace-book;
and conducted the Creatures created in the Creation: to whom God gave Voice,
and the ornament of Speech, but above all the glorious intellect of Mind; which
Angellical State our Protoplast stood in so long as he stood in opposition to
Sin: which gift was ungiven to the rest of the Creation; yet none of them
denied the benefit of Sense, lapt up only in this thin Tiffeny Web of
Mortality; for Sin is but a bulk of emptiness, and impiety; that like a Pageant
does nothing it self, but hinders others from doing good; seducing by the lust
and pleasures of the Body, whiles the Soul is merely starved with penury.

Innocence was then the best guard of our Ancestor, when he stood in the
presence of his God in simplicity; for the more pure that any thing is, the
more sublime is that thing also. Wherefore we consider Adam in an Angelical
State, when clothed with Piety, and adorned with Purity; then he stood his
ground like a Heavenly Champion, for God had made his Earth Celestial. This
answers something to the Doctrine of Hermes, that God inhabits in the Mind of
Man; the Mind in the Soul, and the Soul in the Body: and that he is all things
in All, both Act and Power; for he is God. From the matter therefore the
subtilest part is Air; of the Air the Soul; of the Soul Mind; of the Mind God.
And the Soul of Eternity is God himself; but the Soul of the World is Eternity;
and Heaven as he says is the Soul of the Earth: So that nothing, nor part is
deficient of Soul; nor is the Soul deficient of God.

Thus in innocence and simplicity o^ Protoplast stood, in this Divine posture
without sensual guards, when his Maker selected him a representative at the
great Assembly of the blessed Creation; where all the Creatures were convocated
together. Then it was that Adam like a Magestrate; and a Legislator (for such
then he was) gave forth his Edicts unto all the Creatures his natural Subjects.
The Golden Rule was kept then amongst them, when every one did justice by kind;
and not that the dread of punishment compelled them. For the Ray of Justice was
so generally distributed, that it naturally shined in every individual.

The Earth in those days was unburdned with Tillage, nor do we read it was
wounded with Culture: the Creatures in the Creation lived purely by instinct;
not making their Bodies Sepulchers to bury dead Carcasses in. There was no
Temple in those days to profane; but now we have Temples, nor want we
Prophaners. Wherefore let us consider the glorious Work of the Creation, that by
the hand of God was no sooner made, but by the will of Man was endeavored to
be unmade. Creation is not therefore Generation, nor have we considered
Generation is Life, but by way of allusion it may be called sense. Nor is
Change Death, though commonly so asserted; but rather a forgetfulness, or
obliteration of Elements. Generation therefore is improperly called a Creation;
but rather a production of things only to sense, in time made manifest: nor is
Change Death, but an occultation or hiding of that, that in it self seemed once
to live.

Here methinks I see both Sexes in our Ancestor shine through the luster and
beauty of Adam; for Male and Female God created them, so that both Sexes lived
under one Species; and Adam in appearance was then Hermaphrodite, because
having both Natures and Similitudes in himself. And whatever Adam listed should
then be done, was accomplished before the desire could grow into act: in so
great subjection was every thing to him, that obedience was held more Sacred
than Sacrifice. All the Beasts in the Field came to him for Names, so did the
Fish, and the Fowl of Heaven; and whatever he called them, that was their Name.
God gave him Wisdom, and he wisely improved it; till the Tempter by a
temptation leudly depraved him: so that whiles he steered both Sexes in one
bottom, his success in every thing was more than miraculous; but to Pilot the
Helm of two distinct Vessels, and both at once in a storm under Sail; surpasses
the skill and methods of Navigation.

And God blessed them with blessings in bidding them be fruitful; which
blessing was doubled by multiplication: this was a token of Love to the
Creation, when God daily renewed his blessings upon the Creature. For the
blessing upon Adam was by divine appointment transferred to succession upon
Adam's Generation: which afterward in time perverted through corruption, by a
passive neglect in Adams Posterity. Now as every good thing is the Gift of God,
and since whatever God gives is certainly good; the Fruit of Paradise could be
no otherwise than good, because the Gift of God that gave it: and the Fish in
the Sea, and the Fowl in the Air which God gave unto Adam, were supreamly good.
So that every thing in the Creation, and created being, had the tincture and
sweetness proceeding from God; who through Wisdom ordained it, and by
Providence maintains it; the consequence therefore must needs be good. Yet
above all the blessings that ever God gave us, was in giving unto us himself in
his Son; the glorious Mystery, and Revelation of God; which Gift of God was
greater than the World, and was the Gift of him that gave himself for the World.

To all the Creatures in the Creation, God bid them be fruitful, and in
multiplying multiply, and replenish the Earth. But in Adam peculiarly as in a
Divine Garden-Plot, God sowed there the Seed of Everlasting Life; from whence
by cultivation, and the Goodness of God, he might expect to reap an ever-living
Crop; for the Seed was the Seed of Eternal Life, and not the effects of Sin,
and Dead Works. No Brambles grew up in this heavenly Vintage, whereof God
himself was the Vine-roon. This is the new and the holy Jerusalem, wherein Paul
may Plant, and Apollo Water; yet if the Sons of Adam be barren Sciens, how can
they produce this sovereign Fruit, without the heavenly Dews of the Son of God.
Adam may multiply, and replenish the Earth; yet if wanting the blessing of God
his Benefactor, what profits it. To be good therefore is to be like unto God,
and likeness in every thing creats love; since every thing naturally loves its
like: and this love in Man is the abstract of God, in as much as God is Love
original. Whatever goodness therefore shines in Man, is really a derivative
from God himself.

So that should we trace the dimensions of Adam with the extent of his
Monarchy; how large his Commission runs, over the Earth and the Ocean; it would
be endless; for his limitation was boundless: the Fowl of Heaven knew no Lord
but Adam; and the Fish in the Sea no Sovereign but himself: and every created
thing that had breath, and moved; and every moving thing that breathed, and was
created; had no Supreme, nor Superintendent but Adam. For Adam as a Star shined
then upon Earth, and made great by him that's all goodness, and greatness; was
blessed in his Posterity, and glorious Nativity, or heavenly Birth; since two
Divine Natures shined splendidly in him: For God had implanted both himself,
and his Son, to make Adam beautiful, as himself is glorious: the nature of the
one was to live and never die; but the nature of the other was to die to live.
This seems a Paradox, I Will therefore explain it.

That Power that lives and never dies, is the Divinity of the Majesty of God;
when the Almighty before the Creation divinely calculated the Nativity of Life;
for God said in himself, let us now make man, like unto our self; in our
similitude let us make him: which likeness or similitude was incapable of
death, consequently of diminution, or division of parts; because the similitude
of God himself; for God breathed into Adam the breath of Life, and he became a
living soul: who therefore so vain, precipitant, and idle as to imagine the
Breath of God can extinguish. Time shall wear out, and Gerations walk off, and
Death it self become an Exile; and all things terminate, and drop into decay:
but the Breath of God which is that illuminating light that enlightens the
World, and the Soul of Man; when that glorious light shall co-unite with
darkness, which is altogether improbable, and utterly impossible: then shall
that hidden life God breathed into Adam be capable of death, and not before.

So that two Lives lived at once in our Ancestor; a created Life, and a Life
regenerate: a created Life, as from a heavenly Birth; which sprung Originally
from the Womb of Eternity; and because made like to the likeness of his Maker,
it gave him Victory to triumph over Sin; putting into his custody the secrets
of Life, and placing in his hands the Keys of Death: So that he knew nothing
but absolute freedom; and unprohibited the use of the whole Creation, one Tree
only by the Divinest excepted; in which God had placed a peculiar property, fit
only for himself in wisdom to know: God therefore imposed his commands upon
Adam, not to taste thereof, lest peradventure he die.

The other Life was that of Regeneration, which is Christ incarnate, God in the
Creature; this Life lived invisibly before the Creation, and is that hidden
Life in Christ (manifest by the Apostle) Christ in you the hope of Glory. Which
remains a mystery to this very day, as in former Ages a secret to our
Ancestors: which Life is the Power of God to Salvation; and was in the
beginning with God himself: and it was God, and was made Flesh, and by the Will
of God dwelt among men.

This is that Word that spoke in the beginning, and moved in the Patriarchs our
Ancestors to speak; that lived immaculately in the blessed Virgin, that was
made Flesh, and dwelt among men; that bore our infirmities, and was Crucified
at Jerusalem; that in spite of Death took captivity captive, and in despite of
Hell captivated Death: and which also is that Eternal Word that now is, ever
was, and for ever shall be to convince the World of Sin, Impenitency,
Incredulity, and Ingratitude; which Monster of a Sin is worse than Witchcraft:
and though a Witch be superscrib'd a Rebel in Physics; yet reversing the Point,
a Rebel is a Witch in Politics. The one because acting against the Law of
Nature; but the other because striving against Order, and Government.

But God gave unto Adam a Charter Royal, that was signed and sealed with those
glorious Characters of Sun, Moon, and Stars; and all the Host of Heaven to
witness to it. This was that great and superlative Grant that God gave unto
Adam when he placed him in Paradise: and wherewith to refresh him, he gave him
every Herb, and of every Tree that was burd'ned with Fruit; whereof he might
eat, and live before him. These Royal Privileges God gave unto Adam, and
Heavens Benefactor confirmed them unto him.

Now Adam may freely eat and live, or he may eat, and assuredly die; for Life
and Death stand as it were in a poiz; and because to our Protoplast seemingly
mingled, they seemingly presented one single Existence, as if Property and
Quality were entirely one: it is true one Mantle overshadowed both, till God out
of compassion made more visible discoveries. And as light shined forth by
reason of purity, unmasking or unveiling the scenes of darkness, that lay
hudled up in the hoil of obscurity; light as a thing strangely surprised,
seemed suddenly to startle, because then not to know such a horrid deformity,
as this we call darkness, was in the beginning co-inhabitant with it; or
concealed beneath it: for the light of it self was most pure and immaculate, in
as much as it never entered into unity, nor into any association with obscurity
or darkness.

But darkness represents the solitary shadow of some Elementary thing, or
something substantial; wherefore we shall want some solid substance whereby to
form our darkness out of; and what is more solid than the fixity of Earth, or
more copious than the bulk of the great Creation; when as yet in the Hoil or
confused Chaos, it lay intermingled, and blended together. Light must
necessarily therefore appear a most glorious Creature, which by Divine Act
operated in the Separation: For God no sooner said Let there be Light, and
obedient to the Command it immediately sprung up; which by reason of its purity,
and sublime clarity, exalted it self, and filled all the Universe; so made
visible discovery of things that lay concealed in the commassated mixture, or
Mass of Elements.

And this miraculous Work was accomplished for Man that he might admire the
excellency of his Maker, and raise his speculations to such a divine pitch,
that by visibles he might conclude since such ornaments of beauty and swavity
hung about them, that greater excellencies, and diviner curiosities of
necessity must adorn the more invisible part; by reason what is circumferated
and made visible to us, is only the shadow of that more glorious invisibility*
visible only to Seraphins, and Cherubims; Archangels and Angels; together with
the Saints, and the Sons of God.

Farther yet to comfirm these Royal Privileges, Adams prerogative seems
infinitely enlarged; for all the Beasts on the Earth, with the Fowl of the Air,
and the Fish in the Sea, were given him for Food, by a Royal Grant from Heaven,
to eat of; but not to riot, so dishonor his Creator: and every Vegetable,
besides the Race of Animals, were not only allotted him; but given for
nutrition. So that in effect the whole Creation, consequently every individual
production, by Commission from the Divinest, was given him for sustentation.
And so great a favorite was Adam in Paradise, and such great kindness had his
Creator for him, that he made him Lord over all the Creation; and every thing
that was, was made serviceable to him; nay in such veneration he stood with the
Creatures, that all the Creation doubled their obedience.

Here I fancy the innocent Lamb (because then not knowing the terrors of
death) proffered his Throat to the Shrines of the Altar; and the fatted Calf
was so far from fear, that he dreaded not the formidable stroke of Separation:
the Kids with the Flock sported then with the Wolf, and ran about the Bear
sometimes for diversion. Thus the Creatures made sport and pastime with danger,
as if Death and Destruction were sanctuary to them; so naturally was Innocence
implanted in Eden (or the Suburbs of Heaven) that nothing knew its enemy,
because no enemy to know. Unity and Harmony were inseparable Companions; and
every individual knew no Argument but Love; whose Law was alike forcible to
others, as the Law of Harmony was united in it self.

The Mallard in those days soared with the Falcon, and the timorous Hare lay
down with the Hound: The Leopard, and the Tigre sported with the Herds; and the
Herren with the Shad swam without dread of the Porpus: the Dove and the Lark
took flight with the Tassel, nor was any thing of Emulation known then in the
Creation: Innocence shined naturally in every thing, and its excellency in the
beginning knew no limitation: for nothing could sorrow, nor any thing grieve;
in as much as there was no real cause of suffering: Nor could any thing
languish, nor be sensible of smart; because as hitherto pain was uncreated.
Fear was a thing altogether unexperimented, and Death and the Grave such
eminent strangers, as never to be apprehended. What a pure State the Creation
then stood in, worthy our contemplation, and the admiration of all Men.

But Adam too niggardly he consults the Elements; and Elements because having
periods of their own (by praedestinated Ordination) are locked up in death. Adam
therefore mixing simplicity with impurity, which of it self stood in the limit
of disobedience, cojoyned himself with finite adherences, so drew down upon
himself the shortness of Life, and on the succeeding Generations the issues of
Death; which in time diminished, so by degrees extinguished the beauteous and
luminous Ray of Life, that shined gloriously within him, and was sanctuary
without him; and would ever have gloriously shined in his Posterity, had not ^e
remisly by one single consent, complied with his Consort so vainly to
extinguish it.

Now when God had made a survey of the Creation, the Workmanship of his hands,
and divinely blessed it; he placed therein the likeness of himself, the single
identity of his Divine Goodness; which could not go forth, because the
everlasting Arms of the Majesty of God so sacredly limited, and so sweetly
confined it; that in this Divine, and Cristalline Coagulum, the Majesty of
Heaven beheld himself: who viewing the several Classes of the Creatures, which
by Wisdom he divinely had foreseen in the Idea; it so greatly renewed the
ardency of his Love, which continued and augmented the blessing upon them: for
Love has that singularity to shine in it self, and in its operation always to
renovate. Thus God so loved the World he had made, that he gave us Himself in
giving us his Son; that whosoever believed and persevered in him, should never
die, but have Life everlasting.

Thus God made the World to protrude, and vegetate; and because it should
conceive, and daily bring forth; he placed an appetite, and an immortal Soul
therein; and filled it as Hermes says, with Divine imagination; so that the
Sun, and Celestials fell in Love with the Harmony; and because it was
beautiful, they married with it: and this great Solemnity was Celebrated at
first, when God laid his Ordinance of Multiplication upon it. Which Divine
Institution has been punctually observed, and kept inviolable ever since the
beginning; and will undoubtedly so long remain, and so long continue, till
Generation and Time shall be no more.

And now the Deeps began to break up, when the Rivers and Rivulets with
murmuring Streams silently invaded the florid Plains. The Mountains, and the
Hills also looked big with Flocks, whiles the Valleys and Savannas, with the
fragrant Meadows were abundantly crowded with Herds of Cattle. All the Birds in
the Air now turned Serenades; and every Flower, and flourishing Blossom
perfumed the Air with delicious Aroma's. The lofty Cedar then lifted up his
head, and the Martial- Oak, and the Ash stood by him; so did the Poplar, and
the spreading Elm; but the trembling Asp shak'd his Palsy Head. The Vine in
those days embraced the Olive, and the Eglantine entangled himself with the
Rose. Thus every thing whilst naturally inamoured with its like, the Woodbine
or Honey Succle tied knots about the Hedges.

The Be returned home with laden Thighs, and the Flocks of Sheep laid down
their Fleece. The Oestridge deplum'd his feathery Crest, and the Stork
retaliated kindness with gratitude. The Horse in those days spurned not at this
Rider, nor did the Lion know the Tyranny of Invasion. Alegators in the
beginning were not devourers; no^ were there known any Birds of Prey. The
Vulture, and the Tigre lived not then upon Vermin, for Morts were altogether
unknown; nor was any thing infectious that might nautiate the Elements: every
thing God had made stood in the beauty of Harmony: and whatever was made, and
by wisdom created; that thing beyond dispute was most certainly good.

Adam was invited to this great Solemnity, which was then of it self but one
single Family: nor had he any compeer, nor was there any to control him except
the Divinest, that great Oracle of Heaven that breathed Life into him. And
every Act that Adam made, was registered by the Creatures in this blessed
Creation; and most sacredly and inviolably kept in Paradise, till Sin, and
Impiety spoiled his Principallity: And then it was this great Parliament broke
up, and the Members discontented began to withdraw; so by degrees refused his
Protection: And Adam considering himself neglected, and incapable any longer to
maintain his Prerogative; folicits new favorites, but they forsook him, or
rahter Adam forsook himself, but did not know it; for Sin had so strangely
disfigured and disguised him, that none of his Subjects could remember to know
him, or think, or believe him their natural Prince; suspecting him rather some
foreign Invader, previously insinuated to divest them of Community; and
supplant them of those supernatant Privileges, granted them in the beginning
from their Sovereign Donor. So that the Creatures at once desert him, and not
him only, but his Government also; which looked but little now, when formerly
so great, that all the Creatures in the Creation paid servillity unto him.

Thus Adam amazed to find himself forsaken, makes a League with the Elements to
reinforce his Authority; but they when examined could not cement the breach,
nor in whole nor in part re-establish, enthrone, and eternize his grandeur;
because having ends, and periods of their own: he therefore complies to walk
the shades of Death; and Deaths frigid Zone, and cold Icy touch no sooner
approaches, but invades the Elements, so lets the compound crumble into dust;
which is the ultimate period of all Elementary mixts that ever was, that at
present is, or ever shall be in the progress of time.

Thus the Heaven and the Earth were finished, and all the Host of them; and on
the seventh day God ended his Work, the Work which he had made; and rested on
the seventh day from all his Work which he had made; and blessed, and
sanctified it. So that now the great Work of the great Creator, was by the word
Fiat determined, and finished; when the beauteous Earth most sumptuously
adorned with Celestial Ornaments, like the Queen of Honor came splendidly
forth with Virgin purity to celebrate her Espousals; whose Bride-maids were
Nature, and the Celestial Incholists: but the Spectators, and Relations were
the various sorts of Animals; together with the multiform generation of
individuals, that with general applause, and unanimous consent, gave an
approbation suitable to the present occasion.

Here might be seen all the Beasts in the Forest, hand in hand as it were
coupled together (if not improper to say so) and ranging themselves into an
excellent order, came forth to illustrate this great Solemnity. And here also
all the Fish that swam in the Ocean, embodied themselves as if they were but
one Fin; and with the Fowl of the Air, so exactly moved; and with such a
reserv'dness so equal was their order; as if all of them had but one single
Wing to accilerate, and celeritate their admirable motion.

In this excellent posture all the Creation stood, when attending the approach
of this admirable Union. At length the Sun appears, her amiable beloved; who
came clothed with Luster, and excessive Beauty; and all the Host of Heaven his
illustrious Convoy: Whose Harmony was the Spheres; and every thing that had
Life exirted it self to move by measure; as if all the Creation by gradual
motion, with a reserved gravity moved the Orbs at once. Thus the Creation was
completely finished; and Heaven and Earth became Husband and Wife; and God
himself Divinely blessing them, bid them go forth, increase and multiply.

And on the Seventh Day when God had ended his Work; He constituted a Sabbath,
or a day of Rest, exempt from Labor, and other Servilities: but upon the
Elements were no such imposition, nor were they under any breach of Command, as
legibly construed by this Divine Injunction. Read Rabbi Moses in Sacred Writ,
and you will find it extends to Man, and Beast only; if when to consider the
Minority of Time, with the Earths inhabitants that knew no Servility; but
Agriculture, and Grazing. Wherefore to look back on the Nativity of Affairs,
you will meet Cain, and Abel intrencht in this toil; when as the residue of the
Creation knew no Limitation: but stood entirely as hitherto unconcerned; as if
all days were but one day, or the Almigty's great Holy Day; wherein every
Creature, nay all the Creation with humility rejoiced, and with elevated
Praises expressed their thankfulness to the great Creator.

It was then by Proclamation, and a Royal Command from Heaven, that Man and
Beast only should Rest from Labor. For did not the Sun continue his course,
and all the Stars move in their proper station. Did not the Orbs, the Elements,
and the Heavens turn round with a Rapid Motion then as now; and were they not
then, as they now are in a perpetual, and circular Rotation. Did the Tides seem
to stop their natural Flux, or the sullen Waves lay down their brinish Heads.
Had the Fountains no issue, did the Winds cease to hover in the ambient Air,
and grow remiss in transporting embodied Clouds. Did the Pulse of the great
World neglect to beat, Sea Monsters to roar, Hurecanes to invade, Earth, Hail,
and Rain, Thunder and Lightning, did they associate together, and proclaim a
Sabbath, or a Universal Cessation. None of these things we read of happened
since the Creation; and what is the reason? God in his Wisdom governs the
Creation, but unreasonable Man was to Pilot the Creature. We therefore consider
that this most sacred Ordinance relates more peculiarly to Man, and Beast* and
that the residue of the Creatures in this stupendous Creation stand entirely
exempted, and acquitted from it.

And God blessed the Seventh Day as a Day of Sanctity, who through Wisdom and
Providence divinely hallowed it; which to consider, is a manifest Proof to
confirm the excellency of a Sabbath unto us. For God by Ordination appointed
six days for Labor; but the Seventh he set apart for Man and Beast to Rest in.
The Mind and the Body therefore seem under different exercises, by which I
conclude ought to have different entertainments; the last if we consider
solicites temporals, but the first if well observed she contemplates Eternals:
Where note the one relates to our present State, but the other if I mistake not
to our future Felicity: wherever therefore the treasure is, the desire of the
Soul will also be there.

But Heaven contents it self with a small allowance: is one day in Seven such a
great exaction? What a slender Service is required of us Mortals for so great
kindness from so good a God; how shall, or dare we detract from our selves,
whereby to violate the Commands of Him that so sweetly by his Wisdom puts a
Divine force upon us: and because unwilling to do our selves good, the Divinest
is pleased to do good unto us. It Is true at the best we are but formal
Penitents, that slash our own sides to raise a pity in others; so wounding our
selves make the Spectators cry. O where is the Vision of Piety, and the Mediums
of Charity; when to run and embrace a veneal Polution, as if so sweet and
luscious were the sense of Sin, that we will choose to die, rather than live
without it: so sacrifice our selves to the fury of Flames, fancying thereby we
burn the World, when as indeed, we but scorch our selves in the fiery Trial of
a self-will Devotion.

And God rested from his Work of finishing the Creation, which he made, and
adorned for the good of the Creature; which points out to us the Alpha and
Omega, the beginnings of Time, and the end of the Creature. For when to say the
Creator rested, it implies that Nature began then to Opeperate; after the
Divinest had put bounds and periods to every Creature, and created Being. To
the Stars, and Constellations; so to Elements, and Principles; the Sea exceeds
not her natural Course, nor does her swelling Flux prevail. Nor the luminous
Sun though incircling the Heaven with a rapid Motion, what does he more than
illustrate, vegetate, and illuminate the Universe: and the Stars which by
Wisdom he made to shine, what do they but inspire, and influence the Earth?
And did not he also impregnate the Air, with the concealed treasures of Rain,
and Hail? whereby the Earth as the Air is filled with Life, consequently the
Ocean, as the Earth with Vegetation. What can I say more? Nor indeed offer
less; wherever therefore God is said to be, of necessity Heaven must also be
there: And the Apostle tells us, God is All in All, and the fullness of all
dwells abundantly in him; to whom for ever be everlasting Praises. Amen.

FINIS.

