Two general Epistles SENT IN MANVSCRIPT TO Friends of truth, BY GEORGE FOX the
younger, And now Printed for their further service.

LONDON, Printed for William Warwick 1663.

Two Epistles sent in Manuscript to Friends, etc.
The Servant of Jesus Christ, and prisoner for the Word of God, sends
greeting unto the Flock of God who in this day suffer bonds and other
tribulations and cruelties for the precious Truth, even for obeying the Gospel
of salvation, which is the Power of God.
OH ye beloved ones, who have valued the eternal Truth above your nearest and
dearest Relations, Liberties, Estates and Lives, and have hazarded and given up
all freely in the Cause of God, your reward is with you, which is free: Oh ye
heirs of eternal life, ye babes of God, born of the Seed Royal, ye children of
the promise, who are counted for the Seed, the glory and peace of God rests
upon you, and the Arm of my Father is your strength, the Lord our righteousness
is his Name, who is your strong Tower, the place of your safety: Oh my beloved
Friends, my bowels are filled with the streams of Eternal life and love, which
runs forth freely unto you, who are highly favored of God, who are counted
worthy to suffer for his living eternal truth; blessed be you of the Lord my
Savior, happy are you ye children of the Most High; filled be your bowels with
the springs of eternal life, and filled be your hearts and mouths with the high
praises of Emanuel: Oh Friends, through faith in the blood of the Lamb do you
stand, and in it shall you overcome and obtain the victory over the Beast,
false Prophet and Dragon, whose hour this is in the power of darkness, which is
given to them for a moment to try your precious Faith. Therefore my beloved
ones, who know the clefts of the Rock, and the place where the King is found: O
retire all thither, and solace your selves under the banner of his love, remove
not away from the springs of his strength and virtue which he has opened unto
you, but dwell in his patience, and wait in his Light, in the pure stilness, til
he arise and make his enemies his footstool. Oh Friends, you that cannot act
contrary to the will of Emanuel, you that cannot bow down to any other image but
the Light of the glorious Gospel, which is the image of the invisible God; you
that cannot cease from worshipping him in the spirit and truth; you that cannot
cease petitioning him, and meeting together in his Name, notwithstanding the
Decree of the Rulers, and the raging of the wicked, I feel you in Daniels
spirit, and enjoy you in that power which stops the mouths of the Lions; you
whose bodies are cast into Prisons, Dungeons and Holes, you who are numbered
with transgressors, and are separated from your outward Relations; you who have
given up your Estates and Lives and all, or are freely willing so to do, if you
be called to it; I know the Lord my God is not wanting to you, I know you are
filled with his pure peace, power and presence; I know you have all, and enjoy
all that the Lord sees to be good for you, even as I your brother do, who
suffers with you; and thus we receive an hundred fold, even in this time with
persecution, and eternal life in the World to come is ours; faint not: Oh my
Brethren and Sisters, in the overcomings of the Power, Love, Virtue, Mercy and
Joy of our God which fills my Vessel, do I salute you all, and am near unto
you in the spirit of love, rejoicing to hear of your faithfulness and courage.
Ah my amiable ones, multiplied be your faith and strength in the power of the
eternal God, for we are not yet come to the depth of our trials.

Verily it is but a remnant that will follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: Oh
ye Virgins who defile not your selves with the weaker things, but are washed
and pure in the chaste life of the Lamb, and redeemed from the earth by his
power, his righteousness is your garment; yea his spirit is your covering, his
eye is upon you for good, though the Whore may yet a little while prevail
against your bodies, though she may yet drink some more blood, yet be not
dismayed, seeing you know that by which victory shall be obtained; and all
these things shall work together for good to you that love the Lord, and not
your lives unto the death. Oh ye Babes of God, this day have I long waited and
looked for, and of it have I been made to prophecy, and in the Faith, Word and
Power of God I further testify, that this day must yet be hotter (for a little
space) that no dross may remain among the pure gold, of which the Jewels are to
be made up; but my Friends, the Lord our King in whom we have trusted, he shall
arise and work such wonders In the earth, (even in this age) as shall astonish
and amaze the Heathen, and cause the ears of many that shall hear thereof to
tingle, and men's hearts shall fail them because of those things that they shall
behold; but as for you who know the word of eternal life, hold that fast, and
look ye not out, nor back (remember Lots Wife) neither let in fears, but watch
and wait in the eternal counsel of my Father, and he will minister strength
proportionable to every ones trial, and be a safe hiding place to the meek.

And all you whom the Lord God has touched with his living Power, and visited
with his eternal truth, and counted worthy, and has begotten you into the
knowledge of his truth in any measure, and brought you to believe in the same
(though you be yet out of bonds) know this my Friends, that this is a day
wherein God will try your faith and love which you have professed in, and to
him; yea, this is a day wherein a mighty storm is arisen, which will shake down
the unsound, and the untimely fruit, that so the sound which partakes of the
sap and virtue of the tree, may be clearly made manifest; yea this is a day in
which the good Husbandman will separate the seed from the chaff, which he will
scatter by his searching winds; therefore I beseech you all (who have any true
love unto God, and the way of his holiness) keep close to the measure of his
invisible Life and Power in your own vessels, that so you may retain strength,
and he made able to stand witnesses for his Name; and I exhort and warn you
all, that you suffer not your minds to be entangled or encumbered with the
cares of this life, lest thereby the enemy get advantage against you, and so
you lose your strength. Oh take heed of he Enemies temptations, if he come unto
you, and offer you the things of this life, that may seem pleasing to the
creature, and tell you that you shall enjoy them if you will bow unto him,
consent not to him, for if you cannot enjoy them and the presence and love of
God, let them all go, and murmr not, deny not the Lord, let not the fear of
the loss of any visible thing cause yau to act contrary to that which God has
made manifest unto you. Let not your lives be dear unto you for the cause of
God. Oh Friends, this is a day wherein God will try who they are that love any
changeable thing more then himself, or who they be that will defile their
consciences, and deny his Witness therein, to save their estates, liberties and
lives, and verily they that shall so do, heavy plagues, vengeance and
judgments shall fall upon them, and that suddenly, the mouth of the Lord has
spoken i^: But joy, peace and glory everlastingly shall rest upon them that
stand steadfast in the Faith received from God. Therefore dear Hearts, be
faithful unto death, and ye shall receive the crown of Life. And all you my
Friends who have of this Worlds goods, let the love of God still abound in you,
and then you will be constrained by it to refresh your poor brethren and sisters
that stand in need this day, and thereby you may take away the cause of some
temptation: which otherwise might fall upon them. And oh my Friends, I know the
love and care of many of you has been, and yet is exceeding large in this
particular, even so let it be still continued, and the Lord shall be glorified
and honored thereby, and he will be your exceeding great reward.

O Lord my God, thou have filled my bowels with thy eternal power, thou have
filled my heart with gladness, and my mouth with praises beyond all utterance;
also thy peace and thy glory rests upon me; thou have mightily filled me with
words and boldness; yea, thou have set me above the fears of death; thou have
caused me to be content with whatsoever thou have suffered to come upon me; and
thou know I neither fear imprisonment, banishment, death, or any other
cruelty that is possible for man to inflict upon my body; thou know J
neither regard their threatenings, nor the flatteries of the wicked, for my
trust is alone in thee, and thou art my strength and my glory; thou have made
me to be content to be even what ever thou would have me: Thou know I seek
nothing but thy honor alone; therefore will thou honor me before the people,
according to thy Word.

And now O Lord my God, I beseech thee keep thy people in this day of trial and
hour of temptation, keep them above the earth, and out of the flatteries of a
deceitful tongue, and keep them in contentedness with thy pure will in all
things: Fill them with boldness and valor for thy Name and Truth, that so they
may be careful for nothing, but to answer thy holy requirings; that thou may
have the honor and glory of all, and that thou may exalt thy truth, and them
in it over all.

Then shall praises break forth and be multiplied unto thee, oh thou King of
Saints, oh thou everlasting Fountain of endless life, who is able to express
thy mighty and strange acts which thou art doing, and about to do: Oh keep thy
people I beseech thee, faithful in their particular measures and places; oh
that they may understand thy outgoing every thing, so shall not thy work in any
be condemned.

From the Gate House Palace yard, Westminst. the 17th of the 11th. month 1660.
George Fox the younger.

A Second Epistle to Friends, etc*
Friends,
AS for you who are sufferers this day upon the account of truth, whether in
bonds, or out of them, I know and am satisfied that many of you have not need
that any man teach you, because you are not only brought to the knowledge of
the Anointing, but it abides in you, and your delight is wholly to obey the
same, and whatsoever it Commands you it is your Meat and Drink to do it,
because you are born of him from whence it comes, and he dwells in you, and
you in him, and you know his voice, and are in a Readiness to obey the same;
and I know ye are taught of him what he requires of you, so you that are come
to this state, I know words as to your own particular add but little, because
you enjoy the end of them: Yet I know when any thing proceeds from the same
word and Fountain of Life of which you partake, feed, and drink, that may be of
service to others that are not come to so high a State, that profess the same
truth, or desire the knowledge of it, you can with joy, hear the same, and are
refreshed; because thereby the work of the Lord which you delight in is carried
on: Therefore that which is upon me in the Fear, Power, and Life of God, I
shall write, and send amongst you that profess the truth, as it is in Jesus,
that it may reach to you to whom it is of service, that where the witness of
God is owned, it may arise and make manifest to each particular, what of that
which is here written belongs unto them.

Friends, you who are imprisoned for the testimony of truth, happy are you
that are faithful in your Testimony for the Lord: Now this know, that it is
them that suffer according to the will of God, and Continue in pure obedience
thereunto, which are acceptable unto him (by Jesus Christ) in their Testimony:
Therefore let the pure dread of the Almighty be lived in, and let there be a a
sure watch (kept by every particular) in the Light, least any thing (through
the temptation of the Enemy) get up in any of you that is contrary to the Lords
pure Light, and you join to it, and thereby you, and your Testimony come to be
defiled, and the Lord dishonored; And Friends, this know, that there are many
temptations which oft-times accompany those that are in bonds for the truth,
which are to be watched against in the pure Light which makes them manifest, or
else there is a great danger. Now it is upon me to speak something concerning
someof them, that you may watch against them as your deadly Enemies, (mark) as
there is a true joy that springs in those that in the true simplicity, do
suffer for the cause of God, so also there is this temptation that sometime,
may be presented to some in bonds, (mark) even to think highly of themselves,
because they are put in prison for the truth, ye even to think of themselves
(because of their sufferings) above what they are. Now where this temptation is
joined to, it puffs such up in the fleshly false joy, and leads out of the
fear above the Cross, and so becomes very dangerous unto them, and such become
very burdensome to them that abide in the truth, and suffer according to the
will of God, therefore where any has such a temptation, Oh watch against it
that it prevail not; and where any are sensible that such a temptation has
prevailed, let such sink down to the pure judgment of the Lord, and wait
therein, til through faith and patience, victory be obtained. And Friends, let
the fear and the mighty dread of the Lord God be upon you in receiving of the
Creatures, or else the simplicity in you may soon be betrayed. Oh there is a
great danger concerning those things, if the pure life which is more then meat,
be not continually lived in. Many whose hearts are open, not knowing what you
(who are in bonds) may want, may bring and offer you much, and some may urge
things upon you; therefore you had need to stand in the pure fear, wisdom and
authority of God (in the self-denial) or else those things may soon become a
snare unto you, and so fleshly liberty and ease may be Run into, and may grow
upon you, whereby the true savor and feeling of the living truth may be lost;
therefore keep low and watchful, that so you may be preserved sincere to the
Lord in his authority standing out of, and denying all superfluity; And you who
have but little of this worlds goods, who are in sufferings, and do rather want
then aabound. Oh Friends, commit your cause to God, and let not the enemy on
the other hand prevail in tempting you to look out, or to distrust, and
thereby cast you down, and bring your precious life under, but in the Faith and
Patience of the Lamb abide, doing the things that is lawful and aright in the
sight of God, and he will assuredly provide for you: Oh do not in any wise do
evil, that good may come thereof; the woe will be upon them that keep you from
providing for your families, and they in the day of Gods judgments (which
hastes) will be found and counted worse then infidels, and not you, who are
willing to labor for your families, if you could have your liberty without
sinning against the Lord; and all Friends be watchful one over another, in the
true love which thinks no evil, and live in it, and bear one with another, and
be subject to the power in one another, and that will bring you to know how to
abound, and how to suffer want; and it will constrain you to be helpful one to
another, both in and out of bonds; yea it will bring you into contentedness in
every condition. Oh dear hearts: I know there are many of you that are out of
Prison, whose sufferings this day are as great, and some far greater then those
that are in, but well will it be with you, who are faithful and obedient in your
places and measures, whether in bonds, or out; and ill will it be with the
unfaithful, and disobedient where ever they be; therefore keep to the Lords
living eternal power, that you may be carried through all your trials within,
and without, in your several places. For my Friends, the day will yet be very
hot, yea it must so be, that that which can abide the fire, may be made
manifest clearly, and remain in its purity, and that the dross which has been
mixed with the pure, may also be separated from it, and be made manifest to be
but dross; and you that are in bonds, take heed of looking out, at time, or
place, or at the cruelty of the Enemy; poor hearts, I know some of you suffer
exceeding much hardship this day in your Testimony for the Lord; yet I know the
presence of my Father is freely with you, who in the innocence, and simplicity
of your hearts, gives up to his pure will in all things. Oh Friends, take heed
that none of you yield to uphold any wicked Custom, or oppression; which many
of you may be tempted to in Prisons, and may suffer much for denying them, but
better is it so to do, then to offend the Lord, who is the reward of the
faithful: Oh Friends, this is a day the Lord has mightily discovered the
Beast, his Power, Names, and horns; And this is a day wherein the Lord is
Calling, and Leading his People to bear a clear Testimony against all those
things; Therefore take heed to your selves, that you give not your Power to the
Beast, by bowing to any of his Names. Fear not his Horns, Receive not his Mark;
though he suffer you not to buy, nor sell. Oh Friends watch, for you will be
tempted; and all both bond and free, whose Names are not written in the Lamb,
Book of Life, will be compelled, and all that follow the Lamb this day must
come through great tribulation, for he is opposing the Beast, and breaking
through his Power, Horns, Names, and Marks; And behold there is great Power
and authority given to the Beast; that he may try the Inhabitants of the Earth;
and that the Virgins that follow the Lamb, who love not their Lives to the
death, may be clearly made manifest; and separated from all the dirtie
professors of his Name, that will bow and fall under the power of the Beast, to
save themselves; and say in their hears, who is able to make war with them;
and verily great will be the number of such; Therefore dear hearts stand
steadfast, and watch unto prayer, and wait in the power that is endless, that
your understandings may be kept open and clear, that you may see all the snares
of the Enemy; and that you may feel Power to resist in the time of need: For
my Friends this know, that those that start not a side but follows the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, many of them have greater things to pass through, and
to suffer, then an inprisonment; Therefore wait that you may be prepared for
whatsoever the Lord may suffer to come upon you, for the trial of your faith:
Oh take heed of Dirty engagements, Bonds, or Ties; better were it for you that
have Estates to loose them, or for you or others to suffer Imprisonment
Banishment Death, or any other cruelty, (if the will of God be such as to give
your adversaries so much power) then to bring your selves unto bon^^^g^ who in
any measure are made free by the Lord, Fri^nds, the Children of the Promise are
counted for the seed, and the seed royal is free, and is not to be compelled to
any thing by man, but what it declares to (and does among) the Sons of Men to
stand (and to be done) in its own freedom and liberty, and this seed cannot beg
its freedom and liberty of any mortal, not never did, neither can it, nor give
its power to the Beast, but through suffering it breaks down, and through the
Beasts compelling power, and so by its own power in the Father it conquereth
its Enemies, and works it self into the dominion over all, and all power must
bow down to it, and serve and obey it; therefore all you that know the truth
(the seed Royal) feel his power that Redeems out of all Earthly things, that
so you may be willing to suffer for him, with whom ye desire to reign, and be
willing to bear the Cross, and despise the shame; Then shall you obtain the
Crown which is immortal; but whosoever draws back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him, says the Lord God; Therefore my Friends stand out of all
mortals, in the immortal seed, and consent not, neither bow to, or join to (or
do) any thing that the Life of the seed draws or leads not to (what ever you
may see others) (whom you have esteemed to be before you in the truth Consent
to) yet do nothing (to save your selves) by imitation without feeling the Life
to lead you: but whereunto every one of you has attained, in the knowledge of
the life of God, walk you by the same rule, and mind the same thing, knowing
this, that there are first, that shall be last, and there are last, that shall
be first; so the Lord God keep you in his authority, Life and Wisdom to the
end, Amen.

I am your endeared Friend in the power of the Righteousness, of the Lamb, in
which I war against his Enemies, and not with carnal weapons; therefore I fear
not man, whose heart is filled with cruelty, neither am I dismayed at the power
of those that seek my Life, for it is in the hands of him that pleads my cause
(who will set up his own Kingdom, and establish it in Righteousness, and
destroy them that will not serve and obey him,) let him do what he pleases
with it: Glory to him in the highest; Halelujah. George Fox the younger.
From, the Pallace-yard Gate House 30th 11th Month 3 1660.

