To Thee Oliver Cromwell, into whose hands God has committed the Sword of
Justice, that under thee all may be Godly and quietly governed. A terror to the
evil doers, and for the encouragement of them that do well; and to the rest of
the Army, whom the Lord has set above all your enemies: And to all that are in
Authority, that you may more set up God in your hearts and consciences, and
give liberty to that of God in all consciences, that his people may serve him,
without force or fear freely in spirit and truth, that the Lord may bless you,
and establish you, and you may be so far honored, as to perform what, in the
times of your troubles, you did then promise in the presence of God, that his
people should have liberty of conscience. To you all, I am moved of the Lord,
to writ, as follows.
IT being a matter of the greatest concernment to every man's conscience that
loves Christ, not to uphold any Ministry, under any pretense whatsoever, which
is not sent by Christ; therefore take heed, as you tender a pure conscience, to
give liberty herein, that there be no forcing to uphold any one soul that say
they are Ministers; but that every one herein make proof of his Ministry, and
so shall every man's reward be as his work: And you Majestrates, shall not need
to meddle in this thing, seeing God never required it at your hands, to force a
maintenance neither under Law nor Gospel.

But if any say this will open a gap to all sin, and make men Heathens. I
answer, it will be the only way to cut down sin, as will appear to any
reasoneable understanding: First, a Law being made to punish sin without
exception, this takes hold of the Heathen, and the Hypocrite shall not escape,
under what form soever, and liberty of conscience being given, you will
presently see into whose hands to commit the Execution of that first Law: for
who has not a principle of God to guide to his worship without constraint, can
never execute any just Law for God, but for self ends: And so you should choose
men fearing God, to bear the Sword of God; And till then make what Laws you
will to preserve innocence, yet by them the innocent is sure to suffer; for how
can he whose conscience is forced as to the worship of God, use a good
conscience toward men, or own a pure conscience in another, to preserve it,
who has made shipwreck of it himself.

And for making Heathens, I say it will but discover Heathens that are hid: for
he that has not a principle of God in himself to carry on in his worship,
without forcing, is a Heathen, and knows not God, and his worship and prayers
is abominate to God, and he that forces him is guilty with him, for such was
never forced, but admonished, till they came to be won by the word, or without
the word by a godly conversation, and till then, to be ordered by the Law of
the Magistrate, which is made for such, till the promised seed be owned to
guide in the works of the Spirit; for without that Law, the Parish preaching
will not order such, as is manifest in the Nation, and has been for many
years: and such being declared to be Heathen, would be ashamed, and being
convinced in their own consciences, might come to be saved, which now pass
under the name of a profession.

But if it be said this is the only way to root out the Ministers of Christ, I
answer, its the only way to manifest the Ministers of Christ, from the
Ministers of Antichrist, and it will root out none but such whose care is first
for their bellies, who mind earthly things, whose Ministry stands and falls by
carnal things, who would be sure of wages before they do their work; yea many
of them have taken wages these forty or fifty years, but yet no work done, nor
any brought out of sin, and these cry the workman is worthy of his wages, and
call for wages from such as for whom they do no work: but these are none of
Christ's workmen, who seek for their wages from the world, for his he sends
freely into the world, who never asked any thing of the world: but first
planted a Vineyard, then eat the fruit of it, first sowed in hope, and then
were partakers of their hope, and where they had sown spirituals, and the seed
came up, there they reaped carnals, and so lived of the Gospel and not of the
world: and I demand of any one who owns the Scriptures to prove a forced
maintenance, either under the Law or Gospel, but they were freely to bring it.
But who art thou that says the times are not so now, thee I deny, and thy
Ministry, which follows the times and not Christ, nor the Saints practice in
Scripture, stop thy mouth for ever being counted a Minister of Christ, who art
not content with his allowance, as his have always been, for God is not
charged, nor his Worship, nor Worshippers. But if you say this will soon bring
the Ministers to be poor; I say you know not God, nor his care for his, who so
argues, for never was the righteous nor that seed, begging bread: against that
dispiteful mind do I bear witness, who were sent out without bag, or scrip, or
money, into the most brutish parts of the Nation, where none knew me; yet want
I nothing, in prisons, in wanderings, in beatings, in stoneings, in mocking, my
joy I would not change, for all the Personages in the world, nor shall any
hireling partake of it: And you that would have others forced to maintain thy
Teachers, but would not be forced to maintain others who differ in judgment,
though nearer the Scripture then thine, how do thou fulfill the Law of Christ,
in doing as you would be done by, what is this but to Lord it over the
conscience of thy brother.

That there be no forcing any to uphold the high places of the Nation, seeing
many that truly fear God, connot worship in them, without sin; but that liberty
be given herein, and that every people may repair t^eir own meeting places. I
know many out of a blind zeal to those places will be offended, but what is
that which would not do to others, the same that you would have them to do to
you, is that reason, equity, or conscience, would thou be content to be forced
against thy conscience, to repare the houses of others which they meet in who
differ from thee in judgment, and that upon good ground from Scripture, who
meet in private or hired houses for conscience sake, refusing those places
which have been consecrated to Idols: And if you look upon such as brethren of
free born subjects; is there not the same reason in it: but if thou say, must
the House of God go down. I answer, Houses of God they are not, convenience is
the best you can plead for them, and of all men, you who stay in those houses,
have least cause to find fault, with such as go out, seeing they leave you the
houses you so much esteem of, wholly to your selves, with all that belongs to
them, and you have them for repairing, and they that go out, betake themselves
either into the fields, private houses, or some convenient place, not
chargeable to any.

That there be no forcing any to swear, who makes conscience of an oath, seeing
the plain commands of Christ, and his Apostles does so often forbid it, which
some dare not break for all the world, who are come into the everlasting oath
and Covenant of God, and into the practice of the Saints, which never used any
such things; but if any say, how should true evidence he had in matters of
controversy, between man and man, that true judgment may be given. I answer,
God appointed witnesses in such cases, but never forced them to swear. In the
old Covenant, when swearing was an Ordinance; how much more now, when Christ
has said swear not at all; but if any say men will not matter what they say,
if they be not forced to swear: I answer, such will not matter what they swear
neither, were it not for fear of an outward Law; but if you make an equal
punishment of false witness, as unto imprisonment, banishment, and taking away
life or estate, or what ever should by the Law, befall the person accused,
(which is but just) you shall soon have them more afraid to lie then over they
were to forswear, and hereby come to cleanse the land of all false accusers and
accusations.

He that is faithful to God, must bear Rule, He that is not faithful, must not
bear Rule for God. He that is unjust, must not bear Rule for God. He that
respects men's persons, must not bear Rule for God, for he is a Transgressor of
the Law of God: and he that is light and vain and wild, must not bear Rule for
God: and he that is proud and covetous, must not bear Rule for God: and he that
is in the lust of the world, and in the lust of the flesh, and of the eye: must
not bear Rule for God: and he that has self ends, must not bear Rule for God,
for all these things are contrary to the light, and with the light are to be
condemned; the Light of God in every man's conscience will witness for God
against all such actions and practices, which are condemned with the light. And
no scofer nor scorner, nor persecutormust be a Rule for God, and who are in
envy and wrath, must not bear rule for God; for they are in Cains way, and men
that follow pleasures sporting themselves in the day time, must not bear rule
for God; for such as live wantonly upon the earth, kills the just, and are
dead whilst they live, and such are not to bear rule for God, and such as
receive gifts and rewards blind the eyes, and are not to bear rule for God,
whose eye is blinded and the light put out; and such as are proud boasters in
contention, fierce, despisers, and liars, and truce breakers, are not to bear
Rule for God, the Spirit of God where it rules Judges all these things, and
teaches to show mercy, and to do good, and walk humbly with God: and all they
that respect the rich, and despise the poor, you are not fit to bear Rule for
God.

George Fox

Thus in faithfulness to God, and in love to you, with whom I have served for
the good of these Nations, betwixt eight and nine years counting nothing to
dear to bring the Government into your hands in whom it is, as many can witness
with me herein. And now my prayer to God for you is that you may lay down all
your Crowns at his feet who has Crowned you with victory, that so the Lord
being set up as King in every conscience, all may be subject to your Government
for conscience sake: And so God may establish you, and the hearts of his
people, praise him in your behalf, and so to you I have unburthened my
conscience herein, and let none be rash in judging, but search the Scriptures,
and see if I have not laid before you the Saints practice, by the same spirit
by which they were guided.

James Nayler.

FINIS.
London Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign
of the Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1655.


