THE DYING SPEECH OF Robert Frances OF GRAY'S INN, Esquire July 24. 1685.
Delivered by his own Hand to the Ordinary, at the Place of Execution, desiring
the same might be published.
I Am here by the Divine permission and Providence of God become a spectacle to
God, Angels and men, for a rash, Extravagant and imprudent Act, wherein I do
confess, I have not only offended against the Government and Courts of Justice,
but against Christianity, and even the Rules of Morality it self: Nevertheless,
(I hope) not only the Court, but all unbiased Men, from the several
Circumstances of the Fact, are satisfied that I had no Malicious intent of
doing what fell out, nor had any Grudge or personal Prejudice to him upon any
account whatsoever, more than what all Honest and Good Men could not but have,
that Love the King and the Government. The solemn Truth of all which, I have
declared not only upon the Holy Sacrament I received from Mr. Master, but also
that I never knew nor saw him before that unhappy moment, save once at a
distance in the Pillory at Westminster; and do now as a dying Man solemnly avow
and protest the same: And therefore I hope I may boldly say I am not conscious
of any Guilt before God as to the malice: However God in his great Wisdom has
been pleased to suffer this great Calamity to fall upon me: And I hope this his
severe Chastisement, is in order to bring me to himself, when softer means had
not sufficiently done it. All them that know me (I am sure) will do me that
Justice, as to believe I am far from having done it either wilfully or
mercenarily (as most untruly is reported.) And that these Honorable Persons
are above the thoughts of such unworthy things, for which they have been as
maliciously as falsely traduced upon my score; I beg their Pardon for the
Scandal I have unhappily been the occasion of, and desire this Acknowledgment
may be by them accepted as a Reparation since to disown it at this time of my
death, is all the Satisfaction I am able to make them.

As to my Religion (however I have been represented) there are People that knew
me at the University, and since that can be my Witnesses, how obedient and
zealous a Son of the Church of England (by Law established) I have been.

And these worthy Divines that did me the favor to visit me in affliction,
will give the World an account (as occasion serves) of my integrity therein:
And if I had been as zealous in the Service of God, as my Prince, he would not
have left me so much to my self, as to have permitted me to have fallen into
this unexpected Extremity.

And as for my Morals, the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn will answer for me,
that in above these twelve years time, I have had the Honor of being admitted
a Member of that Society, I never had any Quarrel or Controversy with any
Member thereof; and all Persons with whom I have had Conversation, I question
not will give a good Character of my innocent and peaceable behavior.

I pray God Almighty Preserve and Bless His Most Sacred Majesty, His Royal
Consort Queen Mary, Katherine the Queen Dowager, their Royal Highnesses, and
all the Royal Family; and grant that there may never want one of that Royal
Line to sway the Scepters of these Kingdoms as long as Sun and Moon endure. In
the Union and Love of his Subjects, strengthen him that he may vanquish and
overcome all his Enemies, which I am glad to have seen so much prospect of, and
am only sorry I am cut off from seeing my so much desired satisfaction of those
happy days all his good Subjects will enjoy under his Auspicious Government. I
pray God forgive me my Sins that have made me unworthy of that Blessing.

Blessed be the Lord that I have lived so as not to be ashamed to live, or
afraid to dye; though I cannot but regret my being made a Sacrifice to the
Faction, who I am satisfied are the only People that will rejoice in my ruin,
for there is no man that loves his Prince, but will lament that nothing less
than the Blood of an inoffensive man (save in this single Extravagance) can
satisfy them for the sudden intemperate transport of Zeal and Passion against
one so notoriously wicked and Infamous; for I do protest before Almighty God,
(before whom I shall immediately appear) that when I went to the Coach-side, I
did not intend so much as to speak to him, or believe I could have had
opportunity of so doing, much less of doing him any harm. Neither is it
probable I should with a small Bambow Cane, no bigger than a Man's little
Finger, without any Iron upon it, much less a Dart in it, as it was most
industriously spread abroad to prejudice me in the opinion of the World: For if
I had had such a wicked design intentionally, I had a little short Sword by my
side much more proper for such a purpose. And further, if I had believed or
known that I had done any harm to him, I had opportunity enough of escaping
afterward, which I never endeavored. Now all these things being duly weighed
with their several Circumstances, I leave my sad Case to the Consideration of
all sober and charitable Men. However I would not have this to be interpreted
as a Reflection upon the Court, who I doubt not are by this time satisfied,
(and Mr. Recorder did in open Court declare) that in their Consciences they did
not believe I maliciously designed him the mischief that happened, but that it
was purely accidental. But in the strict Construction of Law I was found Guilty
of Murder.

But that which most sensibly afflicts me, and is worse to me than death, that
I cannot suffer alone, but that they have not only raised Scandals upon me in
particular Preparatory to it, but upon my poor innocent Wife, as if my
jealousy of her had been the reason of my animosity to Dangerfield; when I am
morally certain she never saw him in her whole life, save that fatal Moment;
and no couple (as hundreds can witness) have lived in better Correspondence.
And besides that, she is as virtuous a Woman as lives, and born of so good and
Loyal a Family, that if she had been so inclined, she would have scorned to
have prostituted her self to such a profligate Person: But on the contrary (God
is my witness) I never had any such thoughts of her, and do as verily believe
as there is a God in Heaven, I never had any reason, she having always been the
most indulgent, kind and loving Wife that ever Man had, and in my Conscience
one of the best of Women; nay, I am so far from suspecting her Virtue, that she
is the only loss I regret on Earth, and can freely part with every thing else
here below without repining, which in all my trouble I have owned before all
People, and particularly Mr. Master, Mr. Ordinary, and Mr. Smithies of
Cripple-gate, who can all testify those Tears and endeared Expressions that
have passed between us, when any of them did me the kindness to visit me in my
distress.

And I do from the bottom of my heart freely forgive the Witnesses that Swore
against me those words I never spoke, for as I shall answer at the great
Tribunal, I said no other or more words than these, How now Friend, have you
had your Heat this Morning? For all the ill they have done me, give them
Repentance Good God, even for these that have contributed to the shedding of my
Blood, I pray thee shed thy Bowels of Mercy.

I do heartily thank those Noble and Honorable Persons, and all other my
Friends, that have so charitably interposed with His Majesty on my behalf
(though it has proved unsuccessful) I pray God nevertheless to return their
kind endeavors a thousand Fold into their own Bosoms: Lord return it to them
and theirs.

Lord Jesus receive my Soul, Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.
Amen, Amen, Amen.

Robert Frances.

Licensed

July 24. 1685. To. L'Estrange.

London, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard' s Castle, 1685.


