A FRIEND TO CAESAR. OR AN HUMBLE PROPOSITION FOR The more regular, speedy, and
easy Payment of his Majesty's Treasure, Granted, or to be Granted by the Lords
and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the carrying on of his Majesty's
Expenses, whether Ordinary or Extraordinary, both in time of Peace and in time
of War.

AND ALSO The Causes of those many Debts which the Crown is so heavily Clogged
with. And sound Propositions for the Cure thereof.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Harford at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange, 1681

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
YOu have here, Reader, presented to your View, one of the most useful Books
this Age has seen. This woody, noisy Age, fruitful only in base, in
treacherous, or vain Productions, and therefore sunk in the Esteem of wise and
Good Men, has the Honor at last of Publishing this excellent Book, whose Merit
is too great to be spoke in the narrow Limits I oblige my self to. The worthy
Author has shown himself in the following Pages to be what the Title calls this
Book, a Friend to Caesar. No cunning Gloser of the Court, no fawning Parasite,
no supple insinuating Flatterer, but such a Friend as generously interposes to
free the Sacred Crown of the British Empire from that Rust and Tervith that
has so long obscured its Luster. The Title of this Book promises no more, than
what the Author admirably acquits himself of in the following Discourse. He has
shown himself not only by his excellent Design and End to be a true
Englishman, a brave, an honest, and a worthy Patriot: but also by his
admirable Management of it, to be a Wise and Great Man, capable of the highest
Reasonings, and the best Resolves. A fit and just disposure of the public
Treasure, is a Point so necessary, and withal so nice, that as there is nothing
more worthy the enquiry of such whose Station and Quality fits them for the
Service of the State; so there is nothing that more requires to be proposed and
settled by the steadiest Councels, the greatest Deliberations, and the Wisest
Cautions. You will find, Reader, lively Instances of the unhappiness of
diverting the public Monyes from the Ends to which they were appropriated. And
every reflecting Mind will easily discern how Fatal such Miscarriages may
prove: when the Peace of Nations shall be a Sacrifice to the by-Ends of private
Persons: or when the Treachery of some, or the Neglect of others shall hazard
the ruin of the general Repose, or Wreck of the public Safety. You will find
how heavily the Crown is clogged with Debt. You will find many of the plain and
obvious (tho concealed or neglected,) Causes. And you will find such sound
Propositions of Cure, as nothing less (I believe) than the collective Wisdom of
the Nation can alter them to mend them. I persuade my self that no Man can
bring any just Objection to the solid Reasonings, to the plain Demonstrations
that this Author uses: If at least he Read with such an attention of Mind as
the Subject requires, and comes but to it with an unprejudiced Judgment.

I have often thought it a most deplorable thing, that the Splendour of the
Imperial Crown of these Rich and Flourishing Nations, should be so long
Dark'ned and Eclipsed by such a Cloud of Debts. And I have wondered as often how
it could possibly be so. So many Wise and Faithful Ministers of State, I
thought, could never suffer their Masters Treasure to flow out of the proper
Channel, and to be diverted to Ends, unworthy the Glory of the Royal Diadem, or
unsuitable to the Honor of their own Fidelity and Loyalty. Howsoever it be,
the King is unhappily engaged in very great Streights and Difficulties by the
pressing Burden of his Debts, and as this excellent Author has well dived into
the Causes, and discovered the Moths and Rust that insensibly by unminded
Stepps secretly Cankered and Decayed the Treasure: So has he with all Candor
offered such Means of Redress as he has upon the maturest Result of Judgment
thought the best. The Legislative Power of the Nation is certainly the best
Judge of this Gentleman's Opinion: and himself has with all becoming Humility,
and due Submission, wholly laid these his Sentiments at the Footstool of that
Sacred Power. It Is a sense of Duty that every true Englishman must always
cherish in himself: and which for my own particular, is one of the only things
I can Vallue in my self. God forbid therefore that any thing I say in this
Preface, should be extended to forestal the Judgment of a Parliament: for all
whose Proceedings as I have always the highest Veneration and Deference; So I
would by no means be thought to intend this a Censure upon them, in case their
Sentiments prove different from the Authors. No, but on the contrary I profess
to regulate my little Reason by their strength of Wisdom, and reform the
Errors of my Judgment, by the Truth of theirs. The occasion of my Writing
this, was no more than an excess of Love and Zeal, I naturally have for my King
and Country, which always taking new Fire at every hint that speaks any brave
or generous Service to them, broke out into rapture at the reading of these
Sheets. My Breast I found was too narrow for the Genius that inspired it, and
no longer able to contain, at last it thus ran on. I could not forbear
recommending a thing I liked so well, to the glad perusal of others: and the
Bookseller would needs publish what I writ, I cannot but confess't an Honor to
me; for by this Advantage something of me may remain to future Ages, whilst
annexed to this inestimable Jewel, and this worthless Scribble, which otherwise
perhaps had perished in the next Fire, or which is worse, bin continued by the
fate of Wilds and Flecknots Works to case up Fruit, might now (had I the
vanity to subscribe it) convey my Name and Memory to the utmost end of time. I
could never end, Reader, did I give but way to all the Violence and Heat that
agitates my Mind. What could not be said on this Glorious, this Loyal, this
useful Theme! A Proposition for establishing and securing a lasting Glory to
the English Crown and Nation, by delivering the Crown from the wretched
wardship of its Debts, and by Protecting it from all future Invasions of that
kind. This Glorious Deed once done, I should not doubt to see in a short time,
the Royal English Lions rouse themselves to the Fear and Terror of all their
insulting Neighbors. But I will not go too far: nor too long detain the Reader
from the useful Sheets that follow. I will only beg the Readers Patience, and
the Authors Pardon for adding the following Opinion of mine, to what the worthy
Author speaks about Distress, where the Collectors do not presently pay in
their Money when required. I conceive that not merely a Constable, but in the
Country some Justices of the Peace, or in a Corporation the Major or other
chief Magistrate should be present at the Distress of the Goods, of such as
shall delay Payment of or any ways imbezel the public Monyes, both for the
greater solemnity of the thing, as being the public Money, and to prevent the
Odium and Revenge that may attend a particular Person for doing it. That I may
keep my Word with the Reader and no longer uncharitably detant him from the
Book it self, I will but add my hearty Wishes and Prayers for the auspicious
Progress and Event of this worthy Authors generous Design; and again asking his
Pardon for thus presuming, and of the Reader for his Detention, conclude this
Preface, and conduct you to the excellent Book it self.

FAREWELL.
A Catalogue of some new Books, Printed and Sold by Robert Harford, at the
Angel in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange, 1681.
THe Reformed Bishop: or XIX Articles tendered by (...), a well wisher of the
present Government of the Church of Scotland, (as it is settled by Law) in order
to the further establishment thereof. Octavo, price bound, 2 s. 6 d. A Treatise
of Taxes and Contributions, showing the Nature and Measures of Crown Lands,
Assessments, Customs, Poll Monys, Lotteries, Benevolence, Penalties,
Monopolles, Offices, Tithes, raising of Coins, Harth-Money, Excise, etc. With
several interspersed Discourses, and Digressions concerning Wars, the Church,
Universities, Rents and Purchases, Usury and Exchange, Banks and Lombards,
Registers for Conveyances. Beggars, Ensurance, Exportation of Money, Wool, Free
Ports, Coins, Housing, Liberty of Conscience, etc. The same being frequently
applied to the State and Affairs of Ireland, and is now thought seasonable for
the present Affairs of England. Quarto, price stitched ^ s. Humane Prudence, or
the Act by which a Man may raise himself and Fortune to Grandeur, by A. B.
Twelves, price bound 1 s. The Count of Gabalis, or Conferences about secret
Sciences, rendered out of French into English, with an Advice to the Reader, by
A. L. A. M. Twelv. price bound, 1 s. The Jesuits Catechism, according to St.
Ignatius Loyola, for the Instructing and Strengthening of all those that are
weak in that Faith. Wherein the Jmpiety of their Principles, Perniciousness of
their Doctrines, and Iniquity of their Practices are declared. Quarto, price
st. 1 s. The Politician Discovered, or Considerations of the late Pretensions
that France Claims to England and Ireland; and her Designs and Plots in order
thereunto, in two serious Discourses, by a true Protestant, and well-wisher of
his Country. Qu. pr. st. 6 d. A Mathematical Compendium, or useful Practices in
Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy, Geography and Navigation, Embattelling,
and Quartering of Armies, Fortification and Gunnery, Gauging and Dyalling,
explaining the Logarithms, with new Indices; Nepairs Rods or Bones; making of
Movements, and the Applications of Pendulums; with the Projection of the Sphere
for an Universal Dyal, etc. By Sr. Jonas More Knight, late Surveyor General of
his Majesty's Ordnance. The second Edition with large Editions. Twelves, price
bound 3 s. The Church Papist (so called:) his Religion and Tenets fully
discovered, in a serious Dispute, which long since happened between a (then)
reputed Papist, and an open professed Romanist, whereby the common (and trite)
Arguments of pretended Visibility, Succession, Vinversality, etc. of the Roman
Church, traveling the Nation to amuse and stagger the Weak, and to seduce and
pervert the unstable sort of People, are briefly Confuted. Whereunto is added,
a short Discourse, proving Episcopacy to be of Divine Institution, Kingly
Government of Gods setting up, and the Religion of the Church of England, to be
the best in the World. By one of the Children of the late Captivity, Quarto,
price 6 d. All the Letters, Memorials, and Considerations, concerning the
offered Alliance of the Kings of England and France, to the High and Mighty
Lords, the States of the united Neatherlands, according to the several times
when they were delivered: With Considerations on the Alliance, and also
Reflections on the said Considerations. Faithfully Translated from the Dutch
Coppies Printed at Haerler by Barent Jansen, Hoog Euys, 1680. Folio, price 6 d.
The Privileges and Practice of Parliaments in England, Collected out of the
Common Laws of this Land. Seen and allowed by the Learned in the Laws.
Commended to the high Court of Parliament. Quarto. st. 6 d. The great Pressures
and Grievances of the Protestants in France, and their Apology to the late
Ordinances made against them; both out of the Edict of Nantes, and several
other Fundamental Laws of France; and that these new Illegalities, and their
Miseries are contrived by the Popish Bishops Arbitrary Power, Gathered and
Digested by E. E. of Gray's Inn, sometimes under-Secretary to the French King.
Humbly Dedicated to his Majesty of Great Britain in Parliament.
A FRIEND TO CAESAR, etc.
IT appears by several Acts of Parliament, that the Nation has frequently been
charged with great Sums of Money, for the carrying on Wars, and for other the
necessary Service of the Crown and Nation.

Those Sums for Methods sake were by their several Acts distributed to the
respective Counties, and Cities of the Nation, and afterward subdivided by
Commissioners appointed by the same Acts into Hundreds, Wapes, and Wapentakes
in each County, and the whole Sum for one or three Months laid upon every
distinct County apportioned to the respective Hundreds thereof, and the
Proportion allotted to every Hundred, subdivided again by the Commissioners of
each Hundred, into so many Parts as there are Divisions in that Hundred, more
or less according to the greatness and smallness of the Divisions, and Warrants
Issued out by the said Commissioners, to the Constables of each Division, to
Collect the Sum required after an Assessment thereof made by the Inhabitants,
or some of them, appointed thereunto by the Commissioners of each Hundred.

This Money, laid upon each Division of each Hundred, is again subdivided into
Parishes, and those Parishes into the respective Townships of each Parish, and
at length stated by the Assessors, upon each individual Inhabitant of each
Township, that has any Estate Real or Personal, to render him or them liable
to pay any part of what is laid upon that Division; And so the whole Treasure
granted by the Acts (or ought to be) collected and paid by the Inhabitants of
every Township, by all Townships in every Parish, by all Parishes in every
Division, by all Divisions in every Hundred, by all Hundreds in every County,
and by all Counties in the whole Kingdom. A way very suitable to the Prudence
of the representative of the People, and much becoming the Justice of the High
Court of Parliament.

Yet if I may have Leave, without Offense, I would humbly demand,

How it comes to pass, that notwithstanding so Many, so Great and Unparalled
Sums of Money as have been given and granted to his Majesty, since his happy
return to his Crown, His Majesty should yet be said not only to have an Empty
Exchequer, but also to be much in debt to several of his Subjects.

In all Diseases of the Body Natural, we say to discover the Cause of the
Distemper, is half a Cure, and to remove it, will totally restore the Patient.
What is true in the Distemper of the Body Natural, is as equally true in the
Distemper of the Body Politic; take away the Cause, and the Effect cease.
And however it is not easy (yea it is impossible) to Assign all the grounds and
causes of his Majesty's unhappiness in this particular, after the expression of
so much Love, Loyalty, and Affection from his Parliament and People, who almost
(if not altogether) have at every Session, given him for these ten Years past,
little or much to enable him to carry on his Affairs, without exposing himself
to Debts, and other grieving Disadvantages to himself and his People, yet some
of them that are too obvious (and the grand Causes among many others) shall be
given in answer to this Inquiry, for the future prevention of so great a
disservice, both to his Majesty and his People, who by reason thereof is
always receiving, and yet has not sufficient, and who are always giving, and
yet are as far from their end in giving, as if they had given little or nothing.

1. The first Reason or Cause that I shall mention may be in the Parliaments
not giving or granting, what they do give or grant, till the Service for which
it is given, be commenced or in some forwardness for its Expense, whereby his
Majesty is oftentimes forced either to advance his Treasure upon the Credit of
what they are about to give him, or for want thereof to purchase all or most
Commodities requisite for his Service, at exorbitant Rates and Prizes, which
renders it much more in Charge and Expense, than otherwise it would or ought to
be.

2. These Allowances given by the Parliament out of the Treasure, given his
Majesty in their respective Acts to several Persons, though in it self, it be
upon view, but of small or no consideration; to wit; one penny or two pence in
the Pound, Yet if these pence or two pences be cast up, and put into a total
Sum, to be defaulked from the whole Sum given, it will then appear that the
want thereof is a great Detriment to his Majesty, and does frustrate his
Service (as to so much) beyond his expectation from the Sum given him. As for
Example, suppose the Sum given to be two Millions (as of late it has been and
more) four pence in the Pound, distributed into pence and two pences to several
persons, amounts in the whole, Two Millions to 33333 l. 06 s. 08 p. This 33333
l. 06 s. 08 p. if duly paid would answer his Majesty's expectation of two
Millions of Treasure said to be given his Majesty, and the Parliaments
intention in giving him so much, whereas this defaulkation in the Act it self,
renders the Sum so much less than is promised, and his Majesty so much the more
in debt for want of it, and the Subject liable to future Taxations for the same
Money, which he has already paid as part of the two Millions formerly granted.

3. The Anticipation of his Majesty's Revenues, by Loanes from the City of
London, and other private Men or Places (before what is given him by his
Parliament is or can be reckoned,) is a great cause of its expense, without
that Providence which otherwise might be used, and consequently of leaving his
Majesty under the burden of debt, as much (if not more) than he was before it
was given him.

4. The paying of Interest to all Venders of Goods or Commodities served into
the Navy, for the carrying on his Majesty's Service there, is intollerably
disadvantagious to his Majesty, and contracts upon him such, and so great
Debts, that unless the Parliament be constantly giving, his Majesty must needs
sink under the weight of them (for over and above the common and bare Interest
allowed) these men knowing beforehand, what course they must steer, before
they can compass their Money, will not part with their respective Commodities,
without the inclusion of 20 per Cent. Profit for their Goods sold, for which
upon receipt of Bills or Debentures for their Money, they immedlately carry
them to the Exchequer, and enter them there as so much Money lent to his
Majesty, at 7 or 8 per Cent. till they be paid, whereby it appears to me (I
know not what it does to other men) that his Majesty loses 30 per Cent. of all
Bills or Debentures so brought into his Exchequer, as Money lent for Goods sold
into the Service, which must needs leave his Majesty as much in Debt at the end
of the Year as he was at first.

5. The Payment of those Moneys either lent or anticipated by Tallyes, or
brought into the Exchequer by Bills or Debentures in the new way, commonly
called by COURSE, is the Ivy that eats out the Heart of his Majesty's Revenue;
for though it be true that the Parliament have in their Wisdoms, made strict
Provisoes in several Acts, for the due payment thereof, without much Charge or
Fees to the Vender or Buyer, yet it is also true that, let them do what they
can to prevent the Mischiefs that may attend their Payment Irregularly or out
of Course, yet (when they have done all) all that they have done, nor does nor
can signify any thing as to the freeing his Majesty from being in Debt, in
regard what they build upon in this way, is that which cannot stand for want of
a sure and solid Foundation to bear it upon.

For whatever is or may be pretended unto by those Gentlemen that were the
first contrivers of this way, as men interested to promote it, yet indeed the
way it self is a Sandy Foundation, and so far from answering its end, to wit,
the speedy payment of his Majesty's Debts, that it is totally destructive to
him and the Nation, and the longer it is followed, the more he will find
himself plunged into Debt; So that if he had not the Peoples Purses and
Affections to supply him in a constant way of giving, he would never be able to
extricate himself out of them. And to speak plainly, Payments in course, are at
the best but coarse Payments, both in reference to his Majesty's Honor and
Profit, and with reference to his Peoples satisfaction, except such as are
interressed Persons, or usurious Abusers of his Majesty's Service. I shall take
leave to expatiate a little upon this Head, because I know it to be the
greatest Diana of these times, and is looked upon as the rarest Expedient that
ever was found out for the Honor of his Majesty's Service.

Suppose a Lord, or other Noble Man of this Nation, whose Revenue is 5000 Pound
good Estate, to be also an adventurer to the East Indies, or Guinny, twenty
thousand Pounds with hopes and design to improve his Fortune, who yet by reason
thereof and other Expenses, incumbent upon him for the support of his Family,
and maintenance of himself in that grandeur, that his Birth, Office at Court,
or Nobility requires, begets himself unwarily into Debt to several men 40000
l, which if paid, would almost ruin his Estate, and if not paid will grow more
and more upon him every Year. Suppose also this Nobl-eMan, upon consideration
of his present condition, should advise with his Steward or other Servants or
Friends, what course to take to free himself from this great pressing Debt: It
cannot be imagined that any faithful Steward or Friend will say, Sr. you have
5000 Pounds per Annum in good Revenue, settle it upon your Creditors for their
security, that their Debts shall be paid them, but limit your self to no time
when, only engage your Income for the Principal, and pay them Interest, till
you can pay them both Interest and Principal, and that they may be satisfied
that you intend really and truly to pay them one time or other; give them order
that all and every of them shall bring his and their Bills, Bonds, Book-Debts
or what else soever he has to show for his Debt to your Steward, and there
enter their Claim upon Record with Promise, that he that comes first shall be
first paid, and he that comes last, must be content to stay till the last but
himself be paid, only both the first and last shall all be assured that let the
Payment be when it will (ever or never) they shall all be paid in Course, and
they shall all have Interest allowed them till it be paid, though never, or
never so late first.

Yet admit he or they should thus advise this Nobleman, can any rational Man
think that this is a good way or proposition to disingage him from his Debts,
or that it is a good Foundation laid to free him from them, and yet preserve
his Estate, Honor, Adventure and all necessary Expenses entire? surely no;
Considering that by this Advice his Revenue must be pawned to his Creditours,
his Adventure will daily call upon him for more Issues, his Honor will require
that he should still live at the same rate as formerly, and that the Interest
of his 40000 Pounds Debt will be a constant eating Charge upon his Estate. Must
not these Encumbrances needs leave him in a worse Condition as to his Debts the
next, than he was this Year, if he resolves to take up or prosecute this Way or
Advice.

For the Interest of 40000 Pound for one Year is 2400 Pound, which is almost
half as much as his whole Revenue can drown of his Debts for that Year, so that
he pays but 2600 Pounds of his 40000 Pound Debt in one whole Year, and is left
at loss how to equip and set to Sea his Ships the next Year, having all his
Revenue in Lavender to his Creditours. If he does not set them forth, he
hazards the loss of his 20000 l Stock, if he does, he must then advance Money
upon the Credit of his whole Estate to do it withal, and this involves him into
a greater Debt than he was in at first. If he cannot take up Money without
great Disadvantage, then there is nothing left him but to hire his Ships, Man,
Victual, and Store them with all Commodities fit for the Trade he drives, upon
Trust or Ticket from such as will trust him or sell their Commodities to him at
6, 6, and 6 Months time, till his Ships return from Sea, at what time he has
Freight, Victual and Wages to pay to all his Seamen and Owners as a growing
Debt upon him. Now I pray consider will any of those that trust him with their
Goods at such Days of Payment (if they know his Condition) not include in the
Price of their Goods, so much Profit as may bear the hazard and adventure of
their Trust and Forbearance? surely they will. And by how much his Necessity
may pinch him to make use of their Courtesy, by so much he may assure himself
they will grow upon him in the Price, and Profit of their Commodities, and this
runs him more and farther into debt than ever; for he that drives a Trade upon
Ticket or Trust, either by advancing Money at Interest, or taking up Goods at
Time, is and must needs be in a sad Condition as to his Trade.

Unto which we may also add that if this Lord or Nobleman shall yet resolve to
live at as high a rate as ever for the Maintenance of himself, his Lady and
Family, and for the upholding his Reputation in Court and Country (Necessity
being laid upon him so to do,) then certainly his Debt must and will increase
upon him every Year, so long as he continues in this course, and sink him
deeper and deeper into Debt, and all this (and more that might be said) upon
the single Account of this Sandy Foundation or Advice given him by his Steward
to enable him to creep out of Debt by degrees.

I list not to make any Application of this Parallel to the Case in hand, an
easy understanding will save me that labor, and though I know that Similies
do not run upon four Feet, yet I shall take the boldness to tell my Reader,
that as this Course is and must be greatly destructive and prejudicial to the
private Estate, Honor and Reputation of this Lord or Nobleman, so it is
infinitely much more in the case of the King, in regard no Comparison between a
private Man and a Prince, will or can reach the sad Loss and Damage that must
and will attend his Service, more than any private Man's whatsoever.

6. The next begetter of his Majesty's great Debts, is the non-payment of the
Seamens Wages so soon as the respective Ships come into Harbor, and are safe
at their Moarings after the Service is ended, the neglect or want whereof is
the Ground and Cause of that devouring Charge that attends his Majesty's
Service.

What the Damage thereof is or may be, is not easily discerned by most Men,
and little considered by those that do discern it, as being neither their Horse
nor their Load; but that you may see a little into the mischief thereof, I
shall crave Leave to hold it forth in the Example of a Ship of 200 Men, that by
the Foot you may better guess at the Body of great Sea Monsters.

Suppose a Ship manned with 200 Men, and employed in his Majesty's Service for
six Months past, to come into Harbor, and for want of Treasure to pay off, the
Company lies at her Moarings, or in dry Dock one Month, full manned in Victuals
and Wages; the Question before us is, what Damage this is to his Majesty for
the growing Debt of Victuals and Wages for that Month.

That we may the better see the Damage, we must inquire and know what is the
Debt from his Majesty for the whole Company for their six Months Service past.
Now the Debt for the Wages of 200 Men for one Month, (supposed at 30 Shillings
Medium for one Man) comes to 300 Pounds, which for six Months is 1800 Pounds.
This being stated, it appears that the Damage his Majesty sustains for the
want of 1800 Pounds to pay off these 200 men is for one Months Wages 300
Pounds, unto which if you add for the Price of their Victuals for the same
Month (at 20 Shillings medium) it amounts to 200 Pounds more, and is in the
whole 500 Pounds, which is 200 Pounds more than one quarter part of the whole
1800 Pound Debt for six Months. Now how unreasonable a thing is it that his
Majesty should for want of 1800 Pound present Money be smitten into Debt 500
Pound in one Month, and so in proportion into a greater or smaller Debt, for a
longer or shorter time, whilst the said Ship lies unpaid? If the preceding
Article of Anticipation be by the bare Interest of Money, such a loss to his
Majesty, what Detriment is this at such a time when yet his Majesty has no
need of, nor Service for those men whom he both feeds and pays?

Let those that can, cast it, for my part, though I can I will not, as ashamed
to say what it is; and upon that account I must confess that I have sometimes
stood amazed to think upon the Improvidence (I must not say Imprudence) of some
employed in his Majesty's Service, that should take care to prevent this
Mischief, not much inferior to the last mentioned; And I dare affirm that and
if it be no better provided against in the future, than it has been for time
past, let the Parliament give what Treasure they please to his Majesty, to
carry on his Service in time of War; this very particular shall swallow up a
great part thereof, and leave his Majesty more in Debt at the end of every
Voyage or Service, than can be recovered or paid without new Supplies from the
Nation, for if 200 Men shall beget him 500 Pound in Debt for one Month, it is
not difficult to say what the whole or greatest part of a Fleet manned with 30
or 40000 Men shall fleece from him for two or three Months together.

It would be accounted an officious Act to discover what Debts his Majesty
contracted in this particular, for and during the late War with the Dutch. And
though it be not difficult to Collect it by the respective Sea Books of each
Ship in the Fleets then set to Sea (discompting the time from each Ships coming
to her Moarings, till the day she was paid off) yet indeed it is better to be
concealed than made public, for if it were exactly cast up and known, it would
astonish his Majesty to think how his Treasure has been wasted, and his Debt
increased without any Service done for it, being paid not so much for Wages
earned, as Money cast away for want of Treasure to pay what they had already
earned, before they came to their Moarings.

7. Among other Causes of his Majesty's contracting great Debts upon him, it is
none of the least to farm out his settled Revenues; Such as the Excize of Beer
and Ale, Chimney-Money, etc. to such men as will contract for them, for this is
the way to render these Collections one third part less than indeed they are,
and consequently his Majesty so much the more in Debt. It cannot be denied but
that all Undertakers or Farmers of his Majesty's Revenues, Fish for Profit to
themselves, and were they not assured that in probability they might gain to
themselves one third Part more than what they engaged to pay, they would never
oblige themselves and their Estates to make good what they promise. We may add
to this that all Advance-Money upon the Contract or Farm taken, lessens the
Revenue so much the more, by how much the more ready Money they do advance
before they enter upon their Contract, for it is not to be believed that these
men would deposite so great Sums as they do, were it not as a Shooing-horn, the
better and easier to draw the Contract (as a Shoe) on their Feet. And though
here be no visible Loss of Interest Money to his Majesty by this Anticipation,
as in the case of other Loanes (yea rather a seeming visible Profit,) yet the
invisible Loss included in the Contract it self, is more than the Profit of
double Interest to the Farmer, and consequently more than the Loss of double
Interest to his Majesty.

Nor must I omit (though I know it a Digression from the Point in hand) that
great reflection upon his Majesty's Honor that attends this way of Farming,
for under pretense of his Majesty's Grant or Commission, the respective Farmers
skrew and tenter the Subject unto or beyond the Letter or Meaning of the Act of
Parliament, yea contrary to Certificates produced from the Justices of the
Peace, that they are freed from Payments by the Act it self, and thereby they
render their Lives bitter to them, and their Estates exceeding Poor and Low.
Hence comes Clamor, Discontentedness against the present Government, and the
Cry of the Poor against their own Trustees. I know that most of these
Undertakers are Gentlemen of Quality in their respective Countries, where their
Farm lies (though some also are Strangers to the Places, and live far remote)
but I know withal that these Gentlemen do not Act in their own Persons, farther
than to regulate or methodize their Profit upon the whole Farm, and when that
is done, they let out their Farms to Subcontractors, if they can get any that
will come up to their Price, so as to ascertain their designed Profit, and if
they cannot so do, then they depute the Power of his Majesty's grant to them,
to Subcollectors for their Uses, who generally are men of small (if any)
Reputation in the Countries or Places where they live, and who for the most
part do employ such men under them as are much inferior to themselves, and
altogether unfit to receive any Trust. And these are the men that rake and
tear, that grieve and vex the Subject, which the first undertakers and
sometimes their Subcontractors and Subcollectors are ashamed to appear in,
though yet it be connived at both by the one and the other, to be done by these
inferior Instruments, in order to the improvement of their Farm or Contract,
the Profit whereof was the first Bait that enticed them to bite at his
Majesty's Service, whatever might otherwise be pretended.

Thus I have endeavored to give you a few of the many Grounds and Causes of
his Majesty's past and present great Debts, notwithstanding all that large and
liberal Aid he has and does receive from his Subjects, by several Acts of
Parliament.

I could easily enlarge, and both tire my self, and my Reader in specifying
many more, which though happily they are or may not be such, and so great as
those before mentioned, yet of themselves they are of great Concernment, and
highly prejudicial to his Majesty's Service, by licking up (beyond all Bounds
and Reason) his Majesty's Treasure, and hurrying him into Debt as I may say,
over Shoes and Boots. Such are the Management of his Naval Affairs in the
Victualling Office by Contract, too great Salleries to subordinate Instruments,
want of seasonable Supplies of the Magazeens in all his Majesty's Yards and
Storehouses, buying all sorts of Provisions at extreme Rates and Prizes when
(and not before) Necessity enforces their supply, payment of those Provisions
in a long bow of time, furnishing the necessity of one Yard or Storehouse with
the Provisions of another Yard after they are laid in there, at exorbitant
Rates and Charge, want of due Musters, and in Default thereof Payment, of dead
Pays to Captains, Pursers, etc; Imbezellments of Boteswaines, Gunners, and
Pursers, the abuse of provant Clothes sold to Seamen pressed into the Service,
buying poor Seamens Tickets, compounding for Bills and Debentures, when there
is Money in the Office to pay them, Diverting his Majesty's Treasure to private
Uses. These and an hundred more, that with an easy Recollection might be
ennumerated, are all tending much to the Disservice of his Majesty, the
contracting of greater Debts than needs, the Discouragement of the Subject to
serve his Majesty with Provisions, the Discontent of the whole Nation, and the
Disappointment of the good Intentions of the Parliament, in laying so many and
so great Burdens and Taxes upon the Subject, with design to preserve his
Majesty from being in Debt. But in regard, all or the most part of these (and
those I pass over with Silence) are such as are already in the Hands and Care
of Subordinate Instruments, entrusted with their Regulation and Prevention, I
shall rather choose in Silence to bury them, than by raking in them, to uncover
the Nakedness of those whose Trust is to reform them. And shall proceed in what
remains before me, as the Design of this whole Discourse, to wit (if it be
possible) to propound such Expedients as (at least in my poor and weak
Capacity) may have a Tendency to preserve his Majesty's Honor, and to redeem
him from those needless growing Debts that now burden him, and in him the
whole Nation. And yet to carry on his Majesty's Revenue, Service, and Expense,
at as high a Rate of Honor and Value as now it is or can be supposed to be, by
all those Contrivances and Practices before mentioned.

The whole Charge and Expense of his Majesty may for Methods Sake be looked
upon under the Notion of Ordinary or Extraordinary.

I call such Ordinary as refer to his Person, his House, Guards, Buildings,
Reparations, Privy-Purse, Intelligences, Negotiations with foreign Princes,
Maintenance of his Navy in Harbor, his Garrisons, Fortifications, Building and
Repairing of Ships, together with all other things, that are constant Charges
upon him, and must be kept and maintained by him, and his Successors, as Kings
of England.

I call nothing Extraordinary, but open and Proclaimed War, with one or more
Foreign Nations, or Association with Foreign Princes, whereby he is and must
be forced to raise an Army, or set out Fleets of Ships to Sea, etc. For the
Common Defense of the Nation, preservation of Peace, Trade, etc.

The first of these is already provided for and settled, the Parliament having
given his Majesty twelve hundred thousand Pounds a Year, to enable him to pay
and bear all Charges and Expenses that may or do attend such things as are of a
constant being; and must of Necessity be kept up and maintained for the
preservation of the Nation in time of Peace, and the Honor of his Majesty's
Person and Court. And I could heartily wish that if what is already settled upon
him shall by experience be found too little, more might be added rather than
his Majesty be exposed to follow the by-Ways, and Devices of Biased Men, to
advance Money for his Necessity, and thereby run himself into great Debts, not
so easily Discharged as Made. It is a sad Story that the whole Nation of
England (I might say three whole Nations) should not be sufficient for the
Maintenance of one Man, according to the Nobleness of his Birth, the Dignity of
his Office, and the Necessary Expenses that attend it, without such Precarious
ways before mentioned, that render him (as a borrower) a Servant to the Lender,
and yet after all leaves him in a worse Condition than he was at first.

The last of these must be provided for, by Additional and Extraordinary Levyes
upon the Nation, according to the Greatness, and Formidableness of the Enemy,
the length of the War, etc. As it shall be made known by his Majesty to his
Parliament, who are bound seasonably and speedily to supply what they in their
Wisdoms find fitting, for the better carrying on of the War, both by Sea and by
Land, for the Preservation of his Majesty, and the Honor and Safety of the
Nation, etc. Now supposing the first already settled, and the last to be settled
by the Parliament: the next Enquiry is how his Majesty may have and enjoy the
full proceed of his Revenue already settled upon him for all ordinary Expenses,
without Snips, Abatements, Defaulkations or other great Loss or Damage before
it be collected, or after it is Collected before it is paid to him, or to his
use, to such Persons as he shall Authorize to receive the same. And how his
Parliament may for the future so settle a Reveliue upon his Majesty, for all
extraordinary Charges, etc. in case of War, and dispose the Collection,
Receipt, Payment, and Expense thereof, and of every part thereof, that the
Nation may not be abused, his Majesty Dishonored, nor his Service Retarded,
either for want of Treasure sufficient to bear the Charge, or want of Care and
Fidelity, in the Payment of all Expenses the War may require.

I put the Collection and Payment of all Treasure, whether for Ordinary Charges
in time of Peace, or Extraordinary Expenses in time of War together, because
the same way to be propounded for the Collection and Payment of all Treasure
given or to be given his Majesty for ordinary Expenses is (or with little
Variation may be) the way and measure of all Collections for extraordinary
Expenses in time of War. For the Collection whereof I shall humbly Offer to
Consideration these ensuing Propositions (viz.)

1. That all Acts of Parliament already made, whereby his Majesty has any
Revenue from the Nation in General, such as Excize upon Ale and Beer,
Hearth-Money, etc. and all future Acts to be made to Levy Money upon the
general Body or Bulk of the Nation, for any Cause or Causes whatsoever, either
Ordinary or Extraordinary, be declared by the Parliament to be Collected in
manner and form following. That is to say, First by every Township in the whole
Nation, according to the respective Proportions assessed upon them. Secondly,
by every Parish containing such and so many Townships in that Parish. Thirdly,
by every Division containing so many Parishes in that Division. Fourthly, by
every Hundred containing so many Divisions as are in that Hundred. Fifthly, by
every County containing so many Hundreds as are in that County. And lastly by
the whole Nation, containing so many Counties as are in it. As for Cities and
other Corporate Places, the way of Collection may be carried by Parishes in
that City, Corporation, etc. according to the respective Revenues that may
arise from each Parish. This is already practiced as to all Land Taxes, and
needs no Alteration or Amendment.

2. Secondly, That two able and sufficient Men Inhabitants of each Township, be
required by the Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, or other
Commissioners to Assess themselves and the rest of the Inhabitants of each
Township, Parish or Division, in every Hundred, and enable to Collect what is
so by them Assessed, proportionably to the whole Sum laid upon that Hundred or
Division, and those Parishes and Townships within the same. This also is the
Method of former Times, as to all Land-Taxes, and cannot be put in a better way.

3. Thirdly, That this Money or Treasure, thus Collected, may remain, and be in
all and every part thereof, in the Hands of the said Collectors, respectively,
for and till such time as it be required from them by such Treasurers as shall
be Empowered to receive and pay, or Assign it to be received and paid to such
Men to whom the same or any part thereof shall appear to be due from his
Majesty upon any account whatsoever, according to the respective Trust of the
said Treasurers, and the due and ordinary Form of that Place and Office,
wherein they are Entrusted as Treasurers, and not otherwise, whether they be
Treasurers at War, or for the Army, the Navy, the Household or any other
Treasurers whatsoever, legally warranted to receive and pay his Majesty's
Treasure and Debts.

More than this needs not be said or done, with Reference to the Colecting of
all Aids whatsoever in all Townships, Parishes, Divisions, Hundreds and
Counties of the whole Nation. And more than these, two able and sufficient Men,
are needful to be appointed as Collectors thereof, in their respective
Townships, who are best able to know and Determine how many Chimnies are in
each House of that Township, and how many Alehouses or Brewers and Drawers of
Ale and Beer, do inhabit therein, having the Acts of Parliament to direct them
what to do for the one, and Instructors from the Justices or other
Commissioners for the Hundred, what to Impose upon the other, either by the
Strike of Malt spent, or by the Barrel of Ale drawn, etc.

In this way propounded his Majesty shall be sure to have his full Revenue
Collected, and deposited in good Hands ready to be paid to such as by his
Authority, shall Assign the same or any part thereof, to all or any of his
Creditors, to whom they shall give their Assignations free of all Charge to his
Majesty, not only for Collecting, but also for paying of the same. For they do
not more, nor so much as the Collectors for the Poor, or the Churchwardens of
every Parish, do or ought to do. And by this way it will easily appear not only
what the whole Sum of all and every Aid granted or to be granted to his
Majesty, will or does amount unto in every Township, Parish, Division, Hundred,
and County of the whole Kingdom; but may also happily discover, that whereas
his Majesty now loses one fourth, if not the third Part of his Aids given him
by Anticipations, Loanes at Interest, Extraordinary Prizes for Provisions,
Interest Money for Payments in Course, Fees to Collect, and Charges to Remit
them after Collections, Fees upon Receipt and Payment of them, Contracts with
Farmers and Undertakers, and twenty things more that I list not to mention. He
shall now have not only all or the most part of those Expenses saved, and his
Revenue settled and determined what it is, but also the same augmented some
hundred thousand Pounds by the Year, every Year so long as it shall be
continued.

This may satisfy for the way of Collecting his Majesty's Treasure whether for
Hearths or Excize, and in general of all other Aids whatsoever, that are or may
be given him by his Parliament, and laid upon the Nation in General.

As to the Payment of this Treasure, thus Collected and Lodged in the Subjects
own Hands (which will much content them,) I shall further offer to
Consideration these Propositions following, which I doubt not will content and
please them much more, if due Care and Fidelity be had and used therein.

1. First, That the Treasurers both of the Navy, Army, and Household or other
Treasurers of his Majesty's Revenues respectively, be required and enabled by
Act of Parliament to receive and Pay the same, as the Sole Trustees thereof,
for the Use and Service of his Majesty, and for no other Use or Service
whatsoever.

2. Secondly, That all Treasures, Aids and Collections so Vested in the said
Treasurers, by the several Acts of Parliament, shall not be diverted or paid by
them or any of them, to any other Use or Service, than for the Services proper
and peculiar to their respective Trusts, whether in the Army, Navy, Household,
etc. Or by any other Order or Warrant, than the ordinary Warrant of three or
more of the Commissioners for the Treasury, three or more of the Commissioners
of the Navy, etc. And that if they or any of them, shall presume to pay any
part thereof, to any other Use than the Payment of his Majesty's due Debts,
according to their several Trusts, by any other Order or Warrant, than the
ordinary Warrant of that Office, whereof they are Treasurers, that they by the
said Act, he or they shall be liable to such Punishment as his Majesty with his
Parliament shall think fit to lay upon him or them, for his or their Breach of
Trust in that behalf. And that the Auditors of their Accounts, respectively be
required and empowered by the said Act or Acts of Parliament, not to give him or
them any Allowance of any of his Majesty's Treasure so paid by any
extrajudicial Warrant, or Order upon any Pretense whatsoever, upon all or any
of their present or succeeding Accounts, upon pain of losing their Places, and
suffering what other Punishment his Majesty and his Parliament shall think fit.

3. Thirdly, That the Commissioners of each County nominated in the said Act or
Acts, be empowered and required speedily to send up to the said Treasurers,
under the Hands and Seals of six or more of them, a List or Certificate of what
Sum or Sums of Money are Due and Payable to his Majesty by the said County, as
their Part of the whole Sum granted for three or six Months, according to the
several Acts for the same, and therein declare how the same is by them and
their fellow-Commissioners, distributed into so many Hundreds as are in that
County, and into so many Divisions as are in each Hundred, and into so many
Parishes as are in each Division, and into so many Townships as are in each
Parish. And to signify in the said Certificate the Names of the respective
Collectors of every Township, together with the distinct Sums of Money charged
upon them, and Collected by them, whether for the Hearth Money, Excize, or the
Navy distinctly, whereby the said Treasurers may at one view, have and see not
only the full Sum payable by every Hundred in the said County, but also by
every Division in the said Hundred, every Parish in the said Division, and
every Township in the said Parish for three Months, and where and in whose
Hands the same and every part thereof is Lodged for his Majesty's Service.

4. Fourthly, That the like Certificate or List be also sent up to the said
Treasurors under Hands and Seals of two or more of the Commissioners of every
City or Town Corporate, chargable in the said Act or Acts, with any part of
that Sum that is charged upon each County, as part or member thereof for three
Months.

5. Fifthly, That when the Treasurer of the Navy, or any other Treasurer has
received the aforesaid Lists, Certificate, or Duplicates of every County,
Hundred, Division, Rape, Wapentake, City, and Town in the whole Kingdom,
charged with all or any part of the Sum mentioned in the said Act or Acts, he
or they the said Treasurers be further required, and by the said Acts Empowered
to give public Notice at the common Office of the Navy or other Places, where
their respective Trusts are to be executed, to all men that have or shall sell
any Provisions, Commodities, Goods, or Wares to his Majesty, or others
Authorized by him for his Use in the Navy, or any other Place, where his
Service requires them, and are thereby become Creditors to his Majesty, for any
Sum of Money whatsoever, that they and every of them shall forthwith bring to
his, and their Offices respectively, all such Bills, Orders, Warrant, or
Debentures Signed and Attested in the due form of the Office of the Navy, Army,
Household, etc. by three or more of those that are or shall be Authorized to
give Warrant for all Payments referring to their particular and respective
Trusts, and there to put their Hands as for the Receipt of so much Money as
shall justly appear to be due upon the same, after due Examination had thereof
by the said Treasurers and their Deputies and Instruments, and after
Defaulkation made of all Imprests formerly paid thereupon.

6. Sixthly, That the said Treasurers be in like manner Empowered and Required
by the said Acts to call for and take up all Bills of Impresses Signed and paid
in the due form of their several Offices, to any Person or Persons that have or
shall contract for any Provisions, referring to the Navy, Army, Household, etc.
to be afterward supplied and served into his Majesty's Stores for the present
and future Service.

7. Sevently, That the said Treasurers for the time being, respectively be
required and by the said Acts Empowered upon Receipt and Delivery of all and
every such Bills of Emptions or other ordinary Warrants, Debentures, etc. to
give to the respective Parties from whom they do or shall receive the same, one
or more Assignations under his or their Hands and Seals, upon one or more of
the said Counties, Hundreds, Divisions, Parishes and Townships, most remore
from London, of so much of his Majesty's Treasure vested in them by the said
Acts, as shall Pay and Discharge each Man's Bill or Debenture, Order or Warrant,
therein Charging, and in his Majesty's Name requiring all to whom the said
Assignations shall come or concern, to pay the same to him or them, or their
lawful Assigns upon sight thereof, if then due, or so soon as the same shall
appear to be, and grow due, by and from the said Counties, Hundreds, Divisions,
Parishes and Townships by Virtue of the said Act or Acts of Parliament.

Which Assignation so Signed and Sealed as aforesaid, shall be (and by the said
Acts shall be expressed to be) as good and sufficient Security to the
respective Parties, for their several Debts due from his Majesty, as if they
had still kept their Bills and Debentures for the same, and upon Payment
thereof by the County, Hundred, Division, Parish, and Township, and the
Collectors thereof respectively, upon whom it is charged or drawn, the like
good and sufficient Security, and Discharge for and to the said County,
Hundred, Division, Parish, and Township, and the respective Collectors, and all
other men whatsoever concerned therein, as if they and every of them had paid
the same according to former Custom, to the high Collector, Receiver General,
or Farmers of his Majesty's Revenues.

8. Eighthly, That the said Treasurers be enabled by the said Acts (if the
Parties shall desire it) to include in one and the same Assignation, as one
entire Sum, all such Money as shall appear due, to or upon eight, ten, twelve
or more Bills or Debentures, Orders or Warrants to 8. 19. 12. or more men that
shall amicably Consent and Agree among themselves, to employ one or more men
for them all, to receive the Sum assigned from the respective Counties,
Hundreds, Divisions, Parishes and Townships, provided that they and every of
the said Treasurers do specify in the body of his and their Assignations each
man's distinct Name, Bill and Sum of Money due to him in particular, though he
charge the County, etc. but with one Total.

9. Ninthly, That all Commissioners nominated in and by the said Acts for all
and every County, be required to be Aiding and Assisting to all and every such
Person or Persons, that shall present or produce to them or any of them, any
Assignation upon that County, Hundred, Division, Parish, or Township within the
same, by giving Warrants of Distress to all Constables and other Officers in
case of Refusal or Delay of Payment thereof after the same shall appear due to
his Majesty or his Assigns by the respective Acts of Parliament.

10. Tenthly, That the Comptroller of the Navy, etc. for the time being (or
such other Person or Persons as his Majesty and the Parliament shall think fit
to appoint) be Required and Empowered by virtue of the said Acts, to take and
keep an exact Counter-Check, or Book of Accounts, by way of Charge and
Discharge, or Creditor and Debtor, of all Bills, Debentures, Orders and
Warrants, that shall be taken up by the said Treasurers respectively, and of
all Assignations thereupon given by them or any of them, to all or any of his
Majesty's Subjects or Creditors, therein specifying the particular Sums of
Money due to the respective Persons upon the said Bills, etc. and payable by
the said Assignations, to them or their lawful Assigns, by and from the
respective Counties, Hundreds, Divisions, Parishes, and Townships, as the same
shall grow due to his Majesty, by Virtue of the said Acts, for Beer and Ale,
Chymnies, or any other thing or way whatsoever. And that no Bill, Debenture,
Order, or Warrant be taken in by them or any of them the said Treasurers, nor
any Assignation be thereupon given by the said Treasurers or any of them
without the Presence, Privity. Approbation, and Attestation of the said
Comptroller, or such other Person or Persons, as his Majesty and his
Parliament, shall please to appoint in and by the said Acts.

These things premised, I shall endeavor to vindicate this Proposition from
some of those Objections that may be made against it, either as not Practicable
at all, or if it be, yet with so much Disadvantage and Damage to his Majesty,
that it will not become the Honor of his Majesty, nor the Wisdom of the
Parliament to settle it after this manner.

1. It may be said that all his Majesty's Treasure ought regularly to be
brought into, and lodged in his Exchequer before it be Issued to any particular
Service, etc.

To which I Answer.

That I am not at all against the way of the Exchequer, when the Service may
admit of Formalities without Prejudice to its self (which ought in the first
place to be regarded) but if the Aides and Revenues settled or to be settled upon
his Majesty, whether Land Taxes, Hearth Money, Excize, or any other of the
nature of these, referring to the Nation in General, cannot be Collected nor
Paid into his Majesty's Exchequer, without the loss of much Time, and the
expense of too much of the same Treasure, and that by this or any other way
that may be found out, his Majesty shall not only expedite the Collection as to
time, but also facilitate, if not totally annihilate the Charge and Loss that
attends its Transmission into the Exchequer: I see no Reason, why we should so
far dote upon a Formality (especially in time of War) as to expose his Majesty
to so great and insufferable a Loss, only to keep up that Observance in strict
Mode and Form.

2. Nor indeed is the Treasure of Hearth Money, and Excize, paid at present
into his Majesty's Exchequer, as by the Objection it is supposed it ought to
be, but they are both farmed to several Undertakers, and the Money contracted
for, is paid by them into the Exchequer, and no more. And what his Majesty
gains by farming of them, is easy to be told. It is true, he saves the Charge
of Collecting, and Remitting it into his Exchequer, by these Contracts, but it
is as true that the Remedy is by so much worse than the Disease, by how much
his Majesty's Loss, in and by these Contracts and Farms, is greater than the
Charge of Collecting and Remitting the Treasure into his Exchequer. Whereas in
the Way Proposed, his Majesty shall be at no Charge in Collecting, nor yet in
Paying into or out of his Exchequer, what shall be Collected for his Service,
and besides all this, the Insufferable Loss that now he undergoes by Farming,
shall also be saved.

3. Suppose it Convenient to Lodge all his Majesty's Treasure in his Exchequer,
when it may be done without loss of Time, or Expense of Treasure, as the common
Receptacle of his Majesty's whole Revenue, does it therefore follow, that it
may not be paid elsewhere, when both these Inconveniences that now attend it,
may thereby be prevented; if it were paid into the Exchequer, must it not be
paid from thence to satisfy his Majesty's Debts, to the same Men that this
Proposition designs it for, and when it is Paid do not all Instruments employed
in the Exchequer, discharge themselves of it in their Accounts, by those Bills
and Debentures, Orders, and Warrants, that give them Power so to pay it.

The Design of the Exchequer, is principally for the Accounts of his Majesty's
Revenues, and not so much for the Receipt of the Treasure it self; Now if the
Accounts of his Majesty's Treasure, may be made in his Exchequer, as regularly
as if it had been brought thither in Specie, though it never came there (as all
Farms, and Contracts for these Aides never did) then there can be nothing of
Prejudice to his Majesty's Service in this Proposition, though by it the
Treasure be designed to be paid where it is Collected, to wit, in York,
Plymouth, Bristol, Yarmouth, and all other Places of the Nation: The Truth is,
none but Men Interested in the Receipt of these Aides, will make this Objection,
nor they neither, but as it refers to their private Profit, by being paid
there, and no where else, and by themselves, and no other Men.

4. Nor is the way propounded, altogether a Stranger to the Practice of late
Times. There are many yet living, that do know, and can well remember that in
the Years 1635. 36. 37. 38 and 39. all the Treasure that was then required and
advanced by his then Majesty, from his Subjects, under the Name and Notion of
Ship Money, was by special Order from his Majesty and Council, Vested in the
Hands, of the then Treasurer of the Navy, who was by special Order, Enabled to
Receive and Pay the same, without ever being brought into the Exchequer, and
Limited to Pay all and every Part thereof; to and for the Use and Debts of the
Navy (as Ship Money) and not otherwise, as Part of the ordinary Charge of the
Navy, or any Ships thereof employed at Sea, in all or any of these Years. And
upon this Account it was that his Majesty would not suffer it to be brought
into his Exchequer, that it might not be diverted to any other Service, than
the Service of Ship Money, so called, that he might the better satisfy his
Subjects, that what he did in Levying that Treasure from them, was in Order to
their own Preservation, and not at all for any private Advantage to himself.

5. Yea give me Leave to tell you, that at present his Majesty's Revenue of the
Customs, and Imposts, though it lies so near Westminster, that it may without
much loss of Time or Expense of Moneys, be paid into his Majesty's Exchequer,
yet (for the greatest Part thereof) it is not so Paid, nor does it follow, that
what part thereof is not Paid in there, must of Necessity be Issued thence, and
from no other Place whatsoever, for the Use of his Majesty's Service; But the
common Way is for all Goldsmiths, and others that do lend his Majesty any
Money at Interest, to carry on his Services, before his own Revenue be
Collected, to strike Tallies upon the Commissioners or Farmers of the Customs,
etc. for their respective Loanes, with Interest Included in those Tallies, and
they do receive their Debts, not from the Exchequer, but from the Treasurer of
the Customs, as the same shall grow due upon their Tallies. Now if this Course
has been, is, and may be Practiced for the future, without Prejudice to his
Majesty's Service, though the Revenues of the Customs be not Paid into his
Majesty's Exchequer, I would humbly demand why the same Latitude may not be
given and taken for the Payment of his Majesty's Revenues of Hearth-Mony,
Excize or Land Taxes in any other place of the Nation, by Assignation, from the
respective Treasurers, in whose Hands the same is Vested by Act of Parliament,
which is to them as good a Warrant (if not a greater) than any Talley stricken
in his Majesty's Exchequer, can be to the Commissioners of the Customs,
especially considering that by this Means his Majesty shall save the Interest
Money allowed the Goldsmiths or others, upon their respective Tallies, and also
the charge of Collecting and Paying it into his Exchequer, and the Fees allowed
upon its Receipt there, and Payment thence. And that the Subject shall reap the
Benefit of the speedy Payment, without much Charge or Trouble.

6. If it be said the Way propounded, must needs be very Chargable, Hazardous
and Troublesome to the Subject before he can possibly compass his Assignation,
or the Money Payable thereby, etc.

I Answer.

1. That though I propound the Treasure to be Paid in the Country, and not out
of the Exchequer, nor yet by the respective Treasurers that are now trusted to
Receive and Pay the same, but by private Men that have the Money in their
Hands, and to such as bring to them Assignations for it from the Treasurers,
yet these Men that Receive it, are such Men as have Contracted Debts to
themselves by Provisions, etc. Sold to his Majesty's Use, or for Service done
him, and such as (before they had their Assignations for it) had Bills,
Debentures, Orders, and Warrants for their respective Debts, in the ordinary
Way of the Offices of the Navy, Army, Household, etc. And such as did by their
Receipts to them acknowledge full Satisfaction of them, upon the Delivery of
their premised Assignations, and being such and so quallified, what is the
Difference between their Receiving their Money or Debts at York (if they be
content there to take it) or at London, at a Goldsmiths Shop, upon a Ticket or
Assignation from the same Man or Treasurer, especially considering that the
first is settled (as I propound it to be) by Act of Parliament, and the last is
a Design of the Treasurers and their Instruments (never practiced till a few
Years Past.) Is it not better and more easy for the Subject to take and
Receive his Debt, where he knows it is already Lodged by Act of Parliament
(though far distant from London) than to dance Attendance upon the Treasurer
and his Instruments many Months before he can procure an Assignation to the
Goldsmith, and when he has it, to be as far from his Debt as he was before,
unless, etc.

2. But Secondly. The Novelty of this Proposition, does not render it
impracticable for the Subject, nor does it follow, that because it was never
experimented, nor so much as Propounded before, that it may not be propounded
now, and practiced hereafter, if upon due and serious Consideration had
thereupon, it shall be found both Honorable and Highly Beneficial to his
Majesty, the Parliament, and the Subject, to make Use of it.

As to his Majesty, I dare boldly (yet humbly) Affirm that in the two settled
Aides of Hearth-Money, and Excize, he shall save (what is now lost) some
hundred thousand of Pounds by the Year, and could without much Difficulty make
it appear by an Induction of Particulars, were it needful, and not too much
reflecting upon Interested Men.

As to the Parliament, the Way proposed will enable them to see what they have
given to his Majesty by this or that Aid, and to determine upon View thereof,
whether it be needful for them to grant him more, yea or not, which (as it is
now carried) they are not able to do, for though they know they have given him
the Excize upon Ale, the Hearth Money, and other Aids and Revenues, yet they
neither do nor can know, what one, both, all, or any one of these Aids do mount
unto in the Total by the Year, and for want thereof are necessitated to Act
upon an Implicit Faith, in giving more when it may be what they have already
given, is enough.

As to the Subject, the way proposed is no more (nor indeed so much) as he
voluntarily puts himself upon, in his Trading and Dealing with all Chapmen, in
all parts of the Kingdom, to whom after he has Sold and Trusted his Goods, he
does constantly once or twice every Year make his Application in his own
Person, or by his Instruments, to Collect and Receive his Debts from them,
wheresoever they Dwell, and often times with ill Success, when the Debtor by ill
Husbandry or other Cross, or Casualty, is become Poor and Insolvent (which yet
in the way Proposed can never be supposed in his Majesty or the Parliament) yea
we know that all Merchants that Trade for Ireland, Spain, France, the
Streights, Barbados, Virginia, New England, yea the East Indies do run great
Hazards, and are at greater Trouble and Charge in procuring their Debts, than
possibly are or can be Imagined to be, attending those that do or shall trust
his Majesty in the Navy, Army, or Household, if this way of Assignations for
their respective Debts were vigorously put into Practice, and they thereby
assured, that upon Demand of their Money, due upon their respective
Assignations, they should be duly and punctually paid without Snips, Fees,
Gratuities, Delays, or other Abatements, or Charges whatsoever, other than
their necessary Expenses, to Collect and Receive them.

What better Security can they have or desire to have than the King, Lords and
Commons? what quicker Payment, than from the Collectors of every Township,
Parish, Division, Hundred or County? what greater Power than upon Denial or
Delay to distrein the Parties Goods, and sell them before his Face, and that by
Authority of the Parliament, and that not so much by himself, as the Constable
or other Officer, upon the place required, and empowered by Act of Parliament so
to do. Add to this that all or most Tradesmen in London, that shall or may
serve his Majesty with Provisions for the Navy, Army, Household, etc. came first
out of the several Counties of England and Wales, to be Apprentices there, and
still have their respective Friends, Relations, and Acquaintance remaining
there, by whose Insluence their Charge and Trouble may be much Facilitated. And
I do not understand why those that either do or shall deal with his Majesty or
his Commissioners for his Use, should not as equally be content to take their
Debts or Assignations from private Men, where those Men have it for them, as
from other private Men of the same place, to whom they have Sold, and
voluntarily Trusted their Goods, etc, Especially considering that his Majesty
not only has it there, where it is assigned them, but also that his Majesty
and his Parliament, have of purpose Lodged it there, that it might not be
diverted from them to any Use or Purpose whatsoever.

Moreover, if once the Subject finds the Benefit, Security, and Sweetness of
this way of Payment, and be thereby encouraged to deal farther with his
Majesty's Commissioners, or other Officers, as knowing by Experience their
Assignations certain and punctual (as to Payment) then the said Commissioners
and Officers may and shall make their Contracts at easier Rates, by at least 8
l. per Cent. in the Price, than now they either do or can do, (besides the
unserviceableness of the Provision it self) for every Man is at present loath
to deal with his Majesty's Officers, for any considerable quantity of Goods,
unless they be pricked forward thereto by the profit of 20 per Cent. in the
Price, more than they would willingly sell the same Commodity for to a private
Man, if that Man be a good solvent and punctual Man as to his Payment, whereas
if his Majesty's Payment were certain, they would then seek the Service of his
Majesty. Officers and Commissioners should never want any Provision they
desire to have, better for and at far easier Rates than now they can procure
them, by reason of the uncertain Way of Payment, and these not be named Snips,
Abatements, and Allowances (besides the length of time) that are and must be
made before they can compass their Money.

I shall further add that if it were true that the Subject should (by the way
Proposed) be at as great a Charge and Trouble as his Majesty is now at in
remitting his Treasure into his Exchequer (which yet cannot rationally be
imagined) yet is it not better that 20000 Men or more should divide and bear
the Charge and Loss among themselves, than that the whole Burden should lie
upon one Man's Shoulder, or his Majesty's single Person, especially considering,
(as we say) that the Medium will bear it (as to them) I mean that the Profit in
the Price of their Provisions will bear it, and much more, whereas his Majesty
loses what he loses, be it more or less, out of the quick Stock. I mean his
settled Revenue.

Let me further say, that it is safer and more rational (yea it is practical in
all common Nusances,) that some few Men in the Nation, should rather bear the
Loss and Charge of that Nuisance, than that the whole Nation should suffer under
it, as they do in the Case in Hand. For to speak plainly, it is not so much his
Majesty that loses what is lost (though that be a Truth in some Sense) as the
People of the Nation that pay it, who indeed pay and lose it twice over. First
out of their Purses and Estates, by paying it according to the Act, and
Secondly in its not being employed upon the Service for which the Act requires
it.

In short, I am partly confident, and for the greatest part thereof could make
it appear (were it not to avoid Offense) that his Majesty loses the fourth, if
not the third Part of all his Treasure given him by several Acts of Parliament,
before it can arrive to a nett Payment in the due Form of all Offices, and we
know that the one fourth Part of two Millions, is in the whole 500000 l. Now
whether it be safe for his Majesty or his Parliament to suffer so great a
Damage to attend the Service upon which the Welfare of the whole Nation
depends, if they can prevent it, I humbly submit to their more serious
Consideration, and shall only say that by means of this Proposition, the
Treasurer of the Navy, and all other Treasurers may be constantly furnished
with Treasure sufficient, and more than enough to pay off all growing Debts
upon his Majesty, whether by Interest or otherwise, and after a more especial
manner, that devouring Monster of Seamens Wages before mentioned, so soon as
the respective Fleets or Ships shall be safe at their Moarings, the want
whereof in the late War with the Dutch, was a most intolerable Disservice to
his Majesty.

To conclude, I shall humbly leave it to the Wisdom of his Majesty, and his
Parliament, to consider that the way proposed cuts off all Capability in the
respective Treasurers of Diverting all or any part of his Majesty's Treasure,
already or hereafter to be granted to him, to or for any other Use or Uses than
the Payment of his Majesty's Debts, duly made in their respective Offices, to
which it is assigned, which (if I mistake not) no other way as yet Proposed or
Practiced can prevent or disappoint. And if there were nothing else of Weight
or Worth in this Proposition, that might invite its entertainment; Yet this it
self duly considered, is enough to out-Ballance all Objections, that are or can
be made against it. The Truth is, though I could frame as many Objections
against the Way proposed, as most of those that shall set themselves to oppose
it, yet I cannot see any of them, of that weight and consideration that some
may think them to be, and truly if I did, I should readily relinquish all
Thoughts upon it, as Idle and Vain, having no Design by it, either against any
man's Person or Welfare, or for any private Profit or Preferment to my self, but
entirely to serve his Majesty and my Country, as becomes a dutiful Subject in
these Distracted Times which call aloud for every man's Help to preserve his
Majesty from Debt and Dishonor, and his Subjects from all unnecessary
Burdens. If his Majesty and Parliament shall not think fit to make use of it,
I can as well content my self, as if they did, I shall acquiesce in their deep
Wisdom, though yet I think I shall never live to see his Majesty freed from
those Debts that are now upon him, and do and will grow more and greater,
notwithstanding, all the forementioned Ways and Means now used to free him from
them; Interest Money, and other Improvidences not fit to be named, though yet
notoriously known, being as equally destructive to his Majesty's Revenues, as
they are to a private Man's Estate, if not truly and carefully prevented.

POSTSCRIPT.
ALthough I have in the former Discourse propounded the Payment of his
Majesty's Aids, whether ordinary or extraordinary, whether by Land-Taxes,
Excize, Hearth-Money, etc. to be made to the Subject by Assignations from the
respective Treasurers, upon the Collectors of the respective Townships, yet if
it shall be thought too much Charge or Trouble to the Subject to receive their
Debts by these Assignations, from the Hands of so many Collectors, thus
distributed and distinguished, I shall humbly offer, that the Money or Treasure
collected in each Township, may be paid and deposited into the Hands of one or
more Men, to be entrusted to receive the whole Collection of each Parish, and
if it be still thought too great Trouble to the Subject to receive it from him
or them, then that the Treasure Collected in that Parish (as also in all
Parishes in that Division) be paid over and deposited into the Hands of one two
or more of that Division, as the total Sum assessed upon or arising from that
Division. And if yet it shall not be thought fit to burden the Subject with so
much Trouble and Charge as may attend the Receipt thereof from the respective
Trustees of each Division, that then the whole Sum Collected in that Division
(as also in all the Divisions of that Hundred) be paid and deposited into the
Hands of two or more able and responsible Men of that Hundred. And further if
the Treasure Collected in that Hundred, be not thought fit to be paid by those
Entrusted therewith, to those that shall bring or present Assignations from the
respective Treasurers, for all or any part thereof, that then the Money
Collected in that Hundred (and in all Hundreds of that County) be it more or
less, be paid over to one two or more Commissioners to be nominated and
appointed by the several Acts of Parliament, as receivers of the same for the
whole County, to be by them paid to the Subject, according to such Assignations
as he or they shall from time to time receive from the respective Treasurers
for the same.

This I am sure, (if none of the rest) will both ease the Charge, and
facilitate the Trouble of the Subject, and yet preserve his Majesty's Revenue
entire, and abundantly Satisfy the Parliament, whether what they have given to
his Majesty be sufficient for that end, for which it was given, or not.

If it be said that this Remedy is full as bad (if not worse) than the Disease,
in regard his Majesty and the Parliament must by this Proposition be at the
Charge of so many Commissioners for the Receipt and Payment of his Treasure, as
there be Counties in the Nation, or Hundreds in each County of the Nation; and
that this Charge and Expense will amount to as much if not more than if the
whole Aid were remitted into his Exchequer, and paid thence according to the
present settled and regular Way of the Nation.

I answer, No such Matter, for indeed the whole Charge cannot rationally be
supposed to be the Moiety of his Majesty's Charge, into and out of the
Exchequer, as I could easily demonstrate to all unbyassed Men. But to wave that
dispute, I shall further say that though by this Proposition I do design the
ease of the Subject as to Charge and Trouble in Collecting his Assignations,
yet I conceive it Just and Reasonable that the whole Charge of Collecting and
Paying it from the respective Parishes to the Commissioners for each Division,
and from them to Commissioners of each Hundred, and from them to the
Commissioners of each County, and from them to the Creditors that shall present
their Assignations, may and ought in every part thereof, to be born by the
Subject that receives the Treasure, and no part thereof paid or born by his
Majesty, in regard what is done by his Majesty or his Parliament in this
Particular, is so done for the Subjects ease and benefit, and not his
Majesty's, and in regard all Creditors have either by Interest-Money or the
Profit of their Goods Sold, or both Included in the same Assignation,
sufficient Gains to bear that and a greater Loss, and are also enabled to
Receive their Money Assigned them without all or any of that Charge, that now
attends him or them, by Fees, Gratuities, or otherwise, before he or they can
procure it paid in other Offices or Places, and also that he or they do and
shall come into it, in a far shorter time, than otherwise he or they could
obtain it, either by staying for it till there comes Money in the respective
Offices to pay them, or by carrying his or their Bills, Debentures, Orders, or
Warrants, and entering them as so much Money lent unto his Majesty, to be paid
with Interest in course. All which considered and laid together, is I am sure a
far greater Profit and Advantage to the Subject, than the premised Charge and
Loss can possibly be, and will easily satisfy them that the Charge of Lodging
their Debts after this manner for them, whether in Counties or Hundreds, ought
to be born by themselves, and no part thereof by his Majesty. And I am
confident that if the Parliament should think fit to declare in their
respective Acts, what, and how much the Charge shall be to the Subject in the
Receipt of his Assignations, either to the Justices Clerks, the Collectors of
each Division or Hundred, or to the Commissioners of each County and their
Clarks, as they have formerly done in Acts of Parliament, for Land Taxes to men
of the same or the like Trusts, that the Subject would be so far from
Discontent or Dissatisfaction therein, that it would encourage him to deal with
his Majesty's Commissioners in the future for all Goods, Ships or other things
whatsoever with more Confidence and Cheerfulness, and at easier Rates, by far
than formerly they did. For suppose an Assignation be given for one thousand
Pounds, and that the Charge attending its Receipt, be by the Parliament,
declared to be three pence upon the Pound, to be distributed to several
Instruments, the whole Charge of the Receipt of his 1000 l. is but 12 l. 10 s.
00. And what Creditor to his Majesty's Service would grutch to give 12 l. 10 s.
(which is but 25 s out of a hundred Pounds) as necessary Fees spent out of the
whole thousand Pounds Debt from his Majesty, to save his own Pains and Labor,
that has not only the profit of the Price of his Goods sold, but also
Interest-Money allowed him for the whole 1000 l. inclusively, in his
Assignation till his Money be paid. But admit the worst, to wit, that the
Charge of the Receipt of his 1000 l were much more (as something it must needs
be by Travel, Exchange, etc.) yet (as was said before) is not this Burden
lighter upon the Shoulders of 20000 Men or more in the whole Nation, than to be
laid upon, and born by his Majesty's single Person, especially considering (as
was said) that the profit will bear much more loss, and yet leave them
sufficient Gainers by his Majesty's Service, and that at present, they are at
far greater loss of Time and Expense out of their principal Debt, before they
can compass it to themselves. But suppose his Majesty and his Parliament should
approve of this Proposition, in any of the Notions held forth in this
Postscript: how should those Creditors to whom his Majesty is indebted, either
by voluntary Loans, Anticipations, Advance-Money upon Farms or Contracts,
Orders in Course or otherwise, be paid their respective Debts, etc? Where
Contracts are made, and Farms let, it is both Just and Honorable that the
Farmers should enjoy the Benefit of their Contracts, upon which they did lend
or advance their Money during the whole term of their Contract unexpired. The
same also might be said in the Case of Anticipations upon any part of his
Majesty's Revenue, where Tallies are struck upon them till the Tallies be fully
paid; but for voluntary Loans, Orders in Course, and other occasional Debts,
the sooner they were paid off by Assignations upon his Majesty's Aids thus
settled and deposited in each County or Hundred the better, in order to take off
that eating Charge of Interest-Money, that devours too great a Part thereof.

What if after all this Care taken, it shall appear that the present Aids
settled upon his Majesty, are not enough or sufficient to bear about his Annual
Expenses in ordinary, and much less to pay off his Debts, and how shall his
Majesty carry on his Service, etc. by propounding to his Parliament his
necessity of further Aids from his People, and having it granted to him, when
all the care taken that can be to improve the present Aides given him to the
highest of Frugality, and found too little?

Were it not better for his Majesty to proceed in the present way of Loans,
Anticipations, Farms, Payments in Course, etc. than to depend upon the Love or
Bounty of his Parliament and People, especially considering how ready and
willing the City of London, the Goldsmiths now called Bankers, and other his
Majesty's Subjects, are to supply his Necessities upon all emergent Occasions,
out of their Zeal and Affection to and for his Majesty's Service, etc. Why
should his Majesty be directed to a standing Pool to quench his Thirst, that
has a River to drink in? What Zeal or Affection, either do those that lend or
advance Treasure, show to his Majesty more than I can have from a Common Usurer
in my Necessity, if I can but give him such Security as he likes for the
Payment of his Principal with Interest, Do I look upon him as a man that loves
me, who notwithstanding all his fair Pretenses to me, will not lend me 5000 l
to relieve me, unless I will mortgage to him my Estate for the Security of his
500 l with Interest? Certainly as this is no Love to a private Man in his
Necessity from an Usurer, so it is much less to a Prince in his. And as this is
no safe way for a private Man to take that has a Father, Brother or Friend
that is willing, able, and ready to furnish his Wants without Interest or
Mortgaging his Estate, etc. so is a most destructive way to his Majesty, who
has his Parliament, and his People, not only able and willing, but also bound
in Duty as his Loyal and Loving Subjects, to give him sufficient Aid and
Relief, if they find (as by the way proposed they easily may) that what they
have already settled upon him is not enough. But how shall the Parliament
prevent the Loan of Money at Interest, Anticipations by Goldsmiths, or any
other men, if after all that is or may hereafter be settled upon him, his
Majesty shall yet desire to borrow their Money.

It would savor of too much boldness for any private man (and much more for my
self) to hint any thing in this Particular to the Wisdom of the Parliament:
They know better than any Man can direct them what to do in this Point, though
yet I must needs say, that even in my own time, I have known it looked upon as
a Criminal Act for any Man whatsoever to compound his Majesty's Debts, to
strike Tallies upon his Revenue with Interest included to pay them, or to
advance Money upon Interest, to supply his Majesty's Occasions upon any Account
whatsoever, and do much fear that till some such Course be taken with those
that grow upon his Majesty's Necessity by Anticipations, Loans, Farms, Advance
Money, or any other way whatsoever, with Interest allowed them for their Money;
his Majesty shall (as I have formerly said) never be out of Debt, let the
Parliament give him what they please.

How shall his Majesty have a clear and regular Account in his Exchequer, of
the full proceed of his Hearth-Money, Excize, and other his settled, or to be
settled Revenues in the way proposed?

But the Certificates, Lists, and Duplicates, of all Treasure Collected and
Paid to the Commissioners of each Hundred or County, and by the Assignations
made by the respective Treasurers to the said Commissioners, and by the
Compter-Check of those Assignations, all which will either by themselves, or
compared together, Balance the Accounts of all Treasurers respectively, and
give the Auditor of those Accounts sufficient Grounds for his Allowance of the
same, if paid according to the Direction of the several Acts of Parliament in
the usual Form, and by the common Voucher of their Offices respectively, and
not otherwise.

Who shall give the Treasurers their respective Charges? The several Acts of
Parliament where the Treasure is ascertained by a Land Tax, and in default
thereof, as in the Case of Excize and Hearth-Money, the Certificates of each
Township in every Parish, the Certificates of each Parish in all Divisions, the
Certificates of all Divisions in every Hundred, the Certificates of all
Hundreds in every County, and the Certificates of all Counties in the whole
Kingdom: This I am sure will give them, and each of them a full Charge.

But are not the Treasurers notwithstanding this, left in a Capacity of
diverting his Majesty's Treasure to wrong Persons, and for wrong and pretended
Services?

Not at all, if the Acts of Parliament be their Rule and Guide for their
Assignations, and the Contra-rotulator or Clerk of these Assignations be
faithful to his Trust.

How shall the Townships of every Parish, the Parishes of every Division, the
Divisions of every Hundred, the Hundreds of every County, the Counties of the
whole Kingdom, and every individual Person concerned in the Collection or
Payment of all or any of his Majesty's Aides, or any part thereof, whether
Land-Taxes, Hearth Money, or Excize, be acquitted of their respective payments.

You might have spared your Enquiry if you had observed what was said in the
seventh Article of this Proposition, yet to satisfy your Curiosity, I shall
further say, that they either are or may be acquitted by the Receipts of the
respective Collectors of every Township, Parish, Division, Hundred or County in
the whole Nation, to be nominated or appointed either by the Acts of
Parliament, or by Warrant from the Deputy-Lieutenant, Justices of the Peace, or
others authorized by the said Acts to appoint Assessors, and Collectors for the
same.

Will not the Way proposed be a great Burden to the respective Treasurers in
making their Assignations, and the Comptroler in keeping Check upon them more
than their proper Duty is at present, and will not this beget his Majesty into
a farther Charge than at present he is at for their so doing?

As to the Treasurers, their Labor will not be near so much as what they now
do or ought to do in their Receipt and Payment of all Moneys proper to their
Places and Trusts, a great part whereof they are by this means totally cased
in, and freed from. And for the Assignations themselves they have nothing to do
therein, but to sit up a Blank-printed Assignation of one and the same Form and
Substance, varying only in the Date, the Sum Assigned, the Place, County,
Hundred, etc. The Names of the Commissioners that are to pay it, and of the
Parties that are to receive it; As to the Comptercheck, it is at present, his
proper Duty to check the Treasurers Accounts of all Payments whatsoever, and in
this Way he will be eased of much of that Labor, that now lies upon him, if he
perform his Duty as he ought, so that his Majesty may rather abate much of what
is already allowed, than give more in a way of Augmentation.

How shall the Treasurers of the Navy, Army, Household, or other men Entrusted
for Payment of his Majesty's Treasure by Assignations, be directed where and
upon whom to place and make their Assignments, without interfering each with
other?

By the Acts of Parliament, Assigning such and so many Counties to each
Treasurer, as shall drown the Sum estimated to be the full Expense of each
Office for one Year.

If his Majesty's Revenues should be paid by Assignations after this manner,
from the respective Treasurers, how or where shall his Majesty be supplied with
Treasure sufficient for his privy Purse, Intelligence with Foreign Princes,
and other extraordinary Expenses Suitable to the Dignity of his Person?

By and from the Customs, Excize, and Imposts laid, and to be laid upon all
Native and Foreign Commodities Exported and Imported, the Revenue whereof is
not at all within the Ken, Compass or Prospect of this Proposition, but left
wholly as it now is to be improved and employed by his Majesty, for those and
other Services, without Reference to the Way Proposed for the Collection and
Payment of his other Aides and Land-Taxes, that concern the Nation in General.

In what particulars does the Way Proposed, tend to the Advantage of his
Majesty, or his Successors.

I love not Repetitions, yea have had them here and there scatteringly
delivered through the whole Discourse past, yet in the regard this is the Hing
upon which the Design of this Proposition does turn, and the only Ground of my
present undertaking; I shall (contrary to my Desire, and the Practice of those
that know what they say or write) gratify you with a particular enumeration of
some few of those many Advantages of no small Consideration that may accrue to
his Majesty by this Proposition.

1. First, In his Honor, it being much below the Dignity of a Prince, that
has a Rich, Loyal, and Loving People to his Subjects, willing and ready upon
all emergencies to supply his Wants, to seek the Aid and Assistance of private
Persons, that never Act without Designs of Profit and Gain to themselves, in
all their pretended Services for him, and without which they will not supply
him.

For his Majesty to have Advice and to Prosecute this Way when he was under the
Inhumane Usage of the late Usurpation was no wonder; Force has no Choice; But
for his Majesty to be advised to the same Courses now, when he is Crowned King
of England, by those that I dare say are his Faithful and Loyal Servants and
Subjects, and to prosecute that Advice, when the Persons and Purses of the
whole Nation are at his Devotion and Service, is much to his Dishonor. The
Long Parliament in the late unhappy War, that first brought up the Payment of
Orders in Course in this Nation, were not able to carry on the War without such
a way, in regard of the Peoples Disaffection to them, and that the greatest
part of the Nation was then under the Power of the Kings Army; but this is no
Rule, or Copy for his Majesty's Friends or Servants to walk in, or write by,
unless they could make it appear that his Majesty is at present in the same
Dilemma. When the War ceased, Payments in Course, ceased of Course. And why
they should be continued to his Majesty's great Damage, and Dishonor in this
happy time of Peace, I cannot understand,

If he has not enough, in Gods Name let him have more, yea much more than
enough, rather than one Penny too little; there is no Loyal Subject that will
not say AMEN to this Prayer, only let not the Usurer, Farmer, etc. Eat out and
Devour his Revenues, under the notion of high Services, and I know not what
other Pretenses.

2. In his Revenue of Excize, Hearth-Money, and all Land-Taxes, which by this
Means may be improved to the utmost Pitch of what they are, be it more or less.

3. In the Charge of Collecting the said Revenues, which at present costs his
Majesty, as allowed by the Acts of Parliament, for two Millions of Treasure
33333 l. 06 s. 08 d. all and every Part thereof being by the way Proposed to be
paid by the Subject that has the Benefit of his Assignations.

4. In the Fees allowed to all Officers and their Clerks in the Exchequer for
the Receipt of his Majesty's Revenue.

By the like Fees Paid and Allowed to the same Officers, and their Instruments
for the payment of his Majesty's Treasure, either to private Persons; or to the
respective Treasurers of the Navy, Army, Household, in their respective Offices
to be paid by them to private Men for his Majesty's Use and Services.

6. In all Fees and Allowances made and given by the Auditors to all or any of
these Treasurers upon their Accounts as Money disbursed, as paid by them for
Portage, Water-Carriage, Baggs, Wax, or any other Charge whatsoever in the
Receipt of his Majesty's Treasure, Assigned to them in their several Offices
and Trusts.

7. In having by this means a Bank of Treasure in all those Countries that lie
near London, ready upon all Commands to supply present Occasions; All
Assignations being by this Proposition in the first place to be charged and
given to, and upon all Counties remote from London, whether in England or Wales.

8. Hereby his Majesty shall have Treasure ready to pay off all Fleets or Ships
so soon as they are safely gotten to their Moarings, to prevent that devouring
Charge or Monster of paying Victuals and Wages for twelve or thirteen Months
before mentioned.

9. It enabling his Majesty's Commissioner in all Offices whatsoever to
Contract and Purchase for his Majesty's Use and Service, all and all sorts of
Provisions, far better in their kind, and by at least eight or ten per Cent.
cheaper in their Price, than they can possibly do in the way of Payment now
Practiced.

10. By cutting off all Interest-Money now paid to the Goldsmiths or other men
for Moneys taken up by way of Anticipation, before his Majesty's Revenue can
possibly be Collected and paid into his Majesty's Exchequer.

11. By the like saving of all Interest now paid and allowed upon all Orders
Payable in Course either for Goods sold, or Moneys lent upon that way of
Payment.

12. By preventing the present Damage sustained by Farms and Contracts, upon
all or any of his Majesty's Aides, wherein the profit to the Contractor is at
least one fourth, if not one third Part of what he undertakes for, besides the
Oppression of the Subject.

13. By preventing all capability of Diversion of his Majesty's Treasure in all
or any part thereof from the Services to which it was designed by the
Parliament, when it was first granted to his Majesty, especially in the case of
War, or any other extraordinary Service, where the Tax laid is a Land Tax, and
refers to the Nation in General, and not to particular Persons, so and so
qualified as the Excize and Hearth-Mony do.

14. By capacitating the Victualler of his Majesty's Navy, to make his
Provision of Victuals in all Seaports and Harbors where any of his Majesty's
Fleets or Ships shall lie, or may touch or come, such as Dover, Harwich,
Newcastle, Plymouth, Dartmouth, etc. by taking up his Bills of Impressed, and
giving him Assignations upon those Towns, Cities, or Counties, most contiguous
to those Parts, or Harbors whereby his Majesty's Ships shall or may be
dispatched to Sea, and not lie in Harbor full manned, sometimes two Months
together before he can get Victuals to send them forth to Sea.

15. In full and seasonable Supplies of the Magazeens of all his Majesty's
In-Stores and Out-Stores, in all and every of his Majesty's Yards and
Storehouses at Chatham, Deptford, Woolwich, and Portsmouth; the want whereof,
does at present Rob one Yard to Supply another, after the Provision taken
thence was laid in there at excessive Rates and Prizes, and after the Expense
of Land, and Water-Carriage, Cranage, Portage, Laborers Wages, etc. to Lodge
them for his Majesty's Service in that Yard, which (as before I hinted) is no
small Devourer of his Majesty's Treasure, and consequently a begetter of his
Debts, besides the Disservice that is done to his Majesty, when the Service in
that Yard shall call for the Use of the same Provisions.

In short the Way Proposed, will (if I mistake not) be effectual in a short
time, not only to bring his Majesty out of Debt, but also to prevent his being
in Debt for the Future, by cutting off all Eating Charges upon his Majesty's
Treasure whatsoever, if the Aides already settled upon him, be found upon their
full Improvement, to be sufficient to carry on his Services with Honor, and if
not, yet to satisfy the Parliament so as to Give and Grant him such further
Aides, as may and will do it Effectually, without any Application to private
Men, by the present forenamed Contrivances, and Practices, which are so far
from answering the End Proposed by them, that they are the Foundations of those
great Debts that are Incumbent upon him, and never will, nor indeed can free
him from them, but plunge and involve him deeper and deeper in them, the longer
they are continued by him.

FINIS

