A LETTER FROM THE Duke of Brandenburg, To several Ministers of STATE; SHOWING
His firm RESOLUTION to Defend the Protestant Religion.
Gentlemen,
I Shall be aware both how and with whom I Engage, for through the Conduct of
all the Affairs of the Confederates, since the Rise of the War in the year
1672. Their several Projects have been no sooner formed but betrayed; for, the
Jesuits being the Ascendant, both laid a Monarchical Design and a total
Subversion of the Protestant Religion, all over Europe, influencing most
Princes Councils, by a powerful Operation of Money, both from Rome and France,
which is plentifully bestowed, and was gratefully received and tho the Jesuits
seem* to carry on several Interests, being the guidance of many Princes, yet
craftily center their Designs in the most Potent.

And I too sensibly know, that when I commanded the Imperial Forces, my
Destruction was levelled at, by the Jesuitical Cabal, by those I Assisted,
which caused me timely to withdraw.

Now therefore amidst these Disadvantages, can I promise any better Success? I
have many Motives to induce my belief, that the same Design is Vigorously
carrying on, though in a seeming Peace; nothing therefore can be of Efficacy to
Protect us, till we new model our Affairs, and by a strict sincere Reunion,
and fixed Resolution to go through the Work, and to make an utter Dismission of
all the Jesuits, who lie lurking in our Bosoms only to confound us.

But, I fear some are so infatuated by them, as not to pursue my Advise, till
Desolation and Misery overtake them: And for my part I will strictly observe it
my self, and for ever defy their pestilent Notions, and stand upon my Guard,
and assume the glory, though I be forsaken by all, and choose rather to dye with
the Sword in my Hand, in Defense of my Country and Protestant Religion, than
survive under the Tyranny of France and Malignancy of Rome; for I am sure in
what place soever it dilates it self, a Deluge of Misery will be brought along
with it, both by Oppression and Idolatry.

FINIS
London, Printed for T. Davis. 1680.


