A LETTER Written by his Highness The PRINCE ELECTOR of BRANDENBOVRGH,

Unto his most Serene and Illustrious HIGHNESS RICHARD LORD PROTECTOR Of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Territories and
Dominions thereunto belonging.

DENOTING Their Highness's joynt-Interest in the protecting and Defending of
the Reformed Protestant Cause; and the Swedes converting of those Forces, and
means which they receive from England, and their other Allies, for the
propagating of the Protestant Cause: toward the compassing of their own
ambitious ends, the subverting of the Protestant Churches, and the disturbing
of the public Peace in all parts.

Translated into English out of the Latin Copy Printed at Hamborough.

In the Year MDCLXIX.

Most Serene, and Illuctrious Prince, Lord, and Honored Friend,
EVer since it seemed good to the Almighty to permit the pure Evangelical
Doctrine to be professed in England; the Protestant Churches abroad, especially
the Reformed ones, have at all times, in their greatest Adversities and
Persecutions, rhere met with a signal Reception, and assistance; which is
manifest to the whole world, and both the French and Netherlandish Nations, do
most gratefully acknowledge, and cannot sussiciently praise for the same.
Wherefore being fallen into these unfortunate times, wherein the Protestant
Cause (as well in relation to the Ecclesiastical as Temporal affairs) seems not
only to be disturbed, but even subverted in these parts, by the Protestant
Professors themselves. And pondering upon the remedies necessary toward the
preventing of such eminent Evils; We could not choose but reflect upon your
Highness, whose Father of glorious Memory, having imparted unto us by his
Public Minister, the share he bore, jointly with us, in the concernments of
the Protestant Professors, and Churches, not doubting but your Highness retains
the same inclinations and thoughts, We have the more confidently adventured,
during these Public Calamities, to treat with you thereon, and as well jointly
by the Envoy, which we have designed toward your Highness, as by these our
Letters, to impart our mind unto you, lest by the retardment of the one or the
other, the Pubilke good might be prejudiced.

Your Highness cannot be ignorant, that this present King of Sweden entered upon
a war, some 3 years since, against the Polanders; with a pretense, and under a
color (amongst other things) to promote the Protestant Cause in those parts;
though the success thereof proved no other, save The reducing of some hundreds
of Protestant Churhes into ashes; The destroying of an infinite number of
Protestant Families; the dispersing and dissolving of several Protestant
Congregations, and the exposing of the Professors of the Divine Gospel Truths,
to all kind of Ignominy and Infamy. Insomuch, as since the memory of man,
the Protestant concernments in those parts, never met with a greater
destruction, and desolation; no not under the Papistical Governments, as under
that pretended Patron, and Defender of the Protestant Cause.

Neither did these Evils terminate within the Confines of Poland; but the
aforesaid King, did (among others) involve the Prince of Transylvania in the
like Calamities, and reduced that most zealous Prince for the true Protestant
Cause, unto such a pass, as that he was in danger to lose his whole Country, as
well as his good Subjects, their Livelyhoods, and Subsistances, for the Liberty
of their Consciences.

And that it may more evidently appear, t he said King aims not et Heaven, but
the World, coveting to have the Dominion of the Land, as well as to Lord it at
Sea; He did finally set upon the King of Denmark, contrary to the Faith which
was plighted, and the Peace which was made by the Interposition, Endeavors,
and Authority of your Highness's Father, without any foregoing Declaration, or
Warning; a thing which is observed even amongst the Heathens; assailing a
Prince who is a strict Professor and observer of the Protestant Faith, at such
an unexspected time, when he was deprived of all his Guarrisons and strong
Holds, and did not in the least suspect, much less dream of such a kind of
proceeding, by reason of the immediate proceeding peace, procured by the
endeavors of so many Friends, and at so great a disadvantage to the King of
Denmark.

In like manner the Duke of Curland, did sadly experiment the effects of these
like proceedings; One who is a Lutheran, of the same Confession, which the King
of Sweden professes, and by his solemn Oath, will only tolerate in his
Dominions; Yet nevertheless after the said Duke had conferred so great Benefits
on the Swedes, as that he thereby became suspected to his Lord, the King of
Poland; even after he had made his Capitulations for his Neutrality with them,
he was by an unheard of example, and by a stratagem cast out of his habitation,
and together with his most Illustrious Lady Duchess, ann seven Children,
carried away Captives to Riga.

And as he cannot by the Holy Writ warrant the not sparing of those of his own
Profession, when he sees an opportunity to seize their Lands and Goods; in like
manner his Zeal, and Vehemence moves him, to impose Laws on the Protestant
Reformed Professors, in matters of their belief, and to force their Consciences
in Divine concernments, by his Proceedings against them; an evident Testimony
whereof is most apparent at Elbing, wherein we the rather instance, because it
may best be known in England; in which place those of the Reformed profession,
at their being under a Papist King, did enjoy the free exercise of their
Religion; But at present, the Lutheran Supravisor, being placed there as a
wrack to the Consciences of those who are minded to take the Ministry upon
themselves, does enforce them by an unheard of example, to approve his
Confession, and to obey him in matters of Religion; depriving likewise the
Civil Magistrate, (who are all for the most part of the Reformed profession) of
the Right and Privilege which is due to them in the like Cases; especially in
the ordaining of Ministers: Not permitting the Administration of the Communion,
according to the Form of the Reformed Protestant Churches, save unto strangers
of the English Nation, at the request of the English Resident. Moreover his
vehemence is so great against the rest of the Reformed professors, as that to
the prejudice of Men, and Gods glory, The psalms of David, which for several
years were sung in their Churches (and ought not only to be free unto, but
enjoined all Men) are totally expunged out of the Church.

These things being maturely considered; we cannot be induced to believe, that
your Highness, (as the Swedes do boast will afford them relief, and assist them
to carry on their unlawful designs, since they abound and proceed with so much
violence, and injustice; converting their own Means, and Forces, and the
assistances which they receive from others, to the prejudice, Ruin, and utter
detriment of the Church; and to the disturbing of the public peace in all
parts.

And as we have been informed, these implacable Enemies of the Protestant
Religion, make use of the pretense of Religion, and urge, that their design is
against the Catholics, and chiefly against the House of Austria, who should
have an intent to master the Ports of the Baltic Sea, as they most maliciously
give out; and do even slander us, in that we should have made a League with the
Catholics against the Protestants. But as all men know, the War is waged
between the Danes and the Swedes, both of them, of the Evangelical Profession;
and if the Emperor will not permit the Swedes to deprive the King of Denmark,
and himself of Holstein, (which is an unquestionable part of the German Empire,
and whereof he is the Supreme Lord) but by the Forces which he has sent does
hinder the same, does he any thing thereby, save what belongs to a good, pious,
and Christian Prince? and should he omit the same, would he not be guilty of
deserting the defense of his Territories, and the neglect of that duty which is
committed to him by God? And if we, as a Member, do assist him the Head,
herein, in each others defense, do we any thing hereby but our duty? and might
we not be accused of deserting our Countries defense should we not join therein?

These, and no other, are the Austrian, and our Intentions, and Resolutions;
and if happily there chance to be any other Dissentions between the House of
Austria, and other Kings, States, and Commonwealths, they relate not at all to
this business; nor do the like contentions, which others may have with the
House of Austria, concern the Roman Empire, and its Chief: Nor is it just that
any obstacles should be made, on this account, as Impediments to these so
pious, honest, and necessary Endeavors. For it is so far from the Intentions
of his Imperial Majesty, to deprive any one of their Ports, or Havens, as that
he does not so much as lay claim to the least part of any of them; He has sent
his Forces to restore unto the right owners, that which belongs unto them; not
to bereave them of their goods, or possessions: An instance whereof may appear
by the Isle of Alsen, not so soon taken from the Swedes, as restored to the
King of Denmark, its true Lord and owner; that he might take the Defense
thereof upon himself, that so those commodious Ports and Haveus, which are so
advantagiously seated on the Baltic Sea; might only be empowered, and defended
by Danish Guarrisons.

And what needs there any further contest of words hereon? come we to the
matter it self; Let the King of Sweden therefore restore that which he has
unjustly and violently taken; Let him make amends for the Losses which we and
others have sustained by his means: Let him give security that he will not
henceforth invade others, as he has lately done the Poles, the Danes, and the
Curlander: and we shall in like manner take care, that none of the Emperors, or
of the associated Forces shall at any time be brought into the Field, or made
use of against any of the Neghbouring, or other ports whatsoever. Nor shall
they need to fear the least obstruction in the Trade from these parts; since it
concerns us chiefly, that the Commerce be free, encouraged, and augmented;
Neither do we see how all this can be compassed by any speedier means, save,
That all things be restored to the same state and condition as they were before
the beginning of all these Danish troubles; which is the thing we shall mainly
endeavor to compass.

But with what impudence can the Swedes blemish us for having entered into a
League with the Catholics? since they have done the same with the French;
unless they accuse them also of the like Heretical abominations, which they
themselves seem to abhor: and I pray, what kind of Evangelical profession can
those boast of, who whilst they inveigh against the Papistical purgatory (which
we know through Gads Grace is not able to hurt any one) do in the mean while
exercise all the unwarrantablest proceedings imaginable against the said
protestant Churches, and the Members thereof? and what part or share of the
Gospel, can those appropriate to themselves, who, both with Fire and Sword,
have prosecuted, if not well nigh subverted, both Poland, Denmark, and one of
the not least contemptiblest parts of Germany? and who, whilst they condemn
those good works, which the Papists account requisite toward the attaining
unto Salvation; do live and act in such a manner, as if Heaven and eternal
Glory were only to be acquired by sinning, and committing of horrid Actions?
Moreover, what share can they pretend unto the Name of Christians, who commit
those things, whereby the Gentiles, and Heathens (who are most careful in
keeping and observing their promises) may now, as well as formerly, allege,
to the great dishonor of the Christian appellation; That they can only boast
themselves to be Christians by their Treachery, and perfidiousness.

Wherefore it only remains, That we implore, and beseech your Highness, as you
have a regard unto the Glory of God, the welfare of the Church, the love of
Justice, the common Tie of Friendship, and our joint protestant reformed
profession, that in case you be solicited, and importuned to allow the Swedes
assistance, and relief; You may be pleased to penetrate into their Actions, and
to be moved by these foregoing Holy Inducements, rather to choose to help, and
stand by the oppressed; then the oppressors: whereby, as your Highness cannot
put a greater Obligation upon us, and all those who love, and endeavor the
welfare of the true Protestant Cause; so can you not do a more acceptable
service to God; unto whose Proiection we commit you.

Given at Ripen in Iutland, on the 24 day of the Month of December, in the
year of our Lord God 1658.

