By ANDREW FRASER (designed) of Kinmundie, Sheriff-Deput of Aberdeen.

ADVERTISEMENT for Collecting His MAJESTY'S Revenew of Inland Excyse, within
the Sheriffdooms of Kincardine, Aberdeen and Bamff.
WHereas the High and Potent (his Grace the Duke of Queensburry) Lord high
Thesaurer of SCOTLAND, by his warrant of date the tenth day of October instant,
has Commissionat Me to regulat and appoint the manner of Collecting the
Inland Excyse of Aile, Beer, Brandie and strong Waters to be browen and vented
after the last of this instant within the Shyres of Kincardine, Aberdeen and
Bamff, and to give Advertisement that no Brewer presume to leave off their
brewing and venting upon any pretext whatsomever: and also that I should
appoint Collectors and Overseers, and give them reasonable allowance in each
Shyre or parts thereof as I shall find needful, for taking notice of the
quantities browen and vented, and in-bringing the Excyse thereof to the
Cass-keeper, not exceeding two Merks for each Boll of Malt browen and vented
conform to the Acts of Parliament thereanent, and with power to call the
present Collectors or Tacksmen of Excyse and others concerned to give a clear
account of the Condition and State of the current Excyse, and that I send
Parties (if need be) for ordering these matters, as in the said Commission at
more length is expressed: In Obedience to which, These are Intimating to all
Brewers and Ventners within the said Shyres, that they continue their Trade of
brewing and venting as they will be answerable, wherein if they failie they
will be punished to the outmost rigor that Law will allow, and to be looked
upon as disaffected and seditious persons, and imbaselers of His MAJESTY'S
Revenew: And to the effect they may be encouraged in their brewing, These are
signifying that discreet and understanding Collectors will be immediately
appointed in each Presbytrie, and these Collectors will receive such
Instructions as may be most conduceable for the orderly in-bringing of the
Excyse, and with most ease to, and equality amongst the Brewers, who may in
this expect as much favor and fair dealing as any others within the Kingdom,
and judicious Persons will be appointed to hear and redress their just
Complaints if any be: And therefore, seeing that such equal and fair ways will
be taken for Stenting and Collecting the said Excyse in these Shyres, and that
there is no impediment why the Brewers may not take such competens Pryces for
their Aile, Beer, and strong Waters as may answer the value of the Malt, with
the Excyse and reasonable Profit, they can pretend no just excuse for not
continuing to brew and vent these Liquors, which if they fail to do, it will be
inquyred into, and looked upon as contempt of Authority in those that give over
brewing, or yet shall advyse any so to do: And further, to the effect his Grace
my Lord High Thesaurer may be truly informed of the present state of the
current Excyse, and the manner of Collecting thereof at any time their three
years last by past; Therefore these are requyring all Magistrates of Burghs, all
Collectors or Tacksmen of Excyse within the said Shyres, that they immediately
bring in to Me subscrived lists of all Brewers within their bounds, whether
those that be ordinary Brewers, or those that be extraordinary Brewers at
Mercats, Weddings, or other public Occasions, and the Quota that each Brewer
pays weeklie, or in set, and after what manner, and to whom, whether it be to
the Collectors or Tacksmen, or to their Masters in whose Land they dwell, or
others appointed for that end, where the Excyse is laid upon the Land-Rent; and
that the lists be so exact as that they may make faith thereon, and that if
their Books be not clear thereanent they may yet take pains thereon, by calling
for lists of their respective Parishes within their bounds, and all Heritors
and others concerned are required to give concurse, and that either by
themselves or Chamberlanes they give up the Names of the Brewers, and Quota of
their payments when ever they shall be required by the Tacksmen and Collectors
thereanent, and that the whole Tacksmen and Collectors give account of their
diligence to Me at my House in Aberdeen, betwixt and the twelfth day of
November next as they will be answerable, or else Parties will be direct for
that effect. And that none pretend Ignorance their presents are furthwith to be
Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of the head Burghs of the respective
Shyres, and Copies sent to each Parish Kirk thereof, direct to the Conveener
and Reader of these Parishes to be publicly read the next Lords Day immediately
after Divine-Service, and that the Conveener or Reader return executions of
the publications thereof to the nearest Collectors of Excyse, to be transmitted
to Me within eight days thereafter, as they will be answerable to Authority.

Given under my hand at Aberdeen, the twenty eight day of October, 1685 Years.
ANDREW FRASER.


