THE French Politician FOUND OUT, OR CONSIDERATIONS On the Late Pretensions
That FRANCE Claims to ENGLAND and IRELAND; and her DESIGNS and PLOTS in Order
thereunto.

By a Well-wisher of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhil. M.DC.LXXX.

THE French Politician Found Out.
THE FIRST DISCOURSE.
RIbier, Du Chastelet, The Author of the French Politician, and other Libellers
in France, have had the Confidence of late to pour out such a torrent of
Injuries, shallow Pretensions, and Titles to England, that a Subject long
acquainted with their Ways, thought himself bound in Duty and Faithfulness to
his King and Country, humbly to lay some of his Observations before them;
whereby it may possibly appear, that France is not so much our Friend as she of
late pretended: That these Pretensions of hers are not the mere Academick
Notions of some private Speculatist, but the sense of their Rulers; that they
do but watch their Opportunity to put these and other Claims into Execution
against us. And therefore if this be in some manner made manifest, that we can
never have a fitter opportunity than now to be beforehand with them, in
entering into a Confederacy and Arms, if need be, with our Neighbors, against
these Common Enemies, least when they have too much weakened the rest, they
become too strong for us alone, especially at Sea.

Let Us then observe, That it has been of late a Practice of France, to make
use of such Title-Broachers, as her Trumpets and Heralds, a little before
she is resolved to invade any Country, to publish some Right, forsooth, to
those Nations whom next she intends to set upon against Right and Reason,
thereby to raise the Valor of her own Men with the speciousness of Justice in
their Undertaking; to divide the Minds and Resolutions of some on the future
Enemies side: to suspend also the hands of her Neighbors, from intermeddling
in a Quarrel which seems so plausible, or at least so doubtful; and that surely
France (think they) cannot be unjust or rash in Actions, whereof she is ready
to give such a fair Account to the World beforehand: And it is Prudence first
to see what her Adversaries will answer her; so say they. And thus France
leaving the Matter dormant, for a while, as if she thought no more of it;
before, or as soon as her Adverse Party makes an Answer to her Manifesto, she
suddenly and unexpectedly comes and makes her Reply with her Sword; there is
that she would be at, from the very beginning; let your Defense to her claim be
never so strong and just. Tush! that was but an Amusement, and her Inter Arma
silent Leges, scorns to be bawked with such Ponctilio's.

All observing Persons might be furnished with Proofs enough of this Maxim, in
the late Conduct of France toward her Neighbors; but here are some whereof I
had a nearer occasion than many to know the particulars.

Cardinal Richelieu, who as it is known first laid the Design of making his
Master the Supreme Monarch of all Christendom, before he attackt Spain; in
order thereunto encourages Cassan to write his Book of the Pretensions of
France, upon all or most of the Kingdoms and Principalities of Europe; which he
goes about to prove of each one in particular, either by former Conquest, by
Alliances and Successions, by Clauses in Treaties, and such other obsolete
Titles. However this Pretension Writer so tickled the French Ambition, and gave
such seeming Colors to those Designs they would be upon otherwise, had they no
ground at all; that the Cardinal ordered a present of Sixteen thousand Livers
to be given to that Author; and so sent his Generals to go and pursue with the
Sword these goodly Claims and forgotten Inheritance of the French Kings.

Arroy, Du Puy, D' Aubery, and others, had no worse recompense, and were set on
before these late Wars against Germany and Flanders; for to forge Titles to
these Countries their Master had with himself determined to invade. They have
done it however, but were smartly answered by Lisola and Ramos; and though
Monsieur D' Ambrun bragged then at Madrid, that Ramos was the only Man Spain
had to maintain its Interest upon the point of the Devolution; but that the
King of France could make out his Right at the Head of Sixty thousand Lawyers;
yet his Master scorning to stand to make good this French Gasconade, rather
chose to speak at the Head of more than Sixty thousand Armed Men: While his
Ambassadors were thus drolling and cajolling with their unwary Neighbors; and
Amusing them with fair Pretenses and Promises of Proving their Right by Lawyers
and Mediators. But alas! with France it is too scrupulous a Nicety, so to
depend on the Decisions at the Bar, or on those at Munster, Breda, or Nimeguen
either; her King will plead his Rights but with the Mouths of his Cannons
bravely, Alexander like; and he is told he has more Right to all Europe than
this Young Grecian had to Asia.

For Patru in his New Law Book left this on Record as a perpetual Maxim to be
followed by France, which he often before maintained in open Parliament, That the
Word Kingdom, with them, does comprehend generally all the Lands,
Principalities, and Dominions, which Fontune, Success and the Valor of the
French Monarchs, can add to the Sacred Subjection of the Flower de Luce. And ^s
Rivers and Rivolets, by entering into the Sea, lose themselves presently, with
all their particular qualities, as soon as they are incorporated to the Noble
Ocean, so all conquered Provinces and Nations, do lose their peculiar Names,
Privileges, and Prerogatives, to be made Members of the First Monarchy of the
World, and of its Laws and Privileges.

Pray tell me where this Maxim will not reach, or be made to stretch rather.
For as the Habit in any unjust Course will mortify the remorse, and check the
Sense of all other Law, that may dictate the contrary; so France, by a long
practice of following these boundless Maxims, is become as it were accustomed
to think that her Conquests must be as large as her Ambition; and that those
Nations do really belong to her, she and her Mercenary Pens had but a Fancy of
Right unto in the beginning.

But what of all this, you will say; these are but general Presumptions and
Jealousies, when France puts in no Claim against England; I never heard of any,
I cannot fancy which way. Then hear further:

The forementioned Ribier (among the rest) sets out this Title of France to
the English Crown, as you may more fully see in his French Book, and in the
following Discourse; And one is in right of the Dolphin Lewis, Son to Philip
Augustus, who by the Popes means, and of some of the Rebelling Lords, entered
and was Crowned here in England, and ravaged here a good while; designing by a
general Massacre of all the English Princes and Peers to shorten his Conquest:
till one of his French Cabinet Counselors could not die quietly till he
revealed this horrible Project to some of the English Nobility. Such a Right as
this, with such other, the French Kings are put in Remembrance of in their
Coronation Oath.

Such another Claim they lay to Scotland in Right of Francis the Second, who
married Mary Steward Queen of Scotland; and though she had no issue by him, yet
it is a Maxim with them, That the Crown can lose none of the Rights it once
had, and that no Alienation can be made from it, but it still Reinters.

By a Sequel of the same Maxim, they go on and say, That Ecclesia est sicut
Minor. That no Alienation can be made from the Church no more than from Minors.
But Ireland belonged to the Church of Rome, to which the Natives gave
themselves up long ago; now the French King is Eldest Son of the Church, and
her Heir: Nay it is said, tha this good Old Mother either sold or gave him that
Kingdom, when she could make nothing of it her self; and may he not then claim
it upon as good and better Grounds than Spain took and kept Navarr from its
Lawful King, being an Heretic; of which that Wise Granam deprived him by no
other Right then by that by which she pretends to disposess Heretic Kings.

It was by that Right she sent her Nuncio to display the Banner of Rebellion in
Ireland in 41, and another Nuncio in or about 78, to raise the same Tragedy.
Was it not by this Transport or making over of Ireland to her most Christian
Son, that the Titular Bishop Talbot, undertook with others in Seventy three to
prepare a Seaport Town in Ireland by Brthe or Stratagem to Receive a French
Army, and to have Irish enough secretly enlisted in a readiness to meet them;
when they Attempted first to Kill the English Agent, who came to disclose their
Designs, and prevailed with Secretary Perridge and others to Post after him;
Swearing, That if they met Everard, he would never come to England to tell
Tales; as even Sir Edward Hungerford, who chanced to meet them remembers. When
upon another sham Accusation they thought they had procured his Mouth to be for
ever stopped in the Tower, then I say they went on still with their Design in
Favor of France; and some others, unknown to the former, who since deserted
their Camps, disclosed that the said Talbot and others, were in 78, carrying on
the same Treachery as securely as before: And some, even in this very Month,
came from Ireland, and Accused, as is said, before the Council, those very
Persons, with other Titular French Agents, as Plunkett, Molony, etc. of which
some were, as it is known, in great Favor and Correspondency with the French
Court.

But supposed the French, had with the Papists conceived such a Design on
England or Ireland, yet you say the Possibility of putting it into Execution,
will still hinder it and make it Abortive. That the Landing of any Forreigner
would be the Uniting of all our Divided Parties together against them; that
they would be met with as Vnaminous a Resolution as when they were thought to
have Landed at Purbeck Island last Year. And besides that, we would Clap up all
Papists in such a Juncture that they are disarmed: And even the French
themselves are sensible of this; therefore their Fleet and Back is Turned from
us toward Italy and Germany.

Though it is not my Design to dispute much about the possibility of an
Attempt, which I wish might be for ever impossible; yet for conscience sake,
and to remove our Countreymens too much security, I say that neither you, nor
any man, can know all the Papists, French, and other disaffected, prae-ingaged,
Innovators, and Pensioners in England, who Protheus like, can shape themselves
to all Figures: therefore how can you secure them all; how can you disarm them
totally: And can you Answer for the Sentiments and Interest of all the
different Parties in England, and specially in Ireland, which side they would
incline? In Ireland, where to one Protestant there are three Papists, can you
vouch they will sooner join with an English Heretic than with a French
Catholic? So many Ignorant Blind Zealots, so many Priest-ridden Furies, so
many outed of their Estates on former Delinquencies, so many Thousands of
Frenchified Officers and Cashiered Soldiers and Tories straggling there, shall
they, think you, sooner join with English, against whom they have a blind
Antipathy, than with those whom they look upon as damned Miscreants, Tyrants,
Usurpers of their Country and Religion, than with the French Romanists, whom
they would welcome as Saviors and Restorers of their All: Nay as they think
they lost all by the English, they would venture all they have, viz. their Lives,
for the French or other Foreigner. Neither can we be aware of all the Arms they
may have hid, they may have Conveyed to them secretly; of all the Arms their
fury could make use of in an uproar? What Store of Arms needed they for the
Massacre of the Danes, or for the Massacre of the Protestants in Ireland? And
cannot their Holy Father enjoin again, on such an Occasion, a Third Massacre to
be prepetrated to the full Honor of the Holy Trinity in Three Persons?

In a word, what need we so much Dispute Touching the Impossibility of an
Invasion, to render our selves more secure, when our own Histories do convince
us how often, to our Cost, such a thing has been done, which we could not
prevent, when for our sins God would suffer it to be, by some Art we could not
foresee till done. And not to mention our General Conquests, can we forget that
same in King John's Time, those other Landings of Spaniards and Italians in
Ireland in Queen Elizabeth's Time, at the Invitation of the Pope and Papists?
But you will say we were then less Powerful, we were then more divided, we have
stopped those Gapps; and it may be too they have refined their Policies and
Ways of Attacking to the height of your Preparedness: and what ever our Power
is now, I am sure the French were never more formidable and more fit to
struggle with us. And our secret Divisions are near as great as our open ones
were then; a little Spark from abroad, would perhaps, make it break out into a
Flame; and our secret Enemies are no less dangerous than open ones: These can
be known and met withal, but those cannot; and would be ready at a Watchword
to follow on the back of us; arising, as it were, out of an Ambuscado.

Yet all this, dear Countrymen, is said to caution and not to dishearten us,
and to Unite and prepare us; as Fencers do show the several Passes that can be
made upon us, for to be ready to parry 'em, if need require.

My Design is not to dishearten, but to awaken and unite, to show that this is
the Greatest Plot of all, viz. to work our Disunion, which makes all others
successful.

For I do not presume to say, That the French are just now ready for us, or
preparing against us, but that the French do presume to set up Claims to our
Country is apparent to the World in their Books and late Manifesto's; and give
out mean, contemptible Characters of us, to seek to raise the Spirits of their
Natives to triumph over us; that whether such things be done in Joke or
Earnest, it is by such Artifices they began the Conquest of our Neighbors; its
plain that they never let any of their Pretensions die, but watch fit
opportunities for the execution of them; that the extraordinary number of their
present Ships, is not answerable to any Design they might have on any Inland
Towns or Places in Italy or Germany. What use is there of Ships to sail on the
Land, that if there were no other Attempt against us, their Fleet is such, that
it ought to breed Jealousy and Fears of Encroachments upon the Right of our
Sovereignty on these Seas, on our Plantations, Seaport Towns, and our Inward
and Outward Trade and Comerce; on the Rights and Privileges of our Neighbors,
who for these many Ages stood as our Bulwarks and Banks against the swellings
of this ambitious and active Nation, never so powerful as now. That his
strengthening and manning his Sea-port-Towns ought to be taken notice of, his
turning out of all Protestant Officers from off his Ships. The Sums of Money he
returns to Rome, the Prayers they make for his Designs there, the
unconcernedness that Rome and other Popish Neighbors are in touching his vast
Preparations. The strong Leagues he makes with Swedeland and Denmark, and with
other Princes; wherein he strives to prevent us. All these Considerations, I
say, should make us quickly to Reunite among our selves, Prince and People,
Dissenters and Protestants; and I dare say, if a War were thought sit to be
made with France, in Union with our Neighbors, there would be no better means
to Reunite us all; for this is the grand Plot of all other Plots, to keep us
still disunited, to open a gapand inlet in our Body for a Foreigner.

Yet after all, knowing that the main difficulty will still lie herein, to
persuade us that the French are not so much our Friends as we believe them to
be; and fearing we should be thought to wrong that Nation rashly or groundless,
I will more particularly quote some of the Authors of the French Politick's
Policies, which he proposes to his King, and will confirm by many Secret and
Public Transactions and Matters Fact, that in their continual Practice they do
follow these Maxims I will not insist on the means he offers of enslaving his
own Country, let them look to that, of raising more the Nobilities power over
the People; of devesting of the Parliaments Prerogatives to invest the King
therewith; of bringing down the Clergy, that he make the Leeches of the Public
Revenue disgorge: Let him, I say, suggest means of Arming at Sea, without
charge to the Crown, of improving of Trade, and the Colonies and filling of the
Kings Coffers: But what has he to do to be a Pedagogue to his Ambitious
Prince, for to inslave other free Nations that have nothing to do with him.

This Politician then tells his King, That Spain is slow and stupid, and are
not sensible of any smooth trick he may put upon 'em, but only of Affronts upon
the Punctilio of Honor, yield 'em in that a little. He incites his Master to
fill Portugal with Soldiers, to act in due time; and that the French Queen her
self ought to second this by her Friends in Spain. He advises him to sow
Divisions 'twixt the Prince of Orange and the Hollanders and the English, on
the other side. To bridle Spain, and set these Nations to weaken and undermine
each other. Let the King endeavor (says he) to break their Leagues and Allies
the one from the other, by feeding them with promises of imaginary supplies on
that condition, and of joining the French Fleet to theirs; but they must have
Orders to Act but for a show and not in earnest.

Now he comes to propose the ways of undermining England. And first he calls
her Perfidious, and without Faith or Trust. That France ought to make no Treaty
or Peace with her, but on advantageous and ambiguous terms; yet he wishes his
Master to dissemble with England for to devour her the last. He then begins to
declare by what Artificers this King must be brought to conceive Jealousies of
his English Subjects and Parliament, and the Parliament likewise of the King;
and to bring about that they may not abide the one the other, nor close one
with the other.

In keeping the English thus in Feudes among themselves (says he) the French
will have time to push the Wheel of their Interest forward, and promote their
own Designs abroad and against us without control or suspicion, and then it
will be easy enough to find a pretense to break openly with us, either on the
account of the Title of France we take, and that the King of England must be
put to it to renounce the same; as Queen Elizabeth forced Francis the Second of
France and Queen Mary of Scotland to quit the Title of England, they put in the
Style, etc. or else to pick a Quarrel on the Point of the Precedence of our
Ambassadors.

Then he comes to show after what manner France must seize on Scotland, seeing
that thence first sprung the Fire (as he says) that set England on a Flame.
Then he doubts not but that Ireland will carry things very far of it self.
Afterward that Sects must be set at variance, one English with another; by
which means Germany, and the Seventeen Provinces were put to Confusion.

That the King of England must be made a Favourer of the Catholics, and
Letters to be framed which must be interpreted for the proving of it. Then that
the Hollander must be flattered that the French will make the Trade fall from
England into their hands. That Belle Isle, or the Island of The may be given to
the Knights of Maltha, who must demand of England to restore the Commanderies
and Benefices they formerly had here.

But this Author finding that his Master would be too much fettered, by seeking
out Pretenses of Right to Countries, tells him plainly that he needs such and
such places more; and that is reason enough (for their Conscience.) He needs
(says he) to get Strasburg, the French Comty, the State of Milan, and of Gene,
Portolongone and Piombin; for to reduce Suisserland, Savoy, Tuscany, Madera,
Parma and Rome it self; that Sardinia, Naples, and Sicily would follow of
themselves. But that in fine, Fontaraby, Navarr, Majorca, and Minorca, would
sit him mighty well toward his Universal Monarchy Undertaking; but he is a Fool,
could not he have put him on the Conquering of Spain at his first step, and so
all these same subordinate States would fall to him by course.

Being then in Employ at the French Court, we were told that his Majesty of
Great Britain, as soon as he read these pernicious Maxims, looked upon one of
the Colberts, then here Ambassador, angrily saying, He well perceived that
France did not coaks him but to destroy him. But that they bragged that Colbert
put it handsomely off, by saying, That this Book was composed by Lisola the
German, and to defame France; which incited the Curious to Examine whether that
were true or not, but they found that the style and manner was quite different,
and that these Maxims were but for the advantage of France alone.

This Manuscript of the French Politician, had lain long in the French Kings
Cabinet, whence an Officer was found to have stolen a Copy of it; then it was
printed clandestinely, and care was taken for the suppressing it.

But to evince it more closely and undeniably, that that Book, with the other,
which I quoted above, came out of the French Mint, that is out of their
Cabinets; I Will manifest it by their late Practice in every one of those
Maxims, that are set down in the French Politician. It Is true, that Marshall
Villeroy, a great Statesman, was wont to reduce the main Stratagems, by which
they wheadled their Neighbors, to these two, Par Finance and Finesse, that is
by Money and Cunning and Conney too, which is one of their chief Nets to catch
their Neighbors in. But to come to particulars, Their chief Artifices for
dividing and undermining their Friends, may be reduced to these following: 1.
By Sinons or pretended Fugitives. 2. By Pentioners in our Councils. 3. By
Alliances and French Ladies. 4. By breaking open and diciphering our Secretess
Letters. 5. By sending Auxiliaries that favor our Enemies. 6. By Ambiguous
Treaties, to gain time and advantage of breaking them. 7. By spreading
Slanders and fomenting Jea: lousies betwixt the Kings and their People. 8. By
entertaining a secret League with the Turk.

Now to begin with those more general and remote means, which France takes to
divide her Neighbors in their Leagues and Amity. She usually calls in the Turk
upon the back of 'em; and this most Christian King will not stick to enter into
secret Covenants with that Antichristian Tyrant against the rest of
Christendom. I need not mount up so high as Francis the I. Henry the II. and
other their Successors, who openly brought in the Turk against Charles the V.
and other Emperors; public Histories can bear me Witness in it. Rincon and
Fregose were taken by the way, seized with Instructions from Francis the I* to
Soliman, to excite this Infidel to War against the Christian Princes; and when
any of Francis his Neighbors would upbraid him with such Antichristian
Treacheries, he could put it off but with a Drollery: What, says he, May not I,
when beset with Wolves, call in for Dogs to help me. But to come to our times,
What made the French to be the occasion of the loss of Candia, and to yield the
advantage at Gigerys and Hongary, but for to manage the Turkish Amity to oppose
him to the Emperor, if he proffers to stir or to enter into Tripple League.
They sent some Supplies, it is true, to dazzle the World, but when La Feuillade
(who knew not the Secret) brought his Men to an Engagement, he was opposed by
Coligny; who had Orders to do things but for a show. Besides, the King sent
Counter Orders with some of the major Officers, which they were to read, but
when they came to Candia; Monsieur De Louvas hindered many of the most valiant
and considerable Officers, Gentry and Soldiers, to go thither, even as
Volunteers. In fine, The Divisions, Counter-seasons, and wilful
Misunderstandings of the French with their Allies, in that occasion, did more
to the loss of the City, than the Batteries of the Turks, who had spent some
score years in vain toward the Conquest of that place, but could never get it
out of the Venetians single hands, till these double-dealing French Friends
came into help more toward the losing of it than the maintaining it; so that
the Venetians might have had more reason to send back these French Supplies
than they had in returning home Prince Almerick of Modena's Succors upon some
such suspicion.

And the Turkish Ambassador (a thing very unusual to be sent from the Ottoman
Grandeur) who afterward was dispatched to the French Court, unriddles the
Matter, and though the King made the difficile and scornful with him, yet he
sent Orders to caress him and make much of him in secret; as looking upon the
Mahumetans to be one of the chief Supporters of his Crown and State.

And as the French will be Friends with the Turks to use 'em against their
Enemies, so with those they pretend openly to help, as their Friends, they deal
as with Turks in effect, by underhand Conspiracies; I mean in their Auxiliary
Supplies to their Allies: Their Succors tend but to leave 'em in the lurch, to
be desroyed by their Concurrents; that when he has engaged the Frog and silly
Mouse to a Fight, to weaken the one the other, he, the French Kite, might the
more easily snatch 'em both away in his greedy Talons. Besides what we alleged
above of his treacherous Auxiliaries to Hongary and Candia, we may intimate
those he sent some years ago to help Holland against the Bishop of Munster; and
a little afterward on the same Claims sets Munster again Holland; and when it
came to the push, leaves him to the mercy of the Hollander, all he sought for,
being but to seek to destroy these two (Supporters of Flanders) the one by the
Hands of the other. His Design was the same touching England, when of late he
sent his Fleet to assist us against Holland, with secret Orders to d'Estree, to
leave the English and Hollander to destroy each other.

While France, both at the Treaty of the Pirenees, and afterward, had sworn a
firm Offensive and Dofensive League with Spain; they underhand sought to weaken
their Allies, by sending men and money with Colbert, Schomberg, and under
Turenne's Name, as Volunteers to the Portuguezes, till a Ship that was taken by
the Spaniards, happily discovered that the Portuguezes were stirred up and
encouraged by the French in their Attempts against the Catholic King. France,
by reason of a French Princess, seemed to be the greatest Friend in the World
to Poland, but to show what Friendship that was, they manage with Swedeland
that Treaty of Stumdorff seemingly in favor to the Polanders, but in effect
very prejudicial to them, and in the mean time Avagour, Lombres, and Bezieres,
are employed to set these Crowns together by the Ears, and to persuade King
Cazimer of Poland to lay down his Crown, to make way for Conde, Newburg, or for
some other Votary of France. Moreover, while this coaksing Nation did hugg the
Emperor, he finds such Papers in the taking of Muran, a Fortress in the Upper
Hungaria, which manifestly showed that the French had in the mean time
encouraged the Hungarians in this Rebellion.

3. Another Artifice of theirs is to send out Sinons, or protended Eugitives,
which are forsooth banished from their Court, yet these are in a secret
Intelligence with them to send to 'em all Foreign Intelligences, by seeming to
betray France to that Nation whereunto they sly. Thus have we known and seen
Monsieur Gourville to be banished, as it were upon the account of Foucquet to
Brussells, Madrid, and the Hague. There to screw himself into favor, he
communicated to 'em some empty Secrets, to hide from them the true State of
Affairs of France. His Couriers did seemingly go from Paris to Flanders and
Holland, and backward again; and in this Hurry, Course and Intercourse, he fed
the Spaniards but with Chymera's, and sent an Account of their real Designs
into France: But after all, when this Impostor was found out by the Spaniard,
he was as heartily wellcommed at Paris, as if no grudge had ever been; and from
Intendant of the Prince of Conde's, he was received into an inner favor. I
could mention the Guizes in former times, who were banished, to gull the
Protestants, and some of late sent into England, and perhaps the Earl of S.
(who in their Language makes sixteen) is this last month fled hither into
England, upon no other occasion.

4. What should I run over the particulars I above promised to demonstrate,
when all observing persons may prove them to themselves. When his late breaches
of the Treaties of the Pyrenees, of Breda, of Westphalia, and of Nimeguen, do
show that France values no otherwise such Ties, than Lisander did the solemnest
Oaths, that is to deceive men thereby, and to get a fit opportunity of breaking
them to his advantage. But we intend to set forth shortly an Abstract of the
Treaties of France with the House of Austria in this last Century, and the
Reasons of the Alternative Growth and Decline of each of these, and therein it
will from the words of the Treaties and Impartial Historians appear, how far
the French are to be trusted to in this point of Transactions and Covenants.

5. Now as to the use they may make of Emissaries and Pensioners abroad, to
make Factions in the Neighboring Courts; the clear-sighted know that Monsieur
Vaubrun was sent into Germany but for to stir Serin and Ragotzi, against the
House of Austria. Each one may perceive that the Prince Furstemburg, who is in
Bavaria, does act in consort with the other Furstemberg, that resides in
France: And that Monsieur Gremonville was the occasion of the Revolt in
Hungary; for which and several other Divisions he wrought in Vienna, he was
expelled more civilly than he deserved.

The Archbishop of Gnesne and the Marshall Sobieski, were the Pensioners that
France bragged of in the Court of Poland; and of some also in ours, which could
be named, but that a respectful tenderness for my Countrymen makes me more
reserved, and shall shut them up in my own Breast, hoping they have since
repented of such base and unnatural Treacheries, toward their generous and
gracious King, and dear Country; especially knowing some of 'em to be dead,
and others almost dying: which were mentioned in Parliament.

6. Now touching French Princesses they match out, to have occasion thereby to
divide their Neighbors, God forbid that I should think that all the Ladies of
that Rank were Fredegonde, Brunehaut, or Helena like, but that as this later
was the occasion of the subtle Grecians getting foot into the Trojan
Territories, and of imbroyling and ravaging it by long Wars; so I observed that
most commonly those French Princesses are Engines of State, to carry along with
'em abroad Corresponding Colonies of that restless, ambitious, and intriguing
Nation, to make the interest of that Court where they go to bend to that of
their Native Country, which they ever love best. I Will but glance at Examples,
The very memory of Mary of Nevers is odious in Poland, by whose occasion that
Country was brought into such inward Disturbances and Factions, that not long
ago King Cazimir himself at last was fain to quit the Crown for a quiet Cool
in the Abbey of St. Germain at Paris But the observant in Public Affairs may
find fresh Presidents hereof in Tuscany, Portugal, and perhaps England not long
since; and I am afraid that Lady they of late sent to Spain, will be the
pretense in time to come, of making more Demands than that of Mastrick, which
they would now go about.

7. Hitherto we have touched of the Causes or Instruments the French do make use
of, now of the Effect, which is Divisions in Foreign Courts, either to cut out
work for such at home, that they may be no Obstacle to the Carier of the French
Conquests; or to make a Breach among us, at which they may creep in more
easily. For the proof hereof, for brevities sake I Will refer you to what I
hinted above, touching the Divisions the French Emissaries wrought in Poland in
and before the year 71, and likewise about and before that time in Germany,
when their Agents swarmed there to sow those Seeds of War which we have since
seen sprung up to such a height as cannot be yet cut down nor extirpated
possibly by all the hands in Europe. Colbert the Junior (as I mentioned before)
not long since carried away Corn and Coin, viz. Thirty thousand Crowns into
Portugal, by way of Loan as it were, to raise the Country against the
Spaniard, and so make a Diversion from Flanders. But the Instructions and
Covenants whereby the French required some Seaport Towns on the Coast of Spain
to be given to themselves (as I warrant you they will serve no Friend for
nothing) these I say were seized in another Ship that straggled into the
Spaniards Nett, where all the Mine was discovered. Such was the Disturbances
they wrought in Lorrain, that the late Duke (somewhat guilty thereof himself)
dolefully cried out, That the Neighbor hood of France was a smoke that would
drive him out of his own Country and Estate.

What should I mention the Jealousies, Dissentions and Divisions, which we with
tears behold here to be wrought by them in our England and its Dependants, when
any unbiased considering person may perceive that they strive to repeat the
Scenes of the late Intestine Tragedy, wherein that Wicked French Ambassador
Monsieur de Thou, by his Agents confessed and repented too late, to have acted
here the Prologue, by traducing, blasting, and heightning in that moderate
Royal Martyr a propensity to Popery, forsooth, by mis-representing the King to
the People, the People and Parliament to the King, by unsuspected Instruments;
by contriving means to divide the unwary Protestants about Formalities and
petit Differences, about Indifferent Things, wherein it is impossible to unite
'em in, no otherwise than by Charity, Meekness, and Patience; for Persecution
is observed to increase Proselites, and make 'em more zealous and virtuous;
which otherwise without opposition would languish and decay: but if the work be
of God, as Gamaliel said, that cannot be destroyed by Men by all art or power.
When by such Artifices the French and Jesuit had blinded some Dissenting
Zealots with specious Pretenses of removing evil Counselors and of some
Encroachments, then things being ripe, the greedy Lawless Soldier is brought
on the Stage, to make our King and People bleed together, without seeing the
Hook, but too late; when at first moderate and impartial Counsels might have
healed things, if they might be suffered to come to an understanding, and to
touch the Root of the Disease; Sed quid haec ingrata revolvo.

But remember in a word, That whether Times tend to a further Disunion of
Spirits, or to a through Union, yet in either Juncture the Judgment of God and
Man will soon find out those base Sinons, those Incendiaries, those French
Pensioners and Lawless Statesmen, that seek to divide the good Father and his
poor Children, and to rent miserably their own Mothers Bowels for private ends
by unworthy Policies. And those Persons or Party (whatever it be) which recede
most from French Devices and Popish Forms, and shall in their plain meaning and
counsels, tend but to close to the honest Fundamental Laws of their Country
and of the Gospel, after a simple, loyal, and charitable Interpretation; they
and only they shall prevail and be in request with their King and Country at
the long Run; for that God will be above Man. In fine, I refer to the Reader to
judge, and to our Superiors to determine, Whether the mean proposed in the
following Discourse (which lay by me) be so seasonable or practicable, which
however I meant to be of this use, to make a Diversion of all Englishmens
inward bitterness and choler, against a more fit Object and Enemy; that they
may cease to look upon one another with a sharp Eye, but look off rather
toward abroad, whence the Spring of our Divisions come; viz. from France and
Rome.

THE French Politician FOUND OUT.
THat the greatest dangers of Spain were from England, by reason of our power
at Sea, and that we could block up the Spanish Ports at pleasure; this our
Monsieur believed as firmly, as if it had been an Article of his Creed, and
that the Plot, as he had laid it, in its success was Infallible.

It Is a Truth. But if it were some years ago the Interest of this Crown to
accord to that Maxim; Time, and the present weaknesses of Spain (sinking under
its own burdens) have turned the Balance, and made it impracticable. The Face
and State of Affairs are now very much changed. Henry the Seventh was too
nearly allied with the House of Burgundy, and Ferdinand the Catholic, not to
have opposed the Cabals, which were then formed against Mary, to bereave her of
the Low Countries. His Son Henry the Eighth followed the same Counsels; and if
at any times Charles the Fifth was traversed by him, it arose from that just
Apprehension he had of his growing Grandeurs; Fortune being more favorable to
him, than to Francis the First, whose loss had been a fair Step unto his own.

Queen Elizabeth harbored the same Jealousies; for Spain, puffed up with a
long continued course of prosperous successes, was not arrived to that pitch of
Declension we see it now adays. And if Charles the First beheld with an Eye of
Envy the progress of France, Charles the Second might do it also, his Fear
being much more warrantable, because that Kingdom is grown more powerful, more
formidable than when his Father reigned. And there be Arguments of Glory,
Revenge, and Interest for my Assertion, all which, according to the best of my
judgment, are strictly interwoven one within the other.

Glory demands the continuance of the (triple) League; because this had twice
bridled a Prince who had slipped out of it, and who, without this Restraint,
would have overrun all bounds by reason of his unmeasurable Ambition, the sole
and unvariable Rule of all his Undertakings. Besides, it can be no dishonor
unto England to be reproached of France, as heretofore, of slackness in
assisting her, and that we loved to prolong and foment her Civil Wars, if not
to make them perpetual.

Revenge is yet another and stronger Motive to invigorate us in our conduct,
whether you reflect upon what is past, or on things present. For the present,
it is well known that the French promises are only tendered us for the better
inabling them to play their own Game; and the mischiefs they are now a brewing,
should now inspire us with a greater abhorrency of their greater masqued
Villainies.

Moreover, those brave Methods propounded by our French Politician for the
subversion of this Kingdom, whose Glory Eclipseth theirs, are no longer with
any patience to be endured.

Add farther that injurious manner wherewith they treat England, because it
carries the Balance of Europe, and supports the Oppressed against their
Violence and Tyranny.

And could we not remember those Invectives wherewith they have wounded the
whole Nation, yet this should be considered, that they never spared the Sacred
persons of our Princes.

Ribier is pleased to strew these sweet Flowers upon Henry the Eighth, viz.
That he was the most Insidel and unconstant Prince of his Age, full of
Tentation and Double dealing, whose Soul Symboliz'd with the Seas environing
his Island.

And the forementioned Author of the French Politics advises, that the King
now reigning should be voic'd a Roman Catholic, thereby to procure him his
Subjects hatred, and to Augment it be feigned Letters written to some of the
leading Protestant Lords, to render them suspected, and procure their Ruin by a
Maxim, which with extreme imprudence they themselves have divulged to the World.

These Counsels and Invectives were all forged by them, because Henry would not
turn the Scales wholly of their side to destroy Spain and England in
consequence thereof, which without this invincible Obstruction, must have been
together by the same Torrent overwhelmed.

And as to what concerns Charles the Second, that general interest, in which
insensibly he is engaged, affords Alliment to a damned Plot, which is by them
secretly carried on against him. But I pass this by, and come to the Question
under debate.

And it is this: That the Consideration of what is past should so far influence
a potent Prince, who has his Sword in his hands, as to carve out his own
satisfactions from them, whose insensibleness of doing wrongs raises them to
such a degree of Insolence, as to deride us.

Aquitain, Normandy, and their dependant Provinces, together with Guysnes,
Ardres, Bouloign, and Calais, ancient Demeans of the Crown of England, are such
important pieces, and their Conquest so easy, that they will surrender
themselves as soon as England shall seriously invade them; provided, that the
Obligation of the League and Powers composing it, remain firm and inviolable;
and that from a mere defensive War we become Aggressors, and despoil him of
those Trophies, who, after the glorious Example of his Ancestors, has enlarged
the bounds of his own Dominions on the wrack and losses of his Neighbors.

But and if this Design be delayed, and leisure given France to debase Spain,
then all must yield to the rapid course of that Nation, who is now making
Chains for us, nay, carries them with her, to bind and enslave such who shall
first make head against her, and at long run, of all those who either secretly
or openly maintained or abetted this horrible Design against the common and
public safety. And let her Neighbors be once brought down, England divested of
her Friends will be little more than the work of one day, and must fall in that
very moment she is Assaulted. The pretext is ready, either England shall lose
the Title of France, or France will usurp that of England. I Will explain my self
somewhat more largely.

France being now rid, and standing in no longer fear of her Competitors, will
infallibly break with England, imitating herein Queen Elizabeth, who quarreled
with Francis the Second, for Entituling himself Heir of that Crown she
possessed, and whereof she was exceeding jealous, Mary of Scotland having
furnished her Husband with a Title. But suppose this colorable pretense be
neglected, yet will he serve himself of one more remote; for who so has a mind
to pick quarrels, and wage War, will never talk so big and loud, as the whole
World may hear him. I Will not lead you far to fetch an Instance.

Lewis, Son of Philip Augustus, King of France, reigned in England, maugre all
the oppositions of King John, who was deposed for his Tyrannies. At length John
having recollected his miscarriages, reconciled himself with the Pope, becomes
his Tributary, demulceth his Holiness with his golden Promises, and profound
Submissions, and Lewis unfortunately loses his newly acquired Crown. It Is
true, he bequeathed the Right thereof (such an one as it is) unto his
Successors; who preserve it carefully, and assert it publicly, in a formal
Prayer sung in these express words at their Coronation, viz. That he will never
relinquish the Scepter of the ancient Saxons, Mercians, and other Princes, who
have reigned in England. And therefore the Kings of France, since Lewis the
Eighth, may with more justice, say they, assume the Title of Kings of England,
than the Kings of England style themselves Kings of France.

It was Ribbir that set up this imaginary Title, and suggested unto France a
pretext and ground for falling out with England upon the first and next
favorable opportunity. I have given her the first Intelligence of the
Thunderbolt: England may yet in time avoid it.

Is it to be imagined that Lovois, and many great ones, whose Fortune and that
of their Friends depends upon Warlike Employments, will not now stir their King
to those new attempts against England, (in case they want other Employment)
showing unto him the easiness of it, from the Divisions, Jealousies, and
Unprovidedness that England is in, and the many secret Friends they have here.
But in case they did alter these Measures, or not now execute them, yet seeing
our forwardness; and our Spirits, Eyes, and Arms, to be up and ready for them;
that, I say, will make still our conditions better with them, whether we stand
their Enemies, Friends, or Neuters; otherwise they will be more apt to slight
both the one and the other.

But lastly, let us give Interest leave to follow Revenge, and show what
Measures we ought to take from the Consideration of this cogent Topic. I
confess the Motive is interwoven with that of Glory; but yet more firmly,
because it runs on two Principles, and both of vast weight and consequence; the
one is particular and private Interest, the other is more general and public.
This last aims at the common Repose of Europe, and its care and perpetual
endeavor must be to restrain the Ambition of those two great Potentates, who
court the Empire, which cannot be effected without conserving England's Peace
at home, and confining those two enraged Neighbors to their just and
respective Bounds, that if one of them should win any thing from his Rival, he
may not presently invade England, who became an idle Spectator of their
Actions, without cherishing their mutual Enmities, and giving a Curb to their
several Enterprises. If Reason of State speaks loudly in deaf Ears, Glory does
it in shriller and clearer Terms.

But over and above this general Peace of Europe, wherein I could wish England
were occupied, there is somewhat in special that should rouse her up from her
present Lethargic drowsiness, viz. That France brags how facil it is to blind
her Eyes, and cause her to take what new Measures she pleases.

You will say these are points of grand Importance. Convince England of them.
Well! I shall debate of both immediately.

Let Us first touch at this of the common Safety, and we will in the next place
consider of the proper means to bound France, that she may not abuse their
Credulity, who can certainly and absolutely mortify her.

Marillac, Ambassador for Francis the First, thus writes to his Master from
London, that the English were displeased they had suffered the French to
fortify Ardres, and that before it was too late, they would hinder the
finishing those Fortifications: Adding, That they were vexed to the Heart that
the King had fortified Ardres, and that they repented very much to have
permitted our men proceed so far, that yet notwithstanding they had time enough
to reduce matters to their former state, because they had been informed that
Ardres could not yet in one whole year be so repaired, but that it might be as
easily forced.

But if Ardres, which is no more than a shadow of what France possesses in the
Low Countries, did heretofore strike a Jealousy into England, should not that
gross multitude of important Towns, and the Thirds of a large and vast Estate,
render her now by far much more jealous? especially since it has given such
fearful and violent shocks unto the whole Land, made another Neighbor
Republic tremble, yea and it trembles to this very day at their near
Approaches; the French Armies being led on by a mighty Captain trained up in
the School of business, enured to Hardships and fortunate Successes in all his
Conduct and Administrations. And Ardres (to say nothing of Calais and
Graveling) is something less than Dunkirk, if it be considered according to the
present Estimate that France does set upon it. These two places are the two
Ports, from whence one day the Storm shall be wafted over into England, if
England suffer France to incorporate the Naval Forces of Holland with her own,
and to inoculate that fair Bud into her Imperial Crown. Persons of the weakest
Understanding may without difficulty penetrate into the Issues and Successes of
such an Union.

And let it be remembered, that France was formerly invenem'd against England
for redemanding Calais, and having once got it out of the Spaniards hands, she
wanted neither Armies, nor any other considerable means, to make a sure and
speedy Conquest of other places.

If Fear then bounded their proceedings, because it was not so easy a matter
to dispossess the English, where once they had got footing; yet was it easy
enough to disseise and unroost others, either by Force or Treaty, as they did
justly enough by that of Vervins; yet now the Tables are turned, for they once
understanding that Spain is brought upon her knees, the Conquest of that and
England will not cost much time nor pains. The Balance being now removed, their
Forces augment daily, and like a violent Inundation carry all before them. It Is
true, this is yet impossible if England do not stand neuter, while other
Nations are entering into more than a Triple League; which to effect the one
and hinder the other, they turn every stone, they embarrass all Affairs, they
support the Intrigue with a thousand hopes, and those hopes with a profuse
expense of Treasure, which forces a passage through those sordid Souls, whose
sole Interest is their private Gain and Advantage. And that which is most
surprising is this, they engage the Favorites, who are Lords of the Ascendant
at Court or elsewhere, and at this rate believe themselves potent enough to
give what Laws they please to all politic Transactions, if so be the true
Interest give ground unto the false, which is cheating, changeable, and
infallibly destructive to them that do embrace it.

And by these means they of late out the Gordian Knot of that Triple League, as
if they were cocksure beforehand of their designs, and their business were
already done unto their hands; Pomponne was dispatched into Swedeland, to
disengage that Crown from the League by the golden promises of Conquests,
Pensions, and Presents, which will go very far in a poor Country, and remove
whatever Obstacle stands in his way to the Empire of all Europe.

The worst is, that in France at those times they did publish this Negotiation,
branding England with the goodly Names of Unconstant and Persidious. Which
brings to my mind a story of the Viscount of Narbonne, who told an Englishman,
That six hundred Tun of Wine and a Pension had quickly sent them back again to
England. The other answering, It was a Tribute and no Pension. This was in the
Reign of Lewis XI. who disengaged England from succouring the Dukes of Burgundy
and Bretaigne. The Jest was biting, but it is the usual Coin wherewith France
pays such whom it openly flatters, that so she may if possible ruin and
strangle them the more cunningly.

A League with England blocks up the Spanish Havens, so says du Plessis; and
the French are hot and intent upon it. Truth is, the Daughter of Time and Time
must discover the events of this Maxim. Only let me add by the way, that if
France cannot prevail with England to do this Jobb for her, she will tack about
and treat with Spain upon other terms, that relinquishing the Spanish
Netherlands she shall be recompensed more abundantly with the Spoils of some
other parts of Europe, which France will conquer for her. We will unriddle this
Mystery, and let England seriously consider;

Castillon in his Embassy for Francis I. writing from London advises his
Master to a League with Spain against England; For (says he) I would ever
counsel Your Majesty to quit other designs, and accord with Spain, and to give
this Kingdom in prey, which may be with more facility and less expense
effected, than to take Calais; for the expense cannot last above one month or
six weeks at the most. Divide England between you, and let each take those
parts of it which lie most commodious and convenient for him. And in the close
he subjoyns, Your Majesty may keep Wales, and Cornwall, and Scotland for your
self, and leave the sorry remainders unto the Emperor.

There be three things worthy our observation from this Ambassadors Advice. The
one is, that France believed she might cheat Spain into this treacherous
Conquest, provided Spain would but sacrifice to her Covetousness and Ambition
the Low Countries. The second is, that Spain keeps fast and faithful to the
Public, and prefers it before her own private Interest. And then lastly,
because of this Fantastic League England must immediately and infallibly be
conquered as soon as invaded, especially let her be once abandoned of her
Allies, and that France have brought Spain and Holland upon their knees, and
has united their scattered disjoynted Naval Forces with her own. I trust my
Sentiments are plain, so plain that the meanest Capacity can comprehend me.

Alliances betwixt Crowns bring little profit to the People. This is visible in
the Matches between the two Royal Houses of France and England; for no sooner
was Henrietta Maria wedded unto King Charles, but State-Interest and the
Capricious Humors of the Favorites interrupted that Peace, which a long time
before had continued between both Kingdoms, and by the Marriage was sworn to be
perpetuated. Experience also of what had past might have rendered Spain more
advised, and to have avoided that snare, into which she ran through false
Maxims, with a great deal of Joy.

I Will only quote one passage out of the Memoirs of the Duke of Sully; he then
writing to Henry IV. about his Intrigues with Spain tells him; That the growth
of one Prince is the diminution of another; that no Parentage, Affinities,
Leagues, Peace, Treaties, Agreements, Oaths, or reciprocal Promises, could ever
yield sufficient Precautions for time to come against Interest of State.

I could wish this Memoir affixed on the Cabinet of Madrid for their future
Reformation, and that in time to come they would take other Measures; since
Lewis XIV. adheres most pertinaciously to the Maxims of Sully, and that after a
Treaty sworn with the greatest seriousness and solemnity, and a Cession of all
Rights made and verified in due form of Law. For instead of observing it they
are now debating other Rights, and demand an hundred things, which being
refused, they take up Arms, and proceed to the worst Acts of Hostility, leaving
us without hopes of any Calm to follow upon this Storm, which menaceth with an
universal Deluge all the Netherlands.

Give me leave to subjoyn one important Advice unto England: The Right of
Edward III. (says Laboureur) is not worth the mentioning, were it not to tell
the world how unrighteous the English are in their pretentions to it, and to
manifest what necessity lies on us to keep that Nation at a bay, at a distance
from us, which is naturally quarrelsom, born our Enemy, and that will borrow
Assistance wherever she can get it, and take up any the least pretext in the
world to subdue and ruin us. Robert Abbot of La Celle reproached an English
Prelate with this, that his Countrymen in their Inclinations resembled that
Element which did encompass them, that is to say, they were cruel, proud,
unconstant, and seditious. These are noble Elogies indeed conserr'd upon your
Friends, Monsieur, in a time of perfect peace, nay upon your best and most
potent Friends, to whom you have in this present Juncture of Affairs your
Recourse, and who are guilty of this very great Oversight, to suffer themselves
to be charmed by your Flatteries and Cozenages.

When as Queen Elizabeth redemanded Calais for just Reasons she then alleged,
the French resolved rather to endure a War, wherewith she menaced them, than to
surrender it: Because (says the same Laboureur) there was a double danger, one
to suffer our ancient Enemies to get footing in the Continent of France; and
then too because they are Heretics, who would always have a Faction in the
State to revive their old Quarrels at pleasure; and that it more concerned us
now than heretofore, to shut them up with their new Religion on the other side
the Sea.

This was done in the Sale of Dunkirk, and if any other place offer it self to
purchase, France will be no Higler, but purchase it at any rate, supposing she
be discharged of her Wars with Spain. Again, Queen Elizabeth insisting still
upon the Restitution of Calais, and speaking of it unto Sancy, he after several
shifts and excuses, By God, Madam, (quoth he) can Your Majesty be so simple as
to imagine the King my Master would give you Calais again? Which Answer
touching her to the quick, she demands Bouloigne in lieu of it. The King, who
foresaw the Consequence of the English setting footing once more on French
Ground, commanded her to be told, That he had rather the King of Spain should
give him a Box on the ear, than the Queen of England should give him a Filip.
And in troth she had not Calais when the term of Eight Years was expired,
although according to Treaty it was then to have been surrendered, or Hostages
and sufficient Security for payment of Five hundred thousand Crowns promised
her in case of Nonperformance. But as usual they fail of their Words, and the
good Queen only recovered Six score thousand Crowns at the Treaty of Troys.

Thus Calais is once again become French. France loves her own Repose and Glory
too much ever to part with it; and the Subjects as well as their Prince are too
much in love with it, to suffer it slip out of their hands. I speak but the
very words of the Cardinal of Lorrain; There is no Frenchman (says he) but
would rather hazard his Life, than advise the King to surrender Calais, and
would not more willingly sacrifice his whole Estate, than once give his consent
thereunto.

This was spoken like a true Frenchman, and their Neigebours should resent such
daring Expressions as renderly as they themselves do, if there be any thing of
eredit in what S'aavedre reports, That the Prince's Acquists enhaunce his Dread
and Reverence, but what he forgoes redounds to his contempt and scorn.

Francis I. would never engage himself with Charles V. against England, fearing
lest in the Conquest of this Kingdom it should happen to him as it did in the
Conquest of Naples, between Ferdinand of Arragon and Lowis XII. The Emperor
being unable to brook an Equal, and himself a Superior. Besides, Prancis
should have drawn upon himself a more potens Enemy, than him of whom he was
rid: the Leopards of England being no less terrible than the Eagles of the
Empire, or the Lions of Castile. Yea the Spaniards stiffly seconded the English
in their demands of Calais, confessing, That they ought not to abandon them,
and that if they were not protected, they very well knew Spain would be next
ruined; so that their own Losses would be greatest. This is written by the
Cardinal of Lorrain.

Spain then reasoned solidly and judiciously. In prospect of this, Henry VIII.
coined Medals of Gold, on whose Reverse a Hand appeared out of a Cloud, holding
a Pair of Balances in aequilibrio; the two Sodles whereof signified France and
Spain, with this Motto, He wins on whose side I turn.

Queen Elizabeth governed her self by the same Maxim, and assisted Henry IV. so
long as he was weakest, but seasonably forbore when once she saw him start up
beyond his just and proper bounds; and at that time told Sully, That neither
France nor England, nor any others, had any thing to do with the Low Countries;
and that she would never endure the French King should gain so much as one inch
of ground there.

And when as Pope Clement VIII. told Cardinal Ossat, that England hated France
implacably; he replied, At this time England hates Spain more; and that they
ought now to regard the present state of Affairs, which had united both French
and English against a common Enemy by one common Interest, which was evermore
the strongest and securest band among all States and Princes.

This Reason which once served the turn of France, shall at another opportunity
do Spain a kindness; Because Kingdoms are not to be reputed strong or weak as
they be in themselves, but as they hold comparison with their Neighbors, and
from proportion wherewith they are adjusted one unto another.

Du Plessis sent this Message to Walsingham in England, not to abandon Henry IV
nor the German Protestants. Let Us see whether we may not use those self same
words to evince the true Interest of England. Charles I. was convinced of it,
and Charles II. has been also, and will be possibly yet more, when like a
great and deep Statesman he shall be pleased to penetrate into the future. And
it is not to be doubted, by the way he begins to take, and by what he had done
formerly in Person at the Head of his Army, that he will not suffer himself to
be overreach'd by false Reasonings, nor give his Slanderers occasion to say of
him as of his Grandfather King James, That he knew not how, nor ever cared to
manage businesses, nor would once put his hands to dispatch them, till such
time as both means and opportunities had quite forsook him.

I don't doubt but that Charles, our gracious King who now reigns, will
recollect what happened, how, and by whom, unto his Father; and what manner of
Treatment he met withal in France, even with no less than Banishment. And for
all possible Allurements from the French, he may be fully confident of
receiving the same measure from them again, if the same occasion were, which
God forbid; or if he quit Spain with his own true Interest, and that of his
Kingdom, which subsists by Commerce, to embrace the Humors and Private
Interest of half-sighted and corrupt Ministers. France debitting none other
Commodities than her Brandies and Apish Gewgaws, in lieu of those substantial
Merchandises England has of her own, and imports for all Quarters of the
habitable World. And when Realities are forsaken, and Deceits and Cheats taken,
immoderate and restless Spirits do ordinarily take hold of such sensible
Arguments, to alienate and imbitter the Hearts of the People; which though
frequently too too querimonious, yet gracious Princes without humouring them in
all their childish Cravings, will nevertheless comply with all that shall be
manifestly for their solid Good.

It were a pleasant story to relate the Civilities of France to Edward IV. who
being at a pinch, and driven out of his Kingdom by a Competitoy, and applying
himself to one of their Kings for Assistance, could get none other Answer than
this, That the League was made with the King of England and his State; but he
being no longer King of England, France could not without violating the
Articles of that League employ their Arms against him, who was then actually
possessed of the Crown.

They discharged themselves of him very handsomely, and 'twas a sine piece of
Raillery. God forbid we should be misinterpreted to give these as saucy Omens,
that which we give as plain and sincere Items, not to rely upon the French
Amity, which will prove a broken reed in case of need, as former and later
Examples convince us. Yet this Fear is groundless in our days (thanks be to
God) for Charles is a Prince so August, of so much Justice, and withal so well
acquainted with the World as to that point, that he will not neglect the Glory
redounding to him from those Victories he may atchieve with a wet Finger, by
treading in the Footsteps of his renowned Ancestors. Above all it is then most
needful to use such means, when as a Sovereign Prince is grown so puissant by
his Arms, that the progress of his Victories do make him terrible to his
Neighbors. The Duke of Roan gives the same Advice in his Interest of Princes.

Thus I have endeavored to lay open Monsieur and his Policies, if our Eyes
will be but open to see 'em. And though we have proposed such ways and measures
of attacquing the French in part of their own Dominions, which may not be
deemed to be at this Juncture so practicable, as if we should rather go about
to weaken 'em by helping their Enemies and our Allies; yet that is an Exeoutive
part, and fitter for other persons to direct and prescribe. Our Design here
being only to make such an Answer as we thought the fittest to brow-beat that
domineering Nation; we judged that the aptest and shortest way to refute their
Contumelies and shallow Pretensions on England, was plainly to raise a
Counter-battery of other Pretensions on France, which are more grounded; to
speak to them like Britains, or old Englishmen, to borrow some strong Arguments
ad hominem from both the Edwards Quiver, to manifest that we are not so weak as
to stand a scanning it with 'em Scholar-like with a weak Pen; but rather
Man-like to show, that we are more ready to make an Answer with our Swords, and
with the point of it to prick this Bladder of Ambition, which so vainly puffs
'em up in conceit above their Neighbors, whom they so presumptuously despise,
slander, and would trample under; as if they forgot that the English are the
same when e're put to it, that they felt 'em to be at Poictiers, at Guyenne,
and many other places in France, in the days of old.

But if they or any of them in England will take offense at any thing that is
said here, we say it is but a Retaliation to their Writers. If they say, that
their Writers spoke but their private sense, then let this pass for such
another piece. For I protest no public or private person ever moved me to it,
but the mere disinterested Affection I bear to my Country; and I am so far
from having any particular grudge against the French on any account, (such as
the Common People usually have they know not why) that I declare they have been
far more just and grateful to me than England it self. But let that pass; and
if the French will or must own, that the French Politician, and these other
Defamatory Memoirs, came from the Closet of public persons, and were spirited
and are followed by such in their present courses; we Englishmen do likewise
for our parts (whatever has been here said by way of Argument; and to show
Frenchmen that we want neither Eyes, Feeling, nor Courage) submissively and
wholly leave it to our Sovereign and his Counselors, to return a more fit and
public Answer to France in this point in their own due time.

For we are not unsensible; that those that sit in eminent places have a larger
and clearer prospect of things than others; so that the word of Command and
Motion is to be always expected from them as from the head: but sometimes
persons that stand on a far lower ground may have a more particular knowledge
of some Gaps and Precipices which are just within their own reach and precinet.
And even a Courrier or Scout may without reslexion to his Generals, make a
report touching the matters of fact he has observed in his course on the
borders of the Enemy, and also what he thinks of their next Motions, by what he
has heard or seen among themselves.

FINIS.
The Jesuit 's Catchism, according to St. Ignatius Loyola, for the instructing
and strengthening of all those which are weak in that Faith; wherein the
impiety of their Principles, perniciousness of their Doctrines, and iniquity of
their Practices are declared. Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in
Cornhil near the Royal Exchange, in Quarto. Price 1 s.

Humane Prudence, Or the Art by which a Man may raise Himself and Fortune to
Grandeur. By A. B. Sold by Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhil. price 1 s.


