Printed at Edinburgh, and Reprinted at Aberdeen by Command of Authority, Anno
Dom. 1693.

Advertisement by the Sheriff-Deput of Aberdeen Shire, undersubscryveing.
Whereas, by the foresaid Proclamation, the Lords of their Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council, do strictly require and Command obedience to the
former Proclamation and this, for settling of Maintenance for the indigent and
necessitous Poor, and suppressing of Vagabounds and Sturdie-Beggers, in manner
therein prescryved: and Requireing the Sheriff of each Shire, to call and Fine
any Delinquents who are negligent or refuse to Contribute as is thereby
expressed; And these being Acts so Necessary to be performed, for the good of
the Country, and I being unwilling that any should be Cited as Delinquents
without just evident grounds, (albeit there has been sundry Complaints against
whole Paroches, alse well as Persons who have hitherto been deficient in the
said Matter) do therefore hereby Advertise and Require, that the Heretors
Inhabiting in the respective Paroches or Chamberlains in their absence, with
the Minister and Elders thereof, or Session Clerk; where there is no Minister,
do forthwith Conveen and set down such Rules as is ordained for settling of the
Poor, and supperssing of Vagabounds, as is mentioned by the said Proclamations,
and that betwixt the Date hereof, and the first of November next, they send in
to me an Authentic double in Writing of the Rules and Methods they have taken
thereanent, and a list of recus^nts if any be, Certifying such Paroches as
shall not send such Duplicats, the Heretors alse well as Minister and Elders
will be esteemed Negligent and Deficient, and persued as Contumacious according
to Law. And that none pretend ignorance. Their presents are Ordaind to be
Printed and published with the foresaid Proclamation by the Reader at each
Parish Kirk from the L^tron, immediately after Divine Service, for which this is
warrant.

Given at Aberdeen the Twentyseventh day of September, One Thousand Six Hundred
and Nintie Three Years. By Me ANDREW FRASER.


