THE DECLARATION Of the PRINCE ELECTOUR of Brandenburgh.

With the Grounds and Reasons of his marching with the Imperial and Polonian
Armies into Holsteyn, for the Relief and Asistance of the KING of DENMARK.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

The Declaration of the Prince Electour of Brandenburgh.
WE Frederick Wilhelm by the Grace of God Marquess of Brandenburgh,
Arch-Chamberlain and Prince Elector of the Sacred Roman Empire, Duke of
Magdenbourgh, Prussia, Juliers, Cleve, Berghen, Stettin, Pomerania, Cass^bians
and Vandals; as also of Silesia, Crossen and Jagerndorf, Burgrave of
Nurembergh, Duke of Halberstade and Minden, Earl of Marck and Ravenbergh, Lord
of Ravensteyn; Do by these our Letters-Patent, make known to all and every to
whom these presents shall come; more especially to all and every the Subjects
of the Dukedom of Holsteyn, and of the Dukedomes and Lands thereunto
belonging, and bordering upon the same, according to their several States and
Qualities: That whereas the Illustrious Prince Frederick the third King of
Denmark, Norway, of the Vandals and Goths, Duke of Sleswick, Holsteyn, Stormarn
and Ditmarshen, Earl of Oldenbourgh and Delmhorst, etc. Has at large made
known not only unto his Imperial Majesty, but also unto us, both by writing and
verbally by several of his Ambassadors or Envoyes, the manner of proceeding of
his Royal Majesty of Sweden, who notwithstanding that the War in the year last
past commenced between the two Crowns of Denmark and Sweden, was in the Month
of February last past, by the Interposition of the King of France, and of the
Protector of England, by Gods help and asistance surceased and ended by a
steadfast and irrevocable Peace, which was not highly advantageous to Sweden,
and all things were performed, which on the Danish part were to be performed;
and in Conformity to the Agreements and Pacification not only the Places by
them possessed, were evacuated and quitted, but also Schoonen, Bleykingen and
other considerable Provinces, Forts and Places were surrendered unto the Swedes,
and further in all particulars full satisfaction and consent was given to the
Articles of Agreement. Insomuch, that over and besides all the Premises,
accommodation and condiscention was made, even unto new and unreasonable
pretenses. Yet His said Swedish Majesty, not regarding on his part the matters
above related (amongst sundry other groundless and studied pretenses) has not
only from time to time refused to quit the Forts of Fredricks (...) and the
Island of F^^^* and to dislodg his Forces out of Denmark and Holsteyn, as it
was agreed upon by the Instrument of Peace; and has also with his whole Army
incessantly oppressed, and totally exhausted the Subjects of Denmark; but has
also anew* without any cause given* and without any precedent denunciation or
clarigation, with the greatest part of the Swedish Army, and with a Fleet of
Ships ass^^led the* same, on the Island of Zealand* and has already, for the
space of six weeks, beleaguered the Royal Residence of Coppenhaguen and
Cro^enburgh therein situate; and has also attempted to surprise and take the
Fortresses situate in the Dukedom of Holsteyn* and forasmuch as such his
design succeeded not, He does until this present keep them blocked up; and
has moreover taken Prisoners, and evil entreated the King of Denmarks
principal Ministers, and his Civil and Military Officers, who did remain in and
upon their Offices and Estates without apprehension of any disturbance; and
besides all that which is before expressed, does with fire and flame destroy
all that is in the Land, and therein proceeds in a more then barbarous
manner, such as the like thereof has never been heard of, or before this time
practiced amongst Christian Potentates: We being thereupon desired to join our
Forces with those of His Imperial Majesty, and cordially to embrace this
business, as concerning the welfare of the general or public Cause, and the
re-establishment of the Peace, and effectually to relieve His Royal Dignity in
these undeserved hostilities and oppressions, without any loss of time.

And forasmuch as on the behalf of His abovementioned Imperial Majesty, as
being the Supreme Head and Defender of the Empire, and of the Provinces and
Lands thereunto belonging, such a Force is committed unto Us wherewithal to
repulse such violent and oppressive attempts; and We are assured that His
Imperial Majesty together with the whole Empire, with their united power will
endeavor the same, and will contribute whatsoever may conduce and be
advantageous for the repelling of this disastrous mischief, and for the
preservation of a settled peace in the Empire. So it is that We also for so much
as concerns Us, could not any longer be spectators of these proceedings which
are contrary to the Law of all Nations, and forerunners of consequences so
horrid and highly formidable; But forasmuch as the business cannot admit of the
least protraction or delay, We have found our selves necessitated to the utmost
of our power to maintain His abovementioned Royal Majesty, as being a Prince,
who is our neighbor and Allie, and whose Territories and Subjects being within
the Verge of the sacred Roman Empire, are at present oppressed in such an
injurious manner: And to that end to put in execution that which may tend to
the Freedom and Deliverance of the fame, as We have accordingly resolved, and
are already engaged in the Expedition for Holsteyn to that purpose, with the
Forces of His said Imperial Majesty and our own, and shall undertake whatsoever
may tend to the preservation of the oppressed, the suppressing of all hostile
violence, and restoration of a settled and assured Peace.

And forasmuch as this Expedition is not intended for the burthening, or unjust
oppression of any one, but is only undertaken to the end before expressed. So
it is, That We do assuredly and indubiously hope and expect, That by the
premises all persons whatsoever may sufficiently perceive the inevitable
necessity and most weighty Motives which have enforced Us unto this March; and
that in consideration thereof, they will not only acknowledge such our good
intention, but will also to their uttermost power second, and as much as in
them lies, promote the reducing of peace and quietness; and especially,
without any refusal, will accoring to their ability, supply whatsoever victuals
and other necessaries shall be required for the subsistence of the Imperial,
and of our own Armies, thereby to prevent all disorders and insolences: And
forasmuch as We are resolved generally to observe a good and strict Discipline,
and not to permit any the least insolency of the Soldiery, but with due and
effectual punishment to suppress all disorders; Therefore all persons
whatsoever may quietly remain at home both in the Country and in the Cities,
and there follow their trades and domestique occupations, resting assured that
they shall therein be protected, and need not to fear any inconvenience or
damage; and the like good order the Imperial Generals will also in all places
observe and cause to be observed: And albeit there are some strangers of the
Polish Nation who do accompany these Armies, yet there is no just occasion to
be afraid of them; but all persons may rest assured, that on all parts a strict
Discipline shall be observed, and that nothing besides necessary sustenance
shall be required; nor shall the Soldiery by stealing, plundering, burning, or
other miscarriages destructive to the Land, incommode or drive away any person
from his own, but shall rather protect, and in the best manner defend all
persons from and against such outrages.

And as all persons whatsoever may rest confident hereof, We do also hope that
in regard thereof, they will in all places duly behave themselves, and will
without refusal permit a feee March and re-March in such manner as We shall
find it expedient, and as it shall be ordained by the Generals and Officers,
and as the occasion and reason of War shall require; and that they will not
act any thing prejudicial to our Troops or Forces, but rather will be
assistant unto them, in all their Enterprises and Executions, with all
necessary help and assistance; and in pursuance thereof, will demonstrate that
they are concerned in the best manner to promote the public Cause: But if any
contrary to the premises, and beyond Our expectation, shall offer to make
opposition against Us or Ours, he may impute unto himself alone, all such
inconveniences and damages as thereupon shall or may accrue unto him. And
according to the premises, all and every Person and Persons are to regulate
themselves: And these Presents being Imprinted and the Copies thereof, shall be
accounted of equal Validitude with the Original.

Given at Wittenbergh, in the Duke-dome of Mecklenburg, the 17./27. of
September, in the Year 1658. Signed Frederich Wilhelm.

FINIS.

