A Friendly Letter TO Father Petre. Concerning his Part in the Late KING's
GOVERNMENT.

Published for his Defense and Justification.

Licensed,

May 3. 1690.


J. Fraser.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin in the OldBaily. MDCXC.

A Friendly Letter to FATHER PETRE, etc.
Reverend Father,
HAving some particular Obligation to you more than every body knows, I thought
my self obliged in point of Gratitude (which goes a great way in my Religion,
though it is nothing in yours) to endeavor to make you some kind of Requital;
and not knowing now where to find you, or any of your Friends, I was at a great
loss how to discharge my self of that Debt: At last I considered, that to do
you a real piece of Service behind your Back, were much better than an empty
Thanks to your Face; and I knew of no greater Service I could do you, than to
vindicate your Reputation to the World; and to show that you have always acted
like an honest Man; that is, one that is true and constant to the Principles he
Believes and Professes, which I take to be a good definition of an Honest Man.
And this I do not at all fear to demonstrate to your greatest Enemies.

As a farther proof of my desire to serve you, I will likewise make bold to
offer your Reverence some Advice, which if ever it has the luck to reach you,
and you have the Wisdom and Honesty to follow it, I will presume to say, shall
establish your Reputation to all future Ages. And in doing you these two pieces
of Service, I hope I shall fully discharge what Obligation I have to you, and
sufficiently show my self your Friend.

But you will say, How comes your Reputation to need a Vindication? Sir, I must
deal plainly with you, and tell you, That I can go no where, but I find every
one blaming the strange miscarriages of the late King James; and the wiser sort
that knew that Prince well, and how wholly devoted and given up he was to the
Roman Catholic Religion, say, That it is impossible he should have gone on in
such courses, without the permission at least, or rather the direction of his
Spiritual Guide, which you had favor to be: So that whatsoever wrong course
the late King fell into, and persisted in, you are to Answer for it, to whose
Guidance, there is no doubt, he wholly resigned himself; and truly this, you
and I, and all the World must grant.

But for your Vindication, I will show that in advising and encouraging the
late King, in all these things the Heretics call Miscarriages, you acted most
agreeable to your Principles, that is, the true Principles of a Roman Catholic
Guide, of the Order of the Jesuits; and therefore cannot (I think) but be
confessed to be an honest man. We will then descend to Particulars of what is
laid to the late King's Charge, and necessarily lights upon you, the Guide of
so devoted a Prince's Conscience.

First, The Heretics say, That it is without Example, and beyond any ingenuous
man's Imagination, that a Noble and an Highborn Prince should for many years
make it his Glory to have his Word esteemed most Sacred, and raise men to the
highest Trust and Confidence in it; so that men were ready to Blaspheme when
they talked of this subject, and to compare his Word to the Word of God, and
say, That Heaven and Earth could sooner pass away than his Word fail. And when
he had raised men to the highest confidence in it, with the greatest solemnity
to give this Sacred Word to his People, first in his Privy Council, and
afterward in full Parliament; and to bind it with the highest Solemnity in his
Coronation Oath, That he would invioably preserve to 'em what they accounted
most dear; that is, the Laws of the Land, and their Religion established by
Law: And yet that this Prince as soon as he was warm, and (as he thought) safe
in his Throne, should without any regard to Honor, without any fear of God, or
shame of Man, so openly and apparently break this Sacred Word; this (they say)
is to do all that lies in a man's power to destroy all Trust and Confidence
amongst Men, and to put an end to humane Society. Now, that he did break this
Sacred Word in the face of the Sun, and in the sight of all Men, no Man can be
so senceless to deny, that can but remember what was done with the Law of the
Test, that Bulwark of the Protestant Safety, how it was wholly taken away by a
total Dispensation, and that with a barefaced design to bring in Popery, by
making Popish Officers Masters of those they call Heretics Lives and Fortunes,
which mischief that Law was only intended to prevent. It Is true, a Law may be
dispensed with in some particular cases, where a thing is contrary to the
Letter, but not to the meaning of the Law, because the Intent and Meaning of a
Law, is the Law: But totally to dispense with a Law, against the plain and
whole Intent and Meaning of it, is certainly to render the making of Laws
Ridiculous and Useless, and to dissolve the Constitution of the Government.

Then for preserving the Church of England according to his two solemn Promises
in Council and Parliament; and indeed his Promises an hundred times over to
particular Persons; Did He not (say they) take the right course to preserve the
Church of England, in setting up the Ecclesiastical Commission, to call in
question any that maintained the Doctrine of the Church of England, against
growing Popery, which was Propagated, Cherished, and made to Grow, as much as
'twas possible in our cold and stubborn Climate, on purpose to supplant and
thrust out the Profession of the Church of England? Did He not (say they) keep
to his Word to defend and preserve the Church of England, when as fast as the
lesser Episcopal Sees became vacant, (for the good were kept for Original
Catholics) he filled them up with such special Fellows, the very Scum and
Dregs of all the Clergy, on purpose to make the Name of Protestant Bishops
stink and be abhorred, and to have fit Tools wherewith to Abuse, Oppress,
Suspend, and Deprive all the honest Clergy; over whom he set these Beasts,
whose Filth and ill Manners profaned the very Name of Bishops? Did He not (say
they) begin finely to preserve the Church of England according to his Promise,
when he took care to poison the very Fountains, and planted one of the best
Colleges in Oxford with Jesuits? This and the like stuff, the Heretics make a
great noise with; and say, Was not Father Petre an accursed Villain, to
persuade and thrust on the poor Bigoted Prince, to do things so manifestly
contrary to his solemn and so often-repeated Profession.

But methinks, I see you and your Brethren ready to burst your fides with
laughing, when you hear all this dismal Charge (as Heretics think it) against
you: And so truly would any Man laugh heartily, that understood any thing of
Catholic Principles, to hear Men make such a Business of a true Catholick's
not keeping his Word with Heretics: Alas? has not a whole Council declared,
That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics; and themselves put in practice,
what they had so determined with an infallible Spirit, by burning John Huss, to
whom they had given their Promise for safe Conduct? And, indeed, is it not
against common sense, that a Man should devote and vow himself to a Religion,
that declares nothing less than Destruction to all that oppose it; and yet
should be bound by his Promise, to preserve the Enemies of that Religion? Is
not his Obligation to his Religion, greater than any other Obligation he can
lie under? Therefore such a Promise (as long as a Man is a true Roman
Catholic) is Nonsense, is a Contradiction, and utterly Unlawful, or rather
Impossible to be kept: It is as if a Man should say, I will do that for you,
which I cannot do. So that in making King James break this his Word with the
Heretics, Father Petre did no more than what he was bound to do, as a true
Roman Catholic, and much more as one of the Order of the Jesuits; which not
only is under the common Obligation of all other Papists, but was founded with
this particular Design, for the Destruction of Protestant Heresy.

But some will say, Why was there used so much poor Dissimulation beforehand,
to make Men believe and become so confident, That the late King was a Man that
could and would keep his Word? Dissimulation is mean in any Man, but much more
in a great Prince. To this we answer, Are not true Catholics to use the
Cunning of the Serpent against Heretics; the Spawn of the Serpent? And if true
Catholics are bound by their Religion to destroy Heretics, (as most certainly
they are) Are they not to use the means to do it? And can there be any safer or
surer Means than by deceiving them? And if it be lawful and commendable to
deceive them once, (as the General Council of Constance has declared) Is it not
much more commendable to deceive them often, by a long train of Dissimulation?
This Accusation then is wholly blown off from you, good Father Petre; and you
appear to be a true Roman Catholic Guide, of the Order of the Jesuits; and the
late King a true Son of the Roman Catholic Church, and a true Disciple of your
Order; all the Merits of which, he well deserves to partake of: You both acted
according to the Principles you profess, and therefore must be acknowledged to
have acted honestly.

A second Objection is Ingratitude: A heavy Charge! The Heretics say, That it
is well known, that the Church of England had always stood firm to the Royal
Family, and particularly had preserved the late King from Ruin; had kept off
the Stroke of the Laws from him; had saved him from being cut off by the Bill
of Exclusion; had so often ventured their Lives and Fortunes for him, and
thereby ineurr'd much Hatred, Reproach, and Slander, being continually called
Papists, or Papists in masquerade for their pains: How then (say they) was it
possible, that a Prince, so much Obliged by a People, as never Prince was more,
should as soon as they had settled him on the Throne, turn so bitter an Enemy to
the Church of England-Men above all others? For so he often declared, That he
looked upon them as his worst Enemies. How is it possible to be believed, (say
they) that he should cast all these off, with a Get you gone, you are not to be
Trusted; and receive into his Bosom a SET of new Friends, the very worst of
all the Dissenters, Men of no Interest or Reputation, and declared Enemies not
only to him, but all his Family, and (which one would stand amazed at) whom so
lately before he himself had unspeakably disobliged, by hanging up their
Friends in the West, in such numbers, as plainly shows, that at that time he
thought of nothing else but destroying all that sort of Men? Now that he should
make them his Favorites, and treat them as if they were really such, (though
he hated them now as much as ever he did) only that he might have their help to
destroy their old Friends, whom he knew they hated for being so, and would be
glad to destroy for that Reason; this was Ingratitude with a Witness: And this
amongst Heretics looks like a heavy Charge; but indeed how light is it to any
Man, that understands any thing of Roman Catholic Principles? Is not a true
Catholick's Obligation to Holy Church, much greater than his Obligation to
particular Persons, ^specially to Heretics? Or indeed, can a true Roman
Catholic have any Obligation to any Man that is an Enemy to his Religion? The
late King's Religion was the dearest thing to him in the World; and the
promoting of it he esteemed his greatest Glory: He then that opposed his
Religion, and put a stop to the acquiring of his desired and darling Glory of
converting an heretical Nation, and saving a Succession of Souls to the Worlds
end, ought certainly to be accounted his greatest Enemy. And did ever any Man
oppose this glorious Design like the Church-of- England-Men? Did not their
Nobility and Gentry universally show their stubborn aversness, and throw up
their honorable and profitable Places, rather than they would let the least
thing pass, that might help on the glorious Work? Were not those Heads of
Heresy, the Bishops, so obstinate, that they chose to go to a Prison, rather
than to make the least step toward a Compliance? And did not the Clergy in
general venture to lose their Livings, and to beg with their Wives and
Children, rather than they would read the King's Declaration? On the other
hand, Did not some Dissenters comply to the taking off the Test and Penal Laws?
Accept Dispensations, and submit to the Regulation of Corporations? Make
flattering and fulsome Addressers enough to compile a new Academy of
Compliments? And supposing they had done none of all this, (as some of them
scorned it) Yet is not dividing of Heretics the way to destroy them? And did
not the cherishing of Dissenters promote Division? So that that was the only
means that could be thought of, for pulling down the Church of England, which
is the main, or rather the only Stay of the Northern Heresy, that which gives
it all its Strength, Beauty, and Reputation. What though some Men the late King
encouraged and caressed, had a hand in killing his Father; and others of them
had petitioned for his Blood? Yet if the cherishing of them was necessary to
promote the Good of the Roman Church, was he to neglect that, for which all his
Preachers told him he was raised to the Throne, and preserved diverse times by
Miracle, and so be ungrateful to his GOD, to be grateful to Men, nay, to
Heretics? Was he not bound to lay aside all humane Considerations, either of
Love or Hatted, for the sake of this blessed Design? The late King then had so
little cause to be ashamed of such a Forgetfulness, both of Benefits and
Injuries, for the sake of Holy Church, that it is indeed no small Glory to him,
that he was able to overcome all Humanity and sense of Gratitude to Mankind,
with a far more predominant sense of Love and Duty to his dear Mother the Roman
Church: And had he not great and glorious Examples of Catholic Princes that
did the same before him? That out of Zeal to their Religion, utterly forgot all
humane Obligations? Did the Suffolk-Men's bringing Queen Mary to Crown, so
oblige her that she could not burn them afterward for being Heretics? And
does not the most Christian King now upon the Earth, kill, torment, beggar, or
banish all the Protestants of his Realm, to whom he was beholden for his
Kingdom?

It Is plain then, that the highest Ingratitude in a Roman Catholic Prince, is
highly praiseworthy, when the foolish Humanity of Gratitude does oppose the
holy Design of bringing in the Romans Cath. Religion. If then (good Father) you,
or any of your Society, did persuade your Devoto to contemn such foolish and
sinful Respects, you did but like true Roman Catholic Guides, and deserve to
be approved as Honest Men, that acted according to their Principles.

3. But again the Heretics say, Though what is Decent or Humane has no force
with a true Zealot of the Roman Catholic Religion, yet one would think natural
affection to Children should bear some sway in all men's Hearts, and should be
very difficult to be rooted out: to dis-inherit ones own Flesh and Blood, to
cut off ones own Posterity for all future Ages, from enjoying those Privileges
they were born to, has something in it so unnatural, so monstrous, that it
astonishes. And men that find nothing in themselves that would incline them to
any such thing, can hardly believe it; and some good natured Heretics are apt
to say, That sure the business of the P -- of W -- could not be a Cheat; but
then (say they) it was an unpardonable Folly in you, to let a Reality look so
like a Cheat; if you had a real Child to be born, Why would you let it be born
uuder so terrible a disadvantage? Why would you let so great and irrepairable
an injury be done to the poor Child, and all his Posterity (if ever he should
come to have any) as not to let him be born with the clearest Evidence? And
what Evidence was like the taking all possible care that the Princess of
Denmark (who was so nearly concerned) should have certainly been at the Birth,
instead of taking care that She should be an hundred Miles off at that time?
And why was not the then Princess of O -- sent to, that she also might have
been at the Labor; Or at least, that She might have deputed some Ladies of her
own choosing, to have been present for her own Satisfaction? What (say the
Heretics) were not these Great Princesses concerned in the matter? Who were
like to be put by the Succession of Three Kingdoms by this means? And who were
likely to doubt, and to dispute it, and to have all the Heretics in the Three
Nations, and every where else on their side? Were not they by all means to have
had full and clear satisfaction given them, if there had been any Fatherly-Love
amongst you to your Princely Babe? A man that had but a small Estate to leave
to a Son, would take care that the next Heir should be fully satisfied of the
true Birth of his Son^ especially if there had been any doubtful Speeches as if
there was a Cheat intended, as you know it was in every Bodies Mouth, that the
late Q. Mary had but a feigned great Belly; and if a Man would take care to
leave his Son a clear Title to a small Estate, Is it credible that you should
be so unnatural to your Babe, as not to take care to leave him a clear Title to
Three Kingdoms? You know the Prince of Conde had the satisfaction given him, to
see Lewis the XIV. come out of his Mothers Belly, though he knew not how the
Devil he got in. And so much satisfaction you might have afforded one, or both
of the two Princesses, if you had had any thing re^l to produce. To let your P
-- of W -- then (if he was really such) be Born under such great Suspicions,
was a most inhumane Cruelty to the Babe, even like stifling him as soon as he
was Born, or (which is worse) condemning him and all his Posterity to continual
Banishment, or violent Deaths. And what had the poor Infant done, to deserve
this from you? (if he was real) Did he not come to Establish the Roman
Catholic Cause for ever? And were you such Dolts, as not to take care that
such a Child should be Born with the fullest and clearest Evidence, such as
should make him appear an undoubted Heir, even to the most unbelieving
Heretics? Are you, or your Successors, ever like to have such a fair Advantage
again to the Worlds end, as you have utterly lost, by letting your Catholic
Heir, (if he was true) be Born under so much Doubt and Suspicion, that it was
all one as if he had been a Cheat?

Truly, I must confess, this strikes home, and proves unanswerably, That either
you were the greatest Fools and Block-heads under the Sun, or that the business
of the P. of W -- was all a Cheat.

But you are not unprovided (I know) with a sufficient Answer to all this: I
believe you cannot but smile with Indignation at these pretended Friends of
yours, that would excuse what they think a great piece of Knavery, by charging
you with such notorious and palpable Folly. You thank them (I believe) kindly
for their Love, but desire none of their Complements; you would not for the
saving such a lost Game as the P. of W. venture the great Stake of Esteem and
Reputation that you have all over Europe for Politicians, by virtue of which
you bear such a sway in so many great Princes Councils: you have been thought
Knaves sometimes, but were never before thought Fools, nor never desire so to
be thought; and therefore would not have any wise Man once Imagine that the P.
of W -- was real, whereby you must stand senceless Block-heads upon Record,
that were incapable of understanding their Interest, and making their Advantage
of it. But you desire rather that all wise Men should applaud your Wit, That
having so great a Cheat to put upon a Nation, that was all along so Jealous of
it, you did it so dexterously, that to this day the Cheat cannot be fully laid
open; you are confident that none that know you right, will ever think it other
than a Cheat, and yet all must confess you carried it cunningly.

As for the former heavy Charge (as Heretics think) against you, of persuading
the poor Zealous Prince to do so unnatural a thing as to cut off his whole
Posterity, to set up a Supposititious Brood; this is very defensible upon
Catholic Principles; for a good Catholic ought certainly to love Holy Church
better than Father or Mother, Wife or Children. And did not the glorious Saint,
Q. Mary of England, endeavor to cut off her own Flesh and Blood, her own
Sister, to set up Timothy Malt on the Throne of her Fathers? She would have
done as much, no doubt, by her own Daughters, if she had had any, and they had
been Heretics, and stood in the way, as her Sister did. She was as Unnatural
as lay in her power for Holy Church: And this Trick had taken then, and in all
likelihood at this time the Malt's had been the Reigning Family, instead of
the Stuarts, had not K. Philip spoiled the design; partly hoping when he had
buried Q. Mary, he might marry that Sister of hers, and so hold this Kingdom in
her right; and partly fearing, that if his Son (by his first Wife) Don Carlos
should happen to Die, this young Malt should carry away the Crown of Spain,
from any Son that might be born to him afterward, or from his Daughter the
Infanta Isabella. that was as good a Catholic as he. If K. Philip erred in
this, he made amends for it afterward; for when some Years after this, he came
to understanding that his own Son, Don Carlos, was inclined to the Protestant
Heresy; in high Indignation at this, and Zeal for Holy Church, he threw off
all natural affection at once to that his only Son; and not content to exclude
him from the Succession, he took a surer way to secure the Catholic Religion,
by making him die in Prison. This heroical Action of his, though he modestly
represented it to the then Pope Pius V. in his Letter (which I doubt not your
Fatherhood has read, in the Life of that Pope, now a Saint in your Calendar,
written by Girolamo Catena, the Secretary of his Favorite Nephew, and Printed
at Rome, with a Dedication to Pope Sixtus V.) yet his Holiness set a just value
upon it; and because he could go no higher for a Parallel, he resembled it to
God's giving his Son for the Redemption of Mankind; For, says your Historian,
he presently called a Consistory, and there caused this Letter to be read; and
then with Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, he broke out into the Apostle's
Words; He that spared not his only Son, but gave him up for us all; How shall
he not with him, etc. That which this great Saint and Head of the Church judged
to be so highly Meritorious in King Philip, was indeed a higher Instance by
many degrees, of abandoning natural Affection, than that was to which you
persuaded King James: But your Work was the easier, especially having to do
with a Prince that would think it a very Scorn to be told that any Catholic
King of them all, had a greater Zeal than he has for the Catholic Church: And
for the necessity of it, that he should find out some way or other, to
disinhereit that Heretical Daughter, whom he used to call by the Name of Queen
Bess, you need not tell him that she was as likely to do as much Mischief to
the Church, as ever Queen Elizabeth did; and therefore she ought to be
prevented, in the same manner as that Queen should have been, if King Philip
had not hindered it. For the doing of this, in that way of a Mock-Childbirth,
you had such a Queen to act it for you, as perhaps never was in the World; an
Italian by Birth, that has the Blood of four or five Popes in her Veins; an
adoptive Daughter of France, a most bigoted Disciple of your Order; one that
seemed to have been sent hither for such a purpose, far 'un fioliolo, by all
means to get a Son. I would not seem by setting forth the Necessity of this, or
the Advantages you had for the doing of it, with so much Ease, Closeness, and
Secrefie, to derogate any thing from your Merit (good Father) in the Advice or
Contrivance of any thing else that was properly yours: For whatsoever that was,
(as no doubt your Part was very great in this whole Business, it cannot be
denied that it was worthy of your Self and your Order, and most agreeable to
the Principles of your Church.

Fourthly, The last Accusation of the Heretics against the late King, and
consequently against his Guides, and against You in particular, seems to me the
greatest; and truly it strikes a Horror into all Men's Spirits that think on
it. They say, How could it be proposed to reduce this heretical Land to the
Roman Catholic Religion, without making it swim in Blood? Your Arguments never
did much any where, but least of all in England, where you have been so often
foiled by the Learned Men of the Church of England; and where your Religion
also is so much against the Interest of the Kingdom: Therefore it was observed
by an old experienced Missionary, that had staid long in England, That this
Nation was to be reduced to the Roman Catholic Religion by nothing but the
Sword. And (said he) when the young Missionaries come first over, they think
they can do mighty Matters with their Arguments; but after they have been in
England some time, they are all of my Opinion.

And indeed, this is so known and received a Maxim amongst you, That England is
never to be converted but by the Sword: That the late King himself, in a Speech
to the Parliament of Scotland, told them, That he knew the bringing in of the
Roman Catholic Religion into these Realms, must cost so much Blood, and make
such a Desolation, that he had the greatest Horror at it imaginable; and hoped
that none of them would have such hard Thoughts of him, as to believe him
capable of so much Cruelty and Barbarity, (even as Hazael said to the Prophet
--) Well then, King James knew well enough what it would cost, and what must be
done to bring in Popery; and yet Popery he was resolved to bring in, (as I am
sure every Man in England believed two years since; and every Man must believe,
in spite of his Heart, that knows the Jesuits his absolute Guides.)

What Excuse then can be made for so great Cruelty intended? It Is the Business
and End of a King, or Supreme Governor, to defend from Injury; to Preserve and
Protect the Lives and Fortunes of his Subjects: How then can any one be a King
over those he thinks himself bound, and resolves to Destroy? There are some
indeed so tenderhearted in themselves, and of such tender Understandings to
boot, that they will not believe this; or at least are afraid to be known they
believe it: And therefore they say, Surely the late King did not Design to
bring in Popery at all, or at least not by such rough ways: But by such ways
all experienced Catholics conclude it must be brought in, or not at all.

The Question then is only, Whether the late King resolved to bring in Popery;
and if his Guides were not resolved to bring it in by him. All Men must
conclude them the most ridiculous People under the Sun, that they would suffer
the late King to give so many apparent signs of his Intention to bring it in,
which were more than sufficient to confirm a Nation, jealour before of such a
thing, in the assured Belief that he was resolved to do it.

In answer then to these Objections against Father Petre, and the Society, the
Undoubted and Absolute Guides of the late King's Conscience: I say, That I
believe that Father Petre and his Brethren will conn them little thanks, that
go about thus to excuse them, by making them such notorious Sots, as to make
such an appearance of bringing in Popery, as made all People believe it, and
put them in care how to escape the dreadful Consequences of that Change: And
yet that the Jesuits should never design any such thing? They had not,
certainly, so mean an esteem of the profitableness of having their Devoto
possessed of three such Kingdoms, as to endanger his losing them (only as the
French express it, De Guaiete de Coeur) for nothing. And I do very believe
Father Petre) that neither you, nor any of your Brethren, would for all the
World be robbed of the Glory of having made such an Heroic Attempt to reduce
these three Kingdoms to the Roman Catholic Religion: And I dare swear for yonr
Devoto, that he would not accept of these three Kingdoms again, if he were
fully satisfied that it were utterly impossible ever to make them Roman
Catholics; as he nobly said to one of the Society, He had rather die the next
day after this Land was made Roman Catholic, than Live and Reign fifty Years
in Peace and Prosperity over Heretics.

You have then no need of your foolish Friend's Excuses, who would make you as
weak as themselves, and rob you of that immortal Glory, (which you would not
lose to save your Lives a thousand times over) of having once boldly and
roundly attempted to bring the Roman Catholic Religion into England. You are
ready to avow this to all the World, and are proud of it; as indeed (according
to your Principles) you have reason to be. Neither, will you stick, among
Friends, as ingenuously to confess, That it could never have been brought in
without horrible Bloodshed; which you can very well justify upon Romans
Catholic Principles; and so still maintain your Title of Honest Men.

For herein you proceed according to the greatest Authority in your Church,
which you ought always to follow, and never to dispute. For,

First, You have the Authority of diverse Popes, that have almost continually
exhorted Temporal Princes to use their Sword against Heretics, particularly of
Innocent III. who turned the whole Croisade that was prepared against the
Infidels that possessed the Holy Land against the Albigeois: And of Pope
Julius, who advised Charles V. not to trouble himself with Colloquies and
Disputes, but to use his Sword against the Heretics to cut them off. And
several of your Councils have declared, That a Prince that does not use his
utmost endeavor to destroy and root Heretics out of his Dominion, ought to be
deprived. And according to these great and infallible Authorities of the Roman
Church, the truest and most zealous Roman Catholics have in all Ages acted. So
did Simon Montfort, and (as the Historian says) 500000 Roman Catholics with
him, in a Croisade against the Heretics, Killing, Burning, and Destroying all
they could find in Languedoc and the Places adjacent, 60000 Heretics being but
one Breakfast for them. And what havoc was made of them in succeeding
Croisades, Roman Catholic Historians sufficiently declare.

What has been done by Catholic Princes, especially by the Dukes of Savoy, and
by the most Christian Kings, the eldest Sons of the Roman Church, whenever they
were such Romans Cath. as they ought to be, the World is not ignorant. They have
made whole Rivers of Heretick's Blood stream through their Countries: So did
the glorious St. Charles IX. in the Paris Massacre: So would St. Garnet and his
Accomplices have done here in England, and more too, if they had not been
unluckily prevented in the great and pious Design of the Powder Plot; for which
he is painted in the College at Rome, with a Glory about his Head. What
cheerful Bonfires did St. Mary, of ever blessed Memory, make of Heretics in
her Reign? And thus acted those true Roman Catholics in Ireland; and so indeed
must every one that is a true Roman Catho, lick act, whenever he has
opportunity; if he does not, he is false to his Principles, and not truly what
he professes to be.

And 'pray, What hurt in all this? Are not the Enemies of GOD and his Church to
be destroyed? And do we not believe in our Consciences all Heretics to be
such? Nay, indeed, is it not a Kindness to stubborn Heretics themselves,
speedily to cut them off, that they may not increase their Sins, and
consequently their Damnation? That they may no longer impiously oppose Holy
Church? That they may not Infect others with their Leprosy of Heresy? And
that they may not breed a Spawn of Heretics, fit only to fry in Hellfire.

In designing then to bring in the Roman Catholic Religion into England; and
in order to that, designing to kill all stubborn Heretics that would not
submit to it, Father Petre and the Society did but what was the Duty of all
true Roman Cotholicks; and according to their Principles, acted like right
honest Men. There may seem indeed to lie some Objection against their Prudence,
in the Management of this Design, in that they showed their Design too soon,
before they were ready to Complete it.

To which it may very well be answered, That if the matter be rightly
considered, it will be found, that this was indeed more their Misfortune than
their Fault. The Philosophers say, That Nature makes every thing in Perfection,
according to the Capacity of the Matter it works in: And we know the best
Workman, if he has but bad Tools and cross Stuff to work on, will make but
indifferent Work. Let those that blame the Management, consider impartially,
what they themselves would or could have done in all their Circumstances.

These poor Men had been gaping for an Opportunity to bring in Popery near an
hundred years; and when they had the fairest opportunity that ever they had or
hoped for, and the like to which they could never expect again, would you not
have them make the best use they could of this Opportunity? Was not King James
thought by every one to be a Man on whose Life there was little dependence, and
of whom it was unlikely there should be any Catholic Heirs to live to succeed
him? And did not the insolent Heretics threaten them every moment, what work
they would make with them, if once he should fail? So that their Lives, and
what was much more dear to them, their great Design depended wholly upon the
single crazy Thread of the late King's Life. And did not these Men that had
stood gaping so long, wait almost three Years, without plainly going about
their Business? which was an Age to Men, whose Hearts were before so sick of
having their Hopes delayed. Then, indeed, when they thought it must be Now, or
Never, (which was the common Word among the Roman Catholics about that time,
and when they drank and wished Courage and good Success to the Undertakers)
they fell roundly to their Business.

They had by their Arts before inflamed the two Parties of Churchmen and
Dissenters, one against another; and they did not doubt but the Dissenters
would effectually help them to pull down the Church of England, the greatest
Obstacle to their designs? And who would have thought they should have been so
much disappointed of this hope? Then they used the craftiest means, and
greatest diligence imaginable, to model a Parliament that might remove the Test
and Penal Laws out of the way, that their Friends might be capable of all
places by Law; and then be sure, none should have had any Offices of Trust;
none should have had power over the Lives and Estates of Heretics, but such as
thought themselves bound in Conscience to destroy them: They new Modelled the
Army as much as they could; and brought in as many Foreigners as they could,
without danger of an immediate Rupture: And who would ever have thought, that
an Army composed (as it was then) for the most part of Men, whose Fortune
depended wholly on their Employment, would not have Fought, or done any thing
for their Pay, without examining the Cause? Pray do but consider, How many came
over with the Prince of Orange, who had Protestant Swords, though they
themselves were Papists. No Man indeed, that had ever lived abroad (as all the
Jesuits had) and seen how little Soldiers mind the Cause they Fight for, could
ever have dreamed that the whole Design should have been spoiled by the Army
that was to carry it on, and had been managed and modeled almost four years
together for that purpose. Well! I am sure every body must grant, that the
Jesuits had at least great probabilities to build upon the Army, when the Late
King had made it his Business so much to oblige the Seamen, and Soldiers of
Fortune in the Kingdom: And thus confiding in the Army, they had nothing else
to fear, but might go on boldly, since they could not apprehend any sudden
Rising of the Church of England Men (who were the main Body of the Kingdom) by
reason of their habitual Loyalty; and from Dissenters they hoped they should
have no disturbance, since they had so much carress'd and obliged them, and
made them the King's new Friends and Darlings: They therefore confidently
proceeded, first to cleanse the Nurseries, the Universities from Heretical
Plants, and to plant Catholics in their stead; then they found out a way to
remove all honest Church of England Men from their Churches, by commanding a
Declaration to be read by all the Clergy; which if they did read, they were
Betrayers of the Law of the Land, by giving such an Approbation to an Illegal
Dispensing Power; they had made themselves ridiculous to the People, and sinned
against their own Consciences; and had likewise given a fair opportunity to the
Jesuits of imposing downright Popery upon them in the next place. And we know
that all that would not have been such Knaves or Fools, were to have been
deprived; and when the Bishops had the Wisdom and the Courage to oppose this
well-laid Project by their Petition, we know they flung them into the Tower, in
Terrorem, and presently brought forth the Babe, to show People that the Design
would not die with King James, and that their hopes of any Relief by a Change
were cut off. They had set up Popish Chapels in London, Oxford, Bristol, etc.
which thing alone to be able to effect in England, was enough to make a
Jesuits Heart leap for joy, and overcome him so, that he knew not where he
was, nor could think any thing impossible for him, that had brought things to
pass so much beyond his Expectation. Nay, they had got the Pope's Nuncio to be
publicly Feasted at the GuildHall in London, which was next door to an owning
of the Pope's Authority in that Protestant City; they had appointed Four Roman
Catholic Bishops to take care of the Souls of all the Nation, instead of the
Protestant Bishops they cast into the Tower; and they, to begin their Office,
writ a most loving Pastoral Letter to their whole Flock; the time being not yet
come for Dragooning.

Indeed, just as they were Sailing with full Sails to all their Desires,
unluckily comes the Prince of Orange over, and stops the Bells; and all things
turned upon a sudden, it would even turn a Man's head to think how.

Well; Men may blame this or that in Councils when they don't succeed, and
every body can see Faults afterward, when there is no helping them; but had
any of those that blame the Management been Jesuits themselves, they would
have done just as they did: There was danger in carrying on things so fast, and
there was no less danger in delaying them; for though they had made a Prince of
Wales, yet if K. James should have happened to have failed, their Prince must
have been taken out of their Hands, and bred up by Protestants: A thing of so
great horror to his Queen Mother, that when it was once mentioned to her, she
declared, She would rather kill him with her own hands. But this she might have
done with as little pain to her Bowels, as she had in the Childbirth.

In short, there was danger on all hands, and no Man could divine where the
greatest lay: The Jesuits did as much as Men could do in their Circumstances;
they saw as much as Men could see in the Light they were in, and they wrought
as well as Men could work with the Tools they had, and on the Stuff they were
to work on. If the design did not succeed, it is not the first well-laid Design
that has miscarried; and therefore it was truly more the Jesuits Misfortune
than their Fault; or perhaps the Sins of the Heretics hindered them from being
knocked on the Head, or Converted, they were not worthy of so great a Blessing:
Howsoever, the good Fathers, and their Devoto, did all that lay in them to do
them this kindness, and must have the Glory of heartily endeavoring it, though
they did not effect it. They have all done like true Zealous Roman Catholics,
as they desire to be thought, and would not lose the Glory of the Zeal they
have shown for Holy Church for Ten Thousand Kingdoms: So that no fault, either
of Dishonesty or Imprudence, can be laid to their Charge, but rather they
deserve the Character of True and Zealous Roman Catholics. Only there is one
little blemish indeed, that seems still to stick upon their Devoto (and
consequently upon the Guide of his Conscience) and to soil all his Glory, and
to oppose his pretense to so much Heroic Piety; and that is, his still
Indulging himself so much Liberty with Women: And that he should take upon him
to be an Apostle, to bring all other Christians to his Sect; as if they could
not be Saved otherwise than in his way, seems very strange to them that do not
understand your Religion; but if they understood it, they would easily see how
to Answer this little Objection. For Catholic Priests, and especially those of
your Order (as appears in the Book called the Morals of the Jesuits) have not
quite the same Opinion of this Sin that Heretics have: It Is a Sin that most
Men, and they themselves, often find so great a propension to from Nature, that
they can hardly resist it, therefore they judge of it favorably: And besides,
they do not think as Heretics do, that nothing but the Merits of Christ in
those that Repent and forsake it, can wash it away; for they have the Merits of
the Saints too, of whom the most perfect, even our Lady herself, according to
their Legends, have often been very propitious to such kind of Sinners; and
some of their Saints themselves have been noted for such Sins, and yet found
them no Obstacle to their Canonization.

Again, Catholics think there may be Satisfaction made by Men themselves for
their Sins: And if Men show a great deal of Zeal for Holy Church, and destroy
her Enemies the Heretics, though they should be a little faulty in this
matter; yet according to the Opinion of Roman Catholic Writers, who have ever
reported them great Saints, that were zealous for Holy Church, (though
notoriously given to this and other Faults) such ought still to be accounted
Saints, as appears in St. Gregory of Tours, and other Writers. And truly,
without this Fault in Princes, oftentimes the Guides of their Consciences can
work but little good with them: For if they did not find them tardy in such
things, they could never prevail with them to make such mighty Satisfactions;
and to do so much good to Holy Church, in enriching Her, and destroying Her
Enemies, and the like, to make amends for their Faults, and to prevail with
Holy Mother Church, to Mortgage the whole Treasure of the Merits of the Saints,
to purchase their Forgiveness.

So that if this be a Fault in any Prince, it is the Occasion of so much Good,
it affords so advantageous an Handle to the Guide of his Conscience, so
mightily to benefit Holy Church, that it is a great Question, fit to be
disputed in their Scools, Whether a good Roman Catholic Guide of a Princes
Conscience, be bound wholly to root it out of him? If he be bound in Conscience
to do it, it is a thousand pities; for it is certain, it is not for his
Interest, or the Interest of the Church. And all Roman Catholics agree, that
he is bound to promote, as much as he can, the Interest of his Church. Now
their Schools hold, That in a Case of Conscience, where there are Probabilities
and Doctor's Opinions on both sides, a Man may follow either side without Sin;
and be sure the Confessor will take the most profitable side. The Popish Guides
therefore cannot but laugh at the Protestant Ministers, who teach, that there
is no Forgiveness of Sin, but upon Repentance and forsaking Sin; and so get
nothing by the People's Sins, which have been the Enriching of the Romish
Church.

Thus have I (good Father) fully Justified You, and the rest of the Society, as
to your Honesty and Prudence, in Acting according to True Roman Catholic
Principles in the Government of the late King's Conscience, and shown that he
very well deserves to be Sainted in the Roman Church, for being so Absolutely
and Religiously governed by You, as became a good and a zealous Roman
Catholic: It remains that I venture some Advice upon you, according to my
Promise; which being followed, may preserve to you the Honor of being
accounted a Faithful and Wise Guide of a Zealous Roman Catholic Prince's
Conscience to the End.

And in order to that, I will lay down for a Rule what I suppose you will
readily grant me, viz. That you ought to persuade your Devoto always to do that
(which, according as Matters stand) will most tend to the Good and Honor of
the Roman Catholic Church. If then I can prove what I advise you to, is for
the Good and Honor of the Roman Catholic Church, you ought to take my Advice,
if you will maintain the Character, which you have hitherto had, of acting like
an Honest Man, according to his Principles.

Not to spend many Words about that which seems to me a very plain thing: The
Advice which I have to give you, is this, To persuade your Devoto, with all
speed, to put himself into a Monastery, and become a Recluse. You may say, Yes
indeed; just such Advice you did expect from an Heretic, that would have the
Roman Catholic Cause given for lost in England, and would fain peaceaply enjoy
his Heresy: But an Enemies Advice is not to be taken; nor he to be believed
that speaks for his own Interest.

But pray, think seriously upon the matter. I do assure you, That I am
satisfied in my Conscience that I am your Friend, and the late KING's Friend,
and every Roman Catholick's Friend, in giving you this Advice: For it is
impossible you should be so senseless as to think, That you shall ever again be
able to persuade the People of England, That a true zealous Roman Catholic
Prince will not destroy them, if ever he come to be set over them. It Is true,
they had so good (or rather evil) Opinion of your Devoto, as to think that his
Honor and good Nature would be too strong for his Religion: But since he has
so abundantly convinced them, That he has no regard to his Word; no not when
he has raised Men to the highest Trust in it: That he has no regard to natural
Affection, nor to Humanity it self, when it stands in opposition to the Glory
of advancing his Religion; but that he values his Religion above all things (as
indeed every Man ought to do the true Religion, and he verily believes the
Roman Catholic to be the true) there must certainly a perfect Phrenzie seize
the whole Nation, before ever they will think of taking him again to be their
Governor. No; he that is bound in Conscience to destroy Protestants, (and we
are sure he will follow his Conscience herein) can never be a King of
Protestants; that is, a Preserver and Defender of them: You may as soon make a
Lion turn a good Herdward, and the Wolf a good Shepherd, the Fox a good Keeper
of Geese, as a zealous Papist a good King over a Protestant People. Surely the
Frogs, after they had Experience of the Storks Government; and Jove had been so
propitious as once to remove him, though they croaked still as if they in some
Discontent; yet they would never have been so mad to have called for their
Stork to come and Reign over them again.

It Is true, the Church-of- England-Men have always taught the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, and do not think a Prince for Maladministration (to which any
Prince may be liable) is to be Dethroned; and therefore they stood by King
Charles the First, to whose Charge, at the worst, nothing could be laid, but
some particular Acts of Maladministration, and who had no Principle that
Obliged him to destroy his People, and who ('it is plain) never designed it. But
no Protestant living can be so senseless, as to think he is not bound to take
Protection where he can have it, to defend him from a Prince, who is bound (and
will follow his Conscience) to destroy every Man that will continue a
Protestant: Such a Prince contradicts all the Ends of Government, and is
utterly incapable of it; for no Man can in any Law or Equity, be the Governor
of those whom he is bound to Destroy, and that as being absolutely necessary
for the Saving his and their Souls. There is no hopes then ever to bring back
your Devoto into England, unless he should turn Protestant; which I believe you
nor he would agree to, for the gaining of Ten Thousand Kingdoms. To what
purpose then will you hazard the Lives of so many good Roman Catholics, and
endanger the losing of the Lands and Stock of the Holy Society, besides so many
large Estates of Roman Catholics in England (out of which you may continually
have good pickings) upon such a lost Game? It Is true, the shedding of Heretics
Blood is nothing; but the spilling of so many good Catholics Blood as has
been spilled already, and is like to be lost upon such a vain and unlikely
attempt, is certainly that which you cannot approve.

Now all this needless expense of Catholic Blood and Treasure will be saved,
if you can but persuade your Devoto immediately to sequester himself from the
World, and give himself wholly to Contemplation and Devotion, which will
complete the Glory of his Piety, and finish the Saint. After that he has done
all that was to be done for the Roman Cathhlick Religion in an active State,
What remains for him to do, but to betake himself to the Contemplative, which
the Roman Church has always taught to be the highest State of Perfection upon
the Earth? And as in all other matters, so in this, be sure you have no reason
to doubt of the ready Compliance of your Devoto; for he has already shown an
earnest longing after this State of Perfection; as appeared sufficiently by his
most Pious Expressions to Mr. Chudley, when he took his leave of him to go to
be a Carthusian, O God! (said he) How much I envy you this Happiness? And how
sorry am I, that I cannot go with you!

I do believe therefore, good Father, that in the Opinion of most of the Roman
Catholic Church, you will be guilty of a very heinous Sin, if you do not
promote this most earnest Desire in this Zealous Prince; for to speak seriously
to you in the Words of some of your greatest Saints, Will you commit so great a
Sacrilege as to rob God of one that would give himself up wholly to him? Will
you rob the Virgin Mary of such a Princely Husband? Have you no regard to the
great Merit of this Prince? And after that he has done all that was to be done
for the Roman Catholic Church, Will you envy him, as a Reward of his Labors
in his Old Age, to enjoy the sweet and happy Ease of a Contemplative Life? To
sit down quietly, and reflect upon the Great Things he has done and suffered
for his dear Mother the Roman Catholic Church; where he may read at leisure
the Legends of the Roman Saints, and have the comfort to see, that his own
Deeds have surpassed all theirs; where he may expect and wait for his own
Canonization, the greatest share of Heaven the Romau Church can give him? Do
not therefore, (good Father) as you value your own Credit, or all that in the
Romish Church is Sacred, as you prize the Lives of Multitudes of Roman
Catholics, as you esteem their Wealth and Treasure, and hope to have a share
in it; or as you desire to finish the Noble Work, you have hitherto so well
carried on; and to complete your Saint, or as you fear the dreadful Sin of
Sacrilege, do not hinder this Pious and Ardent Desire of this Zealous Prince,
to become a Recluse, either of the Carthusian Order (according to his own Wish)
or what other you think most convenient for him, according to the Patterns that
have been set him by so many Noble Kings and Princes of your Church.

Assure your self, that by encouraging him in this Desire, you will purchase to
your self, and your Order, an overflowing Merit, endless Fame, and perhaps some
Money besides: For the Heretics of England are not so ill-natured, but that,
though they would not have one over them that is bound to kill them, yet to do
him any real good, they would (I am persuaded) afford him a Princely
Maintenance, enough to reward you Nobly, and to build a Monastery, whereof he
himself might be Governor; and after all this, he may leave enough behind him
to pay for his Canonization. Not to mention old Stories of Kings in former
times, you have two Examples fresh in your Memories of Crowned Heads, that did
the same thing in different ways; one a Disciple of Yours, the King of Poland,
that Reigned 'till he and his Country were utterly weary of one another, and
then he wisely retired, and went into a Monastery. The other, Queen Christiana
of Sueden, who was indeed a wise and subtle Woman; she being turned of your
Religion, plainly saw, That a Protestant Body could not have a Popish Head; and
therefore timely compounded for a good Maintenance, and relinquished. Had you
not better then persuade your Prince to take some such Course, rather than to
spend a great deal of precious Catholic Blood and Treasure? To waste and wear
out his Life in Trouble, and you to get nothing by it? I had thought of other
things to Advise; but if you take my Advice in this, as all the World knows you
may if you will, then there will be no need of any other: But if you will not
be advised in so plain and so easy a thing as this, To what end should I offer
you any other?

Therefore think of it; and Judge of me as you please: But in my poor Opinion,
I have given you Faithful Advice, and therein shown my self

Your Friend.

FINIS.

