A RELATION Of Two several VOYAGES Made into the EAST INDIES,

BY CHRISTOPHER FRYKE, Surg. AND CHRISTOPHER SCHEWITZER.

The whole Containing An Exact Account of the Customs, Dispositions, Manners,
Religion, etc. of the several Kingdoms and Dominions in those Parts of the
World in General: But in a more particular manner, Describing those Countries
which are under the Power and Government of the Dutch.

Done out of the Dutch by S. L.

LONDON, for Printed D. Brown, S. Crouch, J. Knapton, R. Knaplock, J. Wyate, B.
Took, and S. Buckley, 1700.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Earl of Westmorland, Baron le Despenser and
Burghersh.
IT is the fate of Honor and Merit, my Lord, to be lyableto abundance of
troublesome Applications; among which, I am apt to think, a Dedication sometime
to be none of the least; especially when the Author comes with his imaginary
Parallels between the Patron and the Work, and by a far-fetched Relation, would
plead a necessity for his Presumption.

There is no danger, my Lord, of my taking that Method, the Meanness of the
Work, and the Merit of the Person I Address it to, will not permit me to think
of any such Proportion. And I am sensible that if that was always strictly to
be observed, Men would be at a loss to find out an Offering worthy such a
Genius, as does visibly appear, even in this your Tender Age; and which (if it
pleases the Almighty to continue his Favors to you, and to give you an
Addition of Years) will appear with so great a Luster, and such a shining
Brightness, that it will not need to be pointed out, but will command that
Commendation from the World, which if I should give, might probably be thought
a Complement. For what less can be expected, my Lord, when all things conspire
to make you truly Great? Your Birth, your Natural Gifts, your Parents and your
Predecessors great Examples; so that you need only have an Eye upon Them, and
make but a Common Improvement of your good Dispositions, to make you become,
with the Blessing of God, a Pattern of true Greatness and Virtue to Posterity.

If I then presume to offer this to your Lordship, it is not for any Right it
can have to your Acceptance, but because I hope it may give you an useful
Entertainment at Vacant Hours. And if, my Lord, it prove any way Acceptable to
you, either for the Variety of the Subject, or the Intention of the Dedicator,
you will give a singular Instance of your Generous Condescension, in taking it
as (it is meant) a mark of the sincere Respect wherewith I am,

Your Lordship's S. L.

The CONTENTS. Of Mr. Fryke 's Voyage.
CHap. 1. The Author gives an account of his mighty desire to Travel. Of his
Country and Profession. He sets out on his Travels, and passing first through
several Countries of Europe, he comes at length to Amsterdam: Where he makes
his application to the East India Company to be admitted into their Service,
and is accordingly chosen one of their Surgeons The manner of his setting out
on his Voyage. The Orders, Laws, Customs, etc. that are constantly observed on
board the East India Fleet. Reflections on the Voyage, and those that undertake
it. Page 1

Chap. 2. Their setting out on their Voyage out of Texel. Come to the
Canary-Islands. Excessive Heat there. The way of Burying at Sea. Sharks very
dangerous. Many fall sick in their Ship. They pass by the Island of St. Paul.
They are Shipwreckt by the false Cape de bonn'Esperance. How far distant that
is from the right Cape, so called. Their arrival there, and description
thereof, of the Lewenbergh. A fight between a Lion and a Wild Boar. An account
of the Natives and Foreigners, etc. p. 13

Chap. 3 The Author's departure from the Cape, in the Ship called the Europa.
They met with a most violent Storm, which held them four whole days, about St.
Maurice's Island. Their arrival to the Streights of Sunda, then to Batavia.
Description of the City, and Castle; and of the Government of them both.
Customs of the several Inhabitants there; especially the Chinese. Many
Crocodiles in that River, they are called Caimans by the Inhabitants. The
Author present at the catching of several of them. The manner of it. Tigers,
Apes, Coco-trees, Mangoes. Bislang Figs. p. 27

Chap. 4. The Author is removed from the Fort to the Hospital of Batavia. The
Hollanders War with Bantam. An account of that Country, which has been very
mischievous to the East India Company, occasioned by the English and Danes, who
made it their business to incense the King of that Country against the Dutch.
Bantam heretofore under the Government of the King of Japara. The Dutch spoil
Jacatra and Japara, and wanted an opportunity to do the like to Bantam, which
offered it self by a falling out between the old King and the young one, which
broke out into a bloody War. The Son sends to the Dutch for help. An exact
account of that Expedition from the beginning of it to the end of it, which
proves very advantageous to the Dutch. p. 49

Chap. 5. The Fleet comes together again, and falls upon the Javians at Sea.
The Author is ordered to Bantam, to take care of the wounded, that were sent
thither. The Council resolves to pursue the Javians. Their Malice, and
inveterate Hatred against the Dutch. Several Skirmishes with them. The
Expedition of the Dutch from Bantam against Dorjasse, which was the old King's
Residence. A Bloody Fight mantained by the Dutch against the Javians, with a
great loss of the former. Some Javian Nobles sent to desire a Peace which was
refused. The Garrison of Dorjasse set fire on Dorjasse and fly. The Dutch
plunder what was left of it. The Author discovers a very considerable Treasure
buried under ground, but receives little advantage from it. The Admiral's
Expedition in pursuit of the Enemy, where he meets with an unlucky accident. p.
65

Chap. 6. The Author, among others, going along the River Tauburang; meets with
several Parties of the Enemy, and have Skirmishes with them. The Town of Anier
besieged. Bravely defended by the Javians, by the means of two Renegade
Dutchmen; one of which which was taken, and immediately hanged. Anier plundered
and sacked. The Author shot in the Leg. The whole Country brought in
subjection. The Young King's base dealing with some of the Nobles, who came in
to submit themselves to him, not withstanding his gracious Promises to them. An
end of the Wars. The danger that a man exposes himself to, that will take any
of the Indian Commodities for his own private Gain. An instance of it in the
Author himself. A very strange and barbarous Cruelty committed by the Javians
upon some Dutchmen, who fell into their Hands. They are discovered, and
punished after the most cruel manner that could be invented. The manner of
their Death. p. 85

Chap. 7. How insolently the Javians behaved themselves toward the Dutch, and
how civilized. The Dutch get the total Government of the Country into their
Hands by the consent of the young King. The Old King's Surrender, Confinement,
and Death. Rebuilding of Bantam, and its flourishing Condition. Its Traffic,
Commodities, Fruits, and Provisions. Tigers there in great numbers, how
catched. Elephants taken after alike manner in Ceylon, and Aracan. The several
Games and Pastimes at the Weddings of the Chief Javians, together with some
Customs and Ceremonies used on those occasions. A description of Pepper, and
its growth. The Author's departure from Bantam to Batavia, and thence to Banda,
p. 100

Chap. 8. Their arrival to Banda. The Author falls very ill there, how
recovered. Description of the growth of the Nutmog and Mace. Departure from
thence to Amboina. An account of the Clove-Tree and Cloves. Return to Batavia.
The Island Onrust, why so called. A vast quantity of Tortoises there; the
manner of taking them. They are a mighty Food amongst them. How Sharks are
taken, and the use of that Fish's Liver. A Voyage from Batavia to Ceylon.
Columbo the Chief City there. The Stratagems which the Portuguese used in that
Country to get footing there. An account of the growth of Cinnamon there. The
Root Borrobone as good as Saffron. The manner of fishing for Pearls there; many
Lives are lost by diving after them. One Oyster had near three hundred Pearls
in it. Mother of Pearl, what. Departure from Ceylon. Arrival at Batavia, where
their Ship takes fire. Kastizen and Mastizen, what sort of People. A Voyage
from Batavia to Japan. Pass by Formosa, and come to Pangato in Japan. They are
forced to put away all their Books; the reasons why. p. 116

Chap. 9. How foreign Ships are received, and visited in Japan. Women proffered
to them for their use while they stay. Some of the Japonneses exceeding Nimble
at showing Tricks. Strange variety of Birds in the Port of Nangato. Near being
Shipwreckt a going back to Batavia, yet arrive thither. Departure thence again
to Malacca, and Achem, with an Account of those Inhabitants, and return again
to Batavia, p. 131

Chap. 10. Their departure and arrival at Bali. Arrows used by the Inhabitants
which are Mortal. They sell themselves for Slaves. Their strange Idolatry.
Women Burn themselves with the Corpse of their Husbands. The Island Susu
Inhabited by Men-Eaters. Departure from Bali, and arrival at Batavia.
Observations on that place. Account of his Voyage to Surat, and return to
Batavia, which he leaves again to go to Bengal, Pegu, and Aracan. Roses of
Jericho. p. 144

Chap. 11. Masulipatam its inhabitants called Jentives. Account of the Climate.
The Isle of Nicoporas. Arrival at Batavia. Chinese sumptuous in their Burials.
A pleasant quarrel between the Author and one of his Patients, for which both
were called to an account, and Punished. The Author goes to Bantam, gives an
Account of the young King's Retinue there, and of his return to Batavia. And
likewise of several Customs and Humors of the Chinese. p. 157

Chap. 12. The Author's Voyage to Macassar; goes in his way to Japara; Passes
by Pater noster Iflands: The Natives are the most faithful Soldiers the Dutch
have, and the best Slaves. Moors, some black, and some very white: Their
Nobility: The Author cures the Son of one of their Noblemen, and is generously
rewarded. Comes away from Macassar, and finds Japara in an uproar; the Authors
of it seized and punished. The great power of the Dutch Government in the
East Indies. Arrival to Batavia again. The manner of Fishing at Batavia. By a
Flame which they saw afar of at Sea for two Nights together; they concluding
that something extraordinary had occasioned it; they went and found several Men
reduced to the greatest extremity that ever was, and brought them into Batavia.
Departure to Siam; Description of that Country, and the Dutch Factory there.
Return to Batavia, where one of their Ships, by a mischance, is blown up, and
all the Men killed. Ceremonies usual at a Wedding among the Javians, p. 172

Chap. 13. They go to the Negery; an account of their Diversions there with
Tumblers and Javian Baliar Dancers, and of the strange Tricks they showed: The
Charges of their Entertainment. Pirates infest the Streights of Sunda: Ships
sent out against them, and meet with them: Some of them taken, and how
punished. Strange sort of People of the Island St. Galle brought to Batavia,
where they soon died. A Javian Hermit comes to Batavia, and makes a discovery
to the General of a Plot which the Javians were hatching at Bantam. The account
of his Life, etc. The Author going a Hunting with others, meets with a poor
Runaway Slave, a Dutchman, whom he takes home with him. Ships sent to discover
an Island, which by a Magnetic Force draws the Ships on Shore; to prevent
which, some were Built with nothing but Wood. Some of the Javians blow up one
of the Bastions at Bantam, their Punishment, etc. p. 188

Chap. 14. The Author's Departure from Batavia for Holland. Orders observed
among the Ships: They come and lie before Bantam; where the Author going on
Shore, is left behind, but by good luck overtakes the Ship again. They come to
the Cape de Bon Esperance. Observations on the Place, and on the Hottentot's
there. They leave the Cape. Come into the Sea which they call the Graz-zee;
They meet with a fearful Storm, which lasted four days. They come to the Briel;
thence to Amsterdam, where the Author is forced to lie in great Pain, and at
great Expense; and at last, with much ado. gets home to Ulm. p. 205

CONTENTS of Mr. Schewitzer 's Voyage.
CHap. 1. The Rise of the Dutch East India Company. Many go to the Indies
induced by a foolish hope of growing Rich there. Kidnappers send many thither.
The Author's going off from Amsterdam to the Texel. What Ships were sent out.
Ice and hard Weather detains them some weeks in the Texel. Orders given in case
they should meet and fight with the French. The allowance distributed to the
Ships Crew. They meet with Turkish Pirates. Sentence given on a Criminal. The
Equinoctial Line. Great Mortality under it in the Ships. A Remarkable accident
that befell the Author. Northern Pirates. The Devil's Mount in Africa. Arrival
to the Cape of Good Hope. p. 225

Chap. 2. The Cape, how far from Amsterdam. Fruitfulness of that Country. Its
fullness of Inhabitants, called Hottentots, their customs and Manners. Its
Wealth. Their going off from the Cape. The day of Humiliation kept in the
Fleet. A certain Merchant's son falls into the Sea and is drowned. Two more
drowned. Their allowance lessened. Arrival at Iava Major. The Road of Sunda:
Bantam. A Man swallowed up by a Crocodile. Arrival at Batavia. Description of
its Fort, with four Bastions. Custom of the Chinese's there, when one of them
dies. What Heathens live at Batavia. Amboineses great Conjurers. The best
Soldiers sent to quell the Inhabitants of Jappara. The Dutch land, but are
beaten. A remarkable accident. Ships arrive from Holland to Batavia. Account of
the troublesome Voyage of one of them. A Pelican of a Purple color. A strange
Bird called a Casswari. Great Execution of Malefactors. A Crocodile 22 foot
long, caught. A Huntsman tore in pieces by a Tiger. A wounderful Leap given by
a Man. Twelve of the Here Spelman's Slaves that were run away brought back and
broke upon the Wheel: How that is done at Batavia. The Square in Batavia; why
so called, and by whom built. By what means the Dutch took Batavia from the
English. A very Comical thing that happened by one of the Casswari-Birds, that
were kept in the Fort of Batavia. A strange accident between a Peacock and an
old Chinese that had gamed away all his Money and Goods. The manner of living of
the Chinese at Batavia. The Rich Chinese. p. 237

Chap. 3. Bats big as Geese, good to Eat, and esteemed a great Rarity. A
Sentinel killed by a Javian drunk and mad with Opium. Great mischief done by
Lightning. Robbers very dangerous, who are a sort of Dutch Soldiers that have
Deserted. A Serpent of a dreadful bigness being 26 foot long. Wages of the
Officers and Soldiers. The Ship called the Slight Utrecht burnt. An Earthquake
in 1674, that destroyed part of a very rich Island. What may justly be judged
the cause of it. King of Siam's Present to General Maetzuycker. Elephants
taught to stand firing. The Author goes for Ceylon from Batavia. The Prince's
Island. Their allowance at Sea. The Coast of Sumatra, very unhealthy. Catching
of Sharks. They met with strange Men whom they could not understand. Two Seamen
quarrel and sight with Knives; both of 'em punished, and how. What Hunger and
Thirst they all underwent in the Voyage. Their arrival before Columbo. Lions
sent to the King of Candy. The Author is sent to the Fort of Galture. p. 254

Chap. 4. A Description of the Isle of Ceylon, its Cities, Forts, and
Inhabitants, which are chiefly of two sorts. An account of the King of Candi's
Court, Officers, Counselors, and his other Subjects: Their Customs, Manners,
Religion, etc. Their Houses overrun with Fleas and Pismires; their manner of
Eating and Trading. The King of Candi a Cruel Tyrant. The Cingulayans Customs
in War; Their Arms and Exploits. The other Inhabitants of Ceylon are
Malabarians, who are Subjects of the Dutch: They Worship the Devil, Crocodiles,
Serpents, etc. Their Burials. The Dutch took Columbo, and other Cities of
Ceylon from the Portugueses, and the King of Candi, though he had helped them
against the Portugueses. The King of Candi's Resentment of it to this very day.
Unhealthy Climate of this Country. p. 268

Chap. 5. Giving an Account of the sundry sorts of Beasts, Fowls, etc. that are
in Ceylon; a more particular one of the Elephants, concerning which, many
things very wonderful are attested, upon the Author's own Experience. The
manner of catching them, their peculiar Qualities, etc. Wild-Bufflars, Tigers,
Bears, Jackalls, Bitsche-Vergunie, or the Devil of Negombo, very rare; Levers a
lazy sort of Beast, Wandura or Apes, Wild Cats. And many other sorts of Beasts.
Of Fowls, Parrots, Batts, etc. Crocodiles, will live 300 years. Different sorts
of Serpents; of Pismires; Blood-Suckers; Sword-Fishes; Sharks; Sail-Fish; St.
Peter's Fish; Sea-Swine; Sea-Devils; Tortoises. The manner of the Malabarians
Fishing with their Netts, p. 281

Chap. 6. The Year in Ceylon is divided into two Seasons only. Great Floods
there during one of the Seasons. An Account of Caudingelle, a Fort built and
forsaken by the Dutch; much annoyed by the King of Candi's Men. The Author is
ordered to Anguratot; Description of that Place; how the Europeans live there
with Cingulaish Women. He goes back to Columbo; one of the Boats is lost by the
way. He lives a while there with one of the Council. Is sent to Malvane, an
unhealthy Place, which the King of Candi Besieges with 30000 Men, but his
General comes over to the Dutch. The Prince of Candi runs away from Columbo,
where he had been kept a long while, and for what Reason. The Author with two
Companies of Volunteers are sent out, and in their March suffered much Thirst,
and went all Barefoot. They come to Calpintin, Aripen, Manaca, Jafnapatnam;
all which Places he gives a Description of. Then he goes to Porto Novo, where
he has two Arrows shot in him. He goes back to Columbo, where he is Cured. p.
297

Chap. 7. The manner of Fishing for Pearls: Why this sort of Fishing was laid
by for seven years. The Author's departure from Calpintin to Columbo. The
Dangers he went through in his Journey. Comes to Columbo. Presents sent by the
Governor to the King of Candi: What they were. The Author is ordered to go
along with them. In what base manner the Candians received the Presents; and
then treacherously fell upon those that brought them. How they came off, and in
their retreat destroyed two Heathen Temples. What strange things happened while
they were about it. They return to Columbo. The Gates there are shut up twice a
day, and why. An account of Sittawack, and of the Amboineses who serve the
Dutch Company there. Precious Stones in the Earth and in the Rivers; where most
found. A Description of them; and where, and how they grow. What policy the
Author was forced to use to get a Saphir of an Old Cingulayan. A strange Cock.
An Elephant falls into a Well, out of which there was no getting of him. An
Earthquake. p. 315

Chap. 8. The Author, with three others, go a Hunting. They meet with
Elephants, and kill one of them. All sorts of venomous Creatures come to
Sittawack, to save themselves from the Water, that overflowed all the Land
about it. Their manner of Hunting. Envoys that came to bring Presents to the
King of Candi, kept Prisoners by him. Two Englishmen kept for Slaves in Candi,
make their escape, and come to Sittawack; they tell a pleasant Story of a
Country fellow that had used a Ruby for a Whetstone several Years. The Author
and the Englishmen come to Columbo, where they are treated very civily. He
goes to Cormandel, thence to Columbo again. Execution done. The Author is made
Secretary of the East-India-house. A Jew turns Christian, and Marries a
Cingulaish Gentlewoman. A Description of Columbo; and an Account of the Manners
of that place, their Marriages, etc. p. 329

Chap. 9. A sad Accident happens before Columbo by Gunpowder. Two Ships come to
Columbo from Persia, bound from thence for Holland. The Author is discharged at
his request (though with some difficulty): Is to go to Punt de Gala by Sea, to
Embark there. The Master being drunk, they run the Vessel against a Rock, and
all sunk. The Author and fourteen others save their Lives by swimming to shore;
but lost all their Goods. They come Naked to Punt de Gala, whence he Embarks
aboard the Wester-Amstel. Their departure and arrival to the Cape, where they
find the Ships from Batavia that had waited seven Weeks for them. A French
Pirate comes amongst them under a disguise. All come away from the Cape. An
Account of their Voyage: What places they passed: What extremity they were come
to. At last, by God's Assistance, they came safe home. p. 345

A Relation of a Voyage made to the East Indies by Christopher Fryke, one of
the Surgeons to the E. India Company, from the year 1680. to the year 1686.
CHAP. I.
The Author gives an account of his mighty desire to travel. Of his Country and
Profession. He sets out on his Travels, and passing first through several
Countries of Europe, he comes at length to Amsterdam: Where he makes his
application to the East India Company to be admitted into their service, and is
accordingly chosen one of the Surgeons. The manner of his setting out on his
Voyage. The Orders, Laws, Castoms, etc. that are constantly observed on board
the East India Fleet. Reflections on the Voyage, and those that undertake it.

EVer since I came to years, that I could tell my own inclinations, I found the
chiefest of my desires was to travel and to see strange Countries. And whilst,
by reason of my youth, and my more absolute dependence and subjection to my
Parents, I could not think of moving in person; yet, in my thoughts, I was
often transported from one Country to another: And by the help of Books, I did
in some measure enjoy that satisfaction in imagination which I hoped one day to
enjoy in reality; and that too as soon as might be; for the more I read
Voyages, Journals, and other such Books, which gave me an account of strange
Adventures, places, things, etc. which Men had met with in those more distant
parts of the World; the more my desires increased to see those things, they
gave so pleasant a description of. Nor did the greatest of dangers, which those
accounts represented to me, so much affright me from the like undertakings, as
the joyful deliverances out of them, encouraged me to trust so much the more
firmly in Divine Providence. And I proposed to my self so much the greater a
degree of satisfaction, in as much as I might be induced so much more
effectually thereby to admire the great power and wisdom of God; which, though
visible enough every where, yet are more conspicuous in those wonderful works
of Nature, which being less common and less familiar to us, are more apt to
raise our admiration and love of him, who is the Creator of them all.

As soon then as my years and affairs did fairly permit me, I prepared my self
to be gone, and to spend the best part of my time in Travels.

In order therefore to put my resolution into practice, I set out from home in
the year 1677. on the 28th of February, and took my shortest way to Vienna, the
chief City of the Empire; from whence I went and took a view of most part of
Hungary; after that I went into Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Saxony, and other
Countries adjacent; thence I went into Swisserland, where I spent about six
months at Zurich.

But my earnest desire to be a traveling something farther would not permit me
to stay, and afford my self much ease at any of these neighboring Countries;
but I went away for Baden; taking a Boat that carried me all up the River
Limat, which is a little River that flows from the Zurich-Zee, and passes through
the Country of Zurichgow, and below Baden runs into the River Aar. Above
Waldshut I took a Boat on the Rhine, which carried me all down that River to
Nimeguen, whence I went by Land to Utretcht, and from thence by Water to
Amsterdam, where I arrived about Christmas, A. D. 1679.

The vastness and beauty of that famous City, and my being a stranger there,
made me not a little to stand amazed, and look about me; as well to admire the
rarities, that offered themselves to my view every where, as to consider
whither I should go first, and where it was most likely I should meet with what
I sought after, which was, a fair opportunity of undertaking some Voyage to the
East Indies.

While I stood in this doubtful manner considering what I should do next, a
good Woman (in all appearance) observing me to be a stranger, and full of
thoughts, asked me whom I wanted, or whither I would go? I told her that the
first thing I was to see after, was a Lodging; for I was but just come, and the
night was drawing on apace: But withal I told her, what sort of one I wanted,
for I had not much money left: Upon which she very compassionately told me, I
should be very welcome to her poor Apartment (as she called it) if I pleased. I
did not stand long to consider of the matter, but took hold of the opportunity,
and went straightway with her to her house: Being come in there, she bid me
stay a while till her Husband came home. It was pretty late at night 'ere he
came; being abroad at work, a Bricklayer by Trade; when he came, he showed
himself very courteous; and being all sat down, we fell a talking, and he
asking me several questions, as it is natural to do to a stranger, and amongst
others, to what intent I was come thither: I told him the truth of the matter,
and the only thing I proposed to my self was, to find an occasion to go to the
East Indies; and begged his assistance and advice the better to go about my
design and to compass it.

The honest Man did not seem a little surprised at my design, and endeavored
by all means he could to dissuade me from it, by setting before me all the
dangers I was to run, viz. of hardships, excesses of heat, hunger and thirst,
and oftentimes of losing life it self. But the more lively he presented all
these and other kind of dangers to me, the more eager it made me to go through
'em, and the more it established me in my resolutions, as if the dangers had
been the only charm that drew me. Which my honest Landlord observing, he found
it was in vain to attempt to turn me from my design; and upon that turned all
his persuasions into a friendly promise, that he would assist me to the utmost
of his power; and he accordingly recommended me to some of the Chief Men of the
East India Company, and did me very considerable service.

Having in this friendly manner broke the Ice for me, and prepared some of the
Gentlemen to receive my applications, I went cheerfully to wait upon them my
self, and told them, that it was my desire to be employed by those honorable
Members in any service suitable to my profession, which was Physic. They
carefully examined the reasons that induced me to go the Voyage, and advised me
to weigh well what I was about, before I fixed my resolution; that I might not
have cause to repent of my rashness when it was too late; and withal they told
me that I must expect to engage my self for five years. I told them that I had
not wanted leisure to consider of it, and that I was fully satisfied of the
reality of my intention, and that there was no danger of my repenting, or of
performing with any regret a thing I had resolved upon with so much
deliberation. At which they were very well satisfied, yet could they not choose
but wonder to find me, who was but a Youth, so undaunted, notwithstanding the
dangers, which they themselves represented to me. I was then appointed to
appear before the Chief Physicians, and to undergo an examination; which I
accordingly did, with twelve more with me, who were, like me, Candidates to
serve in several parts, out of all which there were but six to be chosen, three
being designed to each Ship, of which there were but two to go this Voyage.

Having been all examined, we retired to the Hall belonging to the Hospital,
where we were ordered to wait for our answer. The expectation and hope which
every one of us were in, of being one of those that were chosen; and on the
other side, the fear of ill success, and of disappointment, made us all very
uneasy. We were not put out of our suspense that day, but we were bid to come
again and make our personal appearance before the Commissioners the next day
following; which we did, and I was one of them that were chosen, and my Post
was assigned me aboard the Ship called the (Ternate) which was the only one
that went the Voyage in company with the Europa. I was not so very uneasy as
the rest were during the time of our suspense, because I was prepared against
all disappointments in relation to my particular Profession; for I was resolved
to go upon any account rather than not to go at all; and a Man so resolved may
easily find admittance into some Post or other. And indeed I utterly despaired
of success as to my being chosen for a Physician, being I was so very young,
and the number of the Candidates so very great; but beyond all expectation I
was one of the six Persons that were called in to give in their Names, though
indeed I was but the last of them: And being all ordered to stand by the
Secretary, we were every one asked severally the second time whether we would
promise faithfully to execute our Office, and strictly to observe all and every
the Articles enjoined by the Company. There were entered with the other
Physicians, and my self a Surgeon for each Ship, and to each of them a Mate,
who serves as a Barber. So that we were six in number, who answering all in the
affirmative, were sworn, and a Declaration was made to us of the several
Offices we were all accepted into, and what Salary each of us was to expect;
viz. Each Physician was to have 42 Gelders per month, and his Table, and a
Shore instead of it 6 Ricksdollers. The Surgeons 28 Gilders, and Diet, and on
Shore 3 Ricksdollers. The Barbers 14 Gilders a month, and their Diet, and on
Shore an allowance proportionable to the others instead of it. Then we all
subscribed to their Articles, and the Cash-keeper paid us two months Salary
before hand; and three Dutch Skillings every day while we stayed on Shore;
which was eighteen days.

After which, a review being first made of all the Ships Crew, we were all put
on board three long flat Boats (which are for that purpose, and though small, yet
so close Decked, that in a rough Sea they will go quite under the waves and
retain no water) they carried us from Amsterdam to Texel, where the two Ships,
bound for the East Indies, lay. Texel is a Sea Port lying on the open Sea,
about 16 miles from Amsterdam; we had a very fresh gale of Wind (I call it so
now, though then I reckoned it a hard Storm) but it was not fair for us; so that
we made something more than four days, before we could reach Texel: Whither
being come, and having nothing to do but to Sail, I will in the mean while give
my Reader an account of the preparations that those Ships generally make for
this great Voyage.

Before they go off from Holland, they take a general review of every person
that belongs to the Ship, and each Man has two months pay advanced him: But
the full and regular pay begins only after they are passed the Tonnen, which is
a place so called, about a League out at Sea; from that time the full pay is to
continue whether the Fleet go forward, or is forced back again by contrary
Winds, as they frequently are; and sometimes kept there a great while, insomuch
that in the Winter they are laid up for several weeks, the Water being frozen
all about them, so that they cannot stir; and when that happens, they do
sometimes discharge their Ships Crew to lessen the charges which would
otherwise be very great.

But when the Wind is fair, and the Fleet has been two or three days under
Sail, then there is distributed to each person, little and great, 5 Dutch
Cheeses as a Present from the Company: Then must all and every Officer, Soldier
and Mariner, make his appearance upon Deck, to be divided into their several
Quarters, which are two: The one of them is called the Prince's Quarter, the
other Count Maurice's.

Each person is assigned into one of these Quarters, in which he is always to
be found on any occasion; and there he is to keep the Watch by turns. And that
all may know to what part every Man belongs, the names of them all as they are
divided is affixed to the Main Mast, on two distinct Tables; where also is set
the order and time that every Man is to watch in. The Prince's Quarter has the
first turn, and is therefore called the first Watch. There is a Provost, whose
Office it is to call them together, and to set the Watch; each Quarter watches
four hours, and then is relieved by the other. Count Maurice's Quarter has the
second Watch, and is also called the Dog-watch. There is a Bell in the Ship, by
which notice is given them of the time. It is rung at the setting of the Watch,
and with a loud voice charge is given by the Provost to every one to take care
not to be drunk upon pain of punishment. There are Hour-glasses put up
conveniently for him that stands Sentinel, and the Helmsman to see; and as soon
as the first Glass, which is but of half an hour, is out, they strike one
stroke on the Bell; when the second is out, they give two, and so on, adding
one for each half hour, until the Bell is rung again. Then another Officer
comes and calls his Men together out of his Quarter, and releases the other.

There is likewise one Man or two always to stand on the Main Topmast head;
but the Soldiers that go to the East Indies are always free from that service,
though in their return from thence Home, that duty lies upon them equally with
the Seamen. Yet (if they can afford it) they may buy it off with a matter of
25 Ricksdollers, though the Voyage should be a year in completing.

When there are a great many sick in the Ship, then those that are in health
are again divided, that they may have the duty as equally shared between them
as may be: And when a Storm threatens them so as to be forced to hand their
Sails, all hands must be at work and help; and so likewise when the Ship is
forced to clap upon a Wind, so that she must tack every two hours.

When any one neglects his turn, or is negligent in his duty, his punishment is
to have a 100 or 200 (or sometimes more) blows on the breech with a Rope's end.
Every one that does not come every morning and night to the Prayers that are
constantly made twice every day, loses for that day his portion of Wine and
Brandy: There is a Psalm also sung every night, and for that purpose a Psalm
book is presented by the Company to every person in the Ship.

Smoking of Tobacco is strictly forbidden at night below Decks, to prevent any
mischief that might be caused by it, the Beds being all stuffed with very good
Cotton; but every where else it is allowed: And there is a great square Chest
with a Pin in the middle, about which there is 10 or 12 fathom of Match, where
any one may light his Pipe.

At the third Watch it is the business of one of them to take care to call up
the Cook, who, as soon as Prayers are over, goes about the Dinner. Three Meals
a day are allowed to all, and immediately after Prayers they ring the Bell,
then every one comes for his Quantum of Brandy, which is about a quartern of
our measure.

Every Saturday each Man receives five pound of Biscuit, about a quartern of
Oil, and double that quantity of Vinegar, and half a pound of Butter, which a
man must husband as he thinks best; it is to serve for the whole week. Three
times a week are Flesh-days, viz. Tuesdays, Saturdays and Sundays, on which
days each Man has three quarters of a pound of Beef or Pork, but most of it is
so salt, having lain in the Salt it may be five or six years, that when it is
dressed it hardly weighs half a pound.

As for the Drink: At the setting out the Beer is in common as long as it
lasts, which is not very long; when it is out, then every one is reduced to his
measure of Water, which is about a large quart to a Man, and very well too; but
when they come into the Indies, if they chance to be commanded away to any
other parts, they are often forced to be satisfied with half that quantity, and
then you may imagine what a value a Man sets upon his Liquor; and a Man may as
well steal all ones money, as a drop of Water from any one.

There is a very great severity exercised over the Malefactors, of which we
shall have occasion to speak more particularly hereafter. In the mean while to
inform the Reader of the general Customs, they are as follow.

If any one wounds another with a Knife, or other Weapon, he is forced to hold
up his hand against the Mast; and the Barber takes a Knife, and strikes it
through his hand a little below the fingers; and sometimes as the fault is
greater or less, through the middle of his hand, and there he leaves if sticking
in the Mast; so that the Offender must pull his hand through if he designs to
have it to himself again. He that strikes an Officer, or Master of the Ship, is
without hopes of pardon to be thrown into the Sea fastened by a Rope, with
which he is thrown in on one side of the Ship, and drawn up again on the other,
and so three times together he is drawn round the Keel of the Ship, in the
doing of which, if they should chance not to allow Rope enough to let him sink
below the Keel, the Malefactor might have his brains knocked out. This
Punishment is called Keel-halen, which may be called in English Keel-drawing.
But the Provost has this Privilege more than the other, that if any one
strikes him on Shore, he forfeits his hand, if on Board, then he is certainly
Keel-draw'd. Part of the Provost's Office is diligently to observe the
behavior of the Soldiers, etc. and to see that they be exercised every day by
some disciplined Soldiers that have been the Voyage already. Punishment also is
inflicted by his orders on the Soldiers that are caught at Cards or Dice,
which are strictly forbid; but Tables and Draughts are allowed, yet must they
not play at them for Money.

All I shall add concerning the manner of going about this Voyage, is by way of
directions to those who have a mind to undertake it. There are occasions enough
for any Man among the Dutch, French, English and Portugueze, and every Man must
take his choice which he will go with, according to the Nation he is of. But
for the Dutch (if not for the others too) the best way is to go to Amsterdam,
whence a Fleet is dispatched three times every year, which for management of
their affairs at Sea yields to no Seamen whatever, and therefore is most safe
and convenient; they go off about June, September and December. But they will
hardly receive any Passenger, as such; and therefore for his admittance, he
must enter into their service, into some Post convenient for him, at least for
the Voyage.

Indeed when one comes to Great Java, which is by Batavia, one may quit their
service; but the Rules which their Articles bind a Man to observe, makes it a
freedom not much different from the service, by reason of the great restraint
the Company will lay upon a Man. For first, He must oblige himself not to stir
out of the Country in less than ten years time: Nor must he Traffic in several
goods, as he would desire; nor with such Countries as would please him best:
For he is only permitted to deal with some small part of the Country, at the
Islands of Molucco: And if a Man transgresses these Injunctions, he does not
only forfeit all he is worth, but also his honor and reputation.

Those that design then to give themselves up wholly to the service of the
Dutch East India Company, must bind themselves to them for five years, besides
the Voyage forwards and backwards; and take his chance for what part of the
Country he is to live in: For it does not lie in his power to choose this or
that part, as a Man might wish; some parts being so much more healthy than
others are, and some much more advantageous than the rest; for that he must
take his Lot as it falls. It seldom happens too, that any one is removed from
the place into which he is ordered at the first: but it falls hardest of all
upon those that are ordered to stay all the while at Sea on board; though indeed
it is more profitable for him.

Any one that goes thither cannot have any prospect of advancing himself much,
unless he understands Trade very well, and the Dutch Tongue; and has Friends
there, that are able and willing to help him. For when the Company take men
into their service, they take 3 or 4 times as many Men as they have Employments
for, and out of them they employ those only that have good recommendations.
Some men indeed by their Industry and good Fortune, or rather I should say,
good Providence, have advanced themselves considerably from nothing, or very
mean beginnings; but there are abundance who want neither parts, nor industry,
who notwithstanding do not move a step toward Preferment all the while they
stay there: Which has made several of them to despair, and betake themselves
to very ill courses. The condition of life wherein a Man meets with least
disappointments under them, is that of a Soldier; where he has four
Ricksdollers a month and his meat; though the latter is very mean and sparingly
allowed, both in the Ships and in the Garrisons, insomuch that it is a very
hard and uncomfortable employ for any one that has any thing of Education.

The Soldiers receive their Pay as follows; one half of it is paid at two
payments in one year; and that not in full, but one part in Cloths, which are
reckoned to him at a sufficient high rate, and the other half is paid him when
he is come home again. He receives for his Subsistence (besides his pay) 40
pounds of Rice (instead of Ammunitionbread) per month, and of a Ricksdoller.

Besides, all the Countries where the Company has any footing are very
unhealthful, except Cormandel, Batavia, and some few others, and most very ill
provided with necessaries, much less with conveniences, for life.

The Soldiers that remain on Shipboard, are yet worse used than those that are
at Land, and by reason of the Foggs they are often in, are more subject to
sickness; and besides, both there and on Shore, there is more severe Justice
exercised on Offenders than in Europe, and a small matter brings a Man to open
and shameful punishment.

All this being well considered, I presume no Man can be very fond of going to
the East Indies on those terms, unless he is reduced to Poverty, or driven to
it by some other necessitous occasion. But my advice would be to any one that
has a mind to see the Indies, and to try his Fortune with freedom, to go among
the English, who with more honor and generosity give a Man the liberty to
advance himself, or to pass his days there as he thinks most convenient, and to
as much satisfaction as his circumstances will permit him, which are left to a
Man to improve as he is best able, and may then comfortably enjoy the fruits of
his Labors and Industry.

CHAP. II.
Their setting out on their Voyage out of Texel. Come to the Canary Islands.
Excessive Heat there. The way of Burying at Sea. Sharks very dangerous. Many
fall sick in their Ship. They pass by the Island of St. Paul. They are
shipwreckt by the false Cape de bonn'Esperance. How far distant that is from
the right Cape, so called. Their arrival there, and description thereof, of the
Lewenbergh. A fight between a Lion and a wild Boar. An account of the
Inhabitants both Natives and Foreigners, etc.

A Review of all our Ships Crew being made, which was three hundred and fifty
persons, on the last of May 1680. We weighed Anchor, and set out with a good
Wind, and the other Ship with us. And the next day about Sunrising we passed
between Dover and Calice, which are seven Leagues distant from each other. The
same day five Fly-boats from the Maes joined us, they were bound for Portugal,
by which we were to pass.

The third and fourth day we still had France on the left of us, and kept
England in sight on the right, and sailed successfully, save that one of the
Master's Boys going to ease Nature at the Ships Stern (whereas the Bowgh is the
usual place) dropped into the Sea; and though we hall'd out our long Boat
immediately, yet the Ship sailing so very fast, they could not come at him; so
the Boat was hoysted in again. The Wind continued good for us till we came
within sight of the Island Salvagues, where we lost our Companion the Ship
Europa, which had steered another course. In the mean time the common Articles
which are to be observed at Sea, were read; to inform every one of his duty
upon all accidents and occasions; and also what allowances every Man was to
have.

We passed by the said Islands, though with a contrary Wind, which obliged us to
tack three or four times a day, till we at last at three weeks end got in sight
of the Canary Islands, and with a side Wind at N. N. E. sailed through between
the two Islands. There we saw that vast high Hill called Pico de Canaria, or
the Peak of Teneriff, which is of such an incredible height, that none in the
World is to compare to it. It Is admirable to see, how far it stretches it self
above the Clouds. It was at that time so excessive hot about us in our Ship,
that we were forced to have a sail stretched, and that continually kept
wetting, to keep us a little cool; and defend us from the Sun's piercing Beams:
And yet you might see through the Clouds, the top of that mountain covered with
Snow.

Here our Master died, being upwards of fourscore Years of Age, and having made
three Voyages to the East Indies: Upon which, a Council being called, one Peter
Peter's was chosen in his Place. This old Gentleman was the first I saw buried
after the Sea-fashion, which is in this manner: They take the dead Body and tie
it on a Board, and fasten two Cannon-Balls to their Feet, and so throw them
overboard, just as Morning-Prayers are over. In this manner they served the
Master. But my Comrade had not all this pother made about him; for without a
Salute or a Cannon-Ball he was barely tied to a Board, and thrown over; so that
he floated a great while. This Solemnity gave occasion to a Dispute among some
of our Seamen, concerning the dead Bodies that were thus thrown overboard;
some affirming, That when they were loose, floating upon the Water, you might
turn them how you would, and they would still turn again, with their Face or
Head toward the East: Upon which, one of those who could not give Credit to
that Opinion, went down (the Water being pretty still) and with a Pole turned
the Corpse about, which immediately turned again, by what Cause I know not, but
it convinced him, That the other's Assertion had somewhat of Truth in it.

Such dead Bodies float till some Shark, or such like great Fish, devours them:
But I do suppose they spit out the Plank again. These Sharks we as often call
Men-Eaters in Dutch, because they are very greedy of Men's Flesh. They have a
large Mouth, which they open very wide, and Teeth of great length, and
exceeding sharp, which shut into one another; so that whatever they get between
them, they bite clear through. They are about 20 or 24 Foot in length; and they
keep about the Ships in hopes of Prey; but are much more frequent in the
Indies, than in the Way; where they do abundance of Mischief among the Seamen
when they go to swim, as we afterward found, when we came in the Road near
Batavia; where one swimming at a distance from the Ship, a Shark came up to
him, and drew him under Water, and we never could hear of him more, or so much
as see any remnant of him; which made all the old Seamen wonder, who said, They
never knew a Shark take any more of a Man, than a Leg, or, it may be, a good
Part of the Thigh with it: But for this Man, we did not perceive so much as the
Water bloody. Near Japara we had a Man, who had lost a Limb by this means,
under our Hands to cure; and he lived seven Days after it; but at the end of
that time he died, being mightily tortured with a vehement Cramp. Another time,
at the Isle of Onrust, about eight Leagues from Batavia, our Ship being laid
up to mend something of the side of it, the Carpenter going to do something to
it, about a Knee deep under Water, had his Arm and Shoulder snap'd off. I took
him and bound him up, but to no purpose; for in less than three Hours time, he
was dead.

But now to return to my Purpose; which is, To give you an Account of our
Voyage.

We had now been above eight Weeks at Sea, and had had very favorable Winds;
in which time most of our Provisions of Brandy, Cheese and Tobacco, being
consumed; and the Heat daily increasing; to which we must add, That many were
not used to such sort of Sea-Diet (and that at last we could hardly get
neither) viz. Bacon as salt as Brine, Gray-Pease half boiled, Grout and
stinking Water: Our Ship became a mere Hospital, so many fell sick. The chief
Distempers were, the Dropsy, the Bloody Flux and Scurvey. Upon this the sick
were divided from the rest, and had the Larboard side allotted them, which is
the side on the lefthand. The Starboard was for the others. Thus we continued
our Course, till we reached the Island called, The Island of St. Paul, which we
left about 30 Miles off on the left hand, and steered our Course for the Cape
of Good Hope.

After about seven days sail from the said Island of St. Paul with very little
Wind, the number of our sick increased daily, and the distempers that now
reigned most, were the Scurvy, and the Smallpox; which carried off almost all
the oldest of our Men, but the younger sort quickly recovered. Many were
lightheaded, and ailed nothing more; which was occasioned, as I presume, only
from the excessive heat we suffered, as we passed under the Line, and came to
the other side of the Globe. In this dismal condition we went on; our only hope
being that we should not be long ere we should reach the Cape Bonne Esperance,
or the Cape of Good Hope.

But our hopes were strangely frustrated: for we quite lost our course: For the
Snow fell so mighty thick (as it is usual about Africa) that our Men could not
see one another the length of the Ship. Then our Master gave Orders that one
should go up the Main Topmast head, and keep strict watch; because we were
continually in expectation of coming to Land. Early the next morning I got me
above Deck, and went to take my allowance of Brandy at the usual place: After
which my Comrade, and I, who had been old acquaintance before we went to Sea,
and between whom an inviolable friendship was contracted, we agreed to go and
smoke our Pipes, and fell into a cheerful conference about our approaching Joy
of setting our feet on dry ground.

While we were thus talking, we heard of a sudden cry of Land, Land, which
mightily increased our Joy; little knowing after what manner we were drawing
nigh to the Shore. But we quickly saw our mistake, when the Master upon this
outcry, comes out, and with death in his looks cries our, Oh my poor Ship! we
are all undone! At which we stood in amaze, not knowing what to say, or to take
in hand to help our selves.

All this while the Ship was running violently to shore, the Wind being very
high, and having no time to hand our Sails, we were forced to cut the Gears,
upon which the Wind carried off our Sails overboard, with such a violent
noise, that one would have thought Heaven and Earth were coming together. While
we were all running hither and thither, in a miserable confusion, the Ship
begun to crack; which made us all cry out with a loud voice, to Almighty God,
to receive our poor Souls. It is easy to imagine what a dismal condition we
were in, with the noise the Ship made, and the crying and sighing that so many
of us made; for we were still 343 persons on Board, and the Ship kept still
cracking more and more, till at last the After-part broke, and the Sea beating
in violently, sunk our Stern in an instant.

None now expected to escape, and we saw nothing but death round about us, by
reason of the depth of the Sea on one side, and on the other the Shore so high,
that it was inaccessible. Yet every body was willing to try what they could do;
and to prolong their lives as long as they possibly could. We resolved
therefore to leap into the Sea; and, if possible, to make to Shore, which was
near enough to us, if happily we might reach it: But we foresaw it almost
impossible to come to it, by reason of its steepness, and the violent beating
of the Waves.

Thus recommending my self to Almighty God, and having implored his pardon and
assistance, I committed my self to the Sea, and strove with the utmost of my
power to get to the Rocks. I touched them twice or thrice, but the Waves carried
me off again; by this time some of our Company were got out safe, and they
could not help us any otherwise, than by calling to us, and advising us what
was best to do; which was no small help to those that swom: for the directions
they gave from the Shore, was a great guide to those poor people who were still
in the Sea, and whom fear made so insensible, and so hasty, that they could not
of themselves think to take the advantages they might have done, had they been
less terrified.

After I had been carried off again from the Rock, so far, that I had little or
no hopes of ever recovering it again, it pleased God that I was thrown on
again, and I luckily struck my hand into a claiy part of it, and thus got safe
to shore.

Seven more got out after me, and 35 before, so that 43 of us only escaped;
viz. the Master, the Steers-man, two Surgeons besides me, three Carpenters, the
Cook's men, the Swabber, the Gunner, 22 Seamen, and eight Soldiers.

The rest, 300 in number, miserably lost their lives.

Here we all fell on our knees, and returned our hearty praise to the merciful
God who had so bountifully delivered us from so great a danger; after which we
went to look a little about us; but none of us knew where we were; which added
much to our sorrow; besides that three of our men were almost dead with the
cold caused by the Seawater.

The Ship sunk downright, so that we could not see the least part of her, nor
had we saved the least thing about us. Her Cargo was worth above 328000
Ricksdollers in ready Cash, and many thousand Gilders in goods besides, which
were all lost.

Finding out at last that it was the false Cape of Good Hope we were got upon,
and that we were at 40 Miles distance from the right one, where the Duth
Garrison lay; we were forced to go further into the Country, which was the more
tedious, by reason of the sick men we had with us. We knew that the Country had
good store of admirable fruits, which we wished to come at; and at last we got
some excellent good Water-Melons, which served us for Meat and Drink.

In this poor condition we saw some Hottentots at a distance, whom we could not
come to speak to; for they run away from us. But it was to fetch some of them
that could speak Dutch; and when we had made our case known to them, they
immediately went and acquainted the Governor with it, who straight sent
another parcel of these Hottentots (who are the wild Inhabitants of that
Country) together with several Files of Soldiers to fetch us. They took up our
sick men, and carried them on their shoulders upon Beds made of Reeds; and we
were comfortably entertained with good Canary, good Rice, Biscuit, and all sorts
of excellent fruits; all which were extremely welcome to us.

When we came to the Cape, our Master and the Streers-man went immediately
before the Governor, to clear themselves from whatever might be laid to their
charge, for the loss of the Ship, and of so many men's lives; and there
alleged, that it could not be imputed to their negligence, or want of due
care; but that it was the good pleasure of Providence to afflict them in that
manner. After which we were all lodged within the Castle, and furnished with
the usual allowance, and there waited for the Europa's coming; which was no
less than three weeks: So that we gave that over for lost too, fearing it had
undergone like fate with ours. What observations I made in this Country, during
that time of our stay, I will now give you an account of.

In the year 1650 a Fort was built by the Dutch in this Cape, and ever since
all the shipping that comes thither, whether French, English, or any other
Nation, must pay Tribute at their first Landing. This Land, for its situation
and fruitfulness, is very commodious for all that go from any part of Europe to
the East Indies, for refreshing of themselves, and recruiting of Provisions,
and taking in of fresh Water, which comes out of the Rocks and Mountains of the
Country. Within the Land, it is richly adorned with abundance of Fruit Trees;
but near the Shore, there are few, or none, by reason of the terrible Winds and
Hurricanes, that beat upon it in a fearful manner, which come generally down
from the Mountain called by the Dutch Tafel-bergh: And by reason of these
stormy Winds, this Cape goes frequently with us by the name of the Storm Cape.

The Dutch, that are there in Garrison, have planted good Orchards and Gardens,
which afford all sorts of Sallads, Cabages, Turnips, Cowcumbers, and all sorts
of Kitchen Herbs: All which are great refreshments to those that come from Sea.
And likewise the free Inhabitants, of which there were already some hundreds
when I was there, have Land which produces good Corn, Wheat, and Oats, etc. and
Vineyards: So that one finds there plenty of good Beer, Wine, excellent Bread,
and such sort of things as well as in Europe.

I dieted at one of these Free-men's houses, and I had a very good Dinner of
Meat, roast and boiled, and Fish, with excellent Sallad, and Butter, and Cheese,
and delicate Beer, all for one Skelling, (which is but six pence English) but
Wine I was forced to pay for, after the rate of half a Ricks-doller the quart.

Besides the great store of Fruits which are common in Europe. There is great
plenty of admirable Lemon and Orange Trees, which afford a very beautiful
prospect.

The Haven is called Tafel-Baey, which is to say, Table-Bay, so called from a
vast Mountain just by the Shore which is called Tafel-bergh, in English
Table-bill, from its figure, which is seemingly square and flat at top: It is
seen a vast way off at Sea; and it lies about five Miles from the utmost point
of the Cape; between which, lies the Hill Lewenbergh, or Lion's-bill, so
called, by reason of its resembling a Lion in shape; the head comes quite up to
the Table-hill, and the tail comes down into the Sea.

I had a great desire to go up to the top of that Hill e're I went from the
Cape: So having got some others who desired it too, we got leave, and set out
the next morning early. It is about a Mile distance from the Castle; we went up
it a good pace for a matter of four hours, and yet we were not near to the top:
We were pretty well tired, and more afraid of being too long about it, and of
being belated; for in the evening it is extraordinary dangerous being there, by
reason of the wild Beasts that then come abroad; so we even resolved to go back
again to get in by daylight: For we thought if we had fallen under their
clutches, we should not have been much the better for our experience: And
besides, a Cloud came over us which wetted us to the Skin, whereupon we
returned back straight, and came into the Castle about half an hour before
night; so that we could not compass our desire, nor could ever yet hear of any
one that had been up to the top of it.

Provision is here so plenty, that the Dutch have it mighty cheap, for a little
Copper-wire, for Bracelets, for Tobacco, and for any such trifle; so that a
large Beast does not stand a man in more than a conple of Shillings.

There are a great many Lions and wild Boars. In the Governors Hall are two
Lions Skins. The one was of a Lion, that one of the Hottentots shot with his
Arrow: The other was killed by a Boar. This last Creature, I mean the Boar,
has on its back a sharp sort of Prickle; near a spang long, and so hard, that
they serve many Tradesmen for Bodkins. And the Lion falling furiously upon
this Boar, the Boar struck him with his prickly Bristles into the belly, and
made him bleed to death, though the Boar perished likewise in the fight; and they
were found dead by one another, and both their Skins were hung up for a
memorandum.

Besides these, there are many Elephants in that Country, and a sort of Beast
they call Bavians, the same we call Baboons; which very much resemble aged Men.
Some of our Men had orders once to go into the Wood to cut down part of it.
Amongst them was one Comical fellow, who had beaten one to death in a quarrel
at Tirol; and being forced to fly, had listed himself a Soldier in the
East India Company, and so made his escape. He staid a little after the rest to
ease Nature; and laid his Satchel down at some distance from him; we saw one of
those Baboons coming toward him, which made us stand still to see what he
would do; and laying hold on his Satchel, away he went with it, and robbed the
fellow of all his provision of Bread, and Cheese, and Tobacco; which made very
good sport for the rest. Ostridges are here also very common; the Eggs whereof
are very good to eat. And among many other sorts of Birds, which they have,
that are uncommon with us, there are a sort called Sea-Ravens; but of these
there has been account enough given by several Writers.

In the Sea, all round this place, one may see abundance of great Fish called
North-Capers, but none of them are catched about the Cape; they have a snout
like that of an Hog, through which they throw up Water as high as an house, and
in such a quantity, as to fill almost a small Vessel, and it comes down like a
violent shower of Rain: They are always to be seen about the Cape, but they do
no manner of harm.

There is a prodigious quantity of other sorts of Fish, both in the Sea, and in
the Rivers too. We went one night with a Net to have some sport, and at two
pulls we had so many, we could not carry the tenth part of 'em. The Fish we
caught were made very much like our Carps; and here are also abundance of
Tortoises.

The natural Inhabitants of this place, are called Hottentots, mere Heathens;
of no extraordinary size; for the most part very lean, and meagre; their
Language very unpleasant, rattling like Turkies when they speak. They go stark
naked, only having a Sheeps Skin about them, the Tail whereof comes before
their Privities.

When a Ship is new come in, as soon as the Boat lands any of the Men, they get
in as it comes back, to beg Biscuit of the Seamen, which they love exceedingly;
when they ask for it, they cry Broqua, which signifies Bread.

It is their custom to cut out one of their Testicles when they are young.
Their chief Ornaments (if such may be so called) is on their Legs; they take an
Ox, or Sheep's guts, and thrusting out the excrements a little, just to let
them lie close and flat; and while they are moist, they wrap them about their
Legs, and there let them stick. These very guts is part of their food too; for
just in this same pickle, they broil them a little over the fire, and eat them.
So that it may properly be said, that they are meat and cloth to 'em: But to
see them use-it either way, might very probably give any man besides them, a
vomit. They use to besmear their body with all manner of dirt and nastiness,
which makes them stink worse than a Goat.

Upon their heads they stick all sorts of little Sea-shells, and small Copper
Rings, that come from Neurenbergh, which the Seamen bring with them, to give
them: And for one of them they will show you some of their Tricks; among which
one is, to throw a Dart or long Stick, with which they will hit within the
compass of a farthing a mighty distance off.

As for their Religion, little can be said of it, their Language, it not being
understood by any, that ever I heard of. They use commonly to get together near
to the Seashore in the morning by Sunrising, and there they get in a Ring,
holding each other fast by their hands, and dance about upon the Sand, looking
up toward Heaven, saying something in their Language; and then write some
strange unintelligible characters and figures in the Sand, and so depart; all
which undoubtedly is intended in honor to some Deity. I have asked some of
them that could speak a little broken Dutch, what thoughts they had of a God,
and whom they believed in; they answered, that they thought that there was one
above, that had made the Hills, and that Sea which we saw, and all that was in
them; and that Homage was due to him; but I could not learn any thing further.

They are very good Footmen, and run very swiftly, which make the Dutch keep
always a Troop of Horse there, to catch them in case of any Insurrection: For
they dare not trust them in the least. In mischief they are cunning enough,
though wonderfully stupid in any thing else. If they are not hungry, they will not
work, though you would beat them to death; but when their belly incites them to
it, they will work like Horses. It is not safe to break ones word with them; and
if one should not give them what was promised, when their work is done, a man
would go in danger of his life.

Their Habitations are most on green Meadows, and grounds that bear sweet Herbs
for Pasture for their Cattle. Their Houses are made of Sea-Reeds joined
together, and fastened at top; just like our Hop-poles, when they are laid up
for the Winter; and when their Cattle has eaten up the Pasture all about them,
then they remove their Houses, to some fresh place, and settle there again for
some time.

As to what belongs to those we call Freemen, of which I made some mention
before, they are such of our Men, as have served the Company in the station of
a Soldier, or any other way during the space of ten or twelve years, and then
desired to settle there, to trade or plant, which they may then do, paying a
certain sum of Money, and all Imposts and Customs to the Company. These have
dwelling-houses built after a manner like as in Holland, but not so high nor so
fine.

The chief Commodities which the Company trades in, to quit the Costs of their
Garrison there, is Sea-Dogs, which are catched here in vast quantities. They
boil the fat out of them, and the Skins are hung up to dry, which they send
afterward to Holland.

When any Ship comes there, an Order is read to all the People that are on
Board, forbidding them all to buy any thing of the Hottentots, except Ostridges
Eggs, and other like trifles. All Commodities of any use or value, as
Rhinoceros Horns, Elephants Teeth, and Sea-Dog Skins, are wholly engrossed by
the Company.

Justice here is very severe, in respect to any of these Heathens especially;
one instance whereof I was an eyewitness of, while I was there; Three of them
having ravished a Christian Maidservant, were hung up by the heels on a
Gibbet, and so ended their lives, after they had hanged there about thirteen or
fourteen hours.

There are four Seasons of the year here, though in a quite different time from
ours: For our Summer is their Winter; and in September, which was the time I
was there, it was their Spring-season.

Their Winters are cold, and always foggy and misty, but there is never any
Frost or Snow. Thus far will suffice to inform the Reader of the nature and
customs of the Cape de Bona Speranza. I proceed now with the continuation of
our Voyage.

CHAP. III.
The Author's departure from the Cape, in the Ship called the Europa. They met
with a most violent Storm, which held them four whole days about St. Maurice's
Island. Their arrival to the Streights of Sunda, then to Batavia. Description
of the City, and Castle; and of the Government of them both. Customs of the
several Inhabitants there; especially the Chinese. Many Crocodils in that
River, they are called Caimans by the Inhabitants. The Author present at the
catching of several of them. The manner of it. Tigers, Apes; Coco-trees,
Mangoes. Bislang Figgs.

AFter we had spent a pretty while here, and were very well recovered from our
late Affliction, we prepared our selves to be gone in the Europa, which by this
time was come, and ready to sail off again for Batavia; and with the first fair
Wind we set Sail, and in the name of God we ran out of Tasel-Bay, leaving only
one English Fly-Boat behind us at the Cape, which was come thither, since we.

All that day, and the next, the same fair Gale continued, which blew us along
so briskly, that on the next day we were got out of sight of Africa, and came
into the Main. We had this brisk and fair Gale for eight days together, which
carried us merrily along beyond the Island called St. Maurice, about which
place men seldom fail of a Storm and bad Weather; so that it was no small joy
to us, to have so fairly escaped it: But alas! our joy was soon palled; and our
security proved very deceitful, while we foolishly took the measures of our
safety, more from the Climes and Latitudes we were in, than from His
Providence, to whom the Winds, and Seas are every where subject; for when we
least thought on it, the Sky darkened all of a sudden, and such a Hurrican rose
upon us, as made us all tremble. No sooner had it given us the first toss, but
our Ship out-did almost the noise of it, with the dreadful cracks it gave,
insomuch that we expected nothing but to sink in the instant. All the while the
Clouds grew darker and darker, and the Wind increased to that degree, that we
could not hear one another speak. The Sea gaped so hideously, that it could not
be thought we should ever escape being swallowed up; our Ship sometimes mounted
on the top of a Wave, plunged down with such a terrible force, as it had been
down a Precipice, that we expected every moment to be overwhelmed with it. And
no sooner had we escaped one Gulf, but we were raised up again to fall into
another. All this while, what with the Sea dashing in upon us, and what with
the great Gaps that were in the Ship, we were so full of Water, that we were
all forced to pump like Slaves, for three days together; all which yet was
little enough. I for my part, who little thought to have been in any such
employment, yet was forced to fall to, and stick to it for four hours together,
which would have been intolerable to me at any other time: But on such
occasions a Man does not much stand upon Niceties: And I do not remember that I
was so much as tired with it, for the hopes we had that God would still cast an
Eye of pity upon us, and relieve us out of our misery, was now all the comfort
we had left. But the Weather still continued, or, rather indeed, grew worse, so
that mounting our Ship up an end, one of our Carpenters was tossed out of his
Cabin, and had tumbled directly into the Sea, had not one of the Seamen
luckily caught hold of him. I tried several places to get a little rest in,
and, amongst others, I got in by some Sheep that we had brought from the Cape
with us, which I found almost dead, never a one of them being able to stand on
its Legs. Not finding my self safe there, without holding fast by the Boards,
which was very tiresome work, I went to the Gunner's Room, where the Surgeons
Chests always lie, to try to get into a Hammock: But all the Chests there were
turned topsie turvy, and in such a confusion, that I could not get to the place
I designed for 'em; so I sat me down: But I had not been there three minutes,
but I heard a low broken voice just breathing out the Name of God; at which,
being mightily surprised, I looked and found our Provost, an old Man, lying
under those Chests that were jumbled together, and crushed to pieces with the
vast weight of 'em. I ran up to acquaint our Master, who in the hurry took
little notice of it, only ordered some of the Men to throw him overboard,
which was immediately done, without any formalities, or so much as a Plank; for
we had no time to tie him to one, as it is usual; but over they threw him,
clothes and all on.

It was now the fourth night that we had been in this condition; and that we
gave our selves for gone every moment of that time: So we were all called to
Prayers, and every one got out upon Deck with much ado, and held fast, some by
one thing, some by another, to hear our Minister, who very earnestly sent up
most devout Prayers to Heaven, that God would in his mercy deliver us; or, if
it were his good pleasure, to receive our poor Souls unto himself.

To those who are altogether strangers to the Sea, the Affliction we were in is
altogether unconceivable; and for my own part, though I have been oftentimes in
great dangers by Sea and by Land, and upon many occasions have, with Courage
enough, stood before the Enemy; yet did none of these dangers ever terrify me
comparably to this, where death does not only seem sure and inevitable, but
comes attended with all the Horror imaginable, and dressed in its most hideous
and terrifying shapes.

But by how much the greater our danger was, so much the more admirable was the
power and goodness of God toward us: For on the fourth day in the morning the
Winds fell, the Air became serene, and the Sea calm, which restored us all, as
it were, to life again. We then, as in duty bound, first fell to praising of
God, whence our help came; and with Hymns and Psalms to rejoice in him for his
goodness, and our miraculous deliverance.

After which we went to set things to right about us, and to mend our tattered
Ships. To this purpose we put all the heavy Cannon on one side of the Ship, to
raise up the other, that the Carpenters might get at it to work; which they
went about immediately: But the Calm did not last long enough for them to do
half what we wanted. We had a brisk Gale, which was very fair for us, it is
true; but having so many Leaks unstopt, we were forced to keep our Pumps going
continually. This Wind held us six days, during which we passed the Latitude of
St. Maurice, and got in sight of St. Paul de Amsterdam; which we left about
sixteen Miles on the right off us, and steered right upon Great Java, whereof
Batavia is the chief Town. In all this time we had a great many of our Men
sick, and seven of them died, and were cast overboard.

The Wind being so fair for us, the allowance was large, and there was no stint
of any thing almost: Yet we wished heartily to be ashore, and the more, for the
sake of our Sick: But we wanted more than a hundred Miles sail to the place we
were to go to. But by God's assistance we reached it, beyond our expectation;
for, by Sunsetting, a Sailor cried out, Land; which caused a sudden joy
amongst us all; and the Master straight presented him a Ducat, or two
Ricksdollers, two Cheeses, and a Bottle of Canary, according to custom.

Upon this we fell to tricking up our selves, painting our Longboat and
Shalloop, and making our Ship very fine: We fastened our Anchors, and made all
preparations to go to Shore, which was not now above forty Miles from us. By
the next morning we got within two hours sail of it; but we over-shot it by
above thirty Miles on the Westward of it; so that we were forced to tack about
to the East; and after some days sail we came up to some small Islands that lie
within five Miles of Great Java; there we cast Anchor immediately, hawl'd out
our Boat, and went on Shore, to fetch some Coco's, which we divided among the
rest on Shipboard. Three days after this, we came into the Road of Sunda,
wherein a great many little Vessels came to us (which they call Prawen, which
sail prodigious swiftly) and brought with them several sorts of fruits, as
Coco's, Pisang Figgs, which are a long kind of Figg, Eggs, and such like.
Lastly, On the last day of November we arrived safely at Batavia, where we cast
Anchor before the Castle, having lost thirteen of our Men, and about 20 sick
still aboard. Here we returned God thanks for our safe arrival; embraced each
other heartily, and discharged our Cannon very briskly. After which the Master
taking some company along with him, went immediately to Shore, to wait on the
General, who was the Here John Speelman, at that time Governor of all the
East Indies.

In the mean time the Fiscal came to our Ship, to take a view of all the Men,
and to demand all their Letters: After which the Men were landed, and the Ship
unladen: The sick were put into the Hospital, and those that were in health
marched in good order into the Castle of Batavia; where being drawn up before
the Generals Apartment, he came out to them, and kindly bad them welcome; and
ordered the Major to divide them amongst the Militia; but first they had three
days freedom given them to rest and take their ease: After which they were
obliged to gather together every day without fail on a place appointed for them
to exercise, until they were well versed in it, and made thorow-pac'd Soldiers
of, and fit to be sent on any Expedition to any part of the Indies.

For my part, I went to Shore several times, and diverted my self very well,
until I received an Order from the Surgeon general to take my Post in a small
Fort, about a Mile or somewhat less, from Batavia; where I found an Ensign, two
Sergeants, two Gunners, to eight Pieces of Cannon, and sixty private Soldiers.
I was mighty well pleased with my Station here; the Place being very finely and
advantageously situated, with the Sea on the one side, and a very pleasant
River on the other, which came down from Batavia, upon which there were
continually a great number of Prawen sailing to and fro with Chinese, going to
a certain place, about half a Mile from thence, where their Mosque is, wherein
they sacrifice at several times in the year to their Idol, called by them
Jasgin, and by the Dutch Josic; and there they perform all their Religious
Ceremonies, which are very diverting to a stranger to see.

As for Batavia, the City and Castle are as well worth a description, as they
are a Man's sight: And truly mine was ravished with it; for I must confess, that
I think them yet finer even than Amsterdam it self. It is five or six Miles in
compass. The River Jacatra runs through most Streets of the Town, and almost
encompasses it. Upon these Canals the Inhabitants have the convenience of going
in Boats to their Gardens and Pleasure-houses: The sides of them is walled up
with good square Stone, and all along each side of it, there goes a Row or two
of fine Cedar, Coco, or Figg trees, where the Freemen use to walk at night
under a most pleasant Shade.

The Castle stands toward the Sea. It has four Bastions, two of them to the
Sea, called the Ruby and the Pearl; the other two to the City, which go by the
name of the Saphir and the Diamon.

It is in the whole exact square, and from top to bottom built up with
excellent good square Stone. On each of these Bastions are sixteen half
Culverins planted: Besides this, they are full of fine Trees, such as Lemons,
and Mango's, which makes them look most sweetly. While I was there, there was a
third Gate built to the Castle, which before had but two. One of the Gates
looks toward the Sea, through which the Goods come in from the Ships into the
Ware houses, and it is called the Watergate. The other goes into the City,
which therefore they call the City-Gate.

In the middle of the Castle is the Generals Apartment, and over against it are
the Houses of two of the Council-men. The rest, (which are four more) live in
the City.

The Government of the Indies lies upon these six Men. The General's Retinue is
not very sumptuous: He had but twelve Halbardiers, dressed much after the manner
of our Yeomen of the Guard, but in Red and Yellow. One of these is always to
stand Sentinel an hour before his Chamber. When he rid out, he was attended by
a Troop of Cuirassiers, and a company of Footmen, and six Halbardiers. But all
this is nothing to his Revenue, which exceeds that of several Princes of Europe.

There are in the Castle many other Inhabitants, some of the chief Merchants;
some Assistants, and Book-keepers; also several Handycrafts men, as Gun-Smiths,
Lock-Smiths, Joyners, and such like, that are to be employed in any Military
business. The Soldiers have their standings under the Gates, and on the
Bastions: Sometimes more, sometimes less, as they have occasion to send them
abroad, or call them home again. Every day about four in the afternoon, they
must come to the Parade, and pass by the General's house three times; sometimes
he comes out, and takes a view of them, to observe their carriage, and
behavior, and to see whether their Arms are kept in good order.

When any one neglects the Parade, he must expect to be severely punished; for
the Military Discipline is most strictly kept up there. If any one should
chance to sleep upon Centry; for the first time, his punishment is to be laden
with heavy Arms, for some days; the second time he is whipped; and the third time
it is death, without remission.

The Castle is encompassed with very wide Grafts or Canals; over one of which
there is a fine Stone Bridge of one and twenty Arches, that goes into a large
Field, which is called the Galgveld, that is, the Gibbet-field; where
Malefactors are executed. There is a Gibbet, a Wheel, and a Whipping-Post; all
which are frequently made use of. Cross this Field is another smaller Bridge,
(where a Centry always stands) which leads to the chief Street of the City,
which is called the Heere-straet.

Within the City are Shops for all kind of Merchandise, and very good and
reasonable Victualling-houses: The Inhabitants are of all Nations, as
Amboineses, Malabarians, Mardigarians, etc. bur the Chinese, being the chief
and greater part, I shall pass by the others, and give you some account of them
only.

They exceed all the others by far, in cunning and policy; and are very good
Mechanics; and there are of them of all Trades, excepting Clockwork, or
Watch-work, and they dive into all manner of Commerce whatever.

They wear most commonly White or Blew. Their Coats are very large, and the
Sleeves so long, and wide, that they fall over their hands. Their Breeches
likewise of the same color, are very wide, and come down to their feet. They
wear a sort of broad Slippers, like Hungarian Shoes: But they are only made of
Past-board; so that when they are to go through any wet or dirt, they take their
Slippers in their hands; then wash their feet at the next Canal, and wipe 'em;
so put their Slippers on again: But in bad Weather, if they are to go through a
great deal of dht, they wear wooden Shoes, such as the Country People do in
France.

They are very neat in their Hair, which they have trimmed and combed every
week by their Barbers; they do 'em up with a Bodkin, and stick a small
Tortoise-shell Comb in it behind, and so put a Coif over it, made of
Horse-Hair, like a Net; so that at the first, a stranger would take their Men
for Women.

Their Hair they value at the higest rate, since it is the last thing they will
stake at play. They are the greatest Gamesters that ever were known; insomuch
that they will play away their Wives and Children, when they have lost all their
Wealth: And when their Houses and Family are lost, then goes the very Hair off
of their heads: But if one loses that, he loses with it all his Credit and
Reputation, and is looked upon as a Slave, and is forced all his life long to
work and sell for other People. Their Beards are very extraordinary, both for
their length, and thinness. I have seen them with only five or six Hairs on
their chin, and those hang down to their feet.

Their Women are most of them Slaves, bought out of the Island Baly and
Macassar; not very black, but of a deep tawny; short and very well set. They
may have as many of them as they are able to keep. When a Chinese dies, his
Heir sells all his Wives away again; except that one that he loved best, who is
by his Will made free. This makes them Gentlewomen, and their Heirs after them
are likewise ennobled. Such as these are esteemed as the right Chinese; and
they are but rare in the Country; for while I was there, there was not above
twenty of them. They have none but Sons, almost; it is rare to see a Daughter
in a Family. I was very curious to know whence that might proceed: But in vain
did I imagine many things, to be the natural causes of it. But being intimate
with one of them, the cruel and barbarous method they take was made plain to
me, which is, that they destroy their Females; and to this purpose, as soon as
their Big Bellies begin to be perceived, they keep within doors, so that none
knows of their being delivered, unless they bring forth a Male. At the same
time this discovery was made to me, I was entrusted with the life of the
discoverer, and therefore I was made to promise all the secrecy imaginable.
Every morning their custom is, to wash their Children in the River.

Their Weddings are kept openly. The Men and Women go in Procession, and the
Relations among them carry all their Presents to the Young Couple, and all
their Riches openly before them. Before the doors, where they are to have their
Entertainment, is a fine Scaffold made up, where their Music stands, which
consists of several Instruments peculair to the Country; as the Gungumma, which
is a kind of Drum, and a sort of Music they make with little Bells, which is
agreeable enough. All the way they go, as also the house they are to come into,
are strowed with all sorts of Greens and Flowers: Or sometimes they go by Water
in their Prawen, on the Canals that run through the City, with their Hair down
about their Ears, or hanging down in the Water. When they are come home, the
first thing they do, is to sacrifice to their Idol; which is done after this
manner. In a corner of the Room they have an Altar set out with abundance of
pretty little Trinkets, upon which is an Image made of Clay, about a span long.
The face of it is very broad, with a large pair of Eyes; it is black, and
painted with some round streeks of Red; a vast large Nose, and a long white
Beard: On the head stand two Horns painted, with all sorts of Colors. This
Image they call Josgin; to this they bow, and make many salutations; clapping
their hands altogether, begging it to keep them from all harms, and to take
care that no evil may happen to them.

They own that there is a powerful God, that has made the Heavens and the
Earth: But they say, that he is of a good nature and disposition, and that
there is no fear of harm from him: But that all their fear is from the Devil,
whom they appease by their Offerings and Prayers under the shape of that Image:
Therefore they are very careful to please him, and will not sail at night to
light Candles made of red or yellow Wax, which they set before it: And there
they bring Meat and Drink, and all sorts of Fruit, which is all taken away the
next day, and then it is eaten by the People of the house, and other fresh Meat
set in the room of it.

But to return to their Feasts; the Men and the Women eat always apart. They
take up their Meat with an Instrument made of two pieces of Wood, which go
cross one another, something like that which the Gold-beaters use with us to
take up their Leaves of Gold or Silver, which they use very dexterously to take
up their Meat with; This serves them instead of Forks, and they keep them very
neat and clean. They sit on the ground cross-legg'd: And if at any time they do
sit on a Chair or Stool, they still sit down with their Legs cross-wise under
them, and by that means they have them so pliant, that they can lay them on
their Polls, with as great nimbleness and ease as we can our hands.

But now to make an end of the Description of the City of Batavia. That is
likewise encompassed with a strong Wall, above forty paces broad, and Earth
thrown up against it.

The Bastions are like those of the Sluys, built with large cut Stone, and all
square and well provided with Guard-houses on all sides of it, where the
Soldiers have their Quarters, and none of them dares to be absent one night
from them, without especial leave, and that is but very seldom granted. Besides
this, there are Canals on each side the Wall all round. The Cannon is always
ready to turn, as well upon the City it self, as upon an Enemy without, in case
of any Insurrection or Disturbance amongst the Inhabitants, which are of all
Nations. So that to be the better prepared, if such a thing should happen,
every Street has a Bastion that commands it, from whence they could
immediately cut off any Party that should be made in any part of the Town
against the Castle.

The same care has been taken, and the like provision made in all places in
the Indies, that are in possession of the Dutch, and they are always well
provided with Europeans, Christians, in the Service of the Company; and there
is of course a considerable number of such as are settled there, and are
married, some to European, and some to Indian Women. And of what Nations soever
they be, they are permitted to keep the same Religion, Manners and Customs, as
they have in their own Country.

The Magistrate consists of persons that are in the Service of the Company, and
of Burghers, which are Freemen; made such after they have spent that time in
the Company's Service, as was agreed upon betwixt them. The President is one of
the Council, but cannot direct in any thing of moment without the consent of
the General.

Each of the other Nations have also a head and chief of their own: But when
there is any thing in hand that concerns the Public; or if they cannot agree
among themselves, they are forced to appear before the Magistrate of the City,
And in all things their Government is very well and prudently established.

The four chief Gates of the City are called by the names of the Utrecht, the
Delft, the Rotterdam, and the Newgate, so called, on the outsides of which,
are the Suburbs, which are large and spacious, and very fine, and inhabited
most by Chineeses: A vast number of which have been forced by the Wars they had
with the Tartars to retire, and seek a Refuge in the Indies, over which they
have spread themselves: And especially in all Maritine Towns, where they are
fallen into Trades and Commerce with admirable industry and success.

The River Jacatra is no small Ornament as well as Advantage to Batavia;
besides which, it is beautified with abundance of very fine Orchards,
Fruit-gardens, and Pleasure-houses, which are very neatly contrived and kept.
There is but very little Rice all about it; though it is their staff of life.
And, as in all the other parts of the Indies, the only thing that serves
instead of Bread; but yet there is never any want of it, it being always
brought in great quantities, and the City sufficiently furnished with it from
Bantam, Japara, etc.

The Rivers thereabouts are much pestered with Crocodiles. While I was there,
as we used to go a walking in the Evenings, we observed one of them for several
nights that used to run out of the hedge into the River, as soon as it spied or
heard us coming toward him: Upon which a desire took us to try to catch him if
we could; which we did in this manner.

We took a long Rope, to which we fastened a strong double Hook, full of
beards: And instead of arming it with Wires, we did it with Packthread; which
being loose about it, gets in between its Teeth, and hinders him from snapping
the Hook off: This done, we tied a Dog to this, with the Hook under his belly:
And setting him upon a Board, thrust him out into the River, and fastened the
Cord to a Tree: Quickly after, the Dog fell a barking and howling, and the
Crocodil did not fail to come to him; and very greedily swallowed him in: Upon
which the Hook struck into his Throat, and had him fast. We had so good success
with this, that we afterward caught a great many of them. The biggest we
caught was twenty seven foot long; and when we opened it, we found two
Steen-Bockiens, and the head of a black Boy in his belly. We were forced to
knock him on the head with great Iron Bars, after we had fired several Muskets
upon him to little purpose. When the Soldiers kill one of these Creatures, they
get some Blacks to carry it for 'em to the General; who immediately gives them
six Ducatoons, for their pains. The only advantage I sought for, was to have
some of their Fat, it being very good for several operations in Physic and
Surgery.

The Inhabitants use to catch them with Nets; which is very dangerous, as I my
self have seen; at Bantam, on such an occasion, a Crocodil bit off both the
Legs of a Javan; yet do they continue that way still, and go often to catch
them in that manner.

Besides these Crocodils, there are abundance of other sorts of Wild Beasts in
the said Island of Japatra.

The Fort where I was ordered to be at my first coming, was very near to the
Forest, and just in the way to it, from Batavia; so that the Huntsmen coming by
us, I often went out with them, and saw them catch most sorts of those Wild
Creatures that the Country affords, It will not be amiss to give the Reader an
account of some of 'em; and first of a sad accident that befell the Hunts-men
one day.

We had two Hunts-men that were made free by the General, and had the liberty
to go abroad for that purpose, to catch what they could. These being gone one
day to get some game for the General; which was commonly Wild Pigeons, and
other sorts of Wild Fowl, and Wild Boars, and a sort of Creature they call
Steen-Bockiens, which is made much like a Hare, and differs only in that it
has small Horns, and the Meat of 'em is far more delicate; while they were
only prepared for the pursuit of things of this kind, and sat down to rest
under a Tree, a Tiger fell in a most furious manner upon them. They were pretty
much used to be followed by them; but they used to be in such readiness to
receive them, that they were the death of them whenever they did but offer to
come near them.

But being now surprised by this more than ordinary fierce Creature, coming of
a sudden upon them: It was as much as the one could do to lay hold of his
Fowling-piece, while the other had nothing to defend himself with, but his
lighted Match in his hand; which he shook about, but to no purpose: The other
had no sooner got his Gun, but in a hurry he fires upon him; but not taking
good aim, did not do any execution, but what served to enrage him the more; him
the Tiger throws down under him; and seizing the other by the hand, bit off
three of his Fingers; notwithstanding which, he luckily seizing his Gun, fired
it, and by good providence laid the Tiger flat on the ground. Upon this he
bethought himself of what he might do for his best security, for the night
coming upon him, the danger increased; besides that he was now alone, for his
Companion was by this time expired, being miserably torn. He took up the Corpse,
lest it should become a prey to the rest of them; and climbing into a Tree,
drew him up with him: There he remained in great fear and excessive pain caused
by his wound. When he had been there a while, there came a couple of Wild
Boars, which he could not see: But he heard them scratch and tear at the bottom
of the Tree, which they did the more furiously, because the blood of his dead
Companion was spilt about the place; so he shot upon them at random, and hit
one of them, so that he fell dead some few paces from thence.

The day being come, and the Coast clear, he gets down, and leaving his dead
Companion upon the Tree, the Tiger and the Wild Boar on the ground, comes
forthwith to our Fort to me, to have his hand dressed: Which being done, he gave
us the account of this Adventure. Our Ensign went to acquaint the Major General
with it, upon which Orders were given immediately to a Sergeant, to go with six
Soldiers, and six Negro Slaves, with a Bier to the place where this Slaughter
was, and the wounded Hunts-man went with 'em, to show them the place. There
they found all according to the Information he had given. The Man was brought
to Batavia, and decently buried in the Malaish Churchyard; and he that was
come off, had for a Reward twelve Gilders given him, and a settled Table for
his life, besides his former Pay, and withal a Corporal's place.

On the other side of the Fort, is almost all Woods, which are cut down every
other Year by the Soldiers. These Woods harbor vast numbers of Monkeys, which
make there such a strange noise, that one would be amazed to hear it. We made
it almost our daily diversion to go a Hunting after them; and we used to catch
such abundance of them, that a Man might have one of them for a Pipe of
Tobacco. They are a very docile sort of Monkeys, and not in the least inferior
to those that are brought out of Africa and America for playing of Tricks; but
they come but seldom over hither, being very tender, and not able to bear the
change of Climates, nor the hardship of so long a Voyage: For at my return I
took a couple of them with me, but as soon as ever we came on this side the
Tropic, where we begun to feel a change of Air, they were seized with the
Bloody Flux, fell lame, and died.

One way to catch them was, by taking of Coco-Nuts, which are very plentiful
there; and making a small hole in 'em, just big enough for 'em to force their
Paws into; we hung them up all about the Trees where they came. As soon as they
espied the hole, they wanting to get at the Kernel, would strive hard but they
would get their Paws in: And when they go to take them out again, they have not
the sense to squeeze their Claws together to slip their Paws out, as they had
to get them in: Besides that, the surprise which the person causes, who watches
them, makes them less able to rid themselves of their Manacles; and as they
went to run down, they fall with the very weight of the Nut, which is it may be
five or six pound weight. But this way there was no hopes of catching any more
than one at one time; for when the others see one of their company thus caught
by the Leg, they will not come near the Coco-Nuts all that day.

I went out once for a fancy after them with a Fowling-piece, but I found it
impracticable; for after I had spied one of them, and got my Shoes and
Stockings off, because the place was a kind of a Moorish ground; but he had his
Eye upon me too, and led me such a dance, that I had almost stuck in the
Slough, for want of minding my way: And since that time, I never went after
them again; for they are so shy, that it is almost always labor lost. And if
one does happen to shoot one of them, if he does not kill him dead upon the
spot, they will run and stop up their wounds with grass, and so get sar enough
from you, though they drop in the long run, and go and die in some hole where you
cannot get at 'em.

My chief Recreation was to take a walk to the City, which was a most delicious
walk indeed, all along shaded with fine large Coco-trees. Sometimes I took a
Boat, and went to the Fort Jacatra; where lay a whole Company of Soldiers, of
the number of which our Men was a sort of a Detatchment: It lies about two
Miles more to the South, and is the chief Pass into the whole Country of Java,
in the direct way to Japara and Kartiri. Near this Fort flows the famous River
Jacatra (from which the Fort had its name) which thence running through Batavia,
empties it self into the Sea about half a Mile below it. There are by the Fort
three Powder-Mills upon that River, which I used to walk to frequently, being
very well worth ones sight for their largeness and ingenious contrivance.

The outward parts of this Country, and that for a considerable way within too,
are very well cultivated, and richly set out with abundance of fine noble
Gardens, which produce all manner of fruits, for refreshment and for
sustenance. There are of all sorts of Figg-Trees; some of which are the most
delicious fruit that ever was tasted: So that with its lofty Cedars, which
overtop the fruit-bearing Trees, and look so sweet and green, and what with
their more useful Coco-Trees, and other fruit trees, which are always verdant,
and afford a cool retreat, and pleasant shade; besides that their fruits are
all of them most delicious, I think truly, it may be called an Earthly
Paradise, and that no Country in the World can outdo it for gratifying the Eye
and taste.

But of all the fruits that the East Indies produce (now I am about 'em) I
think it will not be amiss to give you a description of three of the chiefest
of them.

That which deserves the first place amongst them, is the fruit which they call
the Manges Tanges; of the bigness of a common Apple; the shell is of a dark
brown color, in which are contained four Kernels, of a flesh color, sticking
to each other, which melt like Butter upon the Tongue, and of so fine and
refreshing a taste, that I never met with any fruit comparable to it, in any
other part of the World. It is generally served up at the greatest Tables, as
the most delicious Dish that can be made; dressed with Sugar, Spice and Sack, and
put into fine China Dishes. It is also a most pleasant and infallible Remedy
against the Bloody Flux, when boiled in Water. The Tree that bears this, is
about the bigness of a Mulberry-Tree, and very flow of propagation: For when
you have planted it, you must never expect to see it bear; and if it does
chance to bear any fruit within the life of him that planted it, it comes to
nothing; but withers away: But then there shoots out a little shoot, which you
take and plant very carefully, and that becomes your Stock.

The next to this is the Coco-Nut. The Tree is all smooth and even from the
bottom to the very top; where the Leaves spread themselves all in a fuff, and
the Nutts under them, twenty or thirty on a Tree. The Country people have a
pretty Art of Tapping these Trees, with long Bamboe Canes, that will hold two
or three quarts, or more, which they very artfully stick into the Tree, and let
them fill themselves with the Juice: When they are filled, they put it into
Vessels to keep, or else they go away with it to Batavia, and sell it fresh
there, as it comes from the Tree. This they call Suri, which is to be sold at
the Suri-houses, and is a very pretty refreshing Liquor, and extreme pleasant;
especially when the Weather is very hot. With this Liquor they make the best
Vinegar, and their Arack or Brandy, which goes far beyond our best Rhenish Wine
for strength, taste and color: And mixing it with Water and Wine, with Sugar
and Lemon-Juice, it makes an excellent sort of Limonade, which they call
Massack and Burabols, but sufficiently known in English by the name of Punch.

The Leaves of this Tree serve the Inhabitants for a common covering for their
Houses, and keep them as dry as our Tiles. The stalks of them they bind
together, to make Brooms; and they use hardly any thing else throughout all
India. The outward Coat of the Nutt is good to make Match, which burns better
than that we use in Europe* The Sap serves for Oil to burn. The Kernel being
pressed, yields a Milk, of which they make a very pretty kind of Cheeses; and it
is good for several other uses, as our Milk is. The Shell is good to make Cups,
Spoons, etc. It would be too tedious to relate the many uses every part of this
Tree is good for: Besides that, it has in a great measure been done already by
other hands.

The third fruit I was to mention, is the Bissang-Figgs, which is mighty common
amongst them; and so cheap, that when a Ship comes out of Europe, it is the
first fruit that is brought to 'em, and you buy it for a trifle;
notwithstanding it is excellent; it is in shape pretty much like our
Pine-Apples. The Tree is somewhat like our Elder-Tree; and bears all the year
in abundance. The Leaves are so large, that one of them will shelter a Man from
the Sun and Rain, being about two Cubits in length, and one or more in breadth:
Which makes some people apt to believe they were the Leaves which Adam and Eve
made their Aprons of, after the Fall. They are likewise made use of instead of
Paper to pack up goods.

These I have only taken notice of, as being the most considerable fruits of
the Indies, and must pass by several others, which might be worth a
description, both for their excellency and variety, that I may not be too
tedious.

CHAP. IV.
The Author is removed from the Fort to the Hospital of Batavia. The Hollanders
War with Bantam. An account of that Country, which has been very mischievous
to the East India Company, occasioned by the English and Danes, who made it
their business to incense the King of that Country against the Dutch. Bantam
heretofore under the Government of the King of Japara. The Dutch spoil Jacatra
and Japara, and wanted an opportunity to do the like to Bantam, which offered
it self by a falling out between the old King and the young one, which broke
out into a bloody War. The Son sends to the Dutch for help. An exact account of
that Expedition from the beginning of it to the end of it, which proves very
advantageous to the Dutch.

HAving been now four months in this little Fort, an Order came to me to remove
from this place, to take the care of the Men that lay sick in the City, and the
Hospital, which was very welcome to me; not but that the Post I was in was
profitable enough, and very genteel, and the place extraordinary pleasantly
situated: But it being a token of the respect the East India Company had for
me, and withal more advantageous, I accepted of the Invitation with much
satisfaction.

About a Fortnight after there came a general Order for all that were in the
Company's Service, to make their Rendezvous in the Execution-field; so that you
might see there all their Forces drawn up together; excepting those only, that
were absolutely necessary to stand Sentinels at the Gates and Redoubts. And
indeed a finer sight of that kind could no where be seen; for there were some
thousands of Europeans, which were all very lusty, tall, proper, well-chosen
Men; and almost as many of other different Nations; as Amboineeses, Malabars,
Malayers, Mardikers and Balingers. These were all mixed into several Companies,
which had their own respective Officers; and after they had all passed Muster,
they took the Oath of Fidelity in the presence of the General, and the Council.
After which the General made a very Eloquent Speech to 'em, in order to
encourage them valiantly to prepare themselves for the Action, which was then
in hand; and to make his Speech more truly Rhetorical and persuading, he gave
to every Man a month's pay gratis. Then one half of these Men were ordered to
march toward Bantam, and to Dangerang, which is a Pass to it, which they found
very well fortified. The other half marched through the Castle to the Watergate,
whence they were carried off in little Praw's, or small Boats, on Board the Men
of War, that lay in the Road, about half a League from thence, and so they were
immediately embarkt. And the Wind blowing then just full East, as fair as they
could have wished, they straight weighed Anchor, and steered directly to the
Royal City of Bantam. But

It will be proper to give you some account of that place, before I go any
further, and to acquaint you with the causes and motives of this Undertaking.

First, Then you must know, that this large Kingdom of Bantam, being in it self
of great strength, has of late much improved it self, by the numbers of
Foreigners that are come thither from all Nations; and among them considerable
numbers too of English, Danes, Spaniards, Portugueses and Dutch, which has
made it a very troublesome and dangerous Neighbor to the Dutch East India
Company; insomuch that their Ships that came from Europe, or any other places
thither, did not dare to come by the Road of Bantam; but were forced to take a
vast compass of three or four hundred Miles; keeping to the Northward.

Moreover, the King of Bantam had made several Attempts upon Batavia, both by
Sea and Land. Though he was always forced to retire with great loss, and without
doing us any great damage. But though he could not accomplish his desire, and the
Company could not fear a total overthrow; yet they were still apprehensive,
that he being so much more powerful than they were, would prove very fatal to
them in the end, and by little and little bring his designs to perfection. Thus
they were always very uneasy, by reason of their troublesome Neighbor: But
not finding themselves able to declare open War against him, they endeavored
to gain him by Presents, and a specious show of Friendship. These means did not
prove altogether unsuccessful, but they were never at good understanding with
each other long together. For the King of Bantam, besides that he was very
fickle and unconstant in his Nature, having so many Foreigners about him, who
were no Friends to the Dutch Interest, he was easily persuaded by them, to
break Friendship with the Dutch upon the least occasion. And this the English
and Danes were the chief Instruments of, who made there a considerable Body,
were rich, and enjoyed great freedom, and a most flourishing Trade; so that
they with ease set the King upon us, in hopes of rooting the Dutch out of their
holds.

The Dutch therefore were always forced to be upon their Guard; even while
there was the greatest appearance of a settled Friendship; for they were
sufficiently informed, that he was always contriving how he might at once fall
foul on them, and drive them out of Batavia: Upon which, they on the other
side, resolved to countermine his designs, and thought it the best Expedient to
divert him from that Undertaking, by finding him some Employment with some
other Neighbors; and accordingly made it their business to create an ill
understanding betwixt him and the King of Japara, hoping that the silent Fire
might in time break out into an open Flame. This they effected at length; but
it proved little or no advantage to them; for they lay so far asunder, that it
never came but to a few little Skirmishes; which did not damage him much, nor
profit them: So that they fell very short of what they had promised themselves;
for they were fully persuaded that the Emperor of Japara would have soon been
induced to pursue the King of Bantam, with the utmost vigor; especially, when
there was so great a motive to spur him on, as the rejoyning of that Kingdom to
his Empire, from which it had been divided. The Island of Great Java, of which
I have already made mention, did likewise belong to him once, and altogether
made but one Empire, under the Dominion of the Great Mataran, but now it is
divided into three Kingdoms, to wit, Japard, Bantam and Jacatra, or Kartiri; of
which (i. e. Jacatra) the present Batavia is a part, and did heretofore belong
to the King of Jacatra; from whom the Portugueezes took it. After that, the
Spaniards got it from them: And lastly the Dutch from the Spaniards.

Now the Dutch, having all this while made several Attempts upon the King of
Jacatra, which had proved very advantageous to them; they at length subdued
him: Having first made the Emperor of Japara unable to resist them, or to
stand up in the defense of his Neighbor; over whom they carried a total
Victory a little before I came to Batavia. And having all this while received
fresh supplies yearly from Holland, which, together with Germany, enjoyed a
profound Peace, and therefore could, and did constantly furnish them with large
Recruits of choice good Soldiers: The Duth East India Company thought they
might be able to cope with Bantam, and accordingly made preparations against it.

Now while these things were in agitation, and they big with the design and
hopes of infallible success, the fairest opportunity, that could be wished for,
offered it self to them unexpected, and therefore so much the more welcome,
which was a sudden falling out between the old, and the two young Kings of
Bantam. The occasion whereof was this: The old King being weary with the Burden
of the Government, and desirous to spend his remaining days in ease and
tranquillity, made over his Kingdom to his younger Son; the eldest having
dedicated himself to a spiritual life, was a Bangerang Babay, something like an
Archbishop with us; and having thus invested his younger Son with the Regal
Power, he retired to an Old Castle called Dortjasse, the old place of his
residence, about four Miles from Bantam.

The young King having Reigned some years, his People began to grow weary of
him, specially the Nobles, the Bourgerang and Kirria; and they made their
Complaints to the old King, that he oppressed his Subjects; and that he
overburden'd them with his Recreations, and his constant Hunting; and by his
requiring so much Attendance and Service to be done him; so that they were no
longer able to bear the Yoke. He did not Govern as other Heathen Kings use for
the most part to do, but after the Model he had taken from the European
Countries; some of which he had been in, as Constantinople, and would have gone
to France, England, Spain and Portugal, if his Law had permitted him; and as
far as that had given him leave he had Traveled, viz. in Muscovy, Schiras,
Ispahan, Japan, Siam; from which several places he had taken those Methods of
Government, which he thought most convenient to introduce into his own
Dominions. But his Subjects being dissatisfied with these Innovations,
conspired at last together, and Deposed him; and set his Brother the Bangarang
Babay in his stead.

Upon this the Old King came with a considerable Retinue, and his Main Guard,
before the Castle; which is in the middle of Bantam. The young King, having
notice of this, commanded the Gates to be shut against him, and sent to know
what he wanted. The old King sent him an Answer, which did not please him: Upon
which, without more ado, he gives Orders to Fire the Great Guns from the Castle
upon the City, and particularly, that some of them should play upon his Fathers
Quarters; against which sixteen Pieces of Demi-Cannon were planted, which were
fired briskly upon him by his positive Orders, and some of them too by his own
hand.

Being thus satisfied, that his Fathers Intentions were to Depose him, he
wholly forgot all Duty, and sent him word by one of his Concubines, that he did
not reckon himself now bound to him in any Bond of Duty; and that he would pay
him no other Homage, but Powder and Ball, which he would not spare, for he had
enough of it, and that should be at his service. Besides the Message that had
made him so desperate, he relied much upon the strength of the Castle, which
was very well fortified with very good Walls, lined with Earth, like those of
Batavia, and very strong Bastions upon them, besides very large Canals round
them, with Draw-Bridges. Neither did he want Provisions or Ammunitions; and the
Bastions were provided with very good heavy Cannon. But the number of his Men
was not above three hundred; yet with them he had resolved to stand it out to
the last. So that his Garrison was not so considerable as his Court, which, as
it chiefly consists of Women, according to the general Custom of Heathen
Princes; so he had of them no less than one thousand two hundred that were his
Concubines.

With this continual Firing, the City was miserably shattered, and looked like a
Wilderness; for every Man had got away that could, and all the English and
Danes, together with the Nobility, and the most considerable Inhabitants, went
over to the old King. And having formed a considerable Body, they went and
besieged the Castle; raised several Batteries, and planted their best Cannon
upon them; and then fired briskly in their turn upon the Castle.
Notwithstanding all these preparations, the young King remained undaunted, and
only applied himself to get supplies and support abroad; and by Advice of two
Dutchmen, who were of his Party, and who had formerly run away from Batavia, to
shelter themselves from Justice, he resolves to send to the Company of Batavia,
for Assistance. One of these Dutchmen was appointed for the Negotiation; and
immediately was let down from the Wall of the Castle; and having passed the
Canals in a little Boat, that used to lie there, he came to the Enemies Army,
through which he was unavoidably to pass; but he being very ready in the Javan
and Malleish Languages, having been fifteen years in those Countries, and
having been Circumcised at his Abjuration of the Christian Religion, he easily
passed through all difficulties, and came to the General at Batavia; and by word
of mouth, without any further Credentials, delivered his Message to him in the
young King's name.

This was an opportunity which the Dutch had long wished for; so that the
Messenger needed no great Rhetoric or Art to induce them to take it by the
forelock. But immediately Orders were dispatched; and the Forces had their
Rendezvous appointed. I my self had Orders to attend the Major General St.
Martini's own person; and was in the whole Expedition, so that I may justly
speak of the matter, and be the more particular in the relation of it.

The Major General above mentioned, commanded the whole Fleet; and one Captain
Harzing of Cassel had the whole command of the Landforces. Both set out at one
time, as I said before; the one marched out straight upon Dangerang. The Fleet
went directly to Bantam. Captain Hartzing was forced first to Attack Dangerang;
by which means he reckoned he should have drawn off the old King and his Army
from Bantam; but found himself very much mistaken: For the place made such a
vigorous Resistance, that it appeared they neither wanted necessary Assistance,
nor Courage. We lost there a great many of our best Men, insomuch that we found
our selves forced to Entrench, left they should have routed us quite; so we
made our Lines of Approach, which we fortified with as good Pallisado's as we
could, and so secured our selves, that the Enemy could not come at us.

In the mean while we continued our Approaches with all the diligence that
might be, till we came within Musket Shot of the Fort. There we made use of a
covered way, with which we came up close to the Enemies works, and in some
measure within them: And having finished our Mines, we set them on fire, with a
resolution, that as soon as they should blow up to any purpose, we would
assault them. One of our Mines made a breach that three or four Wagons might
stand abreast in. Upon which it was ordered we should immediately enter: And so
we did, but so with much ado, that we had reason to fear, we must have retired;
but after a little resistance, they seeing us pour in so thick upon them, took
their heels, and most of them threw down their Arms. All this while we pursued
them, and made the most heavy slaughter amongst them that ever any History can
show. For, the Gates of their Castle, or rather their Doors being so little,
that one could not go under them without stooping; they were all forced,
almost, to creep through them one by one; and as they were all in a cluster, and
unarmed, to the number of near five thousand, we fired continually upon them,
so that they lay like heaps of Stones one on another, which made the most
dismal fight in the World: And to prevent the Air being infected with them, we
made our Blacks to carry them off, and throw them in the River Dangerang.

Having gotten this Post, we fortified our selves in the best manner we could;
for we were sure that we should not enjoy our rest there long; and that we were
to be upon our Guard.

In this six weeks time that we had besieged this place, we had lost a great
many Men, and a great many were fallen sick by reason of the bad Water, which
had much of the taste of Saltpeter in it; which made Captain Hartzing at a
stand, whether we should go on or not. At last he thought it best for us to
stay there, till we could hear of the safe Arrival and Landing of our Fleet
before Bantam, which we did in a few days after.

Major General St. Martini being come before Bantam with twenty stout Men of
War, each of which carried between four and five hundred Men, besides a hundred
Fireships, Tenders, etc. gave Orders for their Landing about two a Clock the
next Morning: But first he took a general Review of the Men, and a Gill of
Brandy was given to every one of the Soldiers; and after that six and thirty of
the lustiest Soldiers were provided with a good quantity of Powder; and some
hundreds of Seamen were set out with Pole-Axes, or Hatchets, and eight or nine
Hand-Granado's to each Man; all which were to Land with the Army.

We lay within Cannot-shot of the Town, and we could both hear, and see, the
old King, who kept continually firing upon the Castle; and he had raised his
Batteries above the tops of the houses that were in the City, so that the Enemy
might see us with ease; so they immediately prepared to prevent our Landing,
and for that purpose ordered the Main Body to march to the Seashore; and there
raised Batteries to hinder our coming any nearer. In the mean while it was not
a little satisfaction to the young King, to see our Fleet so near at hand, as
well as to hear of our Forces by Land. And besides, it gave him some time to
take breath, and freed him from the danger he was in continually of a Storm,
for the Walls being almost all down. But now the Enemy could not go on with
that Design, having enough to do to look after us. They took most care of a
certain place, where they thought we designed to Land, as indeed we did: But in
the night time we weighed Anchor, with all the stilness that might be, and
saild on about a League higher; and drawing as near to the Shore as we could
possibly, we let fall our Anchors again. Our Cannon on Board was all laden,
and all things were ordered so, that wherever we Landed, we might fire them
upon the Enemy, and upon the City. The Tenders, and other small Vessels were
all Manned immediately for Landing; some with a hundred Men, some more, some
less; all which went with all speed to Shore. The Enemy having notice of this,
were ready as soon as we, but had not time to raise any Batteries there against
us, or to fortify themselves; for 'ere the day begun to peep, we had got all
things ready for our Landing.

Major General St. Martini, with his Lifeguard, which consisted of sixty Men,
and the Surgeons, came into my Schappon, and stood ready to give Order for the
Signal, by Drums and Trumpets, for the whole Body of our Army to Land all
together: But the Enemy made a very vigorous Defense; and being advantageously
Posted in a Wood that was there, they charged us after so terrible a manner,
that what with their Fire, and what with our Great Guns, that played all this
while crosswise upon the City, there was need of more than ordinary Courage to
stand it out: Besides that, we all this while being still up to the knees in
Water, had a very great disadvantage.

In this condition we Charged them for three hours, and could not come to Land
all that while; at last five of our Companies were quite routed, and of the
twelve Surgeons that we brought with us, there were but five left; and we that
did remain, were not able to do any great feats, by reason that we all this
while stood in the Water. When we saw that we could not get any ground, we got
some small Vessels, which fetched us some Haubitzes, (which is a kind of
Field-Piece to load with small Shot,) with which we rattled so upon the Javans,
that we obliged them to give ground enough for us to get on upon dry Land; and
at last we forced them to quit the Wood, and to to retire to their
Breast-works; so we remained Masters of the Field that night: And the next
morning at break of day, we marched to Attack them in their Intrenchments.

The Major General, considering that the Dutch Companies were mightily weakened,
commanded Captain Jochem, who led the Blacks, to march in the Front; and he
sell upon them straightway with admirable Courage and Conduct. The Major
General behaved himself like a true Soldier, and gave such tokens of his
Invincible Valor, Wise Conduct, and Indefatigable Diligence, as cannot be well
described. And though he had the misfortune to have two of his Fingers shot off
from his right hand, as he was Riding to and fro to give Orders, he could
hardly afford himself time to have his hand dressed; and I had no sooner done,
but he straight mounted again.

The best of this Engagement was, that most of the Enemies Bullets flew over
our heads. But I found that they did not all of them take the same course, and
was a little surprised, when talking with the Sergeant of our Company, and
jeering them for not being good Marks-men, a Bullet came and laid him dead at
my foot.

In the mean while our Men made but little on it: And the Captain was not able
to do any thing more, than just to keep his ground against the Enemy. Wherefore
the Major General, having given some new Orders, and briskly encouraged the
Soldiers, by telling them, that the beating the Enemy out of that place, would
be the chief part of their work, and the sure forerunner of a total Victory,
promising to the three first that should break into the Enemies Camp, an
hundred Gilders, two Slaves, and a Pipe of Sack for a Reward; and having by
such like Speeches and Promises, infused, as it were, new Spirits into them, he
took upon him the Management of the Front himself, and drawing out Captain
Bleutner and Captain Winkler's Companies, together with some others, he led
them in Person; fell upon the Enemy with such fury, that we soon carried the
day; for he had so animated the Soldiers, that every Man was worth two. Our Men
being now come too near to use their Muskets, took their Cutlaces in one hand,
and their Hand Granado's in the other; and when the Blacks saw the Dutch drive
so hard upon the Enemy, they took such heart too, that with their Sword and
Buckler they poured in upon the Enemy, and drove all before them: So that the
Slaughter we made of the King's Army in this place, was nothing less than that
of Dangerang.

The Enemy was wholly put to flight, and left most of their Arms behind them.
And we having gained that Post, the Admirable gave Orders that the Ships should
no longer Fire upon the City, lest we our selves might receive some of their
Shot amongst us.

All this while we pushed on forward to their Pallisado's, and came to the Forr
which they called Speelwick, where we found a great many of the King's Men; but
yet most of our Officers found that we should quickly become Masters of it. We
sent for some heavy Cannon from our Ships, and battered it down in a very
little time. The Seamen forced open the Gate with Hammers and Axes, and so
entered, throwing of Granado's: But all the Javaus being fled, we became
Masters of it, without any further opposition.

This served our purpose mighty well, and saved us the trouble of any further
Entrenchments, except a few Gaps that we made up with Wood, which our Blacks
cut down and brought to us.

Here we took a little breath, and rested that night, and the following day;
and a portion of Biscuit, Sack, and Brandy, was distributed to each Soldier in
the Army. After this fine Refreshment, the Army was put into a new Order, and
the Right and Left Wings formed anew, and provided with Field Pieces, laden
with small Shot. Then we marched against the Enemy, who looked at first as if
they were able to have eaten us all up for a Breakfast, they being above thirty
thousand of them. But our Officers were not in the least dismayed at their
numbers, but very courageously Attacked them on the two sides of 'em; yet
taking such measures, that we could join together again at any time. I must
own, I never expected the Dutch should have escaped a total overthrow,
considering the vast disproportion of Men; and while I was in this
contemplation, on a sudden the Javans sallied out upon us with such a terrible
and horrid Outcry, as their Custom is, that one would have thought it had been
a Hurricane, rather than a Body of Men: But for all that our Men stood their
ground bravely, and gave Fire continually upon them. We had so ordered our
Army, that behind each Rank of Musketeers we had a Rank of Pikes, lest they
should break in upon us: And all the while we played so thick upon them, with
ten or twelve Fieldpieces, that they fell like Bees before us. Our other Wing
observed the same Order; and we at last joined together again into a Body.
Having sustained this for near 3hours they sent some of their Muck Speelers
amongst us, which are a sort of giddy, resolute Fellows, that are ready to be
hired upon any kind of Exploit, how rash and mischievous soever it be; be it to
stabb a Man for any private Affront, or any thing else of that kind: And the
more famous Cutthroats they be, the more they value themselves on their
Reputation of being such. Before they go upon any such sort of undertaking,
they eat of a sort of Herb which they call Avion, which for a time makes them
giddy, and altogether unsensible of any danger; so that they are as foolhardy,
as they are dangerous. They rnsht in upon us with an incredible Fury, and being
incapable of consulting their own safety, they came running headlong against
our Men, and spitted themselves upon our Pikes, and destroyed themselves
without doing us any hurt. And in a little time after, having killed several
thousands of the King's Party, we utterly routed them, and made them leave all
their Arms behind them. Upon which we fell from fighting to plundering.

After this, the Major General went, accompanied with his Lifeguard, and
others, to the Castle, where the young King was; who immediately upon his
approach, opened the Gates, came to meet him, and with all the humble
acknowledgment fell down at his feet, and afterward embraced him, with all the
demonstration of a grateful and sincere Affection.

Before this, the Admiral had given Orders for the Army to Encamp all round the
Castle, and the Gunners to be ready in their Posts with the Artillery, which
consisted of above three hundred Pieces of Cannon.

After this the Army having had 3 days rest, and all the refreshment that might
be, was ordered to march into the City, and there they had the chief Posts in
their hands, as the Boom, the Speelwick, and other Bastions, and the rest were
quartered in the English, Danish, and French Quarters. Some were ordered
likewise to keep Garrison in the Castle; so that all places of consequence were
sufficiently secured, in order to make the whole our own, when time should
serve a little more commodiously.

Here I received Orders to repair to the Hospital, where I had five Surgeons
under me. But there being so many sick and wounded, that we could not well look
after them; the best part of them we sent to Batavia.

The old King, after this Overthrow, retired with his shattered Army, to his
'Fort Dorjasse, where having made ready some hundreds of Prawen, and small
Vessels, he resolved to be revenged on us: And having the convenience of the
two Rivers, Dorjasse and Bantam, which run from that Fort into the Sea; he
Manned them in order to go as far as Batavia, and to do us some mischief, which
accordingly he did. For being come into the Road of Batavia, they set fire on
some of our Ships; and either killed the Men, or took them Prisoners, and went
on Shore on the little Island called Onrust, and made sad Havoc of the few
Inhabitants that were there. To prevent their doing any further mischief, some
of the largest of our Men of War were straight got ready, besides a
considerable number of Prawen, and small Vessels; all which were as well Manned
as we could wish: And with these we went in search of the Javians. In this
Expedition I was made Captain of the Ship called the Europa; which had eight
hundred. Men and three Surgeons; and one Captain De Ruiter commanded the whole
Fleet. We straight put to Sea, and with our whole Fleet we made directly to
Bantam, and Dorjasse, the two Rivers, which I told you, lay so conveniently for
the Javians to run in and out at; and there we lay, to cut off their Pass,
whenever they should attempt to come in there for shelter.

Being come there, one half of the Fleet was ordered to stay there, and the
other half of which number I was, went in search of the Enemy. The next
morning, as we were come about the Island called the Toppers Hoadie, we saw
them about a League off of us, with more than a hundred Prawen, etc. cruising
to and fro. Our Admiral De Ruyter judged himself strong enough to Engage them;
so having called a Council, it was resolved to fall upon them. Upon this a Gill
of Brandy, (the best thing in the World to inspire Courage into a Dutchman)
was given to every one of them: And we were divided into two parts, with
Instructions, that upon the Signal given, we should fall upon them all
together. All that day we lay still; but on the Evening we did so surround our
Enemy, that they had no way left them by the next Morning, but to fight their
way through us, or else be forced to shelter themselves on a little Island called
Schlepse; but that being not above a League in compass, and besides, so barren,
that it would not afford them any Provision or Relief; they were necessitated
to Attack us; and indeed they were not long resolving upon it, having four
times at least the number of Men that we had. They stood to the Windward off
us; so that having that advantage too over us, they came very briskly upon us
with twenty Prawen well Manned, and with forty Double Haekken, hoping with them
to lay fast hold of our greatest Ships first, and so to board them, and then
the smaller would easily be dispatched. The Admiral all this while did not let
us fire one Shot, and had ordered a kind of Breast-works to be got ready upon
the Deck by the Main Mast, and under Deck in the Fore-castle. Our Prawen and
small Vessels kept behind us, ready to fall upon the Enemy, whenever he should
Attack us. We had planted some of those Haubitzen I made mention of before,
behind those Breast-works, which we had made, which were to pour small Shot
upon them; and there were Men ready besides these with their Granado's,
Fire-Pikes, etc. to give them a welcome at their entrance. All this while the
Javians continually fired upon us, but did little Execution: And being come up
close to us, they scaled us, and in an instant our large Ships were filled with
Javans, who upon their Boarding of us, set up such a Huzza, or rather an
Outcry after their manner, that it made the Air to tremble. But we straightway
falling to our works, opened our Breast-works, and fired our small Shot upon
them, together with our Granado's; so that never were Men destroyed after that
rate. Those that were still coming up, and those that were in the Prawen, we
swept down like a swarm of Bees, with our Fire-Pikes, and other Firearms, and
Hand-Granado's, into the Sea; all that remained begun then to Provide for
running off. But out Prawen and light Vessels followed them so close, that they
killed infinite numbers of them, and took up some that were fallen into the
Sea, and made them Prisoners; who we immediately hanged up altogether upon the
said Island. The Sea all about us was pure Blood, and we were all in a Cloud of
Smoke, though we had not fired one Great Gun. There was no less than two hundred
and sixty of the Enemy lay dead Aboard my Ship the Europa. The dead and wounded
we threw one with another overboard; which caused a bitter Outcry among those
who were yet sensible, or but slightly wounded. After this great Victory our
Ships came all together again, and upon a Review, we found our loss to be two
Masters of Ships, seven Steers-men, eight Officers, and about three hundred and
eighty private Soldiers, and seven hundred of our Blacks. We lost two Ships,
the Victor and the Ameland, besides eighteen Prawen, three Galliots, and seven
Fire Ships; all which were burnt. But of the Enemies Ships, which were a
hundred and twenty in number, there did not one single one escape; their Men
were computed to have been 24000.

CHAP. V.
The Fleet comes together again, and falls upon the Javians at Sea. The Author
is ordered to Bantam, to take care of the wounded, that were sent thither. The
Council resolves to pursue the Javians. Their Malice and inveterate Hatred
against the Dutch. Several Skirmishes with them. The Expedition of the Dutch
from Bantam against Dorjasse, which was the old King's residence. A Bloody
Fight mantain'd by the Dutch against the Javians, with a great loss of the
former. Some Javian Nobles sent to desire a Peace, which was refused. The
Garrison of Dorjasse set fire on Dorjasse and fly. The Dutch plunder what was
left of it. The Author discovers a very considerable Treasure buried under
ground, but receives little advantage from it. The Admirals Expedition in
pursuit of the Enemy, where he meets with an unlucky accident.

HAving put our selves into a pretty good posture again, our Men had all the
Refreshment that could be, with great plenty of Brandy, Sack, Biscuit, and such
like. The next thing we did, was to dispatch a Ship to Batavia, to carry the
news of our Victory to the General.

After this we went to join the rest of our Fleet again. The Javians all this
while made several offers to come out of the River Dorjasse: But, our Fleet
lying just in the mouth of it, they could not attempt it with safety; but were
forced to make their way out at some other small Rivers; so that some of them
came in sight of us; but we no sooner made toward them, but they retired. Yet
were we obliged to keep Cruising between that place and Batavia, to prevent
their doing us any mischief. So that there was continually some little Skirmish
with them; but never any Engagement worth speaking of. In a matter of two
months, the greatest part of our Ships, and the best of our Men, were sent
again to Bantam, the rest of 'em kept still Cruising before Dorjasse.

Being come to Bantam, under the Command of Captain Jochem, the Men were put on
Shore, and Quartered amongst the others that were in the Fort. It fell to my
share to be of the number too. So I took my Lodging in the Chineesen Straet,
where I was very commodiously seated for my business. There were also two
Assistants with me, and three Under-Surgeons, who were Lodged in their several
Quarters, for the better looking after their Patients. Those were obliged to
come to me ever and anon to give me an account of those they had under their
hands, and to fetch the Remedies, which were all in my custody, and to take my
directions. Only those other necessaries, as Linen for Plasters, Arack, Sack,
Salad Oil, and such like, were to be fetched from the Steward, who had them in
keeping; but they were never delivered without I sent an especial Order under
my hand. The number of our Sick and Wounded was great, and that of the former
increased, by reason of the Flux, which was very rief among them: And some were
seized with a Lameness in all their Limbs; so that we had enough to keep us in
employment.

All this while we were making all preparations for carrying on the War with
utmost vigor, both by Sea, and Land: But we wanted Men; wherefore we were
forced to stay till our Recruits came from Batavia. We had an especial Eye upon
the Royal Fort Dorjasse; for we saw very well that we labored in vain, while
that stood; and we had reason to think, that if we did but once ferret them out
of their strong hold, we should not find it difficult to give them a total
Overthrow.

I must confess, that besides the pleasure I had out of a public love for my
Country, to see them in a fair way of overcoming their Enemies, and enlarging
their Territories: I had also a secret satisfaction to see that they were the
Javians that were the Object of our Conquests; they being the most faithless,
treacherous and base of all the Indians. They are fit for all manner of
mischief; but never fit to be employed in any action that is noble or generous.
In short, they are skilled in nothing, but in cheating, filching, and all
manner of knavery. I have often found it to my cost, but that which was most
notorious, though of no great moment, was the trick they put upon me at my first
coming, which was this. When our Ship was just arrived from Europe, some of
these Javians came to meet us, as it is their usual manner to come and meet all
Ships, that are newly come in, to welcome them, and to sell them fruits, fresh
meat, and other refreshments. I, who was very much fatigued with my long
Voyage, and quite tired with our S^^ Provisions, was not long a fixing upon
some of their things; and amongst others, I was so set upon some fine fresh
Fish, that they h^d brought with them, that I was resolved I would have it at
any rate.

Their way is to Truck for some of our Commodities; so I agreed to what they
asked me for the Fish, which was some Nails, Thread and Tobacco-Pipes; which I
immediately fetched for 'em, and gave to the Javian, who was then busy about
something that others had bought likewise. I was so pleased with the thoughts
of the rare Feast I was to have, and withal in such haste to be at it, that I
could not stay any longer; but bidding the Fellow leave my Fish, with any of
our Men, I ran down in the mean while into the Cook's Room, to get me some
Water hung on ready, and I think never went so cheerfully about any business in
my life. But no sooner had I turned my back, but the Dog pushed off his Boat,
and went off with my Dish of Fish, and left me to Dine on my Water; and I must
confess, that from that time I could never have a hearty love for one of the
Nation. It was a sort of a satisfaction to me, that in three or four days after
we were Landed, I had an opportunity to be revenged on a Javian, which I never
let slip, for his sake, when ever it offered it self. They are generally very
great lovers of Shooting, though they are so stupid, as never to understand it as
they should do: And as I was one day Shooting at a Mark, one of them comes up
to me, and wanted mightily to have a Shoot. I told him he should: So I shot,
and loaded again with a double Charge of Powder, and a vast deal of Paper,
which I took care to ram down as hard as ever I was able, and then offered it
him: He very joyfully received it, and went to fire it: But the Piece recoiled
so furiously, and gave him such a knock on the shoulder, that down fell my
Booby, and could hardly stir his Arm for a fortnight, or three weeks after it.

But to return to our purpose, all our Affairs were in a very good posture at
Bantam: And there was a very good understanding between the young King, and our
Major General St. Martin. But the Javans were ever and anon upon us in small
Bodies, and came quite up to our Rampires: So that we had many Skirmishes with
them; but so inconsiderable, that they were not worth the speaking of.

One would admire how quickly our Recruits were made at Batavia; for in a few
months we had again a considerable Army on foot, and they had got together Men
from all parts of the Indies, which were all sent to us with speed. And as soon
as they were got together, it was resolved to go directly against the Royal
Fort of Dorjasse.

Our Major General St. Martin left Captain De Ruyter to Command Bantam, in his
absence, and himself went straightway with some of the best Ships thither; and
in some days after sent Orders for the rest of the Fleet, and most of the Men
to follow him, leaving only what was necessary in Bantam for the security of
the Place, which had little to fear from the Enemy without, and less to suspect
from the young King within, who had but a very inconsiderable number of Men of
his own with him. So three thousand Men were ordered to be embarked and of that
Squadron I was, and had that time the Command of the Ship called the
Middleburgh.

When we had joined the Major General, we made together a very fine Fleet; and
indeed such a one, as had never been seen before in those parts of the World.
For we had there fifty two fine large Men of War, besides some hundreds of
Prawen Fireships, Tenders, small Boats, etc. Major General St. Martin, soon
after these were all come together, went back to Batavia; and we continued our
way under the Command of the General and Admiral, whose name was Tack.

As soon as we came to cast Anchor before Dorjasse, the Javians got together in
prodigious numbers to the Sea Shore, and covered the ground for several Miles,
which was all level from the Sea to the Fort, and all Fields of Rice. Just by
the Shore were several Sconces at some distance from each other: Some big, some
little, but all vastly strong, being all made with a double Row of Trunks of
Coco-Trees, that were set very deep into the ground, and the space filled up
with Earth ram'd down very hard. The space between each of these Sconces, was
all Ditches and Rampires, with Pallisado's. The Sconces were so broad, that two
or three Wagons might drive abreast upon them. In the middle of them within,
were the dwellings for the Soldiers: Some of them were built up square, and
flat at top; for the Soldiers to stand there and fight. From all these places
the Javians were continually firing upon us, but to little purpose, because we
were far enough out at Sea; yet were we near enough to hear them make many
hideous Out-crys, and to see their Troops hurry from one place to another.

In the mean time we made all ready to Land. Admiral Tack going all the while
from one Ship to another, to give Orders to the several Captains. Which done,
we went to Prayers, and then the usual portions of Brandy, Sack, etc. were
distributed with strict Injunctions to be all ready. Presently after they
brought us some Schappons or Pontons, which is a flat sort of Boat like a
Horse-Ferry-Boat, which were fenced with a kind of Breast-work; and four Pieces
for Small Shot to each, and to these, Gunners a sufficient number, with some
Seamen, with Hand-Granado's. Then went in the Soldiers. After this manner we
kept our Easter, which was now come, but was none of the merriest for us. The
third day after Easter, we unladed seven large Ships, and sunk them in the
place where we had a mind to Land at: And upon them we raised Batteries, upon
which we planted above forty heavy Pieces of Cannon, to shelter us when we
Landed, and to annoy the Enemy and their Sconces.

The next day after, about two of the Clock in the Morning, the Signal being
given, we all in general left the Ships; upon which I went down into the Boat
with the other Surgeons, which were above seventy in number, upon our Vessel,
which was attended always by two or three small Boats, that were ready in case
of any wounded, that they might carry them off to any place, and upon ever so
shallow a Water.

All this while we kept a hideous Shooting with our great Cannon, which was all
we fired; under the shelter of which we drew all the while still nearer and
nearer to Land, from whence the Enemy kept firing very hotly upon us. When we
came to have no more than knee-deep of Water, we got out; and then our Gunners
played the more freely from their Schappons, upon the Enemy, and the Seamen
could then make the better use of their Hand-shells.

In this manner we Charged for above two hours, and lost a great many of our
Men: Their Sconces lying so high, that they had a great command of us; and we
on the other side could hardly reach them. Seeing that we could make but slow
progress this way, the Council of War met and resolved to fall upon their Works
altogether.

Upon this the Front marched forward directly toward the Enemy, and the
Seamen succeeded in our place, landing, and taking possession of the ground,
which the Army occupied before. We carried some of their Forts by Storm in a
few hours time, though with the loss of a great many of our Men. As soon as the
Javians saw that they had lost some of their Holds, they set fire in most of
the others, and betook themselves to their heels, but did not quite run away
from us neither; for they kept moving in the Rice-fields on the sides of us,
with a resolution to charge us all in a Body. We had yet a very considerable
Army, though nothing in comparison to theirs; but we having by this time got
together our Artillery, and planted it very advantagiously, we were ready for
'em.

The Admiral gave Orders we should play upon them with our Artillery, without
intermission, which we did. The Armies being now come in reach of each other,
the Javians fell upon us with the greatest fury imaginable; the manner of which
I could not see, being then in the midst of our Men; but I heard their usual
Outcry at their falling on.

Our Army opened it self to the right, and left; and then our Artillery, which
was ready for 'em, was all at once discharged upon them, which made a hideous
Slaughter amongst them. After which our Men closed in again, while it was
charging again: Our Front moving always with movable Pallisado's before them,
which was a very great defense to our Men, and enabled them to keep their Order
the better.

All this while, though thousands of their Men dropped, they would not give ground
an Inch, nor did we. And the day was now so far spent, that we were both forced
to give over; yet were we wholly set upon pursuing the Stroke, and hoped that
the night should prove rather more commodious and successful, than the day had
done. As soon as the night drew on, we begun to play upon them with our
Mortars, and sent such a quantity of Bombs among them, and at the same time
fell on one of their Wings so furiously, that we gained ground; and pouring our
Shot so thick upon them, we put them into such a consternation, that they were
not able to defend themselves, so that we thought of nothing more, but to
prepare to pursue them; but they did not design to put us to that trouble; for
we could hear some of them in the front of their Army cry, Dida mou boggel ada
orang Hollando; which is as much as to say, I will fight no longer against the
Hollanders. This was made known to Admiral Tack, and further confirmed by some
of the chief Officers of the Enemies Army, which the Admiral had permitted to
come to him, and were sent to parley, and to beg him to grant a Truce, or
rather make a Peace. The Admiral durst not do any thing in this matter of his
own accord; but was obliged to send to the General at Batavia, who sent him
word again that he should be sure not to hearken to any Proposals of Peace.

During this Suspension of Arms, I conversed much with those Javian Deputies,
and I found them very inquisitive, and curious to know what our Army was
composed of; whether of real Men, or of Devils in humane shapes: We told them,
they were only Men, but brave Men, and most Germans; and indeed they behaved
themselves with such inexpressible Bravery, that it might have amazed a polite,
and well-disciplin'd Nation, and much more might it do so, with a Barbarous,
and Heathenish People.

When the Admiral had received his Answer from the General at Batavia, he told
the Deputies that the Dutch would not hear talk of a Peace, and so sent them
away; and bid them tell the old King, that they would now have as little regard
for him, as he had formerly showed for Batavia.

Upon which our Artillery was fired again, and we charged them with greater
fury than before; so that we put their whole Army to flight, which they took
directly toward Dorjasse, and there we put them all in confusion, totally
routed them, and made a most dreadful Slaughter amongst them. We did not pursue
them as we might have done; for we thought best to keep together, and to
continue in our Entrenchments, while we made all the preparations requisite for
a more effectual pursuit of 'em, and in order to Attack the said Town of
Dorjasse.

Here our Men rested three days, and had all the usual Refreshments; and in
that time our Dead were buried. But in the third night, about twelve of the
Clock, we saw the City of Dorjasse in a blaze, and heard the blowing up of some
of their Building and Fortification, great pieces of which fell into our Camp,
which was half a Mile from thence; all which was very agreeable to our Admiral,
and to our Army too, because it would have cost us a great many brave Men's
Lives, if we had been put to fighting for it.

We sent immediately a Party toward the place, to see what they were doing
there, and in what condition they were. But when they came near to the place,
the old King withdrew with all speed, and passed over the River Dorjasse, with
all his remaining Forces; and fled to the Blawe Peperbergh, which was about
four Leagues from thence; so that our Men found Dorjasse quite empty, and the
Coasts all clear. As soon as the Admiral had Advice of it, he marched thither
with the greatest part of the Army. We found nothing there, but Houses
ruinated; most of them still smoking, and no Inhabitants, but a vast parcel of
Ducks and Hens, flying about the Streets to seek a habitation; which our
Soldiers were very glad to see, and regaled themselves bravely with. I went to
take my Rounds in the City, and as I came near to a parcel of Ducks, I fired
amongst 'em, and shot a good many of 'em, and the rest ran into a House there
hard by: So I followed them with my Fusil in my hand, designing to knock them
down with the Butt end of it; But as soon as I came within the doors, I saw an
old Woman sitting on a Bedstead with a naked Kriz in her hand. But she seeing
me come with a Gun in my hand, fell down dead for fear.

Our Men found a great many Javians, that were hid in corners and holes, who
could not flee away with the rest, being exceeding old, or otherwise disabled.
Our Soldiers were Quartered upon the Bastions. The Admiral took his Quarters in
the middle of the City, in the Court of the Old Palace, which before was the
greatest place for Trade.

The chief of my care was, to see if I could not get some Plunder, which, while
I was looking for, about the Old Palace, I discovered a place in a dark Entry,
which was not Paved firm, but the Stones only laid loose; and knowing it to be
their custom to bury their Treasures in time of danger, I went to examine the
place more narrowly, and made shift to dig down a matter of two foot; but
finding nothing but a few Staefiens or Stiftiens, which were about a quarter of
a Yard long, I grew weary of my work, not knowing the value of 'em. Those I got
I gave away to a Freeman, who went privately among the Freemen, and sold them
for a Crown. As soon as ever I knew the worth of 'em, I went in all haste to
the place again, and got a pretty good parcel of them: But as ill luck would
have it, 'ere I could carry them off, the Admiral, who was come to take a view
of the Ruins of the Palace, came just that way, and finding what it was,
engrossed it to himself, and sent for Men immediately to dig there; and there
they found as many of them as filled eight Wagons, which were sold for 700000
Gilders: All which went into the Admiral's Pocket. However he presented me with
a hundred Gilders for being the discoverer.

In the mean while, others got several good Booties, as Persian Quilts, and
Persian and China Silks, with many other rich Furniture and costly Garments,
that were left in the Palace. And I who had found the greatest Booty, came off
with the least share.

By what I could see of the strength of this place, it is certain the Javians
wanted nothing but Courage to keep us out; for if that had not been wanting,
they might have defied double our number: For though the Town was four or five
Miles in compass, yet there was but two Avenues into it, which was hardly wide
enough for two Carts to go abreast, the rest being all Moorish grounds, where
Rice grew, but where no Army could have come: And instead of a Wall, the Town
was fenced with a Line of Coco-Trees set close to one another, and filled up
with Earth; so that our Cannon would never have been able to batter it down, or
so much as to make a breach in any part of it. The Buildings within were all
built with Bamboo-Canes, except the Palace, and the Noble-Mens Houses, which
were of Stone.

Upon the twenty eight Bastions of this place, we found three hundred and odd
large heavy Pieces of Cannon, though most of 'em Iron; but no Powder or Bullets;
which gave us occasion to think, that through some carelessness the Magazine took
fire, and so set fire on the whole Town, as indeed we found it true afterward,
by the account which some of the Inhabitantss gave us.

The Fortification of this place, was so strong, that all the Canonading in the
World could never make a breach in it; for the outside of it was all of
Coco-Trees, set as close together as might be, and behind them was all Earth
thrown up: And it is impossible for a Bullet to batter any of those Trunks of
Coco-Trees, being of so spungy a nature, that a Bullet will stick in them, and
go no further.

In this place was a high Hill cast up by the King's Order, and a few Hutts
built at top of it; from whence he used to go, and spy the Army when it lay
before Bantam, and take a prospect of the Fleet, the Country lying all level
between those two places.

Two Rivers run through the Town, the little, and great, Dorjasse; which unite
their Streams a little below the Town, and make up a fine River. It runs thence
through the pleasant Vales of the Blawen Peper Bergh into the Sea, and divides
the Kingdom of Bantam, from that of Batavia, or Jacatra, all along in its
course.

When we had laid still here some few days, our Admiral went out with some
Companies to visit some of their Negeryen, or Villages. We plundered all as far
as the Plain of Banta, which is just by the River Bantam, and leads toward
Tangburang, a Province belonging to the Kingdom of Bantam.

Here we saw some Naekens or small Boats lying on the other side of the River;
but neither saw or heard any body therebouts. The Admiral had a mighty fancy to
go over, and so had some others of the chief Officers: Wherefore he offered six
Rixdollers to any that would venture to swim over and fetch some of those
Naekens over. Though the River was about a mile wide, yet there were four Seamen
that proffered themselves immediately, and several Blacks, who are generally
excellent swimmers; but it was thought sufficient to send the Seamen only, and
two of the Blacks, who brought over six Naekens; and having got some Oars to
'em, they went with them, and fetched all the others, which were twenty and
odd. When they were all come, the Admiral went into one of 'em, and all the
Boats were filled with Men. When we were got over, we found nothing but whole
flocks of Hens, and Ducks; so that our Men divided themselves, some one way,
and some another, to see if they could find any Body. One of these Parties met,
by misfortune, with a parcel of Amboineeses, who were come out to get some
Coco-nuts; and these going dressed like Javians, our Men took them for such, and
falling upon them, killed some of 'em, and would certainly have killed more,
had not another party of ours come in of a sudden upon the back of these poor
Amboineeses, who hearing them cry out for quarter, and discovering them to be
Amboineeses, put a stop to the slaughter, and prevented further mischief being
done.

We were all well provided with Powder and Ball, and kept on to the end of the
Plain; where we found some little Works, Redoubts, etc. but all abandoned. In
one of them were four or five pieces of Cannon, which we took, and carried over
the River, and from thence drew them to Dorjasse.

Our Admiral was now thinking to get over the River again, and yet desirous to
know what was become of the Enemy; but truly his curiosity cost us very dear;
for we had not yet reached our Boats, when we perceived a great number of
Prawen, full of Javians, making toward us, with such speed, that we could
hardly get our Arms ready. All we could do was to fire upon them, and hinder
them from landing just in that place. But they past by us quickly, and came to
another landing-place, that was more convenient. As soon as they had got hold
of the Shore, they came upon us in a trice, and so encompassed us, that we had
no way left but to yield, or throw our selves into the River. The first of
these could not please us, and the latter was almost as dangerous, for those
who could not swim very well, so that they who had little or no hopes of
swiming over, resolved to stand it out, and to sight to the last drop of Blood.
Our Admiral escaped with five Boats, and some others followed them as fast as
they could, and swam over after them. I, for my part, finding I could not
escape death, if I staid there, threw away my Arms, and my Surgeons Box, and
leapt into the River, though with little hopes of getting over; however it gave
me a chance for my Life, and it pleased God to carry me over safe to Shore,
where our Men were got, and stood spectators of the dreadful slaughter, the
Javians were making among the poor Dutchmen, that were left among them on the
other side. There was no less than two hundred of 'em, who were all cut in
pieces, but behaved themselves with an unparalled bravery, as Men in such
desperate conditions use to outdo themselves; and as they held it out a long
while, so they sold their Lives at the dearest rate that ever men did.

The Admiral exceedingly concerned at this sad misfortune, and desirous to
revenge the loss of so many brave Men, took the rest who had made their
escapes, and marched with them in all haste to Dorjasse, with a design to go
over with a Body of Men, and pursue the Enemy. It was upon consideration found
impracticable, being we had no way of passing the River, for it was very broad
every where, and we had not above three or four small Boats: So that we were
forced to quit our designs; but that we might not go altogether unrevenged, we
set fire to all that remained standing in Dorjasse, after we had staid three or
four days in it. The main Body of our Army continued along the Sea Coast, very
well entrenched, under the Command of Captain Harzing; while the Admiral went,
with some small Ships, and some Men, down the River Dorjasse, and so to Bantam
by Sea.

CHAP. VI.
The Author, among others, going along the River Tangburang, meets with several
Parties of the Enemy, and have several Skirmshes with them. The Town Anier
besieged. Bravely defended by the Javians, by the means of two Renegade
Dutchmen; one of which was taken, and immediately hanged. Anier plundered and
sacked. The Author shot in the Leg. The whole Country brought into subjection.
The Young King's base dealing with some of the Chief Nobles, who came in to
submit themselves to him, notwithstanding his Gracious Promises to them. An end
of the Wars. The danger that a Man exposes himself to, that will take any of
the Indian Commodities for his own private Gain. An instance of it in the
Author himself. A very strange and barbarous Grulty committed by the Javians
upon some Dutchmen, who fell into their Hands. They are discovered, and
punished after the most cruel manner that could be invented. The manner of
their Death.

AS soon as we were come upon the Road of Bantam, the Young King came to meet
our Admiral, and to thank him for his Signal Services; and after some
Complements passed between them, they went both of them on Shore in the same
Boat; and all the Men got ready, and landed soon after them; and were divided
among the rest of the Soldiers that were in the place. I was ordered to go to
my old Post in the Hospital: But another Order came, not long after, to me, to
get ready to go to Captain Ruiter, to view the Country along the River
Tangburang, which runs through the Province of that Name, and comes by Bantam.

In our march we saw very pleasant Negeryen on both sides the River, though all
without Inhabitants. But one Night as we were very silent in our march, we were
surprised with a sudden alarm, and outcry in one of the neighboring Villages.
We were not very much corncerned at it, because we were 400 of us; however we
stood all to our Arms, and moved, according to our Captains Orders, toward the
Village, and there we met with 'em upon the march, but it was not intended
against us. Some of our Front only could fire upon them, yet that served to
bring down several of the Javians; but the Blacks or Amboineeses, of which we
had a Company with us, pursued them so long, that they brought us seventy Heads
of 'em, when they came back to us the next Morning; according to the Custom of
all those Nations, whether they fight for us, or against us; which is always to
cut off the Heads of as many of their Enemies, as they kill, and to bring them
to their Commanders, as tokens of their Valor.

Having had good success thus far, our Captain was for moving forwards, and
pursuing our good Fortune; which we did, till we came to a small River that
runs into Tangburang: There we found some Forts, and some Negeryen, well
provided with Men. We were about going over to them, and we could have done it,
the River not being very deep; but our Captain did not think it safe; because
we did not know what Numbers there might be of the Enemy, or whether they might
not lie there in ambuscade. He immediately dispatched some of our Men to
Bantam, to Admiral Tack for Recruits; and according to his desire he had the
very next day three Companies of Dutch sent him, and two of Blacks, that were
Bandaneeses.

With this Reinforcement we crossed the River briskly, and marched directly
toward their Villages and Forts: But we had not marched long, before our Front,
(which was hardly got in rightorder, after passing through the River,) but a
parcel of about a hundred and fifty of our Men fell in with a Party of near
four hundred of the Enemy; they would at first have been glad to have been a
little farther off, but there being no retreat, they engaged them so
vigorously, that they killed above an hundred and seventy of 'em, and wounded
several, and made the rest retire to Tangburang. As we pursued them, we took
some of them, who had deserted the others, and hid themselves in the Woods; who
all told us, that all the Enemies Force was within three or four miles of us,
and more than eight thousand strong. That it was the same Army which had
continually been commanded by the Old King, and that they lay there in order to
hinder our coming over that River.

Upon this information, our Captain sent some Expresses with all speed to
Bantam, to give an account of it to the Admiral, who, without delay, sent some
hundreds of Men more, and some Fieldpieces likewise. Then were all the
Officers commanded to take especial care, that all their Men might be well
provided with Powder and Ball. All our Body was divided into five Parties, each
consisting of four Companies, and all the necessary Orders were given; then all
our Army went to Prayers, after which we marched straight upon the Enemy.

A Lieutenant with fifty Men was sent out before, to sec what he could discover
of the Enemy, and so to give us information. We had not moved half an hour,
e're we had an account that the Javians were coming to give us battle, and that
they were eight thousand strong. All our Parties put together, made but four
thousand; yet were we in hopes that we might encompass them, as indeed we did
in a very little while, and made the place so hot for 'em, and sowed the ground
so thick with their dead Bodies, that they betook themselves to their Heels,
and fled in all haste to Anier, which is a strong and well-forfied place, about
two miles from thence, and is the chief Pass into the Province of Tangburang.
Wherefore we provided our selves immediately with Breast-works, to secure us
selves from the Enemies sallies. Every one that work at the casting them up,
had a Rix Doller as a present.

The next day, when we had hardly finished them, the Enemy made a sally upon
us, which turned much to our advantage; for being pretty well prepared for 'em,
we made shift to cut off seven hundred of 'em, and took some of 'em prisoners,
whom we gave quarter to for six or seven days; and then took them into a Wood,
and cut them in pieces. The next night we raised three Batteries, upon one of
which we planted four large Pieces of Cannon, that were sent us from Bantam,
together with two thousand Men. These were laden immediately with Small Shot,
in case of their sallies in the night time; and in the day time we drew 'em out
again, and loaded with Bullets, to send into the Enemy's Works.

When we had lain here about six days before the Town, we began to make our
Lines of Approach; and a General Assault was agreed upon. In three days time we
put it in execution: We had a Water to go over, which we passed with great
ease, by means of some Fascines which our Blacks cut and laid for us; but we
found so brisk a reception, that we were forced to retire with a considerable
loss of Men on our side. If the Enemy had made the best of their opportunity at
that time, they might, with the greatest ease imaginable, have cut most of us
off, and raised the Siege; but it pleased God they did not pursue us any
further than their Works: And this was owing chiefly to some English, who were
amongst them, and who persuaded them, that this was but a Sham-Assault of ours,
and not the Body of our Army, and that that lay in the Trenches to cut off
those that should sally out; which if they had done, they would have utterly
routed us, for we were at first but five thousand strong, (reckoning the two
thousand Men sent us with the Cannon) and of them we had above an hundred
killed, and an hundred and twenty wounded. Notwithstanding this repulse and
disadvantage, we still continued in our Resolution of carrying on the Siege.

In the mean while our wounded Men were carried to a place about a mile distant
from us, where there were ten Surgeons to look after them; and those that were
not dangerously ill, were sent to the Hospital at Bantam, and with them Captain
Ruyter sent a Letter to the Admiral, to desire him to send him a recruit of
about a thousand Men; telling him, that with that he did not doubt but he
should get master of the Town in a short time.

Three days after our Assault we begun still to make good our Approaches to the
Town, being our number of Men increased; and being come pretty near to it, the
Blacks came over to us in in abundance out of the Town. We did not receive them
into our Army, but posted them between our Lines and the Town: However, this
gave us hopes, that the besieged were weary of us. Wherefore we begun to make
ready some Mines, which being finished, we again resolved to make another
Assault.

While we were deliberating on these matters, an English Man, with his Arms,
came over to us out of the Garrison, and gave us a good account of their
condition, and withal told the Captain, that the Besieged seemed now to wish
for nothing more than that we would attempt another Assault; and that in order
to receive us, they had pulled down the Houses in the Streets, and levelled
that part of the Town; that they had guarded all Avenues and Streets with
double Pallisadoes, and that behind them they had planted several Pieces of
Small Shot to receive us: And likewise that they had laid several Mines ready
to blow us up. We on the other side were in hopes that we should surmount all
these difficulties. We mounted Mortars upon our Batteries, and sent such a
number of Bombs and Grenades into the Town, that we thought it impossible they
should keep within it long, and so it proved; for by and by we heard a sudden
Alarm, the Besieged having a mind to try the success of a second Sally upon us.
But we, who were well prepared for 'em upon all accounts, did send such shoals
of Hand Granado's amongst them, that we forced them to retire with very great
loss, and all the while we pursued them to the very Town.

This being done, and our two Mines being finished, and having laid several
hundred weight of Gunpowder in each of them: Orders were given to set fire to
'em, which was accordingly done: And in an instant, the Mines, having been dug
very deep in under the Town, (as we might do easily, the Town being situated
pretty high,) we saw half the Town in the Air, and some part of it, and of the
Men came tumbling into our Camp; and within some thousands lost their Lives at
that one blow.

No sooner was this done, but we, who stood all ready, and in expectation of
this, rusht in furiously upon them, while they were in this confusion and
disorder, and put all to the Sword that came in our way, except those that we
saw were Europeans. Two of them we took, who were Dutchmen, that had deserted
the Dutch Company, but these we immediately hung up without any further
examination, as it is the constant custom, which the Dutch observe whenever
they catch any of their Deserters. But besides that they deserved this death by
Law, they doubly merited this from us; for knowing that there was no pardon to
be expected from the Company, they had been great instruments of the obstinate
resistance we met with here; for their condition being desperate, so was the
advice they gave to our Enemies, to hold out longer than they would have done.
I could not but be exceedingly sorry at the fate of one of them in particular,
being one of my intimate acquaintance, and who came over with me from Holland.
He was of a very good Family, his Father was an eminent Merchant at Bergen in
Norway.

Being now Masters of this Pass, we fortified our selves with the greatest
diligence, it being the strongest Inland fortification, and the direct Pass
from Bantam to Batavia by Land. We had already got all the Seaport Towns and
Forts in our Hands; and having likewise possessed our selves of this, we did
not doubt but the Javians would be obliged to come and surrender themselves,
seeing they could not come at the Sea. Yet in case there should be some small
desperate Parties abroad, Captain Ruyter commanded fifty Men to go and stroul a
little about the Country, and I desired I might be one with 'em.

We marched about for a matter of an hour or or two, through nothing but Woods
and Coco-Trees, and then we came to a River, but we could not pass it; so we
continued moving along the side of it till night; and then not meeting with a
convenience of passing the River, we took up our lodging there that night; but
for fear of the Enemy, we hardly durst speak or stir all that night.

The next morning early we heard a noise not very far from us, and we began to
fancy, that we might insensibly be got round upon our Army again; but when we
were got a little further, we discovered the Enemy on the other side of the
River, as busy as might be, cutting of Coco-Trees, with a design to go and
raise some new Bachers, as they call 'em, that is, Fortifications. The River
was very narrow, but very deep; and seeing they could not come at us, and that
we could easily retire (if need was) to our Army, which was but a mile from us;
we took a resolution, and fired so briskly amongst them, that we fetched
several of 'em down off the Trees.

They, on the other side, did not fail tomake good use of their English
Firelocks, and to give fire upon us; so that four of our Men fell. Two of them
that were only wounded, I brought away, and applied what was requisite to their
wounds; and having done that, I went forward to overtake the rest of our Men;
but I was no sooner come up to them, but I my self received a wound in my
Thigh, from a Black, that was upon a Coco-Tree, and the Ball lodged within me.
The small Skirmish being over, some of our Men took me up, and carried me to
Anier, where the Army was; and from thence I was carried to the Hospital at
Bantam. There I was the daily care of the chief Surgeon of that place, who was
a very able Man, named John Hanss a Leydener.

He used his utmost endeavors to get the Bullet out of the wound, but all in
vain: And after I had undergone a long and grievous pain, and had all the
Splinters cleared out, we were forced to leave the Bullet in, and to let the
wound heal over it.

In two months time I was fully recovered, and found no pain; nor did my Bullet
ever trouble me, till I came into Holland again.

I was now got again to my Employment, in the Hospital that was committed to my
care, where we enjoyed our selves with great security: Only for fear of the
worst, we took care to man our outward Garrisons, and to fortify our Frontier
Places. But e're three Months were at an end, we were sufficiently satisfied
that there was no great need of fortifying our selves any more; for the Javians
came over to us in mighty numbers: And to convince us of their sincerity, and
entire submission to us, they sent us some hundreds of Carts full of Muskets,
Lances, Pikes, Bows and Arrows, and other Warlike Instruments.

After this, some of their Nobility, and some Persons of greatest Note, who had
great Estates in those parts, came to surrender themselves, and to beg for
Pardon of the Dutch Company. But for that time the Company thought fit to leave
that to the discretion of the Young King, who pretended himself willing to
receive them graciously, and to pardon all that was past. But he having got
some of 'em into his power, he forgot his Royal Word, and commanded some of
them to be cast to Tigers, some to Venomous Serpents, some to be strangled,
others were drowned, others had their Throats cut by his especial Command; and
all variously and miserably put to death. Things being come to this pass, the
Company thought it was high time to put a stop to such Barbarity: And therefore
they acquainted him with their resentment of this his base dealing, and made
him sensible of the great imprudence, as well as baseness he had been guilty
of; seeing he ought to have been glad, to have seen these Persons come to
submit themselves to him, and furnish him with Subjects which he was now like
to want; and that so he might have his Towns and Cities once again raised, and
filled with Inhabitants. The rest of them that came in, being hereupon more
civilly used, and kindly treated; insomuch that in the eighteen Months time
that I was there, all the Places were rebuilt, and made finer than they were
before. For then the Chineeses, who are willing to be under the Dutch
Government, came and settled there in greater numbers than ever. For as they
love to live among the Dutch, because of the Privileges they give them; so the
Dutch are very glad of their company, because wherever they are among them,
they cause a brisk Trade, which turns to the advantage of the Dutch, as well as
of the Chineeses themselves.

The Country being now again pretty well Peopled with Neighbors and
Foreigners, and by the coming in of the Javians; I thought it high time to
look about me, and to try to recruit my Pockets, which were now very low, all
Provisions being exceeding dear; and I had had no opportunity in a great while
to get a Farthing by my Profession, any other than what my Salary brought me
in. So I applied my self to the Javians, among whom I thought there might be a
great many wounded, and accordingly I found pretty much practice amongst 'em.
With all this help I made shift to live handsomely enough, but truly it was as
much as I could do: For considering the scarcity there was, and the great
fatigues I had born, as well as the rest, I thought it the prudentest way to
look after my Health, and to afford my self what my Constitution required,
rather than pinch my self, and contract a fit of Sickness, as several, and
indeed most People do, who go over to the Indies with no other design but to
enrich themselves at any rate. Though, by the by, after all the pinching, saving
and scraping together, that is not so easily done, as People imagine: For
nothing is more common than the vulgar opinion, that there is no more to be done
to get an Estate, than just to go to the Indies; from whence they reckon they
may come home with a burden of Gold, Pearls and Diamonds, as if it was but
picking them up and come away. But it may be worth the while, seeing we are
speaking of this Vulgar Error, to show that these precious things are so far
from being thus easy to come at, that it is even a very dangerous thing to
attempt to carry off any of those things, if a Man has got any of them in his
possession.

I my self went once to Amboyna, and got intimately acquainted there with a
Sergeant, that had lived about nineteen years in that Country, and was an
Overseer over several Blacks, that work in Press-Mills. We came to trucking at
last, and I exchanged some of my Cheese, Tobacco, etc. for for some Oil of
Cloves; of which I purchased seven Bottles of near two Quarts a piece. This
exchange of ours was to be kept as secret as any Robbery one should commit in
Europe, for both our Lives lay at stake. Fortune favored me so far, that I
came away undiscovered, and brought 'em safe into the Road of Batavia; where I
began to have some hopes of running it ashore, and pleased my self with the
thoughts of what it would yield me among the Chineeses, and the English. But I
reckoned without my Host there; for no sooner was I got into the Boat, in order
to get to Shore, with one of our Seamen, whom I had made privy to the business,
and who understood that Trade, but the Fiscael made toward us with his
Caffers. The Seaman had so contrived the business, that the Bottles were under
water well stopped, and tied to a Cord; but when we found the Caffers came
directly to us, the Seaman who stood ready with a Knife in his hand, cut the
Cord, and dropped the Bottles into the Sea. The Caffers were immediately with us,
who searched our Boat very narrowly, and then with their Hooks groped all round
the outside: They found nothing but the end of a Cord, which made them give us
an Ugly Look, but it was not sufficient to bring us into any further trouble.
But immediately upon this a poor Gentleman had much harder fortune than I had;
for these Caffars going from us to a Ship, that was come along with us from the
Western Coast, they caught a Lieutenant there, that had got a piece of Gold of
some pounds weight: And the Fiscael carried him strait away to Batavia, and in
two days time he was hanged up in the Galgeveld. This poor Man's hard Lot made
me not regret my loss so much, I rather hugged my self that I had let my Tartar
go. But it cured me from ever attempting any thing of that nature. This may
serve to let you see, how dangerous such undertakings are; and that such
Counterband-Goods are not so easily brought off. So that if Men have no other
end in going to the Indies, I advise them as a Friend, to stay at home while
they are well.

But now to return again to where I was: I ought not to omit giving the Reader
an account, which will not be unacceptable, though the action will rather amaze
than delight, and must needs fill the Reader with horror: For of all the
Cruelty I ever heard of there, I never met with any that could compare with
this, which was committed in my time, though I must confess I think the
Punishment that was inflicted on the Malef^ctors did in some measure outdo it.

Some of our Men went one day a little way up into the Country, rather out of
necessity than for pleasure, designing to shoot some Birds, etc.
notwithstanding they might know well enough, that it was not very safe, being
we were not altogether reconciled with the Javians. They were expected back at
night, but three days past, and no news of 'em, which occasioned many
conjectures; but most were of opinion, that some Javians had fallen upon them,
and murdered them. Upon which Minheer Tack commanded a Lieutenant, with some
Men, to go in search after 'em. Having wandered a matter of two hours, they
came to a lonesome place, whereas they were thinking to go back, and take some
other Road. They heard a piteous outcry, which made them go forward to see
what it was, and there they found 'em all six, and discovered the most dismal
Spectacle that ever was.

One of them was stretched out between two Trees, with his Arms tied to the
one, and his Legs to the other, about three or four yards high from the ground,
with a great Fire still burning under him; but he was quite roasted when we
came.

Another hung by his Privities upon another Tree, with his Arms and Legs tied
together under his Back; this was dead also.

The third was spitted upon a Bamboo-cane, in at his Fundament and out at his
Mouth; he was dead too.

The fourth was buried up to the Neck, his Eyes put out, and his Nose and Ears
cut off; this was not quite dead.

The fifth and sixth were tied fast Back to Back, each of them had their Right
Eyes put out, and their Privities thrust into the holes; both these were still
alive.

Our Men were so surprised at this sight, that they were ready to sink down;
and finding no other remedy, they came with all speed to Minheer Tack, to give
him this tragical account, who sent straight some Blacks with a Barrow to fetch
these poor Creatures, and bring them to Bantam.

We were not a little concerned at this strange accident, but what was an
addition to our trouble was, that we could not learn from these Men how they
came to be thus served, because they were deprived of their Instrument of
Speech.

Admiral Tack sent immediately some Messengers to the Young King to acquaint
him with all this, and to desire him to have a search made among his people,
and to use all means possible to discover the Authors of this Fact. This he
did, and with such good success, that in less than a fortnights time, we found
the Rogues out; and all of 'em (being sixteen in number) were apprehended, and
eight of them were forthwith condemned to be thrown to Serpents.

The manner of these Serpents destroying of Men is thus. They catch hold of a
Man, and swallow him near half up, and then suck all the Blood out of his Body,
then they tear him peace-meal, and eat him up.

The other eight were confined to one Room, where they had very good Diet
afforded them, but that was only in order to prolong their Pain; for there were
Men always attending them with Scourges; and as soon as ever these Criminals
begun to nod, they lashed them severely, and this continued for a fortnight;
and then they begged that we would knock them on the Head, or put 'em to any
speedy death they pleased, though it were the most cruel they could invent.

But all their begging was in vain, for the Young King was wonderfully pleased,
that he had found out such a Punishment, as would probably terrify the rest
from committing such frequent Murders as they used to do.

Thus they continued in that misery, and lived till the fifth Week; then they
fell asleep in spite of all their Whipping; and continued so notwithstanding
they were pincht with red hot Tongs, and so they ended their miserable Lives.
So, that how barbarous soever their Fact was, yet it met with a Punishment,
which, I think, did rather outdo the Fact it self in Barbarity.

CHAP. VII.
How insolently the Javians behaved themselves at first toward the Dutch, and
how civilized. The Dutch get the total Government of the Country into their
Hands by consent of the Tongue King. The Old Kings Surrender, Confinement and
Death. Rebuilding of Bantam, and it is flourishing Condition. Its Traffic,
Commodities, Fruits and Provisions. Tigers there in great numbers, how caught.
Elephants taken after a like manner in Ceylon, and Aracan. The several Games
and Pastimes at the Weddings of the Chief Javians, together with some Customs
and Ceremonies used on those occasions. A description of Pepper, and its
growth. The Author's departure from Bantam to Batavia, and thence to Banda.

THE Javians could hardly bear the Hollanders for a great while, and truly
their antipathy against us was not altogether without some grounds, seeing that
we, being Foreigners, had invaded their Territories, and taken possession of
all they had, and then lorded it over them. They being a very silly sort of
People, had no other way to show their Spite and Resentment, than by making
Mouths at the Dutch as they passed by, and sometimes Spitting upon them. To
break them of that ungainly Custom, we made a resolution amongst us, never to
let any pass by that did so, whether Old or Young, Man or Woman, without giving
them a good Box on the Ear. This cured them of their incivility so effectually,
that you would have wondered to see how courteously they behaved themselves
toward us; for all of a sudden there was so great an alteration, that there
was no passing by 'em, but they would greet you very civilly, give you good
morrow, (in their Language, Dobidis Sinior) clapping their Hands together, and
holding them up to their Forehead; and when they were willing to show
themselves more courteous and officious, they would add, Manna Bigi Sinior,
that is, where are you going Sir? which was as much as offering their service
and assistance, which we frequently made use of.

Admiral Tack was all this while lodged in the Apartment which belonged before
to the English, where the Young King used to come to visit him almost every
day, and maintained a faithful Friendship with him. In a little time, things
being settled, a Proposal was made to the Young King by the Dutch, that if he
would resign entirely all claim of Power and Jurisdiction over his People,
custom, etc. and turn over the whole Government into their Hands, they would
allow him such a Sum as would enable him to keep up his Grandeur, and live like
a King, (a titular one, that is,) and would be obliged to pay him some
thousands of Gilders every Month. To this he condescended; whether through fear,
or through indifference, I cannot well say; and a certain Pension was likewise
settled upon his two Young Princes, all which was duly paid according to
agreement. The rest of the Nobility, and Chief of the Land, remained in the
possession of their Goods and Lands, as before, only that they were now subject
to the Dutch Government. Thus the Dutch compassed their whole design by force
and policy; and by fair means became Masters of that Kingdom, which was, and
had been so long flourishing, and famous for its vast Trade and traffic; and
that in so little time, as from 1682 to 1685, that I believe History will
hardly afford an instance of a more sudden change of Affairs in so great a
Kingdom.

The Old King all this while having wandered up and down on the Blawen Peper
Bergh, whither he had been forced to retire when he was defeated; and being
there forsaken by most of his People, resolved also to come, and submit himself
to the Dutch Company; and accordingly, after near two years, he came and
surrendered himself, having first sent some of his Servants to Admiral Tack for
his Pardon, which was granted him. Upon which he appeared in Person, and came
to Bantam, with a very small Retinue; there they assigned him a Lodging, and
set Guard upon him, and in a little time after sent him to a small Island,
where he ended his days.

Thus all being quiet, all Hostilities ceased, and all reduced to one
Government, Bantam flourished again in a more perfect manner than it had ever
done; and did, like a Phoenix, spring up out of its own Ashes, but more
beautiful and strong than it was before. Its Borders were now vastly enlarged,
by reason of the vast number of Foreigners, which daily flocked thither, and
were all indifferently received, except the English, French and Danes, which
were not admitted, but were sent with their Ships to Batavia, where they were
permitted to trade, and to take Houses and Warehouses, etc.

The chief Traffic of Bantam consists in Pepper, Saltpeter, Salt, Ginger,
Cotten-Cloth plain, and wrought with Silver and Gold; also Fine Linen, and
Flowerd Stuffs, which are the common wear of the Inhabitants.

The Country about it is exceeding pleasant, and produces all manner of
necessary Provisions. There are all manner of tame Fowls, Hens, etc. and their
Eggs very cheap. All sorts of Fish. Great store of Cows and Buffels, but the
Fat of these last is not much eaten, because it tastes so much like Tallow. Many
Wild Boars there are also, but the Tamest of that kind that ever was, because
that the Javians never hunted them, by reason that their Law does not permit
them to eat the Flesh of 'em; so that they used to come so close up to our
Works, that I have shot three or four of 'em in one day, and sold them for
little or nothing.

But the worst Cattle thereabouts is the Tigers, which are in great numbers
near Bantam, which the Javians used to be frequently sent out to catch or kill:
And they did it after this manner.

Thousands of Javians go together to the place where the Tigers lie; and there
they spread themselves round the place in about three miles compass, and so
march gradually to center and meet upon the Tiger, keeping still their
Nassingayen before them; so that if the Tigers come out toward the
circumference they make, they are so frighted, that they run back again; and so
they keep them running to and fro, and retiring, till at last they are so
closely encompassed, that they must of necessity be forced to throw themselves
into some of their Traps, which are something after the manner of our
Wheel-nets, but incomparably stronger and bigger; for they are of strong Wood,
made less and less, and several Partitions; and in each Partition a Trap-door
that shuts upon 'em, till at last they come into the narrowest of all. There
they let him alone a good while without Meat, then they get a Rope about his
Neck, and put him into a small Coop, upon a Cart drawn by Buffels; and these
are always brought to the King, who keeps always some of 'em in his Palace, and
looks upon that as a piece of great State. And when one of them brings forth a
young one, it is so much taken notice of, that all the Cannon round the Castle
are discharged, and great Rejoycings and Pastimes are made upon the occasion.

They do breed very often, but though one might expect to bring the young ones to
be perfectly Tame, as indeed some do pretty well come to it, yet it is never
safe to trust them too far; for while I was there, two of 'em, which they
thought as tame as they could wish, broke loose and run through the Town, and
tore several People to pieces, and would have destroyed several more, had not
some Javians come upon them, armed with their Nassingays, who killed one of
them, and took the other.

There is another way of catching them in Traps, laying a Bait for 'em, but
then you cannot have them alive; so there is shooting of 'em, but not without
very great danger.

In Ceylon, Pegu and Aracan they use to catch Elephants much after the same
manner. It is worth while, upon this occasion, to undeceive those simple and
credulous People, who believe that the way to catch them is, to saw some Trees
almost through, against which the Elephants come to lean to take their rest; and
so the Tree falling, they likewise fall, and are not able to get up again,
being very clumsie, and without Joints in their Legs. Whoever gives credit to
this Fable, is easily imposed upon, for considering the Bulk of 'em, there is
not a more nimble and active Creature than they are; and nothing is more sure,
than that when they are used in War, there are never any Ladders made use of,
to help up the three or four Soldiers, which they carry; but they are taught to
kneel, or rather couch down, while they get upon their Backs. But their Agility
is so observable from what we have seen some of 'em do in Europe, that I will
not go about to describe them any further. But for one instance of their
Nimbleness, and Aptness to be taught any thing, I cannot but set down here what
I was an Eyewitness of my self, done by an Elephant which one of the chief
Merchants of the Company kept of his own, that had abundance of Tricks. And
when he had a mind to divert himself, or some special Company, he would have
him brought out by the Men that looked after him, and knew how to manage him.
This Elephant once was brought out upon a Bridge, which was over a very deep
River, and a great Loaf was given him in his Mouth. The keeper gave him a sign,
and fell a beating upon a Copper Instrument; upon which the Elephant went back,
as in a fright, and tumbled down backwards into the River, with a most hidious
plunge, and kept so long under water, that he eat up his Loaf there, and he
staid so very long under the water, that no body expected ever to have seen him
come up again, except those that were used to this trick; at last up he came
and swam to Shore, and having paid his respects to his Master, he threw up the
Bread he had eaten, and near a Barrel full of water. Many other Tricks he
showed, but this is the only one that I thought worth relating, as being
somewhat strange and uncommon.

I used to frequent many Javians of my acquaintance, to pass away the time, and
to observe some of their most particular Customs and Humors, and to share of
their Diversions. Of the latter none pleased me more, than to see their Balliar
Dances, performed by Women who were kept for that purpose, by Persons of the
greatest Quality. These Women are of an extraordinary small size, but of the
most exquisite Form and perfect Shape that ever was seen: Their height is but
between five and six Spans, their Skin as white as the driven Snow; and taking
them all together, one would sooner take 'em for Angels, in the likeness of
Women, than for Women themselves; for besides their natural Beauty, there is
all the artificial Dress that can be contrived. Their Garments are of the
sinest Silks, wrought with Silver and Gold, and their Tresses neatly adorned
with the rarest Orient Pearls, all which does still add to their luster. Their
manner of dancing is in Masquerade; they have in their Hands some Ebbony Balls
strung upon a String, with which they keep time very exactly with the Music,
instead of our Castanets; and sometimes they sing with their dancing, which is
yet more charming than the rest, their Voice being wonderful sweet. One of
these Women costs generally two or three thousand Gilders, they are fetched out
of the Province of Babylon, about forty miles from Jerico the less; and no
other Women are fit for these kind of Pastimes and Dances but they: So they are
much made of by the Indian Kings, and Nobility, who spare no pains nor charge
to get 'em. Some of these I have seen also at Surat and in Persia, when I lay
before Wond Artz, with the Ship called the Gelderland, where we took in Silks
in lieu of our Pepper and Spices.

Another sort of Sport they have is Cockfighting, which being so common here,
needs no further description.

These Sports and Pastimes are frequently seen amongst 'em, but especially at
their Weddings, which are never held without them, together with several other
Recreations, and strange Ceremonies, of which I will give you some account.

In the time that I was there, a young Gentleman, Son to one of the Principal
amongst 'em, was married; and being intimately acquainted with him, I was
invited to that Wedding. His Wife's Portion was considerable, and proportioned
to the Young Gentleman's Fortune. The Father gave with his Daughter, thirty
Men, forty Women, and twenty Young Maids, all Slaves, besides two hundred
thousand Cujax, which amounts to about sixteen Rixdollers, for twelve
thousand Cujax are only the value of a piece of eight. All these Women-slaves,
the Man may lie with if he pleases, but the Children that are thus born, are
not at his disposal, but at his Wives, who may sell them, or dispose of them as
she thinks fit. But those Slaves Children, which are given in Dowry to the
Wife, are in the power of the Husband to order as he will.

When a Marriage is on foot among them, both the Young People confine
themselves within, for about six Weeks or two Months: The Parents in that time
set out their Servants and Slaves, and make 'em as fine as they can against the
Wedding. The Bridegrooms Apartment is all strewed with Flowers. Then on the
Wedding day he mounts on a Fine Horse, which is set out in the finest manner,
and thus goes to his Bride, where all her Friends meet him, attended with the
Slaves, Presents and Household Stuff, etc. Then a great Dinner is prepared,
where each of the Young Peoples Parents are to be present, and to make merry.
In the mean while the Young Couple are lead to a Room with a fine Bed in it;
where they are shut in, and left to their liberty, after which the Bridegroom
comes out to the Guests, but the Bride is not seen of any Man after that time.

These Rejoycings usually last four days, during which there are some Comedies
acted after the Chineese manner.

Among all their Sports, there is their baiting of a Buffle, which pleased me
very well, but that it so frequently occasions much mischief; because their way
is to leave them loose, and to set several English Dogs upon them. I saw my
self once two Buffels let loose in a small enclosed piece of ground, with five
Dogs against 'em. One of the Buffels desended himself very well of the first
Dog that came at him, and tossed him up a vast height; but a second coming upon
him, before he had well rid himself of the first, and seizing him fast by the
Testicles, it so enraged the Buffel, that he run directly to a little Shed,
that stood there in a Corner, upon which three Blacks and two Dutchmen had got,
the better to see the Sport; and throwing all down before him, and the Dogs
still holding him fast, three of them, viz. two Javians, and a Dutch Carpenter,
were trampled to death, and indeed almost all to pieces: And the other Javian,
with the Admiral's Baker, came off luckily with no other wound, than what they
got by their fall: They had no other way to put an end to this, or to part 'em,
but by firing upon them altogether; for now the other Buffel was deeply engaged
too: So that with their Muskets they killed the two Buffels, and two of the
Dogs, and unfortunately another Javian. So that this Sport ended very
tragically, and it generally proves so, through their want of management.

The next day another ill accident happened; for as there was in that place a
great Mast, which the English had taken formerly out of a Ship, and set up
there, in order to get up, and spy the Ships a-far off at Sea. One of our
Seamen would needs go up for a frolic, and being come almost to the top, one
of his holds broke, and let him down, and was (as you may well imagine) killed
with the fall. Upon which Admiral Tack immediately ordered this Mast to be cut
down, and another to be set up upon the Speelwick Bastion, which was much less
than the other, and not near so high, but commanded a farther prospect, the
Bastion it self being very high, and upon a much higher ground.

While I resided in the Hospital at Bantam, which was some Months, several of
our Company, which we had left at Dorjasse, dropped in by degrees, having
destroyed all in their way; and being all come in, they were almost all sent
back again to Batavia, especially all the Blacks; so that there were not left,
both within, and without the Castle, above five thousand Men to keep the
Garrison; which was little enough for so great a place, it being as far as I
can judge fourteen or. fifteen miles in circuit: and the number of its
Inhabitants was computed to be 700000, besides the Foreigners, which might
amount to half the number more.

Toward Land the City lies open, but to the Sea it is guarded by a very strong
Wall six yards broad; besides some hundreds of Bastions, little Forts,
Redoubts, etc. all which are very well provided with Cannon.

All things were now in good order, and the Government very prudently managed,
so that all those that were in the Companies Service, even the Soldiers
themselves, had no reason to complain. But their Condition was much mended,
their Provisions were cheap, and their Usage and Treatment very civil; and I
must confess, that I had all the enjoyment I could well wish: But
notwithstanding all this, I was still dissatisfied and restless, and wanted to
be going to visit some other parts of the Indies. But it was in vain to wish,
for I was under Obligations not to move yet.

The time now drawing near, that our Captain was to return to Batavia; a
Council of War was held, where it was resolved, that a general Muster should be
made, and that those who had served out their time, should come out and claim
their liberty: But withal notice was given them, that if they would engage
themselves afresh, they should not only be kindly received, but should have
their Pay raised by four Gilders.

Then our Captain Tack went back to Batavia, to be President of that City, and
Captain Harzing succeeded him in his place of Governor of Bantam.

About this time the Muck Speelers were very troublesome about the City, and
daily committing great disorders. Their way is to make themselves mad by eating
of the Herb they call Avion, i. e. Opium: Then ye shall see 'em run about the
Streets, like Men distracted, and kill all they meet. But our custom was, as
soon as we spied them a coming, to cry out Amuck, Amuck, upon which every body
stood ready with his Weapon in his hand; and these Blockheads would run
themselves upon a Pike, or upon a Musket, and be shot through, and in the heat
of the Fury, run it may be an hundred or two hundred paces before they dropped.
And these Disorders could not by any means be prevented, though the Company had
made it death for any one to be found with any of that Herb about him, in any
part of the East Indies.

There being now no more Action here, nor any Novelty that this Place afforded
me, I was very desirous to be gone. But I found the only way to attain my wish,
was to get some Sea-Surgeon in the mind to exchange Places with me. Wherefore I
waited impatiently for the coming in of any Ships that were to go to Batavia:
And in a little time the Tidor, from Bali, came into the Road of Bantam. She
had no sooner cast Anchor, but I was with her to welcome her, and to feel the
Pulses of her Surgeons; but I found their Designs were much the same as mine,
and they were all disposed for a longer Course; so that I found no hopes there
of success: But being told that they expected another Ship in toward night, if
the Wind did not cross 'em, wherein were four Master Surgeons; my hopes quickly
revived, and I resolved to stay there that Night; in the Evening the Ship came
in according to their expectation, and the next Morning early I went on board
of it; and after the usual salutations, I applied my self to the Master
Surgeons, and freely declared to 'em my Intentions. One of 'em, a Gentleman of
Delf, at first liked my Proposal, and after some further discourse, was fully
in the resolution of changing with me, which did not a little rejoice me. The
thing being thus agreed upon, he asked leave of the Captain, after having
acquainted him with his design; and having got his leave, he came away with me
to Shore My business now was to have leave my self, which indeed I had moved
for at a distance before, but not doubting of having leave given me whenever I
should desire it, because I had behaved my self well; and what made more yet on
my side, I had now and then greased the Chief Surgeons Fist: I deferred
speaking for it directly, till I had met with one that would change with me. No
sooner had I declared my Mind to the Chief Surgeon, but he gave me an ample and
honorable Testimonium to carry to the Governor, who with a Complement of
Thanks, gave me a Pass, and entered the other in my Place. So I took my leave of
'em all; and having got my Chest and Hammock ready, I got me a-board my new
Ship, called the Enckhuysen, it was laden with nothing but Rice, and had but
twenty eight Seamen, besides the Officers, and us four Master-Surgeons.

I parted very cheerfully from Bantam, the only thing that I was loath to part
with was, a little Summer House I had ordered to be made in the Garden of the
Hospital, which was very delightful. It was made of Bamboos, and so contrived,
that I might have removed it very well; but being I could not move that with
it, which made it so extreme pleasant, I left the whole standing for my
Successor to enjoy, but not without grudging it him heartily. The Top of it was
covered very neatly with Fig Leaves, and the Sides were sweetly shaded with
Pepper-planks, which hung like a Vine over the Windows, and made it extremely
agreeable. But now that I am speaking of this Pepper, it will not be amiss to
give you a description of its growth, etc. This part of Java is the most famous
for it, and the great Blauwe Peper Bergh, which I have so often mentioned, has
its denomination from it, and signifies Blew-Pepper-Mountain, it being full of
it; there the best of all grows. Indeed Malabar, Malacca and Sumatra do produce
vast quantities of it too, but it is all white and long, like the Canary
Pepper, and is not to compare with the Javian Pepper for goodness; and for that
reason hardly any but the latter is transported into Europe.

They plant it at the bottom of other Trees, to which it clings in the nature
of our Hops, and winds round as that does, but higher. Its Leaf is like that of
the Orange Trees, but less, and of a more pleasant Green, and tastes pretty
sharp if one bites 'em. The Fruit grows much like Grapes, though (every one
knows) much smaller, and closer to one another* They are ever green till they
dry, which is in November, December and January, at which time they gather 'em,
and spread them upon Mats in the Sun to dry; then they run 'em through a Sieve,
and pack 'em up ready for the Merchants to take away.

Now, though Pepper is as plenty in India as Stones in the Streets, and only
serves for Ballast very often, and to pack up other Goods tire; and although
sometimes several whole Shiploads of it be thrown into the Sea, and many
hundred thousand pound weight of it burnt; yet dares no Man in the service of
the Company take one single Corn of it, but every one is obliged to buy it of
the Indians, who deal with the Company for it: And the same rule is observable
in respect to other Spices. But now the Enckhuysen lay still but one day, so
that the next morning after I had boarded her, we weighed Anchor and sailed to
Batavia, with a half wind. It lies but six Leagues from Bantam, yet were we
seven days before we could reach it, for we were ever and anon forced to cast
Anchor and weigh it again, which fatigued our Men mightily.

Being now come before Batavia, our Master went immediately on Shore, and the
next day our Ship was unlading. I went to Shore too with all speed in a
Chineese Praw, and went to wait upon the Head Surgeon there, one Mr. John
Streckelberger, who was my old Acquaintance; but I found him now raised to the
highest pitch of Preferment the Profession is capable of there, which was the
place of Overseer General over all the Surgeons in the whole Indies, in the
place of Dr. Kleyer. I told him upon what design I had left Bantam to come to
Batavia, which was in order to get me a Deputation to some other part of India,
that I might travel farther still. He seemed very ready at the first, but
afterward he desired me to come again in three or four days time.

In the mean while I went to visit all my old Acquaintance in the Fort where I
once lived, and to divert my self with 'em. But unhappily I took out an old
Gentleman with me, one day, to go to a small Island hard by, where there were a
great many Oysters; we had got a good many, but as we were coming back, it blew
at so excessive a rate, that our Boat was turned over. The poor old Gentleman
could not reach the Shore, merely for want of strength, and so lost his Life
within a hundred yards of the Land, but the old Chineese and I come safe to
Shore, and the Boat was driven quickly after us, so that we took that up.
Instead of paying the Chineese, I beat him soundly for being the main cause of
all this. And from that time I never saw him more; without doubt he run away
for fear the Fiscael should call him to an account for the death of my
Companion.

This was the fourth time, that God in his infinite goodness delivered me out
of that Element of Water, once in my own Country, once in Africa, once in the
River of Bantam, and this time at Batavia.

It was now time to go and wait upon the Surgeon General, to know what was
determined as to my affair. When I came there, I was surpised to find a
Deputation to go and Board the Phoenix for Banda and Amboina, for besides that
it crossed my design, which was to go to Japan; I knew that those two Countries
were the most unhealthful of all India. However, after a little pause I
resolved to go thither or any where, rather than to stay there. So taking my
Orders with me, I went aboard the Enckhuysen, and told by Brother Surgeons how
I was served, who instead of condoling with me, laughed at me very heartily.

I was now to be gone in two days time; so I made haste and provided my self
with Arac, Tobacco, and Long-Pepper preserved; all which are found to be of
greater use in those unhealthy parts than in any other: And having made all
other necessary Provision, I went on board the Phoenix.

The next day we weighed Anchor, and sailed from Batavia, the wind N. E. passed
the Streights of Sunday, and in three Weeks time we arrived before Banda, which
is reckoned to be three hundred Miles from Batavia. There fell nothing out
worth any notice in our passage thither, but that a poor Seaman was blown down
by a sudden puff of Wind from the Foremast upon the Anchor, which tore his
very Guts out of his Belly.

CHAP. VIII.
Their arrival to Banda. The Author falls very ill there, how recovered.
Description of the growth of the Nutmeg and Mace. Departure from thence for
Amboina. An account of Clove-Trees and Cloves. Return to Batavia. The Island
Onrust, why so called. A vast quantity of Tortoises there; The manner of taking
them. They are a mighty Food amongst them. How Sharks are taken, and the use of
that Fish's Liver. A Voyage from Batavia to Ceylon. Columbo the Chief City
there. The Stratagems which the Portugueeze used in that Country to get footing
there. An account of the growth of Cinnamon there. The Root Borrobone as good
as Saffron. The manner of fishing for Pearls there; many Lives are lost by
diving after them. One Oyster had near three hundred Pearls in it. Mother of
Pearl, what. Departure from Ceylon. Arrival at Batavia, where their Ship takes
fire, Kastizen and Mastizen, what sort of People. A Voyage from Batavia to
Japan. Pass by Formosa, and come to Pangato in Japan. They are forced to put
away all their Books; the reasons why.

AS soon as we were come into the Road of Banda, our Master went ashore; my
Legs which had been swelled for three or four days, were now so sore, that I
could not stir, else I would have gone with him with all my heart; but my
Indisposition augmenting, I was forced to be carried ashore. There my Swelling
increased, all upward, and my Belly was now swelled to the highest degree that
could be, ready to break: And in this condition I continued the space of three
weeks, (so that I was left here very comfortless, for the Phoenix was obliged
to be gone) and after that the Distemper seized me so in all my Limbs, that I
wholly lost the use of them; and during a quarter of a Year I could not bring
my Finger to my Mouth; so that truly I despaired of ever recovering the use of
my Limbs, (although I was not sick inwardly) and therefore I often prayed to God
to take me to himself. I was carried every day to the Bagnio, where several
other Patients with me were set upon Seats, all in a ring, with Blankets wrapped
round about us so close, that nothing but our Heads stuck out; there was a
great Fire of each side of us, which made the heat intolerable, and then we
were held over the steem of some medicinal Herbs, which were boiled for the
purpose; into which infusion they threw thirty or forty red hot Cannon Bullets,
which raised such a steem, and made such a smother, that not one in a hundred
was able to bear it, but they were forced to be taken out, and carried away
upon Quilts made for that purpose. I was taken out thus in the beginning, but
when I came to be used to it a little more, I bore it out bravely, and found it
very helpful. So keeping to this for some weeks, I recovered apace, and then
they begun to anoint my Feet with Oleum Terrae, and prescribed me to drink
frequently a small Glass of Bitter Brandy, or Arac infused in Bitter Herbs; by
which method, with the help of God, I perfectly recovered.

After this I went to satisfy my curiosity, (which was the occasion of my
coming) and to see the Country. But I shall decline giving any description of
it, because it has been done already sufficiently by others, especially by
Johan Hugen Van Linschooten. Only I will give you a short account of the Noble
Fruit which this Island is famous for, viz. the Nutmeg and Mace, which the
Inhabitants, whether Dutch, or Freemen, or Slaves, are obliged to deliver
yearly to the Governor, and is sent afterward to Holland, and other parts of
Europe, and to Persia, and other places of India.

The Tree on which the Nutmeg grows, is almost like the Pear Tree, but does not
spread so much, and its Leaf is somewhat rounder. The Fruit is much like a
Peach in bigness and looks, of an extraordinary fine taste, and delicate smell,
when it is ripe: On the outside is a thick hard Shell, like the Bark of a
Tree, over which the Flower grows. When the Nut begins to be ripe, it swells so
much, that the first Shell bursts open. The Flower is of fine Red, and very
agreeable to look on, especially when the Tree is pretty full of Fruit.
Sometimes the Mace comes off of it self, and when it sticks to the Fruit, they
gather all together; and in the drying of the Nutmeg, the Mace drys and falls
off, and changes its lively Red into that brown Yellow, which we find it has
here in Europe. The whole Fruit is very proper to preserve, and is an excellent
Confite.

While I was at Banda, a couple of Fellows were executed for having killed
their Mother; the death they were put to was very terrible; they were fastened
upon a Wooden Cross, and their Limbs were broke with an Iron Bar, and there
they were left to expire.

After I had spent three Months here, in pretty good health, the Ship called
the America came to Banda; so that having now the opportunity of completing my
Voyage, which my sickness prevented me to do with the Phoenix, I embraced it
readily, and went in her for Amboina. I was glad to leave that unhealthy
Country; and though I had, and shall ever carry with me severe tokens of the
Plague of that Country, I was glad to come off so well as I did. In four days
time we came before Amboina, where our Ship was straight laden with Cloves. I
went there on shore to look about me; and while the Ship was lading, I had time
to examine how they grew, and what I could not be an Eyewitness of, I had from
my old Friend the Sergeant, whom I made mention of before, from whom I got
those Bottles of Oil of Cloves, which cost me so much care and trouble, and at
the last I was forced to drop them into the Sea.

The Clove-Tree is much like the Laurel-Tree, the Blossom is White at first,
then it turns Green, and after that Red. While it is green it smells so fine
and sweet, that nothing can be compared to it. These grow mighty close to one
another, and many of 'em together, all within the Blossom; when they are ripe
they gather 'em, and dry them; then they are of a brown Yellow. Those Cloves
which they do not gather, as not being ripe, hang on till the year following;
and those they call then Moeder Nagelen, i. e. Mother Cloves. Where these Trees
grow, there grows no kind of Grass, or any green thing nigh; their nature being
such, that they draw all the moisture about them to themselves, and so do the
Cloves likewise, as I have often seen my self, that a Tub of Water being set in
a Warehouse that had store of Cloves laid up in it, after they were picked and
cleans'd, in three or four days time the Water would be all gone out of the
Tub. The smell of 'em is so strong, that some People have been suffocated with
it when they have been busy with too great quantities of 'em, and in too close
a place.

Our Ship having taken in all her Lading, we left this place, and made directly
for Batavia, and arrived there happily in a Fortnights time; where our Ship was
immediately unladen, and all the Cloves put aboard the West-Friezland, in order
to go for Holland.

Here an Order was sent me to change my Ship, and go in the Old Europe, the
same Ship that brought me from the Cape to the Indies. I went with her to the
Island Onrust, which is a place fit for careening of Ships; where she was to be
fitted up, being very old. The Island has its name very justly, Onrust,
signifying no rest, by reason of the continual disturbance, which the Sea
causes to the Inhabitants, who are only Carpenters, Smiths, and other such
Artificers for Shipping. For the Island being very low, and the Sea Ebbing and
Flowing every two hours, at very uncertain heights, gives the Inhabitants no
rest or security: And every new and full Moon, the Sea drives 'em up a vast
way; but so unsixt are its Bounds, that they are forced to be continually upon
their Guard: Which besides the great labor, and great quantity of work that
lies upon their hands, makes it truly very restless for them.

There were two Master Surgeons besides me belonging to the same Ship, and we
had all our Patients ashore: The only pastime we could have, was catching of
Tortoises, of which there are vast numbers there. When it is fair, and the Sun
shines bright, they come out of the Water, and lie in the hot Sand. So when
they were all very quiet and settled, we came upon them of a sudden with Sticks
and Iron Bars, and turned them upon their Backs, as fast as we could, for then
they cannot stir. When we had done catching 'em so, we took them out of their
shells, and put them in Pickle, and kept them in Barrels or Pots, with Salt and
Vinegar. This was our daily Food, and very good, but some of 'em are far better
than other some. The biggest we caught was more than three Men could compass,
and a loaded Wagon might safely have gone over it without breaking it.

Besides these, there are also a great many Sharks, which do much mischief; of
which I gave you an instance before in the poor Chineese, that was diving for
Iron, and was devoured by 'em. There is much fishing for 'em. And the manner of
catching them is, by baiting several very large strong Hooks, with the whole
Liver of some other Fish, which the Sharks will not fail to swallow Hook and
all, being extreme greedy, and so they are taken. The Tail is all that is eaten
of this Fish, and that is not very palatable neither; but the whole is eaten
sometimes by Seamen, in case of necessity, for want of other meat: But its
Liver is very useful for many things in Surgery.

Our Ship being now thoroughly refitted, we returned to our old Anchoring Place
at Batavia; where we found a Ship newly come from Holland, that had not yet
cast all her Anchors. I took in all have a Chineese Praw, and went on board of
her to see if I could not meet with any old Acquaintance there, and to hear
some News from our Country: And there I heard the first account of Stransbourgh
being taken by the French, which was a very great surprise to us.

As soon as our Ship had taken in all Necessaries here, she was ordered to sail
for Ceylon, at which I was mighty joyful, and accordingly I recruited my self
with Provisions, and went on board: Then we left Batavia with the first fair
Wind, and in five Weeks time we happily arrived before Columbo, which is the
Chief City of the Dutch in Ceylon. It is one of the most commodious Ports of
any in the Indies, where Ships may lie safe many years, and come in at will,
with the Sea-wind, and run out when they please, with a Land-wind. Yet there
are a great many Rocks there, but they are only dangerous to Strangers; for
which reason, when a Ship comes thither, that has never been there before, she
is obliged to fire three Guns; whereas if he is acquainted with the place, he
need fire but one. This is straight answered by a Gun from a Watchtower, that
is on one of the highest Rocks, about two miles distance from the City, where
there is always a Pilot, and his Men ready, who as soon as they spy a Ship
coming, display a Flag in token that they must come no further, and then they
go and bring the Ship in.

At the Mouth of the Haven lies a Fort or Castle, called 't Swart, i. e. the
Black Fort. It was first built by the Portugueze, but under a specious pretense
of building a thing of a very different nature. For when the King of Candy, who
could at that time have prevented their work, sent to know what they were
about; they told him they were only building a Playhouse, and under that
color carried on their work, and provided it with large pieces of Cannon,
which they brought to Shore in great Hogsheads; and so became able to maintain
themselves there.

I do not design to enter upon a description of this Island, because it has
been done very particularly by others, and especially by Chr. Schwitzor, whose
Relation is now published with mine, to which I refer you.

While our Ship was lading with Cinnamon, and several other Rich Commodities, I
went on Shore most of the time; where I took my diet at a Freemans House, where
I had it extreme good, and well ordered, and for a very small price.

The great Commodity of this Island is Cinnamon, which is the Bark of a Tree,
much of the bigness of an Olive Tree; the Leaves are much like the Laurel, but
somewhat smaller; the Flower it bears is white, and the Fruit is like the Black
Olives of Portugal. The Tree has two Barks, the Cinnamon is the inner one of
them, which is peeled off the Tree, and cut in square pieces; then laid in the
Sun to dry, which makes it roll up together, as we see it in Europe, and
changes its color, which is at first near upon Ash Color, into what we find
it of here.

When the Trees are peeled in this manner, they are let alone for three years,
in which time they have regained their Coats as before. The Trees grow wild,
without planting and cultivating, and make a sort of Coppice of themselves; and
require no other hand than that of Nature to make them beneficial to Man.

There is besides this, a sort of Cinnamon, that grows in Malabar, and is
called Canella de Matte, but it is a bastard kind, and nothing near so good.

None of the Spices, neither the Cinnamon I have been speaking of, nor the
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Saffron, etc. may be carried away by any private Person
upon pain of death: And it has cost some Men their Lives for attempting to
bring them over; as I saw an instance of one who had got a small parcel of
Borrobone, in order to take with him home, and was executed for the fact. This
Borrobone is a Root growing in great plenty in Iava, and is made use of instead
of Saffron by all the Inhabitants; and it has all the Virtues of the best
Oriental Saffron; it is cut and dried, and looks like Ginger.

The other Great and Rich Commodity of this Place is Pearls, which they fish
for after this manner, The Company has some thousands of Diverse for that
purpose, which are divided into so many Companies, and to each of them there is
an Overseer. These Men are all divided, so many to each Boat, and so they go to
the Oyster. Banks; where stripping themselves, every one of them tie a small
Basket round their middle: Then they bind a piece of a certain Root they have,
that is very hollow, and of an Oily substance before their Mouths, so that it
resists the water a good while, and gives them some time to breath. In this
manner you shall see 'em all go down with wonderful quickness to the very
bottom; where they fill their little Baskets with Oysters, then come up again
as nimbly as may be; and when they have a good quantity of 'em, they carry them
to Shore, where they lay 'em out in the Sun; there they open of themselves, and
in them are found sometimes many Pearls, sometimes none at all.

Some of these Diverse, more skilful than the rest, will, without the help of
those Roots, keep under water almost as long as they that use them.

When their days work is over, they come to Shore all together in good order,
delivering faithfully all the Pearls they have got to the Officers that are
appointed by the Company, which finds all these Men with Provisions, and other
Necessaries, and allows some of them pretty good Salaries besides.

In the whole fishing Season it cannot be but, there must happen several
accidents, and that many Men lose their Lives in the Sea among the Rocks; you
hear almost daily of some such misfortune, and every day gives subject of
lamentation and complaint to some new made Widow or Orphan. Yet notwithstanding
all this, there is no want of Men, ready to take to serve in this dangerous
employment, some being forced into it by the Dutch, and others by their
necessities.

The Oysters in which the Pearls are found, are fine, white and smooth; I have
known 'em find three hundred and odd of Pearls in one of 'em. When they have a
mind to give them a fine color, they take Rice, and beat it to dust with Salt,
and rub them with that, and it makes them as bright as Crystal, and so they
will continue.

There is another sort of Oyster in Ceylon, which is called by the Inhabitants
Changa, by us Mother of Pearl; this they polish very fine, and make fine
drinking Cups of it. It is also of great use for many Ornaments, especially
that which comes out of China, Bengal, Ormus, Gammaron, etc. as we see most
frequently on those pieces of work, that come from thence into these parts of
Europe.

There is likewise another manner of fishing, which is more tedious, and
therefore less used. Yet I have seen it practiced in a River that was thirty or
forty Fathoms deep. Two Ships were laid aside of one another, at about eight or
ten yards distance; and a Beam being laid across them, whereon there is a large
Pully fixed; they hang a large Bell thereon, in which the Man sits, (upon a
cross Seat fixed within the Bell) and so the Bell is let down; there is a
little ringing Bell fixed upon the top of the Beam, and the Man has a Cord with
him fastened to that, and to his Body; as soon as he finds the Air begins to
fail him, he pulls that little Bell, which is a token to the rest to pull him
up; and when he has cleared that place, they move a little further, and fix
there again till they have got all they can.

Having spent my time ashore, I went on board again, and then the other
Master-Surgeon took his turn, and I went no more on shore, but only once, when
my Comrade sent me word, that there was an Elephant of the Governor's was to
show a great many Tricks, of which I have given you a relation before.

In a matter of five Weeks time, all our business being done in Ceylon, we all
got aboard, and set sail for Batavia again, where under the Almighty's
Protection we arrived safe, after a kind Voyage of three Weeks. But we were no
sooner arrived, and cast our Anchors, but we fell into an extreme danger. Our
Butler, according to custom, and by the Skipper's Order, went down to fetch
some Arack for the Seamen, and as he was drawing it out of the Bunghole, with a
sort of small Pump, which they had for that purpose, either by a Snuff of the
Candle, or by the Candle it self, the Arack took fire; and that spreading like
Lightning, set the whole on sire; for the European Brandy does not burn near so
violently as Arack does. All our Men were immediately at work to put it out,
but all in vain: It got a head after so furious a manner, that it set fire on
the Ship it self, and it was not long e're that was all in a flame. We had then
nothing more to do, but to look after our selves, and to endeavor to save our
own lives; and it was a great mercy we could do that, for we could not save the
least parcel of our Goods, nor one of our Chests, much less any of the
Company's Goods. This was a mighty loss to the Company, who had abundance of
Cinnamon, and rich Cinnamon-Oyl on board, all which helped its own destruction,
and increased the Fire: For no sooner had we left the Ship our selves, but the
fire took in the Powder-room, where there was some Tuns of Powder, which blew
up the Ship and tore it all to pieces, and threw some of its Cannon above a
quarter of a mile up into the Air. Thus, when we thought our selves secure, and
past all danger, and pleased our selves with the thoughts of our success, we
were all on a sudden mortified with this great accident, and all our Joys
destroyed, with the utmost peril of all our Lives. But God be praised, that no
Man got any harm, but every one of 'em were saved by means of a good number of
Small Boats that were sent to our Relief. The Butler, who had been the occasion
of this, was seized by the Judge Advocate, and for ought I know, was forced to
serve the Company all his life long for nothing.

After this I had Orders sent me to go upon the Fort, called the Hollandia,
which is by the New Gate. There I had the care of the Sick and Wounded; and was
set over a Young Man, whom I had formerly known at Dantzick, and was here
married to a Daughter of one of the Kastizen.

These Kastizens are those that had a Dutch Father, and an Indian Mother. When
an European marries one of these Kastizees, and has any Children by her, they
are called Mastizees; and these may wear the same Garb that the Dutch use. Of
this latter sort, there are many thousands in and about Batavia.

An Old Freeman, whom I used to converse with frequently, and was very intimate
with, undertook once in friendship to advise me to marry one of those
Mastizins; who, as he told me, was worth above forty thousand Gilders. This
proffer did not much displease me, but it was an Old Woman, he told me, and the
Widow of an European Officer, who had served the Company. Hearing of her Age,
made me not so eager to see her as I was at first, when he proffered to carry
me to her. But the very seeing of her disgusted me so much from Matrimony, and
my Friend, that I never had a charitable thought of him ever after. I thought
at the first of her, that it was an Ape of the larger size, that had been the
wonder and pastime of Mankind for some hundred years: And asking him, whether
he thought me fit for nothing but the procreation of Baboons, I left him in a
mighty passion, and would not so much as speak a word more about the matter.

When an European designs to marry any of those People, He and the Woman must
appear before the President of the Council, and bring their Contracts, (which
are to be drawn up and signed by a Public Notary) to him, to have his consent
to the consummation of the Marriage; likewise a Memorial of the Goods of each
of them must be showed him, and registered: And when they have obtained leave,
the Wedding is generally kept about a fortnight after.

Besides, that this baulk had turned my Stomach for some time against
Matrimony, I was not very much inclined to it, because a Man is obliged to
settle, and spend his life in India. For I had a design to be going further
still; and by the means of some Presents, now and then, to obtain leave to go
to Japan. For which purpose having made some close applications, and used the
means I mentioned just now, I after some time had orders to get me ready to go
thither, on board the Ship called the Asia, which was to go in a fortnight to
Formosa, and from thence to Japan. So I went and provided my self with all
necessaries for that Voyage, it being no small one.

According to the Orders given, we set sail in the Name of God, on St. Steven's
day, with so fair a South Wind, that by the next morning we were got three
miles beyond the great Island Java, and passed by the small Island Carousing.

The next day we saw the famous Coast of the Island Borneo, and leaving that on
the right and Temabo, Tumbolan and Ananibo on the left, we steerd our Course
between them, till we came into the open Sea of Paragoa; where leaving China on
the left of us, we sailed directly upon Formosa. But e're we could reach it, we
had very bad weather for some days, and were in extreme danger; for besides
that, the Sea it self is one of the most dangerous by reason of the many Rocks
there; we went through one of the dreadfullests Storms that was almost ever
known; insomuch that we lost both Bolt-Sprit, and Sprit-sail, and one other
Sail. As we were drove to this extremity, our Master and Steersman advised
together, whether they should not make what way they could to an Island that
lay on the right Hand, and within sight of us, to see if by that means we might
not save the Men and Cargo. So it was agreed upon, that we should make thither
with only our Mainsail, But the night coming upon us, before we could come near
it, we lost all hopes of safety; for the Tempest increased with the darkness of
the night, and we were most of us in despair of our Lives, and for my part I
never was less fond of Traveling, than at that time.

Yet my hope was, that as God had often preserved me from Eminent dangers
before, so he would not forsake me then in this Condition; Thus we Continued
till near Morning, when our Seamen conceived some hopes of attaining to Land,
and accordingly by break of day, we discovered the Island Manilba within two
Miles of us, and by the help of the Light we made shift to weather the Gulf of
Manilba, which as soon as we were got into, we gave God Almighty thanks for his
great Preservation.

Here we resitted our Ship as well as we could expect, and got a new Mast, and
in Eight days time we set Sail again with a fair wind Early in the morning, so
that by next day we left China on the left, and the next Morning were in sight
of Formosa, whither we came on safe, and cast our Anchors before the Fort,
called the Zealand.

Our Master went ashore, and did all his business in a fortnights time; during
which time I was most upon Land, but it being needless for me to give any
Account of that place, which has been so Amply described by others; I will
wave it, and pursue our Journey.

We set Sail again with a fair wind, and sailed for Three days along the vast
Coast of China, which we had still on the left of us, and when we came before
Cucheu we cast our Anchors, and lay still Two days there.

And then continued our Course, so that the next day we passed by the Island of
Chanquoish, and Steering between the Island of Fuego, etc. We in few days came
before the City of Nangato, where we again returned God thanks, for having
brought us through that dangerous Voyage. Notwithstanding that our ship was so
tattered, and that we had lost 14 of our Men; and had 20 sick, among those of
us that were left.

We were forced to leave our Chaplain behind us at Batavia, for the Javians
will not suffer any Nation to bring any of their Teachers along with them into
their Territorys. So that we were forced to make use of one of the gravest of
our Company, who was Assigned to read Prayers daily in the Ship, and as soon as
we came to cast our Anchors, we had strict Orders given by the Master to hide
the Book very carefully, that had been used in the Voyage; and to keep all
other Religious Books close out of sight, lest we should go in danger of our
Lives, if they should discover any of 'em about us.

CHAP. IX.
How foreign Ships are received, and visited in Japan. Women proffered to them
for their use while they Stay. Some of the Japonneses exceeding Nimble at
showing Tricks Strange variety of Birds, in the Port of Nangato. A Ship takes
Fire, by means of the Men drinking of Arack. Account of the Manners, Customs,
Religion etc. of the Japonneses. Departure from Nangato. Near being Shipwreckt
a going back to Batavia, yet Arrive thither. Departure thence again, to
Malacca, and Achem, with an Account of those Inhabitants, and return again to
Batavia.

WE had scarcely dropped our Anchors before Nangato, but we had some Japonneeses
Boarding us with their Canows. They visited our Ship from Top to Bottom, by
Order of the Emperor; and according to their Custom, secured all our Sails, and
all our Powder and Bullets; dismounted our Cannon, and took off some of the
Principal Tackle of our Ship, and carried them on Shore with them. Thus they
serve all the Ships that come thither, and thus they had done to 3 or 4 English
and French Ships, that lay there: But every bit they take away is faithfully
returned, when they are ready to go off again.

When we had begun to unlade, a parcel of Japonneeses came to us to offer us
some Women, and asked us, if we would not have some of 'em while we stayed
there: But no body hearkened to their Proposal but the Master, and the
Book-keeper.

The goods were unladen by the Japonneeses, of which a certain number is
allotted to each Ship: So that our Men had little or nothing to do. The Master
went on Shore, as soon as the Ship was come nearer to the Town, and laid up
there: But he came back every day an Hour at least, or Two, before night: For
all the while that we lay here, the Japonneeses held a continual Watch aboard
all the Ships that were in the Port. I cannot undertake to give you a large
Account of Japan, because it would require a larger Volume then I intend; nor
do I think it necessary, because so many have done it before me; but what I
observed most particularly amongst 'em, will, I hope, be sufficient to satisfy
the Readers Curiosity.

When I came on Shore, the first place I entered into, was a public house,
where they drunk Tea, and that very plentifully; having rested there a while
with my Companions, we went to take a view of the Town; where we saw abundance
of Joyners, and Japanners Shops, set out with Wonderful variety of rich and
Exquisite work, as Scrutores Cabinets etc. inlay'd with silver and gold, and
most admirably lackerd, all which made as fine a Show, as ever I saw. Some of
these pieces of Work were valued at some Thousands of Gilders. In that kind of
Work they outdo all Indians whatever, and indeed in all manner of Ingenuity
and Cunning, insomuch that it was a Proverb among the Dutch, that though a Dutch
Man was Cunning, be might go to School to a Japoneese.

They do not trouble themselves with Linen or Silk Manufactures; by reason
that they are brought over to them in such abundance from other Countries, that
they have 'em as Cheap, as in the places where they are made.

Our Ship the Asia, was laden with such kind of things, and took in Exchange,
what Japan affords, as Copper Stafetiens, Silver, Gold etc.

Their Manner of Saluting us seemed very strange to me at first; for whereas
the Chineeses, and other East-Indians used to show their respect by clapping
their hands together against their Breast or Forehead, these People pulled off
their Shoes, and set themselves down on the Ground, for they look upon it as
the greatest piece of Incivility to receive any Person Standing.

Whereas other Nations think fair Hair, and white Teeth great Ornaments; these
are of a quite different Opinion, and think none agreeable, but those who have
the Blackest Hair and Teeth: and they use all the Art they can to make them so;
their Notion in this being directly opposite to ours, taking Black to be the
Livery of Mirth and Pleasantness, and white of Grief and Mourning. They have
but very little Hair on their Heads, being always careful to pluck it out by
the Roots from their Youth. In short, all their Customs, Language, Dress etc.
is as different as can be from all other People.

There is a certain Antipathy between them and the Chineeses, they cannot bear
with one another; when they go to War against the Tartars or the Chineeses,
they never give Ground, and will sooner be Cut into a Thousand pieces than Fly:
and if Thousands, 10 or 100000 are Cut down, they are immediately Recruited:
For their Law forbids them to yield to, or Flee from, any Enemy. Their Country
is so Populous, that one who has not seen it cannot hardly believe it

The Sea Port of Nangato, was at our first coming so full of Birds, that it was
almost covered with 'em, and all the Ships that lay there as it were Blockt up
with them; they were very Tame, insomuch that as our Boats went to and fro to
Land, they would but just give us way: the Reason of that vast Quantity is,
because they never kill any of 'em to Eat, for their Law forbids them strictly
to Eat any thing that is Tame, as Oxen, Cows, Hens, etc. But any thing that is
Wild, they may and do Eat. So that these Fowls being harmless, as well as Tame,
they do not so much as disturb them; which makes 'em Increase to that
prodigious number. They are in Shape and Color much like our wild Pigeons, and
have the same feet with Ducks.

The night before I was resolved to go on Board again, there fell out an
unlucky Accident in our Ship. Some of the Seamen had saved their Portions of
Arack for some days, designing to have a good Quantity together for Punch, and
the place where they went to drink it being very dark, they got themselves a
Lamp, which they lighted, and Imprudently hung up upon one of their Hammocks;
One of them being a little Intoxicated, and lazy, laid himself down in that
Hammock, and the rest of the Company pressing him to drink in his Turn, he did
now and then take his Cup, but at last his hand growing more and more unsteady,
he spilt part of his Cup over the Lamp; which by Misfortune hung over their
Bowl. So that the whole taking Fire, and they not in a Capacity to look
carefully about them, the Fire took hold of the Hammocks, and burnt several of
them. But by the Assistance of the other Seamen it was happily stopped from doing
any further Damage.

The men who had occasioned this were immediately clapped up in Irons: And some
days after they were brought to public Punishment, according to the Custom of
the Sea: Which was to receive from every Person of the Ship 90 Blows on the
Breech, with an Anchor Rope.

And had the Master not been very favorable, it would have fared much harder
with them. However, as mild as the punishment was, it made them in such a
Condition, that they were forced to keep their Beds for several Weeks; and most
like to Die: Neither could any of 'em ease Nature, or make Water, for several
days.

While we lay here, I was Invited on Board an English Merchant-Man, and there
had great proffers made me if I would have gone along with them; the proffer
was the more Advantageous, because they had lost their Surgeon in the Voyage,
and had but a Young raw Boy with them that could hardly spread a Plaster. But
I would by no means hearken to their Proposal, because it was as much as my
Life was worth, and what was yet more, I should have been Perjured if I had
accepted of it, and forsook the Company.

In this Port dyed three of our Men, and a Carpenters Boy. Some Japonneeses
carried them out of the Harbor in a small Boat, into open Sea, where they
threw 'em over: For they are so far from suffering any Foreigners to be Buried
among them, that they will not permit them to be thrown so much as in the Water
that is near them. We had here such a Terrible Storm all on a sudden, that if
our Ship had not been well provided with Anchors, and the Tempests lasted but a
very little while; it had certainly been lost. For in that little while, of
four Anchors that we had, we lost Two.

The English Ship I was just now speaking of, foundered, at that time 7 of her
Men were drowned, and the rest very hardly escaped. The next day they refitted
our Ship again; during which time, I had an opportunity of going on Shore again
for three or Four days.

In that time there happened to come some Juglers to Nangato, who showed the
finest and the most dexterous Tricks that I ever saw, both of Legerdemain, and
of Activity of Body; but of what they Showed of the latter an Instance or two,
will not be unacceptable. One of these Fellows had a Bamboo Cane, of about 6
foot length tied to his Middle, and as he was Standing still, another Fellow
leaping on a sudden with his feet upon his Shoulders, climbed up to the Top of
the Cane; and there laid himself out at length upon the Knob, which was on the
top of the Cane, of about the bigness of a Goose's Egg, stretching out his Arms
and Legs, and whiring round 3 or 4 times. The Man upon whom the Cane was tied
fast, walking all the while to and fro, and never offering to touch the Cane
with his hand.

After this there came a second who stood upon his head, with his feet directly
up in the Air, and then a third came and got up and stood upon the Soles of his
feet.

Then another set himself firm upon his Legs, and there came one of them and
stood upon his head, with his feet up in the Air.

Lastly, they took a Board all stuck with sharp Nails about two spans length;
over which a Fellow raised himself upon his hands so neatly, that his head did
not touch one of the Spikes. These Tricks being somewhat extraordinary, and far
more surprising than what I have yet seen in Europe, I thought it might not be
amiss to give you an Account of them, though I am sensible that some who think
all Impossible which they have not seen, will be apt to censure it, rather than
believe it.

This last time of my being ashore, I chanced to come by one of their Religious
Assemblys, into which my Curiosity led me to go, in hopes of seeing some
strange Custom: But there was nothing very peculiar. There only came in one of
their Priests, who set himself down in the midst of the place, and a great many
People being gathered about him, he made a kind of Sermon or Oration to them,
which I hearkened to very diligently; but could not understand a word of what he
said. Nor would any one of that Assembly give me any answer when I asked them
what it was that he had been saying to them, but all went off like Mutes; they
do not at all care to enter into any discourse with Christians concerning
Religion, which I often attempted to bring them upon: And indeed it is not safe
for Christians to talk to them on that Subject, as we had all sufficiently been
Informed 'ere we came to Land here. Yet I could not forbear to touch a little a
upon it sometimes, with one particular Acquaintance I had got there, who was a
grave, sober, understanding Man: And he would often express very favorable
Sentiments of the Christian Religion, and did not stick to tell me once
(fetching a deep sigh) that he wished he could be at liberty to Embrace it, but
withal conjuring me not to discover him; because it would cost him his Life, if
it was known that he had such a desire.

My time now grew short; and I made haste to buy what I wanted; but when I came
to look about in their Shops and Warehouses, I was so Tempted with the sight
of their Fine-works that I bought a great deal more than I at first designed to
do. What I bought, though of the Finest-work, I had exceeding Cheap: Which was
another Encouragement to me to lay out my Money. These Workmen are but very
poor, as indeed all the Tradesmen in the Country are. Some of 'em do not live
better than Beggars, and a little Charity Transports them into such humble
Acknowledgments, that if at any time I gave any of 'em the value of Twopence
of our money, I could hardly keep them from falling upon their knees before me
to thank me. There is no middle Rank of Men among them, of any value, even the
Merchants being not looked upon: But on the other side, their Gentry or Nobility
are valued and Respected at a more than ordinary Rate: And in their gate and
behavior one may observe such a Grandeur, or rather Haughtiness, as is scarce
to be seen any where else.

Our Ship being now full laden with Copper, Lacker'd work, Jappan-money, and
other Commoditys, the Japponeeses came again to us, first to visit the Ship,
and then restored us all our Cannon, Powder and Bullets, and our Sails; all
which they brought us on Board again, and the next day, we set sail out of the
Port, though it snowed hard, and the Wind was somewhat Rough.

The next Morning we saw three Suns in the Heavens; but the Brightness of the
two unusual Phoenomenas the two seeming Suns was not comparable to that of the
real Sun; all three of them were seen within a large Rainbow.

The 2d. 3d. and 4th day we failed by the Island Ximo, and coming to a small
Island of about 6 miles compass, we cast Anchor, to wait there for a Wind. Some
our Men went on Shore, and brought back some Eggs with 'em, which Water-fowls
lay usually about the Shore. They were as large as Geese eggs, and we found 'em
extraordinary good.

The next day we went off with a good Wind; 2 or 3 days after, we were all of
us Surprised to see something Floating, and hundreds of Fowl upon it; but
coming nearer to it, we found it was a vast big Fish, covered with those Birds.

We found here but 18 or 20 fathoms Water; so that we were daily and
continually forced to use the Plummet: Till a fresh Storm came upon us which
obliged us with all speed to hand all our sails.

The Tempest was so furious for a time, that we thought no otherwise but we
should have been swallowed up: But God Almighty, whose Compassions never fail
toward them that call upon him faithfully, was pleased to deliver us out of
our distress, by stilling the Winds, and after some time we came to a small low
sandy Island, called Kruys Island, where we dropped 2 of our Anchors.

In this stress of Weather we lost one Man, who was Tossed off the Maintop Mast
into the Sea. The Billows carried him quite out of our sight, else we had been
obliged by our Sea Articles to have put out the long Boat and to have gone
after him, though we run the risk of loosing all the Men of the Ship. But being
we could not see him, we were not obliged to seek after him; and it was more
prudent to give him over for lost, than to venture 7 or 8 Men more when there
was no Prospect of doing any good.

It Snowed very hard: so that we lay still here 2 days, and on the 3d. day, we
set sail directing our Course toward Formosa. In our way thither we came by a
large Rock almost covered over with Fowl, we went up to it with our long Boat,
and caught above a hundred of 'em: if we would have stayed a while, we might
have caught thousands, for they hardly fled away from us: But most of 'em crept
into their nests, which were nothing, but the natural Cavitys of the Rock,
without any straw or any kind of Lining in them; they being so easy to come at,
made us conclude, that they had hardly ever been disturbed by any Man.

At Noon our Steers-man took the Suns altitude, by which we found that we were
within 40 Leagues of the Island Formosa, whither we were Steering. It was as
fine Weather, as we could wish; but the Wind being against us, we were forced
to clap upon the Wind to make the best of it, and get a little forward, till we
came to have the Wind upon the beam, which in 3 days time brought us before the
Road of Zealand. There we put some Rice ashore, and stayed but a day and a
half, and at night we put out of the Bay, Firing 3 Guns to take our leave.
While our Gunner was doing this, he had left a measure of Powder in the Boys
hands who stood behind him, and a Seaman coming by with a Pipe of Tobacco in
his Mouth, going to peep into the Powder case, let fall some of his Tobacco
amongst it, which burnt him dreadfully, and threw the Boy backwards to the
ground. It was well this did not happen in a greater parcel, and that there was
no more harm done. But for this the Seaman was taken, and was severely puss'd:
That is done by laying 'em flat on their Belly, and stricking them with a Rope
across the Breech.

The next day we Steered between two high Rocks, that were about half a League
asunder: The Wind from that time continued fair for us during the space of 8
days, in which we passed by the Island Manilha, then we came into a Wind, which
was very troublesome to us; for it filled the Air with nasty stuff as thick as
Snow, this Wind came over some small Islands that lay 2 Miles on the South of
us, which are called the Stof Elyanden. When the Wind is pretty high, and sits
in that corner, if a Ship goes too near them, it is almost enough to Smother
Men. But God be thanked we came safe through it, and with a favorable Wind came
into the Sea of Paragua; we kept on our Course to Borneo, and from thence to
Great Java, whence we quickly reached Batavia; which happily completed our
Voyage in 5 Months.

Being Arrived, our Ship was unladen: Our sick Men carried to the Hospital, and
I at the same time went on Shore, and took all my Medicaments with me, but we
had not been here above a fortnight, but an opportunity offered it self to me,
either to go along with a small Fleet to the Straight of Sunda, or else with
another which was to cruise between Malacca and Sumatra. I had my choice, and
having declared my desire rather to go with the latter, I received my
Commission. The reason why these two small Squadrons were sent thither was,
because we were informed, that the French and English being disguised at the
disturbance we had given them in Bantam, were coming out against us.

After we had been some Weeks a Cruising there, now toward Sumatra, then
toward Mallaca, sometime to the Island St. Maurice and Madagascar, without
Meeting with any either French or English, Captain Vander Bors, who was our
Commadore or Admiral, resolved to go with the Fleet to Achem, and to lie still
there, only he orderd that one Ship should be Cruising about, and bring
Intelligence, and the whole Squadron which consisted of 11 Ships should take it
by turns.

While we lay here we had a most dreadful Storm for the space of 6 whole days.
The Sciam was cast away, Men and all, except a few of 'em. The Zealand having
lost all her Anchors, was drove upon a Shelf, where she stuck. We went in haste
to help her Men, and we did save some of 'em: But at last the two long Boats
which we had sent to their Relief being Tossed violently against each other,
Split in pieces, and all the Men in them were drowned, which were about 130.

As for our Ship, we were forced to Swaddle it with a four double Cable Rope,
lest it should have Split, by the violence of the Waves, and to keep constantly
Pumping, six and six at a time, changing Men every quarter of an hour. And
whereas one Man used to suffice at the helm, we were forced to have 10 to keep
our Anchors from twisting altogegether and breaking. The worst of this was,
that we were not far from Land, and we were just of the Windward of'm: For we
had been much safer if we had been in open Sea. But that is safe enough every
where which God takes into his keeping, and it pleased him at the end of 6 days
to send us a fine Calm again, wherefore we went immediately to Prayers, and
gave God thanks that he had thus deliverd us.

The next thing we did was to give the Men some Refreshment, one chief part of
which is always a good portion of Arack, and that being done we sent word to
Batavia, what a poor condition we were in, to which we had for answer, that we
might come away for Java again: For that two Ships were lately come thither
from Holland, which had brought information, that there was no report there of
any likelihood of War, and that we needed not to fear it in those Parts: But
only that England required some Millions of Money from Holland, for the damage
the English had sustained by their means in Bantam; and that in case the Dutch
did not come to a Composition, a War would most certainly follow.

While we lay still before Achem, I went often to Shore to refresh my self with
the excellent Fruits of that Country. The Religion, Manners Customs, etc. of
that People are much the same with the Javians.

In a Village not far from thence, where none but Fishermen live, I saw Men
that had one of their Legs as big as most Men's middles; when they used to hold
them up, it would Shade their whole Body from the Sun, and yet would these Men
run as fast as Horses. I sometimes laid my hand on those Legs of theirs, and
they felt just like a Sponge.

By that Village runs a very fair and pleasant River, which empties it self
into the Sea, near the place where we lay at Anchor, along the sides of which
are a great many strange Tree, which bear a Fruit they call Wild Ananas 3 times
a year, when the Fruit is ripe it is extreme pleasant.

Our Fleet, which consisted now of no more than 9 Ships, set sail for Batavia,
where we Arrived in a fortnight: And found the other Fleet come three days
before us. I had changed my Ship, and was in Business in the Hollandia, where I
had a great deal of work, and most of my patients Afflicted with sore Legs.
The Surgeon that did belong to it dyed in this Voyage, and I the rather chose
that Ship, because it had already received Orders to go to the Isle of Bali.

Before it went off I went to Shore to take my leave of my old Acquaintance;
and there met with one that was lately come out of Europe, a Native of Ulm, a
place I was well acquainted with; and it being a day which was kept there as a
Festival, we kept it here also amongst our selves, and diverted our selves very
well: Among other news he brought over with him, the most considerable was,
that the Turks were beaten from before Vienna; which did not a little
contribute to our Joy and Satisfaction.

CHAP. X.
Their departure and Arrival at Bali. Arrows used by the Inhabitants which are
Mortal. They sell themselves for Slaves Their strange Idolatry. Women Burn
themselves with the Corpse of their Husbands. The Island Susu Inhabited by
Men-Eaters. Departure from Bali, and arrivel at Batavia. Observations on that
place.

Account of his Voyage to Surat, and return to Batavia which he leaves again to
go to Bengal, Pegu and Aracan. Roses of Jericho.
IN two days time we set Sail with a fair Wind: And the same day before Sunset
we passed by the Island Onrust, then came between the Island Toppers-hoedie,
and Bantam along Great Java into open Sea: And in 18 days time we reached the
Island Bali, and cast our Anchors before the Capital Town of the same name.

In our former Voyage to Banda and Amboina, we passed by this place and came
within 8 Miles of it; But the Wind being then so fair for us, we would not
touch here, but made the best of our way forward: Otherwise we should have
called here of Course, as most Ships do, to take in fresh Water, and other
Refreshments.

Here we unladed our Ship, and exchanged the Commodities for those of the
Country: Which were chiefly, Silk and Cotton wrought, most of the PeoPeople
here being employed in Spinning and Weaving.

They are a very Strong sort of People, somewhat Blacker than the generality of
other Indians are. They use no other Weapon when they fight but Arrows, which
they carry always about them in a kind of quiver. These Arrows are so
contrived, that when the Man who is Wounded with 'em goes to draw them out,
they break; besides that, they are so Artificially Poisoned, that it is present
death without any Remedy.

They permit themselves to be sold, to any Nation over all the Indies, for
Slaves; while I was there I bought a young Girl of a Merchant, for 18
Rixdollers, and took her with me to Batavia, where I could make her earn me two
Shillings or 18 Pence a day.

They are exceeding Brutish People, and the Simplest of Heathens. Their God is
what ever they first cast their Eye on in the Morning, so that it is still
variable, sometimes a Cow, sometimes a Tree, sometimes a Dog, or a Bird, etc.
This they keep in veneration for all that day, and pray to it with great
earnestness upon all emergencies.

They know nothing of Marrying amongst 'em. But as it is among Brutes, Men and
Women are in common to each other, which makes the Country very Populous. Yet
each man has always some one whom he looks upon as a Principal Consort, and by
the Custom of the Country she is obliged to such a severe and Rigorous Ceremony
upon the death of her Mate, as would very ill go down with those who make a
profession of more faithfulness and a more Honorable observance of their more
solemn Engagements: And I have seen them acquit themselves of it with the
greatest Resolution imaginable; I mean the Burning themselves, when their
reputed Husbands Corpse is committed to the Flames.

The manner of it is thus. When the Man is dead, they sow him up in a Cotton
cloth, and carry him up to the Top of the House, where they keep him four or
five days; during which time the Woman has time to prepare her self, that is,
to take her leave of her friends; and all the while some old Women who are
hired for that purpose, are sitting at the door, crying and howling. Then they
dig a great hole near the River side, which they fill with Wood, and having
laid the Corpse upon it, they set fire to the Wood. The Woman all this while
having taken her farewell of all her Relations, and having got a whole bundle of
presents and recommendations to their friends in the other World, she binds up
all her tokens together in a Cotton Cloth, and when the Fire is thoroughly
lighted, she throws her self therein.

These tokens are different according to the Condition, Inclination, or degree
of Relation of the Person they send to; as one Man shall send his Wife Money,
the other Flowers, the other some other small present, all which she promises
to deliver faithfully. There stands round the Fire several Persons with their
Instruments of Copper and other Metals, on which they make such a horrid noise,
that there is no hearing of the Woman's Shreeks, besides there are Men ready
with Vessels of Oil to pour into the Fire to make it Burn more vehemently, that
she may the sooner be out of her pain.

When they are thus consumed to ashes, they are taken up very clean and thrown
into the River with another consort of howling and crying. I know there has
been several Accounts of this given by others after a different Manner, but
what I have here given is as I have been an eye witness of it my self.

Here grows some of the sinest Fruits in the World, and in great plenty, so
that I eat my fill of 'em. These Fruits are a Refreshment of no small value to
an European, and it makes him have a much greater esteem for those remote and
Barbarous Isles, and it is very often the only thing for which one would value
them; it is as observable, that the more Barbarous the Country is, the more it
excels in choice and delicate Fruits, as this place may well serve for an
example, and all the Isles thereabouts, which are Inhabited by the most Brutish
sort of Men. And some of 'em by Men who devour one another, and make a feast of
their Victory; as at Susu, which lies here hard by, and likewise in the Country
of the Hottentots near the Cape of Good Hope. I have often wished for some of
them since I parted with them, and that they had agreed more with our Climate,
so that we could have them in Europe.

Our business being done, we left Bali; And quickly gained the Cost of Great
Java, from which Bali lies but eight Leagues distance; and in eight days Sail
we arrived at Balavia again. We had all the way the sight of the Island we
left, and sometimes could see over it in a very clear day, it not being above
sixteen Miles in compass.

When we came to Shore I was very kindly receved, and placed into the Hospital
at Batavia; there being just then a vacancy by the death of the chief Surgeon
of that place, the Council was pleased to choose me in his stead, and to give
me the care of it. Here I had five Masters Surgeons under me, and my Station
was every way much more agreeable than hitherto it had been; but that which
pleased me the best, was that I had both time, and opportunity to serve God;
and though it was only the Reformed Religion that was exercised there, yet I took
a great deal of Satisfaction in going to serve God with them, when their
Assemblys met; which was three times a Week. But I could rather have wished
there had been a Church of my own persuasion (which is the same that Luther
maintaind and professed) for then I believe I should never have troubled my
self to have come back into Holland again, and I dare say that thousands more
would willingly continue there, rather than undertake such dangerous Voyages to
come back, if they could but have the free exercise of their Religion, as they
have in Holland, where all Religions are tolerated; and it was ever a wonder to
me, that the same liberty was not granted in Batavia, which is as wisely and
politically governed as any City in the World, and keeps as good an order in
all things, notwithstanding the great variety of its Inhabitants; having within
it, besides the Natives of the several parts of the Indies, vast numbers of
Turks, Persians, Tartars, Chineeses, Siamers, Moors, Japoneeses, Armenians,
Arabians, etc. Yet is there no other Religion allowed, but that of the
Reformed, and at their Assemblys are all the Soldiers obliged to be present, of
what persuasion soever they be, and forced to be there every Sunday by Turns,
under the Eye of an Officer, and then they put their Shoes on, whereas they
wear 'em but-rarely otherwise.

There are besides the Church in the Castle two other Churches, where they
Preach in the Portugueeze and the Maleysh Languages the first for the
convenience of the Burghers, the other of the mixed Nations, who generally speak
that Language.

Yet for all this liberty of Religion is not given, there are many hundreds,
who when their time is expired, bind themselves a fresh rather than venture the
danger of going home again, though they lay their Religion aside for ever for it.
The frequent news of of Ships being cast away, and loosing one half of the
Fleets, and sometimes the whole ones, increases their fears daily. While I was
at Batavia my self, I sent a Letter to my Relations, by one who intended to
pass through Ulm, where they lived: And of this Fleet he went in, half was lost
by the way, though he got safe home, and to my great surprise brought me an
answer to it himself, about two years after that: Just as I was preparing to
come into Holland my self, he told me he was come over again to end his days
there, for he found that the Air of his Native Country would no more agree with
him.

While I was thus settled here, I got very considerable practice among the
Freemen, besides my fixed employment; and especially among the Chineeses, whom
I found by much the most generous sort of People and best to deal with. It was
common for them to give me three or four Rixdollars for letting of 'em Blood,
and forty or fifty Gilders for curing the least Wound. But of all the Patients
I ever had, I cannot but mention one, who for the odness of the Punishment
which was inflicted on his Adversary, is well worth the Relating.

I was once in a Chineese's house drinking of Tea, which is drunk in great
quantitys there in Tea-houses, very good and very Cheap. On a sudden two
Chineeses fell to high words, till at last one of them took a pot full of Boiling
hot Water, and threw it all upon the other, and all Scalded his Face, and some
other parts. I took the Man home, and cured him in a few days, for which he
gave me thirty Rixdollars ready Money and did me all the kind services he
could, often inviting me to his house, and treating me very civilly. The other
who had used him thus basely, was Condemned to have twelve of the longest Hairs
of his Beard pulled out, or else to pay thirty Golden Cubanz which is in value
300 Rixdollars (each Cubanz, being worth 10 Rixdollars, and the Golden Coin of
the Great Mogul's) but this Chineese being a Man of Substance, chose rather to
pay the Money than to part with so many precious hairs out of his Beard, and
they are all of them so fond of that Ornament, that it would have been as
Reasonable to have ask him for twelve of his Teeth. Besides this, he was
obliged to defray all the charges my Patient had been at, and to stand to all
damages.

There was all this while a fine Ship preparing for a Voyage to Surat, and I
having a great desire to go that Voyage, because it is looked upon as very safe,
and hardly ever attended with bad Accidents, I ordered my affairs so as to get
leave to go: Upon which I sent my things on Board the Gelderland, for that was
the name of the new Ship which I was to go in.

On Easterday in the Morning, all things being ready, we set Sail by break of
day, and took our farewell with three Guns, but we reached no further by night
than the Island Onrust, and for want of a Wind, were forced to lie still there
four days. At last we weighed our Anchors, having a small gale of Wind, which
carried us past the Isle Sumatra: And as we came by the Island Engano, it
ceased and left us without a breath of Wind. Thus we left the Ship to run a
drift, and our Men were all idle for three or four days, during which time we
had Engano still in sight of us, for we moved but very slowly.

In this while many of our Men took notice that one of our Soldiers (for we
had fourteen of them a Board besides Seamen) a Venetian Named Nicolao, used to
be frequently with two Boys that belonged to the Ship, and those three would
meet in private ever and anon. The Boat-Swain took a particular notice of 'em,
and watched 'em narrowly; at last he discoverd the end of their Meeting, and
Surprised them in the Act of Sodomy; Upon which he went and informed the Master
of what had passed. Immediately after the Venetian, and both the Boys, one of
about eighteen, the other about twelve year of age, were seized, and laid up in
Chains, and upon Examination they all confessed that they had been guilty of
that abominable Sin ever since their departure from Batavia. I and the other
Master Surgeon were then of the Council, and by them, we were orderd to visit
them, and we found it but too true, upon which the Sentence was pronounced
against all three of 'em, viz. that they should be cast into the Sea, and
accordingly early the next Morning after Prayers, the Venetian was brought
forth: And one of the Boys tied to his right side, and the other to his left,
and in that Manner thrown in altogether, and were never more seen by us.

The Boys were very penitent, and much affected with their guilt, and Prayed
with the Chaplain very heartily, and shed Tears in abundance: So that there
were but few of us, that could refrain weeping at the sight of 'em. But the
Venetian was not at all concerned; and when he stood upon the Plank, ready to
be thrown off, he begged for nothing but a draught of Arack. The Master told
him, he should have drink enough in an Instant, and desired him to consider of
his latter end, and to provide for futurity, but all Remonstrances were in vain
to the last, and so he was thrown over.

There was another, who was suspected of the same crime; and upon Examination
he confessed he had intended it, but never was guilty of the act, him the
Council ordered to remain in Chains, and to be set on Shore on the next Wild
Island we should come at, which was Ouro, which was accordingly done; when we
Landed him there, we left him some Water, Biscuit and Tobacco to serve him some
days, and a Gun; he begged heartily that we would rather take away his life:
But it was not granted.

So we went forward with so fair a gale of Wind, that we lost sight of that
Island before night. We passed on between Ceylon, which we left on the right,
and the Maldivy Islands which lay on the left, and Steering round the Coasts of
Malabar, and Bisnagar, we came with good speed to Surat after five Weeks sail,
where we cast Anchor.

Our Ship was immediately unladen to make room for other goods: And our
Merchants went on Shore to their apartment, which is always ready for 'em here,
as it is in all those places, where they have Factories: And there they have
all necessary Warehouses; Apartments, Servants, etc. fit to receive them when
ever they come.

Surat lies about 800 Leagues from Batavia, and belongs to the Emperor of
Indostan, otherwise called the Great Mogul, who calls himself Lord of all the
Indies.

It is remarkable and strange to observe how the Seasons of the Year are here
divided, their Winter only shows it self by its constant Rains, for half a year
in one part of the Country; during which time it Rains almost daily more or
less; and while this sort of Winter lasts in one part, it is Summer and fair in
the other parts of the Country, so that they have it by turns. The days and
nights are always near equal, of twelve hours each, what difference there is,
is not perceptible.

All this while our Ship was taking her lading in apace, but it was not great,
most of it was Persian Money; when she had all in, we set Sail without delay
with the first fair Wind, and in fourteen days time we passed again by the
Coast of Malabar now on the left. Thence we sailed about the Cape of Gomori,
which lies extended to the South, and after that, we came to Punto de Galle,
which is very commodious for all the Ships that pass that way to take in any
Refreshments. There we took in fresh Water and other necessarys. We found there
an English Ship, called the Sina, come from Bengal, and bound for Cameron in
the Persian Sea.

We laid four days here, before Punto de Galle: And then the Wind blowing fair
for us, we run out of the Haven, and passed the next day by the Maldivy
Islands, of which it is computed that they are above a thousand in number, and
in seven days sail we came to the Island Ouro, where we had left the Soldier.
We cast Anchor there, and sent out the long Boat with some Men to look after
him, but they could not hear or see ought of him: So we continued our Course
toward Great Java.

While we were in open Sea about 100 Leagues off Malacca, we had during three
Weeks time such a Calm, that we thought we should never have had a breath of
Wind more. So that in all that time we did not get a League forwards, only the
Sea Wind moved us a little to and fro, but did us no good. For, though it may
seem strange to those that are Ignorant of it, it oftentimes happens that the
Main Sea, especially that part of it, where no Bottom is to be found, is in a
very great agitation, though there be no Wind at all to be perceived: And I my
self have often seen in the stillest VVeather, the Waves heaped up on Hills,
and so furiously high, that no Storm can raise them higher, and often times
there is as great Danger, and as many Ships are there cast away; especially
those that are not well laden.

During this Calm, we suffered more than ever we could have done in the most
Terrible Tempest, for we were under the Line, and the excessive heat caused
several to fall Sick, and what was worse still was, that we had made no great
provision of Water by reason it was looked upon to be but a short Voyage; So
that with heat and thirst, we were all in danger of being suffocated. Our Water
was now so far spent, that a draught of it cold not be had under a couple of
Rixdollars. At least it came to that pass, that there was a necessity of
setting two Centinells to guard the Water-Cask; out of which they used to
distribute every man his portion, and to set four Locks upon it. And when the
Portions were given out in the Morning, it was not above one quarter of the
measure that it used to be.

In this miserable Condition I have been forced to to give two dozen of my
Silver Buttons off my Wastcoat, for one draught of Water, and to gnaw bits of
Wood, hoping I might suck some moisture out of it. In short, it put us all upon
trying all the ways we could imagine to allay our excessive drought; we had now
but six Barrels of Water left, and we saw no prospect of Relief, so that many
of us often wished that our Ship would sink down right with us, we neglected
not to call upon God, and to send up our Prayers to him constantly thrice a
day, that he would have Compassion on us; and as this was more becoming
Christians than the rash wishes which our desolate Condition forced from some,
if not the greater part of us: So it was that undoubtedly which was most
Effectual, for our merciful God sent us a seasonable relief, and surely because
we cried unto him in our trouble, he delivered us out of our Distress.

The Moon, which shined very bright, was all of a sudden a little over cast,
and at length a Black Cloud came, which deprived us wholly of the sight of it,
and gave us mighty hopes that we were going to have some Rain. This gave us all
new life, and set us all at wotk to spread out our Sails ready, sastening them
by the four corners, with a Bullet in the Middle, to receive the Water; thus
we stayed between hope and fear for about three hours; at last the weather grew
very cool, and the Clouds gathering together, the Sky was all darkened, and
suddenly the rain came pouring down upon us: But never were Men more heartily
glad tobe wet to the skin. The first Water that came through the Sails was very
bitter; so we threw that away: and then we fell to filling of our Vessels,
which done, we hoysted up our wet Sails, and run briskly before the Wind.

One may Imagine what Joy it was to every one of us to have our miserable
Condition brought to such an happy End; nor did we fail to give due thanks to
the great Author of it, who had so mercifully, heard us. With this VVind we
were not long 'ere we reached the Island of Engano, so that we after three
Months Sailing passed the Straight of Sunda, and arrived happily on the Road
before Batavia.

The Master and the Steward, who had been so imprudent as not to provide the
Ship with more Water, was called to an Account for it, and punished for their
carelessness, and had a good round fine laid upon them, which was to be deducted
out of their wages, by little and little till the whole was paid.

This same Ship being designed for Bengal, Pegu and Aracan in a very little
while, and some of the goods being ready to load, I left all my things on
Board, designing to go that Voyage too. And having provided my self with what
Medicaments I wanted, in about a Months time we left Batavia, and came in nine
days before Pegu, where we cast Anchor. We had but very little business there,
so that we stayed there but three days, and set Sail again, and came to Aracan;
and thence went to Bengal, which is but eight Leagues further. There we cast
Anchor just at the mouth of the River Chaor, which mixes with the Ganges, about
a mile before it throws it self into the Sea of Bengal. About eight Leagues up
that River, lies Verma, a Town of considerable Trade: Some of our Merchants
sailed up to it; But I went not with 'em.

About forty Miles from Bengal, between the River Ganges and Perselis lies a
place, called Lohanack; where there are whole Fields of those Flowers called
Roses of Jericho, or the Rose of Jerusalem, and the Lady's Rose. They are quite
green; when you gather them, they close together straight and keep so, while
they are dry, and when you put them into Water, they open as at first. They are
good for many uses; but excellent for Women in Labor, and facilitate the
Birth, by being only put under the Woman. I could have had abundance of 'em for
little value, of the Inhabitants. They say the seed of these was brought over
by a King out of Syria, where they grow in abundance about Jericho. I do not
find they grow any where, but in these places I have mentioned; they have
endeavored to Transport them into several places, especially in Great Java:
But they die and come to nothing, the ground ought to be very full of nitre.

As to what Relates to Pegu Aracan or Bengal, I will not undertake to give a
description of either of the places, because I did not stay there long, and
besides they may be seen at large in Linschooten's Travels, who has been very
particular in his account of them.

CHAP XI.
Masulipatam its Inhabitants called Jentives. Account of the Climate. The Isle
of Nicoporas. Arrival at Batavia. Chineeses sumptuous in their Burials. A
pleasent quarrel between the Author and one of his Patients, for which both
were called to account and Punished. The Author goes to Bantam, gives an
Account of the young Kings Retinue there, and of his return to Batavia. And
likewise of several Customs and Humors of the Chineeses.

AFter our Ship had got in her Complement of Sugar, Saltpeter, and Opium, we
set Sail and went from Bengal to Masulipatam, belonging to the King of
Galconda, whose Son keeps his residence at Pentipoli, lying not far from thence.

The Inhabitants are most of the Mohammedan Religion. The Air is very healthy
one half of the year, when the Northern winds blow constant: But the Southern
winds, which blow the other half of the year, fill the Country with distempers.
We were there during this latter Season, and felt the dismal Effects of it. We
had already lost nine of our Men, and the rest were most of them ill of Agues or
Dropsies. But blessed be God, I was not at all indispofed. The ill State we
were in, made us make all the haste we could to be gone, and hoysting Sail, we
departed, and came in four days time before the Island Nicoparas, here we
sailed in very great danger; for all the Sea there abouts is full of Rocks that
lyc three or four fathoms under Water, and little small Islands, some of which
are almost covered with Water. A little before we came by there, the Lion, a
Ship of 470 Tun, run upon one of them, and was Split in pieces: But we past
them all safe, and Steerd between Sumatra and Malacca, and thus got to Batavia;
where I returned to my former post. I used to go and visit the other Surgeons
that had the care of some small Forts about us, and when they had any Patients
that were dangerously ill, and their case desperate; they were sent to the
Hospital at Batavia by virtue of a warrant from the Governor, which they used
to get for that Purpose.

Near the Fort Jacatra, where I used to go often, is a piece of ground which
the Chineeses bought of the Dutch, and cost them abundance of Money, in which
they bury their Corpses: It was called the Chineese's Churchyard. I remember
there to have seen a Grave made for one of the Richer sort of 'em, that
amounted to three or 4000 Gilders, neither are they raised high, or costly in
the Ornaments they bestow on 'em, but only they dig them of such a vast depth,
and line the Grave from the very Bottom with fine square Stone cut for the
purpose, and so strong is the Work, as well as neat, that it is as if they did
design never to move from thence. I omit the other particulars of their
Ceremonies, etc. Because others have done it before me.

All the way from that Fort to Batavia, is so pleasant and diverting by reason
of the continual variety of sweet Walks, Curious Gardens etc. that it is a
perfect earthly Paradise, and there is none comes to Batavia but goes to see
it, and is exceedingly Charmed with the sight of it.

A pleasant accident besell me there once. An Officer, who was at that time a
Patient of mine, a loose debauched Fellow, who followed no prescriptions, and
therefore made all my remedies ineffectual to him, being at the head of a
Company exercising the Men, and having got I suppose a cup in his head, seeing
me come toward him to be a Spectator among the rest, Saluted me at first sight
after a kind of an insolent manner, and then gave me some Scurrilous Language,
and told me, he thought I understood my business but very indifferently, since
I kept him so long under my hands. I told him he talked like an Impertinent
Fellow, and that all the means of the most skillful Surgeons in the World would
be in vain to him, while he was always drunk and lived such an intemperate
life, and observed no rule. In short, I told him that my Art was to cure Men,
and not Beasts, and that he might seek a cure elsewhere; this enraged him so,
being spoken at the head of his Company, that he came and struck at me with his
Cane with all the eagerness that might be, but 'ere the blow fell upon me, I
closed in with him; and having no VVeapon in my hand, I wrested the Cane out of
his, and flung him upon his back, as he was getting up again, the standers by
parted us, and there was no more heard of it for that time.

This spread about among all the Officers, and the Account of it being little
to his advantage, and giving sometimes occasion to some to jeer him with his
adventure, it made him stark mad; and set him upon thinking of revenge. I
expected it, and therefore avoided him, whenever I could hansomely do it. But
one day we chanced to meet in a Chineeses house, where we dined; nor did I see
any tokens of his Resentment all the while we sat together, so that I was apt
to think he designed to pass it by. But when he had drunk a little largely, and
the ill humors were set a Floating, he begun to make little insolent
Reflections upon me, which turned at last to down right abuses. This did not
suffice, but he must needs urge me to come out to him in the Street, and going
out first into it himself, with his drawn Sword in his hand, he vapourd and
called me all the Cowards he could think of, who durst not come out to meet
him. I wore no Sword, as indeed none of our profession did: But I had a tuck
Cane in my hand, which I used to wear; but especially since my first quarrel
with him: And being forced to it, at length I came out to him, and with my
unwildy weapon after some passes on both sides, I struck him into the left
side, but glancing against his ribs, I just larded him, and that was all; but
he keeping his ground, I made another pass at him, and fortunately run him into
the Shoulder, and disarmed him; upon which he was carried into the Chineeses
house.

As Soon as this was made known at Batavia, we were both of us taken and brought
bound into Batavia, and there had before the Judge Advocate, who, having
examined us and our Evidences, passed Sentence upon my Adversary in an instant,
which was, that he was to be kept in Chains for three years, and to work among
the Slaves; and to forfeit his Salary for the time, which was to be distributed
among his Company, which was accordingly put in Execution, as soon as he was
perfectly recovered, and that was in a few VVeeks time.

My cause being much more just than his, and my Sentence being suspended for a
while, I thought I might come off Tolerably well; but when I considered with
what severity they had dealt with him, I could not but expect something
proportionable would fall to my share. But it was not long 'ere I was put out
of doubt, and my Sentence was pronounced. I was to stand before the Corpse de
Guarde at Jacatra three days after one another, with six Muskets hung about
me, and to forfeit three months Salary to the Judge-Advocate, and to do for
that time the Duty of a private Sentinel, standing such hours as were allotted
me, with a Musket in my Hand.

This was tolerable, and better than I expected; but it seems it was rather
contrived for me, that I might not go altogether unpunished, than as a
punishment deserved by, and suitable to what I had done. One may see by this
punishment that was inflicted on me, that a Martial Genius reigns there; and
that they are much given to a Military Discipline; for there was no manner of
relation between the Musket and me, nor indeed did it agree with me at all.
But some of my Friends gave me hopes, that they would soon get me released; and
by their means, orders were sent me to return to my Post, after I had exercised
the Musket during two Months; by which a Month of my Sentence was remitted me.

A little while after I was restored, Orders were sent to the Sumatra, the Ship
I was last in, to get ready in eight days to go to Bantam. I put my self in a
readiness to go with her, being desirous to see how the Place stood since its
great disorder. The last day we were to be in Town, being Sunday, I went to
Church, and heard a most admirable Sermon preached by the worthy Mr. John
Conradus; after which I took my leave of my Friends, and then took a Praw to
carry me aboard the Sumatra, which had her full Lading in, which was all
Provisions, and most of that Rice. The next Morning the Wind being very fair
for us, we set sail, and came that very Night into the Road before Bantam. I
went to Shore with the first Boat, and was much pleased to see all the Parts of
that City so neat, and in so good an order, that there was not the least sign
of its late Misfortunes to be seen. I staid there that night, being told that
the next day eight Javians were to be executed for killing some Dutchmen in the
Country; and accordingly four of them were broke upon the Wheel; the other four
were tied fast together, and turned down headlong off the Castle-Bridge into
the Water.

While this was doing, there was a vast outcry of a sudden of Fire: The Houses
being all of Cane, the first House had in an instant set sire to several
others; so that the Uproar increasing, the Magistrate set double guard upon all
the Convenient Posts and Gates of the City, to prevent further harm; and lest
this might be intended to serve for an Insurrection: But both the Fire and
Noise ceased quickly after.

I went on board again, and hearing that the Young King was in a few days to
make a Visit to the Governor, I desired a Friend to give me notice the night
before the day on which it was to be; and notice being given me accordingly by
my Friend, I went to Shore.

The manner of his Pomp and Magnificence was, I thought, very well worth my
sight; and it may not be disagreeable to the Reader to have a short account os
it. As soon as ever the King had set his Foot out of the Castle, all the Cannon
were discharged, great and small, all round the place.

The first that walked before him were four Amboineeses, carrying Bucklers and
Swords in their Hands; next to them went a Company of Javians, then a Company
of Balingers, with Assagyen; after these came six Javians, who carried a Chair
finely wrought and gilt: then followed six Persian Horses, with Trappings
richly covered with Gold and Silver; after them four Amboineeses, with
Escutcheons and Swords in their Hands; then the Young Prince; or King's Son, of
about eight Years of Age, on Horseback; his Horse was set out after the noblest
manner I ever saw: He was attended by some hundreds of Women, each of which had
something in their Hands; some, Golden Cups; some, Flowers; others, several
Fruits of the Country; these were followed by the Company of Dutch. Then came
the King himself, riding on a very fine Persian Horse, sumptuously accoutred,
and sitting with that Majesty, that one would have thought him Lord of the
Universe. Next to him went a great Company of Women; then another Company of
Dutch; and a Company of Javians, with their Krizzen and Assagyen, which ended
the Procession. All this mighty Show and Formality, was a very great surprise
to me, considering that King's Station, and that his Dignity was merely
titular. But that Pomp and Grandeur did not give him so much luster, as it did
those under whose subjection he was forced to live: And in that consideration,
I suppose, the Dutch were willing enough to amuse him, with this vain show of
Power and Greatness. When the Guns were fired, one of the Men, not being so
careful as he should have been, had one of his Arms shot off, as he was raming
in the Powder. As soon as the young King heard of it, he came into the Hospital
himself to see the Man dressed, and to charge the Surgeon to take great care of
him, and ordered an hundred pieces of Eight to be given him; promising withal,
that if he cured him, he would give him a Pension of two hundred pieces of
Eight yearly; which was an argument of a good tender Nature and Generosity,
notwithstanding some of his Actions, before-related, might represent him as one
of a cruel and barbarous Disposition.

It was not without Wonder, as well as Pleasure, that I beheld the great
Restoration and Improvement of this Famous City, which once lay in so ruinous
a condition; and to see such plenty and abundance there, where some time before
there was such a scarcity of necessaries, that many Men were even famished. And
certainly of all the hardships of that War, none was to be compared to that
which we underwent for want of Water. I was once forced to give as much Money
for one single draught of it, as would have bought a Butt of Wine in some
places. And such was our lamentable condition, that a Man would have given his
Life the next hour for a draught of Cold Water to prolong it till then. So that
when Water could be got at any rate, those who had the greatest share of
Plunder, would give all they had for one single Cup of it; and thought
themselves happy they could purchase it upon such easy terms: And thus after
all their labor, they were but little the better for all that Booty they had
gotten.

But what was the most dismal of all was, that it was not to be gotten
sometimes, though one had had the World to give for it: And in those extremities,
many of our Men drinking out of some Pools that were not wholesome, some being
Nitrous or Saltpeterish, and others being poisonous Water, it threw them into
such Distempers, and put 'em into such Tortures, that it would have grieved any
one to have seen the miserable condition they were in.

In the Wars with Kartiri, which were a little before my coming to the Indies,
the poor Soldiers were in as bad a condition to the full. So that a Man would
wonder, that the same Persons should willingly expose themselves to such
difficulties a second time; as most of our Men did, who were in both
Expeditions. But what will not necessity put a Man upon, especially when it is
a little enlivened by the hopes of some fortunate Success? And I believe, that
the good Fortune of a certain Drummer in those late Wars, served in a great
measure to animate the whole Body of our Army. For this Drummer lighted
fortunately of the King of Kartiri's Crown, for which the General at Batavia
gave him thirty thousand Gilders of Dutch Money; and gave him his Freedom, and a
Pass to go into Holland, where he was to have his Money paid, though the Poor Man
never lived to enjoy it, for he died in the Voyages; but the Money was duly paid
to his Sisters, who lived at Middleburgh, according to the agreement made with
the Deceased. And I make no doubt but every one of our Men, that knew this,
were in hopes of getting at least a Crown for their share too.

I was one of four who had almost got as considerable a Booty, but we lost all
by our want of curiosity; for three of the Admiral's chief Attendants, and I,
being just come into Bantam, after a little fatigue, we went to take a Nap in a
Warehouse that stood open, we laid us down upon a great Chest that stood there,
and never dreamt that there was any thing of value within it; but we had not
been there above half an hour, when an Officer was sent from the Admiral to
demand our Bed from under us, which we readily yielded. We were strangely
surprised when we saw a Party of Men ready to convoy it to the Admiral, before
whom it was opened; and out of it came seven hundred Leathern Bags full of
Cubangs, which (as I told you before) are pieces of Gold, worth ten Rixdollers
apiece. You may imagine then how silly we looked upon one another, when we heard
this; and how angry we were with our selves, that we could complain of the
hardness of our Bed, and were not so wise as to shake up the Feathers. But to
be short, we lost very simply a Treasure which we might have had very fairly,
and without opposition, if we had but been so prudent as to search into it at
first.

But it is time to return to the Sumatra, which was now ready to go off; so
that with the first fair Wind we set sail, and got safe to Batavia again, where
we found a Fleet of seven Ships in a readiness to go home, i. e. to Holland.
(as the custom is to send some such number of Ships home every Year, sometimes
more, sometimes less at a time.) I was glad to have the opportunity to send
some Letters by 'em, and I did so; but charging only one Friend with 'em, my
Friends in Holland never received any of 'em. But what made me the more
negligent was, that I was near the time of my freedom, and in full design of
going over my self in a very little while. As soon as that Fleet had hoisted
sail, I went to Church to join with the Prayers of the Congregation for the
Fleets Prosperity and good Voyage, as there is always on those occasions.

Our Ship lay still at Anchor here for three Weeks, which made me very weary of
it; at last we had Orders to go with a smaller Vessel, called the Bali, to a
small Island, about four Leagues from Batavia, to fetch Timber to repair the
Ships that lay at the Island Onrust, and to carry it thither. This Isle has
nothing but Timber upon it: Here we spent our time in catching of Tortoises,
with which we feasted our selves rarely; and having carried what was requisite
to the Isle of Onrust, we returned to Batavia. The Bali being but a small
Vessel, we ran up the River, with ease, to the very Gate of the Castle. The
Chief Surgeon of India's Lodging being very near to us, I took the opportunity
to wait upon him, and desired him to take care I might be appointed to go with
the next that should be sent to any distant part of the Indies, where I had not
been; which he promised to do, seeing it was my desire.

He represented to me sufficiently, and I knew it well enough, that I had a
better Post already, and that any Post at Land was more considerable than the
best at Sea; and that those who had a settled Charge there, were more regarded,
and better esteemed. But I was for seeing of strange Countries, and variety of
Things; and besides, a continuance upon Land, required a continual expense,
which the Sea does not give such opportunity for. But, in a word, I would not
have been penned up in one Town only, as some are there, for all the Credit and
Advantage they can propose to themselves, or attain to; and indeed except in
Bengal, Surat, Camron in Persia, Japan, or some few other places, it is hardly
worth a Man's while to rest in hopes of being advanced; for Preferment goes
there by Favor, as well as in these parts of the World: And when it does so, I
think no wise Man will depend upon it.

Thus I continued upon the Bali, and as soon as she had taken in her lading of
Linen and Striped Stuffs, together with some Chests of Money; we fell down the
River and set sail for Bantam; whither she was bound. We were above two hours
sail; but we were forced back by a contrary Wind, which blew so excessive hard
for the space of two days, that we were very happy, that we ridded our selves
out of it so luckily. As soon as it was over, we set sail again, and in forty
eight hours we reached the Road of Bantam, where we immediately unladed.

When we went to Shore there, we saw some thousands of Javians got together at
the Mouth of the River: We were a little surprised at first, not knowing what
the meaning of it should be; but coming nearer, and seeing several Hollanders
amongst 'em, and then discovering their Nets, Hooks and other Instruments, we
found they were only catching of Crocodiles. When we landed, we saw several
they had caught and knocked in the Head already; their King was amongst 'em to
see the Sport. No body can think what a strange kind of a Noise these silly
Javians made, and how they rent their Throats at it. Whereas my Comrade and I
had caught almost as many without any kind of Noise, and not half that Trouble.

The Bali was only to unlade here, which being done, we set out fot Batavia
again; and as we came by the Island Onrust, we heard all the Cannon fire, both
in the Castle, and in the City; we could not tell then what it was for, but we
kept going on; and not long after, when we came to cast Anchor, we heard that
the Fleet from Cameron in Persia was safe arrived, and had brought the good
news with 'em, that all the Old Differences between the Viceroy there, and us,
were perfectly adjusted; and that there was a Good Correspondence settled
between us. And another Ship was come in from Holland, which had also brought
the good news of the quarrel being made up between the English, Danes and
French, and ourselves concerning the Injury done to them at Bantam: Which good
news coming together, could not but make us all exceeding joyful. So that all
the Streets of Batavia were all illuminated with Bon-fires, and Fireworks. The
latter were chiefly the work of the Chineeses, who delight much in them, and
are so ingenious at 'em, that one would wonder, especially being a People who
never have any Instruments of War, where Powder is used. They likewise
entertained us with their Comedies, which are very diverting, if seen but
seldom. We Germans had over and above these good news, that which more nearly
concerned us, which was, that of the good success of the Emperors Arms against
the Turks; so that some of my Countrymen and I joined so much the more
cheerfully in the common Rejoicings, which continued all that Night. The next
Morning the General Camphuysen went to the Maleysh Church, where public thanks
were returned to God for our Prosperity; then the Service being over, the Guns
were again fired round the City and Castle.

Three or four days after, as I was returning to see my Patients on board the
Bali, I met with a Company of Soldiers that were going on board the Flessingen.
These were very prettily accoutred with Silk-Stockings on their Legs, and Shoos
made of Sail-Cloath: These Men were designed for Camron, Surat and Macaran, to
fill up the vacancies there of such as keep Guard before the Houses of the
Company. But I would not have a private Soldier to fancy by this, that they are
all to meet with such treatment there; for this good usage is only to a few,
that are to credit the Factories in those places; and those are some of those
that have a great many Friends, and great Recommendations: Whereas many a brave
Soldier is forced to spend his time in Bantam, Amboina, Banda, and other
unhealthy Islands, where they must trudge it without either Shoos or Stockings,
and it may be perish miserably.

Our Ship was once again ordered to go to Onrust to carry Rice, and other
Provisions; which we did, and returned in four or five days.

As we were come back, it was my fortune to fall once more into the Sea; for as
I went to ease Nature on the outside of the Ship, according to the usual way, I
held fast by the Rope, which broke, so in I dropped. The Ships Crew was more
ready to laugh at me, than to lend me their Hand; and I was doubly put to it, to
swim with my Breeches down; but at last my Comrade threw me out a Rope, by
which I got up, and praised God for my safety. This made me more careful for
ever after; and that the Boatswane might be more diligent to see for the future
that such things were firm and strong, the Master gave him a severe reprimand,
and laid a Fine on him.

After this I went to pay another visit to the upper Surgeon; and from thence
went to Sup with an Acquaintance of mine in the Castle, and took a Friend with
me. I was to go into the Town to lie; so my Friend and I took a Praw to carry
us thither up the River. In the way we came through the Boom, which is a String
of Trunks of Trees chained together, which block up the River from one side to
the other, so that there is no passing through without an Officer, who stands
there to let you through, who first visits and searches you, and then too you
must pay so much, according to the bigness of the Vessel; and this goes to the
Company, who make some thousands of Gilders yearly out of it.

The next day we went to the Lottery, to see what Gaming there was; that was
most full of Chineeses, who, as I said before, are the greatest Gemesters in
the World. Whoever is a loser there, the Company is sure to be the winner; for
there is a Mony-Changer appointed by them, who sits to keep order amongst 'em,
a kind of Groom-Porter; and every throw that is thrown with the Dice, there is
two pence paid to him for the Company. And notwithstanding that some of those
who ruin themselves at play there, might be supposed to fall into a passion,
and cause some disorder, yet there is never any disturbance heard of; it being
no less than Death to make any in that place: For without that severity it
would never be free from it, especially when poor Soldiers lose sometimes their
whole Pay in one Night, which they have done very hard service for a Month or
two, or may be more; or when a Chineese loses all that he is worth, even his
Wife and Children, nay his very Beard; nothing being more natural, than for Men
in that condition to fall into excessive Passion. But they dare not give it any
vent there, nor make the least noise.

I could not refrain neither, but ventured six or seven Ducatoons, which were
gone in the twinkling of an Eye; but I presently gave over, and took my leave
of it for ever.

Thence I went to reside for a few days at a Friends house, and a Countrymans
of mine, one Mr. Buschbach, who had got his Freedom, having completed his time
in the Company's Service, and was in very good Circumstances. He was a Man of
an exceeding kind and generous Temper, and a constant Patron of all the Germans
that came to Batavia, and never weary of doing them all the service that lay in
his power. I was a little indisposed at his House, so that I sent word to the
Ship, that if they were ordered to go any Voyage before I got better, they
should give me notice of it, that they might be supplied with some other Person
to go in my stead. But blessed be God I recovered in a few days, which I think
verily was in some measure owing to my Friend's care, and his facetious
diverting Company; for I never met with more agreeable Company in my life.

His House stood upon the Vierkant, a place so called from its being a Square,
where the Rice Market was kept, and feveral other Provisions, being just at the
Mouth of the River, and therefore most commodious for all Country People to
bring their Fruits by water, as well as for the Fisher-boats to bring their
Fish thither. There is also a small Dock for building of little Vessels. And
all Vessels whatsoever that come by here, must come to Shore, and be visited by
a Sentinel that stands there for that purpose, and is relieved every hour; and
in case any of 'em should attempt to slip by, his Orders is to fire upon them.

CHAP. XII.
The Author's Voyage to Macassar; goes in his way to Japara; passes by
Paternoster Islands, etc. Description of Macassar: The Natives are the most
faithful Soldiers the Dutch have, and the best Slaves. Moors, some black, and
some very white: Their Nobility: The Author cures the Son of one of their
Noblemen, and is generously rewarded. Comes away from Macassar, and finds
Japara in an uproar; the Authors of it seized and punished. The great power of
the Dutch Government in the East Indies. Arrival to Batavia again. The manner
of Fishing at Batavia. By a Flame which they saw afar off at Sea for two Nights
together; they concluding that something extraordinary had occasioned it; they
went and found several Men reduced to the greatest extremity that ever was, and
brought them into Batavia. Departure to Siam: Description of that Country, and
the Dutch Factory there. Return to Batavia, where one of their Ships, by a
mischance, is blown up, and all the Men killed. Ceremonies usual at a Wedding
amongst the Javians.

BEing pretty well recovered, though as yet somewhat weak, I returned on board,
where I spent my time but after a melancholy manner, and most of it lying in
my Hamock; yet I gathered strength apace, and in some days got perfectly well.

There an Order came to me to remove on board the Tiger, which was to go to
Macassar; this I received with a great deal of satisfaction, and accordingly
went out with her. We had not been three hours under sail, but such a violent
Storm came upon us as brought our Mainmast by the Board with such a force,
that we thought our Ship was dashed in pieces; and this continuing for some
time, we were obliged to cut our Gears, and hand in what we could of our Sails.

Our Master was not for going further, so we went back to Batavia; and being
there refitted, we set Sail out again; and in three days came before Japara,
which lies likewise in great Java, seventy Leagues eastward of Batavia.

This Place, which was once the Residence of the mighty Emperor of that Empire,
is as much under the Dominion of the Dutch, as Bantam is. And that Emperor
likewise is no more such, than merely in Name and Title; and is as subject to
the Dutch Government as the King of Bantam is, of whom I have given you an
account. So that this whole Island, which is above five hundred miles compass,
is almost all in subjection to the Dutch Company. The Religion, Manners,
Customs, etc. of the Inhabitants of Japara are much the same as of those of
Bantam.

Here we provided our selves with Water, and Wood for Fuel; which being done,
we wound up our Anchors, and set sail: The next day we passed by the six
Islands of Luboce, leaving them on our left, and Java on the right; and arrived
to the Island of Madura, which is about ten Leagues from Java. There we staid a
while, and then we set forward again with the first Gale of Wind, and passed by
some hundreds of little Islands and Rocks, which are called Pater noster, some
of which we went over, whilst the Sea beat most terribly against those Rocks
which stood a little above the Water, and made us very much afraid, we having
no other way, but through them: So that we were continually sounding with the
Plummet. We fell foul of the Rocks four times notwithstanding all our care; but
God be thanked, without any damage. The best of that course is, that there is
scarcely ever any stormy Winds there, by reason of the great heat the Sun
gives. A few days after we got before Macassar.

Macassar is a considerable Kingdom, and well governed. The Dutch, English and
Danes have all freedom of Traffic there, as well as the Indians of all parts.
It lies on the Island Cebebes to the South, and reaches about an hundred
Leagues; under the Line, it has Borneo on the one side, and the Molucca
Islands on the other.

Here lay an English Ship, which had lost both her Surgeons in the Voyage, and
were in great want of one to take care of their Men; they applied themselves
not only to me, but to the Resident, to permit me to leave my Ship, to go with
them, but it did not lie in the Governors power to free me from my Engagement
in the Dutch Company. However they being drove to such necessity, I went and
looked after their Patients, and I left all that was proper for 'em with one of
the Ship, together with written Instructions, how, and when to make use of 'em;
for which they thanked me heartily, and gratified me very generously.

There happened a Fire one Night in one of their Negerys, which was all
consumed in an instant, being built with nothing but Bamboos, and gave so great
a light, that we thought it was the Day breaking upon us again, and put us into
a kind of Consternation, till we knew what it was.

The People, Natives of this Island, are scattered through all parts of the
Indies; and all Nations are desirous of 'em for their Slaves, becuase they are
exceeding faithful, diligent, and good natured, and make the bravest Soldiers,
as I have seen it my self in the whole time of the War of Bantam, where they
daily signalized themselves, both by their Courage and Conduct. They are
likewise the most profitable sort of Servants. I have had two of them, who have
got me half a Ducate on a day; so that these are looked upon as the most
valuable of all the Indians; and therefore are used with the greatest care and
humanity that may be. The hardest and most slavish part of their Work, is
generally put upon the Malabarians, who are an ill-lookt sort of People, like
the Caffers. They are so black too, that they are often taken for Moors:
Whereas it is a Nation of Asia, but dispersed here and there over all the
Indies, as the Jews are in Europe.

The right Moors are those of the great Mogul's Country, and the places
adjacent, as Bengal, Surat, Golconda, etc. but they very seldom or never go out
of their own Country; nor does any body dare to take them for Slaves. As there
is some of 'em as black as a Coal, so there is some as white as any European
whatever. They are most of 'em very civil, handsome and well shaped, courteous
and genteel in their Behavior. They are great Merchants, and very sincere in
their Dealings; and those I have had to do with, I have always found very
generous and grateful. I had once the Son of a rich Moor under my hands, while
I was at the Hospital of Bantam: He had broke his Leg, and had been left to the
care of some Surgeons of that Nation, who had done him no good. The Father at
length despairing of the skill of his Countrymen, sent for me, and showed a
great deal of rational concern for his Son's condition. I went to the Boy, and
having examined the Fraction, and found it to be better than I imagined; I told
the Father he might take Courage, and that I did not doubt but I should in a
little while set his Son upon his Legs again, with the help of the Almighty
Creator of Heaven and Earth; (making use of those Terms, because it is in that
Idea especially, that the Moors worship God:) Upon which he bowed and lift up
his Eyes toward Heaven. I sent for my Boy, and with the assistance of a Moor,
I set the Bone of the Boy's Leg; and having done all that was necessary for the
present, my Young Patient found ease immediately. This gave the Father much
satisfaction, and he immediately presented me with twenty Spanish Matten,
telling me that was nothing of my pay, but to encourage me to take what carel
could of his Child. Thus, with God's assistance, I cured his Boy entirely in
six Weeks time; and without asking me, what I expected, he gave me thirty
Cubanz into my hands, which amounted to three hundred Rixdollers, and asked me
whether that satisfied me. I told him it did extremely well; and truly well it
might, for in our Country we knew nothing of such large Fees as those are. If
we had but a few such Patients there, it would keep a great many at home, who
are now forced to ramble abroad, merely to get their livelihood.

But I return now to my Ship, which was ready to set sail again for Batavia,
and waiting only for a Wind. Therefore with the first Easterly Wind, we set out
of the Port of Macassar, and running happily through the Paternoster Islands, we
came to Anchor before Japara, where we found three Ships come from Batavia,
three days before us; and had brought some Soldiers from thence, to quel an
uproar that had been made at Japara, in which above twenty Dutch had been
killed by the Inhabitants, who attempted to throw themselves into the Fort
Sambura. But by the means of the Governor, and this Auxiliary Force, all was
quieted, and the Ringleaders sent away to Batavia, where they received their
due reward. Some of them were broken upon the Wheel, some had their Ears and
Noses cut off; and were sent chained altogether to some Islands to spend all
their Life in burning of Lime, and there to remain perpetual Slaves.

I Landed before these Wretches were sent away, so that I saw 'em go along
Chained together: But that which was the most dismal to see, was the
Lamentation and sad Outcries of these poor Fellow's Wives and Children, who
conducted them to the Waterside.

All being thus settled again, the Company augmented the Garrison, and
fortified thosePlaces which needed it most, to prevent any such Disorders for
the future. It is a wonderful Thing, that such are not more frequent; and that
whenever they happen, they are so soon Calmed, considering the vastness of the
Dutch Dominions, which are so scattered here and there, and so far asunder; but
it is to be ascribed to their vigilant, and wisely Modeled Government; without
which, they could not support the weight of their several Dominions, which
contain several Empires, Kingdoms, and large Provinces, (all which would be too
tedious to setdown) and it would amaze one to think, what a vast number of
Deputies, Presidents, Governors, and Officers, they are forced to maintain for
the Preservation of their Power; besides some Hundreds of Ships: And, I dare
say, by good Computation, they have above a Hundred thousand Men by Sea and
Land. But as their Expense is great, so their Wealth is unaccountable; for
wherever you go, you shall not see one Thing in a thousand, little or great,
but if you ask whose that is, all the answer is, the Company's.

We departed from Japara, and came the next day into the Road before Batavia,
and an hour or two after us, came in the Ship that had those Rebels on board:
so that there we saw them Executed, and disposed of as I have said already.

Before our Ship was quite Unladen, here arose a most terrible Hurricane, which
tore most of the Ships off their Anchors, and drove two of them upon some of
the little Islands, that lie near there; one of which being old and decayed,
was dashed into pieces. It lasted but half an hour, and so the Damage was the
less, else there would hardly a Ship have escaped: Ours had cast out five
Anchors, two of which we lost; and two of our Men being in the Longboat, the
Storm coming upon them so suddenly, could not make to the Ship, but the Rope
breaking, were torn off from us. When the Wind ceased, we went to see after'em,
and found our poor Seamen still alive, but that was all, tied fast by Cords to
the Boat which floated with the bottom upwards; So that all were recovered: But
it was a Miracle, that being so far spent as they were, and not able to help
themselves, their Brains were not knocked out against the Boat; or that they
were not devoured by Sharks. Besides all this, abundance of small Vessels,
Prawen, etc. were cast away; and many Persons drowned.

The next day I went to shore with the Master and the Factors, who designed to
stay there all Night, and ordered the Seamen to go back to their Ship. I
desired they might stay till the Evening, because I had a mind to go with 'em.
But it being pretty dark, and the Wind very high, our Seamen keeping up the
Sail without Fear or Wit, we were all over-turn'd, within a Stone's throw of
the Ship; but by the Blessing of God, and the speedy Assistance of the Ship's
Crew, we were all took up Safe.

The next Morning I returned to Land, where I was no sooner come, but a Muck
Speeler, who had done a great deal of Mischief, and put the People in an
Uproar, came running by me, and by good Fortune did me no harm; but killed a
Boy within 20 Steps of me, and was presently Shot himself in the Head, and
dropped down; but it was after he had killed five or six People: Nothing saved me
but the corner of the Street, by means of which, as he run so furiously, he
over-shot me, and got past me before I could get aware of him; and so, God be
praised, I was safe, but ever since I was always upon my guard at Turnings and
Crossings of Streets.

Here I spent my time with a great deal of variety of Diversions, as Fishing,
Walking, Shooting, going by Water, and chiefly seeing my Friends: Most days I
took a Praw, and went to some small Islands that lie hard by there, where the
chief Fishing is to be seen. Upon one of these Islands lived a rich Chinese
near to the Chinese's Temple. He having a numerous Family of Children and
Servants, I had frequent Business in his House, and got a great deal of Money
by him. One Night, as I had taken my leave of him, and was going home, I saw a
bright Flame at a mighty distance, and heard some Shooting: Being Landed, I
took some of my Friends with me to a high part of the Shore to see it. We were
all amazed to think what it should be, and in giving our several Opinions, we
spent all the Night looking upon it. In the Morning the Flame could no longer
be seen; but we hearing still a Gun go off now and then, we went and acquainted
the General with it, who ordered a Boat to be set out with 20 Men and an
Officer, ready to go at Night, in case the Flame appeared again, and the
Shooting continued. As the Day shut in, the Flame begun to be seen more and
more, and somewhat nearer than the Night before. I desired the Officer that I
might go with him, which he readily granting, we set forward, and made directly
up to the Fire: Coming nearer, we saw it was a small Bark and People in it, we
Hailed them, upon which they gave over Shooting, but made us no Answer. This
made us the more Earnest to get up to 'em, and to Board 'em, which we did: And
there we saw a most lamentable Sight, eight poor Englishmen, three of 'em Dead,
and the five others little better, not able to speak one Word, but endeavoring
to mutter. We took them into our Boat with us, together with some Chests of
Tanges and Larines, (which is a certain Money of that Country) which they had
in their Boat with them; we used them as gently as we could, and made all speed
possible to the Place from whence we came, and there gave them all Kind of
Refreshment. It was five or six hours ever they came to themselves, so as to
speak: At length they gave us an Account of themselves; and told us, they
belonged to an English Ship that came from Bengal richly laden, and was Bound
for Batavia to join the English Merchantmen that lay there; but coming by the
Island Engano, it being hard Weather, they were thrown upon a Shelf, where
their Ship was sunk, so that of 78 Men they had on Board, but 15 got into that
little tattered Boat, and that of them there was but those we saw left; the
rest having perished one after another for want of Water, which they had not
had a Drop of in 15 or 16 days time.

When we had this Account from them, we took them to Batavia, and carried them
to the English House, where we were heartily Thanked, and treated with great
Civility: Besides all which, the next Morning a Reward was sent to every one of
the Soldiers, and to the Officer: And as for me, Having been very Helpful to
them, and managed them with some Cordials, and taking Care lest their sudden
Refreshment should do them an Injury, I had 20 Ducatoons sent me as a Present.

While I remained here, there happened nothing more worth taking Notice of: And
now Orders were sent me to repair on Board the Bergen in Norweegen, which was
to go Commadore, with two other Ships bound for Odia, the capital City of Siam;
so that I went and provided my self with all that was necessary for the Voyage:
Which being done, I went on Board my Ship, the Fleet being ready to go off, and
we should have set Sail the very nextday, had not the Ekersloo, one of our
three Ships, sprung a Leak, which obliged us to stay while they took all the
Goods out of her again, and mended her, which was a whole fortnight.

This done, she had her Lading put in again; and then we went under Sail with a
favorable Wind, and next day passed by the Isle of Lucapara; and thus we
continued our Course with good Success for about eight days: But as it is
almost impossible for two or three Ships to make so considerable a Voyage
without some Let or Misfortune; the Ekersloo struck upon a Bank of Sand, which
frighted us all very much. As soon as she gave us notice of it by firing a Gun,
for we were a good way before her, but had happily Steered aside and missed the
Bank, we immediately set out our Shallops, and went to her, and found there was
no Remedy but Unlading her; which we did with all speed, and bestowed the
Goods, partly on Board of our Ship, and partly on the other: It was a great
happiness that the Wind was not very high, else we could never have done this.
When all the Goods were out, we made shift, by means of casting Anchors, to get
her off the Bank; and having examined her within, and found she had no Damage
done to her Keel, we put the Goods on Board of her again, and continued our
Course, thanking God we had escaped such a great Danger, by the favor of the
Wind, which still continued good for us.

This happened to us in our Course to Tumbolan and Ananibo as we sailed between
Borneo and Malacca, from which in three days we reached the Island Matuna. As
we passed by it, we saw some Ships before us, which we concluded were Chinese
Jonckers; About night they passed by us directing their Course toward Borneo,
which made us think they came from Cambodia. At break of day we saw five more,
who likewise past by us about Noon, and steered their Course toward Malacca.

When we were come up to the corner of that Island, we took the Elevation of
the Pole, and found we were to Sail more to the Northward; and in a short time
we came to the River, which runs through the Kingdom of Siam, up which we
sailed as far as the Town Bontempia, and there we cast Anchor. Our Master and
the Factor went straightway in the Longboat to the Chief City Odia; which is
30 Leagues up the River; as soon as they were come back they went to Unlading.

I then went on Shore too, and visited the Dutch Factory there. The House which
the Dutch Factors have there, is amazing both for its Largeness Beauty, and
Strength. Above, are all the Lodgings, which are wonderful Stately both without
and within: Under, are the Warehouses, which are of a vast bigness, and richly
stored with all manner of Commodities.

The City of Odia is very large; but most of the Houses are very low: So that
all the Towers of their Temples (which are computed to be above Five thousand)
being raised much higher, and being all easily seen by reason of the other
Buildings being so low, seem altogether like a Forest in Winter. It is
impossible for any one to conceive what vast numbers of People is continually
moving about in that City, insomuch, that a Man who is newly come, would be apt
to ask what is the matter, and take that for a gathering of the Mob, or an
unusual Crowd, which is but the usual Concourse of the Town. It is seated upon
the River Menan, which is likewise filled with Ships, Praws, etc. This River is
of the same Nature with the Nile, the Niger, and the Ganges, and like them,
overflows all the Fields about Odia, and makes them very fruitful; spreading it
self over great part of the Country, by means of several Arms or Creeks which
Providence has ordered for that purpose. And besides this Advantage which this
Inundation affords to the Country, it is a mighty Fence to the City Odia;
because the River overflowing at certain Seasons, no Enemy can Besiege it but
for some Months, during which the City is always able to defend it self, being
extraordinary well Situated and Fortified.

Through most of the Streets run fine Channels, as at Rotterdam, so that one
may go with a Boat from one part of the Town to the other, which renders it
mighty Commodious for Trade; I may say, that considering all things, there is
not a finer City in all India.

Our Ships having now in little more than a Fortnights time unladen, and taken
in their full Lading, which consisted of several Commodities, as Buck and
Roe-Skins, Jappan-Wood, etc. we fell down the River, and with a fair Northerly
Wind set Sail homewards again.

The next day it Snowed so hard, and the Wind was so high, that we were drove
almost upon Land 'ere we could be aware of it; but by good Providence we came
off without any hurt, and in 11 days came up with the Island Puloaura; where we
lay still three days refreshing our selves, and then continued our Course. We
arrived at Batavia in three Weeks: We were hardly come into Harbor when we saw
the most dismal Spectacle that can be. The Ship the Elephant, which rode at
Anchor hard by us, laden with Powder and other Ammunition designed for Bantam,
by some Accident took Fire; and in an instant blew up into a thousand pieces;
so that of above 80 Men that were on Board her, there was not one left alive to
tell how it came. It was the most dismal sight methoughts I ever had seen, to
behold so many humane Bodies tossed at such a vast distance into the Air, for
some of them went over our Ship, and so did several large pieces of the Ship
likewise; and what made it the more dismal, was, that no manner of help could
be afforded them.

Instead of going ashore with the rest, I went on Board a Ship that was come
hither some days before us from Cameron in Persia, because the Surgeon which
belonged to that Ship was a Countryman and intimate Acquaintance of mine, and
we had been together in several Expeditions in the Wars of Bantam. He was
over-joyed to see me, and I was no less pleased to find him well. After many
Questions past on both sides, we came to give one another an Account of our
Adventures since we parted, which gave him occasion to tell me, that he had had
pretty good Fortune in all his Voyages, but that he had narrowly escaped Death
in a place where he thought himself most secure: For, says he, When I first
went to Shore at Cameron, I went with some of my Companions to the Factor's
House, and having spoken with them I had Business with, we went into a Cabaret
or publick-House; whence, after we had staid an hour or little more, we thought
to go back to our Ships; but ere we could get to our Boats the Night caught us,
and we were set upon by a company of Cutthroats. They out-did us in number, and
were well Armed, whereas none of us had any Weapon about us, so that we could
make but a fruitless Resistance. Flight being the best Remedy, I presume we all
attempted it; but three of us only escaped their Hands, yet not altogether
neither; for I had several Blows from 'em, and was run through in two places;
the two others had their share too; but neither of us three got any further
hurt, and we have great reason to thank the Almighty God who delivered us out
of their Hands; for whatever they did with the rest of our Company, which were
five more, we never yet could learn what became of 'em.

He likewise speaking of Cameron, told me, That while he was there, there had
been such an Earthquake as had thrown down several Houses, and killed several
hundreds of People.

Our next talk was about our own Country, to which we having both of us an
Inclination to return, we agreed there in an instant to take our Measures about
it; for both of us had served the Company our due time, and some Months over.
So we went together on Board my Ship, and from thence we took a Boat to Shore,
and went together to wait upon the Head Surgeon, to acquaint him with our
Design, and to desire him to Employ us now on Land till the Fleet went off for
Holland. He received us with great Civility, and did what we requested of him;
and gave us part of the Hospital in Charge, as I had had before. This being
done, We went each of us to our respective Ships to take our leave of 'em, and
to fetch our Things, and returned in the same Praw to Batavia, where we
repaired to our Post, and proposed to our selves to take such Care, that there
might be no Cause of Complaints, least they should prove an obstacle to our
Designs, as it frequently happens.

We had not been long here, but a Ship arrived from Holland. All the People
that came in her, which were above 200 Soldiers, besides Seamen, were presently
landed, and drawn up before the Castle-Gate, till an Order came from the
General for them to march up to his Apartment in the Castle. I went to see
them, for as the Reader may well suppose, every Body is desirous to hear how
Matters stand at home, and is in Expectation to meet with some Acquaintance. I
found one there whom I had some Knowledge of, a Merchant's Son of Suabia, but
had lived a long time at Amsterdam, where I had seen him.

When I had given him the Welcome, and he me an Account of his Voyage, he
rejoiced me with the good News of our Victories over the Ottomans.

While we were Talking, the Order came from the General to let them march into
the Castle; where they had each of them their several Posts and Stations
assigned. But as all New-Comers have three several Days liberty to refresh
themselves, I took my Acquaintance with me, to show him the Civility of the
place, (which is commonly speaking, not very great). I took him out designing
to go to a Negery, about two miles from Batavia: But as we were going up the
River in a Praw we had taken, we met some Javians coming down in a small Boat,
making a mighty noise with some little Bells. We asked them the meaning of it;
they told us that it was a Wedding, and that that was their Music. So we
resolved to go back with them, and see the manner of 'em: They went to an House
about a quarter of a Mile out of the City. We were invited to come in. The
House was all set out and strewed with Flowers, and several Mats made of
Rice-Straw were laid upon the Ground, on which they were to have their Dinner.

After a great many Ceremonies were past, which I have given an Account of
already, a Buffle was brought, which the Bridegroom knocked down, and the Bride
took a Knife and cut his Throat. Then they by turns cut pieces of the Flesh,
which they gave to the Cook to Dress, giving him at the same time Instructions
how they would have it done, and Herbs to do it with. Some of it was ordered
upon our Account, but we neither of us cared to be Sharers of such a tough
Entertainment, and they being but a meaner sort of People, we thanked them for
the Civility they had shown us, and so left 'em.

From thence we returned to Batavia, for the day was shutting in; and no
New-Comer may absent himself from his Post the first Night, wherefore we
deferred our designed Walk till the next day.

That night one of the Castle-Gates was opened, (which is a thing seldom known)
to let out the President of the City; who, together with some others of the
Council, had been at Supper with the General.

CHAP. XIII.
They go to the Negery; An Account of their Diversions there with Tumblers and
Javian Baliar Dancers, and of the strange Tricks they showed: The Charges of
their Entertainment. Pirates infest the Streights of Sunda: Ships sent out
against them, and meet with them: Some of them taken, and how punished. Strange
sort of People of the Island St. Galle brought to Batavia, where they soon
died. A Javian Hermit comes to Batavia, and makes a discovery to the General of
a Plot which the Javians were hatching at Bantam. The Account of his Life, etc.
The Author going a Hunting, with others, meets with a poor Runaway Slave, a
Dutchman, whom he takes home with him. Ships sent to Discover an Island, which
by a Magnetic Force draws the Ships on Shore; to prevent which, some were
Built with nothing but Wood. Some of the Javians blow up one of the Bastions at
Bantam, their Punishment, etc.

THE next day we took a Chinese Praw to pursue our Design, and went up the
River to the Negery. In our way, we came to a strong Current, which being very
shallow, the Head of our Boat struck upon a Rock and turned us over. We were in
no danger of our Lives because it was not deep, but we were Duck'd over Head
and Ears; but we got up and drew our Praw to Land, and so got in again, and
went forwards.

We went there into a public House that stood not far from the Waterside upon
an Eminence, which afforded us a very agreeable Prospect, and sat us down in a
very pleasant Arbor, with Cedar-Trees, Limon-Trees, and other Green-Trees of
that kind all about us. We caused a Dinner to be got ready for us of what the
Country afforded; which was Fish and Fowl, Eggs, Herbs, etc. Our Liquor was
Suri, which is a Juice drawn from the Coco-Trees; with that, we made very good
Massack and Lemonade, by the help of some Sugar, Spices, Limons, and Oranges,
which we had in good plenty.

I having a mind to make my Friend merry, and to divert him with variety, I
sent for some Gomgomers, (the Musicians of that Country) and some Javian Baliar
Dancers, who made us a great deal of Pastime. The Baliar Dancers, which come
from Babylon, I have spoken of before; but these were Javians, which are a sort
far inferior to them, and differ from them much in the same manner as there is
between a Dance performed by a Dancing Master and one danced by a Rustic: But
what was most Diverting to us, especially to my Friend, was, some Tumblers and
Jugglers that were amongst 'em, who showed us several Tricks, which do usually
so much surprise, even those that see them, that I know a Man runs some risk in
relating of them. However, some of their most considerable Tricks of Activity I
cannot wholly pass pass by.

They were five in number: One of 'em laid himself flat down upon his Belly,
upon a Mat they had spread on the Ground, and in the twinkling of an Eye,
raised himself upon his Legs; then laying himself down again as before, he
raised himself after the same manner, and stood upon his Head only: After this
he laid himself upon his Back, and gave several Leaps in the Air like a Fish.
The other four did the same Tricks over, one after the other, and still better
and better. After this they took a Ladder of about 12 Rounds, and set it
against one of 'em; one of the other four got up to the top of it, and laid
himself a cross it; the second went up, and sat across theother's Shoulders;
the third climbed up and pitched himself on his Head, upon the Head of the
second, and there stood with his Feet directly upwards; upon which, the fourth
came, and stood upright on the Feet of the third; And after playing several
Tricks there, he leapt down on the Ground, and stood still; the next Fellow,
that was still standing on his Head, gave a spring upwards, and falling down,
lighted on the Shoulders of him that stood below; the next, who was on the
Ladder came down likewise with a Leap, and fell across the Shoulders of him;
and so did the fourth and last, who had been the first on the Ladder: He that
had stood all this while, and held the foot of the Ladder, took it and climbed
up with it to the top of the other four, and there made a sort of Harangue to
us in Japponnese, which concluded the Sight. There was a great many other
Tricks intermixed with these, which were well worth the taking notice of; but I
thought these would suffice to show you, how far these Men outdo any thing we
commonly see in Europe.

This being over, we called for our Reckoning in, which came to no more than
Two thousand Butgis. An European at first is frightened at such a reckoning as
this, and thinks that such a Sum of Money should be enough to Treat a King and
all the Nobility, or to defray the Charges of a Lord Mayor's Feast; but he must
understand, that these Butgis are but little thin pieces of Lead, with holes in
the middle of 'em, a certain number of them is put upon a String to save the
trouble of telling them over upon every occasion, and three Hundred of 'em are
worth but Two Pence of Dutch Money; so that our Dinner amounted but to 13 or 14
d. Besides this, our Music and Dancers cost us a Shilling, and we gave a
Ducatoon to the Juglers and Tumblers; having paid all, we went back again down
the River to Batavia.

At this very time the Straight of Sunda was very much infested with
Pickaroons; They had only Praws or small Boats of their own, with which they
run with ease in and out of several Rivers of the Kingdom of Bantam, and did a
great deal of mischief about the Islands of Toppers-hoedie, Dwarsin-de-zee, and
others. They used to wait there for their Prey, and when they had gotten their
Booty, they made immediately to their lurking holes, where finding safety for a
great while, they were at last so bold, that not a Ship could escape them; and
the more, because the Company never concerned themselves about it, nor took any
Measures to suppress them. But at length, the Bali, (the Ship in which I had
been some time before) coming that way, bound for Jambi on the Coast of
Sumatra; and being obliged to cast Anchor near the aforesaid Islands, these
Pirates joining their Forces together, came and surrounded her, and
notwithstanding a stout Defense made on Board the Bali for some hours, they
made themselves Masters of her, killed all the Men they could come at; and
having taken what they could conveniently carry away, set it on Fire.

While the Ship was all in Flames, a Ship from Malabar coming luckily by, made
toward the Fire to see what it was. Two Men, who in the Engagement had hid
themselves below Deck, and were now got out, but knew not how to dispose of
themselves, stood upon the Fore-Castle ready to throw themselves into the Sea
to avoid being burnt: But they sent them a Boat, by which means these poor
Creatures were preserved; and being brought on Board the Ship, they continued
their Course to Batavia, where they gave the General an Account of what had
happened.

The Company now being Sufferers by this, thought fit to send after these
Pirates, which they never minded before, while they came by no loss themselves,
and while the Fishermen only, etc. were in danger. Immediately two Men of War
were ordered to go after 'em, together with eight small Boats well Manned, to
give them Chase. It being requisite there should be Chirurgions more than
ordinary in those Ships, and this being like to be a short Expedition, and near
home, my Friend and I, who could not be employed in a long Voyage, were
appointed to go with them. We were very well pleased with our Commission, and
accordingly we got ready our Chests, and went on Board the Ceylon, which
carried 300 Men, and 48 Guns: The other Ship was about the same Rate. The Boats
had each of them from 60 to 70 Men, and about 16 Patterero's.

When we were got past the Island Onrust, we kept along the Seashore till we
came beyond Bantam, and there we lay before the Mouth of some Rivers, as close
to the Land as we could: And so as to lie to the Windward. At Night we divided
our Fleet, and sent two of our Boats out to Sea to entice the Pirates out after
them, if they should chance to see them, and we stood ready to clap in between
them, and the River; so to cut off their Pass, and hedge them in. We lay two
days close to the Shore, within a Stone's throw of Land, but very safe, with no
less than 60 Fathom Water. Atlength, about Sunset, we saw five Boats making
Sail toward our two Boats, at about two Leagues distance from us; upon which
we moved altogether forwards, along the Shore; and by that time it was quite
dark, we made directly toward 'em, taking still care to be between the Shore
and them.

The next morning we saw them by break of day sailing by a small Island. They
having found out our Design, were endeavoring to make their escape, for the
two Boats we had sent after 'em were farther from 'em than we were with the
whole Fleet: So we joined together again, and our eight Boats sailing much
faster than the Men of War could, pursued them so tightly, that notwithstanding
these Rovers had several Oars with them, (which they use to make use of in a
Calm or in case of pursuit) yet by Noon our Boats were all got within a quarter
of a League of 'em; so that the last of 'em were forced to yield or fight. We
with our great Ships were within a League of 'em all, and turned round a small
Island, during which we lost sight of them: But our Boats all this while having
got ground, they begun to thunder amongst 'em; so that in a little time, two of
the Pirates Boats were seized. Then we came in sight again, and took these two
Boats into our Charge, and brought the Men on Board of us. Our Boats having
made some stay, while they engaged these two, the other three were got away
again pretty far. However, ours were not long 'ere they came within shot of
'em, and so pursued them that they came to a close Engagement, and after a
sharp resistance, at length became Masters of them.

We lost in all 28 Men, and had 30 wounded; but we killed 200, and wounded
above 50 of theirs. The rest we carried to Batavia.

There was at first near 900 of 'em; of which nine were Dutchmen, and two
Danes; one of whom had been a Captain of a Man of War. We caught both the
Danes, but we had but three Dutchmen, the six others were killed in the sight.

Being come to Batavia, they were all put into Prison, and Examined. They
confessed, that they had their Habitations in some Negery's, about the Blaw
Peper-bergh, and discovered several of their Companions thereabouts: Upon which
they sent Soldiers both by Sea and Land toward those places; and in three
Week's time they brought back with 'em some thousands of 'em, most of 'em being
Javians.

Of the whole, one part was broke upon the Wheel, some were Quartered, some
were Whipped, some had their Ears and Noses cut off, and some were burnt in the
Forehead. The three Hollanders were Hanged: The two Danes Beheaded: and a great
number of others were sent to severalIslands; to Burn Lime, Hew Stone, etc. and
there to remain Slaves all their Lives. Their Wives and Children were served
after the same manner, that it might more effectually prove a terror to others.

About this time came into the Road of Batavia a Ship from Madagascar, which
brought with her two and twenty Savages from the Island St. Galle. They were
much uglier and much more brutish than the Hottentots at the Cape of Good Hope;
their Speech was hardly articulate, but confused like that of Children, and as
if they Sung. They had no Hair on their Heads, only a rough scabby Skin. They
were strong, though excessive Lean, and had scarce any thing but Skin and Bones.
Before their Privy-Parts they had a Wild-Cat's Skin, which reached down to
their Knees; for in St. Galle there are multitudes of Wild-Cats.

They were shut up all together, like Beasts in a Stable, and were fed with
nothing but raw Rice and Water, which it seems was too good for 'em; for in a
little while they all died. A nastier sort of Men I never saw; for as I said,
except their Head, they were Hairy all over to their very Hands and Feet. Their
Face was very red; but their Teeth were very fine and white: Their Eyes were
very large; and their large Ears slit in five or six places. About their Neck
and Feet they had some Twists of Sea-Rushes; which their Women made use of
likewise to bear up their long swagging Breasts. I believe the World does not
afford a more Savage Wild sort of Men. St. Galle, from which they came, lies
about 1300 miles from Batavia, and about 300 from the Cape, on the side of the
Island Madagascar.

Some time after this, a Javian Hermit, who lived in a Cave on the Blaw
Peper-bergh, came to Batavia to speak with the General; and refusing to deliver
his Message to any of his Attendants, he was admitted and brought before the
General, with whom he spent some time alone. His Business with him, was to make
a discovery of a Plot, which several Javians had laid to surprise the City of
Bantam, and to put all the Dutch Garrison to the Sword: Upon which the General
dispatched an Express to the Governor of Bantam, to Command him to be upon his
Guard, and to let him know that he should have a Reinforcement sent him
speedily by Sea and Land.

The Company upon this conceived a great Suspicion, that the young King might
be in this Conspiracy; But it was upon a close Enquiry, found to be a mere
surmize; and all his Actions showing so much the contrary all along, they
continued to treat him with the same Respect as before: For all the
Ringleaders of this Plot were detected, taken, and punished according to their
Deserts; but not the least thing could be found that might any way reflect on
the young King.

The Hermit did not Care to return to his Cottage again: So the Company
promised him, that he should never want if he would continue with them; which
he accepted of readily.

He spoke seven Languages; to wit, Turkish, Arabic, Persian, Moorish, Chinese,
Maleish, and Javian; and had Traveled over most parts of Asia and Africa. He
had lived 15 years in that Cell; and it was a wonder how a Man should continue
there so long with any thing of safety; considering the many Tigers, Leopards,
Serpents, and other devouring Creatures that are in great numbers all about
that Mountain.

His Dress was very much like that of the Armenian Women; so that one would not
have taken him for a Man; and besides that, one might have mistaken him, even
though one was near him, because he had pulled his Beard out by the Roots: He was
very thoughtful, spoke but seldom, and very gravely. He had above twenty pair
of Shoes made of Pastboard, hung about his Girdle. Instead of a Hat, he had a
sort of a Turbant wrapped about his Head made of stripped Cotton, about twelve
Else long, as the Moors usually wear.

As to his Diet, he Eat moderately, but loved to have all very good. Whatever
he Drank, he poured part of it upon his Head, which was as bare as the Palm of
a Man's Head, which was as bare as the Palm of a Man's Hand. The Lodging that
was appointed for him was over against mine, so that I had some Conversation
with him in the Maleish Language. But he was not free of his Discourse, except
sometimes in the Relation of his Voyages, and the Description of the Countries
he had seen; as to the rest he seemed reserved. I asked him one day, how he
came to be an Hermit; to which he replied, just as you come to be a Surgeon.
But to have done with my capricious Gentleman.

I was sent for to one of the General's Servants, so that I had once more an
opportunity of seeing the General's Garden, which was one of the finest that
ever was seen; for all kind of Asiatic or Indian Trees and Flowers, in which
were two Parts set aside, the one for all manner of Wild-Beasts; the other for
all sorts of Birds, of all which, an account would be too tedious: In short, I
can hardly think of any rare Creature that was not there to be seen.

Two days after this, my Companion and I, and two more, went a shooting, about
two or three Leagues into the Country, along by the Powder-Mills, upon the
River Jacatra: And as we had pretty good sport, and killed a good quantity of
Pigeons, Rabbets, etc. we were going to a Negery to refresh our selves, and
make Merry with our Provisions, we spying a Rabbet making toward a little
Wood; two of us went after him, while the others went forward to get that
Dressed which we had killed. As we were in pursuit of our Game, my Friend one
way, and I the other, I came to a narrow River's side, where I saw a Man
sitting in a Melancholy posture, with his Eyes on the Ground. Hearing him
groan and sigh, put me to a stand, and ask him what he was; to which he
answered me with a deep sigh, that he was a poor Hollander. I asked him what he
did there, and whither he designed to go. Ah! Sir, says he, I know not where I
am, nor which way I am to take, but surely Providence has sent you to my
Relief; and seeing I have the Happiness once more to meet with a Christian, I
beseech you to direct me, (if there is any way for it) how I may come to you:
Saying this, he fell upon his Knees; so I told him, I would get him over, and
bid him stay there. My Companion had made his shoot, and was gone to the rest:
So I went up to the Village, and got a Praw, which I sent to bring him over to
me; and as soon as he came over, he gusht out in Tears, and Embracing me,
thanked me most passionately for my seasonable Assistance. I desired him to go
along with me to some Company I had, which he did; and gave me a short account
of himself by the way. My Company wondered who I had got with me, but when they
were informed what he was, we all helped to Comfort him, and treated him as we
did our selves. In that while he informed us of the particulars of his
Misfortunes: The sum of which was, That being come over from Delst, in the
Company's Service, as Carpenter, he had been employed in the Kartirian Wars;
and as he, with three more, were sent out to take a View of some part of the
chief City of that Kingdom, they had the ill Fortune to fall into the Hands of
the Enemy, who carried them away Prisoners to Tuban, and there Sold them to a
rich Chinese, who was just come thither in a Ship of his own: That Chinese
carried them all four to China, to the Seaport Town called Quancheu; where
after seven years of hard Slavery, they found an opportunity, and made their
escape from thence in a small Boat to the Island of Manilha; where they luckily
met with a Ship that was coming to Batavia, but as they were got almost within
reach of it, and within four miles of Land, their Ship struck upon a Shelf, and
there sunk; and he knew of none that had saved themselves but he alone. The
Relation of this dismal Story did affect us so, that we were as Melancholy as
himself.

Our Dinner being over, we returned to Batavia, and took this poor Man with us,
and presented him to the General, who appointed him a Post under the Gunner of
the Castle, till further Orders.

I need not give the Reader the particular Account which he gave us of his
Slavery, it being much the same with what we use to hear concerning that
Condition, and may be found in most Books of Travels, especially in those of
Ferdinandus Mendez Pinto, who gives an Experimental Account of all sorts of
Slavery, having been himself, taken 13 times, and 17 times sold, in the space
of 21 years.

About this time three Ships were getting ready, to go and make a discovery of
a certain Island which lies Northward of Japan. There had been some Ships sent
thither some years before, but they had all miscarried; some by the way; others
(as it was reported) by the attractive power of the Magnetic Mountains were
drawn violently to Shore; so that to avoid that danger, they contrived the
Building of these Ships, without Nails or Iron Work. When they were ready, they
Beat up for Volunteer Seamen, promising them for an Encouragement a Twelve
Month's Pay over and above their Wages; half of it to be paid presently, the
other half when they came back. This raised Men in abundance, and as fast as
they could wish; and in three weeks time, the Ships being ready, went under
sail with 220 Men on Board of 'em.

It is said that Island was first found out by the Portugueses, but that they
were forced to abandon it by reason of the excessive Cold and multitude of
Wild-Beasts; for it lies Northward of Tartary. But the Gold, which as it is
reported, comes in great store down several Rivers of that Country, was (I
presume) the only Motive which set the Dutch upon making these dangerous
Attempts, and upon ventring a second time, after such bad Success. What became
of this last Expedition I never heard; for there came no News of it to Batavia
before I came away from thence.

Soon after this, a great piece of Roguery was carried on at Bantam, which
unhappily proved successful. The Dutch had there under one of the Bastions, a
great Magazine of Powder, and they had unfortunately at that time above 100 Tun
of it in the Magazine. A Javian undertook to get in by breaking of the Wall,
which he was forced to do by digging a way under Ground quite to the side of
it. Every day he closed up the entrance into his Hole with Earth, so
artificially and so softly, that no body perceived it, and that neither of the
two Sentinels that stood on the Bastion heard the least Noise at any time. When
he was got in, he took a Bamboo-Cane that was hollow, and filling that with
Gunpowder, lighted it at one end, and the Fire coming to the Powder in the
Cane, gave a great Blow, with some Flame, without doing any further harm for
the present. This alarmed all the People, who presently went to search every
corner of the Bastion, to see what the matter was, and there the Bamboo-Cane
was found, and the Powder that was in it was consumed: But no sooner had they
opened the Vault-Door, but the Wind finding a free passage, took some sparks of
Fire along with it, which lighted among the Powder, and in an instant set that
on Fire, and blew up the whole Bastion with 16 pieces of Cannon, and above 200
Persons.

An Account of this Accident was quickly sent to the General at Batavia, who
presently sent Men thither; together with Orders to the Governor, and to the
young King, to make a diligent Enquiry after the Author's of this Villainy: And
in a short time, three Javians were discovered to be the Men; who were brought
bound to Batavia, and confessed, That they were the only Contrivers of that
Action; upon which they were all three Condemned to Die. He that had set Fire
to the Cane, was brought upon a Scaffold erected for that purpose, and there
Pinched with red-hot Tongs from the morning till toward the evening, at which
time he was cut into Quarters; so that that day was spent in Torturing of that
Fellow only. The next day the second was served in like manner; The third was
Broke upon the Wheel.

We thought the time long now 'ere the Ships went off to Holland, or at least
till the time was fixed for their going; which we expected daily should be done:
However, we had got our Names upon the Roll, and having time enough, we
ventured to take a small Journey together to visit the Hermits Cells; for which
purpose we took some Javian Guides with us. The Road, we found as it was told
us, very commodious, having a great many Inns, and good Accommodation, till we
came to the Wilderness where these Hermits dwell. Within six or seven miles of
which, we came to two Villages, one on one side, the other on the other side of
the River; in the middle of which was a very high Rock, upon which was a Javian
Temple. We went to see it, and found there only one Reverend Bard, who resided
there all the Year round. That Temple was used only two days in the Year, viz.
Their New Year's Day, and the Feast of Mahomet, whose Sect they follow: And on
those Days, there is much Praying and Worshipping, and great Processions made.

Having taken a View of this, we went on, and came to a Village that is near
the Blawen Pepper-bergh, from which we had not above 2 or 3 miles to the place
where the Cells are. In that Village we staid the latter part of that Day, and
all that Night, in order to spend all the next day in satisfying our Curiosity;
and accordingly we got thither early the next morning. There we saw a great
many pretty Caves, cut out of the Natural Rocks, and very Artificially
contrived. We had been told, that they were poor little miserable Holes that
were not worth the seeing; but we were not a little surprised to find them so
neat and delightful, nor less pleased to see how successfully they had imitated
Nature; insomuch, that it was hard to judge, whether Nature or Art had had the
chiefest hand in the ordering of 'em. These Cells were most inhabited by a sort
of Men, who in imitation of their Founder, Devote themselves to a perpetual
Austerity, Mortification, and Self-Denial, as he himself had set them an
Example; assuring them, That the Chastizing of the Body, would conduce very
much to Felicity, and would infallibly draw down God's Blessing upon them; so
that he was looked upon as a great Saint; and his Followers are valued at no
less rate all over that Country.

They wore long Gowns after the manner of the Armenian Priests, or the Bonzen
in Japan. They spend all Day and Night in lifting up their Eyes and Hands to
Heaven, intimating, That they Desire nothing here below. The Javians that were
our Guides, told us, That they used to Eat nothing but Boiled Herbs, Beans,
Roots, and such like Fruits: And that on some Days, which they call their
Feast-Days, they eat Flies, Mice, Scorpions, and Spiders, dressed with a Juice
pressed out of a certain Herb that grows there in abundance, which looks very
much like our Sorrel. In this poor Condition they live and die; but in the
highest Esteem and Veneration among all the Javians: So that they never fail to
be Canonized after their Death, and their Bodies are burnt with great
Solemnity, and with all the respect imaginable; every one thinking himself
happy, that can but come and throw in a Bundle of Sweet-Herbs upon the Corpse.

Some of those Hermits, thinking that the more they mortisie the more they are
acceptable to their God, Eat nothing but green Herbs and Roots, and that very
sparingly; which makes them look so nastily, that it frightens one to look upon
them, and kills them quickly too.

When we had seen all we could see, we came away time enough to reach the two
Villages again before Night; where we staid that night; and the next morning we
set out early, to get into Batavia as soon as we could; because we had a mind
to share in the Rejoicing that was to be that day, it being the General's
Birthday; wherefore we took a Praw, seeing the Wind and Tide was for us, and
with a very quick passage down the River, came to Batavia just as the People
began to move. All the Burghers and Freemen were in Arms, and drew up before
the General's Lodgings in the Castle, where after the Discharge of all the
Cannon about the Castle and City, they saluted his Excellency with several
Vollies of Shot. Each Nation then came in a distinct Body with Presents to the
General; as first, the Chinese, Siamers, Japonneses, Macassars, Amboineses,
Bandaneses, etc. and even the Javians, who are not permitted to set a foot in
the Castle on any other time, were then let in; but all these come but after
the Company of Burghers and Freemen, which is composed of Dutch, Germans,
English, Danes, French, Portuguese, and other Christians, born in the Indies,
who altogether make one Body. These Presents are Magnisicent, and one may judge
they must needs be very considerable, when the very Soldiers who stood to their
Arms under the Castle-Gate, had some Hundreds of Guildens given them.

Besides this, all the Streets were full of Lights, Bonesires, and Fireworks;
wherein the Chinese employed their utmost Art and Skill: And for three or four
days there was nothing but Feasting and Treating one another.

The time now being come that the Fleet was to go to Holland, and the day fixed,
viz. the 12th of February, (in case the Weather should permit it) my Friend and
I made our Applications to be ordered on Board of one Ship, if it might be
thought convenient: And according to our Request, we were assigned on Board the
Ship called the Ex-change; which did not as yet lie before Batavia, but was
resitting in the Island Onrust, and was ordered to get-ready to go Commadore of
this Fleet, as she was to have gone with the last Fleet which went on the 22d
of November 1684. but that she was disabled. Thus we had time enough to make
Provision for our Voyage.

The Ships being come into the Road before Batavia, some days were appointed to
Address our Prayers in the most solemn manner to the Almighty for his
Protection, and to Beg of him that he would preserve us from all Dangers; which
was Religiously observed in the Dutch and Maleish Churches.

After this, the General gave Order that the List of those who had served out
their time, should be called over; and public notice of it being given by the
Clerk of the Musters, those who were to go, appeared all with their Arms in
good Order, and by Beat of Drum were led into the Castle, where they delivered
their Arms into the Hands of the Armourer: Upon which every Man of 'em was
presented with four Rixdollers, as a Gratuity over and above each Man his
Half-year's Pay. Those that wanted more Money, and desired to have it might be
furnished with it, so it was less or not more than what the Company owed them,
abating or allowing 20 per Cent. and giving an Acquittance of his Money so
received aforehand, made and signed before a Notary Public.

CHAP. XIV.
The Author's Departure from Batavia for Holland. Orders observed among the
Ships: They come and lie before Bantam; where the Author going on Shore, is
left behind, but by good luck over-takes the Ship again. They come to the Cape
de Bon Esperance. Observations on the Place, and on the Hottentot's there. They
leave the Cape. Come into the Sea which they call the Graz-zee; They meet with
a fearful Storm, which lasted four days. They come to the Briel; thence to
Amsterdam, where the Author is forced to lie, in great Pain, and at great
Expense; and at last, with much ado, gets home to Ulm.

I Had made Provisions of all things necessary for my Voyage, but especially of
preserved Pepper, Arack, and Tobacco, which are the chief Things for such a
long Voyage as that is. I took with me a good quantity of China-Ware, some
pounds of Tea, and some Murus and Parcallen, (which are a sort of very sine
Linen) off the Company, upon my own Account, which amounted to a great deal of
Money. After this, I went to take my leave of all my Friends, and amongst
others, of our Countryman, of whom I made mention before, who entertained my
Friend and me with all the Expressions of Love and Friendship that could be
imagined. He gave me a Seal-Ring and a Letter, desiring me to deliver them to
his Wife at Vlm, in case I got safe thither; so we parted with Tears in our
Eyes all three of us. He conducted us two to the Vierkant or Square, from
whence we took a Praw, and went on Board the Exchange; where a Review was made
the next day, to see if there were no body wanting. All being found there,
Orders came the next day, that we should weigh Anchor, and go a Quarter of a
League into Sea, and there cast Anchor again.

Then was there again a Day appointed to Implore the Blessing of the Almighty;
which was duly observed, both at Land, and on Board our Ships. Then the Masters
of the Ships and the Factors were invited a Shore to take their Farewell Dinner
with the General, and to receive his Orders for Sailing, and to take their
Oaths of Fidelity: After which, they repaired every one to their several Ships,
with Orders to set Sail with the first fair Wind; but the Wind was so
changeable for three or four days, that it made us weigh our Anchors, and drop
them again four or five times. Some of our more debauched Seamen, and others,
did so fret and fume at these frequent Disappointments, and grew so very
impatient, that they could not forbear venting their Rage in very undecent and
profane Expressions; for which, the Master, a good old Man of near 90 years of
Age, reproved them very sharply, and threatened them severely if they did not
refrain from such Words; telling them, that this was not the way to obtain
their Desires, but that they ought rather to Pray to God to send us a
favorable Wind, and patiently wait his Will and Pleasure.

About 12 of the Clock, in the 5th Night, the Wind came good for us; whereupon,
our Master as Commadore, ordered a Gun to be fired as a signal for the two
other Ships to weigh Anchor with us. So we all went under Sail together, for in
the Voyages homeward, the Ships are always obliged to go together; and though the
one may be a quicker Sailer than the other, yet she must not run away before
the rest; but she is forced to Furl some of her Sails, so as the slowest of 'em
may keep pace with her; and nothing excuses their parting from each other but a
Storm, or hard Weather; after which they are to rejoyn as soon as possible.

The next day we came and Anchored before Bantam, about a League from Shore
near the place where we lay when we went in pursuit of the Pirates. Our Boat
went on Shore, and I went with it, to see some of my Acquaintance there, and to
take my leave of them. Notwithstanding that the Steward had given me very
strict charge not to stay, and told me two or three times he was just going, I
could not part from my Friends readily, and when I came to go, I found my Spark
gone; and was told he was gone off half an Hour before, with eight Cows, and
other Provisions that he was come for. When I heard this, I was ready to die
with Fear and Grief; and had no other Remedy, but immediately to Hire a light
Praw with 16 Oars; When we came out of the River of Bantam into Sea, we saw our
Ships just ready to Sail; for the Wind was very good, and then they loose no
time: However, I plucked up a good Heart when I saw 'em, and encouraged the
Javians to pull stoutly, and promised them six Rixdollers amongst 'em over and
above the Bargain, in case they overtook our Ship. This made them Row like
Tigers, and by that time it was Night, as the Ship was got up to the Island
Dwars in the Zee, we came in reach of her, at which the Javians set up a full
Huzza, and I was so transported with Joy, that I could not but join with them
very heartily. As soon as we could come to fasten by her side, I went to get
up; but unfortunately made a false step, and tumbled down again into the Boat,
and so Sprain'd my Leg, that I was forced to be drawn up into the Ship, and lie
still for some days.

The next day, three of the Cows were killed and distributed among the Ship's
Crew. Some days after we passed the Streights of Sunda, and came to the
Prince's Island, where we parted with our Convoy Ships, and sent them back to
Batavia.

As we came by the Prince's Island, which lies at the furthest corner of Great
Java, we came into open Sea, and the Wind being right good for us, we continued
our Course forward, not being willing to loose so fair a Wind as we had then;
so that we did not put in there, nor would we stay to send in our Boats for a
Recruit of fresh Water, as it is Customary; but made the best of our way, and
fired three Guns to wish each other a good Voyage.

We steered our Course now directly toward Cape de Bon Esperance, Hall'd in
our Longboat and Shallop, and took in our Anchors, and fitted our selves for
the Voyage.

When we were got out of sight of Great Java, a second Review was made of all
our Ship's Crew, which amounted to Eighty eight Persons in all, viz. the
Master, the Upper Steersman, two Under Steersmen, and two Mates, to relieve
them from Duty; two Quarter Masters, to Order the Watches, which I have given
an Account of in the beginning of this Book; a Factor; a Book-keeper; and a
Clerk or Assistant; An Upper Surgeon, (my self) and an Under
Master-Chirurgion; a Steward, who distributed the Allowances of Meat and Drink
to every Person according to the Master's Orders; a Cook and a Scullion; a
Gunner with four Men and Boys, who were likewise to help the Steward; a
Sergeant; two Master Carpenters, and three Mates, a Boatswain, and his Boy, a
Schieman and his Boy; a Provost; four Boys; the eight Soldiers, and 32
Mariners; We had no Chaplain, but we had Prayers duly Read by the Book-keeper:
There was another Master of a Ship, and a Master Surgeon; but neither of
them had any Post in our Ship, they were only Passengers.

We came safe with all these People, till we got past the Island, called St.
Paul of Amsterdam: After which our greatest concern was, to pass safe through
the Latitude of Madagascar, or St. Maurice; which, as I have already told you,
is very subject to dreadful Storms and Hurricanes, most Seasons of the year;
insomuch, that more Ships are lost thereabouts, than any where again.

Having escaped this place likewise, though we met with hard weather, we came at
last, after nine weeks Sail, in sight of the great Promontory of Africa, the
Cape of Good Hope, which rejoiced us much. One of the Carpenter's Men had the
good fortune to spy Land the first of any; for which good Tidings, the Master
presented him with two Ducatoons and a Quart of Canary, as it was ever the
Custom on Board our Ships, to gratify those that first discover Land. We
immediately loosned our Anchors, and fastened them to their Cables, and made
directly toward Tafel-Bay, which lay about 20 miles from us. The next day we
were within two Leagues of it, it being a very great Snow, and the Weather
being very Calm, which was very extraordinary, it being for the most part very
Blustering there all the year round. We hall'd out our Boat, and Longboat, into
which having sent some of our Men with Oars, they hall'd our Ship into the
Haven. This took up half a day, and when we were come to a place where we could
cast Anchor, we did so; and hoisted up our Flags, after which they at Land did
the same likewise upon the Tower of the Castle.

Then our Master went to Shore, and gave the Governor of the place an account
of our Success thus far on our Voyage. Here we found three Ships from Holland,
and one English Fly-boat, riding at Anchor. We were immediately supplied with
some Sheep, Fruits, and Herbs, which were very welcome Refreshments, and many
Hottentots came on Board of us; some of which, our Men made several little
Presents to. Our Men were likewise permitted to go on Shore by turns, to
refresh themselves: Some of our Crew were sent on purpose, that they might go
into the Wood to fetch some Fuel, and others were sent for a Recruit of fresh
Water.

When I went ashore, I found the place extraordinary full of People, but mostly
of those Soldiers, which belonged to the Dutch Ships that lay there. They were
brave lusty Men, and very brisk, having met with nothing but good Success in
their Voyage thither. Some of their Men were Sick, and carried into the
Hospital, which was pretty full. I went to see it, and told near 200 of them
there; most of which were forced to be left behind, not being recovered before
the Fleet was obliged to go on, on their Voyage. These Ships being gone off,
the Town was left as thin as might be, and every thing was as cheap again; so
that we had more convenience of making our selves Merry. I spent here some time
very pleasantly, my Landlord being a very honest Fellow, and extraordinary
obliging. He was of Newrenberg, and by Employment a Brewer. He having some
Knowledge of me before this, seemed daily to increase his good Opinion and
Esteem for me; and his Daughter, I observed likewise, to become every day more
and more obliging, which I looked upon as a design between them of staying me
there: But I was so heartily set upon my Return home, that I might once again
Enjoy the free Liberty of my Religion, that I could not be gained upon to alter
my Mind upon any kind of Consideration whatever. A few days after, I found,
that what I had surmiz'd was true enough; and the Father very kindly made me an
Offer of his Daughter, and told me what he was ready to do for me if I would
stay there; and withal, that he had a great Inclination to go into his own
Country, which he was loath to do, unless he could by such a means as this,
make over his Lands to his Daughter, and put her into Possession of them: For a
Freeman cannot otherwise dispose of what he has; and if he is desirous to
leave the Country, he cannot Sell his Estate, but it must fall of Course to the
Company; so that he can take nothing over with him but his Personal Estate. But
neither the Daughter's Beauty, nor the Sweetness of his Habitation, could have
such an Influence upon me as to make me break my Resolution. So that without
hearkening to him any further than just to thank him, I made all necessary
Preparation, and made me ready to go back to my Ship. But I wondered that my
Landlord could ever have the Heart to part from so pleasant a place as his was
to return home, seeing he had that only thing which I wanted, the opportunity
of Exercising my Religion publicly.

One day I went out by my self to fetch a walk, and as I went musing along, I
found my self before I was aware of it, within a quarter of a Mile of the
Lewen-bergh, between which and the Sea, I saw some of those Hutts which the
Hottentots dwell in. Upon sight of which, my Curiosity led me to go and see
what kind of life those People led. I went into one of 'em, and there I saw a
parcel of 'em lying upon the Ground like so many Hogs, and fast asleep: But as
soon as they awaked and saw me, they sprung up and came up to me, making a
noise like Turkies. I was not a little concerned; yet seeing they d^d not go
about to do me any harm, I pulled out a piece of Tobacco and gave it them: They
were mightily pleased with that Present, but the way they took to show their
Gratitude, and to thank me, was so odious to me, that I wished I had not given
them any occasion of returning me Thanks. For no sooner had I given them this,
but they all lifted up those Flaps of Sheep-Skin which hang before their
Privy-Parts to give me a sight of 'em. What with this beastly Behavior, and
what with the nasty stench of their Kennels, (as I think I may properly call
'em) I made all haste to be gone. Some of 'em I found at their Dinner, or
rather, Eating, (for that is a word of too much Order and Decency for them.)
They had only a piece of Cow-Hide, laid out upon the Coals a Broyling, and to
make the Carbonnade more pleasant, they had squeezed the Dung out of the Guts,
and spread it finely on the Hide to moisten it, and to give it a relish; and
this they take when it is broyl'd, and chop it, and so Eat it. The very
ordering of it in this manner, turned my Stomach so, that I could not stay to
see the Eating of it: But I made all the haste I could to be gone. I went from
thence directly to the Lewen-bergh, which is a fine pleasant Hill, not at all
Rocky, but covered over with Grass, and affording a most pleasant Prospect.
Here I sat me down, and took a view of the Country all round me. After I had
been there a while, I espied at Sea a Ship making to the Port with full Sails;
and presently after I saw the Flag hoisted up in the Castle. Upon this I came
down to go toward the Fort, and as I was going along the Shore, there stood a
Servant Maid, who was come to fill a little Tub with Sand: As soon as she saw
me, she cried out to me as loud as she could, Maridi sini Senior: Oh Sir! Pray
come and helpme. I ran full speed toward her to help her, and when I came up
to her, she showed me a dreadful long Serpent, that had just then been
devouring a young Hottentot, and had swallowed him all up but the Legs, which
still stuck out of his Mouth. This had put the Maid into a great Consternation,
and made her afraid that she should be his next Prey: And truly being much in
the same Apprehensions my self, I betook my self to my Heels, which the Maid
seeing, she gave a dreadful Shriek, and began to run too. That great Shriek she
gave brought out some Hottentots that were thereabouts, who came running
toward us. As soon as they saw what was the matter, they got themselves ready
to catch the Serpent; and having brought out some long Ropes, they threw them
with wonderful Dexterity about its middle, and drawing the Ropes, some at one
end, some at another, as hard as they were able; they held him so fast, that I
expected they would have cut him in two. All the while the Serpent Hissed in a
fearful manner, and Twisted it self strangely, but could not slip away. At last
came some of the Men with great Poles, with which they knocked him on the Head.
This dreadful Creature was very near 16 Foot long. They fastened it to a Stick,
and let it dry.

This being done, I returned to the place from whence I came.

In my return I met with some Wild Hottentots, who come down thither from the
Cafre's Country, about 100 Leagues from thence. They, as I observed, are almost
Blind in the day time, at least extreme Dim-sighted; so that they do most of
their Business by Night. In the time that I staid in the Cape, I saw once one
of these Wild Prople executed for Theft: He had some time before stolen some
Cows and Sheep from some of the Freemen, without the Approbation of their King,
(which is a Dignity they confer upon some one amongst 'em; and wherever they
are, though but to the number of five or six together, they always make them a
King or Captain to Rule over them, without whose Consent no kind of thing is to
be done; and in this the Company does not at all interpose, but leaves them to
their own Customs). The Criminal was tied Hand and Foot, and stretched out
betwixt two Posts, about half a Man's height from the Ground; after which some
Men came with great Sticks, and beat him to Death. If they hit him on the Head
or Breast he is soon dispatched; but they never give over as long as they find
any Breath in him. When he is expired, they carry him to the Wood, and there
fasten him to a Bough, and leave him for a Prey to Wild Beasts.

The Ship that I espied coming from the top of the Hill, was an English
Fly-boat, which came and cast Anchor by the other English Ship that lay there
before. The Master gave us an Account of his Voyage, which had been thus far
very prosperous. He was bound for Jappan, but was to call at several Places by
the way. He put in here to Treat with the Governor, but about what, I could
not be informed.

After we had staid herefull three Weeks, which is more by a Week than Ships
generally do, every body was ordered on Board in a readiness to be going. Our
Master being Commadore, called a Council to settle the Orders of their Voyage.
The next day a Review was made, where all were found in very good Order, except
two that were very sick; but yet, as ill as they were, they would not stay
there, but would venture on their Voyage.

The next day, after the Review was made, our Master and Factor, together with
the other Masters of Ships, went once more a Shore to wait on the Governor to
take their Leave of him; They came back that same night in order to go out of
the Bay with the first fair Wind; which happened that very night, being the
23th of May; and then we steered our Course North-West.

All the next day we had the African Coasts in sight. Our Water Vessels were
shut up again, and dealt out by Portions; which was, a Can to each Person once
in 24 hours; and half a Quartern of Brandy, or Arack. When we had been a while
under Sail, out came a Seaman from under the Hatches, who had hid himself there
till we were got out in full Sea. He was but just come to the Cape with an
English Ship; and being sent ashore to fetch in fresh Water, he so contrived
his Business as to get in with our Men, being resolved never to go with the
English again. He was an Hamburgher, a brisk active Fellow: In the hardest of
Weather, he was first and last on the Mast, and extremely serviceable. So that
he got the love of every body, and generally had a larger share of the
Distributions than any of the rest.

Having now sailed about 10 days, we came up to St. Hellens, where the Ships
that are homeward bound from India seldom fail to call; but our Master did not
think fit to put in there, partly because we had already made great stays, and
partly because we needed no Provisions.

In 14 days we found our selves under the Line, and the Sun stood Perpendicular
over our Heads. This was the twelfth time that I passed under it in my Voyages
to and fro. As soon as we came there, our Master commanded a White Flag to be
hung out; which was the usual Token for all the Masters and Steersmen in the
Fleet to come on Board of him. When they were all come together, he opened
their Instructions to them, which were, That contrary to the Custom of the
East India homeward bound Ships, (which was to Steer their Course betwixt
Scotland and Hitland, in their return to Holland) they should now go round
Hitland, and pass betwixt Fero and Filo, and so keep along the Coasts of
Norway, where they should meet with a Squadron of Men of War for their Convoy.
And this was accordingly done. But now being our Voyage was made so much the
longer by these Orders than otherwise it would have been, they began to shorten
each Man's Allowance to make it hold out the better.

All this while we got, (Blessed be God) all safe from under the Line, and were
not above seven days a passing of it. Whereas it is common for Ships to lie
there two or three Months, and cannot stir for want of a Wind, so that what
with the Calm, and the excessive Heat, they loose abundance of their Men: But
we had but five Men sick all that time.

From thence we passed to the Gras-Zee, or Grass-Sea, so called from the Grass
which grows there, so that the Sea appears just like a Meadow, and it looked to
us as if we were already with one Foot upon Land. This held for near 100
Leagues together. We passed through it with a very good Wind, and were very
glad to get out of it, notwithstanding it was a pretty Sight enough. When we
pulled up any of that Grass, we found it had very long small Roots.

Soon after this we came in sight of the Islands Corvo and Flores, and at the
same time of the North-Star. Being got thus far, each Seaman's Allowance began
to increase again. But before this Order was given, the Master sent to Examine
all the Provisions, and had an Account brought him of what quantity there was
left of each particular. He finding there was good store of Arack left, and
that we had had a very quick Passage so far, and the Wind continued so very
fair for us, that it gave us hopes of being quickly at the end of our Voyage,
was willing to let the Men enjoy themselves a little more, and so ordered that
a pretty good share of Arack should be dealt out to every one of 'em. But there
being several that were sick, and could not use their Arack themselves,
disposed of it to those that were well, who having then too much of that strong
Liquor, made themselves exceeding Drunk, and committed a great deal of
Disorder: For though there is very severe Laws on Shipboard, and those are
generally Executed with Rigor, yet such is the Seamen's Temper, that they ever
grow more disorderly and ungovernable as they come nearer home. Wherefore our
Master being a very good honest old Man, resolved to let none have any more,
but those that were in a fit Condition to Drink it themselves; And that this
might be observed punctually, he ordered the Under Steersman to stand by every
day, and to see every body Drink their own Portion: By this means he put a stop
to those Disorders, and prevented a great deal of Mischief.

When we came more and more in sight of the North-Star, we began to be very
cheerful, and fell a Singing of the Hymn,

Hoe Schoon light ons de Morgen-Star.

But by that time we got a little beyond the Island Fero, the Weather began to
seem very Cold to us, though it was in the very middle of the Summer, that we
could not bear to sit above Deck, till we had got some more Clothes on. What
made us so very sensible of Cold was, that we came from so Hot a Country as the
Indies is. Here we observed, That the day was 20 hours long, and that in the
four hours that the Sun was below our Horizon, it still gave so much light on
the one side, or the other of us, that a Man might make shift to Read any Book
of a fair Character any time of the Night, by the help only of that refracted
light.

The next day our Master, and Steersmen, judged that we were not far from
Hitland. Then we saw continually great Flocks of Birds and flying Fish, which
fell down in great numbers in our Ship. So Orders were given to watch on the
Main-top-Mast-Head, and about the Evening one cried out Land. The Mountains
assured us sufficiently that it was Hitland; therefore we bore directly upon it
with a brisk Gale, and no small Joy it was to us, that we were thus happily
drawing apace toward our Country.

Thus we kept sailing all the next day along that Coast, within about a League
from it, and so past it. Quickly after that we spied four Men of War, which we
concluded were our Convoy; and being come something nearer, we perceived them to
be so by their Colors: Upon which, we hung out ours, and fired some Guns for a
Signal. We likewise Hall'd out our Boats to go on Board them, but the Wind
hindered us from doing it. All the while we came nearer and nearer, and the
Convoy having a small Tender with them, they loaded it with Provisions, and
sent it toward us; as it is always the Custom to meet the homeward bound
Ships, and to bring them fresh Victuals, etc. to refresh them after such a long
Voyage. They brought some Vessels of Beer, Sack, Butter, Cheese, Tobacco,
Pipes, and Brandy.

When these things were brought on Board of us; one Vessel of Beer was put on
the one side of the Mainmast, and another on the other side; and those were
free for any body to go to, and Drink at Discretion.

But we did not long Enjoy our selves thus; For as we were just coming to a
pitch of Mirth and Jollity, such a dreadful Wind arose, as we had not met with
any thing like it in our Voyage; and it terrified us so much the more, because
we were near home, where we thought our selves secure, not dreaming of any
farther danger. The night came upon us, and our Ship being very old and crazy,
began to spring several Leaks, so that we were forced to keep continually a
Pumping. The Weather was so cold, the night so dark, and the Wind so very
boisterous, that we were past all hopes, except what we had in God's Gracious
Providence, and to that alone we committed our selves. The morning came, but
gave us but a small Relief, for the Wind was as terrible as before; and so it
pleased God to hold on for four days together without Intermission; at the end
of which, God was pleased to Calm the Wind and Seas, and restore us to our
former Peace and favorable Gales; for which we all heartily offered up our
Thanks to the Almighty.

Here we lost our Upper Steersman, who had been sick most of the Voyage, and we
threw him overboard.

We had after this hard Weather, a pretty good Gale of Wind which brought us
quickly in sight of the Northern Coasts. We sailed then all along by them, and
steered our Course directly upon Holland, reckoning to reach the Maes in three
or four days more. In our Course we met with some Fishermen, who came a-board
of us, and sold us some fresh Herrings. This was to me the greatest Feast I had
had a great while, and I think I never liked any thing better in my life. Among
those Fishermen, there was one, that was as he said, 142 years old; and because
we scrupled to believe him, he showed us an Extract of his Birth out of the
Register-Book: He was as Active at his Business as any of his Fellows.

Shortly after this came a Pilot on Board of us, and by Orders from the
Company, took the Government of the Ship on himself, and dismissed the Master: So
we came to cast Anchor before the Briel. As soon as we had cast Anchor here,
the Deputies of the Company came on Board of us: They are generally two of the
oldest that are Deputed for that purpose. These Gentlemen called all the Ship's
Crew together, and thanked them in the name of all the Company for their
Faithfulness and Diligence in their Service; from which they immediately freed
them, and promised them that they should be paid with speed: After which, every
one was at liberty, and was carried to Shore in some small Ketches that came
for that purpose.

Immediately upon this, came other Seamen on Board the Ship, which they call
Sjouwers. These Furled in all the Sails, and took them down; fired all the Guns
and charged them again. All the Provisions they found remaining was theirs.
Every one of us was forced to leave his Chest on Board, they being all to be
brought to the East India House, and there to be Searched.

The Wound I had received in the Wars of Bantam had of late been a little
uneasy to me; and the two Bullets which were ever since that time in my Leg,
began to be a little troublesome: But now my Pain increased so fast upon me,
that in a very little while after we came to the Briel, I was no more able to
walk at all by my self; but was forced to be carried into a House by a Couple
of our Men. I was sorry I had not a little more time to Ease my self here; but
the rest being ready to go for Rotterdam, I was obliged to be gone along with
them.

Being come to Rotterdam, and having within 3 days time received my Chest back
again, as all the rest likewise had. I was forced to go from thence to
Amsterdam, that being the Chamber where I had engaged my self; and from which I
was to receive my Money. Thither I went partly by Land, and partly by Water;
but either way with so much pain and uneasiness, that all the Hardships I had
undergone in all my Voyages were not to be compared to that: Yet was I full of
Acknowledgement to Almighty God, who had delivered me out of so many Extreme
Dangers to which I had been exposed, from the merciless Sea, fierce and cruel
Serpents and Beasts; and from several Heathens of many Nations more Barbarous
than them all, and had brought me again into a Christian Country. And though I
was not in Health of Body, yet it was an exceeding Comfort to me, to have so
good Opportunities again of making better Provision for my Soul, and to
participate of that Holy Sacrament from which I had been absent during seven
years. Wherefore being in this weak Condition, the chief thing I desired was to
have a Minister, and to receive the Communion. My Landlady helped me to one who
was the Minister of the German Lutheran Church at Amsterdam, from whose Pious
Discourse, and Absolution, together with the Blessed Sacrament, I received an
exceeding great Comfort, and then very cheerfully resigned my self up to the
Almighty's Pleasure. I thanked my Ghostly Father for his Kindness, and made him
a Present of six Ducatoons, some Roses of Jericho, and some China Ware.

My Pain increasing rather than diminishing, and I growing daily worse and
worse, I sent for a Doctor and two Chirurgions, not willing to trust to my own
Skill only. And being I was not able to go and receive my Money my self, I was
obliged to send a Person to the East India Chamber to receive my Money and
Goods, by Virtue of a Letter of Attorney which I gave him. The Money that was
Due to me from the Company did not amount to more than 4 or 500 Ducatoons,
which was all the Fruit of my Labors; except some considerable East India
Goods I had brought over on my own Account, which I had to Sell: But by that
time I had satisfied my Attorney, my Doctor, and the two Chirurgions, and
defrayed the rest of my Charges, I found my Bag very light. My Doctor did not
cost me above Forty Dutch Gilders: The two Chirurgions, who were two of the
most famous Artists in the whole City of Amsterdam, had Eighty Rixdollars; They
had taken out my two Bullets, and cleared the Bone of above Twenty Splinters,
great and small: For my Lodging, I paid TWO Rixdollars a Week, and had but a
very poor Accommodation neither. The Apothecary too came in with a hideous
Bill. In short, I should have been but in a miserable Condition if I had not
had Money: And that went after such a Rate, that in less than Three Months time
I had spent above 300 Ducatoons. However, I began to recover a little, and my
pain was not sharp as before; though I could not go or stand as yet: But as soon
as I was able to stir, I was resolved to continue my Journey, and set out of
this place, and endeavor to get home, whatever befell me. And in order
thereunto I took a Coach to carry me to the Vtrecht-Poort, where I took Boat
for Vtrecht, and from thence went to Nimeguen, and so passed through Cleveland
to Cologne. By that time I was got hither, I was so fatigued, that I was not in
a capacity of moving any further; and therefore I was forced to lie still here
for near three Weeks; during which time, I spent a great deal of Money again,
and was so weak that I had hardly any hopes of ever reaching so far as home;
nor did any Body think I should ever have recovered. But it pleased God to
Bless human Endeavors, so that I recovered a little again; upon which I
immediately got my self carried to the Rhine, and there went on Board a Ship
which carried me to Mentz, and thence to Franckfort. Some Relations and
Gentlemen of my Acquaintance were so kind as to come to meet me before I got
Embarked on the Rhine; but I was not in a Condition to take notice of them.
However, they were so Civil, as to Convoy me along the Shore. When I was come
to Franckfort, I was forced to stay without the City two days before they would
permit me to enter, and the Weather being very Cold, I made but a poor shift in
the Ship all that while: till at length, the Chirurgions came to me, and went
themselves to the Burgher-Master; upon which I was let in to the City that very
night, though late. It being hard to get a Lodging in an Inn at that time of
night, some good Friends of mine carried me to a private House, where some of
my Acquaintance came to Visit me. One of them got me a Coach, which in seven
days time brought me to the place where I so earnestly desired to be, the City
where I was Born. There I found all my Dear Sisters alive and well, who
received me with all the Demonstrations of that sincere Love and Affection they
had for me, and were extremely Serviceable to me.

Thus I finished my Travels, which had taken up Nine whole years: And by the
Faithful Relation which I here give thee of them: Thou may not only see, what
Dangers and Difficulties I have been exposed to in so many various Adventures,
but also thou ought to Admire the wonderful Goodness of God, who so
wonderfully delivers Men, and never forsakes those that put their Trust in him.
And not being able to Praise him sufficiently my self for his great and signal
Mercies to me, I heartily desire that every thing that has Breath may Praise
the Lord.

The End of Mr. Fryke's Voyage.
A RELATION OF A VOYAGE To and Thorough the EAST INDIES, From the Year 1675. to
1683. By Christopher Schewitzer.
CHAP. I.
The Rise of the Dutch East India Company. Many go to the Indies induced by a
foolish hope of growing Rich there. Kidnappers send many thither. The Author's
going off from Amsterdam to the Texel. What Ships were sent out. Ice and hard
Weather detains them some Weeks in the Texel. Orders given in case they meet
and should fight with the French. The Allowance distributed to the Ship's Crew.
They meet with Turkish Pirates. Sentence given on a Criminal. The Equinoctial
Line. Great Mortality under it in the Ships. A Remarkable Accident that befell
the Author. Northern Pirates. The Devil's Mount in Africa Arrival to the Cape
of Good Hope.

IT is about sixty years since some rich Merchants and others in Holland, as at
Amsterdam, Enckhuisen, Rotterdam, Leyden, Delft, Hoorn, Middleburgh, and
Flessinguen, having joined Stocks, made up a Company, Rigged out some Ships,
and Manning them with Officers and Seamen, sent them to the East Indies. They
have from time to time mightily increased their Strength there, and at length
made themselves so powerful, as to wage War, not only against some Kings of
Europe, as of England and Portugal; but to be able also to Curb several Kings
and Emperors of the East Indies. And hereby they are already become much more
Wealthy than some Kings are, and grow every day greater and greater.

The rich Things which several Persons have brought with them out of the
East Indies, the great Booty which several opportunities offer to Men, the just
and exact Pay of those who are employed in the Service of the Company, on the
one side; the desire of seeing strange Countries, and the Customs and Manners
of People, so far distant, on the other, induce many Men to undertake this
Voyage: Besides that, there are many Strangers that come into Holland, who are
drawn in by a sort of Kidnappers, to engage themselves in the Service of the
Company, allured by the hopes of great Profit and Advantage.

These Buyers and Sellers of Men, are People that entice Strangers to their
Houses, if they see they have but little Money, or are in perfect want, or if
they come of themselves through Necessity, receive them, and provide 'em with
Meat, Drink, and Clothes plentifully, till the Ships are ready to go, and the
People Embark; Then each Kidnapper brings his Men, sometimes Ten, Twenty,
Thirty, to the East India House, and there gets them listed. Some days after
this, he receives for each Man, for his Pains and Charge, a Note of a 150
Guldens, and Two Months ready Pay, which the Soldier or Mariner, whatever he
be, must Earn out. And the Note is not paid till it comes to be Due in Monthly
Wages. An Account of what Pay is due to every one is sent every year out of the
Indies to Holland, and may be seen upon the Books there. But if one of these
Men happens to Die in the Voyage, the Kidnapper looses all his Charge; for in
such a case, the Company does not pay him his Note, because it was not workt
out.

These Men, to Entice Strangers to go, make them believe strange Stories of the
Indies, promise them vast Things, and are not ashamed to go so far as to put a
Hammer into their Hands to knock the Diamonds out of the Rocks they shall meet
with. Many of these poor Fellows Ruin themselves Body and Soul, by Marrying
Indians, and running over from the Christians to some Heathenish King, when
they have Habituated themselves to their Customs and Manners: Others meeting
with untimely Deaths, amongst Drinking, or other ill Company, which often
happens: Others committing what Costs them their Life by Sentence of some Court
of Justice. And because these Men trapan that sort of People to go a Voyage
that commonly proves their Destruction, they are generally called,
Ziel-Verkopers or Kopers, that is Soul-Buyers or Sellers.

I for my own part was forced, for want of Money, to be some Weeks at one of
these Jack-Call's Houses for Entertainment, paying a 170 Guldens, the two
Month's ready Pay being reckoned in; and I was accepted by the East India
Company on the 15th of November 1675. as a Volunteer, and was made Steward of
the Ship called Asia: My Pay was 20 Guldens per Month of Dutch Money; and I was
to serve them five years in the Indies.

Upon these Conditions, I, with several others, went off from Amsterdam in a
little Smack to the Texel, on the first of December 1675. There the Fleet lay
that was ordered to go to the East Indies, which consisted of Five Ships, viz.
the Asia Admiral, the Macassar Vice Admiral, the Vtrecht, the Cortgeene, the
Tidor: We saw besides, a great many English and Dutch Men of War and
Merchantmen, that staid for a good Wind.

The 2d of December, I Embarkt on Board the Asia, together with several others,
engaged in the same Service.

The 3d Ditto, The Dutch Gentlemen that were Owners came on Board of us, with a
very rich little Yatcht, wished us a good Voyage, and took their leaves of us.

The 4th there came a Muster-Master, to see if all those that belonged to the
Ship were in it. There was in ours, the Chief Merchant, the Master, the
Chaplain of the Reformed Religion, with his Wife and four Children, four
Steersmen, one Book-keeper, five Barbers and Chirurgions, two Mates, two
Stewards, two Cooks, two Gunners, four Carpenters, three Coopers, two
Sail-Makers, two Quarter Masters, one Sergeant, two Corporals, two
Under-Corporals, 150 Soldiers, and 93 Foremast-Men, nine Boys to Swab the Ship
every day, and one Boatswain; the whole number was 297 men. The Muster-Master
having taken a view of all, wished us a good Voyage and a good Wind.

The 5th, The Wind blew very strong at North-West, so that we were obliged to
drop four Anchors at one time, of which each weighed 36 hundred Pound.

The 12th of January 1676. The greatest Trouble we had was caused by the Ice
that came against us in great Flakes from the North, and encompassed us on
every side, striking continually against our Ship, and did our Cables a great
deal of Damage. Therefore our Officers having consulted what to do, resolved,
That if the Wind did not change in three days, we should leave Ship and Goods,
and go back to Amsterdam, with the light Vessels; that the Men as well as Ships
might not perish, as it happened 15 years ago, when 15 foundered about the same
place.

The 13th Ditto, At Eleven a Clock at Night the Wind changed and blew very fair
for us at S. E. upon which a Gun was fired from our Admiral, all the Ships in
the Fleet being to be governed by it, and was a Signal that every one was to
weigh Anchor, and make ready to Sail.

The 14th, early in the morning, sailed first the Admiral, with Flags and
Pendants on the Mainmast; after him the Vice Admiral, with a Flag on the
Foremast; and then the Vtrecht, with a Flag on his Mizen-mast, and then the
other common Ships.

The 15th, An English Fisherman came to us, and gave us Information that there
were 16 Frenchmen of War cruising near Calais, with two Privateers and two
Fireships laying wait for our Fleet. We sent out immediately a Yatch for true
Intelligence, which came back to us on the 16th, and brought us word, that the
Enemy was making up to us. Then we fell back to the Rode of Duyns, and lay
under the Cannon of that place, while we prepared our selves for Fight, and to
Consult what we were to do: Upon this we had these following Orders agreed on.

I. That all Captains, Seamen, and Officers, should carefully observe what
Signals and Commands were given by the Admiral, and Obey them punctually.

II. That as soon as the Enemy came in sight of us, we should draw into the
Form of a Half Moon.

III. That if we should happen to find a strange Ship fallen in amongst our
Fleet, we should give the other Ships notice of it by firing off three of our
Demy-Cannon.

IV. In case a Ship should be ready to sink, it should give notice of it by
hanging a Lanthorn on the Foremast, if it were night; or by hanging out a
yellow Flag, if it were day.

V. Being the Admiral upon Pain of Death, must not yield himself, nor his Ship,
into the Enemies Hand; the Vice Admiral was (in case of a Fight) to be nigh,
and second him.

VI. The Admiral was to put up two bright Lanthorns, and the other Ships but
one, that they might distinguish and follow the Admiral.

VII. Upon all Occasions, the Officers and common Soldiers were to behave
themselves briskly and honestly, and to observe very strictly, these and all
other Articles relating to the Fleet, upon their Peril.

The 17th, We lay still, and a French Privateer came up the English Road, and
passed by our Fleet, narrowly viewing it, and struck in to Sea again.

The 18th instant, in the morning, Our Admiral shot off one piece, and hung up
a Blue-Flag for a Signal to hoist up Sail, which was done accordingly, with
many discharges of our Cannon in Honor to his Royal Majesty the King of
England, which were answered from Dover-Castle.

The 19th, We saw the French Fleet about a League distance from us, but when
they saw that we were so strong, they did not dare to fall upon us, but made
home to Calais.

On the 20th, We lost sight of England and France. The Sea that lies between
them two is called the Channel, and is 96 miles long. After this we came into
the Sea of Spain. The Water there looks extremely blue by reason of its being
so vastly deep. About Noon, the Admiral sets up a white Flag, and fires a Gun,
to give notice to all the Captains, Masters, and Stewards, belonging to the
Fleet, to come aboard his Ship, which they did; and whilst he treated them, and
all were mighty merry, the danger of the French coming upon them being over,
the Macassar fell foul on our Ship, and gave us a terrible shake. The Macassar
got a great Hole in her side by it, but it was easily stopped again. Toward
Evening, our Guests went to their respective Ships, and the Cannon kept firing
all the Night.

The 21th in the morning early, The Ships, that till then kept together,
parted, each taking their several Course to the Places they were Bound for.
Some went to the West Indies, others to Smirna, Spain, Italy, and Portugal. We
that were bound to the East Indies, being five Ships, kept on to the
South-West, having a very good Wind at N. N. E.

The 22th, Our Men aboard the Asia were divided into two parts; the one called
the Prince's, the other Count Maurice's Quarter, one of these Quarters was to
watch by turns four hours a piece at Night; when the Watch on the one side
wanted to be relieved by some body of the other, two Men sung a Song to awake
them.

In the Evening of this day, The Rantsoen (as we call it) began, that is, we
came to a set Allowance, which was, to every Person three Pound of Biscuit a
Week, half a Pint of Vinegar, a quarter of a Pint of Lisbon Sallad-Oil, and
every day a Gill of Brandy: On some days we had Stock Fish and Pease boiled in
Water, upon which we used to pour a little Oil and Vinegar: But the next
morning we had a Wooden-Dish full of boiled Barley allowed to every seven Men.
On Sundays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays, our Dinners was Pork, or other Flesh.

From the 23th of January to the 24th of February, nothing remarkable happened,
except that the cold Weather had quite left us; And we saw the Fish sometimes
driving one another to and fro, and particularly the flying Fish, about the
bigness of a Herring, always in fear of being devoured. The longest Flights
they could take was about a Musketshot, and then they were forced to light on
the Water to wet their Wings again: By this Flight they escape indeed from
their greatest Enemies, the Dolphins and the Porpoises; but then they often
become the Prey of Sea-Birds, called Boobys: Here we saw Birds and Fishes
flying together.

The 25th of February we saw Pico de Canaria, or the Canarie Mountain: We
steered our Course thither, and came pretty near it by the next day; and then
we found that we were 20 Leagues off when we first discovered it. Otherwise,
upon a smooth Sea, we could not see farther than five Leagues in a straight
Line. This difference happens from the extraordinary height of the Hill above
the surface of the Water.

The 26th, 27th, and 28th Ditto, we had good Weather.

The 1st of March, early in the morning, We spied two Ships with Dutch Flags
and Pendants, that were Roving about; but we would not trust them, for we knew
the Turkish Pirates used to Lurk about this Mountain of the Canaries, or the
Southern Islands. After a Council of War held, our Admiral, about Noon sailed
foremost to take better notice of them, and he quickly found them to be what we
suspected.

We were not the only one who made our selves ready for a Fight, but our four
Ships that came after, at about a League distance, did the like, and gave us
notice by an appointed Signal, that they were prepared. We expected them, and
toward the Evening, the Enemy came somewhat nearer to us, yet not within shot;
all that Night we kept a very strict Watch.

The 2d Ditto, very early in the morning, the Wind blew hard at North-West, by
which means we lost sight of the Turkish Ships about Twelve at Noon; and about
the Evening it ceased.

The 3d, we made vast way with a good Wind, and about four hours after we spied
a Ship, and found by her running she was one of the Turks we had seen the day
before; our Master being a very brisk Sea-Soldier, (his Name Peter Vander
Woetstiin) found that he could not possibly outsail this Pyrate; so he lowered
his Sails and staid for him, as much as to say, that he did not fear him. The
Turk sailed by us with his Dutch Flag up, as near and swift as he could: He
pretended to be a Friend of ours, and set a Renegado to Hail us, and ask us in
Dutch, What Ship? And whither Bound? Our Master ordered the Gunner to fire, and
the Men fired so briskly with the lower Tire, and battered the Mohammedan so
sorely, that they made all the haste they could to get away, and found work
enough to mend the Holes our Guns had made.

The 4th in the morning, about 7 of the Clock, this Turk, battered as he was,
came up to us again; his Design was to clap us on board, and to Storm us. We
having a sufficient Force on Board, defended our selves so bravely, that the
Enemy was obliged to run again at night with no small loss. On our side, we had
Twelve killed and Twenty wounded, Soldiers and Seamen: The wounded were all
cured. In the mean while, the Carpenters were employed in Repairing what Damage
the Enemies Shot had done us, and stopping the Holes.

The 5th Ditto, Our Chaplain Preached a Thanksgiving Sermon for the Assistance
God was pleased to give them, delivering them through his Mercy out of the
Hands of those Cruel Tyrants: And after that, our Master and Admiral thanked
his People for the help they had given him with so much Gallantry; and ordered
a Bottle of Sack for every Man.

From the 6th to the 24th of March, we had very blustering Winds, and a
dreadful violent Storm, so that we often thought our selves at the very brink
of Death.

The 25th, While that Tempestuous Weather still lasted, the Mate and his Boy
were caught together acting the abominable Sin of Sodomy: A Council was held
upon it, and Sentence was given that they should be tied back to back, (which
was done by the Boatswain), and tied in a Sack, and thrown alive into the Sea.
As the Minister was doing his Duty toward these Malefactors, representing to
them the hainousness of their Crime, and directing them to prepare for Death,
the Boy, about 14 years of Age, wept bitterly; But the Mate, being an Italian,
about 40 years old, showed himself mighty ready to Die, saying; 'Twas better he
should be punished alone for his horrid Sin, then that the whole Ship should
suffer for his sake.

The 26th, the Wind ceased; But we hardly knew where we were, nor had known it
for 20 days time, having not been able to make an Observation since the 6th
day: And,

On the 27th, it being very fine Weather, we found that the Storm had carried.
us under the Equinoctial Line. Here it is extreme unhealthy, and a certain
Distemper seized most of our Men, which made them raving mad: In one day five
Persons died, one of which was our Chaplain, the other four Soldiers. These
Dead Men, were (according to the Custom of our Dutch Ships) sewed, each Corpse
by it self, in a sheet, and after our usual Morning or Evening Prayer, (with a
Psalm sung at the end of it) thrown into the Sea.

The 28th, we had no Wind: On this day, one of our Barbers, and two Seamen
died; and two Soldiers, in their raving Fit, (caused by the intolerable Heat)
leapt into the Sea; which two of our best Swimmers perceiving, leaped in after
them, and brought 'em into the Ship again: But one of 'em after all this,
hanged himself that very Night by his Bedside.

On the 29th, The other Soldier that had leapt in the Sea, died, having no
regard to any good Advice that was given him, and could not be made to Pray. We
had not a Breath of Wind this day, nor

The 30th and 31th: These two days we threw overboard our late Chaplain's 4
Children, 4 Chirurgions and Barbers, a Carpenter, and 10 Soldiers.

The 1st, 2d, 3d, and 4th of April, the Calm held us still; And in those four
days we lost a Steersman, two Carpenters, the Sergeant, and 30 Soldiers and
Seamen; so that we expected every Soul should Die out of the Ship.

The 5th Ditto, it pleased God to deliver us from that fatal place by a
favorable Wind at West and by-South. We had still a great many sick Men, and
not enough in health to be able to Brace our Main-Sail, though the Mortality
ceased; so we were forced to make shift with our small Sails. That day we
caught with a Hook one of the great Fishes called Sharks, that rolled and
tossed about our Ship. We designed to dress him, and refresh our selves with
it; but when we cut it open, we found in the Belly of it our Sergeant that we
had thrown overboard, not yet digested. The sight of this so turned our
Stomachs, that none could find in their Heart to Eat of the Fish; so that we
threw Man and Fish into the Sea again. It is observable, That these great Fish
have always some small ones to go before 'em, that are called by the name of
Pilot-Fishes, and swim in and out of the Shark's Mouth. And when a Shark is
caught, they cleave to his Back like a Burr.

But I must not omit what happened to my self. As I fell Ill and was in a
Swoun, he that looked after the sick, took me for Dead, and fetched a new Shirt
out of my Chest, and was putting it upon me; The Sail-maker too was a going to
sew me up; and he handling me a little roughly, after all his pushing and
tossing of me, I opened my Eyes: Those that were about me were not a little
startled; and said, it was high time for me to open 'em; for if I had winck'd
but a little longer, over I had gone. Our chief Merchant gave me a Glass of
Sack, which refreshed me very much.

From the 6th to the 18th of April, we had a very fair Wind and good Weather.
In that time we saw some of the Northern Capers, and a great many Whales, which
kept us Company till we came on

The 20th, within sight of the Devil's Mount in Africa, which is very
remarkable for its height.

The 22th, We came happily into the Road near the Land called, Capo de Bonne
Esperance, or the Cape of Good Hope. And here we met again with two of our
Ships, Cortgeene and Tidor, which had been parted from us, and we had not seen,
since the 2d of March. They gave us an Account, That they had been busy with
the Turkish Privateers that fell upon us, and that they had wetted their Feet;
which was, that they had sunk 'em. However, They took up 36 of their Men that
could Swim best, and brought them along with them. This News gave us a great
deal of Joy. The Prisoners we sent hence immediately to the Robin-Island, to
gather Mussel-shells, and others, for the burning of Lime.

CHAP. II.
The Cape, how far from Amsterdam. Fruitfulness of that Country. Its fullness
of Inhabitants, called Hottentots, their Customs and Manners. Its Wealth. Their
going off from the Cape. The day of Humiliation kept in the Fleet. A certain
Merchant's son falls into the Sea and is drowned. Two more drowned. Their
allowance lessned. Arrival at Iava Major. The Road of Sunda: Bantam. A Man
swallowed up by a Crocodile. Arrival at Batavia. Description of its Fort, with
sour Bastions. Custom of the Chinese's there, when one of them dies. What
Heathens live at Batavia. Amboineses great Conjurers. The best Soldiers sent to
quell the Inhabitants of Jappara. The Dutch land, but are beaten. A remarkable
Accident. Ships arrive from Holland to Batavia. Account of the troublesome
Voyage of one of 'em. A Pelican of a Purple color. A strange Bird called a
Casswari. Great Execution of Malefactors. A Crocodile 22 foot long, caught. A
Hunts-man tore in pieces by a Tiger. A wonderful Leap given by a Man. Twelve of
the Here Spelman's Slaves that were run away brought back and broke upon the
Wheel: How that is done at Batavia. The Square in Batavia, why so called, and
by whom built. By what means the Dutch took Batavia from the English. A very
Comical thing that happened by one of the Casswari-Birds, that were kept in the
Fort of Batavia. A strange Accident between a Peacock and an old Chinese that
had game'd away all his Money and Goods. The manner of living of the Chinese
at Batavia. The Rich Chinese.

THE 23th of April, early in the morning, I went on Shore of Africa with our
Admiral: From this place to Amsterdam they reckon usually 2000 miles. At this
Cape we lay still nine days, and in that time provided our selves with Water,
Wood, and other Necessaries. As to the Qualities of this Land, by what
Observation I could make of it, I found it to be: First Fruitful; And for that
Reason, our East India Company has caused some years ago, many very strong
Places to be Built there by the Waterside, close under the Duyvel's-bergh,
Lewen-bergh, and Tafel-bergh, well stored with Soldiers, and all things
necessary, and are sufficiently provided against the Incursions of the
Wild-Men; so that their Ships going to and from the Indies, may safely, and
without any danger, put in there at any time, and take in Provisions, whether
it be of Cattle, Water, Wood, or other Refreshments. And here are already a
great many Boors that are come from Holland, and by reason of the great
Privileges that are granted them, have settled there, and have Tilled the Land
and made it very fruitful, for a matter of 20 or 30 miles round about those
Places. Secondly, Very populous: The Inhabitants are called wild Africans, or
Hottentots. Their Color is like that of the Egyptian Heathens, or as we call
them corruptly, Gypsies. The Hair of their Head grows entangled in one another,
like the Wool of a young Lamb; upon which they hang for Ornament all manner of
Sea-shells. They are of a middle stature, and well proportioned, only that they
have their Noses a little too flat and broad.

They wear no manner of Clothes, only a Sheeps-skin or Calf-skin on their
Shoulders, (and that is besmeared with Grease to make it soft and pliant) when
it is a little Cold, or when it Rains. They wear the Tail of a Fox, or of a
wild Dog hanging before their Privy-Parts. The Women among these Hottentots
have a different Ornament from the Men, which is the Gutts of their Cattle
fresh killed. These they wrap about their Legs, not minding the inconveniency
it puts 'em to, which is such, that they can hardly go, and they leave 'em
there till they are quite dry.

I had oftentimes been told, that these Women had naturally a little kind of a
Flap growing over their Privities, like that of a Turkey-Cock's Bill, which I
had a mind to see if it were true; but upon Examination, I found nothing of
Truth in it. My Experience cost me only some Tobacco.

These People have a very strange Speech, and make such a disagreeable Noise
with their Mouth, as other Nations cannot imitate; but a great many of them
that live near to the Cape of Good Hope can speak some Dutch. They have no
manner of Religion, Prayers, or Laws, only they Worship the Moon. The first
time that they see it; they spend that whole Night in Dancing, Singing, and
Bawling Ha, ha, ha, ha. They do not at all trouble themselves with Building or
Planting: So that they have no constant abode, but move from place to place
with their Children and Wives, where they can find Pasture for their Cattle.
They Eat all sorts of Fruits and Roots that grow either above or underground.
They make no difference, whether their Meat is killed, or dead with any
Distemper, or whether it be Man's Flesh: Whatever it be, they throw it upon
some Coals, leave it there a little while, and so Eat it.

They lie in small Hutts or Holes, every one with his Wife. If any of the Women
have two Children at one Birth, they kill the weakest, that the other may have
the Breasts to himself, and grow stronger and lustier. As soon as the Boys come
to be about Twelve years of Age, they cut off his right Testicle, that he may
be the fitter for Running.

They have some Kings amongst them, and a great many Captains, and have cruel
Wars between one another. They shoot Darts, and are excellent at hitting a Mark
with a Stone. The Women too will come in often and carry their Husband's Arms:
If they take any of their Enemies, they kill 'em and eat 'em with great Joy and
Satisfaction. And in the same manner they use the Europeans too, (who come
often to Truck a little Tobacco or Bracelets, for a good parcel of Cows and
Sheep) if they can get them into their Hutts.

Thirdly, Rich. They have all manner of wild Beasts. For here are the furious
Lions, which regard no Man, and when Hungry, fall upon Men and Beasts and
Devour them. The Grinning Tigers. The vast Elephant for Bulk and Strength. The
Angry Rhinoceros. The skipping and clambering Ape: Besides, Wild Dogs, Bears,
Wolves, and wonderful fine Wild Asses, all in great numbers; As also Ostriches,
which have indeed Feathers and Wings, but cannot Fly by reason of their bigness
and weight. Their Eggs are hatched of themselves, and not (as some misinformed
Persons have given an account of it) by their continual looking after 'em.
Sea-Cows, that lie in the fresh Rivers all day, and at night come on Shore to
feed: Their Flesh is better than that of Swine. Stag and Deer, Wild-Boars,
Partridges, Peacocks, Geese, Wild-Ducks, and other sort of Poultry, too long to
give an Account of, all which are here very plentiful.

The 1st of May, toward Night, the Asia, Tidor, and Cortgeene, put off
together to go forwards, and continue our Course (with the help of God) to
Batavia.

The 2d we had a General Day of Humiliation in our three Ships. For though we
were now out of Danger of Sea-Robbers, we were not so from Storms and Tempests,
and other fatal Accidents.

The 3d, The Wind blew very hard at N. W. though it was Serviceable for us to set
us forward.

The 14th, The Wind grew higher still: And in the Afternoon, a Merchant's Son
of Franckfort, Morel by Name, going, (as it was usual) to the forepart of the
Ship to Ease Nature, fell into the Sea; and all our Endeavors to help him were
in vain, by reason of the boisterousness of the Waves, and our swift Sailing:
That same day the two Ships of our Company, the Tidor and Cortgeene, parted
from us.

From the 5th to the 10th the same Wind lasted.

The 11th, We felt it very Cold.

The 12th, We had a mixture of Hail and Snow, and two of our Seamen fell in and
were drowned.

The 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th Ditto, We hoisted up
but one Sail, and ran very swift, the Wind blowing almost a Storm, and made
commonly 70 miles, or more, in 24 hours.

The 21th, We reached the Altitude of the Island St. Maurice. This Island was
not long since Invaded by the Dutch East India Company, before which time it
was not Inhabited. It is fruitful, and has great store of Wild-Deer; It
produces Amber-Greese, Ebony, and other fine Woods.

The 22th, A Seaman of ours fell unluckily from the Mainmast upon one of our
great Anchors, and from thence into the Sea, and sunk immediately, his Breath
being gone with his first fall.

The 23th, We came again into a warm Climate, and we had a very favorable Wind
to the end of this month.

The first of June it was very still, but very Rainy Weather.

The 2d, Our usual Allowance of Flesh, Bread, and Beer, was lessened, which did
not please most of us very well.

From the 3d to the 20th, We had nothing remarkable, save that we suffered in
some measure both Hunger and Thirst, though that contributed much to our Health,
according to the Proverb, which says, That Hungry Men will not over-sleep
themselves; and much Sleep being unhealthy, the sharpness of our Stomachs would
keep us from any such Indisposition.

The 21th, Our Master promised Twelve Crowns to any one that should discover
Land, upon which we all looked about us very sharp, and kept very strict Watch,
taking great notice what Color the Water was of, by which we often have notice
that we draw near the Land; in the mean while we were busy with getting of our
Anchors ready.

The 22th, in the morning, One that stood on the top of the Mainmast, cried
out, Land, and being asked which way he spied it, he answered, Directly in the
East, and that it was a high Land. This was about Sunrising, and about Noon we
found that he had not been mistaken; for it was the very Land which we were to
go to, viz. Java Major, or Great Java; This occasioned a very great Rejoicing,
for now we had Bread and Water allowed in abundance.

The 23th, We came into the Road of Sunda, which is about 36 miles long: Here
we were obliged, by reason of the Calm, and the fierceness of the Tide against
us, to cast out our Anchor. While we lay there, some of the Inhabitants of Java
came to visit us, and brought us all manner of Indian Fruits; such as King's
Apples, Mellons, Figs, Citrons, Bananas, Sugar, Rice, and other-like things;
all which Refreshments we had of them in exchange for old Iron and Tobacco.
They came in little Boats, but oddly made, and very ill put together, but they
sail very fast with 'em.

The 24th, Two of them were sent over to us out of Bantam, laden with Fruit
from Java, Ducks, Goats, etc. This day we made some of our way with a good
Wind, but toward the Evening we cast Anchor, the Wind being changed.

The 25th, in the morning, betwixt 9 and 10 a Clock, we saw at the right Hand
of us, the Royal City Bantam; In the afternoon, about 4 a Clock, we came into
the Road before Batavia: Our Cabin-Boy swimming very well, and having a mind to
refresh himself in that Water, was unexpectedly caught and devoured by a
Crocodile.

The 26th, in the morning, We were fetched to Shore in a small Skiff to
Batavia, to our great Joy: Thus we did (by God's Assistance) complete this
great Voyage from Amsterdam to Batavia, in five months and 12 days, and in less
than 24 weeks, made 3636 miles.

The 27th, Came in the Tydor and Cortgeene, which came out with us from the
Cape of Good Hope, and which had not been seen since the third day after that
until now. This made them all very glad in Batavia.

This day at night, all the Soldiers that were sent here from Holland, were
brought, well Armed and in good Order, before the Dutch General there, called
Maetzuycker: He welcomed them; and after that, the Officers divided them, and
sent them, some into the City, and some into the Fort. I went to see the
Fortification: It has four Bastions, viz. First, the Diamond, where a Major,
with 40 or 50 Soldiers keep constantly; Secondly, The Ruby, kept by a Captain,
and as many Men; Thirdly, The Sapphire, which is commanded by a Sergeant; And
Fourthly, The Pearl, commanded also by a Sergeant.

The 28th, 29th, and 30th, We had three days liberty to go up and down, in and
out of the City; and here we much wondered to see the Chinese, (of which
several live here upon the account of their great Trade) carry Meat and Drink
to those that are Buried in the Churchyard, in Vessels of fine China,
lamenting, and asking them, Why they Died, and what they wanted; and telling
them, it was unkind not to let their Friends know of it; But the Dead there, as
well as here, are very silent. This good Cheer of theirs is generally carried
off by the Dutch Soldiers and Seamen, who Feast themselves with it, when they
have Game'd away their Money, or otherways spent it. Besides these Chinese,
there are several other East-Indians, and other Heathens, that live at Batavia,
and drive a great Trade there. They are all obliged to join together in the
common Defense of the City, in case of Necessity; chiefly the Javans, the
proper Inhabitants of this Island: They are very Tawny, and wear only a Girdle
about their middle, of fine Linen, or Silk: They are Circumcised as the Turks:
Some of them Worship an Image with a Lion's Head, the Sun, and the Moon, etc.

Beside Amboineses, Tarnatans, Malleyers, Machassers, and other-like Nations,
each of these have their Kings; are very skillful with Weapons, which are Bows,
Arrows, Javelins, Spears, and Poisoned Darts. When they go into the Field, they
adorn their Bucklers with a great deal of finery, wearing on their Head a very
fine Bird, called the Bird of Paradise, which is found in Amboyna, about 500
miles from Batavia. Their warlike Music is an Instrument made of Mettle,
called Gum-Gum, much in the Nature of our Drums; It makes a greater noise than
a good large Bell. The Amboyneses are great Necromancers; and from hence it is
said, Doctor Faustus got his Master, and was carried thither through the Air
riding upon a Cloak.

From the 1st of July to the 9th, We were daily exercised in the handling of
the Musket and Pike, etc.

The 10th, Some of the stoutest and briskest of all our Men were picked out and
sent,

The 11th, Under the Command of Major Poolman a Brandenburger, Captain Harzing,
Captain Roodbol, Captain St. Martini a Frenchman, and Captain Dack, each with
his Company, and Embarked in one Ship to go to Japara to quell the Insurrection
there, and to help the King of Bantam against the Inhabitants.

The 12th, Our Seamen too, belonging to our five Ships were divided into
Companies, and provided with Hand-Granadoes, sharp Cutlaces, Pikes, Bills, and
other Weapons useful in War: Their Officers were the Master as Captain, the
Mate was made Lieutenant, the Boatswain a Sergeant, and the Quartermasters
Corporals.

The 13th and 14th, We past by Bantam, and afwards by Toppers-hoedie, and the
Prince's Island.

The 15th, We saw our Enemies in an innumerable quantity of little Skiffs. They
had notice of our approach, and designed to keep us from their Wall; so they
came to meet us, and quite surrounded our Ship: Their intent was to get on
Board, then Storm, and Rob us. All this while, our Granadiers and Soldiers were
employed, and fought so briskly, that that day we destroyed about 1100 of their
Skiffs, little and great. We had but few of our Men killed, but many wounded.
We could not tell the number of the Enemy that was slain; for supposing there
were as many of their Boats sunk, as I said even now, the number of the Men is
uncertain, for they hold according to their bigness from 6 to 30 Persons. And
besides, As their Boats sunk, abundance of them were Swimming to Land, like so
many Water-Spaniels for about a mile's space, and so saved their lives. Our
Booty was but small; for the Indians had nothing about them but Provision and
Arms, the best part of which fell into the Sea.

The 16th, early in the morning, We were put ashore all together to pursue the
Enemy, whilst they were still terrified with their late loss. We expected to
make an easy work of it, but they understood, and we found it, otherwise. They
fell upon us like Mad-Dogs, in vast numbers, and of all sides. The Opium that
they use to take always before they engage, had made 'em stark Mad; so that
they killed the flower of our Officers, and 150 private Soldiers: And at last,
the rest of us were forced to Flee and Swim for our Lives to get into our Ship.

The 17th, All our sick and wounded were put into a Ship, and sent to the
Hospital in Batavia; And a Letter sent to the General, and the Council, to
acquaint them, that we wanted a sresh Assistance and Recruits to go on in our
Enterprise.

The 18th, We sent out a large Boat, with a Lieutenant, and Soldiers and some
Seamen, to go ashore and view the place, and give us Intelligence; but the
Enemy fell upon them, and slew every one of them, except one Seaman; who,

On the 19th, came swimming to our Ship very quick, having the stream with him.
He gave us an account, how they were fell upon by four Boats full of those
Japarians, who killed all his Companions; and as for his own safety, he had
made his way through 'em with a great lighted stick of Wood, that he snatched up
from under a Kettle, and with that kept them at such a distance who were half
Naked, that he had room and time to throw himself into the Water to Swim for
his Life, though they continually shot at him with their Arrows. Our Master
ordered him immediately a Glass of Sack to refresh him, for he was sadly
weakened, having been almost a day and a night in the Water.

The 20th, After a Council held, Letters were written to the General
Maetzuycker, in Batavia; and I was one of those that were ordered to go with
them.

We sailed all the 21th, 22th, and 23th, and arrived happily at Batavia on the
24th, and delivered our Message and Letters.

The 25th, An Advice-Boat was sent with a Letter to the Fleet at Jappara, to
order them to come all back to Batavia.

The 26th, A new Ship from Holland arrived here, and brought us an Account,
That they had been 9 months a coming, and that 18 of their Men died in their
Voyage.

The 27th, Came another Ship in, which the Hollanders had given over for lost,
having been gone from Zealand above 18 months, and they had no News of it all
that while. The Master of it told me, They had undergone a great deal of
Hardship; (which one might easily see by the Ship and her Crew.) Amongst other
things, he told us, That they had been driven so far Southward by a continual
Storm, that their Compass did 'em no more Service, the Needle turning from one
side to the other irregularly. At last, they had discovered in the night, a
high Land, which appeared to them like Fire; but they turned their Backs to it,
and sailed so long, till they came at last by mere good Fortune, to get the use
of their Compass again.

The 28th, A Ship came from Malacca to Batavia, which brought a great many
Spiauters and Pellicans of a Purple Color, as also a Casswari: This is a great
Bird that has no Feathers on his Body, but Hair, like Hog's Bristles. It will
Eat red-hot Coals, Tobacco-Pipes, Iron, and leaden Bullets; but does not Digest
any of 'em: It has no Tongue, but makes a Noise as Shrill as that of a little
Gosling. Of this Bird we shall take an occasion to tell you a very pleasant
Story by and by.

The 29th, Four Seamen were publicly Beheaded at Batavia, (which is here the
common Death of Criminals) for having killed a Chinese. At the same time, six
Slaves that had Murdered their Master in the night, were broke upon the Wheel.
A Mulatto (as they call those that are begotten betwixt a Black-a-Moor and a
White) was Hanged for Theft. Eight other Seamen were Whipped for Stealing, and
running away, and were besides this, Burnt on the Shoulder with the Arms of the
East India Company. Two Dutch Soldiers that had absented themselves from the
Guard two days, ran the Gauntlet. A Dutch Schoolmaster's Wife that was caught a
Bed with another Man, (it being her frequent Practice) was put in the Pillory,
and Condemned to 12 years Imprisonment in the Spinhuys.

During the time of Execution, the Gates of the Fort, and of the City, were
shut up, and all the Garrison in Arms.

The 30th, Came 32 Javans, with a Crocodile, 22 Foot long, which they had
caught with a great Crook, and brought into the Fort to show it to the General,
who having taken a view of it, gave the Fellows that brought it 6 Rixdollars
for their Pains: So they carried it away again.

The 31th, A Javan came into Batavia, and gave an Account of the General's
Huntsman's being fallen upon by a Tiger, and torn in pieces by him.

The 1st, 2d, and 3d of August, The Dutch Burgers and Soldiers, as also the
Indian Inhabitants of Batavia, drew up in the Galge-Veldt, each by themselves,
and made a very fine show. Many of the Indians here showed their Activity in
Leaping, and in exercising their Arms, viz. Shields, Bows, Arrows, and Pikes.
The most remarkable Leaper amongst them all, was one Captain Joncker, who Leapt
cleverly over a Dutch-Trooper, that was mounted on a Persian Horse. We
Hollanders were Posted, (about the House where our General and the Lords of the
Council of the Indies were, with their Wives and Children) with four Companies
under Arms, ready in case the Indians (who were in great numbers) should
attempt to Rise or make a Rebellion. This show was made to entertain the Here
Rycloff Van Goens, a Dutch Admiral, that was newly come over, and was then one
of the Lords of the Council, and a short time after was made General.

The 4th, Twelve Slaves of the Here Speelman's one of the Council of India, run
away; they had taken a Boat and got to Bantam. The Muster-master of Batavia,
went with six Servants, all Guinea-Gaffers, well provided with Cutlaces and
other Arms, in a Yatch in pursuit of 'em. They soon met with them, but the
Slaves so well defended themselves, that they killed the Mustermaster and all
his Company; and went on to Bantam: where they thought themselves very safe,
but to their Grief, they found themselves mistaken; for as soon as they Landed,
they were known to be Fugitive Slaves, and seized and sent back.

On the 7th, All the Twelve were broke upon the Wheel in the place called the
Galge-Veldt. The manner of doing it is thus: There are four Posts drove into
the Ground, and stand out about two foot: To these they Tie the Malefactor's
Hands and Feet; Then comes the Executioner with a Bar of Iron, and breaks his
Limbs one after the other, and at last gives him one Blow on the Breast.

The 8th, A Seaman was found in the Square, (the Dutch call it the Vierkant)
cut most dreadfully with a Knife. This Square is a very large place, and is so
called, because it has four Angles. It was built by the English about 60 years
ago. Afterward the Dutch got it from 'em, by this means, (as I am informed.)
Some Dutch Ships came close to this Square; Their Admiral begged the favor of
the English Governor, that he might be permitted to bring in his Men, (who
were very sick with their long Voyage) for recovery of their Health and for
Refreshment; which the English Governor generously granted out of Pity and
Compassion. The Dutch sent two Boats full of their best and stoutest Men, armed
privately with such Weapons as might not be discovered, as Swords, Knives, and
Pistols, and with a feigned groaning and grunting, were let in at the
Watergate; and being got in, fell upon the English, and slew one part of 'em,
and took the other Prisoners, and plundered all their Goods. (vid. Van Hesse 's
Account of the taking of Batavia in his Voyage.) Since that time, the City and
Fort was built by the Dutch, who have now made it so strong both within and
without, with Walls and Ditches, (which never are frozen up by reason there is
no Winter here) that the place is inaccessible, and is able to resist all their
East-Indian Enemies. The Fort, with the 4 Bastions, (which I have given an
Account of already) commands all the Streets of the City, the Square, the
Watergate, and the Road where the Ships lie.

The 9th, Our Armourer sent Orders to all the Guards, That those who wanted
Musket-Balls should come to the usual place at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon,
(after they had been Exercised,) and fetch 'em. He sent out beforehand, a Box
full of 'em by two of his Slaves from the Storehouse, and bid them set it down
in the great Court. A while after, coming to give 'em out, he found his Box
empty. He runs immediately to our Captain, and complains, That the Soldiers had
stole away the Bullets: The Captain sets him Sentinel for his Negligence; and
then had all the Soldiers searched: But on

The 10th, They found out that the Casswari Birds (of which we have made
mention above) that run all about the Fort, had swallowed all the Bullets, and
dropped them here and there, as they wandered about, whole and undigested. Our
Armourer was forced for his Carelessness, to go all over the Fort to pick up
the Bullets that were fallen, and to hunt the Birds about to make them restore
the rest.

The 11th, As an old Chinese was coming along the said Fort, with two Vessels
of Milk to sell; a Peacock that belonged to the General, seeing him, flew up
upon his Head, and had certainly picked out his Eyes had it not been for some
Slaves that beat him off. This old Chinese had once been the richest Man in
Batavia, and worth some Tuns of Gold, which he had played away at Dice, and
lost the very Hair of his Head which was his last Stake.

The 12th, I went into the City to a Chinese's House to drink a Glass of their
Grass-Beer, which is made of Sugar, and is very pleasant. There I saw their
manner of Eating: Seven of 'em, all Men, sat at a Table by themselves, for they
will not trust themselves among the Europeans, nor will they let them see their
Wives: Besides their Wives, they keep several Malleyers, that are fine Women,
though of a tawny Complexion, and broad Noses, whom they Buy for their use. These
Women have the liberty of showing themselves abroad: Their Masters lie with
them at their Pleasure; but besides these Women, they frequently keep Swine for
the same purpose, and make the same use of 'em.

In the middle of the Table stood a very large China Dish, with a great many
little ones in it, which were filled, some with Fish, and boiled Rice instead
of Bread; some with a sort of a Mess made of Citrons, which they call Arschhar;
and others, with a pickled sort of Fruit like our Barberies, which they
preserve in Juice of Citrons and Vinegar. Each Man had a Wooden thing in his
Hand like a pair of Tongues, which they use instead of a Fork, to Eat their Meat
with. After they had done Eating, they took every one a Whiff of Tobacco out of
a Pipe (which they call Gur-Gur) the Bole whereof is so large, that it would
contain half a Pint of Water.

At the time of their Meals, they did not forget their God, which was an Idol
made of Wood, and stood very finely adorned upon a Table, with a Lamp burning
by it. Him they served first with their best Fruits and Meats, and laid it all
decently on a Board that stood by for that purpose. I was so intent upon
observing them, that I never minded my Drink, though it was excellent, and
continually expected to see that Devil Eat the Victuals that were set before
him; but I found, I might have staid long enough, for he was so modest, he
would not offer to touch them, so I came away: For I saw they did not like my
standing so near their Door to observe 'em as I did, and they knew me to be a
Dutchman. What the Devil did with his Meat afterward I cannot pretend to give
you an account of.

On the 13th, I went to visit the Rich Chinese. Any European that goes there,
is treated very liberally with as much strong Drink as he pleases; which sort
of Drink is Distilled out of the Suri that comes off from the Coco-Trees, and
they call it Arack. The Richest Chinese has all the others under him; and as
soon as he hangs out a red Flag, they are all obliged to appear immediately. He
furnishes also all the Dutch Ships with a sufficient quantity of Arack, and
Vinegar; of which he makes a Bill, which is abated out of their Contributions.

CHAP. III.
Bats as big as Geese, good to Eat, and esteemed a great rarity. A Sentinel
killed by a Javan drunk and mad with Opium. Great mischief done by the
Lightning. Robbers very dangerous, who are a sort of Dutch Soldiers that have
Deserted. A Serpent of a dreadful bigness being 26 foot long. Wages of the
Officers and Soldiers. The Ship called the Slight Utrecht burnt. An Earthquake
in 1674, that destroyed part of a very rich Island. What may justly be judged
the Causes of it. King of Siam's Present to General Maetzuycker. Elephants
taught to stand firing. The Author goes for Ceylon from Batavia. The Prince's
Island. Their Allowance at Sea. The Coast of Sumatra, very unhealthy. Storm and
Tempest. Catching of Sharks. They met with strange Men whom they could not
understand. Two Seamen quarrel and fight with Knives; both of 'em punished, and
how. What Hunger and Thirst they all underwent in the Voyage. Their arrival
before Columba. Lions sent to the King of Candy. The Author is sent to the Fort
of Galture.

THe 14th of August, Came two Javans to Batavia, and brought Twelve Bats as big
as Geese for a Present to our General. They are reckoned there a very delicate
Food; and I was told, they were brought to the General's Table as a Rarity, and
fit for a great Entertainment. They fly out at Night as ours do, and haunt the
Coco-Trees, and there suck the Suri that lies in the Coco-Nuts, so long, till
they tumble down, and so are easily taken up with one's Hand; in the Day they
keep in the Woods and hollow Trees.

The 15th, A See more of him in Christopher Frike 's and Elias Hesse 's
Relation.
Javan that had eaten some Opium struck a Soldier that stood Sentinel with a
half Pike upon the Bridge, between the City and the Fort, with a Poisoned Dart,
and killed him. This mad Fellow went on with a Design to fall upon the next
Sentinel also, which stood next to the Gate; But he being aware of him,
presented the Point of his Half-Pike against the Javan, who ran furiously upon
it, and so killed himself. His Body, was, for an Example to the rest, dragged
about the City by the Executioner's Men, (who are Caffers of Angola,) and after
that Hanged up upon a Tree by Jacatra.

The 16th, We had a great deal of terrible Lightning that set fire on many
Chinese Ships, and consumed them. It looked all that day, as if the Cannon had
been perpetually firing. The reason of which is, That their Masts and Ships
(Jonckers as they call 'em) are of Bamboo-Canes, the Knots of which, when the
Fire comes to crack them, give a very great Bounce in the Air.

The 17th, Two Soldiers and one Seaman deserted out of the Garrison, and went
to join with the Robbers that dwell on the Blaew-bergh, that is, Blew-Hill,
about 12 Leagues off here. These Robbers are a parcel of Soldiers and Seamen
that are run away from the Dutch Service, and live about the Blaew-bergh with
their Wives that are Javans, and much annoy the Passengers.

The 19th, Twelve Javan Wild-Horses were brought over from Bantam for a
Present, to the Here Maetzuycker our General.

The 20th, Some Javans brought a Dead Serpent 26 foot long, before our
General's Lodgings. When the General had seen this dreadful Creature, he
ordered it to be carried to his Physician Dr. Kleyer, who had it cut open by
one John Otto Helwigh, a Saxon Doctor of Physic, (that came over with us as a
Soldier) and had his Skin stuffed up, and kept for a Show.

The 21th, Three Month's Pay was paid to all the Garrison, in Money, Silks,
Stuffs, Linen from China, Shirts, Shoes and Stockings; instead of Victuals
here, we are allowed Board-Wages. The Pay is as follows.

A Captain's, 80 or 100 Guldens per Month Salary; 10 Rixdollars, and 7 Cans of
Wine, and two of Oil, Board-Wages.

A Lieutenant's, 50 Guldens per Month Salary; and 6 Rixdollars, Board-Wages.

An Ensign's, 36 Guldens per Month Salary; and 6 Rixdollars, Board-Wages.

A Serjeant's, 20 Guldens per Month Salary; and 4 Rixdollars, Board-Wages.

A Corporal's, 14 Guldens per Month Salary; and 4 Guldens, Board-Wages.

And a Private Soldier's, 10 Guldens per Month Salary; and 4 Guldens, and 40
pound of Rice, Board-Wages.

The 22th, The Vtrecht that was come some days before from the Western-Coasts,
and loaded with 400 Lasts of Pepper, was burnt in the Road of Batavia. The
Cannon and Anchors were hall'd up again, by reason it was not very deep, and
all the Men saved.

The 23th, Our Major Poolman ordered a Lieutenant, with 60 Soldiers, to go with
the Asia to the Western Coast.

The 24th, Two Ships happily arrived before Batavia; the one from Siam, laden
with Spiauter; the other from Tarnate, laden with Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace.
They brought us the News of a great deal of mischief that had happened in
Amboina and Tarnate about 500 miles Eastward from Batavia, by the Earthquakes,
that are very frequent there, and commonly every year. Amongst others, a part
of an Island that was sunk by an Earthquake in the year 1674. which at that
time was saved, and was very rich in Clove-Trees, was now wholly sunk.

Those that know the way of living here, need not much wonder why that Island
should have such severe Misfortunes fall on it. The Spaniards heretofore found
this Island, and seeing it abound so much in Spices, fortified it with Castles
and Towers, and adorned it with Churches, Cloisters, and Schools: But they
exercised an excessive Tyranny over the Inhabitants. For after they had treated
with them and established themselves in Peace, the Don's carried themselves so
haughtily and cruelly, that if an Inhabitant chanced to meet 'em, and did not
go 10 or 12 steps out of their way, and then stand still, till the proud
Spaniard was gone by, Sinioro made no more on it, but thrust him through the
Guts with his Cinque-Palm, (a Sword five Span's long) and laid a certain piece
of Money, called a Perdau, upon the Dead Body: After which, the Murderer was
free from any Punishment, nor was he liable to be accused or reckoned a
Murderer. And in this manner they have dealt with abundance of poor Indians
upon any slight occasion, and oftentimes out of a mere insolent Humor. This
Tyrannical Spanish Yoke has been made somewhat lighter to 'em by the
assistance of the Dutch; but the latter too, often plagued them sufficiently,
though not so bad as the former; and being once become Masters, turned the
Churches, Schools, and Cloisters into Warehouses, Inns, or Taverns, to save the
Charge of Building new ones. To this excessive height of Inhumanity and
Irreligion they were come, till in the year 1674. they were overwhelmed by an
Earthquake, and their Forts, Walls, and Houses sunk, together with a great
number of the Inhabitants.

The 25th, Two Elephants passed by our Fort, which the King of Siam, who keeps
his Residence in Odea, sent as a Present to General Maetzuycker; besides 35
hundred weight of Spiauter: With this, His Request was, That we should lend him
a Man to make him some Gunpowder; promising that he would send him back again
to Batavia in two years time.

The General received the Present, thanking the Ambassador; and desired him to
return his Thanks to his Master for his Favors, and to tell him, That he would
heartily have fulfilled his Majesty's Desire, but that he could not possibly do
it then, because he had but one of them himself, which he could by no means
spare; but that he had some Powder that was at his Majesty's Service.

From the 26th to the 31th, We were obliged to appear every day upon the place
where we used to Exercise, with our Companies, and fire against two Elephants
that were newly come from Ceylon, which were brought every day to that place,
that they might stand firing, and be useful in fight.

From the 1st to the 30th of September, I did not stir out of the Fort, by
reason of a terrible Headache that seized me, and such a terrible one, that it
fetched all the Hair off my Head; nor was I able to bear the excessive heat of
the Weather. I used no other Remedies but Bathing and Refreshing my self every
night and morning (after Sunrising and Sunsetting) in the Water that runs
about the Fort, though that was very dangerous, by reason of the Crocodiles that
are there.

The 1st of October, Three Companies of the Garrison of Batavia were ordered to
Embark in three Ships, called the Macassar, Polsbroeck, and Polran to go to the
Island Ceylon. They were all to be ready the next day to go off: I being one of
the Company that was to go, took my leave of my Friends, and made my Provision
of Fish, Sugar, Dates, Citrons, and other Necessaries for my Voyage.

The 2d, About 10 a Clock in the Forenoon, each Company went to its appointed
Ship; We and our Lieutenant (called Henrick Rentzen Van Oldenburgh) went to our
Admiral-Ship, called the Macassar; In the Afternoon a Muster-Master came to
visit the Ships, to see whether all the Men were on Board or no. If at any time
one absents himself after Orders given, and is found on shore, he is condemned
to remain in Chains till the Ship in which he was to have gone is come back
again.

The 3d, early before day, The Master ordered the Gunner to fire one piece,
which was the signal for our two other Ships to weigh Anchor, and to hoist up
Sails. At break of day, (the Sun rising here all the year round at 6 in the
morning, and setting at 6 at night) we sailed with a Land-Wind by Bantam: In
the afternoon, when we came to have a Sea-Wind, it blew very hard, and quite
against us; so we were forced to cast Anchor, and lie there still, till

The 4th, about two at night, The Tide and Land-Wind turned for us again, which
carried us as far as the Prince's Island, where we were to take in Wood and
fresh Water.

The 5th, 6th, and 7th, I went ashore with five Soldiers, well provided with
Arms, to defend those that cut the Wood, from the Tigers; and to shoot some
Fowls, such as Peacocks and Ducks; for this Island being not much inhabited,
does very much abound with all sorts of Fowl.

The 8th, at break of day, We weighed our Anchors, and passed that day through
the Road of Sunda, and came about the evening into the Sea. The Wind was S. E.
and by S. our Course lay most toward the North.

The 9th, We were divided into two Quarters, for the better regulating the
Watch, that every one might know when to Watch, and when to enjoy his Humor.
Till this time we had Water to Drink, and Rice enough, but boiled only in Water.

The 10th, We had a very favorable Wind, And this day we came to an Allowance,
which was, To each Person half a pound of boiled Rice every day, half a Pint of
distilled Arack, and a Pint and a half of Water: Two Pound of Biscuit a week,
and half a Pint of Vinegar, and half that quantity of Lisbon Oil. Sundays and
Thursdays three quarters of a pound of Flesh: On Tuesdays a Quartern and a half
of Bacon; Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, Gray-Pease, which we Eat
with Oil and Vinegar.

The 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, and 15th, We had still a good Wind, and we began
to draw pretty near the Western Coast. In the night, about the 2d Watch, which
is between 10 and 2 of the Clock, we saw a continual Lightning shoot through
the Clouds, which looked like a mixture of black and red, and made the most
dismal sight that Man ever saw. In the 3d Watch, called the Day-Watch, about 3
of the Clock, we changed our Course from West and by North, to North and by
East.

The 16th, It was a very serene Calm; But on

The 17th, 18th, and 19th, We had nothing but very unconstant Winds and
Weather, and very dark Clouds all about us.

The 20th and 21th, We saw neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars; from whence we
concluded that we might expect a great Storm, and for fear of it we took in our
Sails, and prepared our selves for it.

The 22th, We had a smooth Gale of Wind at West: Our Course being Northward, we
saw continual Lightning, and heard much Thunder: I was Amazed that it lasted so
long, and I enquired of our Master, and of some of the oldest Seamen, what
could be the reason of it. They told me, That it was dark in that Country of
West-Kust six months together; that the Country afforded great store of Pepper,
and some Gold was to be found in the Mountains of it. For that Reason, the
Dutch, after a long War, had built there some Fortisications, and kept Soldiers
there, which hold it to this day. That the Europeans cannot bear the Climate
long, it being very unhealthy; and unless they are fetched away within three
years time, they generally Die. To prevent which, they send fresh Men thither
every year. That those that Die there are commonly taken away suddenly, as they
are Eating or Drinking at Table. Their Food is Rice instead of Bread, Bufflars
Flesh, Beef and Pork, and Fish in abundance: Their Drink is Suri that comes
from the Coco's, and Sugar-Beer, 3 or 4 years old, which they keep under Ground.

The 23th, The Wind blew hard at West. We saw an infinite number of Fishes,
called Springers; their length is generally about 6 or 7 foot, and about as
much in thickness. Their Flesh is very firm; they Swim always against the Wind.
When they Leap very high out of the Water (as they did then) the Seamen expect
a very great Storm and Tempest. We caught several of 'em with a certain
Instrument, which they call an Ellegaer, striking it into their Bodies. This
night the Polran parted from us, but we could not tell whether it was done
designedly by the Master, or whether it was by the Carelessness of the
Helms-Man, whose turn it was to Watch.

The 24th, We were forced to take in our Main-Sail, by reason of the hard Wind,
and defend our Deck all over with pitched Canvas from the Waves that were so
boisterous, that they almost overwhelmed our Ship.

The 25th, 26th, 27th, and 28th, We had stormy Winds, but yet so tolerable,
that we made 25 or 30 miles of our way in 24 hours.

The 29th, The Wind increased. The Polsbroeck, which still kept us Company,
gave us a Signal, that she was so full of Water, that she stood in need of our
help. When we came to be somewhat near, the Master told us, That his Pumps were
good for nothing, and begged of us to lend him some of ours, which we did; for
our Ship was so strong and close, that it received no Water, and we did not
want'em our selves; but that night this Companion of ours lost us too.

The 30th, We took in all our Sails, and lowered our Yards, and made our selves
ready for a Drift; that is, to bind the Helm fast, and commit our selves to the
Winds and Waves to drive us where they pleased. This Drift we held out in, till

The 4th of November, five days together. Upon Consultation held, we cut down
our Mainmast, which, with the force of its fall, was like to have sunk our
Ship. Till that day we had not taken the height of the Sun, so that we could
not tell whither, or how far, we were cast.

The 5th, The Wind fell, and changed to the S. E. Then we hoisted up our Sails,
and took the height of the Sun, whereby we found that we were close by the
Equinoctial, and not cast yet away so far as we were afraid we had been. We
sailed N. E. and by E. all this Voyage we had that kind of Birds flying about
us, that live upon the flying Fishes; but upon the great Heat we were now come
into, they left us.

The 6th, We had a brisk Wind, and from six in the morning to six at night we
made 20 miles of our way, and found the next day, being

The 7th, That we had passed the Line. Two Soldiers and three Seamen died out
of our Ship that day, and were thrown, after Prayers, into the Sea: And we had
about 20 sick.

The 8th, The Wind changed to the South; and we were directly to go Northward.
The Boatswain's Mate caught a large Shark, in which they found four Boys, and
some Bones of Men.

The 9th, We saw a little Vessel that made toward us; in the afternoon it came
near to us, and we were big with the hopes of some News they brought, but they
were all vain: For our Orlamen (as we call them that have been before in the
Indies) spoke to them in the Malleyers, Amboineses, Cingulaish, Malabarish, and
Maldavish Languages, but neither would do; and they answered us in a Language
that none of us could tell what to make of; but they made us to understand by
Signs, that they were in great want of Drink: Our Master had their Vessel
boarded, and in it we found 24 Indians, with long Hair tied up on the left side
of their Heads. They had with them 12 Muskets, some Gunpowder, and Iron-Balls;
pretty good store of Rice, Pepper, and dried Fish, but no Water. We supposed
them to be some Indian Robbers come from the West-Kust, and drove thus far into
the Sea by the late Storm. Our Master ordered them to be taken into our Ship,
together with their Provisions, and we drew their Vessel along after us, tied
with a strong Rope to our Ship. We allowed them Bread and Water, and we made
them Pump the Water out of our Ship, and Swab it.

The 10th, 11th, 12th, and 13th, The Wind continued directly for us at South,
we going on still Northward.

On the 14th, We changed our Course to the N. W. and by W. the Wind kept where
it was, but something weaker. This day one that sat on the Foremast, holding
by a Cord, the Cord broke, and he fell down Dead into the Ship.

The 15th, We observed, that the Water begun to change color; at night we used
the Plummet to sound the Water, but we could find no bottom, though the Line was
200 Fathoms long.

The 16th, The Water changed yet more, and seemed whitish; we made our Anchors
and Cables ready, if occasion should be, to use them.

The 17th, Our Master promised six Rixdollars to the first Man that should spy
Land, and a Flaggon of Wine.

The 18th, We had a lovely Wind and good Sailing. A Seaman that stood on the
outside of the Ship to draw up Water, was washed of by a Wave. We immediately
tacked our Ship, and backed our Sails, and threw out our Longboat to go and
take him up; which they did, and in about two hours time brought him safe to us.

The 19th, We had a very fair Wind and fine Weather. Two of our Seamen
quarreled, and fell at last to their Knives, and wounded each other. As soon as
the Master knew of it, he had 'em both Duck'd from the Mainmast, as wilful
Transgressors of the Laws of the Ship.

The 20th, about 6 in morning, our Boatswain, a very expert Seaman, climbed up
the Main-top-gallant-Mast, which is the highest part of the Ship; no sooner had
he looked about him, but he cried out aloud, Land, Land: The Master asked him,
which way, and he told him to the North-East; straight we changed our Course
from North West thither. The Helmsman threw out the Plummet, and found a sandy
bottom at 80 Fathoms. In the afternoon we got sight of the high steep Mountain,
called Adam's Pick, and by that we knew that this was the place we wanted to be
at, viz. the Island Ceylon. Toward night we changed our Course again to the
East, and sometimes to the E. and by N. for we had no mind to be near Land that
night, and we could not have reached the Road that day. In the first Watch,
between 6 and 10, we could feel ground still, but in the 2d and 3d we could not.

The 21th, in the morning, at break of day, We changed our Course again, and
went directly toward Land lying South-East of us, with the Wind at S. W. About
10 a Clock before Noon we saw the Ships that lay at Anchor upon the Road by the
City of Columbo. In the mean while, the Wind veer'd four Points more to the W.
and so much the fitter for us. About Noon, we felt a sandy ground at 40
Fathoms, but we kept Sounding still, till we were quite out of the deep, and in
full sight of the Land. This day every one had plenty enough of boiled Rice,
and the Water Vessels were free to any body. We had suffered a great while
Hunger and Thirst, notwithstanding that we had Course Diet enough, and above 40
Barrels of Dutch and Batavian Water. The Soldiers now begun to Equip
themselves, to make a show at their Landing, and dressed themselves very sine
with great Joy and Satisfaction. Their Arms, which till then had been kept up
in the Gunner's Room, were delivered to 'em, to go out Armed, as is usual, to
Shore.

All our Flags were out till about three in the afternoon, when we cast our
Anchors, and found still 12 Fathom Water. The Gunner was ordered to fire one
Gun, and one Seaman was to strike our Admiral's Mainmast Flag before the City
of Columbo, but immediately again to set it up. After this, we fired all our
Guns, to which the Fort of Columbo answered with seven of their Cannon. The
Governor of this City sent two great Sloops of Ceylon to fetch us ashore; in
which our Lieutenant and Men went up to the Governor's House, who welcomed us
all very heartily, and gave all our Men three days liberty to refresh
themselves after their hard Voyage. The distance between Columbo and Batavia is
about 500 Dutch miles, which we had reached in 49 days, from the 3d of October
to the 21th of November.

The 22th, I went to Board with an old Cingulaish Woman, because she could
speak a little Dutch; and she got her living by keeping a House to entertain
the Dutch, of which she had generally 20 or 30 in her House. I paid 15 s. a
Month, and 40 pound of black Rice. We had every one his own Dish, served up
with Flesh, Fish, Figs, and such like Diet, twice every day, at 8 a Clock in
the morning, and 4 in the afternoon. Our House was only a Hut, made up of
Boughs of Trees. And here I met with three of my old Acquaintance; who,

On the 23th, took me Abroad to a very large Orchard, called Tang Salgato,
where we drank some Sury fresh from the Coco-Trees. This was in the morning,
and about noon we bespoke a hot sort of Liquor, called Massack, which is made
in the following manner. They put into a Vessel 8 Quarts of Suri, and to that,
one Quart of Arack or Brandy. All this boiled together, and about 20 or 25 Eggs
are broke into it, which gives it substance, and a good color. Then they add to
all this some Kings Sugar, (which they get from some certain Trees there) and
some Nutmeg, and Mace: All this came to half a Rixdollar. We had some Women to
wait upon us, which they call Bulliatoses, who diverted us with various Leaping
and Dancing. Their Ears are about a Span long, with Golden Pendants in them;
They saw by my Dress, that I was newly come from Europe; and I found they had a
great mind to Converse with me, but I not understanding them, made them
understand by shaking my Head, that I did not Care for their Company.

The 24th, We took a walk about two or three miles out of Columbo, to see some
tame Elephants that were kept in Orchards there. And having seen them, we went
into the House which belonged to a Portuguese, who treated us very nobly; and
at night had us home upon an Elephant of his. This day an Ambassador, named Mine
Here Bucquoi, was sent from Ceylon, with a Lion, for a Present to the King of
Candy.

From the 25th to the 30th, Our Men were daily Exercised, and at night our turn
began to be upon the Guard, where my Post obliged me to be, till

The 25th of April 1677. which was five months, in which time I learned the
Cingulaish and Portuguese Languages, finding them not only useful, but
necessary to those that are to stay there.

The 22th, I was sent with 30 Soldiers to the Fort of Galture, 8 Leagues from
Columbo, to have some new Ramparts added to it. Of this Fort I intend to speak
by and by, designing now to give an Account of the Cities, Inhabitants, Cattle,
and Fruits of the Island Ceylon, as far as I could observe of them while I
staid there.

CHAP. IV.
A Description of the Isle of Ceylon, its Cities, Forts, and Inhabitants, which
are chiefly of two sorts. An Account of the King of Candi's Court, Officers,
Counselors, and his other Subjects: Their Customs, Manners, Religion, etc.
Their Houses overrun with Fleas and Pismires; Their manner of Eating and
Trading. The King of Candi's a Cruel Tyrant. The Cingulayans Customs in War;
Their Arms and Exploits. The other Inhabitants of Ceylon are Malabarians, who
are Subjects of the Dutch: They Worship the Devil, Crocodiles, Serpents, etc.
Their Burials. The Dutch took Columbo, and other Cities of Ceylon from the
Portugueses, and the King of Candi, though he had helped them against the
Portugueses. The King of Candi's Resentment of it to this very day. Unhealthy
Climate of this Country.

THE Island Ceylon is about 200 Dutch miles in compass. It lies in the Indian
Sea, not far from the Maldivian Islands, and the Wild Coasts of Cormandel and
Malabar. It was found out about 200 years ago by the Spaniards, who invaded the
Kingdom of Cotta, which the City of Columbo belongs to, in this following
manner.

They came with two Ships, and landed at the place, where now Columbo is: The
Cingulaish King, being informed of it at Cotta, came out with an Army to meet
them, but in vain; for his Men could not abide the smell of Gunpowder. The
Spaniards fell to Building some small Fortifications, and to settle themselves
in the Country: As soon as they were able to get some Assistance, being well
pleased with the Land and their Success, they carried on the War not only
against the said King of Cotta, so as to beat him out of the City where he
resided, and lay it waste, (as it is now to this day, a place where the wild
Elephants are caught) but in time reached farther; and at last, of seven Kings
that had possession of this Island, they destroyed six. But the seventh, who
resided at Candi, in the middle of the Island, being vexed to see with what
Tyranny they used his Subjects, begun to carry on a War very vigorously against
them, and continually Plagues the Cities and Forts, which they had built on the
Seaside, and for about 20 miles into the Land.. How this Country fell from the
Spaniards to the Portugueses, and from the Portugueses to the Dutch, I will
give an Account hereafter.

Their chief Fortifications, are, the City and Castle of Columbo; eight Leagues
Eastward of that lies the Fort Negombo; 20 miles further, the Fort Calpintin;
again, 22 miles from thence, another called Aripen; and between those two, the
Paerl-Bank, heretofore so famous: Six miles further, a very strong Fort on the
Island of Manara, very fruitful, and seven miles in compass. This Island of
Manara is divided from Ceylon by an Arm of Salt Water, about a Cannon-shot
wide. Jasnapaparnum, a fortified City, lies 22 miles distant from Manara, and
is secured with Bastions, called by these Names, Pas-Piil, Pas-Beschatter,
Pas-Elephant, and Punt de Pedre. Six and thirty miles farther, is the Fort
called Trinconamale, built by the Dutch against the French. This Fort the
French had taken Possession of; as also of the Bay, where Ships ride very safe,
under the Command of Monsieur de la Hay, as Viceroy, till the Dutch drove them
away again. There is another Fort called Battacolo 40 miles from that. Thence
to Punt de Gala 30 miles. Thence to Alecan 11 miles. Thence to Galture 5 miles.
Thence round back again to Columbo 6 miles.

The Description I have given here of these outward Fortifications, makes the
Circuit of this Island to be in all 206 miles.

The Inland Fortifications, are; Maluane, 6 Leagues from Columbo; Hanguelli or
Gourwebell, 2 Leagues from Malvane; Sittawaca 4 miles farther; Ruenell also 4
Leagues farther; Saffrigan and Bibliogam, 8 Leagues from Ruenell: And 12
Leagues on this side of Columbo, you have Anguradotten and Caudingellen, lying
upon two Rivers that run out of the King of Candi's Country, very rich in
precious Stones.

The Island of Ceylon has chiefly two sorts of Inhabitants. Those of Columbo,
from Columbo to Gala, are called Cinguleeses or Cingulaians. They are very well
shaped, part of a black, and part of a yellowish Complexion. The Men have long
straight Hair, and wear their Beards very large, like the Suissers. They are
generally very Hairy upon their Breasts, and they are very proud of it. They
wear a piece of Linen about their middle, from the Navel down to their Knees:
But they make a very great distinction of their Apparel, according to their
Dignity, and Quality.

Their King dresseth himself as he pleases. His Cap is of Silk, wrought with
Gold about a yard high, with a great Carbuncle before, and Rubies and Saphiires
all round about it, and at the top a Bird of Paradise. His Shirt and Wastcoat
is made of the finest Cotton, with Golden Buttons, and he wears a Garment of
colored Silk, that goes 4 or 5 times round his middle, and hangs down to his
Knees. His Stockings are fastened above his Knees with a string, whereon is
fastened a silver Plate as large almost as a Trencher. His Shoes are only
Leathern Soles with strings, one of which comes up between his Toes, and the
other comes round his Foot, and ties the Sole fast to it: And all these strings
are set out with Saphires and Rubies. He wears a Sword close under his right
Arm, tied to a Silk Ribbon: It is very heavy, being in a massy Silver Scabbard;
it is made like a Hanger, and about a yard long; the Handle is ordered with
fine precious Stones. On his left side, between his Shirt and his Wastcoat, he
wears a long Knife, besides his Sword, inlaid with Gold and Jewels, and by that
a sharp Pen, (wherewith they write upon Leaves of Trees) in a Silver Sheath.

Those of his Council, called Pisare, and his Generals, may also wear Silk,
Gold and Silver, but they are not permitted precious Stones for Ornaments; and
it is as much as their Lives are worth, to offer or pretend to wear any of 'em,
though they are of little or no value; Nor do they dare so much as take up one of
them when they find them any where; and the greatest, as well as the meanest
Persons throughout all the Kingdom, are equally obliged to the Observation of
this Custom.

His Corals, which are Governors over some one Coral or County, may wear Silk,
but neither Sword nor Stockings. They wear a Staff tipped with Silver, with the
King's Arms on it; they wear a sort of Slipper or Shoe made of Wood, mighty
neat, and very curiously wrought.

Next to these Corals, the Apohami or Nobles are ranked: They go dressed as the
Corals, excepting that they may not tie, like them, the Caps they wear on their
Heads. These are to be known, when they come into the City, by their having a
Slave always behind them to carry a Talpot Leaf after them, which serves as an
Umbrello when it Rains.

The next in Rank are the Scriveners and Husbandmen, who Manure the Fields of
Rice. They must wear nothing but Linen, no Swords, Shoes, Stockings, nor
Caps, only a Knife they may, and an Iron Pen. Their Wives, and those of the
abovenamed Persons may have their Garments from a handful above the Navel down
to the Ground; but nothing upwards, but a short Bajuvan, as they Name it, which
does not come so low as to cover their Breasts.

After these, are the Handicrafts-Men, as Carpenters, Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths,
Potters, Barbers, Burners of Chalk, etc. These and their Wives may wear a
Linen Garment from the middle downwards, and set out their Ears with Gold.
After them are the Trivitors, who gather the Drink from the Trees and boil the
Sugar: Tschallias that peel off the Cinnamon: The Fishermen and the Laserins
their Soldiers: Mainets their Washers: Borrowayen, their Drummers: Cubin, who
are a sort of People that will carry People where they please for Money: the
meanest of all are the Batins and Zubies; These may not lay them down upon the
Ground, but must always have a Fan with them to lie in; Nor are they permitted
to lie under any Roof. All their Women are obliged to go Naked all upwards upon
pain of being whipped.

To give you a Specimen of the Cingulaish Language, they express their numbers
thus:

1 Eckai. 2 Deccai. 3 Dunai. 4 Hattarai. 5 Paurai. 6 Hasai. 7 Hattai. 8 Attai.
9 Nahahai. 10 Dahahai. 11 Eccollahai. 12 Dollahai. 13 Dahattunai. 14
Dahattarai. 15 Pahallohai. 20 Wishai. 30 Dihai. 40 Hattalishai 50 Paswichai.
100 Sihai.

But it is to be observed, That here are Diversity of Dialects, as in the
several Provinces of other Countries, and so the Inland Cingularians differ
from the Borderers; which makes Rob. Knox in his Description of Ceylon, give a
different Account; and generally writes with an o, what I put down with an a;
as Echoi, Dechoi, Tunhoi, Hutterhoi, Pauhhoi, Hoyhoi. Their Salutation is in
these Words, Deo wardende Sacradende Neinde; and is answered with the same,
both clapping their Hands to their Foreheads. Whither go you, Gaudi Januade. I
don't know, Dutwanetti. Fire, Genere. Water, Diwere. They write upon the Leaves
of Sugar-Trees; when they read, it is with a very unpleasant Accent, and very
long Tone, as if they sung. They write to each other on these Leaves, which are
about an Ell long, and two Inches broad, and can fold them up so artificially,
that none can open them, without discovering that they have been opened. They
teach their Children to write upon the Sand or Ground with their Fingers. As to
their Religion, they believe, That God, whom they call Deine, governs in
Heaven, and that the Devil governs on Earth. Wherefore they Religiously serve
him, giving him the Name of Jacie; and that not only by Offerings, and Songs in
their Temples, but with Meetings in the Fields, under a sort of Tree, which I
cannot compare to any Tree so well as a Lime-Tree. There is a Wall built round
it of about half a Man's height; Here they Dance, Leap, and Sing, to his
Honor: He comes to them in their Dance, and gives them Answers to their
Questions about things to Come: As whether it shall be a plentiful Year, dry,
or wet, and other things of this kind. The Soothsayer too, that receives the
Answer, has great Honors paid him. But because the Devil torments him too
much, they are forced to carry him away home. They believe, That those that Die
are turned into a Bufflar, wherefore they give the Bufflars the name of Apetie,
which signifies Father; and to the Cows, that of Amme, which signifies Mother.

When the mean illiterate People (who cannot Read) have a Child Born, the
Father Plants a young Jacken or Jager-Tree by his House, by which he can reckon
up the Child's Age. I have been at some of these Men's Houses to Buy Goods, and
happened to ask the Age of some of their Children that came about me, and they
showed me a Tree, and told me, he was of the same Age with that. But they have
there a Proverb, the cursed Allusion of which they verify in earnest, which
is, That it is fit a Man should Eat the first Fruits of the Trees they Plant;
so the Father always deflowers his Daughter as soon as she is come of Age.

They have a New Year's Festival, which lasts six weeks, and begins about our
Easter. In the first three weeks they wash themselves every day; the other
three weeks they pass away in Singing, and all kind of Mirth.

Their dwelling Houses are made according to the convenience of the Country;
some are near one another, after the manner of our Villages, which they call
Aldeen. Others stand by themselves upon some rising Ground, to be secure from
the Water, which sometimes rises very high, by reason of their great Rains:
They are covered with Leaves of Trees. There is commonly but Room where they
Eat and Lie, and another to Dress their Victuals in, which they besmear every
week with Bufflar's Grease, to free themselves from Fleas and Pismires. Their
Money they generally Bury in a Pot under the Hearth, or sometimes under the
Devil's Tree, in the Field, where it is Sacred.

Their Victuals is Rice boiled instead of Bread, and what they Eat with it, is
made of all kinds of Herbs, Roots, Fruit, dried or fresh Fish, which they Boil
with a deal of green Pepper, or else with the Milk that comes from the
Coco-Nuts. Every one takes his share of Rice upon a Fig-Leaf, (instead of a
Plate) and takes his other Meat, and mixes it together with his Hand, and so
Eats it.

They wash their Hands and Mouths very clean before and after Meals. They chaw
Betel all day which they prepare after this manner. They take one or two of the
Leaves, about as broad as one's Hand, they call them Bular: They grow all round
about, against Fruit Trees, as Ivy does. Then they take some very fine Chalk,
made of small Musselshells burnt, and of it they scatter about as much as will
lie on the top of a Knife over those Leaves, and then roll them up, and put
into the middle a fourth part of an Arck, which is a Fruit like a Nutmeg; and
to this Composition they give the Name of Betel, which they keep continually in
their Mouth: And this is to prevent the Scurvy. They Smoke Tobacco too, not out
of Pipes, but wound up in a dry Leaf.

In their Trade, like other Nations, they love to Buy as cheap, and Sell as
dear, as they can. They have no particular Traffic amongst them, dealing
almost all in the same Goods. One thing which seemed mighty strange to me, was,
That when I, or other Europeans came to Buy any such things, as Butter, Pepper,
Sugar, Honey, Figs, Fowls, Rice, etc. and asked them if they had any; they used
to say Netti, which is to say, No. So that we were forced to give them very
good Words, and insinuate our selves into their favor, by giving their
Children some Tobacco, or some little Trifle; Then they would ask their
Children, even the smallest of 'em, whether they had best Sell any thing to
these Persons; and according to their Answer, they either sold to us, or
refused us, and would not have sold us any thing without their Consent, though we
would have paid ten times the value of their Goods. When they had sold us any
thing, and received their full Price, they would beg of us, that we would give
them some of it again, though at the same time they were well stocked with the
same Commodity.

Theft, though but inconsiderable, is punished with Death. All their King's
Commands must punctually be observed upon Pain of Death; and that not of the
Person only that has Transgressed, but of his Kindred, to a third Generation.
This King of Candi is a very cruel Tyrant. Some Europeans, that had been
Prisoners at his Court for above 20 years, have told me, That he had ordered no
less than 300 in some years, to be drawn in pieces with Elephants, for a very
small Fault, or sometimes a mere Humor.

We will now give you some Account of their Military Exploits and Discipline.
They have a General, which they call Dissave; next to him some Saudis. Then the
Araski, which are as Captains over 20 or 30 men each, with an Ensign. Their
Artillery is only a sort of Muskets, which stand upon a frame with three Feet,
of which the hindmost is broad, and shorter than the two foremost: Having no
Lead, they shoot with Iron Bullets. These Muskets, the Nobility, which serve
the King, carry with 'em in fights.

They come into the Field, 30, 40, or 50000 strong, all barefoot. Their Arms
are a heavy Iron Cimiter about a yard long, and a light Half Pike. Few have
Muskets or Firelocks; or if they have, they do little Execution with them;
though they have never so much room to draw up, yet they never advance but in
single Ranks, for fear the Hollanders should take too many of them off at once
with their Fieldpieces. Their Drummers are very much despised, being taken out
of a sort of People, (though Cingulaians too) that live upon Bufflars Flesh, and
the Flesh of any kind of Beasts. They call them Borrowayen. They tie to their
Body, two little sorts of Drums called Tamelins; others have but one of 'em,
but then it is bigger. They beat distinct Marches, with a great deal of Art,
and the Soldiers understand them very well. They beat morning and night, but
differently. Their Pipers use both a straight and a crooked sort of Pipe, and
make pretty Music with them both together.

Any Dutchmen, that are taken by these People, are never to be Ransomed at any
Rate; but must remain amongst them in great Slavery all the days of their Life;
and all the ways are so strictly guarded, that there is no escaping by any
means. The Dutch that sometimes desert us, and go over to the King of Candi,
are maintained in Necessaries, but are not trusted in any Employment.

The other sort of Inhabitants of this Island, are those of Gala Batacolo,
Trinconomala, Jafnapatnam, Manara, Aripen, Calpintin, as far as Negombo; and
are called Malabars. These are all very well shaped, and very black. They are
all under the Government of the Hollanders, except those of Wani, who have a
King of their own. But he is obliged to pay to the East India Company a yearly
Tribute of many Elephants, and Money besides.

These Malabars come originally from the Wild Coast of Malabar, lying by
Manara, and from the Kingdoms of the great Samerin, Calicut, Cananor, and
others. They are all Infidels, and of different Opinions. Some of 'em, who are
called Vitzliputzli or Joosie, Worship the Devil; others, a Serpent, a
Crocodile, or an Elephant, and commonly what they please themselves. They
neither Eat the Flesh of Bufflars, nor Swine. They hire old Women to Mourn over
their Dead a whole night, and cry over the Corpse all the time: Ajo aniate,
ariate, inguwarre, which is as much as to say, Why did you Die, Come, come live
again, etc. Then they Bury him, and leave the Hutt out of which the Man died,
and build another. They are a little more Civil than the Cingulaians, and their
Dress is a little more comely. The Women never let themselves be seen uncovered
by the Christians. When they go abroad, they are all covered with white Linen,
and so close, that they can but just see their way with the corner of one Eye:
Their Arms and their Legs are all adorned with Silver Rings, and their Ears,
about a Span long, with Gold: Their Fingers and Toes too are all richly set out
with several sorts of Rings, most of Silver and Gold.

Their Numbers are; 1 Onera, 2 Renda, 3 Muna, 4 Nala, 5 Anse, 6 Ara, 7 Ola, 8
Orta, 9 Otta, 10 Padda, 11 Paddona, 12 Padda-renda, 13 Paddamuna, 14
Padda-nala, 15 Padda-anse, etc. The manner of their Salutation, is, Laying
their Hand on their Forehead, and saying Damrian Amadran, which is returned the
same way. They write likewise upon Leaves of Trees with an Iron-Pin, and make
whole Books of 'em. We will now give you some Account, How the Hollanders came
to Conquer this Country, and make themselves Masters of it.

I have already told you, how it came to be in the Power of the King of Spain,
and fortified by the Spaniards: It remained a great while in their Hands, till
the Portugueses Rebelling in Spain, chose a King to themselves, with whom all
the Spaniards that were in the East Indies, joined. And thus the King of Spain
lost all his Pretensions in those Countries, which was no small loss to him.
The Portugueses would be improving their Conquests, and try their Strength
against the King of Candi, and thought by Fire and Sword, and their barbarous
Slaughters and Murders, to frighten him out of his Kingdom, but all in vain.
For the King of Candi, finding himself in a great Extremity, called the Dutch
to his Assistance; who together fell upon the Portugueses, and became at length
Masters of all their Cities and Fortifications abovenamed. The last that was
Besieged by 'em, was the Capital City of Columbo, which is about 28 years ago.

The King of Candi was now free, and had an Army of 50000 Men. The Dutch
General on the other side, (called Min Here Vander Hulft) had an Army of 12
Companies of 80 Men each, together with a Fleet of 8 Ships. Both these, though
the one a Heathen, and the other a Christian, agreed very well together, put
things into very good Order, and made a Treaty; That when the City of Columbo,
both the old and the new, should be taken, the King should have the Old one for
his Residence, and the Fort Negombo, lying 8 Leagues from thence, toward the
Kingdom of Candi, in his full Possession: The Dutch for their part should have
the new City of Columbo without any Molestation, with all the other
Fortisications they were already possessed of; and besides this, should have
Privilege to Trade in any part of the Kingdom whatsoever with its Inhabitants.

The City of Columbo being taken at last by the Dutch Admiral Ryclof Van Goens,
(the above-mentiou'd Here Vander Hulst being shot Dead in the Trenches) and by
the Assistance of the King's Forces, who did not suspect any Falsehood after the
Treaty made. The Here Van Goens, having gathered together the King's Army under
pretense of giving them a Treat, and the Streets being filled with them, he
sets all his own Men upon them, (for what Reason I cannot tell) who cut the
best part of them in pieces, and put the rest to flight. The King, whom they
thought to have taken Prisoner, made his escape upon his Elephant, and got over
high Mountains, Rocks, and Wildernesses, and at last into his Kingdom of Candi,
where being secure, he swore never to forget the Falsehood and Treachery of the
Christians, but to continue in a perpetual War and Enmity against them.

And in that he has so constantly kept his Resolution, that in these 28 years,
he has taken Prisoners, and put to Death some thousands of them. Therefore
this Island of Ceylon is not unjustly called the Dutch Soldier's
Slaughterhouse; and when they are commanded thither, they reckon themselves
going to Execution. For the Cingulaish Soldiers or Inhabitants are not the only
Enemies they have there, but the Blood-Suckers, or Hedge-Hogs, which the Ground
is covered with after a shower of Rain, will suck the Blood out of 'em: Besides
this, there are other Dangers; which are, First, Being very often Pinched with
Hunger; and then the Unwholsomness of the Air, by which those that are not used
to the Climate, fall into many Distempers. Some are seized with a Stiffness in
their Limbs, others with a Dizziness and Swimming of the Head, and cannot
endure to look on the Light. Others are killed by the Bloody Flux; and with
these Distempers, I have seen more Soldiers at one time in the Hospital than in
the Garrison: Besides many others, who in pursuit of their Lustful Desires,
destroy themselves by Venereal Distempers.

CHAP. V.
Giving an Account of the sundry sorts of Beasts, Fowls, etc. that are in
Ceylon; a more particular one of the Elephants, concerning which, many things
very wonderful are attested, upon the Author's own Experience. The manner of
catching them, their peculiar Qualities, etc. Wild-Bufflars, Tigers, Bears,
Jackalls, Bitsche-Vergunie, or the Devil of Negombo, very rare; Levers a lazy
sort of Beast, Wandura or Apes. Wild Cats. And many other sorts of Beasts. Of
Fowls, Parrots, Batts, etc. Crocodiles, will live 300 years. Different sorts of
Serpents; of Pismires; Blood-Suckers; Sword-Fishes; Sharks; Sail-Fish; St.
Peter's Fish; Sea-Swine; Sea-Devils; Tortoises. The manner of the Malabarians
Fishing with their Netts.

I Come now to give a short Account of the Wild and Tame Beasts that are in
this Island of Ceylon.

Among the Wild ones, I will speak first of the Elephants. They are finer and
more Docile than in other Countries. Therefore they catch a great many of 'em,
which they make Tame, and fit for War, and send them to the Kingdoms of Persia,
Surrat, the Great Mogul, and several other places; and the Dutch themselves
make use of them in the Field.

I have been very curious in Searching into the Nature, Disposition, and
Qualities of these Elephants; and for that purpose conversed much with those
that Catch them, when they are young, and have my self helped to catch 'em. I
have found in them all a great deal of Cunning, and a good Memory, in which
they seem to be almost Rational Creatures. They never forget a Master's kind
Usage; but that of a rough and cruel one, they on the other side, never leave
unrevenged. They never Couple together in the sight of Men, but first they
search round about the Wilderness to see if no Body is there hidden in any Tree
to spy 'em; and if they find any, woe be to them. The Male has his Testicles
inwards, and the Female gives Suck between her fore Legs.

When they are Caught and Tame'd, they never Couple together. They carry their
young ones seven years, and this has often been manifest by the Wild
She-Elephants that have been taken, and kept in the Stables which they have for
'em at Gala, and have brought forth their young at seven years end, after they
were caught. The young ones are, at first, about the bigness of a Calf half a
year old. They feed on Grass, Figs, Leaves, and Coco-Nuts, Rice, and other
Fruits, and Bread if one gives it them. This they reach and hold fast with the
end of their Trunk, and then thrust it into their Mouths. Before they Eat any
Grass, they throw it and toss it about, to shake out the Pismires, by which
they are mightily tormented sometimes. If these little Animals chance to get in
their Trunk, they walk about there and tickle them intolerably.

Though they have no Hair, except on the Tail and Ears, yet they Swim very well.
They Will live above 200 years, as has been seen in some whose Age has been
designedly marked. They go together in the Woods some 8, 10, or 20 in a
Company. They have a sort of King, or Master-Elephant, which they follow; the
young ones go in the middle. In the day time, they keep on the Mountains in the
shade, but toward the Dusk of the evening, they repair to the Meadows and
Waterside. They break their way through the Boughs and Bushes with their
Trunk; so that by the Noise they make, one may hear them coming a Mile off.
Then the Inhabitants, and the Keepers of the Fields, cry out to one another for
help, to keep them out of their Grounds, where they destroy all when they come.
They holloe first, Hu, Hu, and then they cry for help, Alia innuwate, The
Elephants are a coming: Therefore, when they come near their Hutts, Orchards,
or Fields, they light Torches, which they have on purpose made of long dry
Wood, and with this they drive them away, making a great deal of Shouting and
Noise. Those that watch the Fields of Rice, sit and sing all night in a little
Hutt raised upon four Posts; and when they hear the Elephants coming, they
holloe and light their Torches.

There is two different ways of Catching the Elephants. Among the Malabars,
from Trinconomala to Batacale: There are some that Worship the Devil, by whose
help they Charm these Creatures, after having Sacrificed to him a Cock for an
Offering. After they have Caught 'em with their Hands, they tie them with
strong Thongs of Bufflar's Leather, and Tame 'em: But neither the Persians, nor
the Moors, care to Buy those that are caught this way.

The other way of Catching them, is in a Pound prepared for that purpose, as I
have seen one in the Kingdom of Cotta, two Leagues from Columbo, near the Aldee
or Village Battalamuda: And I have been my self at the Catching of 50 of them,
young and old; which is done thus.

When the Inhabitants have notice where they are, and what place they frequent
most, the Governor of Columbo gives a general Order for a Hunting Day; on
which every body high and low, even the Nobles themselves, meet at the
appointed place: Besides this, the Governor takes all the Soldiers, Drums, and
Burghers, along with him; being all met, they spread themselves in a Wing a
League or two long.

Thus they go holloing and shooting along the whole day, through Woods and over
Mountains: At Night they rest, and for fear the Elephants should get out back
again, they light Fires all along about a Stone's throw from each other, which
the Elephants are very much afraid of. The next day they go on again, and draw
the Elephant's into a narrower compass. If any of 'em offer to go back, and
break through, they fright them with Drums, and shooting and holloing. If one
of them should chance to break through, all the rest would inevitably follow.
When all the Hunters have in 3 or 4 weeks time ranged over 20 or 30 miles
Ground, these Wild Elephants are at length, by the means of Tame ones that
serve to decoy them drove into the Pound, which we mentioned above. Then they
tie a Wild one to a Tame one, or if it is a very lusty one, between two. Then
they make 'em so Tame by giving them neither Meat nor Drink, that with a
certain Instrument they use, a Child may manage them. Notwithstanding there are
some which they can never Master, and those they turn out again to Breed and
Increase.

The East-Indian Kings and Merchants buy the Elephants by their height, which
they measure to an Inch (as we do Horses here) from the Ground to the ridge of
the Back. According to their height, they are worth 7, 8, 900 or 1000
Rixdollars. Sometimes they Buy them (when they are of an extraordinary vast
Bulk) for show. Otherwise they use 'em in War, and to draw the Baggage, and
great Artillery. The Great Mogul has frequently with him 4 or 500 in the
Field; And we used them in all Expeditions: Each Company had an Elephant, as we
shall tell more largely hereafter.

The two Teeth that stick bending so long out of their Mouth, are sufficiently
known by the Name of Elephant's Teeth. The Flesh of Elephants is not fit to
Eat, and their Hides are made no use of, by reason of their wanting Men to
dress and prepare them. They are extreme thick. The Flesh is Spungy, and Rotts
in two or three days. The Hair that grows upon the Tail they hold very good
against the Cramp, and as an approved Remedy they wear it made up in Rings on
their Fingers.

When they are to draw a Load, they go side long and look steadily upon the
Wagon, to see that no Body lays any thing more upon it than what is usual; and
if one does, they will not wag a foot further till it be taken off again: But
what is more strange then that, is, what I have often seen at Columbo and
Jafnapatnam, That these Elephants when they were drawing a Load of Stones for
the Fortifications, would stand stock still at 11 a Clock, which is the Dinner
time allowed to all the Slaves and Workmen, and would not draw an Inch further,
though they were just at the place, and the Drivers encouraged 'em never so much.

There is great store of Bufflars in Ceylon, especially in and about Calpintin.
They are about the bigness of a Podolian or Hungarian Ox, but stronger. Their
Horns are about two yards long: They are of an ash color. In the day time they
lie in the Water up to their Nose, and at night they come to Graze in the
Meadows. Their Flesh is Eatable, when it has lain 2 or 3 days in Salt; but
very hot, and gives the Bloody Flux to most People that Eat of it. They are
very dangerous to go near, especially to the Europeans, and chiefly if they
have any young ones by them.

Tigers are here also in abundance, and very pernicious to Man and Beast, and
particularly to Stags and Deer. They are about the bigness of a large Ass, but
something longer; they are spotted with yellowish and whitish spots, and in
their Make exactly like a Cat. Their Flesh is white, and many People Eat of it.
Their Skins serve to make Belts, Holsters, etc. and are much used for covering
of Trunks and Boxes. They have so much of the Scent of Musk, that the Huntsmen,
if they take the Wind right, will sind them out by it, and so in their pursuit
of other Beasts, avoid them.

Bears are likewise found here in several Parts, and are dangerous Creatures:
Yet they are not so much feared here, as the Wolves are in Germany.

Jackalls are of shape and bigness like a Fox, only a sharper Snout: They keep
all day in their Dens, and at night they gather together a hundred of them or
more, and come to the outside of the City of Columbo, in quest of Dead Bodies,
and fall sometimes upon a Man, if they chance to find him asleep.

There is a sort of Creature here, that is not very well known, because it is
rare; it is called Bitsche Vergunie, and by the Dutch, The Devil of Negombo,
which Name they have given it, because of its Qualities, as I am going to tell
you, and because they are most frequently about Negombo. It is about a yard
high, and three yards long. It has a sharp Snout, and very sharp Teeth. The
Body is as it were Harnass'd over with thick round yellow Shells. When it is
pursued, it can wind it self up into a Ball. At night it makes such a dismal
frightful Noise, that it has often scared the Sentinels from their Posts.

The Lewer is another, called by the Dutch, Luiste Dier; i. e. Slow-Beast.
These Beasts are made like an Ape, with Hands and Feet, look very ghastly, and
as lean as a Skeleton, wonderful slow in their Eating, Drinking, and Going;
though Dogs, or any Wild Beasts come toward 'em, they will not hasten their pace
in the least; and when they come near 'em, they turn themselves to 'em, and
with their glaring Eyes, fright away the fiercest Dog that can be. Their Eyes
stand quite out of their Heads, and appear very terrible: When Men come after
'em, they do the same: But it has not the same Effect, for Men have a Snare,
which they clap on their hinder parts, and so catch them as they do Monkies.
After they are caught, they are still slow as before, and would not go above a
League in a day, if one left 'em to themselves. They are kept in Cities for a
Rarity, but they are too tender to transport into other Countries.

Wandura or Apes are here in abundance; they are black, excepting a whitish
Ring about the hinder part of the Body, and a great gray Beard, which makes
them look very much like some of the Old Cingulayans. They are about the
bigness of a Mastiff, and have a very long Tail. They skip about the Woods from
Tree to Tree, making a great noise, their young ones hanging all the while
about 'em. If you shoot 'em, the young ones fall with 'em, and then you take
'em off to keep and breed up: But this is not a true kind of Ape for keeping,
so that few People take the trouble to Catch them; for they do not take any
thing that is taught 'em, as others will. If a shot wounds them so as to fetch
out a part of their Guts, they work out the rest with both their Hands, (if I
may so call 'em) and so fall down. Those that are Caught will never Couple
together, though one keeps them ever so long.

Wild-Cats; there are of two sorts: One of which is as large as our common
House-Cats, and live upon all sorts of Fowl. The other is as small as our
Squirrels, and are called Suri-Cats; because they keep about the Coco-Trees,
whence the Suri comes. Their Hair is of a gray color; and they make a noise
like a young Turkey.

Stags are bigger than the Stags in Holland.

Deer, are somewhat less, and full of white spots.

Wild-Goats are a little bigger than our Hares.

The Hares less than with us.

Wild-Boars here as in Africa.

All these are in vast numbers, because but few People Hunt 'em; there being so
great a quantity of Wild-Beasts there that are better.

Wild-Horses are very plentyful in the Isle of Manara, and not far from thence
in another Isle toward Jafnapatnam; but they are less than our Horses in
Holland. Sometimes they catch some of the finest of 'em, which they Break for
the Saddle, or else they use 'em for Carts and Wagons.

Among the Tame Beasts and Cattle, Oxen and Cows are in so great plenty, that
one of 'em is not worth above two or three Gulders.

Bufflars are in abundance; the Country Fellows use them in their Rice-Fields:
One of them is worth three or four Gulders.

Three sorts of Sheep there are amongst 'em; one which comes out of Persia,
which for Wool, etc. are like those in Holland, excepting that their Tails are
so vastly big, that some of 'em will weigh 20 or 25 Pound: Another sort comes
out of Africa, with Horns about a Span long, but no Wool, only Hair like
Calves: A third sort has Wool like the first, but very long Ears.

Goats are in good store here, and Swine, such as in Holland. One of the
biggest and fattest in the Island Manara is not worth above a Rixdollar.

Now for the Wild-Fowl. There are Peacocks of the same color as here; and
besides those, there are many as white as Swans.

Wild-Cocks and Hens are about the bigness of ours.

Waterfowl, Snipes, Stock-Doves, and others. Two sort of Herons, one of 'em
bluish, the other half black. Geese and Ducks in great numbers. I will not make
any mention of their small Birds, etc. I will only give you some Account of the
Parrots, which are here of three sorts. The largest are of a green color, mixed
with blue and red, with a black Ring round the Neck, and are accounted the
best. A lesser size there is, all green, with a red Ring round the Neck, which
is but little valued; and a less than that which is less esteemed too, because
it is the least docile. They Eat Rice and Figs. They are best to be taught when
they are young. They are tied to a Cord or Chain, and morning and night, while
it is duskish, one talks to 'em half an hour or thereabouts, till they get 'em
at last to speak any thing after them.

There is also a great many Birds of Prey; as Falcons, Hawks, and Ravens, with
a white Ring about their Neck.

Batts are of two sorts; the one small as ours here, that fly by night; and the
other as big as those I have spoken of in Java.

There is another sort of Bird, which is called, a Navi, (because it makes a
noise which sounds like that word) which when the Portugueses hear, they expect
the arrival of some Ships in a short time.

They have but few Geese, except such as are brought hither from the Cape of
Good Hope; they have a Bunch growing on their Bill: They cost a Rixdollar
a-piece.

Other Tame Fowl is there in such plenty, that one may Buy a Pullet for a Penny,
and 40, 50, or 60 Eggs for the same price. Ducks that lay 200 or 300 Eggs after
one another, without one days intermission, will cost but Two Pence or Two
Pence half penny. Many keep Pigeons likewise, which come from Holland, which
they Buy for 10 d. a pair.

Among the four-footed Animals, in the Rivers; There is the Crocodile which
devours many Men that live near them, as they are Fishing, Washing, or Bathing
themselves, if they do not take an especial Care: But I will in short describe
something of the Nature of them.

The Crocodile is not so very furious as some People imagine. He seeks his Prey
alone; but when he is hungry, he Devours any living thing he can Eat, whether
Man, Fish, Beast, Dogs, etc. shows himself commonly, and swims any part of the
day at the top of the Water, like a piece of Timber. He sets open his Mouth for
a certain Bird to pick his Teeth with his Bill, which is about the length of
one's Finger. At night he comes upon Land to seek out for Meat. These Animals
lay their Eggs upon the bare Sand, and leave the Sun to produce the young ones
out of 'em, who as soon as they come out, are about half a yard long; The Egg
it self is about twice as big as that of a Goose. They continually keep growing
as long as they live, and come to be some 20, some 25, some 30 foot long: The
Body is armed all over with a thick Scale: Their Teeth are exceeding sharp; and
so much strength is in their Tail, that they will kill any Fish or other Animal
with a blow of it. Upon Land they can run faster than most Men; but in a short
turning, a Man may have the Advantage of 'em, because they must take a great
compass; and being so long and thick, without any bending in their Backs, they
are forced to take a large turn, which affords a Man fair time to escape out of
their reach.

Here is another sort of Beast, much like the Crocodile, which is called a
Caprigoy; but it has neither Shells, nor Scales on it, and its Tongue is very
long and pointed. The longest I ever saw of these was not above ten foot.

Another not much unlike this, but less yet, called a Leguwan, the Flesh of
which many People Eat.

Now of Serpents there are several sorts; one of 'em is called Worgers, they
are 10 or 15 foot long. They will seize a Man, and clasp themselves round about
him, and squeeze him so that he cannot Breath, and falls down Dead: And to be
armed against these, no Man goes abroad without a good Knife about him, to cut
them in two, which makes them let go their hold quickly.

Another sort, which is called, Chapel-Snakes, because they keep in Chapels or
Churches, and sometimes in Houses; These are very mischievous and venomous, and
without a timely Antidote, they who are bit by them, die Infallibly. They are
commonly from 4 to 6 foot long; and they have a sort of Bladder, or spot of
white, which shows it self on the top of their Head when they are vexed.

There is another sort of 'em, which they call Rat-Catchers, which are not so
dangerous. They live all in Houses, and destroy the Rats and Mice as much as
any Cats would. They are nine or ten foot long, and will never hurt any Body
unless one Angers them.

The Green Serpents keep upon the Trees, and when any Man or Beast comes near
them, they dart themselves upon them, and with their sharp Tongues endeavor to
put out their Eyes. They are about two yards long. The most poisonous of all,
are, the two headed ones, which have a Head at each end.

Here are two sorts of Remedies against the Poison of those Animals: The one,
which the Inhabitants use frequently, is Witchcraft: The other, which I have
often used, is a Serpent-Stone. This Stone is laid upon the Wound, and it
sticks to it, till it has drawn to it self all the Venom out of it. When it is
come off, it is thrown into new Milk, which fetches all the Poison out of the
Stone, and grows black and blue with it: Then the Stone is applied afresh to
the Wound, and if there be any Poison remaining, it sticks on, if not, it falls
off, and the Person is secure.

I have seen many Scorpions here as big as a common Crab, but their Stings are
not dangerous, and cause only a smarting for two days, and never prove mortal.

The Hundred-Feet called by the Portugueses Cente-Pe, because it has a
Hundred-Feet, is about half a yard long, and has two Horns wherewith it
Pinches. It is so full of Venom, that it is all over of a blew and yellow
color with it; if one is pinched by 'em, it may prove very dangerous, besides
the cruel Smart it causes, unless the place is anointed quickly with Oil of
Coco's.

There are three sorts of Pismires, red, black, and white. The first are the
biggest, and rid the Houses of other Vermin, as Rats, Mice, and Serpents. The
black keep in the Fields; if they touch a Man's Skin, they make it Smart for
about half an hour. The white ones live amongst Household Goods; they Eat
through Chests and Trunks, and damage Clothes and Linen very much.

Fleas are here in Shoals, so that Men could not have any rest, if they did not
besmear all their Houses with Cow Dung, to keep them away.

The Air is full of little Flies and Gnats; and in some places People cannot
Eat for 'em, but are forced to stay till night when they are settled.

Blood-Suckers, or Leeches, are the worst Vermin on the Island: They are most
toward the North between Candi and Columbo. There are of two sorts of 'em, the
great and the small; The first are the common Plagues of Bufflers: The other of
Men. They keep in the Water, and are made much like our Hedge-Hogs. When any
Man or Beast goes into the Water, they hang upon him till they have sucked their
fill, and swell three times as big as they were at first, then they fall off.
If one goes to strike them off, immediately they break off and leave the Head
in the Flesh, which makes the Wound the more dangerous: But the best way to
deal with 'em is to have some green Lemons with one, or good Vinegar and Salt
or Saltpeter, and wet them with it, and they fall off immediately.

The small sort are about the bigness of a Straw, and about three Inches in
length, and of a brown color. They have neither Eyes nor Feet. In dry Weather
they are seldom to be seen; but after some Rain, they fill the Ways and Shrubs.
They do not creep as Worms do, but raise themselves up an end, and throw
themselves upwards. If they lay hold of a Man they are not easily got off
again, nor without great danger. Some Cingulayans say, That these things were
first brought over into this Country by the contrivance of one Lamammea, one of
the Kings of Candi's Sister, (whose Brother the Portugueses had taken away by
violence) to be a Plague to them, but how much truth there is in the Story, I
leave the Reader to judge.

Amongst the Seafish commonly caught here, I place the Sword-Fish; it is from
8 to 12 foot in length: It is called by that Name from a sort of Sword it has
upon his Nose, which is like a Saw, with about 50 Teeth about the bigness of
one's Finger. The biggest of those Swords that I ever saw was an Ell long. The
Flesh of this Fish is fit to Eat, but the younger the Fish is, the better.
These Sword-Fishes are not of that sort which are so great Enemies to Whales,
for they never come so far into the North, it being too Cold for them there:
Besides, those that sight with the Whales have their Sword on their Back, and
keep about Greenland and Ysland in vast numbers.

Sharks are right Sea-Wolves, and devour the Men they can catch, but they are
often caught and devoured themselves.

The Sail-Fish, so called, because it has a large Finn, which stands upon the
Back of it above Water, and lets the Wind drive it forwards; has a sharp long
Head of about an Ell long, and his Body is twice as long again: though its Flesh
is but course, yet a great many People Eat it.

There is a Fish which they call Oan-Egbertsen half an Ell long, and very full
of Blood. They are in so great plenty, that they pull up 7, 8, or 900 at one
Draught. The great time of Fishing for 'em is in February, at which time not
the Fish only is very cheap, but all sorts of Meat and other Victuals are at
very low Rates.

The St. Peter's Fish, or Five Finger-Fish, is called by some the Leather-Fish,
by reason of the thickness of his Skin; Has five white streaks on the Back in
the shape of a Man's Fingers; it is about two yards in length, and very good to
Eat: It is most in season in March, and then they catch likely 2 or 300 of them
at once. The old Portugueses will tell you that this mark on the Back came by
St. Peter, who drew up one of them in his Net, and left the figure of his
Fingers upon it. But this I leave the Reader to believe at Discretion.

Jacks are here of the same kind as in Holland, one, two, or three yards in
length, and are to be caught with Angles in April or May.

The King's Fish is the best sort that is here, and is something like our Carps.

Cablins are like our Herrings, but a little broader, there is vast plenty of
'em, and one Buys 10 or 20, sometimes 40, for a Penny.

The Sertin is a small lean Fish. They catch some thousands of them at one
Draught, because they go together in Shoals.

Sea-Swine or Sea-Hogs, are caught here in great numbers; their length is five
or six yards, and half that about: They have a sharp Snout like ordinary Hogs;
The Flesh of 'em is very fat, and the Blood very hot: In the Water they
out-swim all other Fishes.

Sea-Devils or Sand-Creepers are 5 or 6 yards long, with a frightful Head, very
broad, but not thick, black at top, and white underneath. There is much
difficulty in catching of 'em with Angles, because they lie 15 or 20 Fathoms
deep.

Scaits are round and flat: Have their Eyes in their Body, and a thin flat Tail
about two Yards long; they are very good to Eat.

The Piil-Staert, as they call it, (which signisies Arrow-Tail) is much like
it; it is as good to Eat too: But the Tail is of that Nature, that if he wounds
a Man with it, it is mortal to him: Wherefore great Care is taken to cut that
off as soon as they have caught 'em.

Tortoises, are caught here of 200 pound weight. They lay their Eggs on the
Sand, 200 at a time, and leave them to the Sun to hatch; they have no Shell,
only are covered with a Tough Skin. When they come upon Land, the Indians turn
them over on their Backs, from which they cannot rise again, having not the
command of their Legs. When they have them thus, three or four Men carry them
to Market, and there cut them out. The Shells of these very large ones are not
useful, but the small ones are of great use for inlaid Work, Combs, etc.

Sea-Crabs, and Sea-Lobsters: These are here a Yard long, with large Claws; and
the other round with a very hard Shell.

Sea-Lice, are made like Lice, covered over with a white Shell, about the
bigness of a Walnut. They keep in the wet Sand on the Shore, and are Eaten only
by the Malabarian Fishermen.

Muscles stick to the Rocks, and when the Sea is at Ebb, they pick them up.

The manner of Fishing, which the Malabarians use, is much like ours. Their
Nets are exceeding long, so as to reach about half a mile in compass, and are
buoyed up with Wood instead of Cork; and in the middle of it, which comes last
to shore, they have a great Bag, into which the Fish is all driven.

Fresh River-Fish are these: The St. Pilang, a Fish with a broad Head, as
smooth as an Eel, about a yard long, and two Spans about. The Bald-Head is a
better sort of Fish, all Scaly like a Carp, excepting the Head; weighs
generally 7 or 8 pound. A Fish called a Fool, because whoever Eats any thing of
the Head, becomes stupid: Wherefore the Head is always thrown away, the rest is
very good to Eat. The Pager is a black Fish, with a hard thick Head; its Body
is round, with very sharp Finns. There is small Fish also in abundance, as we
have here, such as Gudgeons, Craw-Fish, etc.

Gurnets are a small sort of Fish like the Craw-Fish, without a Shell, and have
only a whitish Scale over their Body. They are most used in Angling, for a Bait
to catch other Fish with.

CHAP. VI.
The Year in Ceylon is divided into two Seasons only. Great Floods there during
one of the Seasons. An Account of Caudingelle, a Fort built and forsaken by the
Dutch; much annoyed by the King of Candi's Men. The Author is ordered to
Anguratot; Description of that Place; how the Europeans live there with
Cingulaish Women. He goes back to Columbo; one of the Boats is lost by the way.
He lives a while there with one of the Council. Is sent to Malvane, an
unhealthy Place, which the King of Candi Besieges with 30000 Men, but his
General comes over to the Dutch. The Prince of Candi runs away from Columbo,
where he had been kept a long while, and for what Reason. The Author with two
Companies of Volunteers are sent out, and in their March suffered much Thirst,
and went all Barefoot. They come to Calpintin, Aripen, Manaca, Jafnapatnam;
all which Places he gives a Description of. Then he goes to Porto Novo, where
he has two Arrows shot in him. He goes back to Columbo, where he is Cured.

THE whole Year is divided into two Seasons only, called the good and the bad
Season. Each of them consists of five Months; the other two are called the
Dubious Months, being March and September, in which are the two Solstices, on
the 12th Old Style, or 22d New Style, of each of those Months.

In the Month of March, the Rains begin to fall on that side on which Columbo
is Situated, and continue most commonly to the Month of September; so that all
the Rivers overflow the Countries in such a manner, that the People, Cattle and
Wild-Beasts are surrounded on a sudden, and carried away by the Water-floods.
Those that delight in Hunting, may find great quantities of Beasts forced up
into the Mountains at that time.

In September it begins to hold up, and the Weather is much like what we use to
have in April, in Holland: Then the Sunbeams come to be so violently hot, that
it dries up sometimes Navigable Rivers, and then the Wild-Beasts are forced to
run a vast way to get Water.

In this good Season (as they term it) Thunder and Lightning are very frequent,
and to that degree, that many huge Trees are split and rent to pieces with it.
The Sun does not move far from this Place, wherefore little notice can be taken
of the lengthning or shortning of the Days: Nor is it ever very cold here; only
when the North Wind begins to blow in February, and which holds on for about
four Months, one may bear a cotton Garment on. In this Season, the Fishermen
have seldom the opportunity of Fishing, by reason of the roughness of the Sea.
Whilst the good Season is on that side of Columbo, the other side toward
Cormandel, Jafnapatnam, Manara, Batacolo, etc. have the bad with them, which is
not a little strange, considering that they are not far from one another.

I was upon Duty in the Fort Galture, where our Men worked by Day on the
Fortifications, and at Night stood Sentinels, (the Night lasting but two Hours)
from the 22d of April 1677, till the last of September of the same Year. Our
head Officer there was a Lieutenant, one Adam Slecht, a Bohemian.

On the 1st of October, we were ordered by our Governor to march to a Forlorn
Fort, called Candingelle, six Leagues from Galture, with 40 Europeans, and 200
Lascarins, or Cingulaish Soldiers.

A very hard Storm fell upon us in the way, which so swelled the Waters about
us, that we were forced to wade with our Clothes tucked up, and we were not a
little plagued with the Blood-suckers. We found the said Fort overgrown with
Trees and Shrubs, and no Inhabitants within two Leagues of it; they were all
retired up into the high Mountains, because those of Candi continually made
Incursions upon that side of the Country, Spoiling, Burning and Destroying all
they came near. The Hollanders had built this Fort some Years since; but having
not made it strong enough, and provided it with necessaries sufficient, they
were forced to leave it. It takes up about two Acres of Land; it has four
Bastions, a Parapet, and Pallisado's as high as a Pike, and as thick as a Man's
middle. We Europeans were posted within, and the Cingulaians on the outward
Works; and were forced to cut up all the Wood about it, within a Musquetshot.

We were in no danger in the daytime, but we had enough to do at night with
several Parties of Candians, and with Elephants too: But these we frightened
away easily with the Fires we made, having good store of Wood. Our Magazine was
stored with Salt, Rice, Bacon, Flesh, Brandy, Powder and Shot, all which we had
from Anguratot, two Leagues distant from us; and the care of it was given to
me. Our Water was fetched about a Pistolshot from the Fort.

After we had lain here eight days in this wild and desert place, the Candians
came against us, Headed by Dissave Tennecool, the great Robber: An Aratsi of
ours brought us intelligence that they were coming with great forces upon us.
We found then it was high time to remove our Quarters, which we did, setting
all on Fire, and retired to another place near to Anguratot. By an order sent
us from Columbo, we were obliged to go back to our old Quarters at Galture.

The 12th of October I was sent to Anguratot to reside as Master of the Stores,
and Play Master of the Forces. I was made mighty welcome by our chief
Dutch-Officer, who lay there; and by Mr. Busterweld, who was the Ensign there.
He was a Man that had been employed in great Affairs here, and had been sent as
an Envoy to the King of Candi. He invited me to stay with him and make my abode
at his House to keep him company, that being together we might spend our time
more agreably.

I was well enough pleased to be at Anguratot, because it was very strong, and
well provided with Cannon. A very fine River runs before it, which comes from
Saffrigam, and has great store of good Fish, and Tortoises; and we had some
thousands of Inhabitants about us, of whom we bought choice Fruits very cheap,
and all other sorts of Victuals, as Fowls, Butter, Honey, etc. for a very small
price. It is very pleasant living here for one that can speak the Cingulaish
Language.

The Europeans that live here, who are not above Forty or Fifty in number, live
live in this following manner. They have Prayers every day, morning and night,
and a Sermon on Sundays, with Singing of Psalms. They watch, and are free by
turns in the daytime, but at night they must all be in the Fort upon pain of
Death. Out of the Fort every one has his little House, where each of them
keeps his Cingulayish Woman to provide and dress his Victuals, and serves
likewise for his Bedfellow. If a Woman at any time is brought to Bed of a White
Child, it is matter of great Joy to the Parents and Relations, and they grow
very proud upon it. If a Man design to go out of the Country, he must keep it
exceeding private; for if his Bedfellow knows any thing of it beforehand, she
certainly poisons him, or bewitches him, as several have been served that have
gone away; and though they were got 2 or 3000 miles, yet they were forced to come
back again.

On the last day of December, a Letter came to Mr. Busterweld from Columbo,
advising him to come thither, seeing he had a mind to go back into his Country.
He asked me if I would not go with him to Columbo: So I accompanied him
thither, and we gave orders for three Boats to be made ready for our selves and
our Baggage.

The 2d of January, 1678; Early in the morning we went out of Anguratot, and
ordered the Cingulayans (of which there were four in each of our Boats) to take
a great deal of care, for we were to pass through two several places that were
very full of Rocks. The Dutch call the one of them, The Great Hell; the other,
The Little Hell, because they swallow up so many Men. We sent out before in a
Boat that went free, and old Fellow (a Cingulayan, who was most experienced) to
show us the way. The Boat was loaded with Rice and Fowls, but the Men not
Rowing so strong as they should have done, all sunk with their Boat. We that
came just after them were not a little startled. I encouraged the Men in my
Boat, as the Gentleman did those in his, and we fortunately got through, and we
compassed 3 Dutch miles in 4 hours: So we got to Galture: But we never heard
more of our four Cingulayans that we lost in the first Boat.

Our Lieutenant Sleght received us very nobly, and invited us to Dinner, and
gave us other Cingulayans, which we sent out before with our Boats. And being
Columbo was a great way from Galture, he ordered two Palanquins to be got ready
for us (which are a sort of Chairs, but so contrived, that one may either sit
or lie down in them) and two Culins or Slaves a-piece to carry us; they carried
us very fast, and we got safe to Columbo.

The 5th, Mr. Busterweld, having sent all his things aboard, and being to leave
me behind, introduced me to a certain Captain of Columbo, one Min Here
Witzenburg, to whom after he had recommended me, he went on the 6th Instant
aboard his Ship to Punto de Gala, where he was to take in her Loading of
Cinnamon and Pepper, and then put to Sea.

This Captain Witzenburg was a brave Soldier, about 50 years of Age, was then
in Columbo as Commander, and was likewise one of the Council, which consists of
eight Men only, who are treated with no less Title than that of Honorable.
They Judge and give Sentence in all Causes, as well Capital as others. Our
chief Merchant, one Van Vorsten, was the President of them: He had been raised
to this from a Cabbin-boy. The best part of them could neither Write nor Read:
nor could the Captain I am speaking of, though he was the third of the Council.
If any Man will appeal from them, he must transfer his Cause to Batavia, which
is 500 miles distant from thence.

I staid 5 months with this Captain, during which time I was a very serviceable
Companion, by reading to him all Orders and Causes at home, before he went to
the Council (for they were always sent to them there first) in which he used to
take my opinion, and in answering for him all the Letters that came to him.

The 1st of July, I was obliged to go to a little Fort called Malvane, 4
leagues from Columbo, where I remained four months. The place is very strong,
by a River, it has Pallisado's, Parapets, and a Ditch, eight Fieldpieces, and
other necessaries, and sixty Men to keep it. Our Head Officer there, was one
Oldenburgh, a Lieutenant. It was very unhealthy by reason of the thick Fogs;
and therefore the Garrison is often relieved from Columbo.

The 6th, We were informed that the King of Candi would Besiege this Fort;
wherefore we provided our selves against it.

The 16th, The Dissave, or General, appeared with Thirty Thousand Men, (this
was that Tennecool the Renegado we have spoken of before,) and he let us know
privately

On the 17th, That he resented an affront which the King of Candi had put upon
him, and besides, that he had deceived him in his expectations, for which he
would now be revenged; and with this opportunity return to the Dutch, and not
molest our Fort in any manner. We were obliged to keep this very secret, least
it should come to the knowledge of his own Soldiers; and we sent an account of
his offers to Columbo, whence we received orders to direct him to Columbo, but
not receive him into our Fort.

The 20th, He went with three hundred of his best Men to Columbo, where he was
received honorably by the Governor, and presented with a Gold Chain worth 300
Ricxdollars. When the King of Candi had an account of this, he ordered the
siege to be raised, and all Tennecool's Generation to be destroyed.

The 31th of October we were relieved, and went altogether to Columbo. We were
to cross over a River 7 or 8 at a time, with two Boats tied to one another. I
was one of the last that were to go over. I was here very near being drowned by
an unlucky accident. The old Dottia or Waterman was just shoving the Boats off
of Land, when the Boats which are exceeding little turned over, for the Rope
broke that tied them together. My danger was so much the greater, for that a
lusty fellow, who fell in with us, and could not swim, took fast hold of my
Leg, and would have drowned us both, had I not fortunately laid hands on the
post to which the Boats used to be tied, by which means we were safe. Those
that could swim were in no great danger: The others hung luckily upon the Boats
that were floating with the bottom upwards; so that all saved their Lives. Some
Muskets were lost, but it was a wonder that none of the Men were drowned or at
least devoured, considering that there is always so vast a number of Crocodiles
in that River.

From the 1st to the 8th, We lay in the Old Town of Columbo.

The 7th, and 8th, Several People were sent out to hunt after the Prince of
Candi, who had been kept some years by the Dutch, with a design to put him on
the Throne of Candi, when the old King should die. He was kept out of the City,
near the old Hospital, and had a Guard of six Files of Musketeers and one
Sergeant; notwithstanding which he found means to make his escape, and was
never heard of since.

He had been about six years at Columbo, where, at his coming, he declared
himself to be of the Royal Blood of Candi, and the true Heir to that Crown,
alleging that the present King of Candi had Usurped it from him, and that he
was the Person that should have succeeded the Old King. And indeed all the
Inhabitants were much more affected to him, which they used to express
continually by the rich Presents they used frequently to bring him.

The Dutch allowed him Forty Rixdollars per month, and 41 Simmeri's of Rice, to
maintain himself and his Retinue, which was a Steward, a Wizard, a Captain, 20
Soldiers, 6 Drummers, 4 Leapers, and 8 Slaves, or Chair-men, to carry those
Sedans we have already spoke of; in all 21 Men. They would not have lost much
by this, if he had continued at Columbo, and had ever come to the Crown of
Candi; for they would have made such Articles with him before they had settled
him on the Throne, that he would have been little more than Titular King.

The 9th, Two Companies of Volunteers were formed out of the Garrisons of the
City and Castle, of 80 Men each, and were ordered to go to the Coast of
Cormandel.

The 10th, We were mustered up, and received the next day two months Pay. Our
chief Officer was a Dantzicker, one Tobias Guntz, Captain-Lieutenant, and our
two Lieutenants were one Koningh, and one Vernie.

The 12th, We went aboard in two small Vessels, and arrived the next day at
Calpintin, where our Men were lodged in a Church which stands out of the
Fortification, where Divine Service is done in Dutch, Portuguese, and
Malabarish. This Fort was built here, and is carefully looked after, because it
is a considerable Pass for other Nations; and besides the Inhabitants drive no
small Trade with the Moors, and others. A great Commodity there, is Areck,
which is a Fruit that grows like the Nutmeg. Most of the Eastern Indians cannot
live without it, being so used to it, that they are never well, but when they
are chawing of it. The Soldiers here, which are 100 in number, keep Dogs, with
which they go and Hunt Bufflers, Sheep, Stags. etc. upon which they live: For
the Land affords nothing but what is Wild, some Fish and some Rice.

We lay still from the 14th, to the 18th, Then orders were given for every Man
to make his own Provision for three days, and to be ready on the 19th of March.
Accordingly they were; and I having a desire to be in the adventure, provided
for my self too, and ordered one of the Men to get me 6 pound of Beet boiled in
Salt Water, and half a pound of Biscuit. The next morning early we set out. Our
two Malabarian Guides went before us. At noon we came near to a Well, but found
no Water there, which we began to want; but our want rather increased: Then we
turned our selves to a River; where we thought to have satisfied our selves,
and found the Water to be Salt. Our comfort was, that we were to come in the
evening to a Well; but when we came to it, we found a Buffler fallen in and
drowned, which made us all abstain from drinking, notwithstanding we were
exceeding thirsty. Our Guide then took us half a mile farther, to a deep sandy
Soil, where they told us we might have Water. There we were forced to make
several holes in the Ground, 2 or 3 yards deep, to get at it; but we were happy
still to have it upon any terms. In this place we lay all night, having set
some Men to watch, and kindled some Fires to prevent the wild Beasts coming
upon us.

The 20th, Early in the morning we marched on through great Woods and
Desert-places, where we saw and heard nothing but Elephants, Tigers, Bears,
etc. there being no Man in all that part of the Country. We came in the
forenoon to an Arm of a Salt-River that reached into the Land a great way; so
that we were forced to wade over, after we had staid about three hours, till
the ebb was at the lowest; and then too we were all forced to strip, and pack
up all our Clothes, Provisions, and Arms, and carry them on our Heads. We were
almost half a quarter of an hour going over; and it was so deep, that some of
the least of our Men, had much to do to keep the Water from running in at their
mouths. Some that thought to be wiser than our Guides, went up to a place where
they saw the Water run very rough, because it was not so deep there. It was but
shallow indeed, but the stream was so strong there, that it threw 'em off out
of their depth, and drowned most of 'em. We being got over made haste on, for
we were by this time in want of Water again, and the best allay of our thirst
we could get, was our Bullets which we rolled about in our mouth to moisten
them. At night we lay still at a place, whence those that would of necessity
drink were forced to go about a mile for Water, and then dig for it too. After
they had made each of them their hole, they drank their sill, and then laid
down in it for coolness, and took a nap there.

The 21th, Three Soldiers came to meet us with three Horses sent from Manara
for the Officers. We got upon them with a very good will, while the poor
fellows were forced to drudge on without Shoes or Stockings (in the same manner
as they set out). We arrived all at Aripen about 3 of the clock in the
afternoon, having gone about 22 Leagues in our three days march; which was very
hard for our Men, who went all the way barefoot. Aripen is a pretty strong
place, kept by 20 Dutch Soldiers, provided with 4 Fieldpieces, and other
Warlike Necessaries convenient for a place of that bigness.

Many Malabarians live about it, of whom one may buy Flesh, Milk, Butter, Eggs,
Fowls, etc. cheap enough: And we bought here two pretty good Bullocks for one
Rixdollar, that served both our Companies.

This place is chiefly designed to keep the Pearlbank from being sish'd by any
one that has no title to it, which is an ossence punishable with death. It is
very unhealthy there, and no European but must expect a Fever that will kill
him, it he stays there long. For which reason they are exchanged from Manara
every four months; and yet they lose generally half their Men. We staid there
all night, and

On the 22th, We marched away again, and at night came by the Island Manara, to
go to which we were to cross the Waters, which is about a mile broad: It is six
miles from Aripen. We were very kindly received by the Dutch Captain that lay
there; and treated very nobly with Flesh and Fish, which is here in great
plenty.

This Island, as we mentioned before, has seven miles compass: It is inhabited
by several Malabars, and abounds in Flesh, Fowls, and fruitful Trees; and all
the Water about it affords plenty of Fish. In short, it may be called an
Earthly Paradise. The Fort is well provided, and is kept by near 100 Dutch
Soldiers. Each Soldier keeps a Boy to clean his Arms and carry them for him,
and a Woman to look after his Meat and serve him. Proportionably to this, the
Officers live in very great State. We lay here three days, and

The 16th, We went in three Dutch Boats to Jafnapatan, where we arrived on

The 27th, And were very well received, and Quartered in the Fort that lies to
the Sea.

The 28th, 29th, and 30th, Our Men were exercised, and 20 Elephants were
brought upon the place whilst we Fired, to use them to stand it without
starting in War. At first they were very fearful and untractable, not being
able to bear the noise and smoke of our Guns, tossing up their Trunks, and were
very furious. At last they were brought to it so, that an Indian could get upon
them, and ride about a Furlong away from us, and then drive them upon us, (we
firing against them all the while,) at length they would break our Ranks, take what
care we could; and though we shot in their very Noses; and if the Cingulayans
that rid them had not prevented them with their Instruments, they would have
trampled us under foot.

The 1st of December, Two Companies of Soldiers came to us from the Coast of
Cormandel, out of the Fort Palliacate, and Nagapatan. They were Quartered in a
Stable, used generally to keep Elephants in.

The 2d, Another Company came from Gala, Battacula, and Triconomala.

The 3d, We had a general Muster, and marched with our 7 Companies, and 8
Fieldpieces drawn by Elephants, and 20 others Elephants besides, out of the
Fort of Jafnapatan. And being drawn out in the Fields there, we were commanded
to enclose our Leaders; that is, to form our selves into a Ring, where we heard
the Articles of War read to us.

Jafnapatan bears the Name of a small Kingdom, which the Dutch took by surprise
from the Portugueses. Its Fort is well built, and strong; having four Bastions,
two Towers, a Counterscarp, and a deep Ditch. It lies upon a Salt Water on the
side of Manara, where the Dutch have built a very strong fine Key.

All the chief Officers lodge within the Fort with their Wives. The under
Officers and Soldiers Wives live amongst the other Inhabitants in the Town,
which is about a League in compass: But there are a great many Gardens in it,
and many poor small Hutts; as also fair large Streets. There are two different
Marketplaces in it; the one for Fish, the other is for all sorts of
Commodities, as Silks, Linen, Pearls, Gold, Silver, Spices, Salt, Butter,
Alum, Tobacco, Rats and Mice, Herbs, all sorts of Colors; in short, all a Man
can desire. Their current Money is made of Copper, and is either Shillings,
Two-pences, Peny-pieces, Damagasties, Half-penies, and Farthings. One may buy
10 or 15 Figs for a Farthing, that are almost a span long; and sometimes 2 or 3
Pounds of Fish for the same price: So that a Man that goes to Market with 4 or
5 Farthings, may buy Provisions to serve a common Family two days for his Money.

I met here with an acquaintance of mine, a Physician, who was chief Surgeon
to the Dutch Hospital, and Physician to Min Here Laurent Piil, the Governor,
and was much esteemed among the Natives of the Country for his Abilities, and
the great Cures he performed.

The 4th, We marched out. Our Major Clebout went first, carried by Slaves in a
Palankin, a sort of Sedan, I have already mentioned. After him marched the 6
Companies, with each an Elephant to draw the Baggage. It was supposed that we
were designed to march to Wani, where the Inhabitants had chosen a new Prince
without consent of the Dutch, their Prince Don Philip being Dead; and designed
to free themselves for the future from paying Tribute to Jafnapatan. But as
soon as they understood that we were drawing toward 'em, they sent to meet us
with ten Elephants, with offers to continue willingly a yearly Tribute of
Elephants and Money, on conditions we would secure them from the King of Candi.

The Major sent them to Jafnapatan with a Letter, and we came at night to a
place called Pas-Piil, where a Dutch Garrison lay. Here the Hutts were ready
for our Men, and provided with necessaries against our coming.

The 5th, 6th, and 7th, We lay still here, being much tired with going ten
Leagues in a day in all that heat, and so sandy a Country. We found there three
great Dutch Ships that were come from Batavia.

The 8th, Four of our Companies, viz. The two that came from Columbo, the other
two from Cormandel, were to Embark secretly, and the two other Companies were
to remain in the Fort, by reason of the Troubles that were in Wani, That very
evening we set forwards for the Coast of Cormandel.

The 9th, Early in the morning, we came before Negapatan. Here a Dutch Yatch
joined us, and two other Vessels, together with three great Boats well Manned
with Seamen. With this Fleet we sailed along the Coast by Krancko Baar, a City
belonging to the King of Denmark, and lying 8 Leagues from Negapatan. We sailed
by the Danish Admiral that lay in the Road, with two other Ships, to whom we
struck our Pendants. We passed on by Porto Novo, a Fort that belongs to the
Moors, under the command of the King of Volkendal. They had a great many Boats
before it, and one at a distance to watch the rest. This one put up a Flag, and
sir'd a Piece for a Signal; and of a sudden they were all under Sail, taking us
for Enemies. But it was but a false alarm of theirs; for our design was only
upon the Fort Policere (which is not far from St. Thomas) into which many
Soldiers that had deserted from the Viceroy Lakay, were got: And this Fort we
had orders to Invest and Demolish, because it was a great hindrance to the
Dutch Commerce.

But on the 21th, A Yatch met us, that was coming to bring us word, that the
French, upon notice of our coming, were fled out of the Fort, and gone to the
King of Volkendal. So we went back to Nagapatan, where we arrived

The 11th, at night, and cast Anchor there. We heard that the Moors had drove
away a Dutch Merchant that was Registerer, and Secretary of Matapatan, and had
seized all his Goods: Upon which we sent 2 of our Boats with 150 men to redress
this Injury.

And on the 13th, They came back with an account of their good success; and
that they had restored the Merchant his Habitation, and forced the Moors to
give back all they had taken from him. Our Ship being to take up 400 quarters
of Rice at this place, we lay still there till

The 12th of January, 1679, When we set sail, and came on

The 13th, To a Dutch Fort called Punto de Pedre, a very pleasant place, having
great plenty of Onions, Tamarins, Figgs, Cocos, Jager, and Arecktrees, which
make delicate shady Walks, some of 'em a mile or two long; and a fine Campaign
Country; There we lay all night, and very well lodged we were.

The 14th, Early in the morning, we marched on foot to Jafnapatan. I was very
dry in the march; and coming to a Malabarian Village, I slipped into a little
Hutt to get me some milk to drink. I found an old Woman there with her
Daughter: I desired a Pint of milk, and they gave it me, asking me a Damagas
for it (which is twopence;) I drunk it off, and having paid my money, went
away to overtake the rest of my Company; and not thinking of any thing, I was
immediately shot in the Leg with one Arrow, and with another in my Thigh. I
pulled them out, and looked all about me, but could not perceive any body, nor
whence they should come. However I thought to fright them, and cried out, O
Nay, Dayoli, mettene Lands inguw^^^e; which signisies, Ye dogs, there are more
Dutch a coming. But that was all the revenge I could have, for I durst not
complain of it, because it was done by stealth, and contrary to our orders,
that I stopped there. So I went out of the Village as fast as I could, and
stopped my Wounds with an old rag, that I used to wrap the lock of my Fusil in,
and overtook my Company, and went on to Jafnapatan in great pain. There our
Post was; and I immediately went to my Countryman Lutz the Physician, who Cured
me; but was forced to cut open my Wounds, because the Arrows were poisoned. We
staid there till

The 14th of February, And then we were carried back in Boats to Manara. There
was a Vessel here that would have held us all very well, but the
Captain-Lieutenant would take but one Company in with him, wanting room for
good quantity of Hogs and Onions, that he had a mind to carry to Columbo to
trade with. We had very good Quarters here, and staid till

The 1 st of March, Then we were divided, and went in two Boats: The one was a
large Dutch one, called the Elephant; the other a poor little Mallabarish one,
into which it was my lot to go: It was quite open, and had neither Rudder, nor
Compass. But those in the Dutch Vessel told us that we should not want one, if
we would but follow 'em; we told 'em we would if we could; but we gave our
selves over for lost, and never expected that it would carry us over the Sea.
However we went well enough while the day lasted; but toward the evening,
coming to the Pearl Bank at Aripen, it began to Rain, and blow exceedingly. The
Wind was good, but so strong, that we were afraid of overturning every minute.
Our four Seamen, who were Malabarians, thought good to keep as nigh to the
shore as we could; all of us thought very well of that too: But the Rogues,
more afraid than we, as soon as they came in sight of the Land, leaped into the
Sea, and left us, and swam to shore. By mere good fortune we had some Soldiers
amongst us, that had been Saylors, who managed the Sails and Stern. I had
chosen to lay me down by the Hearth, where they used to dress their Victuals,
to keep my self and my Writings dry; but the Rain beat upon me, and mixing the
Ashes and Soot with it, I looked next morning like a Chimney-Sweeper; but the
best on it was, that I kept my Papers very safe. This was a bitter night; and in
the morning we struck upon a little marshy Island, and there staid till day, to
see which way we were to take. There was an old fellow with us, that knew
where-about Calpintin was, being well acquainted with the Country; by the help
of his Directions, we thrust off our Boat, and sailed by many other little
Islands like this, and got in sight of Calpintin, and by the next morning to
it. Here we found the fellows tha^ should have been our Guides, but had basely
left us. We lay still here till the 5th Instant.

CHAP. VII.
The manner of Fishing for Pearls: Why this sort of Fishing was laid by for
seven years. The Author's departure from Calpintin to Columbo. The Dangers he
went through in his Journey. Comes to Columbo. Presents sent by the Governor to
the King of Candi: What they were. The Author is ordered to go along with them.
In what base manner the Candians received the Presents; and then treacherously
fell upon those that brought them. How they came off, and in their retreat
destroyed two Heathen Temples. What strange things happened while they were
about it. They return to Columbo. The Gates there are shut up twice a day, and
why. An account of Sittawack, and of the Amboineses who serve the Dutch Company
there. Precious Stones in the Earth and in the Rivers; where most found. A
Description of them; and where, and how they grow. What policy the Author was
forced to use to get a Saphir of an Old Cingulayan. A strange Cock. An Elephant
falls into a Well, out of which there was no getting of him. An Earthquake.

BEfore I proceed, I will inform the Reader how the Pearls are got here, how
Fished for, and how Sold.

The Bank, where they are, lies in the Sea, not far from the Land. It is about
twenty miles long, and two broad; from seven to ten Fathoms deep. It belongs at
this time to the Hollanders. The Oysters in which the Pearls are found, are
about the breadth of one's hand. They stick to the bottoms of Rocks, some
twenty or thirty together. There are People to look every year, and see whether
the Pearls are ripe; when they are so, they write to all the neighboring Kings
to let them know what time the Fishing is to begin. Then the Diverse are sent,
who are Malabarian Fishermen, who come with their Boats, and some Stones along
with them. Each Diver hangs a Stone upon his Foot to sink him the sooner; when
he is at the bottom, he fills his Net with Oysters, and then loosens himself
from the Stone. Then the Stone, together with the Net, is drawn up by another
Malabarian in the Boat, whilst the Man shoots himself up to fetch breath. When
they have thus filled their Boat with Oysters, they row to Land, and throw them
out. There is a Dutch Soldier waits on each Boat, to see that the Malabarians
do not take any of the Pearls away. The three first days these Boats are all
employed for the East India Company; after this they may Fish for themselves
paying a Rixdoller a day for every Diver.

The Oysters are laid in heaps on the Shore, and the Merchants come there to
buy them. They are sold at the rate of eight hundred for a Rixdollar. The gain
or loss of the Buyer depends on mere chance: For some may be find no Pearls in
all they buy; others make vast advantage of their Bargain.

There has been no Fishing here for these eight years. Some superstitiously
think that the place is bewitched: Others give this for a reason (which I
rather approve of) that the boisterousness of the Sea has covered the Oysters
with Sand, so that they cannot come at them.

The 6th, In the morning all our Company went in the Boat called the Elephant;
and having the Wind for us, we expected to reach to Columbo by night. The
number of the Soldiers and Officers was in all 110. We had but a small Vessel
with Water, a bushel of Rice, a small Buffler, and a young Buck; which two
last things were for a present to the Governor. Thus the Boat was quite full,
and no Man had room to lie down, but was forced to keep his Seat. The Wind blew
North: But at noon it ceased, and then we went but flowly: but we kept in sight
of Land all along on our left hand. Toward night, the Wind arose again; and and
then we made some speed. Therefore the Steersmen bad us all look out sharp for
Columbo, where we earnestly desired to be, especially because our Water Vessel
was every drop drunk out.

The 7th, By break of day, we found that we were carried wide off of it by the
strength of the current, and partly by the oversight of our Steersman: For we
could see no Columbo, nor Land neither. All the Officers were very angry with
him for it, and would certainly have thrown him into Sea, if he had not got up
to the top of the Mast, where they made him stay all that day for his
Punishment. Our Captain consulted the Map of the Island Ceylon, and he directed
us somewhat in our course; and about night we got in sight of Picod' Adam, or
Adam's-Hill; and at six of the Clock next morning we got happily to Columbo. It
was high time for us to get thither, considering that we had been two days and
three nights without Meat or Drink. The Steersman begged we would pardon him,
and not complain of him to the Governor.

The 8th, As soon as the Gates were opened, we entered the City and went to our
respective Posts. The Captain, with whom I spent some time when I was here
before, sent to me to desire me to make his House my own again, if I pleased. I
did not make any refusal of so advantageous a proffer, but accepted of it, and
I staid with him till

The 16th, When I was ordered to go with several others to carry a Present,
which the Governor sent to the King of Candi; during which time I had the Title
and Office of Captain. The Presents were, two Persian Horses, with sine Velvet
Clothes and Trappings, each Horse led by two Malabarian Slaves: Ten Falcons,
each carried by a Malabarian dressed all in white: Six Musk-Cats, each in a
different Cage, carried by two Slaves: Six very large Cocks from Tutucurini,
each of them likewise in a Cage, covered with green Velvet: Two Persian Sheep,
each with a Tail that weighed 20 or 25 pound: A Box that had two Bottles in it,
that held each of them six Gallons of Persian Wine: Besides this, a great piece
of Sandel Wood, that weighed 200 pound, wrapped up in sine white Linen. The
Letter that was to be delivered to the King, was carried in a Silver Cap by a
Sergeant bare-headed, and a Canopy was carried over it by four Cingulayan
Nobles: By each of which another went with a large Wax-Candle lighted as long
as a half Pike.

Our march began in order at the Governor's House. Some Companies of Cingulaish
Soldiers went first; then some Companies of Dutch; then the Presents; after
them two Companies more of Dutch. These were ordered to go as far as the King
of Candi's residential Town, Ruenel. All the City was in Arms, and all the
Cannon was Fired round, and a Dutch Company that conducted us out of Town gave
three Vollies and went back again.

We, together with the others beforementioned, went on with the Presents. At
night we came to a place, where Dutch Potters live, two Leagues from Columbo;
there we lay that night, and the next morning marched on, and came

The 17th, At night to Hanquelle or Gourwebel, a Dutch Fort, where we lay.

The 18th, We had a very unpleasant and dirty way, and were not a little
tormented with Bloodsuckers, till we came to the Fort Sittawack, which is in
possession of the Dutch, and 12 Leagues distant from Columbo. Immediately
Letters were written, on leaves of Sugar-trees, and dispatched to the Coral of
Candi at Ruenel, to acquaint him with our being come thither, with a Present
for the King his Master; and that he should permit them to come forwards, if he
pleased to receive them. But not a word of answer did we get, and we staid here
in expectation of it six whole Weeks, till the end of September. At last we had
Directions sent us from Columbo, which were, That we should go four Leagues
farther beyond Ruenel, and deliver them to the Coral, and then come back. And
accordingly

The 1st of October, We went; and after having crossed seven little Rivers, we
came to Ruenel. This Fort heretofore belonged to the Dutch, but was abandoned
by them, though themselves had built it. There we crossed over, and having
marched a League further, we came to a large Plain, where we halted a while to
rest and refresh our selves. By that time we had been there about half an hour,
we saw and heard several small Parties of Cinguleses coming upon us from every
side. Our chief Commander sent some Cingulayans to ask what they meant to do?
They answered them, that the King of Candi had sent them to take the Presents
we had brought.

We would not trust 'em. So we put our selves in order, and stood our Ground.
Their number still increased, and they came very thick out of a Wood. At last
their Artillery (which was very small) appeared too, and then they drew toward
us. We sent again to 'em to know what they designed to do with their Artillery,
and whether this was their custom to repay Civilities? They told us their
Fieldpieces were not loaded.

We would have been glad to have been at home again, for we were but two
Companies of Dutch of 160 Men each, and two or three hundred Cingulayans; and
these Heathens were almost innumerable. They appeared as thick as Grass on the
Field. The Presents were sent for by the Monthou, who was one of the King's
Chief Officers, and an under Officer took them and delivered them to him. He
received them, and he giving no orders for their Artillery to be dischrged, we
gave no Volley of our side.

Our Officer desired to speak to the King's Saudi in Person, and a place was
appointed for them to meet at, equally distant from them both. The Saudi came
upon an Elephant, and our Officer was on Horseback. These two sorts of
Creatures are not to be brought near one another, wherefore they were forced to
light, and meet a-foot.

The Saudi did not take off his Cap, because he belonged to Crowned a Head:
Ours only represented a body of Merchants, and Deputy Governors.

Our Officer complained of the manner of our Reception, and asked why so many
thousand Men were drawn out against us, knowing that we had but two Companies
of Dutch: The reason the Saudi gave was, That his Master had commanded it to be
so; so they parted, but neither would draw his Men off first. At last, Night
coming upon us, we were forced to retire.

They let us pass by quietly enough till we were got to the River by Ruenel
(which is most like the Rhine of any I ever saw;) But as soon as one of our
Companies was got over, they fell upon the Rear of the other. Our Cingulayans
took the River, and swam over, leaving us in the lurch. We continued Firing
upon them, and they upon us; till we were all got quite over. We lost our
Lieutenant and two private Soldiers. We killed several of theirs, and wounded
many more. We had a very bad way to go, and it fell a Raining, which made it
more Dirty and Slippery, so that we could not go so fast as we would have done.
We retired toward Sittawack, and passed by a steep Rock; whence it is
reported, That the late King of Sittawack's Wife and Daughter flung themselves
down headlong, having received the News that he had lost the Battle against the
King of Candi. The Candians all the while came after us, but were not able to
do us any great harm, because the ways were so narrow that they could not come
up to us. Yet we were forced every now and then to Fire in the Rear of us.

The 2d, 3d and 4th we rested at Sittawack, the next day we destroyed two
Heathenish Temples not far from that place; they were built upon a rising
Ground, and cut out of a vast Rock: Within they were adorned with many Images
and Statues of Wood and Stone, representing Devils, etc. Under one of the
Pagods we found a dark black hole, as it were grown so with Smoke, no body
durst venture to creep in. We threw some Straw into it, and Fired it, but we
could not sound the Depth or Length of it. Some Fellows were mightily afraid of
standing near the hole, and were afraid that we should poke some Cingulayan
Devil out of it; but if he was there, he did not come out, nor did we find out
what it was made for.

We had several Lutherans and Papists amongst us; the first of these fell a
Singing some Spiritual Hymns in the Temple, that had that hole under it. The
Papists went together into the other, and they having among them an Old Fellow
that had been a a Priest heretofore, he fell to saying Mass. There was on the
sudden such a noise, and thundering, and cracking, that we thought we should
have been a blown up, or that the Temple would have fallen upon us, Some run
out thinking to be safer, but the noise and hurly-burly was greater there than
within, so that some came in again; and this continued a quarter of an Hour.

The 6th we came away, and toward the Evening entered into Columbo; where we
found two great Ships lying in the Road come from Japan, with Copper, Gold,
China and Saccapali which is a liquor of a faint smell, but very wholesome.

The 7th I was ordered to my Post, which was at the Gate called Victoria, where
I stayed till the 2d of February 1680. I had 110 Men under me. The Castle Gates
were opened and shut, every Morning and Night at Six of the Clock, and all the
Keys tied together with a Silver Chain, were carried to the Governor: The Gates
are shut likewise from Eleven to One a Clock in the Day time, that being the
hottest part of the Day, and therefore generally taken to sleep in. We
Exercised our Men every Mondy, and every Sunday we went constantly twice a Day
to Church, where Divine Service was performed in Dutch and Portuguese, after
the Reformed way.

The 9th Instant we went to relieve the Company that was at Sittawack, Twelve
Leagues from Columbo; we got there that Night, and the next Day being

The 10th, the Company marched out and left us. And here I shall give the
Reader some short Account of the Fort of Sittawack: It is situated upon a
Rocky Ground; near to this, just over the River, stood heretofore the King of
Sittawack's Palace, ruined since by the Portuguese: It is about four hundred
Paces in Circuit: It is built foursquare, with four Bastions, called, Rycloff,
Louisa, Columbo, and Gala; Each of these Bastions has two Pieces of large
Cannon. In the middle of this place is a large square Bulwark: Under this are
kept the Provisions, as Rice, Flesh, Salt, and Brandy; and the Ammunitious of
War, Powder, Grenades, and Balls: Over that was the Guard Room, where all the
Men lay; at each corner of which were two small Pieces of Cannon. Half the Men
might have leave to be out of the Fort in the Daytime, but at Night they were
to be in, every Man, upon pain of Death. Every Night the Names were called
over, and Prayers Read; and on Sunday Night we had a Sermon preached in the
Guard-Chamber. Here is also a Company of Amboineses continually kept in the
Dutch Service. Their Licutenant was called Alons, and was of Royal Blood. They
live in the Town altogether, and with their Huts they make a very pretty
Street, and they have their Wives with them. But at Night they are as much
obliged to be in the Fort as any of us. They are very nimble and active at
Running or Leaping. They never have but little Beards, and behind in their
Necks they have a sort of bunch grows like a Wen. Their Pay is, for a
Lieutenant 24 Rix Dollars a Month, an Ensign 16, a Corporal 8, a Private
Sentinel 5, all paid in Money.

The Cingulayans are mightily afraid of the Amboineses, and rather more than
the Europeans are; for they are great devourers of Men. They wear Muskets and
short Swords. Besides their own Language, they generally speak Maleysh,
Cingulaish, Portuguese, and Dutch. They love Gaming excessively, and the day
time they generally spend in Cock-fighting, Cards, and Dice; and when they have
lost all their Money, they go to some work or other, as Carving several things
in Stone or Wood, etc. till their Month's Pay comes into their hands again, and
as soon as they have paid their Debts, what is left they put to the venture;
and when they have lost that, it is much if the Wife is not stripped of all her
Ornaments to supply him in the pursuit of his Gaming, and the Family is left
often in an extreme necessity, and ready to starve.

As for Sittawack, it is a Fort designed to resist the King of Candi: It has
three little Counties or Corls depending upon it, the one is called Cuculi and
in Dutch the Hoender Grafschap, (Hoender signifying Fowls, which are there in
abundance;) the second is called Bulatkam-Corl, from the quantity of Plants it
produces, which serve for Food to the Inhabitants: The third Bisang-Corl, from
the great quantity of Figs that grow there. In each of these Corls are some
hundreds of Peasants that are under Contribution, and are forced to pay a
fourth part of all their Rice to the Fort, and likewise of their Fruit-bearing
Trees, as Cocos, A ack, Sugar.

This Fort besides serves for a Guard upon all the precious Stones, as Rubies,
Saphyrs, Emeralds, the Topaz and Azure Stones, that lie in and upon the Ground:
They are sometimes washed into the Rivers by the great Rain and Water Floods. In
the River that runs from Saffrigam (which was once a Dutch Fortification, but
now left) one may find abundance of little Rubies, and sometimes a pretty large
one; the very Sand of that River is almost of the same substance with the
Stones, being of a Red and Blue Color. We often used to go to bath in that
River, and seek for precious Stones, but not when the Water was high, for fear
of the Crocodiles; though it was not worth any Man's while, unless he could
swim, and venture to dive in the deepest places for 'em; because it is there
only that those of any considerable bigness are to be found.

There is a little rivulet that runs below this Fort, coming from between two
high Hills, and discharges or empties it self into the River, in which are
found Saphyrs, Emeralds, Topaz and Lazule-Stones: We have walked many a day in
this Water for two or three Miles an end, to look for 'em. We had little
Basket-nets which the Amboineses lent us; and we used to thrust the Nets into
holes, and fetched out good and bad together, and shake out of the Net all the
Sand and Gravel, and the Stones that were of any bigness remained. Those that
had no Net made but but little on it. The Elephants used to be very troublesome
to us, and we were forced often to go some Miles about to avoid them, and I for
my part was always provided with a Gun against them; and for fear too of Tigers
and Serpents.

A small account of the Nature of these Stones will not be unpleasant to the
Reader; wherefore I will, as far as I know, give as brief an account of them as
I can:

And first for the Rubies, they grow in a reddish, stony, sandy Ground, one
Fathom or two deep, spreading themselves like Veins, and though the great
Floods carry them away in the Rivers; they keep their Beauty and Color as well
under water as under ground, but if the water runs off of them, and leaves them
ever so little exposed to the Sun, they turn as black as a Coal.

The Saphirs grow in a hard bluish ground, about a Fathom deep, and in veins
too, and are washed likewise into the Rivers by the violent Rains and Flood.
Some are as big as the top of one's Finger;

So are Emeralds, Topazes, and Lazule-stones, these are as Red as Fire, and as
Blue as the Sky.

Another sort of stone is found here, called Cat's Eyes: These are so called
from their color, which is a changable Blue and White.

Red, Blue, Yellow, Black, and White Crystal is to be found every where, and
is very troublesome to Men upon their March, when they go barefoot, as all our
Men did, but they find an Herb very common there, which they call Horse-foot,
that cures them in two or three days time.

Some of our Company used to frequent those Rivers every day, and at last all
of 'em contracted some Distemper, and that was all that some got by it;
wherefore our Officers gave orders that no man should go any more into the
water upon that design.

On a certain time that I was upon no Duty, I went about a League from the
Fort, where I spied an old Cingulayan, with his two Sons, in the River seeking
Stones: I took care to come up to them without being discovered, least they
should have slipped away; I asked 'em if they had found any stones, one of 'em
answered, Netti Ralu, which is, no Sir; I would not believe him, so I searched
his Clothes, and found in some of his Buttons, among other little Saphyrs, one
that was about the bigness of a Hazel Nut. I asked him if he would sell it, he
refused it at first, but at last he offered it me, and two small ones with it,
for half a Dollar, Dutch Money. I had at that present time no Money by me, and I
durst not take it by force from the old Fellow neither, because he was a
subject of the Dutch; and what to do I could not tell, having a great mind to
the stone too: I had a piece of Crystal in my Pocket, which I took out, and
conveyed the Saphir into my mouth; so I told him I would give him his price if
he would go to Sittawack, and offering to give him it again, to keep till then,
I let the Piece of Crystal fall into the Water, he thinking it was his stone,
cried out, O Deine Balatie, which signifies, Plague it is gone: I seemed
concerned, and told him he might find it again. He and his Sons went to seck
for it, but to no purpose: They were mighty sorry for their loss; I told them I
would make them some recompense, and took them with me to Sittawack, where I
gave them three shillings, and they went away very well satisfied. I made use
of this stratagem, because if I had left the stone in their keeping, they would
have mistrusted me, and never have come to the Fort after me.

The Tenth of March I went with two other Lutheran Gentlemen, (each of us
having a Gun with us,) to the Hill, where we had not long since destroyed the
two Pagods, to see what condition they were in. We found them ruined as we had
left them, and poked again in the dark hole; But I believe we had routed the
Devil the time before, for we could not make him roar any more, do what we
could. At the bottom of the Hill I saw abundance of fine Cocks and Hens, and I
bought some of the Hens and one Cock of an old Woman they belonged to. She told
me that the Cock I bought was consacrated for an Offering, while the Pagods
stood, and therefore that I should not kill him, and that he would beat any
Cock whatsoever. I laughed at the story, and yet was a little afraid because it
was designed for the Devil, and did not know but he might come and fetch him.
However I ventured upon him, and paid as I did for my Hens, a Dutch penny for
each of them. Being come to the Fort, I let him run there: In two or three days
he fought and beat every Cock in the Fort that he could come nigh. Every Body
wondered at the sierceness of this little Cock, and I began to think that what
the old Woman had told me might be true. At last I made a trade of
Cock-sighting, and I got all the Amboineses about me. They laid wagers among
themselves, and I only won the Cocks that mine beat, which amounted to two or
three and thirty. At last they ignorantly hit the Nail on the head, saying that
the Devil was in him. Being to go to Columbo again, I took him with me, and
thought he would have done as great feats there, but he was overmatched with a
Cock that came from Tutucurini, that beat him lustily.

The 2d of March, A Laserin came to Town, and told us that an Elephant was
fallen into the King's Well, on the other side of the River. I went with
several others, and saw him lie at the bottom squeezed together, standing
almost up an end, but his Legs bent, and he was very uneasy. We took some Fig
leaves which we threw down to him; he took 'em very thankfully, and eat them.
At last he lifted up his Proboses, and made a horrid noise, which we
interpreted as a begging us to help him out; but he lying 12 Fathoms deep, we
could not possibly do it. One of our Drummers was there with us; who having
been pursued one time by an Elephant, as he was Hunting, knew this to be the
Elephant, that had put him so hard to his shifts; for if it had not been for a
large Tree that he climbed up into, he had certainly been killed. The Drummer
to be revenged of him, went the next day by himself, threw a great many dry
sticks upon him, and some straw, and set it all on Fire, and then came home and
told us the exploit.

The 3d of the same Month about 8 or 9 of the Clock at night, We felt a very
violent Earthquake coming from the Northward, which shook our Block-house
extremely. All the Men that lay in the Guard Room were awaked out of their
sleep, and thought it was an Alarm. Every body would make haste to come out,
and every body would be first down stairs. The Throng was intolerable; and in
the bustle the Lamp went out, which made the greater Confusion; so that at last
very few went out as they should do, but fell down stairs. We felt three
several shakes, the last of which was so very violent, that we thought the
whole Island would have been lost; and we heard from the Seamen that lay in the
Road before Columbo, that they had felt it very sensibly too. What conclusions
may be drawn from this, of the causes of Earthquakes, I leave Naturalists to
agree about if they please or can.

CHAP. VIII.
The Author, with three others, go a Hunting. They meet with Elephants, and
kill one of them. All sorts of venomous Creatures come to Sittawack, to save
themselves from the Water, that overflowed all the Land about it. Their manner
of Hunting. Envoys that came to bring Presents to the King of Candi, kept
Prisoners by him. Two Englishmen kept for Slaves in Candi, make their escape,
and come to Sittawack; they tell a pleasant Story of a Country fellow that had
used a Ruby for a Whetstone several Years. The Author and the Englishmen come
to Columbo, where they are treated very civily. He goes to Cormandel, thence to
Columbo again. Execution done. The Author is made Secretary of the
East-India-house. A Jew turns Christian, and Marries a Cingulaish Gentlewoman.
A Description of Columbo; and an Account of the Manners of that place, their
Marriages, etc.

I Spent all the Month of March in Hunting, and I lived altogether upon what
Game I used to bring home with me. Upon a certain night the Moon being at Full
(knowing it would be light all night) I, with three Gentlemen more, went out
into a fair Plain, about a league from Sittawack, where we designed to have
some Stags. We set our selves down at the side of a Hill, to watch the wild
Beasts, that we expected would come out of a Wood to feed where we were, there
being very fine Grass.

The first that appeared were Bufflars, among which there was a Stag; they came
directly to the place where one of our Company was (who was a Swede) and did
not know what Creature it was. As soon as these came to smell him, they took to
the top of the Hill again immediately, and made a great noise there. On the
other side we heard several Elephants making toward us. About Midnight, being
tired with sitting, we got together to ask one another's Advice, what we should
do, when the Elephants came. We resolved to fall upon them; because we
concluded they kept the Game from coming into the Dale, and so spoiled our
sport.

When we got into the middle of the Plain, an Elephant broke out of the Wood,
and run at us immediately; We took to our Heels, and run as fast as we could to
the place where we first sat down; there we took Courage again, and resolved to
go on again, and that not one of us would run away, as we had done before: At
the left hand of the Plain, we saw two great Elephants by a Tree eating the
Leaves of it.

The Swede would show the greatest Courage, and went foremost; and being within
60 paces of 'em, fired upon them, but they did not stir for all that: After
that I went a little nearer, and shot one of of them in the Head, which made
him make a most hideous noise; and then they ran off into the Wood again.

We heard on the other side of us some more of 'em, and went toward 'em: We
heard where they were, but we could not see 'em; for they were feeding about a
Tree that had boughs which reached down to the ground, amongst which they stood
like so many Horses at a Manger. We came close to the very Tree, where they
were, and yet could only hear 'em. I went a little on one side of the Tree, and
then discovered a terrible huge Elephant, with four small ones besides, about
ten paces from me. My Gun was cocked, and I, having overcome that little
Pannick fear that seized me at first, gave fire upon the biggest, and hit him
just on the head, which made him roar lustily. Then I retired, and another
stepped in, who fired likewise, and then another; so we kept firing three times a
piece round. The Elephants gave ground, but not above 20 or 30 paces, and set
up a hideous roaring.

We did not think it safe to pursue any more Game; So we went back to
Sittawack. The next morning the neighboring Cingulayans came down to the
Valley, to see what was done there, having heard much shooting in the night;
They found an Elephant, with two very sine teeth, lie dead. They gave an
account of it to our chief Officer, who sent immediately for me, and asked if
we had shot the Elephant: I told him it was probable, because we had been
pursued in the night by some of 'em, which obliged us to fire upon 'em. This
was the only reason that could serve to excuse us; for it is strictly forbidden
to shoot any Elephants, unless a Man is in danger of his Life. Our Officer sent
word of it to the Governor of Columbo, and sent withal the Elephant's two
Teeth. The Flesh of this kind of Animals is good for nothing; the Fat is used
for Lamps, the rest was left in the place.

In April it rained so violently, that we were almost overwhelmed with Water.
The Amboineses, who, as I told you before, lived in the Town, were forced to be
taken into the Fort, with their Wives and Children; Men, and Beasts, both tame
and wild, were drove up into the Mountains: And our Fort was very full of
Serpents, Scorpions, and other venomous Creatures. We did what we could to keep
them out, by making Fires at all the Gates and Posts where the Sentinels stood.

The Rains abated in May, and likewise the Floods; and that Month I saw nothing
remarkable, but that the Elephants showed themselves in vast Numbers about our
Fort. Most nights of this Month I went a Hunting with Cingulayan Sports-men,
and with them I had always good Sport; and brought sometimes as much home as
would serve the whole Garrison. An Indian used to go foremost, with a lighted
Torch upon his Head, and a Stick in his Hand, to which some Shells are tied
loose; and he goes along shaking of 'em, making a continual rat'ling. As soon
as any Bufflers, Hearts, or Hares, etc. hear this, and see the Fire, they come
toward it, and within shot of the fellow; then he that goes behind him shoots
as many as he pleases of 'em. But the fellows sometimes are in danger of being
run at by an Elephant, who now and then pursues them, and puts 'em to it very
hard, notwithstanding their Fire, and the ratt'ling of their Shells.

The 1st of July, There came an Envoy from Columbo to Sittawack, called Mierop:
He had with him an Ambassador from the King of Persia. He rode in a very fine
curious Chariot, made after the Persian manner, drawn by two Oxen, covered with
fine white Linen. His Presents for the King of Candi were two white Lions,
three Tigers, twelve Musk-Cats, all carried in very neat Cages, lined with
green Velvet. Two black Persian Horses, covered likewise with green Velvet; and
twenty Falcons, carried by so many black Malabarian Slaves. The Letter was
carried by the Dutch Ambassador in a Silver Cup, and over him was a Canopy
carried by 4 Cingulayan Noblemen bare-headed.

The 2d, We guarded these Presents as far as a place, called The Devil's Tree,
by Ruenel; and having given our Ambassadors three Vollies, we left them. They
went forwards with their Presents to Buare-Birge, which is in the King of
Candi's Dominion. As soon as the King heard of their coming thither, he gave
orders to have them all secured, and provided Necessaries for the Men, and the
Beasts they brought along with them; and to keep them in close custody till
further orders. And it is a question whether or no they will ever be set at
liberty: For it is above 22 years since one John Baptista was sent thither as
an Envoy from the Dutch, and another Ambassador sent from the French Viceroy of
Trinconomala, who are there still, kept in Prison and in Fetters, without any
hopes of being ever free, as long as this King lives.

Besides this Consinement, they live very hard; for though the King allows them
necessaries (and those it may be not in great plenty neither) the King's
Officers convert the half of them to their own Use and Profit.

On this same day, Two gray Old Men came to us in the Fort of Sittawack,
dressed after the Cingulayan manner. They told us that they came about 20 years
since to Calpintin with an English Ship, and that they, with ten other Seamen,
being sent on shore to this Island to fetch Provisions, Water, and Wood, they
were trapann'd by some Candians, who sent them to Candi, where they had been
kept Prisoners all that while every one of 'em. That the other ten were dead,
and they two had ventured their Lives to make their escape, and had left their
Black Wives behind them. They had been eight days a coming (or rather eight
nights, that being the only time they could travel in, being forced to lie hid
all day in the Woods). They had heard that day the shooting from our Fort, and
judged it, by that, to be a place in the Hands of the Christians; and were
overjoyed to find themselves delivered out of the power of their cruel Master,
the King of Candi.

One of them was a Gunner, the other a Drummer, and both spoke besides,
English, very good Cingulaian and Portuguese: The Gunner told us a great many
passages of his Life, during their Slavery; and amongst other Relations,
described to us the Richness of the King of Candi's Warlike instruments: His
Carriages are all over-laid with Gold and Silver, and inlaid with Rubies and
Saphyrs. He told us that he had seen once a great Ruby that a Cingulaian
Peasant had found, and carried home to use for a Whet-stone, and had whetted
his Knives and Hatchets with it for some Years. A certain Field Officer of the
King of Candi happening to go to that Contryman's House, saw it, and carried it
to the King, who sent immediately for the Country Fellow, and asked him what he
would have for his Whetstone: The poor fellow told the King that he had found
it in the River of Bibliogam, and that it was at his service, and that he could
get another stone to do his business as well. This innocent answer satisfied
the King that he did not know the value of his Jewel; for had he known it, it
would have cost him his life. The King dismissed him, and commanded some Land and
Cattle to be given him, ordering him for the time to come to let such stones
lie whenever he found 'em.

The 3d Instant these two poor English Men were sent in a Boat to Columbo; I
went along with them to introduce them to the Governor, who received us with
extraordinary courtesy, and after a great many questions to satisfy his
curiosity, sent for Clothes, which he freely presented them with, and then took
them to his Table, and very civilly desired them to stay in his House till some
opportunity offered it self to send them to Batavia, where they might easily
get an English Ship to carry them to Bantam.

The 4th I went back with two Soldiers to Sittawack, where I continued till

The 12th; when we were all relieved by a fresh Company from Columbo.

The 15th we marched from Sittawack in the Morning, and came at Night to
Columbo. I packed up amongst my things, two or three hundred of Bulat Leaves,
which two Cingulayans carried after me. These Leaves I have already told you
are chewed commonly by the Inhabitants; so I brought them to make a present of
to my Landlady. I cannot tell whether Heaven designed me an occasion of making
my Fortune or no, but however it was, I refused laying hold on it; and how it
was I will relate in short. My Landlady treated me very civilly from the first
time of my coming to her House, where I paid her 3 Rixdollers by the Month, and
had a very good Table, and what Suri I pleased at Meals: Her entertainment grew
in time kinder and kinder; and then it broke out into some preliminary
interrogations, why I would not settle there? Why I would not Marry? and many
things of that kind; at last it came to a close application, and to a plain
offer of her self, if I would marry. When I considered her on one side, as to
her Fortune, I must confess she did not altogether displease me. Her first
Husband was a substantial free Merchant at Columbo, called John Christantz; he
was owner of of a Ship, with which he had often been at Bengal at the River
Ganges, and drove there a considerable Trade, but going there again in the year
1678, was cast away with a Hurrican, and he and his ship lost. What she lost by
this accident I do not know, but she was left worth near thirty thousand
Ducats, and twenty Slaves from Bengal which she used very inhumanly: But the
Figure she made never would permit me to entertain a thought of marrying her,
but that other People may judge whether I was too nice, or but reasonably so, I
will give some description of her: I did not dislike her merely for her being
Black, but methoughts her Ears, though they were richly set out with Gold,
looked but hideously, being longer than my Hand: Her Hair, that would reach
down to her Heels, she would besmear every Day with Oil made of Coco-Nuts, and
then wind it up on her Head, just as we serve Horses in Holland, when they have
long Tails: She wore a little short sort of a Wastcoat that hardly covered her
Breasts, fastened with Gold Buttons; from the Breast down to beneath the Navel
she was Naked. The best part of her Dress was from beneath the Navel downwards,
having a Linen Garment down to the Feet, and another-like one at top of that,
something longer than the under one: She had a great Necklace round her Neck
made of Gold and Ivory: She spoke no Dutch, but Portuguese and Cingulaish,
which were her Father and Mother's Languages, and the Malabarian which is much
the same. All these things together were so far from raising any Passion for
her, that they were a preservative against it, so I even left her as I found
her.

There were at this time two Sloops and a Yacht ready to set sail for the Coast
of Malabar, there to hinder the Malabarians Boats in their Pepper Trafsick: I
was sent to command them, and had my choice of Men out of all the Company:
After that I picked them out that I liked best, I took twenty of them with my
self on board the Yatch, called the Trinconomala, and in each of the two Sloops
went 12 Men, and 7 Seamen.

The 18th. in the Evening we set sail. I had with me besides my twenty Men, a
Steersman, and 15 Seamen; and I put off with our Flags and Pendants as
Commadore from Columbo.

The 19th, 20th, 21st, and 22d, we saw no Land: We had the wind for us, but the
stream was contrary to us.

The 23d, we espied land in the Forenoon, and in the Afternoon we came before
the Town Couchin, which belonged heretofore to the Portuguese. I went to the
Commadore that lay there, and delivered my Letter to him from the Governor of
Columbo. The next Day he joined us with another Sloop well Manned, and gave us
instructions how we might best annoy the Malabarians.

The 25th we went to Sea again, and there Cruised along the Coast up to Goa, a
Portuguese Town. We were in a continual Chase, and all the Boats that we met
laden with Cardamunga, and Pepper, and could not produce a Dutch Pass, we
took. Their Provisions and Goods we stowed in our Vessels, and sunk theirs; but
many of the Malabarian Vessels being little ones, kept in the Shallows near the
Land, where we could not come, ours drawing much more Water than theirs did,
and those were secure enough.

The 6th of October, we went back to Couchin, and brought thither fifty
Malabarian Prisoners with us, and a great deal of Onions, Pepper, Cardamunga,
Rice, and Dry Fish. I acquainted the Commadore with what I had done, and
brought with me, and he left all the Booty amongst us, except the Pepper, which
he kept to himself.

Here we stayed till the 20th of November, and found it much better living than
in Ceylon.

The 21st, we went back homewards, and arrived happily at Columbo on the 29th
about three of the Clock in the Afternoon: I delivered to the Governor my
Letters from Couchin, and every one went to his respective Post. We had but two
Men died in the Expedition, they were shot with two Poisoned Assagayen or
Darts; and one Seaman had his Arm shot off by a Gun that burst in the firing.

The 30th, a Master Gunner called Henry Scholten was shot to death, he was a
Lutheran, and would not hearken to any instructions or advice that our
Protestant Minister offered him: But being come to the place of Execution, he
prayed for himself: Three Muskets were fired upon him, which dispatched him in
an instant. Then his Friends took him and put him in a Coffin, and buried him.
The same day two Moors of Volkendal that had been caught at Aripen by the
Pearl-bank, were soundly whipped, all their cry was Apoi Paring, Apoi Paring in
Malabarian, that is to say, Mercy Sirs, Mercy Sirs; at last they hung their
Heads on one side, which made me think they were dead; but as soon as the
whipping was over, they held up their Heads briskly again. The Executioner
rubbed their wounds afterward with Pepper and Salt, and they were kept in
Fetters, as belonging properly to the Company.

I was now offered a Post, which I thought more advantageous, and not exposed
to so much Fatigue, which was to be Overseer of the 12 Clerks belongto the East
India Company: I accepted of it, and entered into the Office on the 1st of
December. The Chief of that Office was one Walter Vander Beek. It was open from
Seven till Ten in the Morning, and from Two till Six in the Afternoon, all
which time there was business enough for the Twelve Clerks.

I Dieted all this while with my long-ear'd Widow, who continued asking me why
I would not marry: I told her I would have her if she would leave off Oyling
her Hair, and let her Ears be clipped into shape; at which she shook her Head,
and said in a doleful manner that she would die first.

There was at this time a Jew that had lived a considerable time in the House
of a Cingulaish Nobleman, and had been very familiar with his Daughter, though
not Married to her: He had a grievous fit of Sickness, during which she was so
faithful and serviceable to him, that he promised her Marriage as soon as he
should be recovered. Being got up again, she pursued him to make good his
Promise; but the Jew refused it out of mere shame of being seen at Church with
such a long-ear'd Creature; and told her that was the only reason he could give
her for going back from his Word. She, to remedy that, consented to have her
Ears cut into better fashion, and had it done accordingly; after which the Jew
Married her in Columbo on a Sunday. A little while after he fell Lame, both in
his Hands and Feet, and nothing but misfortunes befell him. The cause of all
this he imputed wholly to his being turned Christian; and looked upon all as a
just Judgment upon him for having forsaken the Jewish Religion: Bitterly
Cursing the hour he had ever been Baptized. Another Jew, a Convert likewise,
Married at the same time a Black young Gentlewoman of Malabar, very Rich; but
this Marriage proved more happy than the other.

Being occasionally come to treat of Marriages, I will give you some Account
how they are performed at Columbo.

The Parties being agreed beforehand, the Bridegroom comes, with two or three
of his Friends, to the Bride's House, where she is dressed in fine white Linen
and fine Flowers, to receive him. Her Father and Mother, if she has any, are to
be present there; and so are any two Persons that were at her Baptism. The
Certificate being produced, the Bride and Bridegroom give one another a Ring;
after this they make merry. The next Sunday after it, the Names are published
three times in the Church; and the Tuesday after that, they are Married. When
they go to Church, they have several Balliators, or Leapers, that go before
them Dancing all the way. Then goes the Bride between two Women, with a fine
Umbrella over her Head; then the Bridegroom between two of his Friends. The
Ceremony being ended; when the Bride is come home again, every one in the Room
Sprinkles her with Rose Water, and throws an handful of Flowers upon her. Then
they have a Wedding-Dinner, which is always given by the Maid's Father and
Mother at their House: When the new Couple are got to Bed, they fall a-beating
Drums, Tamelins, and other Instruments, for about an hour; the Balliators all
the while Dancing, and making a great noise. The next day they go about a mile
or two out of Town, where they have a Dinner at some Publick-House, which is
generally given by the two Bride-men.

Any European in Ceylon may marry any Woman he pleases: But if he is in the
Dutch Service, the Marriage is not permitted; unless a Testimonial is given of
the Woman's being Christened, under the Minister's Hand and Seal.

These Women pretend to have a much greater Inclination and Love for a white
Man, than for their own Countrymen: So that, if there is any Credit to be
given to 'em, one might be pretty secure of keeping one's Wife to himself, at
least, from a black Rival. But I have known many Instances to the contrary, of
Women that have been brought to Bed with black Children, which never happens if
a Woman keeps constantly to an European; and several complaints I have known
made of this kind to the Ministers. Many indeed choose rather to to take no
notice of it, than to expose themselves by making their complaint; but if any
brought it to an Examination, and it was either found out or confessed; both
she and the Adulterer were severely Whipped, and made Slaves of, together with
the Brats. There lived a Shoemaker in the Old City of Columbo, that had
married a Mastize, (so they call a Woman that has had a white Father and a
black Mother,) her Father and Mother were very honest People, and my great
acquaintance; (he was a Brewer of Columbo, and one of the Burghers): The young
Couple had not been married above six or seven Months, when a Malabarian, one
of the Washers, came as it is usual at Columbo for them to go twice a-week to
fetch People's foul Linen) to this Man's House, and sinding the Woman alone at
Home, courted her to comply in his rustical manner, promising to Wash her
Linen for nothing. The Woman pretended to like the bargain well enough, but
told him she could not for the present do it with safety, but the next
opportunity she would grant him his desire. The fellow went home very well
satisfied with the hopes of his future Enjoyment. But when the Shoemaker came
home, his Wife very faithfully tells him all that had passed between them: The
Man was not a little glad to find his Wife so virtuous, and desired her to
admit him into the Room, where he designed to lay wait for him. At the time
appointed the Malabarian came, and the Woman, according to promise, gave the
signal; upon which the Shoemaker and a Neighbor of his came out, each of 'em
having a good Club, and fell upon the poor Malabarian, and disabl'd him from
any such attempts for the future. A short time after this the young Woman died,
supposed to have been poisoned by some Blacks, for being so faithful to a White.

Their marrying with the Whites is (I am apt to think) generally more out of
Policy, and to have the advantage of living more secure and free among the
Europeans, who have all the power in their hands, than out of any true love for
'em.

The Women live very lazy Lives; they chaw Betel and smoke Tobacco, all day
long; they are very neat, and wash themselves all over every day. The Man has
all the Care of the House upon him; and they have generally two Slaves, the one
to go to Market, the other to dress the Victuals.

I will, now I am treating of Columbo, give you some Description of that City.

I have already told you how it was built by the Portuguese; but when the Dutch
East India Company took possession of it, they Demolished many parts, and
Rebuilt others after the Dutch manner; and to this day they are building at
the Castle and City. The Castle has on the West Side, the Sea; on the
North-East, the City; on the South-East, a sweet River: It is fortified with
several Bulwarks, each of which has 20 or 30 Guns; a very good Counterscarp;
and there are so many Rocks on the Seaside, that no Ships can come near it.

There is a broad Channel runs all round it, where one may see every day
Crocodiles in abundance: It has three Gates, one to the South-West, called
Port de Gala; about a Musket Shot off, on the side that goes to Galture, the
Land about it is richly filled with Orchards and Gardens, full of fine
Fruit Trees, which reach a mile or two: The other Gate is called the Delfsche
Port, from the Bastion which is just by it, that bears that Name. This Gate is
toward the City, and the way to it has the Sea all along on one side, and a
deep Ditch on the other, and a large Field called the Buffler's Plain, which
they can lay all under Water when they please, by opening a Sluice. The third
Gate, which is Northward, has the Name of Water-Port; on the left side of that
is the Water-Pass, guarded by many Cannon, that command all the Ships that lie
in the Road. Within the Castle are many pretty Walks of Nut-trees, set in an
uniform Order, but they bear no Fruit, only red and white Flowers: The Streets
are pleasant walks themselves; having Trees on both sides, and before the
Houses. The Castle contains about 40 Acres of Land. The Governor, all the
Merchants, Officers, and Soldiers, have their Dwelling within it; and without
the Walls, between them and the Sea, are the Huts, where near four thousand
Slaves, belonging to the Company, lie at night. They are of different Nations,
and are constantly kept at work: Their Huts are very little, made up with
nothing but Straw and Leaves. There are Dutchmen to look over 'em, who are
called Mucadons; each of these have 70, 80, 90, or 100 to oversee, and must
give an account of 'em.

There is likewise a very large place for Ammunition, two strong Cellars for
Gunpowder, and Magazines for the Merchants, and a Church; and behind that, a
very fine Stable, commonly full of Persian Horses. There is also a Powder
Windmill by Port de Gala, and by the Water-Pass, a Windmill to saw Boards,
etc. The City of Columbo is much larger than the Castle, by reason of the large
Trees and Gardens that are in it; and it is very well fortified with five
Bulwarks, called, Victoria, Constantia, Concordia, Haerlem, and Euckhuysen. It
has on the North the Road where the Ships lie; on the other side the River
that is full of Crocodiles. It has three Gates, the one (as I said just now)
is called the Delfsche-Port, the second is not far from that, and goes toward
the Sea; the third is the Port-Victoria, or Negumbo.

The Inhabitants are a mixture of Officers, Soldiers, Burghers, and Tradesmen,
Blacks and Whites, and others: For which reason the Hollanders are obliged to
keep a careful watch every night. The Streets are always very clean, though it
Rain never so much. There is an Hospital for the Dutch, very well provided with
able Surgeons, and they with very good Medicines, and Slaves allowed them. The
chief Doctor, that had the Care of it in my time, was in very ill Repute for
his ill Management of those that came under his Hands, and for several ill
Actions he was accused of; and, amongst others, of having a pretty while been
too familiar with a Slave of his, and then Killing of her, and Burying her in
his Garden.

Not far from that is an Hospital for Dutch Orphans: The Boys are taught to
Read and Write; after that they are made either Drummers or Soldiers: The
Girls, besides Reading and Writing, are taught to Sew, or any other Employment
proper to their Sex; and there they are kept to work till somebody comes to
marry 'em, which commonly happens by that time they are 12 or 13 years of Age.

The Dutch Churchyard is in the middle of the City, enclosed with a Wall, on
which a Malabarian School stands: On the outside of the Churchyard, there is
Sold, all the Week long, Silks, Stuffs, and Linen, by the Moors and Persians;
and all sorts of Fruits, dried Fish, Onions, Sugar and Rice, by the
Malabarians, Maldivians, and Cingulayans, and other Inhabitants of Columbo.

CHAP. IX.
A sad Accident happens before Columbo by Gunpowder. Two Ships come to Columbo
from Persia, bound from thence for Holland. The Author is discharged at his
request (though with some difficulty): Is to go to Punt de Gala by Sea, to Embark
there. The Master being drunk, they run the Vessel against a Rock, and all
sunk. The Author and fourteen others save their Lives by swimming to shore; but
lost all their Goods. They come Naked to Punt de Gala, whence he Embarks aboard
the Wester-Amstel. Their departure and arrival to the Cape, where they find the
Ships from Batavia that had waited seven Weeks for them. A French Pirate comes
amongst them under a disguise. All come away from the Cape. An Account of their
Voyage: What places they passed: What extremity they were come to. At last, by
God's Assistance, they came safe home.

IN the Year 1680, We had three unlucky Accidents: The one was, That a Ship
being come from Holland by Batavia, and lying at Anchor in the Road near
Columbo; it had brought a great quantity of Gunpowder for the use of this
City; the Inhabitants thereof had already loaded their Boats with 80 Barrels of
it, and were so near Land, that they prepared for haling of it to shore: A Boy,
belonging to the Master of the Boat, stood smoking with a Pipe in his Mouth;
which the Master seeing, gave him such a box on the Ear, that he dashed his
Pipe into the next Boat, where some Powder being scattered, took Fire, and blew
up that Boat, and, in the twinkling of an Eye, the two next; and not only so,
but also, all the People that stood upon the shore had a toss in the Air.

Another was, That two Ships lying at Anchor in the Road, and the Wind growing
very violent, broke their Cables, and stranded them against the Fish-market;
but all the Men saved their Lives.

The 9th of December, Two great Ships called the Africa, and the Cortegeene,
came from Persia.

Having now staid seven months over and above the five years I was obliged to,
in the Service of the East India Company, I designed to have gone off with
those Ships, but the Governor refused to discharge me for that time, under
pretense of affection to me.

They sailed away on the 10th from Columbo to the City Punt de Gala, to take in
Pepper and Cinnamon. I made my complaint that I was detained wholly against my
will, to the chief Merchant of the Company; he told me I should go, and that I
should stay but some days; that a Vessel was daily expected to come from
Bengal, and was to take up several other Persons here, and then to go for our
Country.

The 11th, News came from Punt de Gala, by Land, that the said Vessel was come
in there from Bengal, well loaded with Saltpeter, but had no Masts left.

On the 12th, Some Carpenters and three Masts were sent in a small Vessel to
refit the Ship, and get it ready to go with the two others for Holland.

The 14th, I went to the Aldee or Village, called Batalamulo, two miles from
Columbo, where I took my leave of our General Dissave Tennekool (that was come
over to us from the King of Candi.) He entertained me very civilly at Dinner,
and ordered four Cingulayans to carry me back in a Palankin, to Columbo, and
presented me with 200 preserved Citrons for my Voyage.

The 15th, My Captain invited me at night to a very handsome Supper.

On the 16th, A very rich Portuguese, called Don de Pairo, living at Matual, a
league from Columbo, sent an Elephant for me to come to his House, where he
received me with a noble Entertainment of Music, and a splendid Feast: I spent
that night with him; during which he used a great deal of Rhetoric to persuade
me to stay, and asked me, why I would venture so hazardous a Voyage, seeing I
lived so pleasantly there, and so much beloved in that Country; but all this
was in vain: My Inclinations for my own Country were to me the most prevailing
Arguments.

On the 17th, I took my leave of him, and thanked him very heartily; and he
lent me an Elephant to carry me back.

On the 18th, I took my leave of my Friends at the Office at Columbo, and

On the 19th, My Landlady invited me, with some others of her Friends and
Acquaintance: She seemed very much discontented with my leaving of her thus,
yet would show her self kind to the last; and presented me with abundance of
Fruit and Spices: But when I came to Sea, I threw all overboard, for fear some
trick or philter should have been played with them, which is usual here.

The 20th, The Governor sent us word, that we should get us all ready to go
aboard that night; about four of the Clock in the afternoon, we went on board,
and took all our Goods with us. Our Ship was but small, yet it had four Pieces
of Cannon, twelve Seamen, besides the Master, and the Steersman. Our Maker was
one Cornelius Erasmus, a Jutlander, a true Pitcherman, who staid at Columbo to
take his leave of his Wife, and Friends; his Wife was a Papist when I knew her
first, but he was a Lutheran. While I was at Columbo, I took a great deal of
pains to convert her, and at last effected it; but I believe she only embraced
Luther's faith because it was her Husband's: I thought however she had changed
somewhat for the better; and I believe if I had staid, I might still have
advised her better. She had a Sister, one of the prettiest Women I almost ever
saw; at least, the finest that ever was in that Country. She was a white Woman,
and her Mother was a Babylonian. The dress she went in was a great disadvantage
to her Beauty, being the same dress as I described before, when I spoke of the
Habit my long-ear'd Widow used to wear.

Being obliged to lie still here till the 21th to stay for Letters, I went in a
Fisher-boat to Columbo to our Master's House, where he was making very merry,
having staid a while, he took his leave of his Wife and Sister, who were very
much grieved at his departure; but they little thought it was their last
farewell, as it proved the next day; for, being got into the Ship, and having
weighed Anchor, we set sail. The Wind toward night grew something boisterous;
and as we came within a mile of Punt de Gala, our Ship, by the carelessness of
the Master, and Steersman, who were carrousing in the Cabin, struck upon a
great Rock, called the Whale (which is but just covered over with Water) and
sprung a large Leak, which made the Ship begin immediately to sink. The Master
hearing the knock, and being sensible of the Danger, came out to give orders,
and cried out we should turn the Ship about; but it was too late to give
Directions; so we prepared our selves for swimming; and I stripped my self to
my Drawers, and with several others I leaped into the Sea; we guessed by the
scum where-abouts the shore was; we made that way, and in less than half an
hour we reached the Land: We were fifteen of us that saved our selves by
swimming; the rest, being the Master, the Steersman, and ten others, were all
drowned.

We went to the first House we saw, which belonged to a Cingulaish Nobleman,
who received us very kindly, had a great Fire made for us, and gave us all the
refreshment his House did afford.

The 23th, In the morning we came before the Town of Punt de Gala. The
Sergeants, Corporals, and Soldiers that kept the Guard, were moved with
Compassion; and, before we went any further, gave every one of us some old
Garments to cover our Nakedness; After this we were brought before the
Governor, who examined us all, to know who was to blame for this miscarriage.
The Master was in all the fault we told him, but he had his Punishment already.
The Governor ordered every one of us to have 12 Rixdollars paid us to equip our
selves again, which was to be abated in our Accounts. Six of the Men that came
from Columbo with me would not venture to Sea again; so they engaged themselves
anew for three years, in the service of the Company; their Pay was augmented
with two Guldens a month, and they were now to have twelve Guldens, whereas
they used to have but ten. Orders were given to a Sergeant to take twelve men
with him to go that very morning and see if they could recover any thing of our
Shipwreck. I went thither my self in the afternoon, and saw a great many pieces
of the Ship, and pieces of Chests ashore: But I shrewdly suspected that they
were broke by the Soldiers, and that they had buried the Goods under Ground.

The 14th, Some of the Men that were drowned were drove upon the Land; the
rest, I suppose, had feasted the Sharks, that are there in abundance.

The 25th, I went on board the Wester-Amstel, and gave my Pass to the Master of
it. The form of it was thus: To N. N. Master of the Ship, called the
Wester-Amstel; You may receive on board the Bearer hereof, Christopher
Schewitzer, with his Goods, to go with you into Holland.

My Ship did not at all please me, for I saw it was very Old, and besides that,
very small, and mighty slow in sailing. The Carpenters, etc. were busy in
mending of it: In the mean while I went to shore again, and staid at Punto de
Gala, till the Ships were all ready, and there I took my provisions. This Fort,
by what I saw of it, is stronger than that of Columbo.

The 5th of January, 1682, All our loading was complete; it consisted of
Pepper, Cinnamon, Linen, and Silk-stuffs, from China and Bengal.

On the 13th, An Officer came to take a view of all the Passengers.

The 14th, We hoisted up Sail all together, with a direct Wind for us at S. E.
The Cortgeene being the biggest Ship, was our Commadore, or Admiral. We fired
all our Cannon: The like was done in return all round Punto de Gala.

The 15th, We kept a Fast in our Ship, to beg God's assistance in our Voyage;
all the Dutch Cities in Ceylon did the same.

The 16th, The Masters of our Ships met in the Cortgeene to advise and resolve
upon their signal, in case of their needing one another's assistance; and upon
the Watchword, and ordering of their Lanthorns in the nightime.

The two large Ships sailed away briskly, but ours went very slowly; toward
night they took in some of their Sails, that we might come up to them.

We had in our Ship, the Master, three Surgeons (one of which always read
Prayers) some Officers, 12 Soldiers, 24 Seamen, all together made 56 men. The
two other Ships had each of 'em 150. We had besides a great many Animals on
Board, viz. Two Parrots, two Apes, two Cacadus of Amboina, (they are white
Birds as big as Pigeons, with a tust on their Heads, and apter to learn to talk
than the Parrots;) we had a Crocodile an Ell long, a Stag from Bengal: All
these dyed in two months time, except the two Apes. We had likewise fifty Hogs
from Bengal, and two or three dozen of Ducks for refreshment now and then. Our
otherProvisions were 60 Barrels of Water, 6 Barrels of Salt Pork, 6 of other
Flesh, 6 Barrels of Indian Brandy, and Rice enough. Our Ship was loaded at
bottom with old broken pieces of Cannon instead of Ballast, then with
Saltpeter, then with 200 Lasts of Cinnamon and Pepper; and at top of all there
were 250 great Bales of Silks and Linen.

We kept altogether without storms, or bad weather till the 28th of April.

We were then near the Coasts of Africa; but a thick Fog came upon us, and the
Wind changing at South West, blew us in one day and two nights 50 miles from
Land; after which it changed to the East by which means we came,

On the 30th, in sight of Tasel-bergh, Lewen-bergh, and Duyvels-bergh.

The 1st of May, We came to the Cape of good Hope: There we found the Ships
that were come from Batavia, that had lain there seven Weeks staying for us:
There were five of them, four large Vessels, and one Fisher-boat, called the
Postborn. On board the Admiral, called the Landschowen, that had a very fine
gilt Stern, was the Old Here Rycloff van Goens, heretofore the General over the
East India Forces. They told us that they had suffered much in the Latitude of
St. Morris by a storm, which had wholly disabled the Middleburgh, but that she
was since almost resitted.

We lay there still seven days longer, and in that time took in fresh Water,
Wood, Turnips, Herbs, Cabbage, Sheep, and Goats. Min Here Rycloff van Goens,
with all his Retinue, lodged all that while at the Governor's in the Fort. His
Retinue was very magnificent; having several Gentlemen to wait on him, a
Trumpeter, 12 Men for his Guard, all dressed very fine in yellow, with silver
Buttons, and red Breeches, and a great many Slaves from Bengal. I lay at a
Dutch Countryman's House under the Devil's Hill; he was forced to keep several
Hottentots, and great Dogs, to secure his Vinyards and other Grounds from the
Wild Beasts.

The 2d, A Ship came and lay amongst ours in the Road; she put out white Flags
and Pendants. The Men on board of her gave out that they were French Merchants.
But at night a Seaman comes swimming to our Admiral by the Moonshine, and
discovers what they were. He told 'em that they were French Pirates, richly
loaded with the booty they had got along the Arabian Coasts: For his own part
they carried him away by force out of Persia, and used him as a Slave every
since; and he begged that we would receive him, and carry him into Holland. In
the morning early the Pirates missing this fellow hasted away, two of our best
Ships were ordered to go after them, but they could never come near them.

The 8th, The Admiral went on board with all his Retinue, only he left his Wife
behind him; for what Reason we could not learn.

The 9th, Early in the morning, we hoisted up sail and weighed Anchors. The
Wind was very good for us at South-East; and we went by the Zee Honden or
Banditen Island.

One the 10th, We kept a day of Fasting and Humiliation.

On the 11th, There was a meeting of all the Masters, etc. to agree all of us
upon certain signals to be given amongst us either by shooting, lighting Fires,
or hanging out of Flags, etc.

From the 12th to the 16th, We had very uncertain Winds, and little for us. At
that time we had several North-Capers about our Ships. They are a large sort of
Fish almost like a Whale. We held our course Westward and by South.

The 17th, We came into the Trade-winds, which blow constantly at North and
West. We made directly toward the Island of St. Helens, to be informed there in
what posture Affairs stood in Europe.

The 20th of June, We came in sight of that Island; and being come on one side
of it, where the English had a Fort, we ordered the Posthorn to sail close by
that Fort, to give them notice that we were Dutch, and came thither upon no
other design than to ask some News about Europe. They answered us that it was a
general Peace every where at Sea. Upon which we very joyfully fired all our
Cannon, which was all answered from the English Fort. We kept on in our course
West and by North; the Winds still continuing; and we left St. Helens on the
left hand of us.

The 22th of July, We came under the Line, and very happily passed it, and lost
but two Men, both of 'em Soldiers.

The 23th at night, We saw again the Northern Star to our great Joy; till then
we had only the Southern Cross in sight, which is a Constellation of four
Stars, which stand in this Order.

The 24th we met a Spanish Ship that had a great many Women on Board, who were
sent into the West Indies to People them: She was afraid of us, and would have
escaped, but our Admiral soon fetched her back again.

The 25th we met an English Ship that had but one Mast, she was Laden with
Tobacco from Brasil; we Bartered with them, and gave a good quantity of Spices,
Silks, Stuffs, and Linen, for their Tobacco; but we were glad we could have it
on any account. I for my part gave a great deal of Pepper and Cinnamon for half
a pound of it.

The 26th, 27th, and 28th the Englishman kept by us, but on the 22th he left us
with wonderful swiftness, and got out of sight immediately.

The 30th a great many flying Fishes fell down in our Ship, some of which we
Eat, and the rest we kept for a Rarity.

The 31st abundance of Sea-hogs came through our Fleet, Swimming against the
Wind. Our Gunner shot one of them with an Elligar which is an Instrument that
sticks in the Fish it hits: it has a Leaden weight at the But-end, which makes
that end sink, and with the other it turns up the Fish: As soon as that one was
made to bleed, all the others made away. That which we caught was Seven Foot
long, and half that in compass; It was perfect Bacon, and had a deal of warm
Blood.

The 1st of August we went directly Northward; the Wind was at South-West, and
blew very cold. The Days were long, so that we rested more by Day than by Night.

The 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th we had much Rain, with which we filled our
Water-Barrels; the Wind too being something boisterous, parted us: Our Vessel
was just going to Founder, and began to gape in some places half a. Foot Wide.
The Carpenters fell to Work, and were forced to bind up the Cracks and Chinks
with Cords, Iron Bands, and Chains; and by our continual Pumping, we made shift
to keep the Ship up.

On the 8th we were forced to take in all our Sails, and let our Ship Drive;
two Waves struck into our Ship which would have certainly Sunk us, had not
God's Mercy, together with our extreme Diligence, happily freed us from the
Danger.

We were at that time by our selves, without either Friend or Foe near us. Our
Cook had for some Days not been able to Dress us any Victuals for the Tossing
and Tumbling in our Ship, so that we were forced to Eat Bacon that came from
Bengal Raw, and afterward help the Digestion of it with Indian Brandy, of
which we had good store.

The 9th we heard several great Pieces of Cannon Fired, but could not tell for
what: In the Afternoon about two a Clock, we saw at our Right Hand a large
Ship; we found it was our Vice Admiral, and perceived by the Pendants that it
was in danger of Sinking. We both endeavored to get up to one another, and the
Admiral being come within reach of us, the Men on Board begged that we would
send our Longboat to help them.

They kept still Calling, Bawling, and Firing, whilst we were advising whether
we had best join them, or keep off* For if they, being an Hundred and Fifty in
Number, had all come over to us, we must have starved; yet we designed to be
ready to take up as many as we could if their Ship had sunk: At last we
resolved that our Master, a very skilful Seaman should go to them, to see what
condition they were in, and to give them his Advice. When he was come unto
them, he advised rhem to throw Overboard some of their Goods, as they designed
to do before: So they unloaded the Vessel of near Four Hundred Lasts of Spices,
as Cinnamon; Cloves, Nutmegs, Pepper, etc, by which means they could come to
stop the Leak, and so at last they saved themselves. The Pepper being scattered
about, got into their Pumps, so that they could not use them; the same thing
has often happened with us too.

The 10th, and 11th, These Stormy Winds abated. We began now to find it colder
and colder, and the Fogs to rise again. In those two days all our Fleet, except
the Posthorn, met again.

The 12th, 13th, and 14th, The Fog was so very thick, that we could not see one
another, but were forced to Fire often, to know where we were all of us, that
we might keep together.

The 15th, we met with an English Fisherman that was coming from Ysland; he was
laden with Salt-fish: We truck'd with him for some of it.

The 16th, we passed by two Dutch Vessels going home from the Whale-fishing in
Greenland. Of these we got some Cheese, Biscuit, and Tobacco for Spices. One of
them had caught ten Whales and the other Eleven, which is reckoned a good
Voyage. The Men were very Lusty and Healthy, but we looked all like Death,
being almost quite spent and worn out with the labor and trouble, our great
danger had put us to. Being come now into the Latitude of Sixty one Degrees, 7
Minutes: We turned to the North North-East.

The 17th, Some Dutch Men of War came to meet us, with another Ship that
brought Provisions for our East India Fleet, and accompanied us back.

The 18th in the Morning we came in sight of Hitland, and kept as much as we
could toward the English Shore, according to the Orders we had received from
the States of Holland, least any Winds might have drove us into some ports of
Norway, especially because the States were at that time at Variance with the
King of Denmark: So we held to the North-East, and East-North-East, till

The 1st of September, when we came in sight of the Dutch Coasts. Two of our
Company struck off the day before to go to Zeland. There came Pilots for each
of our Ships, who brought us safe through the Tonnen in the Vlic. Here were two
of the chief Men of the East India Company in a Yatch, expecting of us, they
welcomed us all, and thanked us for the Faithful Service we had done them. They
took as many of us as would go, to Amsterdam; but our Chests and Goods we were
to leave behind us in the Ships.

On the 2d of September we came to Amsterdam. We were from the 14th of January
to this time coming from Ceylon; which is Three Thousand one Hundred Miles in
Two Hundred and Thirty Two Days.

The same Day our Chests and Beds, etc. were brought into the East India House,
and there searched by Men for that purpose. If nothing Prohibited, or worth
above Two Month's Pay was found in them, it was Delivered straightway to the
Owner, otherwise it was Seized, and Consiscated to the Searcher, and the Owner
either Fined, or sent perhaps to the Rasphuys (the same as Bridewell here).

The 3d I gave up my Accounts to the East India Company.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed.
AN Account of a Voyage from Archangel in Russia in the year 1697, of the Ship
and Company Wintering near the North Cape, in the Latitude of 71; their manner
of living, and what they suffered by extreme Cold: Also Remarkable Observations
of the Climate, Country and Inhabitants, etc. By Tho. Allison, Commander of the
Ship.

The Ingenious and Diverting Letters of the Lady -- Travels into Spain,
describing the Devotions, Nunneries, Humors, Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade,
Diet, and Recreation of that People. Intermixed with great variety of Modern
Adventures and surprising Accidents; being the truest and best Remarks extant
on that Court and Country.

A new Voyage Round the World, Describing particularly the Isthmus of America;
several Coasts and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of Cape verd, the
Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico,
the Philipine Islands, etc. Their Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits,
Animals, and Inhabitants; their Customs Religion, Government, and Trade. By
Captain William Dampier, in two Volumes.

Observations concerning the present state of Religion in the Romish Church,
with some Reflections upon them; made in a Journey through some Provinces of
Germany in the year School. As also an Account of what seemed most Remarkable in
those Countries. By Theophilus Dorrington, Rector of Wittresham in Kent.

Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow, Esquire Lieutenant General of the Horse, Commander in
chief of the Forces in Ireland, one of the Council of State, and a Member of
the Parliament which begun on November the 3d 1640; in 3 Volumes.

Memoirs and Observations, Topographical, Physical, Mathematical, Mechanical,
Natural, Civil, and Ecclesiastical; made in a late Journey through the Empire
of China. By Lewis le Compte, Jesuit, Confessor to the Duchess of Burgundy,
one of the Royal Mathematicians, and late Missionary in the Eastern Countries.

Voyages and Discoveries in South-America. The first up the River of the
Amazons (which runs a Course of 1200 Leagues through the finest Country in the
World, not yet planted by the Europeans) to Quito in Peru, and back again to
Brazil; by Christopher D' Auvigna. The Second up the River of Plate, and thence
by Land to the Mines of Potosi, by Monfieur Auarete. The Third from Cayenne
into Guiana in search of the Lake of Parima. Englished from the Originals,
being the only Accounts of those Parts hitherto extant, with Maps.


