THE FRENCH KING PROVED A Bastard: OR THE AMORS OF ANNE (Queen to Lewis XIII.)
With the Chevalier de Roan. The Second Edition. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Mitre in Fleet Street near Temple Bar,
1691. Price 4d.

To the Right Honorable John Lord Lovelace, etc.
MY LORD,
THis small Treatise, like a Travel into the Mountains of the Moon, for the Bed
of Nile, being a full Inquiry into the Little Birth of our GREAT LEWIS, Your
Lordships Favor to the Subject of this History, has encouraged the fixing so
Noble a Name before it: Nor let Our Mighty Monsieur's Idolizers themselves take
Offense at the Theme, it being, perhaps, not the least of his Honor, that so
Diminutive a Seed should give Root and Production to so Prodigious a Spreading
Greatness: Nor can I do his Homagers, and Adorers a kinder piece of Justice,
than making a Consecrated Relic of his very Swaddling-Clouts. I confess,
indeed, I have taken the easier Work in hand; the Delineation of his minuter
Original, being something a fezible Undertaking, when the Description of his
fuller Growth, the Manhood of our Prodigious Hero, is almost Impossible:
Impossible, indeed, when all the public Declarations, the whole Neighboring
World around him, have so justly, and so unanimously confessed their Inability
of matching his Lineaments, even amongst Heathens and Turks; and truly if the
least resembling Feature of him can be found in the spacious Creation, we must
look amongst the Remoter Indies for it; and consider Our Great Lewis's
Ambition, as only a more Hideous, Wild, Indian Delirium, running a Muck at all
Mankind.

But while I presume to commit this piece into your Lordships Protection, my
Duty leads me to a just and awful Veneration of that Honor to which I Address.
In all the Rapidity of our late Driving Jehu's, your Lordship carries this
Triumph, that in their highest Exaltation, and most formidable Prevalence, you
never bent a Knee. Your Spirit was too Masculine to flow with a Tide, and chose
rather singly to stand the Indignation of Power, than herd amongst the
Flatterers of it. And if so much true British Merit, as shines in your
Lordship, so late a Royal Favorite, makes so new a Figure in Court, we are to
consider, that in the former Sway, when French Counsels and French Gold reigned
too Potent, Your Lordship thought Your self a very unqualified English Courtier
in a Court so little an English One, and it is perhaps Your Highest Glory, to
have no sooner a Call to Glory.

But, alas! Your Lordships Historian is not my Province; it is enough to have
chosen a Patriot for a Patron, and to pride my self in this occasion of
publishing my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Devoted, Obedient Servant.

TO THE READER.
AFter so many Years Vassalage to France, our too long and too Scandalous
Degeneracy, Providence having at last raised us the fair Hopes of being
Englishmen once more, I make my True British Reader no disacceptable Present
in the Contents of this History, unfolding the Great Mystery of Iniquity, the
true Extract and Generation of our Great Disturber of the World, Lewis XIV. But
though this Narrative may be somewhat Novel here, it has been the Universal
Outcry of France. The known Frigidity of Lewis XIII. and the Birth of this
Deodat, so called, after 23 years Childless Marriage, with all other attending
Circumstances, so plainly convincing the Impossibility of his being his Reputed
Royal Father's Begetting, that nothing but the Forehead of a Legender must
pretend it. The famous Barricado of Paris, and so formidable a Revolt under
such Great Leaders against him, at his first Accession to the Throne, too
publicly proclaimed his Extraneous Birth, insomuch that all Tongues were full
of it, Reason confirmed it, and scarce a Doubt or Scruple to question it. It Is
true, indeed, His Canine Teeth and the French Slavery growing up together, so
bold and so dangerous a Truth was a little hushed, and durst talk no louder
than in the Whispers and Murmurs of Closets. And if any critical Reader should
ask why this History never saw Light in England till now, let him but think
when he moves that Question, and he will soon answer himself, by considering,
that in the two last French-pension Reigns, when Coleman told Le Chaise [The
Interest of My Master and Yours are inseparable] the very Attempt of so hideous
a Profanation against our then adored Idol of France, our Grand Master Lewis
had pulled down that inevitable Thunder against so capital a Transgressor, as
had undoubtedly raised both Publisher and Printer a higher Gibbet than Hamans.
For Instance of which, a Paper but a little inclining this way, only in some
Minute Reflections upon the Birth of Lewis, our present Theme, was about the
latter end of King Charles's Reign burnt at Charing Cross by the common
Hangman, and the Impression suppressed. And if the Prosecution stopped there,
'twas more for the politic hushing of the Subject of the Paper, than in any
Mercy to the Author or Promoter.

Now after this full and thorough Search into the Cradle of our Son of Thunder,
Lewis, after examining the Nest, the Egg, the Brooding and the Hatching; though
the whole Conduct of his Reign has been so much the Subject of Humane Amazement
and Horror, I must do him this public Right, as to own I am not so much
startled as the rest of the foolish World may be. For example, to survey him
round, what if, in the first place, History or Chronicle have rarely or never
afforded his Match in Breach of Treaties abroad, or Oaths and Sacraments at
home? For let us consider him as he is: Why should we expect His Honor any
Stronger than his Mothers! Imposture was his Foundation, and Falsehood and
Treachery run in his Veins. What Wonder then that he should Reign in Perjury,
when he was Begot in it? Infidelity governed the whole Ascendant at his
Conception, and the continuing of its Influence ever since, is only to make his
Life of a piece with his Nativity; and the Wielding of his Scepter an Original
like his Means of Gaining it. But then he takes Delight in shamefully
Falsifying and Faithbreaking with Sovereign Heads -- Yes; Royalty is no Kin to
him; and therefore his Aversion. The Cannibal never devours a Cannibal, and
Lewis preys upon Princes, because they are Aliens and Heterogenes to Himself. I
confess however there is yet one Prince in the World at least, that our Lewis
has some kindness for. And strong cause why: For he was learning after his own
Copy, to keep Faith as little as Himself, and as once so hopeful a Proficient
under so Great a Gamaliel, he loves him for some little Likeness-sake. But then
what is more Monstrous, he Leagues with Mahomet-Yes, his Engagement with the
Turk against Christendom is a little Notorious, and the Alcoran is more in his
Favor than the Bible. And good Reason. For That will never rise up in Judgment
against him, though This shall. Though he has made bold to crack a small Oath,
when he Swore to the Edict of Nants; and another Oath and Sacrament that he
would never invade Flanders, etc. He was never Forsworn upon the Alcoran,
though he has been upon the Evangelists. It Is true the Clamours of Europe are
justly loud against him for the Sanguinary Principles and unprecedented
Cruelties of the hard-mouthed Lewis -- But for my part it is a less Subject of
my Admiration, when my little Reading in Physics leads me to consider that
those Principles in him, and that Propensity to Blood lie only at Nature's
Door. Do we not daily see the very same natural Inclinations predominant even
in Inferior Animals? What treacherous ill nature shall we find in a Mungril,
compared with the Generosity of a True Begotten Mastiff?

One Advertisement I must give my Reader, viz. That our young Monsieur Legrand,
afterward dignified the Chevalier de Roan (whom in respect to his exalted
Fortunes in his Royal Mistresses Favors, I rather mention by his Title than
his Name) has not here finished his History: The fatal Catastrophe of that poor
Gentleman, the Tragic Conclusion of his Dear bought Pleasures, being reserved
for a second Volum.

The Amors of Anne (Queen to Lewis XIII.) with the Chevalier de Roan, true
Father to the present Lewis XIV. King of France, etc.
HIstorians have but too loudly, and too infamously recorded the long usurped
Dominion and Ascendance of the Triple Diadem over the Scepters of Temporal
Princes; an Acquisition obtained only by the implicit Resignation of the too
bigoted Disciples of Infallibility, whose strength of Romish Faith overpowring
their weaker Royal Reason, has sometimes subjected their Thrones to a Vassalage
almost as entire as that of their Souls. But this is not so much to be wondered
at, since Ecclesiastics even of a lower station, and of inferior Dignity to
that of their mighty Lord the Pope, have sometimes been little less than sole
Administrators Supreme; whilst not only the whole Helm of States has been
guided by them, but also the whole Regalia of Power have been so totally lodged
in their own Hands, till the subministring depending Monarchs, their kind
Resigners, have been little more than Titular. An instance of which, perhaps,
was never more famous, than in the French Administration of the Illustrious
Cardinal Richlieu under, or rather over Lewis XIII. That fatal [ Ego, and Rex
meus, I and my King] so vainly and so unhappily arrogated by the unfortunate
English Woolsey, (that memorably glorious Butchers Son, who had kneeling
Nobility for his Cup-beaters) was a truer and more conspicuous Jewel in the
greater and happier Richlieu's Cardinals Cap; whilst no exalted Favorite
possibly ever governed more absolute than himself. And to fix this glorious
Blazon in his Scutcheon, perhaps it had a double Supporter. First, The
exorbitant Favor of Mary de Medicis, sometimes Queen Regent, during the
Minority of Lewis XIII. that introduced and advanced him to all that Grandeur:
And next, the poor spirited Weakness of Lewis himself, that even after his
Arrival at Manhood, only changing the Regency from Mary to Richlieu, continued
still under the Cardinal's Guardianship, either not willing, not daring, or not
able (or all of them) to resume the unlimited Authority that that great
Minister had so long possessed.

And as true Greatness is only perfectly established, where no Control or
Opposition can shake it, this Reigning Favorite had all the kindest Smiles of
Fortune to gild his Brow; for his Sovereignty over the Will of the King was not
greater than the Dominion he held in the Favor of the Queen too, the Royal
Consort, Anne of A. The Affections and pleasure of his generous Royal Mistress,
were so much under the Guide and Government of Richlieu, that the Cardinal was
her most trusted Cabinet Counselor. Thus, in fine, with no superior Influence
to malign him, nor Equal to rival him, with the Hearts of all with him or above
him, and the Knees of all below him, his Power stood fixed, and his Foundation
immovable. In this high station he grew so popular, and withal so aspiring,
that together with the Exaltation of his personal Honors, his Soul was no less
elevated too; Insomuch that he wanted not an over-large Taint of that common
Contagion of Dignity, Pride. The Sanctity of his Spiritual Robe, alas! was no
Fence against it, whilst Ambition, with all its attendant Vanities and
Frailties so wholly possessed our great Lord Cardinal, that the Churchman was
entirely lost in the Governing Statesman, and his Ecclesiastical Scarlet
wholly truckled to his sairer and all commanding Royal Purple, with which his
propirious Fortune had so signally invested him.

Under the Umbrage of our great Richlieu, the present tallest Cedar of the
Grove, sprung a fair Scion from so nourishing a Root, a beautiful Niece; who
favored and cherished by so potent a Patron, and so near a Relation, made one
of the brightest and most glittering Court Stars of France; a Lady in her
Person, Mein, and Air so extraordinary charming, as could not sail of a whole
train of Hearts. To match these outward dazzling Charms, Nature had no less
richly furnished her within, viz. with that sprightly Wit and refined Sense, as
spoke her Mistress of a Soul no ways unworthy so fair a Lodging. It Is true,
indeed, she had a natural Pride, and an unbounded Ambition; but those, as
hereditary Qualifications, derived from Richlieu, and which (whatever Faults
elsewhere) in the present Estimate of the World, are reputed Virtues in the
fair Sex, were rather her Ornament than Blemish.

This young Lady, the Darling of Richlieu, (under the Tutelage of his peculiar
Care and Protection, you may imagine) had no splendour nor Pomp wanting to bear
that Port, and render her that Figure in the Court of France, to the highest
that either Beauty deserved, or almost Vanity could wish. And as if her
Alliance to the Cardinal had entitled her to share a part of his Trophies, and
Rule where he Reigned, she had gained so far upon the Favor of the kind Queen,
so caressed and so loved by her, that the Queen had scarce that Secret which
she lodged not in the Bosom of this fair Favorite; so fond of her Company, and
so wedded to her Conversation, that she could hardly relish a Pleasure without
her. To style her the Queens Confident and Friend, is a Name of too narrow a
comprehension: their endearments were so extravagant, that she treated her more
like a Sister. And that Court Ceremony and formal State might be no bar to
their more particular Intimacy and Familiarity, the Queen was generously
pleased to give her self the Romantic Name of Statira, and her fair Confident,
Parisatis; (Titles borrowed from the famed Daughters of the great Persian
Darius) with an absolute Command laid upon her in all their private
Entertainments and Converse to use no other Names between them; that the Title
of Majesty, or the customary respect, and more awful Distance to a Crowned Head
might be no impediment to that nearer Liberty, and freer Air and Gayety she
desired in the Friendship and Society of her dearest Parisatis. Our fair
Parisatis (for since that Name had the honor of a Royal Donation, we cannot
give her a better) had her natural Pride in no small measure heightened from her
standing so fair in these extraordinary good Graces of so Royal a Patroness, as
borrowing no small Additional Luster from that station and sphere. For she
could not think that the envious World could imagine her to receive such
unaccountable Favors, without some extraordinary Mine of Virtue to deserve
them. Thus, besides the Attraction of her own singular Merits, with such Crowds
of Suitors, and daily Court made to her, so many of the Supplications to the
Queen being addressed to Parisatis, she looked upon her self as a small Saint to
a Deity, enriched with no common Emanations of Glory (for Court Favorites
shine by Reflection) from so Divine a Fountain of it.

With all these caressing Smiles of Honor on her side, the fairest golden Lot
of Fortune so prosperously drawn, Love only has his last Game to play, which if
a lucky one, must now give her the only remaining Consummation of Felicity.
Adorers such Beauty cannot want, for Cupid might be proud to empty a whole
Quiver in her Cause. But whatever silent Vows were paid her, in all the random
shot she daily made among the Herd of unworthier Slaves, as they are Objects
all below her thoughts, so nothing but the highest and noblest Quality must
dare to be Pretenders to the Glory of wearing her Chains. The only wounded
Heart she can vouchsafe to pity, must have no other Recommendation than the
Highest Princely Veins to center in it. For as we told you, Ambition ruled her
whole Ascendant; instead of Person, Courage, Wit, Gallantry, Passion, Fidelity,
Services, those inside and outside Qualifications that usually prefer the
Faithful Lover to the easier Ladies Favor; High Blood only answers all with
the aspiring Parisatis; and no Oblation or Incense burns hallowed or fragrant
without it. In short, Love must lead her to a Palace before he gets her into a
Temple; for truly she takes her only prospect of Happiness from Turrets and
Battlements, and her Bridal Pillow can only lie soft where the Bed is Imperial.

Amongst her numerous Captives (not to mention any of her inferior Conquests,
which, as not thought worthy her own Cognizance, shall be as little worthy
ours) to gratify the Ambition of our towering Parisatis, it fell out, that no
less than the Monsieur, the King's own Brother, Gaston, Duke of Orleans, was
become her most passionate Admirer. The most ardent Devoirs, with a thousand
Vows and Protestations, were daily laid at her Feet by this Royal Inamorato.
His whole Orizons were paid to no other Saint, and the Praises of her Beauty,
and the Effects of its Power, at all Opportunities studiously sought, were
chanted in her Ears by so assiduous a Servant. The p^^^^ed Parisatis, no doubt,
wanted no listening Ear to so Illustrious a Lover, and though with all the
re^^^^^ and distance, suitable even to the Character of a Clelia or a
Cassandra, she received his Addresses under all the most rigid Laws and
Obligations of Feminine Honor, and with all the formal Coldness of her Sex,
she had nevertheless a private Satisfaction which gave her no little warmth
within, from the Contemplation of that courting Glory, which she saw bent low
before her, as so humble a Suppliant for her Acceptance. She looked upon him
not only as the Brother of the King, a Title of it self alone sufficient to
build his fair hopes of Success, and her own fairer Foundation of Happiness
upon; but also at present the Heir Presumptive (if not Apparent) of the Crown
of France. For as his unperforming Brother, the King, (alas!) had now lain more
than twenty long ineffectual years by the side of her charming Statira, and his
Fair Anne of A -- there was very little or no interposing Danger of a young
Dauphin, from that Fair but uncultivated Field of Love, to bar the Monsieur's
Inheritance of Empire: And consequently the prospect of a Diadem glittering in
her Fancy, and the possibility of her living to be Queen of France, infused no
mean Inclinations in Favor of Orleans. And though, it is true, it lay only in
the Breast of Providence, whether Orleans were destined to survive his Brother,
and reach that Crown; however if she lived not to be Wife of a King, she might
probably be the Mother of one. For as Gaston had given the World a more
pregnant Testimony of his Manhood, than his imbeciler Phlegmatic Brother, made
already a happy Father, yet his fair Offspring being of the Female Sex, and
therefore by the Salick Law excluded from Imperial Succession, it might
possibly be ordained, she fancied (and even Virgin Fancy may sometimes rove to
Motherly thoughts) her own peculiar Glory and Blessing (though she wore it not
her self) to bear from her own Veins an Heir to a Diadem, and perhaps to see
him wear it too. In conclusion, how long a Chain of thoughts on this fertile
Theme, and what pleasing Conceptions presented themselves to her Meditations
upon her present gaudy Fortune in view, the Spirit of Parisatis, or at least a
Soul of her own Dimension, can only imagine.

The Address of our enamored Orleans, as an Affair so nearly relating to her
Dear Parisatis, was kept no Secret to the Queen; and indeed there was no matter
of Privacy in it, the Queen being really an original Confident in so visible an
Amor: for there was scarce that Access to be gotten to Parisatis, but what was
in the presence of the Queen; so industriously she avoided all other
Opportunities, as there was rarely a moments Interview between the passionate
Orleans and her self, that had not her sacred Eye and Ear a Witness of all that
passed between 'em; so cautiously had the wise Parisatis managed so important a
Treaty of Love. But as neither the Queens presence, nor indeed any thing else
could baulk our Monsieur's amorous Persuit of his Mistress, his emboldened
Professions were under no Restraint, avowing before the Queen, his entire
Devotion and Captivity to the conquering Eyes of her beloved Darling, and his
own adored Parisatis. The Queen, whose Zeal for her Parisatis Advancement, had
made her an interested Party, took the occasion very often to applaud the
Monsieur's choice in the disposal of his Heart, assuring him that both her Wit
and Charms were so highly deserving, that he could not sit down in a nobler
Siege; and if his Heart were answerable to his Vows and Professions, he should
not want her best friendly Offices to promote any Honorable Pretentions to a
Lady, who besides her own ponderous Merits and Attractions, had Her Richest
Royal Favor, an unalienable part of her Dowry, to fill up the Scale. The
Monsieur, to express his high Satisfaction from her Majesty's Gracious
Inclinations toward him, always returned her his humble and most profound
Acknowledgments, continuing still to launch out into all the most extravagant
Praises and Raptures that Wit or Eloquence could furnish on so copious a Theme
as the Beauties and Charms of his Parisatis, avowing himself her eternal Devote.

The Cardinal, who had not yet publicly appeared in this Affair, was
nevertheless all this while a most attentive Listner behind the Curtain, as no
indifferent Zealot for his Nieces Preferment. And accordingly being called to a
private Consult with the Queen, after some General Reflections on the Glory of
so Noble a Match for her dearest Parisatis, together with not only her best
Services, but also her promise of engaging the King too, if necessary, in her
Cause (to which the Cardinal expressed his most dutiful Sense of so Royal an
Obligation) the Queen began to make a full Repetition of all the Court the
Monsieur had made to his Niece; but upon full Scrutiny and Descant upon the
whole, she remarked, that Orleans, it is true, had all along been so
exorbitantly passionate in his Vows and Protestations, that if his Language
spoke his Soul, there could not be a more captivated Lover than himself. But
all this while he had never yet come to a particular Declaration, his Courtship
hitherto had only expressed it self in Generals, in Harangues upon her Beauty,
and his Fetters, with all the Customary Love-Flourishes, the usual Preliminary
Gallantries of an Amorous Suitor, and that was all. He had yet rather
endeavored the rendering his own Love acceptable, than supplicated any
particular Return of Hers, having never yet come to the Peremptory Question,
Marriage. And though it is true, as far as Decency would permit, her zealous
Friendship for his Niece had prompted the Generous Queen sometimes to hint to
him the Merit of so Beautiful a Bride; and it is true, the Monsieur had always
made answer with that Transport as declared how grateful so pleasing a sound
was to him, yet he had not made the least direct Application to Parisatis or
the Queen (though offered her Intercession in it) tending that way.

This Observation afforded matter of Debate: As first, That the Monsieur was a
Person that had not only more innate Honor, but also more Years upon his Back,
than to make so public (for now the whole Court rung of it) and so serious a
Suit to a Young Lady, and yet not really to be in earnest. For Rallery or
Amusement to so notorious a Prejudice to a Virgin Ladies Reputation, too Sacred
to be jested withal in such a manner, was a thing the Monsieur neither would
nor could be guilty of. So that the Truth and Reality of his Love was past all
Doubt or Dispute. But then again, if so violent a Lover, as his repeated Oaths
had sworn for him, what Bar lay in his way to hinder him coming to the
finishing Interrogatory? His Courtship had now been the Business of
considerable Time; and tedious Woings are only fit for Lovers of humble Merit,
such who have possibly no other Recommendation than their Whining and Dying at
a Ladies Feet, and consequently through long Services and longer Penance, must
make a Pilgrimage of it to a Ladies Heart: But the Monsieur's Case was quite
different, he was Brother to a King, and visible Heir to a Crown. His very
Character and Birth therefore commissioned his Bolder Advance, and made so
strong a Plea for him, that his Approach lay fairer and nearer without all this
idle Ceremony, and unnecessary Formality; a Vanity likewise generally
unpractised by Persons of his Age and Experience, who having been a Husband
before, if for no other reason, they thought might have launcht forward with
more Confidence, and arrived at the deciding Conclusion, without all this
lingering woing Pain and Toil. Nay, what was odder yet, and seemed a little
unaccountable, though even prompted by the Queen to the determinating Period,
his Answers still rambled wide from the purpose, and always waved that Subject.

Upon summing up the whole, the Queen came to this Advice, That as Matters
stood, the Cardinal should take a favorable Opportunity, in the presence of
some of the Nobles of France, after his Thanks for the Honor the Monsieur had
done him in his kind Ircllnations toward his Niece, frankly to make a tender
of Marriage to him; a part so becoming the Cardinal in paternal care of his
Niece; and considering the high Extract of the Monsieur, no ways below him to
be the first Aggressor; nay, and which perhaps might all this while have been
the only real occasion of the Monsieur's Hesitation, as expecting it from him;
it being not impossible, his Pride, as a Prince of the Blood Royal, might look
for that Gratification, nor was it unreasonable for the Cardinal to give it
him. This Counsel, as it carried the Face of Reason, was heartily and
thankfully embraced by the Cardinal; and for that favorable Opportunity,
desired, he proposed the making of a splendid Ball at his own Palace, to which
inviting their Majesty's, the Monsieur, and the whole Court, in the midst of
all his Hospitality and Entertainment, he should lay hold of some kind Minute
to make him the Tender proposed, under his own Roof. The Queen highly applanded
the Projection of Richlieu, and the Consult terminating in this Resolve, the
Fair Parisatis was called to give her Assent to it, who readily and dutifully
submitting to the undisputed Pleasure and Will of the Queen and the Cardinal,
entirely resigned the Disposal of her self, and the Ordination of her Fate, to
their absolute Decretals.

Accordingly a Ball is made at the Cardinal's, with all the Gallantry and
Magnificence suitable to the Glory of an entertaining Prelate, where a full
Constellation of all the Court-stars, the whole luster of France, shined
together. But to recite what Faces amongst so many rivalling Ladies carried the
preference, or how far our Parisatis was a leading Beauty amongst them, being
not material to our History, we have only to remark, that a Noble young
Gentleman, hitherto a Stranger in Court, but afterward known by the-Name of
the Chevalier de Roan, appearing in this Illustrious Assembly, made the most
eminent Figure there, and drew the Eyes of both Sexes upon him His
extraordinary Personage, his gallant Mein and Deporment, and what added an
Ornament to the rest, as being the peculiar Grace at this time and place, his
excellent performance in Dancing, recommended him to the general admiration of
the whole Company, and conferred upon him beside, the particular Honor of
being singled out to dance with the Queen, as due to his own singular merit; a
favor at such a season, and in so gay a Court as that of France, not always
given to pre-eminence in Title or Blood.

In the height of their entertainment, whilst the younger and the gayer
Revellers were taken up as Spectators or Performers in this Princely Scene of
Delight, their Eyes, or their Heels, (or both) employed, it happened that
Gaston, having had enough of that airier Treat, had selected out half a dozen
of the Grandees of France, and resolving to see what more substantial Cheer and
Hospitality he could find within, was retired into one of the withdrawing
Rooms, where several sumptuous Banquets of Sweetmeats were prepared, set forth
in all the richest state imaginable. The Cardinal, whose Eye and Thought
attended the Monsieur, was instantly one amongst them, and complemented the
Prince, and his few, but noble Companions, with all the Civilities and Caresses
that might be expected at all times from a Person of so much Address as
Richlieu, more especially on this occasion, where it was introductory to a
Parley of such Importance.

After a brisk Glass or two of Wine had gone about, enricht each round with a
several Noble Health, it fell out at last in the Circle to one of the
Noble-men's chance to begin Madam the Cardinal's Nieces Health, possibly more
in complement to their generous Host, the Lord of the Feast, as being his
Relation than in any Thought that concerned the Monsieur as her Servant. The
Cardinal well pleased to have her Name first started by a second hand, laid
hold of the opportunity to apply himself to the Monsieur in a very eloquent
Speech, acknowledging (in all the most obliging (...)) the signal Glory that
shined upon him, as a particular Donation of the Prince, in his generous (...)
and Inclinations for what was so near to him both in Relation and Protection,
as his Niece. And that all his present return in part of Discharge of so vast
an Obligation loaded upon him from so high an Honor, was only his own and his
Niece's duteous Resignation to the pleasure of the Prince; and in farther
gratification to his Honorable Pretensions, by virtue of his own Authority
over her, (to which her Obedience must acquiesce) to tender her in Marriage to
him; which in all Humility he accordingly offered him.

The Monsieur, who from the Cardinal's first entrance upon this Subject, began
to glow extremely, his Face redning all the while at no small rate, attended
(with what patience may be imagined by the sequel) the end of his Speech; when
coming to the proposal of Marriage, all his return was in this short Answer,
Marriage, Proud Priest! seconded with a hearty Box of the Ear bestowed upon him
with no little indignation. The attending French Nobles were struck with no
common astonishment and confusion at so amazing a Rupture. The Astront of a
Blow given to the Prime Minister the great Superintendant of State in the Post
and Power of Richleiu, being matter for sufficient Surprise. But as the
Greatness of both their Qualities stood too high for any particular
Interposition of theirs, all their part was only to express their general
Concern and Disorder, and to endeavor to withdraw the Monsieur. Accordingly
they instantly requested him to retire home by the Backstairs, without
publicly disturbing of the Assembly within, by that certain Uproar which the
least Breath from this Air would unavoidably raise amongst them. The Prince
prevailed upon by that Consideration, accepted their Counsel, and retired, only
with two or three hearty Oaths muttered at his drawing off, That his Niece and
himself might have come to a right understanding without reading so hard a
Chapter as Marriage, and honor enough too done his Reverenceships
Church-blood, as High and as Proud as he was -- Whether these last words of the
Monsieurs were heard or no, we are not informed; but truly it matters little,
his Soul being full enough of those three hard Words that came before, and the
harder Blow that came with them: And indeed the Sense of this last part of the
Princes Declaration was too plainly contained in the foregoing short, but
comprehensive Sentence. His disdainful Refusal of his Niece in Marriage, with
the Storm that followed it, but too manifestly publishing what sort of Love the
Monsieur drove at in his Courtship to that Young Lady.

What Resentments, or rather what Agonies the Cardinal felt at this Affront, I
shall not so much endeavor to describe, the whole Sequel of our History, being
indeed only the violent Motions from this one Mortal Ferment. It is enough to
tell you that Prelatick Honor, alias Spiritual Pride, was wounded in the
tenderest Part, and bore all the Pangs of so penetrating a Stab. And as the
highest Revenge is the natural Product of so provoking an Injury, you must
expect from this one Minutes fertile Seeds, the Brooding Work for Years of
Mischief; and to find our Man of Heaven possessed with half the Furies of Hell,
with so much as every Snake and every Sting about them. But as deep a Mine of
Sulphur as this Fire brand had lighted in the Cardinal's Breast, he was
nevertheless so much Master of his Temper, as not to start out into too sudden
or flashy a Rage, his Vengeance being reserved for more certain and therefore
more deliberate Execution. And accordingly, returning to the Noble Company, he
forced a Complaisance, which for the short remainder of the Entertainment,
shrouded all his Discontent under the fairest Face he could put on. And the
Witnesses of his Disgrace being all at present departed, it was a means to hush
all, at least so long as till the Ball was over. But no sooner had this
Accident taken Air (which was in few hours after) and the whole Court began to
be loud with it, but the Cardinal, to be neither Idle nor Ungrateful, for a
small Earnest of better Payment, the first work he did, was to paint the short
History of last nights Adventures in such Colors to the King, that the
Monsieur's Banishment from Court was the next Mornings first Dispatch before
his uprising.

From the King's Bedchamber his next step was to his Nieces, who, poor Lady,
partly through the Fatigue of last nights Dancing, and likewise some little
Thoughtfulness after her waking, relating to the expected kind Answer of the
Monsicur to the Cardinal, which detained her some time longer in Bed, (neither
Dreaming last night, nor fancying on her Pillow this Morning, any less than an
honorable Reply, suitable to the Violence of his Passion, and the Force of her
own Charms,) was but newly risen, and Heaven knows, as yet, wholly Ignorant of
the fatal Schriech-Owl Notes approaching her: For alas! though long before
this, the meanest Attendant about her, nay, the poorest Servant in the Family,
had the whole Dismal Tale almost old and stale amongst them; yet as ungrateful
Sounds come generally last to the unhappy Ears that are most concerned in them,
the sad Narrative is reserved for the Cardinal's first Delivery.

The Cardinal accordingly entering her Chamber, took his Niece alone, and gave
her the whole Story at large, aggravated by all the keenest Bitterness of
Spirit, in the manner and Circumstances of the Relation. Our Parisatis, who
attended the last Syllable of it, without interposing one word (her Soul indeed
being too full for a hasty vent) after the Cardinal had completely finished the
matter of Fact, together with some Additional Remarks of his own, dressed up in
that Language which the most poynant Gall and radicated Spite could furnish
him; she broke out at last into this following Reply. O Monster! Monster!
Infidel! I have been woed then all this while only to make a Whore of! Traitor!
Villain! A Toy reserved to play with at his idle Hours. Alas! the generous
Monsieur designed Honor for me. A little poor low despicable thing as I am, by
his most Gracious condescending Favor, decreed the Glorious Exaltation of
being the High and Mighty Orleans' s private Divertisement. Goat! Satyr! Devil!
Then musing a while she continued, What Shame and what Confusion is destined
for poor miserable me? Had he but played the honest barefaced Villain, and at
his first Address frankly spoke out his Lewd Lascivious Suit, and plainly told
his execrable purpose, I could have met the Monster with that Look and
Treatment he deserved; and at his very first Assault have thundered my Desiance
in his hardened Face, and made the Ecchoing World a Witness of my Scorn and
Indignation. But the base Gozener, the Unprincely Poor Impostor has worn the
Golden Vizor and betrayed me, betrayed my credulous Ear; seduced my cheated
Reason so egregiously, that I have heard him, heard him with Patience, suffered
him my Presence, and bore the treacherous Sounds of his vile Love repeated over
and over. And what will babbling Fame and the mis-judging World, to think that
I have hearkened so long and loathed no sooner, but Record me for a Listener, a
downright Favourer of his lawless Suit pleased with the fultry Breath; whilst
thus my injured Virgin-Innocence must stand the Blast of each pollutin Tongue,
and all my Honor Canker into Infamy; when common Story, and every laughing
Varlet shall jest upon my Shame -- Here the Cardinal began to interrupt her,
endeavoring to pacify at least that part of her Resentment, by assuring her,
that both her Conduct and his own in this matter, as senseless as popular
Mistakes and Follies may be, should soon convince the World as to that Point,
and remove all shadow of so mean an Imputation, and so sordid a Blemish upon
the Virtue of his Niece; and that no danger of Reproach or Slander should
threaten her then. Well then, replied Parifatis, suppose the World will (...)
me the Right as to clear my Innocence and Virtue at le^^^ from that one
Scandal, and as a special mark of the Justice, only give me my due, in
publishing me that wea^^ that shallow, bubbled, cudden'd Fool (for that is the
best of my Names) as could hear an insolent uninterrupted Villain, buzzing so
long, so loud, and so often in my Ear, without either Wit or Sense enough to
understand him all this while. Alas! Sir, what if I escape this Calumny,
surmounting one Billow while another sinks me? Oh! do but think, but seriously
consider what a Deluge and Inuadation of irresistible Shame will overwhelm me,
when I must ever bear about me, and carry to my Grave a Name so little; pointed
and hist at by reviling Tongues, as a poor course-born Creature sought only for
a Harlot; a wretched thing, thought worthy of no higher than the loose
Pleasures of the Monsieur. Oh! that accursed fixed eternal stain! Which not the
Blood of that ungrateful Man can ever wash away. The Beauty of a Subject has
sometimes conquered Kings, and the Daughters of common Nobility have been often
raised to the Beds and Thrones of the greatest of Monarchs. But the poor
harder-fated little humble Niece of Richlieu has neither Beauty, Blood nor
Merit, worth an honorable Thought from the Younger Brother of Lewis, that
Lucifer Devil of Pride, Orleans. Nay, she so much undeserved so exalted a
Favor, that the very Motion of it could be repulsed with no less a Contempt,
than treating the Great Cardinal Richlieu with the Indignity of a Groom or
Varlet, the Reward of an impudent vile Blow, a Buffet for a Vagabond. But, Sir,
I hope such Injuries as mine, this Outrage of a rude Barbarian, acted upon a
poor young Virgins bleeding Fame, so near to you in Blood (and I hope nearer to
your Heart) this ruining blasting load of my Dishonor, cries loud for
Vengeance from you. Yes, my poor Child, replied the Cardinal, doubt not but I
shall be thine and my own Avenger. Alas! dear injured Sweetness, my Fever burns
as violently as thine, though I do not talk my pain so loud as thou do: For
this Barbarian (as thou justly call him) has acted Outrage on my Honor too;
and I have that long heavy Score of Justice (...) account and balance with
him, that if I show him Mercy, may Heaven never show me any. -- Our Parisatis,
at the Cardinal's so hearty a Promise of Revenge, was ready to embrace his very
Knees in gratitude for so pleasing an Accent: Even the thought whereof was such
an Alleviation to the Torments and Anguish of her Soul, as changed the very Air
of her Face; insomuch that with all the gayest and spriteliest Raptures and
Applauses as due to so glorious a Resolution; she called him the best of
Friends, the kindest of Fathers, her Sacred Champion, her Tutelar Angel (no
Name was too Good for him) Her Transport could hardly forbear giving him more
than Humane Attributes; such Divine Music to her, was the very sound of
Vengeance.

Their private Conference was now interrupted by a Visit of the Queens, who
having both heard and felt the Injuries of her dear Parifatis, was kindly come
her own Embassadress, with the Compliments of Condolance on so sad an Occasion.
The Queen soon bore a part in the mournful Chorus, and expressed her self in so
many just Reproaches to the Baseness of Orleans, and so much sensible pity to
her dear Friend, as drew Tears from the Eyes of Parisatis; her Affliction
hitherto having given it self a more Manly sort of vent, her Pride being indeed
too high for so much weakness in her Eyes, as so Feminine a Distillation. But
beside the Rudeness and Ingratitude of Orleans, in so public and audacious a
Slight of a Lady so much more deserving than himself (for such her kindness and
esteem of Parisatis was pleased to think her) she had another no less Heinous
Accusation against him, for his Wickedness: That his base vile Lendness should
dare to entertain a Thought of such Impiety, as to form Designs against the
Virtue of her Parisatis. And her Reflection thereupon (so tender was the nice
Virtue of the Queen) made her look back with Horror and Trembling, to think how
often her own Ears (how Innocent or Ignorant soever) had been profaned with so
many unhallowed Sounds directed to so wicked an end, as remembering that all his
lewd Addresses (as gilded as they were) were made in her own Presence -- To Sum
up the many and long Plaints the generous Queen was pleased to make, in
exploding the Ingratitude of the guilty Monsieur, and the Wrongs of the
unfortunate Parisatis, would be too tedious a Recital for our present Treatise.
Let it suffice that Hours, Days and Nights were spent between them on that
Melancholy Subject. And as low-prized as her Merit stood in Orleans's lighter
Balance, her Character and Value was not lessened in the Esteem of A -- who
continued still rather the more passionate and faithful Statira; whilst the
Wrongs of her Friend, like the Foil to the Diamond, had only renderd her more
Lovely; there being no Tenderness nor Endearment wanting, to show she was a
Jewel worn next her Heart; whilst our Parisatis at the same time daily poured
her whole Bosom forth to her Gracious Royal Mistress, excepting only that she
cautiously concealed the Cardinal's and her own sworn Revenge against him. For
Malice is ever that Matchiavil Politician that Mines so low, that nothing but
its own Darklanthorn Light must peep into it. That only Secret was of
Importance too weighty for the Trust even of the Highest Friendship; for she
considered that in the intended Circle of her own and her Uncles Vengeance,
possibly there might be those conjured Devils raised up, too frightful an
Apparition for so tender a Constitution as the Queens. The Queen was so too
much a Devote, so over-zealous her Principles and Practice of Religion and
Piety, as would render her but an ill Confident in such an Intreague; Rancor
and Envy being unsociable Companious for Rosaries and Prayer-books; and
therefore for the Poison and Gall now brewing, the Queens Breast was wisely
thought too nice or too weak a Crystal to hold them.

Our Monsieur all this while under the Disgust of his Banishment from Court,
was no inconsiderable Malcontent. And amongst those of his Followers, that
made their several Descants upon the Rencounter between himself and the
Cardinal, there were some of the Boldest of them, who in Pity or Affection for
the Young Lady, were pleased to argue in her Favor, and tell him, That though
it must be acknowledged his own High Birth entitled him to a more dignified
Choice than the Niece of a Prelate for a Wife for the Royal Orleans: However,
as Princes have often dispensed with meaner Deserts than her own; with
Submission to the Monsieur, they thought, that at least after his former more
Princely Choice of more Illustrious Quality, it were little or no Blemish in
his Royal Scutcheon, to be once overruled more by pure Love than rigid Honor
in this last Election: And therefore, what through the Consideration of her
Alliance to the High and Potent Richlieu, her Interest in the Friendship of the
Queen; but above all, the Recommendation of so much Youth, Wit, Beauty and
Virtue; they were of opinion, that the Monsieur's Dispensation in this case,
had been no such impardonable Condescension. Virtue! (replied the Monsieur a
little smartly) Yes; ask the He Goat her Uncle Cardinal else, that old
Pharisaick Letcher in his own Tribe. No, Gentlemen (continued Gaston) if I had
a small itching Fancy for my private Recreation, to come in as a fair Gamester
at a little harmless Level-de-coyl, I think it had been kind enough in taking
the unnatural Drudgery off of his sanctified Hands, without hanging a
Church-Relique about my Neck in an Ecclesiastical Collar, and making a Noose
for Life on it. No, my kind Counselors, I durst not play so bold a piece of
Knight-Errantry for her, as Dispensing a Power as you are pleased to give my
Honor and Me.

This ill-natured Rallery upon his own and his Niece's Virtue, delivered so
hideous in the Original, and nothing lessened or lost in the carrying (as
Malice is always fleet of wing) soon reached the Cardinals Ear; and made an
impression, if possible, deeper than the first affront, as heightened in some
circumstances above it, that being an Act more of Heat and Passion, but this of
Study and Premeditation, But when it came to Parisatis, (the Cardinal being
still the fatal Messenger) her unbridled Rage was turned into down right raving
and distraction; to wish her self the Eyes of a Basilisk, the Aspect of a
Gorgon, the Tresses of a Fury, or that with her own hand she might but have the
pleasure to root his impious Heart up, were her least extravagant expressions.
Such an infernal Spirit of Detraction! Such a tremendous mass of Forgeries
against her unspotted Virtue, as an execrable pollution with her own Uncle! The
innocent fondness of the Cardinals (possibly) more than common Paternal Love,
and her own assiduous Filial Duty so perverted! so blackned! so deformed! In
fine, exasperated and incensed into a perfect raging Libertine, she flew out
into the most vehement inveteracy against the Be-divel'd Orleans, that
ungoverned Female Passion, or Desperation it self could invent. Insomuch that
the Cardinal was forced to use his best Rhetoric to disperse, at least, some
part of the too outrageous storm, by telling her, That if his own envyed
Greatness in the World (for he could impute it to no other cause) had raised so
monstrous an exhalation, so ridiculous a Calumny against him, he was sorry
indeed (poor Innocence) that any part of it should touch her; but at the same
time was something pleased at least in the Incredibleness of the Scandal, as
being too fabulous to find Reputation with any thing but the grossest of
Ignorance and Stupidity; in which List belike Monsieur was one of the number.

Matters thus standing, we must now lead our Reader to the Cardinals thoughtful
Pillow, and there examine the Minerals compounding, and the Bolts a forging, for
the Execution of that vowed Vengeance, which only waits for Strength and Power
worthy the Cause that moves it, and the Hand that weilds it, to roll down on
the Head of Orleans. In his unsleeping Meditations on that Subject, the
Cardinal considered the Monsieur's boundless Pride, founded chiefly on his
standing the visible Heir of France. For as the King (as before mentioned) for
above twenty tedious years, that long reproachful Age had now slept, and
perhaps only slept in the Arms of the fair A -- and Lucina not so much as once
called in all this time. No Fruit from that fair Tree; no, not so much as a
promising Blossom or Bud toward it; so little prospect of an Heir of Empire
from this ill matched Pair, that even the Physicians themselves in all their
highest Court-Flattery, the common sin of their Profession, through all their
Medicinal Prospectives, had not yet ever discovered even a Symptom of one, and
in truth, not so much as a Foundation laid, or an Essay made toward one. Thus
after the whole Court and the whole Kingdoms worn-out-Hopes of the least Scion
from the present Regal Root, the universal Despair of France had now fixed their
Eyes on the Monsieur as their succeeding Sovereign; whilst the Devoirs, the
Veneration, and the Knees on that only account were the greatest, if not the
only Supporters of his proudest Greatness, and most insulting Vanity.

This Consideration led his musing Thought to this Question with himself. What
if yet late as it was, Engines might be set at work, Address, Art and Eloquence
managed, and natural means at last used, that the Queen might yet bear a Son
from her own Body to inherit the Crown of France, and thereby totally dash the
Monsieur's aspiring Hopes, and crush his whole tottering Pride at that one
mortal shock? The very first start upon this darling thought spread so pleasing
a Titillation through the whole Veins of the Cardinal, that he hugged himself at
the very conception, and looked upon it even in the first Embrio as the
sublimest Machination of the most exquisite reach of Revenge, and a Projection
worth the Soul of Richlieu. Accordingly his entire Study and the whole
Faculties of his mind, are bent and intent upon no other Design. And for the
promising Feasibleness of the Undertaking, he presently revolves with himself,
that the whole Default of Royal Issue lay only on the King's Part, and that no
Deficience on the Female side, had all this while obstructed the fairest
Happiness of the Kingdom in an undoubted numerous Royal Progeny, that long ever
this had blessed the Hopes of France, had the Abilities of the Unfortunate
Lewis been but answerable to the Fair A -- 's Merits, or his longing Peoples
Wishes. The complete Accomplishment therefore of so good and so great a Work,
in this necessitated case, lies only in the artful Introducement of some
charitable Assistant, to supply the Conjugal Indigence and Wants of the poor
pitied King, and borrowing abroad what cannot be found at home; a Crutch not
the first time made use of, for the timely Support of a failing Family.

This Proposal, as reasonable as it appears, has nevertheless this formidable
Opposition lying in the way, viz. The Queens severe Virtue and inviolable
Chastity, as almost (upon due Reflection) staggers the whole Enterprise. He
very well remembers, to his no small Grief at present, that never was Life and
Conversation more exemplary for Devotion and Piety than the Queens: A Lady
whose constant Practice had held so unshaken a Conformity to the Strictness of
her Education, that she startled at the very Shadow of a Sin: A Lady so Famous
for the many and singular Christian Offices performed by her in the most
conspicuous Acts of Charity, some of them of that Condescension, even below her
Imperial Dignity: Her Conscience of that Nicety, as in all Humane Appearance
must render her Honor altogether inaccessible. Insomuch, that upon a serious
Review, he meets with those apparent Difficulties, which to a Soul less
resolved than Richlieu, would make him quit the Attempt as impracticable, and
the Success impossible.

Resolved then, as he is, he considers, like a true Engineer, which way the
subtle Mine must work, and where the weakest side, to make the most
advantageous Approach. For this he can fancy no Movement so cunning, as first
guining her Confessor to the Party, engaging him in the Plot, and so making use
of Ghostly Influence, and Ecclesiastical Policy in the Operation. Under that
Shelter what Golden Pretenses can he want! Necessity of State, the Glory of a
Kingdom (and what not? as may be managed) nay, the very Safety of the King her
Husband, and even the Service of Heaven it self shall be Interested in her
Consent; that the very Transgression sweetened and softened into Virtue and
Piety, even Innocence shall Combat Innocence, and Honor Battle Honor, till
Love and Pleasure bear away the Trophy and the Triumph: The Rhetoric of a
Conscience Guide, especially where Flesh and Blood is the Argument, possibly
carrying that persuasive Eloquence over implicit Believers, that nothing like
Church-Musick to tune her into Love.

The Cardinal, for moving of this Machine, presently considers he has one of
the best Tools for his purpose, that his own Heart could wish, or rather the
whole Sanctified Robe could yield him, viz. Father Joseph, a Capuchine, his own
entire and absolute Creature, and at present the Queens Confessor; one whose
very inside he knows so well, as that the undisputed Will of his Patron the
Cardinal is his guiding Oracle, and that there cannot be that Design of what
Stamp soever, that (he is well assured) Father Joseph will not readily and
joyfully embarque in, with all Fidelity and Secrecy; and without Hesitation
Scruple or Reserve, either to serve his Interest, or gratify his Pleasure. The
very Person of the World too; who besides his being not only the properest
Instrument, and hopefullest Coadjutor in this Affair, as a Man principled for
such a Design; but who also in his present Eminence in the Court and Kingdom,
as standing fair for a Cardinals Cap (a Promotion which the special Favor of
Richlieu had been so strenuously endeavoring for him, and thereby a Chain that
more firmly linked his Heart to him) had consequently a Power equal to his
Inclinations of serving him. For this Trusty Joseph therefore is an immediate
Dispatch sent, and a close Conference held; where the Cardinal at large
recounts his Grievances (which indeed were no Secret to Joseph before) and
after the most pathetick Remonstrance of the unpardonable Indignities put upon
him by Orleans, together with his own resolved Justice in revenging himself, he
comes to the particular determined Means and Artifice for executing it, and
thereupon desires his kindest and best Assistance in it.

Father Joseph proud of the Glory of so high a Trust, and glad of all Occasions
of testifying his inviolable Bonds of Gratitude to so Illustrious a Benefactor,
as thinking his ablest Services at best but a Tributary Acknowledgment of his
own ALL received and held from Richlieu, presently assures him of his steddiest
and most vigorous Performance of his Eminencies Sacred Commands, telling him
(with a Transport in his very Countenance) that Fortune in all the Lottery of
an Age, could never have presented such an opportunity, so lucky an offered
Minute for Accomplishing such a Design upon the Queen as now. For, Sir,
continued Joseph, to make bold to crack a Seal of Confession, I must tell you,
that the Queen at her last Shrift, has confessed her self passionately fallen
in Love. And though your Eminence knows our Ecclesiastical Key of Consciences
unlocks almost all the Secrets of Courts and Kingdoms, however our Spiritual
Commission in cases of this nature, out of a tenderness for Personal
Reputation, extends not to an Inquiry into Names. It Is enough that the Female
Penitent, under more heavy Circumstances, more mortal Dilemma's than the poor
Innocent Queen, is obliged to the Penance of a Blush, in exposing her
shamefullest Frailty to her Confessors Ear, without specifying the Person, or
declaring the name of her Seducer, though the Invader of her Virgin Chastity,
or the Violator of her conjugal Sacrament. Nevertheless the Queen, poor
harmless Creature, who, God knows, I believe, had scarce a thought that ever
went astray that way before (at least I can answer for those years she has
continued under my Ghostly Tuition) came yesterday to Confession, and with a
Contrition as great as some Sinners would have felt for robbing an Altar or
burning a Church, without mincing Circumstances, or Particulars, and with an
innocent openness both of place and time, confessed she had unhappily cast a
look and a wandering thought (not to mention the hard names she gave 'em) upon a
young Stranger, that danced with her the other night at your Eminencies Ball,
expressing in so mortifying an Accent, that heinous Sense of her Transgression
in so guilty a Breach of her Conjugal Duty (though God wot but in a look and
thought) as if she had broken the whole Ten Commandments; that I dare Swear I
might have enjoined her the walking barefoot through the longest Street in
Paris, and the poor thing thought it but reasonable, had I had so little
Christianity as to have inflicted so cruel a Penance for so venial a Sin. It Is
true, I must own she did not utter his name (for I believe she hardly knew it)
however my Curiosity upon so novel a Confession from the Queen, giving me some
inquisitive Thoughtfulness upon so surprising a Subject, has since plainly
pointed out the Man to me, who must undoubtedly be the same gallant young
Gentleman, an unknown Face in Court, whose Figure at your last Ball drew so
many Eyes upon him; and whose Title (which I have likewise since discovered) is
the Chevalier de Roan, a sprightly young Gentleman of noble Extraction, who
educated abroad in his tenderer Youth, has brought home the Accomplishments of
a Gentleman and a Traveller to grace his native Country.

The finding of a Golden Mine could not have been half so welcome to the
Cardinal, as this Intelligence of Father Joseph's, so infinite a Treasure he
now thought himself Master of, in so prosperous a Discovery. And looking back
upon the Extraordinariness of past Circumstances, viz. That the very Minute
that Orleans's bold Hand, and bolder Arrogance durst so impudently lift it self
up against him at his own Ball, the Queen should so fortunately at the same
time play the amorous Rover, twining so lucky a Snare about her Heart; as if
the same overruling Destiny that suffered so loud-tongued an Affront given to
his Person and Honor, was in Justice to himself so studious for the
Reparation, as that at the same moment it permitted the Guilt, it was also
knotting the very Whip for the Punishment. Reflecting I say in this manner, his
Fancy played so much the Self-flatterer, that he could not look upon the whole
Adventure as matter of Accident, the mere blind cast of Chance; but that no
less than the Hand of Heaven it self was in it, and consequently his intended
purpose carried both Honor and Honesty along with it from so potent a
Justification. But however his Cause did not want any of this beautiful Varnish
to set it off; for Revenge so naturally dear to the Constitution and Kidneys of
Richlieu even in the blackest Face was always lovely. But to lose no time, but
lay hold of the Forelock, and fall upon Business, his immediate Determination
is to send for the Chevalier, and to take him into his own Protection; and the
first mark of his Favor shall be to introduce him into Court, and plant him in
some honorable Office near the Person of the Queen, a Stand very necessary for
the Game in hand. And for that, his own uncontroled Disposal of all Honors in
Court (and, in truth, in the whole Kingdom) paved his way so fair for him, that
the Cardinal's least word was a perfect Patent Royal for any Grant of that
kind. And considering farther, that Loves best Arrow is Golden-headed, and the
gayest Shaft strikes deepest, he resolves that if the Chevalier's private
Fortunes (whatever they are) shall be any thing too narrow to furnish out an
Equipage for this Expedition, his own kind Purse shall be open to support that
highest Court Grandeur as may dress him up the fairest Mark for a Royal Eye: So
far will he be from starving so glorious a Cause, for the Crowning of whose
Success, he cannot think the Exhausting a whole Exchequer a profuseness too
Lavish or ill Spent. And therefore the whole Result at this time between them
is, that this Initiation of the Chevalier to the Queen; Conversation, shall be
first managed, before himself and Father Joseph come to a closer Attack of the
Queen, reserving their farther Measures to new Counsels, as occasion shall
arise, or necessity require.

Means therefore is presently used for bringing the Chevalier to the Cardinal's
presence, who no sooner saw, and entertained him, but he descryed all those
Manly Charms both in his Person and Conversation, as rendered the shaking of the
Queens Heart from so powerful an Assailant, a less subject of the Cardinal's
Wonder. For though he had partly taken notice of him at the Ball, and remembered
he had seen him Dance with the Queen; yet the Cardinal's Thoughts being then
otherwise taken up, he had not leisure for that Observation which his present
more critical Survey of so deserving an Object affords him. The Cardinal, whose
penetrating Judgment possibly could read a Man through at as quick a sight as
any Person of the Age, received that instant Satisfaction, and that
enlightening of his hopes from an Aspect so promising, as carried him to the
most vigorous pushing on of the present smiling Fortune before him. After
several Questions relating to his Birth, Education and Travels (the chief
Subject of the present Interview) to all which, the Chevalier answered with
that graceful Assurance, in an account so pertinently delivered, and likewise
with all that Sweetness, as added a farther Illustration to that Worth which
each Minute appeared but more conspicuous: The Cardinal, in return, addressing
to the Chevalier, told him, That as the Advancement of Virtue and Merit had
been always his Study, he had received that Character of him, which supported
by so many fair Credentials now before him had recommended him to his Favor;
and therefore he required his attendance to morrow Morning to receive some
Pledge of it, and in the mean time to be assured that his Fortune should be his
own Dependant. The transported Chevalier, who desired no greater good Fortune
than Court-Smiles could build him, and no greater a Founder of such a Fortune
than Richlieu; Power, Honor or Trust in the Court of France, being really the
Work of no other Creation than his own; made the Cardinal a return of that most
sensible Duty for so dazzling a Grace as his Eminence in this surprising manner
was pleased should shine down upon him, taking his leave with that profound
Obeisance, that he carried home with him such pleasing Idea's from so elevating
a Meditation, as sweetened his whole Thoughts all day, and gilded his very
Dreams all night.

The Cardinal has no sooner dispatched the Chevalier, but strait he posts to
the Queen, where the business of his Visit was to tell her Majesty, That he
came a Suitor to her in the behalf of Merit. Merit, my Lord, answered the
Queen, and such an Intercessor for it, are very prevailing Orators in any
reasonable Suit. The Reasonableness of my Suit, replied the Cardinal, I Will
refer to your fair Self, when telling you I have occasions of State to remove
an Officer now in Service under your Majesty to another post, I would entreat
your gracious Acceptance of a supply to fill his vacancy in the Person of a
Gentleman, who besides noble Friends, has nobler Virtues his Advocates. It Is
true, he is something a Stranger in Court, and I suppose unknown to your
Majesty, though I confess your Majesty has seen him once at least; and if
amongst your numerous Denations of the like Favor at that time, your Majesty
might chance to take notice of him, I could recall him to your remembrance by
reminding you, that your Majesty did him the Honor to Dance with him at the
Ball the other night: And though as young a Courtier as he is, yet being a
Person of that remarkable Appearance, that not only the Approbation of the
Court in that fair Assembly gave him some Respect, but my own Testimonials of
his complete Worth can more fully answer for him, I am emboldened to present
him to you as one of your Menials in the Capacity of your Majesty's Knight of
Honor your Gentleman Usher.

At the Cardinal's first mention of the Stranger that Danced with her, the
Queen in spite of her best Endeavors to bide it, could not hinder the rising
of a little extraordinary Vermilion in her Cheeks, which the Cardinal with a
Secret Delight perceiving, nevertheless in tenderness to the blushing Queen, he
as industriously managed his Looks to take no notice of it, as the Queen could
do her own for giving him no occasion for it. And by that time the Cardinal had
finished his Address, the Queen, with much ado, had pretty well recovered her
natural Complexion, and suppressed the guilty Bloom, the lawless Rebel Blush
that had made so bold an Invasion so much against her Will; and at first
Thought, out of a Secret Check of Honor, and a Religious Guard of her Virtue,
she had almost resolved to have denied the Cardinal her Acceptance of so
dangerous a Servant; only upon a sudden Recollection she was not provided with
any reasonable Objection against him, for her just Refusal of so qualified a
Person, unless she would plainly, or at least tacitly have confessed the true
cause of her Denial, and thereby have discovered her guilty Weakness to the
Cardinal, a Frailty so shameful, as she could sooner pass an Ordeal, than but
once think of exposing. Enforced therefore to a consent, she made the Cardinal
a short Answer, telling him, He needed not to have given himself all this
Trouble, but have used his own pleasure; for the Choice of her Servants being
always the least of her care, he best knew who were the Persons fittest for
her. And so with an affected Indifference, and by way of Prevention to all
Danger of any new Insurrection of a second Insolent Blush, she diverted the
Subject by falling into Discourse of other Matters, with no little pleasure to
her self at so prudent a conduct herein, though Heaven knows to a quite
contrary Effect; for little thinking what Hands, Poor Lady, she is now fallen
into, the Artfulness of her affected Innocence, is only a plainer Indication of
what she most labors to conceal.

The next Morning at the appointed hour of Attendance, the Chevalier waits the
Cardinal's Uprising, when the generous Richlieu taking him alone with him into
his Closet, he told him, As an Earnest of his Favor, and an Introduction to
his future good Fortune, he designed to place him near the Person of the Queen,
in the Quality and Post of Her Majesty's GentlemanVsher. And that he might make
his Entrance not unworthy himself, he desired his Acceptance of thirty thousand
Crowns for some little present help: Giving him farther to understand that his
pleasure was, That no Person should appear in more Splendour at Court than
himself: And to encourage him to be no ways sparing in any Equipage necessary
thereunto, He assured him his own Hand should never be shut to him, but a
constant Assistance should daily flow from the same kind Fountain to support
that Figure he intended he should make; only one Injunction he must lay upon
him, which was, that, as his Favors were never sullied with the Affectation of
Vanity; for that reason, and some other private ones of his own, he conjured
him to make at least this part of his Kindness an inviolable Secret. The
Chevalier utterly confounded (as well he might) at so pouring a Torrent of
Bounty, fell instantly upon his Knees to thank his generous Patron, in a
Language and Posture suitable to the Reception of such accumulated Graces in so
astonishing a manner heaped upon him. For as the Season was not yet thought
ripe to unseal the Chevalier's Commission in the Post to which he was entering,
the Cardinal's Favors appeared so much the more magnified, as that the
Chevalier was at present wholly ignorant, that there was concealed Vengeance as
well as open Love in so extravagant a Benefactor, and that a descending
Thunderer lay hid in the Golden Shower. The Cardinal was pleased likewise to
question the Chevalier, if he were married or no; to which the Chevalier
modestly answering in the Negative, the Cardinal told him, That as he had made
him his own Adoption, his whole Preferment should be entirely his own Care; and
therefore he enjoined him not to engage himself in any Amor without his
Privacy; for with the Disposal of himself, the Disposal of his Heart too he
intended should be his own particular Care.

The Chevalier, whose natural Ambition and Vanity (to give him his right)
perhaps the World could hardly match, in persuance of the Cardinals Will and
Pleasure, the extraordinary Splendour and Gallantry ordered him to appear in,
resolved rather to outdo, than fall short in his Obedience to that part of his
Command. For not only the Cardinal's Bounty (shower as often and as much as it
kindly please) but his whole Patrimony, rather than want, should be all
ventured on the same Bottom.

Our gay Chevalier thus pompously enstated, has not shined many days in his
Office, before the Cardinal thinks fit to send for him, to closet him once
more, and there open the great Arcanum to him, with all the necessary Documents
for the Conduct and manage of it. After several other Caresses, the Cardinal
for feeling his Pulse, asks the Chevalier his Opinion of the Queen, and how he
likes his Royal Mistress. To which the Chevalier, Like her! and please your
Eminence! it is impossible but every thing that is humane must kneel to such
Divine Goodness; nay, her very ministering Angels, her Guardians themselves,
must certainly be in Love with her. Nay, my Chevalier, replied the Cardinal,
now you speak like a passimate Servant indeed: But I perceive you are rightly
qualified for a Courtier, you can play the Flatterer so expertly. No, my Lord,
replied the Chevalier, Whatever other Qualifications of a Courtier I may justly
mourn the want of, I am no ways desirous of that common Court-trapping,
Flattery, as fashionable as it is now worn. Besides, I believe, your Eminence is
sensible of that Royal Merit in the Person of the Queen that deserves a better
and abler Panegyrist than my self; the highest Character I can give such
sublime Excellency, being only the universal Duty of all that have the Honor
to be blessed with the Vmbrage of it, and that I am no more than one of the Crowd
that pay it her. Well, my Chevalier, answered the Cardinal, smiling, the Queen
is not ungrateful for the kind Character you give her, for she is pleased to
return the Chevalier as a kind one. But to put one Question to you; Could you
love the Queen? Love her! my Lord! answered the Chevalier something surpized.
Yes, says the Cardinal, Love her! Love that Divine Goodness you have painted so
beautiful. Examine your Heart, and faithfully answer me that serious Question.
My Lord, answered the Chevalier, there is something so amazing in the Question
demanded, that I am unprovided with sense enough to understand you: But since
your Eminence's absolute Command repaires my Answer, and I dare not be so
insolent to ask an explication, I can only reply, That had Providence, the
great Disposer, debased the Quality of the fair A -- level to the poor
Chevalier de Roan, or advanced mine up to hers; and the Divine Dispenser so
ordained to lodge such Beauty in my Arms, I could out-pride my self in such a
Prize above the famous Alexander with his conquered Universe, Lord of a fairer
World than his Sword ever conquered, or his Ambition wept for. The Cardinal
rouch'd with a pleasure to find the Wax so soft and so fair for the Impression,
began at large to unfold from the whole beginning (without the least concealed
particular) the Queens favor for the Chevalier; and in fine, the whole
Structure to be raised on that Basis. Only he a little minced the private
revenge engaged in it, and laid the more weighty stress on that more popular
Argument, the safety and the glory of the Nation so zealously labored for, in
raising an Heir from the Body of the Queen; concluding the charming Subject
(for such the ravished Soul of the Chevalier began to feel it) with this
closing point, Well, my Chevalier, if the Royal Grace of the Queen, and the
Interest of your assisting Friends are planting so fair a Grove of Laurels for
you in the stolen pleasure of so sweet a Paradise, I hope you are not of too
strait-saced a Conscience, but so fair a Lady -- Conscience, my Lord! (replied
the Chevalier, interrupting him) No; there is that higher Divinity in the fair A
-- 's Charms, that truckling Conscience moves a Sphere below it. The enjoyment
of such Bliss carries its own Consecration; and I could mix my Orisons to such
Beauty, even with my Prayers to Heaven. This amorous Rapture of the Chevalier's
had a little tang of Profaneness in it, being something of a bold Launch before
so high a Church-pillar; however the Cardinal's Sanctity relished it never the
worse on this occasion; and finding so hopeful a Knight Errant of him for
marching under a Lady's Banner, he told him what obstacles lay in the way, in
the rigid Virtue and Chastity they had to combat. However, not to let that
dishearten him, the surmounting of those Bars for him, shall be his own and
Father Joseph's Work. For as thick a mass of Ice as Honor had hardened about
her Heart, they had Incense and Altar Coals ready to thaw it; and Religion it
self should be the ministering Instrument made use of for softning her most
obdurate Scruples of Conscience. And therefore the Chevalier's business was
only to be very assiduous and officious about the Person of the Queen, his
silent Services being all the Address he must dare to make; for the distance of
a Crowned Head would admit of no bolder an approach, his Province being no more
than to attend the consummation of his destined Felicity; and waiting for the
golden Fruit, till they had ripened it for gathering. But above all things he
was to remember, (and that with a most religious observance) that he was
pushing for that Conquest which would admit of no Triumph. For there was more
than Fairy Treasure in the Blessing designed him; a Secret to be sealed up in
eternal silence, and prized as valuable as his Life.

This private Conference of the Chevalier and the Cardinal was now interrupted
by a Visit of his Niece's; and the Chevalier dismissed with that entire
satisfaction, and those Raptures about him, that he could scarcely think he
trod on common Ground, but looked upon himself as already translated to some
more than humane Elysium, from the Aspect of so many gaudy Visions that now
danced before him. Our Parisatis, who being hitherto not called to the Consult,
and thereby ignorant of the great Work of Projection, and the present
forwardness of it, thought the Cardinal's Bolts a little slow a forging; and in
truth was making this Visit for lending her help to the Bellows, or (rather
than fail) to the Hammer to hasten them. But Fortune at this time spares her
the needless trouble; for the Cardinal prevents her the Question, by
voluntarily making her the Partner of his own Joys, in a Relation at large,
containing the whole Progress of their Plot, and the full prospect of their
Success. Our Parisatis lent an Ear to the Narration with as much Attention as
to a delivered Oracle; and though it plainly terminated in downright betraying
the Honor, and rifling the Chastity of her dearest and kindest Statira; yet
whether all the most sacred and binding Ties of Friendship were swallowed in
the insatiate and undistinguishing Thirst of Vengeance; or that perhaps her
Feminine Pity to the Queen for her twenty long abstinential years, might think
a Loveplot no unfriendly design against her, she could not forbear giving the
Cardinal the highest Applause, as due for this Masterpiece of Invention. The
Cardinal finding his Niece's Pulse beat so even with his own, was pleased to
tell her, that her Faculties too must be exercised, as well as Father Joseph's
and his own, viz. in seeking all occasions before the Queen, of extolling the
Wit, Person and Gallantry of the Chevalier; there being no whet to Love like
Praise, nor can the Queens Fancy be better edged. Parisatis, whose too zealous
revenge against Orleans was ashamed to stand an idle Spectator in a Cause so
much her own, readily assented to join in the Triple League, and heartily make
one amonst them, promising her ablest helping Hand for the turning of any Wheel
in her power to setting of the great Machine a moving.

Parisatis was not admitted into the Consult in vain: for there was scarce a
day passed that she did not artfully insinuate into the Queen a good Thought,
and a kind Eye for the Chevalier. If the Chevalier had any Access more than
ordinary to the Queen, 'twas through Parisatis. His Services and Assiduity were
magnified with all the little Arts of her best Manage and Applause. Nor only
this, but she cunningly engaged him in those pleasing Narrations before the
Queen of his Travels, Observations, and Adventures in Italy, Germany, and
several other parts of the World, as infinitely contributed to the Queens
Divertisement; and which so ingeniously related, discovered a Treasury of that
rich Wit and Sense in the accomplished Chevalier, as could not but plume new
Darts from this new Quiver, and heighten the impending Fatality of those more
and more dangerous Charms, which were before but too mortal.

The Cardinal in the mean while considering how requisite it would be for
himself to act in conjunction with Father Joseph in the Religious Attack upon
the Queen, the great Church-battery to be planted against her; not doubting his
own Ability in furnishing a great many sinewy and forcible Arguments, the
necessary Artillery toward it; and yet on the other side reflecting on his own
known Rancour and Revenge against Orleans, he finds himself a very unqualified
Orator on that Theme. For in spite of all the pretended fair Face of Zeal and
Religion designed for their purpose, he is but too sensible that the Queens
piercing Judgment will discover the Vizer, and detect the rooted and gangreen'd
malice at the bottom. But for wise prevention of all this, he instantly
resolves upon this Expedient, viz. by Father Joseph and other private Agents,
to have the Monsieur recalled to Court, and himself to appear so cool, so
easy, and indeed so gall-less in the remission of so heinous an Affront, as
shall utterly stifle all suspicion of the least remaining Dreg of Spite or
Resentment against him. Accordingly the next News we hear, is the Return of the
Monsieur. His Banishment so gently repealed without either Pardon asked, or the
least Atonement or Submission made; that the hushing up of so noisie a Storm in
so sudden and unexpected a Calm, is the Subject of universal wonder; insomuch
that the whole Conduct of the tame-forgiving Cardinal herein, much to their
astonishment, appeared more agreeable to the meekness of a cloistered Saint,
than the Spirit of a State Churchman; and so publicly resounded his more than
Christian Moderation and Lenity, as his Revenge could not well have its Cloven
Foot better covered.

All things carried on thus plausibly, the indefatigable Engineer Parisatis has
so often gained the Chevalier those near and familiar Accesses to the Queen,
that new Fuel is added to the old Fire; and the poor Quen comes big with a sad
and lamentable Account of her Female Weakness to her Confessor. Her Confession
makes a Relation of that dismal Violence committed upon her Heart, by the more
and more prevailing Influence of her bold and formidable Incroacher, as
requires no small expiatiory Contrition. Our well-pleased Joseph, who (had it
been yet time to speak) would have told her, it had been more her Virtue than
her Sin; however takes a very gentle cognizance of her Frailty, and gives her
so easy an Absolution, that by the cheapness of her present Balm in Gilead,
the Queen had good reason to believe, that her Offense (if his Ghostly
Spectacles saw true) was not altogether so frightful as her own over-prying
Terrors of Conscience had presented it.

The Capuchin immediately posts to the Cardinal, and gives him at large the
whole pain of the Queen, and the full Dimensions of her opening Wound, her
whole Confession having disclosed that radicated and invincible Passion for the
Chevalier, that to lose no time, they think the Iron full hot for striking; and
if if she be ever malleable, it is now. It Is resolved therefore that the
Cardinal and his trusty Joseph shall presently desire a private Audience of the
Queen, and prepare for a general Storm.

Such a private Conference by Persons so high in her esteem, is no sooner asked
but obtained: where the Cardinal, with a Gravity suitable to the occasion, very
eloquently, (by way of Introduction) makes a long Harangue upon the Happiness
of those Kingdoms, where the Smiles of Providence have blessed the Royal Bed with
Heirs to Empire; recounting several Instances from History in diverse parts of
the World of the establishment of the Peace and Glory of Nations, founded and
secured upon that only Basis of their Felicity; hinting several unfortunate
examples of Crowns devolving upon Collateral Lines, and the public Feuds and
fatal Troubles arising from that unhappy Cause. From this Topic he begins very
artfully to condole the like unhappiness of Lewis in Defect of Issue from the
Illustrious A -- 's Veins; insinuating also the like impending misfortune of
France from that National Calamity, the present Childless Bed of Lewis; telling
her how much the whole Kingdom groaned under that Affliction, and what
inexpressible Delight and Transport they would receive, if Heaven even yet
would hear the Prayers of an Age, and relieve the Distresses of a People, in
opening that Gate to their Bliss (as late as it was, and as long shut as it had
been) by raising them a Branch from so Divine and so dear a Sovereign Stock.
The Queen, who yet fathomed not their Depth, was pleased modestly to reply,
That she was highly obliged both to his and her Peoples kind wishes. But as the
immutable Will had otherwise ordained, they must all acquiesce in the Divine
Pleasure, and cease those fruitless Prayers, which Heaven had now too
manifestly decreed should be in vain. Decreed, Madam! replied the Capuchin very
passioonately, Kind Heaven forbid! No, Madam, if the Divine A -- a would look
down with an Eye of Mercy upon a mourning Kingdom, we have no reason to
distrust but Providence would pity where you pityed. And since the Almighty
Dispensation, as high and as great a First-mover as it is, has not so wholly
assumed the entire care of Mankind to it self, but in a high measure has
remitted the Attainment of some Blessings to inferior and second-moving
Causes: And though our Worldly Felicities are truly all formed for us above;
however there must be that humane cooperating Study and Industry, the
effective Means of receiving them. And since (as we have too long and too just
Reason with anguish of Soul, and fullness of sorrow to lament) we your nearest
and faithfullest Servants are but too sensible of a drooping Kingdoms Loss, and
the true and only defective cause of their long Infelicity; my Lord Cardinal,
that zealous and pious good Man, and learned Prelate, with my unworthy self,
are sent to you, commissioned from the Divine Authority, to open your Ears to
the Cries of a Nation; and in the everlasting Name, to soften your Compassion
into that Maternal Care of France, as may raise up her languishing Head, and
establish her Welfare, Tranquillity and Honor to endless Generations. Yes,
Royal Madam, proceeded the Cardinal, With that Divine Authority, and for that
great purpose we are come your Suppliants, beseeching your Attention to those
cordial and faithful Admonitions, which, as Ambassadors of Truth, we are
emboldned to lay down before you, under the Warrant and Credentials of that
Heavenly Command that sends us. Ah, Madam, if the languishing Flower-de-Lisses,
a wailing Kingdoms Tears, and an Empires waning Glory could move you to
Commiseration, propitious Heaven might yet raise that blessed Fruit from these
Illustrious Veins, as one day shall adorn the Gallick Throne; an Heir that my
Prophetic Soul foretells shall Reign a Hero upon Earth, and shine a Saint in
Heaven. But oh! the misery! the incomprehensible misery that the Royal Chanel
in the unhappy Lewis should be so totally blocked up, that our kneeling Vows
must look up to some new Sourse of Providence for so Divine a Blessing.
Consider, Gracious Lady, how the natural Orb of Glory is totally shaded; and
let your pitying Goodness supply some borrowed Luminary, or all the Light of
France must set for ever. Nor let any sudden Fantom, (for it is only Fantom)
from this shocking sound assame a shape to fright you. For I assure you I come
a Minister of Light, and not an Imp of Darkness; and bear a shining Lamp of
Heaven, and not a sooty Brand of Hell before you. No, Madam, to answer even to
your most ghastly Fears, and dispel the Gorgon; for I cannot make too plain a
Scrutiny into so nice a point of Conscience: Consider, Madam, that the
terriblest of Sins Adultry, being a Command within the second Table of the Law,
is only so far a Violation of the Divine Ordinance, as it is a Breach of our
Duty, or a wrong to our Neighbor. The true Adultress is the Defiler of her
Nuptial Bed in the Invasion of her Husbands Right. But, alas, that horrid
Blemish will no ways touch the Innocence of A -- a: For a Right cannot be
invaded, before a Right possessed. As hallowed as the Matrimonial Bond, and as
inviolable as the Conjugal Bed should be; it is not the Sacred Words alone
before the Altar that tie that Bond, and make that Conjugal Knot so
uninfringible, but the stronger consummating Seal of Matrimony. If any personal
Defect renders that Consummation impossible, (and indeed Marriage it self under
any such personal known defect, is rather a Privarication with God, than an
Holy Sacrament) the Matrimonial Obligation is of it self so invalid, that the
Law lies open to null it with a Breath, and every days common Process can
dissolve it. I confess, could any Vows, Oblations, Prayers or Sacrifices
prevail to obtain this inestimable Bliss to the up-raising a despairing Kingdom
by an Heir from Lewis; my Soul would tremble at so unhallowed a Motion, as this
then would be, and sink my blushing Face in dust at the horror of so tremendous
an Imagination. But since the fatal Wants of the lamented Lewis have
barricadoed even the least Glimps of Light out, and excluded all our Hopes from
thence; what Injury, what Injustice to Lewis can the Fair A -- a commit? What
private Violation of her Shackles and Fetters (for such rather than her
Hymeneal Ties I must call 'em) can she make; especially under so urgent a call:
when even those Shackles she may publicly in the Face of the World, by the
Laws of God and Man, utterly unbind, cancel and throw off; if foolish worldly
Honor, that by long prevailing Custom has laid a popular Stain on such a
preceding, would permit so reproachful though so highly legal a Separation?
Besides, Madam, were there a shadow of a Fault, or any remaining unsatisfied
Scruple against the Sacred Counsel I have given you; consider, that when
Extraordinary Occasions call, Heaven has permitted the use of Extraordinary
Instruments; and so warrantable have those Extraordinary Instruments been, that
the Divinity it self has laid down Patterns and Precedents even of its own
exemplar Conduct under the same Dispensation. Look back, Madam, but to the
Creation of the World, and you will see the first Original of Mankind raised
even by incestuous Beds, a Generation betwixt Brother and Sister. And though at
the same time we must own that the unlimited Almighty Power (had the
inscrutable Wisdom so thought fit) could have otherwise Peopled the World; yet
such was his Decree, that even that which his first delivered Law proscribed,
and condemned as so black and deformed, was nevertheless by Himself under his
own dispencing Pleasure (for Necessity with Omnipotence is incompatible) made
the very corner Stone to that fair Fabric, the Race of Men, the Image of
Himself. And if, Madam, so universal a dispencing Power was exercised for the
Benefit of Mankind; shall one singular Distencing Act for the Benefit of a
whole Nation be Capital: especially where that Dispensation infringes no Law,
Violates no Right, and breaks no Command, as has so fully been proved to your
Majesty? Alas! Madam, it is the Intention makes the Sin; the Gratification of a
Lust may be Criminal, whilst the Preservation of a Kingdom shall be righteous
and unblameable. But perhaps, Madam, you may have some little Tenderness to the
Pretensions of the present Expectant Heirs of France, and nicely think the
Diverting of Succession a Trespass upon their Birthright. No, Royal Madam,
stagger not your Royal Reason there. Examine but the Conduct and Practice of
Imperial Policy in imumerable Examples. How many of the Great Roman Cesars have
Adopted Sons to Inherit, I may say, even the Empire of the World (for such was
then the Roman Greatness) And if Adopted Heirs, utter Aliens and Strangers to
the Blood, were so publicly let in to rise up in Bar of all the nearest
Imperial Demandants, and so notorious an Exclusion of Lineal Right justified by
those strict and critical Observers of Meral Justice the Roman Administrators;
how much more Righteous will an Adoption to the Crown of France appear, when so
far from an Alien, it shall challenge at least half the Royal Title, the Rich
Veins of the fair Partner of the Throne, the Sacred A -- a; And the other
Additional borrowed part, only a charitable Supply of Indigence, and support of
Weakness. Alas! Madam, (cried the interposing Joseph) let me do the noble
Cardinal this right, as to avow, that not a prophesying Martyr could have
delivered more oraculous Truths, than the Profound and Divine Reason he has
uttered. Yes, Madam, replied the Cardinal, what I have uttered has been
delivered in the Spirit of Truth and Fidelity, without a Taint or Sully of the
least malicious or sinister Thought. I confess, indeed, I have received Wrongs
from Orleans, and perhaps crying ones; But so forgive me Heaven, as I have
forgiven him: and that I speak the Sincerity of my Soul, the Eternal Witness
can bear Record for me. Forgiven him! answered Joseph very passionately, Yes,
and so exemplar a Forgiveness, as the admiring World resounds it even to your
Reproach. That meek forgiving Goodness to that great bad Man, so much above a
Christian Love, and Fraternal Amity, even to a Humane Weakness. Believe me,
Royal Madam, continued the Cardinal, I have given you Counsel, and perhaps may
have surprised you in it; but to answer before the everlasting Tribunal, for
the Integrity of my Thoughts toward the Sacred Majesty of France, in the
Person of the Royal Anne of A -- a, the Righteous Judge that knows the hidden
Secrets, knows, that your Guardian Angel cannot bear his Charge over you more
Faithfully, and would more tenderly guide your least unerring Step than
Richlieu. Better a Thousand sinking Kingdoms Mourn, than the fair Soul of A --
a should but trip even in a Criminal Thought, by the misleading Counsels of
Richlieu. Betray my Royal Mistress! No! far be that abhorred detested Thought.
And though in this weak Vale of Mortality, each Minute has its Faults and
Frailties to account for; I would not have so black a Sin to answer at my last
Audit of Eternity, as the betraying of my Royal Mistress, for twice that
Kingdoms Price, for whose Glory I am so Solicitous. No, Madam, I have given you
honest and faithful Counsel; and to conjure you to embrace it, my Souls
Eternity answer for yours.

The Queen who all this while had never interposed one syllable, but resolved
(patiently I dare not say) to give a full run to these assailing Church.
Militants, could now hold no longer, but falling into the most pathetical
Exclamation, she cried, Good God! where shall I hide my blushing Head, and how
shall I be able to look Day in the Face, to think that two such Reverend
Professors of Christianity durst ask me such a Question? No, my Lord Cardinal,
I will not enter into Dispute with you, nor quarrel your Religious Jargon upon
this strange amazing Theme; for I am too weak to play the Castiist against such
Learning. But to answer you in my own Province; had you been a sensible Judge
of that Worldly Honor you mentioned, you would have sooner bit that Tongue out
than have dared but motion such profaration to A -- a. The Cardinal was going
to reply, when the Queen interrupted him, For shame, for shame, no more.
Flatter me not, mistaken Guides, with an easy forgiving God, to what I could
never forgive my self, and cease this fruitless suit; for when you can move the
Globe, hope to shake Me: for the Attempt is equally impossible. The Cardinal
and the Capuchine were endeavoring to speak again; when the Queen absolutely
commanded their silense, and with an Ansterity in her very Look, an Aspect that
the sweetness of her Temper was never ruffled into before, Bid them eternally
forbear the Ropetition of this days Folly, or see her Face no more; and so
bolted from them out of the Closet, as if she meant to tell them that she
disdained even to converse upon so loathed a Subject, and would not bear the
very Air 'twas breathed in.

The Cardinal and Capuchin very mournfully withdraw, and could not forbear,
between themselves, a great many hard words upon the Queens incorrigible
obstinacy and perverseness. But as shamefully defeated as they have been,
however it is resolved they will rally again; only that new Mines and Trenches
must be managed to carry on the Approach. The Capuchine he advises, That some
Love-potion or amorous Philter should be given her, and in the height of the
operation the Chevalier boldly loosed upon her; and that Engine could never
fail success. But the Cardinal utterly disliked this project, giving these
Objections, viz. That if there were any such Arts to be practiced, their
Effects were only to be wrought by Poison; and undoubtedly the Queens overheat,
under any such unnatural Ferment, would be as prejudicial as her Husbands over
coldness had been before; and so their whole Design fall to the Ground. No, he
had not Read all Divinity, but he thanked God he was a little piece of a
Naturalist too; and very well knew that the Current of Generation must keep the
easy channel of Nature; for in all forced Torrents and violent Rapidities, the
Inundation would be destructive. Besides all such Arts at best would lay but a
crazy Foundation; for compulsive Love would quickly turn into Hate and
Aversion; and the Charm dissolving and stupyfied Reason awaking, a work so ill
begun would be in danger of tottering before any perfection accomplished. Then
replies the Capuchine, What think you, Sir, if the Queen by some stratagem or
other, at some unguarded Minute, should be snared into the Chevaliers Arms?
Consider poor liarmloss Creature, a mere Virgen as she is; she is insensible of
the unexperienced Felicity, and her Ignorance is the only Rock against us. But
oh you cannot imagine, upon such a surprise, how presently her Ice would melt
before him; the offender with his short lived Guilt would quickly play that
ample Peacemaker, that after the Relish of such a riotous Feast of sweets,
undoubtedly the Taste would soon create the Appetite; and I assure you you need
not doubt fixing him the entire Lord of her Ascendant, and expecting a
prosperous Revolution of your utmost Designs. The Cardinal entirely pleased
could not but applaud the Capuchines depth of Knowledge and Confidence in a
matter so extraordinary, so profound a humane reach being so much more wondrous
as from a Cloysterer, and a vowed Recluse; assuring him, He likes it so well,
that he will steer to the Golden Coast of all his Hopes by no other Chart.

Our Parisatis (for our History must now take a small walk with her) who has
now an Extraordinary piece of Work cut out, one Morning finds the Queen alone;
and with a melancholy Look, and a deep Sigh, she accosts her in these few sad
Accents, Ah Madam, I am the unhappiest of my Sex! How my Parisatis, answered
the Queen, what new Cloud dares shade that Brow? Has Fortune any more invenomed
shafts against that envyed Beauty, after so many extravagant Bolts of her
Malice in the Insolences of the ungrateful Orleans? Yes, Madam, (replied
Parisatis) she has new Vengeance, and the same Orleans to pour it down upon me.
For after all my Load of Injuries from that Vile Man, to complete his
Villainies, he has this Morning bribed one of my Women, this night when I am in
Bed to admit him into my Chamber. The Queen was almost thunderstruck at this
Relation, and replied, How, my Parisatis, after all his impious Barbarities,
has he a new Reserve of Execrations? Is his Mine of mischief inexhaustible? But
above all after so wondrous a condescending Mercy of the forgiving Cardinal, is
this his kind Return? Yes Madam [cryed Parisatis] to so generous, I might
rather say, shameful a Remission of so many notorious Insolences this is his
Gratitude. The Queen was strangely alarmed at so amazing a Discovery, and
expressed her concern in the most sensible and obliging Terms, assuring her dear
Parisatis, That rather than such Wickedness should go unpunisht, she her self
would be her Champion, and not only all her Interest with the King, but her
whole power in the World should be armed against him. Parisatis (who indeed
expected no less from her kind Statiry,) fell upon her Knees to thank her for
her Royal Goodness. When the Queen raising her up, advised her to have her
Woman appear publicly against him, (nor need she fear the Monsieur, for her
self would be her Guard) and confront him with it to the open Face of the
World; and if he were past all shame, and the Disgrace of so unprincely a
Design so loudly detected would not be punishment sufficient, then to leave his
farther prosecution to her self. Alas Madam, replied Parisatis, pardon me when
I tell you that such a proceeding against him would be the most ill managed
policy imaginable; for as the Mensieur had hardened guilt enough to hatch such
a piece of Treachery, he has no less hardened Confidence (no doubt) to deny it
too: and what would the single Breath of a creature of her low Quality signify
in so heinous a charge against a Prince of the Blood; and how much would the
Reputation of the Mounsieur, in the popular Balance, outweigh the credit of
so poor an Accuser: and so the whole Impeachment irstead of punishing the
guilty Monsieur, rather retort and wound the innocent Parisatis; when the
misjudging World, upon such a Defeat, might be too apt to lay the original
Malice of the Accusation not at the Servant but the Mistrises Door? No, Madam,
If I would wake some able Justice in my Cause, the only means of gaining that
point would be, by having the Monsieur caught at the guilty Hour in my Chamber,
with some more Authentic Witness planted there to confront his intended
Wickedness; some Witness (if such a one could be obtained) whose not only
Credit but Power also should be able both to publish and avenge my Wrongs. The
Queen as if inspired with a sudden Thought from this Hint, of doing some
extraordinary Act of Friendship to serve her Parisatis, told her, That since
not only the Train was laid against the Honor of her dear Parisatis, but the
very Scene of his Treachery was most audaciously laid too under her own Roof
[for the Reader is to understand that by the Favor of the Queen, Parisatis lay
in an Apartment belonging to the Queens Lodgings, their Beds not many parting
Walls between 'em] she her self would be that confronting Testimony against
him, for she intended this night to change Beds with her Parisatis. In short
she would have Candles lighted up in the Room to receive him; and the Monsieur
at the hour admitted. By this means the unexpected Appearance of the Queen, she
was well assured, would not only sufficiently stagger her Wicked Brother, and
load him with Confusion; but likewise the Reprimand she would entertain him
with should prepare him to expect no common Vengeance in her own Royal
Vindication of her Perisatis. Nor did she doubt to do her this more important
service, from the management of this discovered Villainy, as to enforce him to
make her no less a Reparation, for that and all other his loud Abuses, by no
meaner an Atonement, then marrying of her; whilst the Gratitude of Parisatis
threw her immediately at her Feet to embrace her Knees for so astonishing a
Favor.

To put this lively project in Execution, the Night approaches, and the
generous Queen is privately stolen into her Parisatis Bed; where ruminating with
a thousand various thoughts, and all the preparing Thunder for the approaching
Orleance; when her long waiting for the expected Traitor had almost deluded her
into a slumber, instead of the criminal Monsieur, the more guilty Chevalier, in
only a Nightgown, bolts in upon her. The Queen had hardly fully opened her Eyes
to see the Idol of her Soul so near her, when the Ardence of his Burning Lips
and twining Arms around her, (a Circle that soon conjured up those strange
bewitching Demons that hushed all other interposing Powers,) so totally
enchanted all the Reason and Resolution about her, that she had not scarce a
Hand, a Look, a Breath, or a Murmur to resist him. Whilst the poor betrayed
Queen thus lost, for ever lost, the uncheckt Riffler plays the lawless Rioter,
and the yielding Sacrifice is all his own. But here let Modesty draw the Vail,
and lead the blushing Reader to the Cardinal, who hugs his darling Niece for
this pregnant and prosperous Mischief; where the poor Parisatis could not
forbear some very sharp Reflections upon the Undertaking the Cardinals command
had put her upon; when besides the betraying of her Royal Friend, a
Consideration of it self alone too poynant, she had so poorly debased her self
to the acting even of the vilest and most despicable Office of the most Sordid
of her Sex. But the Cardinal endeavored to smooth this little Roughness, by
guilding the Meanness of the office, with the Glory of the Revenge, and the
National Benefit from so kind and so Meritorious a Treason.

But to raise the blooming blushing Queen from the Arms of her now too dear
Chevalier, no sooner did she set her first Eye upon the Cardinal (for the
Absconding Parisatis for some few days avoided her sight) but she whispered in
his Ear. Well Cardinal, Cardinal, you have gained your wicked End; but look to
it, Churchman, look to it, and see there be that Mercy, that forgiving
Goodness in Heaven for the unhappy A -- a, that your Religious Sophistry has
flattered me with: Have a care of my Soul, I charge you, for I have given my
self away. The Cardinal immediately gave her so many tender and healing Ghostly
Comforts, which in truth he applied fresh and warm every day to her, till the
Queen at last grew almost an Enthusiast in Love, so artfully the Cardinal
distilled and infused Religion into the Philter, till her Zeal even warmed with
her Kisses, and she played the very Bigot in Pleasure. And for the seducing
Parisatis, though she gave her at first some small Rebuke, her Anger was but
plumed with Down; so much the sweetness of the Treason had atoned for the
Traitor.

This unrestrained Loose of Life continuing, the Kingdom is very quickly blessed
with the resounding Fame of the Queens being with Child, whilst such Bonfires
and Illuminations are set a blazing, that universal Joy echoes through all
France. And really even Lewis himself was the leading Master of the Ceremonies,
whilst by his own special Mandat a Solemn Thanksgiving was commanded through
the whole Nation. But when the happy day, the crowning Felicity came, that a
young Dauphin was born, the Celebration of his Nativity was a perfect Jubilee;
and such solemn and magnificent Processions were made, that he was almost
carest with Hosannahs and Haslelujahs. Nay, the very Poets of the Age were
busied on that only Theme, and all the Nine Sisters labored with no other
Birth. Thus after Twenty Three Years worn out Patience was Lewis XIV. the
Transubstantiated Son of Lewis XIII Miracled into the Royal Heir of France, and
justly honored with the famous Title of Dieu-Donne, Given of God.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published the Life and Reign of Innocent XI. late Pope of
Rome, whereunto is prefixed his Essigies: Written by an Impartial Hand.


