A DIALOGUE By Way of Question and Answer, Concerning the DEITY. All the
Responses being taken verbatim out of the Scriptures.
Q. 1. WHO and what is God? They say there are several called GOD's in
Scripture, besides the Most High GOD, if it be so, pray give me some examples
in the matter.

A. Exodus 20.28. Thou shall not revile the GODs, nor curse the Ruler of thy
people.

Exodus 7.1. And the Lord said unto Moses, see I have made thee a GOD to
Pharaoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet.

2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the GOD of this world (i. e. the Devil) has blinded the
minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of
Christ, who is the image of GOD should shine unto them.

Q. 2. But are not all these true Gods then as well as the Supreme? What say
the Scriptures?

A. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. For though there be that are called GODS, whether in Heaven
or Earth (as there be GODS many and Lords many) but to us there is but one GOD
the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom are all things, and we by him.

Q. 3. What say the Scriptures then of these lesser GOD's?

A. Psalm 97.7. Confounded be they all that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of idols, worship him (i. e. GOD) all ye Gods.

Q. 4. They say GOD has forbid our worshipping any other but himself, by the
First Commandment, and other places, pray repeat then if there be such places
in Scripture?

A. Exodus 20.2. Thou shall have no other GOD's before me.

Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our GOD is one Lord; (v. also the Emphatick
Discourse in the Text that follows it.)

Mat. 4.10. Then said Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is written,
thou shall worship the Lord thy GOD, and him only shall thou serve.

Q. 5. But is there not a Trinity in Unity in this GOD? You said, you would
show me a Text that calls the Father the one GOD, in opposition to the Son and
Holy Ghost, pray what is it?

A. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as you are called
in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one GOD, and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

Rev. 4.2. And immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold a Throne was set in
Heaven, and one sat on the Throne -- (Cap. 5. Ver. 6, 7.) And I beheld, and lo
in the midst of the Throne, and of the four Beasts, and in the midst of the
Elders stood a Lamb as if he had been slain, having seven Horns, and seven
Eyes, which are the seven Spirits of GOD sent forth into all the earth, and he
came and took the Book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne,
etc. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.

Q. 6. I see then that from these places, and because that there are no such
words in Scripture as Trinity in Unity, you are apt to believe that there is no
such Doctrine; but what say you then to John 10.30. I and my Father are one;
and 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; you used to say that one
here only signified a Unity in Record and Testimony, and not a substantial
Unity, but pray what Scripture find you to favor such a Construction?

A. Joh. 17.21. (Christ praying for his Disciples, says) That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
that the world may believe that thou have sent me.

1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. I have planted, Apollo watered, but GOD gave the increase,
now he that planteth, and he that waters are one, etc.

Q. 7. You used to speak also of a gradative precedence of Style, when there
are these three Persons mentioned in Scripture, you are in the right in this
indeed, that the Father is for the most part called GOD, the Son only Lord, and
the Spirit but Holy, as in the Apostles Creed, but pray what other find you?

A. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. Now there are Diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit,
and there are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord, and there are
Diversities of operations, but it is the same GOD which works all in all.

2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all.

Romans 15.16. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the gospel of GOD, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.

Q. 8. I perceive then by this gradation that you would insinuate, as if the
Son and Holy Ghost were as Servants to the Father, but pray how comes it then
that the Son is so often called GOD in Scripture, as John 20.28. And Thomas
answered and said unto him (i.e. Christ) my Lord and my GOD; Romans 9.5. Whose
are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over
all GOD blessed for ever, Amen; and Acts 20.28 Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of GOD, which he has purchased by his blood. I
have repeated these Texts because they seem too considerable to leave Christ
among the lesser GOD's; if you have any warrant therefore to call the Father
the GOD even of Christ's GODhead, pray show us so weighty a Text, for we do not
deny him to be Christ's GOD as he was Man.

A. Heb. 1.8, 9. But unto the Son he says, thy Throne, O GOD, is for ever and
ever; a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity, and therefore GOD, even thy GOD has anointed
thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy fellows.

Q. 9. But what have you no other Scriptures to prove the preference of the
Father in the Deity, that he is the Son's GOD, and that the Son wholly depends
on him? If you have, pray inform me what they are.

A. Rev. 3.12. (wrote as spoke by Christ after his Resurrection) Him that
overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of GOD, and he shall go no more
out, and I will write upon him the name of my GOD, and the name of the City of
my GOD, which is the new Jerusalem which comes down out of Heaven from my GOD,
and I will write upon him my new name, etc. John 10.29. and 14.28.

John 20.17. Jesus says unto her, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to
my Father, but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father,
and your Father, and to my GOD, and your GOD.

Ephesians. 1.17. That the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory may give
unto you the Spirit of wisdom, and Revelation in the Knowledge of him.

1 Cor. 15.27, 28. For he has put all things under his feet, but when he says
all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put
all things under him, and when all things shall be subdued unto him; then shall
the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
GOD may be all in all, 2. Cor. 11.13.

Q. 10. But are there no Texts in the Gospel where Christ himself preached up
the Father to be the one and only GOD, exclusive of all others, as well as
himself, pray repeat them if there be?

A. Mark 12.29, etc. And Jesus answered him, the first of all the Commandments
is, hear O Israel, the Lord our GOD, is one Lord, and thou shall love the Lord
thy GOD with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength, this is the first Commandment, and the second is like
unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, there is none other
Commandment greater than these; and the Scribe said unto him, well master, thou
have said the truth; for there is one GOD, and there is none other but he --
and when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, thou art not
far from the Kingdom of GOD.

John 8.54. Jesus answered, if I honor my self my honor is nothing, it is my
Father that honors me, of whom you say that he is your GOD.

John 17.3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
GOD, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Luke 18.19. And Jesus said unto him, why call thou me good, none is good
save one, that is God.

John 14.28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, how I go away, and come again
unto you, if ye loved me ye would rejoice, because I said I go unto the Father,
for my Father is greater than I. (A strange comparison, if not with the
pre-existent state of Christ, as well as his Manhood).

Q. 11. You say you have other Authorities in the Epistles as well as those in
the Gospels, if you have, pray let us hear a few of them, that we may make the
better Judgment upon the whole.

A. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one GOD, and one Mediator between GOD and Man, the
Man Christ Jesus.

Romans 16.17. To GOD only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever.

1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal and Invisible, the only wise
God, be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. Was the Son invisible?

Q. 12. I perceive you apprehend the Scriptures then to make the Father only
the Supreme GOD; pray what then is it that you think the Son to be? What say
the Scriptures of him?

A. Col. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible GOD, the firstborn of every
Creature.

Rev. 3.14. And unto the Angel of the Church of Laodicea write these things,
says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, and the beginning of the
Creation of GOD. Rev. 1.15. Eccl. 1.4, 9. 24.9. and 18. and 23. And for the
same Reason also called a and o Rev. 1.8. in opposition to I am in God for pure
and simple Being.

Q. But what Character had the Son in the Old Testament, pray acquaint me, and
repeat the Texts which speak of him there.

A. Exodus 23 20, 21, 22. Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the
way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared for thee; beware of
him, and obey his voice, for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my
name is in him, but if thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I
speak, then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine
adversaries, for mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee, etc. Genesis
16.10. -- 18.1, 2, 22.48.16. Exodus 13.22. -- 24 10.

Eccl. 5.6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou
before the Angel that it was an error, wherefore should GOD be angry at thy
voice, etc. Number. 20.16.

Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bore
them, etc. Isa. 6. 1. Ezekiel. 1.26, 28. Zech. 12.10.

Q. 14. I perceive then by these Texts that you think Christ an Angel, but
withal the first and chief, but have you no more express Texts in this case.

A. 2 Esdras 2.42 to 48. I Esdras saw upon the mount Sion a great people whom I
could not number, and they all praised the Lord with songs, and in the midst of
them there was a young man of a high stature taller than all the rest, and upon
every one of their heads he set crowns, and was more exalted, and which I
marvell'd at greatly, so I asked the Angel, and said, sir, what are these? he
answered and said unto me, these be they that put off the mortal clothing, and
put on the immortal, and have confessed the name of GOD, now are they crowned
and receive palms; then said I unto the Angel, what young person is it that
crowns them, and gives them palms in their hands, so he answered and said
unto me, it is the Son of GOD whom they have confessed in the world, then began
I greatly to commend them that stood so stiffly for the name of the Lord, then
the Angel said unto me, go thy way, and tell my people what manner of things,
and how great wonders of the Lord thy GOD thou have seen.

Q. 15. But the Socinians deny the pre-existency of Christ, have you any Texts
therefore in the New Testament referring to these, and that may convince us
that they were wrote as of his pre-existency? if you have, pray repeat them.

A. 1 Cor. 10.4, 5, 9. (The Apostle speaking of the Fathers of the Children of
Israel, says) and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of
that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ) but with many
of them GOD was not well-pleased, for they were overthrown in the Wilderness --
neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents, Luke 13.34, 35.

Phil. 2.6. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who being
in the form of GOD thought it not robbery to be equal with GOD, but made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men, etc.

John 16.28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world, again I
leave the world, and go to the Father.

John 13 3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands,
and that he was come from GOD, and went to GOD.

John 17.5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
glory which I had with thee before the world was Mat. 22.44.

John 17.24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst
me before the foundations of the world.

John 8.57, 58. Then said the Jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty years old,
and have thou seen Abraham, Jesus said unto them, verily, verily, I say unto
you, before Abraham was I AM.

Q. 16. You were saying that there are Texts in the Old Testament wherein this
great GOD-Angel, the Son tells us that he intended to be incarnate, pray what
are they?

A. Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced.

Mal. 3.1. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the
messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight, he shall come says the Lord.

Q. 17. Pray what Prerogative do the Scriptures allow this GOD-Angel-Son before
other Angels then? They say you hold that GOD the Father created this
first-begotten Son first, and afterward by him as an instrument formed all the
other Creatures; pray what Texts have you to support such an Opinion?

A. Heb. 1.2, 10. GOD -- has in these last days spoke unto us by his Son, whom
he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds -- and
thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of thine hands. Heb. 2.10.

Ephesians. 3.9. And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery which
from the beginning of the world has been bid in GOD, who created all things by
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6.15.-27, 28.

Col. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible GOD, the firstborn of every
creature, for by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible; whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him, and he
is before all things, and by him all things consist, and he is the head of the
body the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in
all things he might have the pre-eminence, for it pleased the Father that in
him should all fullness dwell, etc.

John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with GOD, and the
word was GOD, the same was in the beginning with GOD; all things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made -- he was in the
world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not, he came unto
his own, and his own received him not.

Q. 18. But pray what Authority have you to call the Son a GOD-Angel as you do?
You used to say that there is a Text where the Son as GOD is said also to have
the Angels for his Fellows, if there be such, pray let us see it to satisfy us
in what you do.

A. Heb. 1.4. Being made so much better than the Angels, as he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they, for unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee? and
again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son; and again, when
he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, and let all the
Angels of GOD worship him, and of the Angels, he says, who makes his Angels
Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of Fire, but unto the Son, he says, thy
throne, O GOD, is for ever and ever a scepter of righteousness is the scepter
of thy kingdom, thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore
GOD, even thy GOD, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. Rev. 8.3. -- 5.6, 7 -- 14.2.

Q. 19. I see then that it is this Prerogative of Christ that makes you think
him called the only begotten Son of God so eminently as expressed John 3.16,
etc. but have you no Texts that declare Christ came to this very intent into
the World incarnate, to redeem his Creation that fell by Adam, besides John 1,
etc. before?

A. Heb. 2.9, 10. But we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels
for the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace
of GOD should taste death for every man for it became him for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory to make
the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. John 6.62.

Romans 5.18, 19. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men
to condemnation even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life, for as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

1 Cor. 15.21, 22. For since by man came death by man came also the
resurrection of the dead, for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive. Ephesians. 4.10.

Q. 20. What you believe then that the great GOD-Angel Christ was reduced as to
the first semen of an humane Soul when incarnate, and so lost all his former
power by it; but pray what Texts have you to prove it.

A. Heb. 5.7, 8. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save
him from death, and was heard in that he feared, though he were a Son, yet
learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. John 17.2.18. -- 20.21.
-- 14.31.

John 12.49. For I have not spoke of my self, but the Father which sent me gave
me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.

Luke 22.43. And there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven strengthening him.

Mat. 27.46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice,
saying, Eli, Eli, lamasabachany, that is to say, my GOD, my GOD, why have thou
forsaken me?

Mat. 26.39. And he went a little further, and fell on his face and prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless
not as I will but as thou will?

Mat. 26.53. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall
presently gi^^ me more than twelve legions of Angels.

John 11.41, 42. Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead
was laid, and Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father I thank thee that thou
have heard me, and I know that thou hear me always, but because of the
people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me.

Q. 21. But had not Christ all the glory of his pre-existent state restored him
after the Resurrection? Pray what say the Scriptures?

John 17.5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
glory I had with thee before the world was. Acts 2.31, 32. -- 3.35.

Mat. 28.18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, all power is given
unto me in heaven and earth. Acts 2.24, 32. -- 3. 15, 26. -- 13.32, 33. --
16.28.

1 Pet. 3.22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of GOD, Angels,
and Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him.

Ephesians. 1.20. Which he wrought in Christ whom he raised from the dead, and set
him at his own right hand in heavenly places far above all Principality and
Power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come.

Q. 22. But pray have you any Texts of Christ, which by a Multitudinary or
Ubiquitary Power given him, show him to have been more than the Socinian 's
mere Man on his Resurrection.

A. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith, prove your own
selves, know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye
be reprobates.

Mat. 18.20. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am
I in the midst of them.

Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens that he might fill all things. Mat. 23.37.

Phil. 2.11. And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to
the glory of GOD the Father. Mat. 28.18.

Q. 23. I perceive then that you take it for granted, that as Christ had all
power restored to him, so he must have been made more than a Man to have
possessed it; and so also that his being preferred before the Angels is a sure
Argument that the Sociuian sense of him as a mere Man is not true, but pray
give me an account also why you call him the Son of GOD so often and so
eminently in Scripture.

A. Acts 13.32, 33. And we declare unto you glad-tydings, how that the promise
which was made unto the Fathers GOD has fulfilled the same unto us their
Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the
second Psalm, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. Romans 1.4. Heb.
1.4. Luke 11.35.

2 Pet. 1.17. For he received from GOD the Father honor and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, this is my beloved Son in
whom I am well-pleased. Heb. 1.

Q. 24. But what say you to the Text, Phil. 2.6. Let this mind be in you which
was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God thought it not robbery
to be equal with GOD.

A. (Ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. in Context following tell us), But made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man he humbled himself, and
became obedient to death, even the death of the cross; wherefore GOD also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things in earth,
and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord to the glory of GOD the Father. (And therein is the Equality in
the universal Deputation) according to what is said in the Text before.

Q. 25. But have you no other Texts to give color to such an interpretation,
and to show all absolute power in GOD the Father only.

A. Mat. 20.23. And he says unto them, ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to sit on my right hand
and on my left is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it
is prepared of my Father. (Barely to forgive sins the Apostles had power as
well as himself.)

Mark 13.32. But of that day (that is of Judgment) knows no man, no not the
Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son but the Father. Surely Christ was
as careless in speaking as the Trinitarians are corrupt in Commenting, if this
Climax can possibly admit a Coequality of Father and Son.

1 Timothy 6.15. The Apostle speaking of the same day, says, Which in his time he
shall show who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, etc.

Acts 1.7. And he (Christ) says unto them, it is not for you to know the times
or the seasons which the Father has put in his own power.

Q. 26. But there is another Text that presses hard upon you for an answer,
Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Pray what other
Scriptures have you to explain that?

A. 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether
we be bond or free, and whether we be Jews or Gentiles, and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit, etc. -- ver. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular.

1 Cor. 10.2. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea.

Q. 27. But what say you to the worshipping of Christ which the Scripture
mentions? Have you any Texts that limit the manner of it, I mean when not
personally present to us for then, as at St. Stephen's death, and as he is a
Sovereign Lord of all, it is not to be disputed but that there is an
extraordinary honor due to him.

A. Rev. 5.9, etc. And they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take
the book, and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to GOD by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation, and have made us unto our GOD Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth, and I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the
throne, and the beasts, and the elders, and the number of them was ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice,
worthy is the Lamb that is slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, and every Creature which is in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and
all that are in them, heard I, saying, blessing, honor, glory, and power be
unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

Q. 27. I perceive then that by this you take the honor done to the Lamb or
Christ to be but an honor given him by the Father, but what say you then to 2
Cor. 13.14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of GOD, and the
communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all? Have you any parallel Text to
show that these words are not a worship to the Son and Holy Ghost?

A. Genesis 48.16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil bless the Lads, and
let my name be named on them, and the name of my Father Abraham and Isaac, and
let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. That is as if he had
said, God grant the Angel bless the Lads, etc.

Q. 29. But can you show me any Text then where we are forbidden to worship
either the Son, or Holy Ghost, if you can, pray what is it?

A. John 16.23. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing, verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you.

John 16.26. At that day ye shall ask in my name, and I say not unto you that I
will pray the Father for you.

Q. 30. What Scriptures have you that testify of the Holy Ghost, pray declare
them?

A. John 14.16, 17 -- 27. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the
Father will send in my name he shall teach you all things, and bring all things
to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you -- and I will pray the
Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever, even the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive because it sees
him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for be dwells in you, and
shall be in you. Ephesians. 1.13. 1 Cor. 12. -- 6.19. 2 Cor. 1.22.

John 15.26. But when the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father he shall
testify of me.

Q. 31. But is there any Text that shows you an absolute Duality in the Father
and Holy Spirit to confute the Socinians who think them one, and the
Trinitarians that think them at least Coequal and Essentially one?

A. Romans 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it is self makes
intercession, for us with groanings which cannot be uttered, and he that
searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the saints according to the will of GOD.

Ephesians. 2.18. For through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father.

Q. 32. I perceive then by these Texts, that you take the Holy Ghost, as well
since the Prophets as before, Acts 28.25. Luke 2.25, 26. to be Christ's
Deputy-Angel, for I see not how you can suppose Christ to send the power of the
Father from the Father, as the Socinians imagine, pray therefore let me know if
there are any other Texts which show the Son to command the Holy Ghost as his
Lord.

A. John 16.7. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that
I go away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I
depart I will send him unto you -- (13, 14, 15 Verses following), Howbeit when
he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth, for he shall
not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he
will show you things to come, he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you; all things that the Father has are mine,
therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and show it unto you. John 7.39
-- 14. 12. -- 20.22. Luke 24.49.

Acts 1.2. Until the day in which he (Christ) was taken up, after that he through
the Holy Ghost had given commandment to the Apostles whom he had chosen. 1 Cor.
12.13. Ephesians. 4.11. Acts 1. 8, 20, 28.

Acts 2.33. Therefore being by the right hand of GOD exalted, and having
received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this
which we see and hear. Rev. 5.6. Mat 3.11.

Q. 33. But how comes it to be so peremptory then to Blaspheme the Holy Ghost
according to the words of Christ, Mat. 12 31. Mark 3.28.

A. Acts 5.3, 4. But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart to
lie to the Holy Ghost -- thou have not lied unto men but unto God; i. e. Thou
have studiedly affronted even God himself through us and the Holy Ghost, for though
Rev. 1.1. -- 2. 11. Heb. 1.14. compared to Acts 2.2, 3, 4. and Luke 3.21. show
the Holy Ghost to be but an Angel, yet as he is that Angel through whom by the
Son of GOD he himself bear Record to us. 1 John 5.7. So indeed in that respect
he is the Representative both of Christ and God himself.

Q. 34. I perceive then that according to the Texts, 1 John 4.6. John 14.17. --
15.26. which say, We are of GOD, he that knows GOD hears us, he that is not
of GOD hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of
error; and Romans 8.26. 1 These. 5.19. Mark 13.11. Luke 12.12. I say I find that
you suppose with these Texts that there are two great Angels, an evil one, and
a good one, that help and tempt all Mankind severally at once, but pray what
Authority have you for Notioning such great Spirits from Scripture.

A. Rev. 12.9, 10. And the great dragon was cast out, the old Serpent called
the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world, he was cast out into the
earth, and his Angels were cast out with him; and I heard a loud voice saying,
now is come salvation and strength, the kingdom of our GOD, and the power of
his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is cast down which accused them
before our GOD day and night.

Rev. 20.2, 3. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent which is the
Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the
bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should
deceive the nations no more till the thousand years should be fulfilled, and
after that he must be loosed a little season.

Ephesians. 2.2. Wherein in time past we walked according to the course of this
world, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience.

Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual witkedness in high places.

Dan. 10.12, 13. Then said he unto me, fear not Daniel, for from the first day
thou did set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thy self before GOD
thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words, but the Prince of the
Kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days, but lo Michael one of the
chief Princes came to help me, and I remained then with the Kings of Persia --
Verse 20, 21. Then said he, know thou wherefore I come unto thee, and now
will I return to fight with the Prince of Persia, and when I am gone forth lo
the Prince of Grecia shall come, but I will show thee that which is noted in
the Scripture of truth, and there is none that holds with me in these things
but Michael your Prince.

Dan. 12.1. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which
stands for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble
such as never was since there was a Nation even to that same time, and at that
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in
the book.

Q. 35. I shall trouble you but with two or three Questions more; pray acquaint
me whether Christ died for a Universal Redemption or not? That is, did he die
to Reconcile us all to GOD? And was his Death for others as well as Christians?

A. 1 John 2.1, 2. My little Children these things write I unto you that ye sin
not, and if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world.

Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he
entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us
-- (25, 26 Verses) nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
high priest enters into the holy place every year with blood of others, (for
then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world) but now
once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself.

Q. 36. Pray then acquaint me also, whether the Scripture assures us of any
safety in natural Religion where a Man has never been able to come to hear of
Christ.

A. John 9.41. Jesus says unto them, if ye were blind, ye would have no sin,
but now ye say, we see therefore your sin remains.

James 4.17. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him
it is sin.

Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, these having not the law are a law in themselves,
which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another, etc.

Q. 37. But do not the Scriptures threaten the wilfully ignorant?

A. Hos. 4.6: My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, because thou have
rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to
me, seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy GOD, I will also forget thy
children.

FINIS.
A Brief, but Clear CONFUTATION of the Doctrine of the TRINITY.
I. SUrely if God gave Man his Reason to serve him, or if a Religious Enquiry
be any end of our Being, this Controversy deserves the greatest of our Care,
and the strictest Scrutiny: For what? shall we slightly transfer the Honor of
God to his Creatures, and think to go unpunished? Shall we thwart the very
design of our Creation; and yet after all, not imagine that it is a Controversy
worth examining?

Nay, or if we believe but our own Scriptures, can we slightly entertain a
breach of the first and greatest Commandment, as Christ calls it, and be
guiltless? Shall God himself tell us in Jealousy, That none other shall be
worshipped but himself? Nay, shall God destroy whole Nations for Idolatry, and
the Holy Ghost reckon Idolatry with Whoredom and Sorcery, Rev. 21.8. and yet we
not tremble at the very Thoughts of such an high Treason against the Infinite
Majesty of God?

But forsooth, we must not name the word Idolat y, it is not grateful nor
genteel, you say, in Controversy. And what, must I not rub my Friends Nose in
a Sound or Lethargy, because it is an Affront when he is well? Nay, and may I
not follow the Holy Ghost in this case, who has commanded our denouncing
Idolatry against Antichrist, as a Sin that not only offends God, but has
corrupted our Christian, as well as the Heathen Morals?

And what, are we not all on Fire in our Zeal then on the least Apprehension of
such a Guilt? Or what, can we bear such a Charge as this with any thing like
Moderation? In plain terms, either Christ and the Holy Ghost are Creatures, or
the real supreme God: If Creatures, it is plain it is as much Idolatry to worship
an Angel as a Worm; and how glorious soever God has made them, we are madmen
to think he has set them up in rivalry with himself, when he has absolutely
declared that he will not impart with his Glory to another.

And these things therefore duly considered, methinks I have little reason to
trouble my self further to show, that the Design of this Paper is considerable,
and that (...) every Man's Duty impartially to con^. Christ says, that he that
is not for us is against us; and if he judges right, the Luke-warm's as bad as
the Reprobate, and he that buries his Talents as bad as he that abuses them.

II. But, good God! what do I propose? I endeavor to show, that the Divinity
attributed to the Son and Holy Ghost is both unscriptural and Idolatrous, and
an Injustice to the Father. But I forget that I write to Men that dare not even
by Principle regard me.

I Will maintain to scruple Purgatory and Transubstantiation of old, was never
more dreadful to the blind Papists, than but to think of this Mystery is to our
present Protestants. Strange Infatuation, that Priests should as it were thus
eternize their Tyranny over us, and we should never dare to look out of it!

Christ purposely as it were condemns him that had one Talent, for burying it,
to show us, that not the least Abilities ought to rest idle on others: And we
Protestants by our very Name profess our selves such as will not hearken to a
confident corrupt Church, and now, what at last, must we degenerate and
apostatize from our Profession?

Nay, the Apostles called even the Bereans Noble for not taking things in trust
from themselves; and a Prophet of old was torn in pieces by a Lion for
harkening to another Prophet, because it was wilfully to his deceit; but with
us, alas! it begins to be a Merit again to believe as the Church believes.

Forsooth, these things are too high for me, says one: Says another, I Will
follow Dr. such an one, he is a learned Man. And what, was it not said of
Christ of old, Have any of the Scribes and Pharisees believed on him? In plain
terms, he that will rely on Learned Men, and on prospect of Arguments not in
his present reach or capacity to search or enquire, has fortified himself
against all the Powers of Truth or Conviction.

Nay, and what says the Apostle in this case? Does he not tell us, That not
many wise, not many learned, etc. are accepted? 1 Cor. 1.20. to show us
plainly, that it is neither the Great nor the Mighty, but the sincere Enquirers
only, that shall be able to attain to Divine Truths. And what, will we regard
neither Sense nor Scripture neither?

Thus the Ministers of all Sects, what, are they not all learned? and yet who
oversee Truths more than they? Either their Simplicity offends them, they are
Tongue-tied for fear of Censure or Deprivation; or at best, they track like
Wild-geese, and rather regard Parties than Truth. Alas! Truth and Goodness are
one, but their Wisdom and Learning makes them not the nearer so.

In plain terms, the Priests of all sort hope insensibly to raise themselves a
Dominion over us, and accordingly the Corrupter of them, and which are still
the more in number, have always acted; and are we not mad then, though that we
reverence their Offices duly, yet to let their Blindness lead our Blindness
hoodwinked into the Ditch, as Christ says.

And thus, who can read our Ecclesiastical Histories, and not perceive that all
along the Priests of all Ages have rather strove as a Faction of Men to raise
themselves great, than to seek through Self-denial and Humility for the truly
glorious and incorruptible Crown. No, no; were Heaven an Estate, they have
taken the proper methods indeed to get it: I cannot say so of the Laics in
their hindering them from it.

Nor suffices it in this case to say, that there have been an abundance of good
and well-meaning men amongst them, even in all Ages. Alas! what have they been
able to do? 't has been your wicked, and impudent, and proud Designers that
have exalted their Hierarchies, that study rather Politics than Religion, and
which find little difficulty to hurry the good with the bad, in their Tides of
the Times.

III. And now, if what has been said prove enough to make my Argument worth
examining, and sufficient to make men lay by their Spectacles of Priests and
Religious Factions, I shall be able the more cheerfully, these Prejudices laid
by, (as I hope) to show beyond all doubt, both that the Doctrine of the Trinity
is unscriptural, nay, and Idolatrous too, and contrary to all the known
reasonings of Mankind. And thus,

First, This Doctrine of the Trinity destroys the very Unity of God. Our
Trinitarians talk indeed of a Trinity in Unity, and that Natural Religion
teaches us, that there is but one God, a white, black, or an one set of Gods
they mean, or how else they can say that many personal Gods can make one God,
God only knows, for I don't; this I am sure, had the Heathen of old used this
Argument, even an Angel must have despaired of ever convincing them of
Politheism, though they had 10000 Gods.

So also our Trinitarians would tell us, that God is the most pure and simple
Being; and yet again they can say, that he is 3 Persons, has 3 Wills and 3
Understandings, etc. Good God! that men can pretend to any conception of such a
mock simplicity and Unity.

Nay, and certainly I may as justly add in this case, that this one fundamental
false Principle, as well with Jews as Turks and Heathens, has done more
mischief to Christianity than all our other Errors besides. Mahomet inveighs
above an hundred times against it in his Alchoran; and I may say God has
prospered him with this Weapon of Truth as an unpregnable Bulwark against all
the Assaults of the New Antichristian Christianity.

To be short, God that is most pure, must he be thus confounded? He that is
immutable, must he stoop to our little nonsensical and pragmatical Definitions
of Faith? So he that is infinite, can he be incarnate? Or he that is Almighty,
can he have Coequals? much less die, as in the Son; or act such a mean and
inglorious part in substitution to Father and Son, as it put on the Holy Ghost.

IV. Nor is the abuse in this case less to the First Commandment, than the
truth of the Unity of God, Thou shall have none other Gods but me, says God;
that is not me personally, but me and my coequal Companion Gods. Bless me!
would not this be an unlimitable and incomprehensible Command? And how dare we
then but think, that God should confound us thus!

To be short, if the first Commandment has any Sense, it is plain it is to
prohibit Politheism; and if there can be any Politheism, it is as plain, that
it is where men set up many personal Gods. As therefore the Commandment wrote by
the Finger of God must be sense, so many Persons in God must break it, and the
Trinity must have in it Politheism and Idolatry, or there can be neither
Politheism nor Idolatry.

And besides a Trinity supposes three Persons in God. And why but three? Surely
all between One and Infinite's imperfect; if diverse Personality were a
Perfection in God therefore, Infinity should be the number, and so in time by
Joh. 17th. and some other Texts, we may happily at last make all the Apostles
and good Christians in as great an Unity with God as Christ himself. The
Papists have made a fair step toward it (some of them) in Deifying the Blessed
Virgin: An admirable Foundation, if but well improved.

V. But to return a little, and examine those Contradictions as arise more at
large from this Doctrine in the Athanasian Creed, says it, The Father is God,
the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; and yet there are not three Gods,
but one God. And why not as well, Peter is man, John is man, and Thomas is man;
and yet there are not three men but one man: Or the Father is one, the Son is
one, and the Holy Ghost is one, and yet there are not three ones, but one one.
What? Are not all these Expressions parallel, and implicit Contradictions alike?

Yes surely they are; and to say of three Persons each severally God, that they
are one God, is as much a Contradiction as to say, three men are one. But no,
Dr. Wallis answers us to this matter, That it is three somewhat's only are one
God, and not three common Personalities; and in that there is no Contradiction,
he says. But what, are we come from Divinity to Juggling? And shall Dr. W.
change the Sense of Words, and the very Hinge of Controversy at pleasure.

And so also for the Homoonsiotes, is it not alike a Contradiction in terminis
also, that three Persons may be of like substance may by possibility be true?
But to say that they can be of the same Substance, destroys their very distinct
Personality and Subsistence.

And in plain terms, Did not the Trinitarians help themselves out in these
cases with Mystery? Or did not their numbers support them, or their Pretenses
to Religion screen them, they could not but be deemed as Metaphysical Madmen.
For my part I declare, I shall never more admire at the Absurdities either of
Papists, Turks or Heathens; nay, and that be they as gross as they will, I am
sure they will never be able to exceed this Doctrine.

For instance, as to Transubstantiation; the Body at 20 we see manifestly is
not the same as it is at 30; and yet we say that it is properly enough the same
to most purposes. And why then also might not the whole Doctrine be true by the
same reason, according to John the 6th, etc? But what? Is there any such
Apology as this in nature for the Contradictions of the Trinity?

But good God then, that in the mean while we should thus embrace even the
worst of Popish Errors, and outdo even the Deliriums of the Heathens! But
what? while we do thus, can we think that God will either prosper us, or our
Popish Reformation? What? Can we be so presumptuous, as to continue in the very
sink of Errors, and that to the highest Dishonor of God, and yet expect his
Favor and Protection?

VI. Nor is this Doctrine one jot less absurd when examined more particularly,
than when thus in the gross. And thus, First, with relation to the Son. Bless
me! What a number of Absurdities quite drown his absolute and coequal Divinity
with the Father?

What? God himself must die to satisfy his own Justice to himself, and that
only because we have offended him? Bless me! What a notion we have of God's
Justice? and so, that the Infinite and Immortal God could become incarnate,
grow in Wisdom, and suffer; nay, and cry out unto himself upon the Cross, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yes, yes: Infinity could become a Babe,
Wisdom it Child, and God impotent.

Nay, surely Elijah was a vile and wretched Blasphemer to mock the Baalites as
he did, when he said, their God was either walking, talking, or gone a Journey.
What? Can we suppose that that great Prophet, who was afterward translated,
did not know that God himself was afterward to become incarnate?

But what? Did only the Man die? Was only the Man tempted? Christ then was but
inhabited by the Godhead; and when the Man was in his Streights, God left him
to comfort himself; but where is the room for the Merits and Sufferings of the
Godhead then?

So you say, Christ lived and suffered as our Example. Alas! What Affinity for
God to be a Pattern for Man? What? Is there any Parity in their Natures? But
no, 'twas not the Godhead that was tempted or suffered, some say. But why then
is the Merits of it charged unjustly upon the Godhead, when it belongs to the
Man only?

So also sometimes by a kind of Ventriloquy they make Christ as God, to be able
to tell us all things; but by and by again as as Man they attribute Ignorance
to him: So sometimes again they make him omnipotent, and yet by and by again
Hocus Focus, we must have an Angel to comfort him against his Sufferings. Good
God! shall we never be delivered from these Labyrinths?

So also they tell us, that Christ for his Sufferings is made our Mediator. But
what? Is that an Honor for a coequal God? 1 Cor. 15.28. And so that all Power
in Heaven and Earth was given him on his Death. But what? Could he then be a
coequal God before? Or what? Was such Power given to his Manhood only?

Nay, and do not the Scriptures also assure us, that the Son as God, yet even
as such has the Father as his God, Heb. 1. and that even the Revelations he
gave St. John he had from the Father, Rev. 11. But alas! our Trinitarians
forsooth will not own that we honor Christ at all, unless we hairbrainly equal
him with them to the Father.

VII. But now as for the pretended Deity of the Holy Ghost, there, there can be
no such Shuffle and Apology as the Incarnation occasions for the Son; and yet
think you, that our Trinitarians for all that cannot wire-draw the manifest
Inferiority of that Holy Being also quite up to a Coequality with the Father?

Thus he that is not once called God in Scripture, nor once ordered to be
worshipped, is it likely that he should be our one and only adorable Supreme
God? And is not this true of the Holy Ghost? And yet for all this, do they not
equal him to the Father?

So also, he that has an Understanding distinct from God, can he be God
himself? 1 Cor. 2.10. Or a Will distinct, can he be God? Romans 8.26, 27. And
what then? Would not these Reasonings make a man protest with the Holy Ghost,
that surely these men have Eyes and see not, and Ears and hear not.

But to proceed, the Holy Ghost prays to another, how can he then be God? Rev.
22.17. Matthew. 10.20. Romans 8.15.26. So he, that men have not known, much less
believed, and yet have been Disciples, can he be God? And are we not told this
of the Holy Ghost in the Acts of the Apostles?

So also he that is sent by God, and is his Gift, John 16.7. Acts 12.17. 1 Pet.
1.12. can he be that God giving and sending also? Surely I may say, that these
bundles of Incongruities have so quite confounded our Trinitarians, that they
know not how to reason at all in the matter; or their Enemy has a most peculiar
Charm over them to with hold them from Truth, against all the powers of
Reasoning.

So he that receives from another, or changes place cannot be God. And does not
this appear of the Holy Ghost by John 16 14? And his descending on Christ like
a Dove; and so also he that speaks not of himself can he be God? And does not
the Holy Ghost appear to receive what he shall speak by the whole course of
Scriptures, John 16.13. But good God then, that Men can seign such Epicles in
Theology on any pretense, as that the all-wise and immutable God should be
taught, and truckle thus!

VIII. Nor are these few only a small number of Consequences drawn from
Reasoning: Alas! this Doctrine is as unscriptural as absurd: The expressest
Text of the Father is the first Commandment, of the Son, Heb. cap. 1. and of
the Holy Ghost, John 16.12. etc. But surely those are all as contrary and
remote from a coequal, and independent Trinity in Unity as Light from Darkness.

Or if Men were otherwise minded to controvert this Doctrine by the whole
Scriptures, I say, let them but do it fairly, and have at them: By wresting
little single Scraps indeed, the Trinitarians seem as if they had something to
plead for themselves; but when I have gathered but all the Texts of a Subject
together, methinks nothing possibly can look more unscriptural.

Nay, and it is pleasant to observe how the Trinitarians even confound one
another about this matter. Forsooth, for all this Creed is such an infallible
Thunderer, yet Dr. W. dares be so bold as to clip the Wings of its Damnatory
Sentences, and Dr. S. with the Greek Church, to deny the Filioque. I thought
that this rare Contexture was all of a piece: But I find for their turns even
our very Adversaries can show I am mistaken.

To be short, the three grand Foundations of this Doctrine are the Eternal
Generation, the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and the Homoousiotes. Great and
noble Thoughts indeed, if true. But I here challenge any man upon the face of
the Earth, to show so much as one Text with sense to favor them; and might not
we be ashamed then of such Castles in the Air.

IX. Nor is the Tradition of this Doctrine when examined less considerable than
its Scripture proof. What? Are not all our Prayers even at this day to the
Father, except a few and trifling innovations? And can there be a greater
Tradition in Nature for it than that is against it?

They Christen this Doctrine Athanasian indeed; and surely a happy Doctrine to
as happy a Patron. What was his first entrance into the Ministry but a wicked
Mock-Baptism? And while that for which another would have punished him as
confident and impious, Alexander forsooth admires and advances him.

Nay, read but his treatment of the excellent Emperor Constantius, not so much
an Arrian, as one who sought the Apostolic Liberty; and you will quickly see
what a blessed Saint he was. I may say, Mr. Johnson in his Book, called
Julian's Arts, p. 55. has set out Athanasius and his Followers beyond all the
bloody Anabaptists, Jesuits and Villains that ever professed Christianity, (had
they not been more cowardly in acting than thinking.) His Passage is too fine
of it self about it to need the least stroke of an Unitarian Addition.

Nor may I add, is the common Doxology of a less precious stamp than its
Patron. Sparks himself on the Liturgy, tells you, that before the Trinitarians
altered it, it run, Glory be to the Father, through the Son, and by the Holy
Ghost, and then surely hopefully improved since.

To be short, who can read Histories, and not see that Popes, that Councils,
yea, that the whole World was Unitarian at one time; and till a corrupter
Church, that has since forged and mangled, as well all Histories as Traditions,
as the Apostle prophesied, was given up to believe a Lie.

X. And what, these things considered then, can any Mortal be so unreasonable
as to vindicate an Imposition of the Trinity, or an innovation of new Articles
of Faith upon us for it.

And thus also, what tho this Doctrine were a most Divine Truth, yet in the
terms explained is it not apparently humane? What? Is there either Trinity in
Unity, Homoousios, Eternal Generation, Procession of the Holy Ghost, or
Athanasian Creed to be found in Holy Writ? And are not men very confident then
that dare change the words, and yet not fear the spoiling of incomprehensible
Mysteries under them, and in Scripture-terms pray who will disagree with them?

Nay, or what can the Trinitarians mean, when they explain this Doctrine the
most nicely of any, and yet at the same time cry out it is incomprehensible.
What? Are not these shrewd men, that would force all Mankind to conceive things
even by themselves confessed inconceivable?

Nay, and what says Christ in this case? Woe be to him that gives Offense; it
were better that a mil^^one were hung about his neck etc. But are our
Trinitarians of that mind? No, they are glad of an incomprehensible
stumbling block, and hug and enforce it more eagerly, though confessed
unintelligible, than the plainest Doctrins whatever.

To be short, History tells us that the Jews have often met, if possible, to
reconcile themselves to Christianity; and what think you has hindered? Nothing
but this, and a few other enforced unscriptural Mysteries, that were it not for
prejudice, none but an Idiot could go down with. And think you then, that these
men shall not one day pay for these their Offenses?

In plain terms, I Would loose a Million, were I worth it, but to hear one
inconvenience named in the ancient and Apostolic Liberty and Freedom. But no
forsooth, that is not the case with our Trinitarians; a bastard Constancy and
Obstinacy shall make them maintain a Creed with Damnation at middle and both
ends, be it only to set us on Sins and Confusions inextricable, and to fright
every body from the Church of Christ that would approach it.

Says Constantine, Christians fall short of Heathen Philosophers; for they,
though disagreeing in multitudes of Opinions, yet still and nevertheless esteem
one another for their Learning. And in truth, our different Opinions of God
should rather convince us of our Ignorance, and teach us how to adore his
unsearchable Goodness, then set us to quarrelling with one another.

So St. Hillary Bp. of Poictiers in France, writing of the times about the
Council of Nice, says, Annuas and menstruas de deo fides decernimus, decretis
paenitemus paenitentes defendimus, defendentes anthematizamur, aut in nostris
aliena, aut in alienis nostra damnamus, and mordentes invicem jam absumpti
sumus.

But what says a Modern Author upon it? Nevertheless the more advised
Christians were more moderate, still reputing honest men, honest men, though
weak, and not able to discern the subtilties of the times. But what, is this
like the Temper of our present Mystery Men?

Nay, and this on the supposition that this Doctrine of the Trinity may be a
probable Doctrine, and not absolutely false. But good God! how little grounds
of any probability is there to be found in this Mystery? And then pray, what
can be alleged for its unreasonableness?

XI. And thus, first, is it likely that God should so far innovate with the
Jews on their first Commandment, as the Trinity implies, and yet not give it an
express Repeal and Construction? Or is it probable that the Scriptures should
be so silent of the Worship and Dignity of the Son and Holy Ghost, if Persons
really coequal with the Father, as not once to mention it.

Or is it probable that so great a truth should be left for Alexander and
Athanasius only to declare it, and that near 300 years after Christ and his
Apostles? Or is it probable that the Apostolic Church, that wanted this
newfangled Faith was therefore less perfect than our present Churches? Or if
it were, is it probable that they would have omitted it?

Or is it probable, that as the Athanasian Creed implies, we should be saved
only by Parroting over a few and unintelligible Articles of Faith? Or is it
more probable that the Church should be less pure or Orthodox in a Primitive
Simplicity without them?

Nay, is it probable, that ever that can be a plainly revealed Divine Mystery,
which the Trinitarians for this 1300 years have neither known what it is they
mean, nor agreed either in Expressions or Sense about it; and so that their
Foundation is after all so tottering, that not a little Heretic, as they call
them, appears, but what is able to put them to suppression; and to use Force
instead of Argument.

XII. But good God! this charging of the Trinitarians with Unreasonableness and
Improbabilities is trifling, tho most just, when compared with their real
Guilt. To be short, as I have said, Trinitarianism is Politheism and Idolatry,
if there be any such a thing in nature; and if, as Christ tells us, he that
breaks one Commandment is guilty of the whole Law, what must our wilful
Trinitarians expect? Nay, and if not, surely 'twere better for them to be
Adulterers than Idolaters, if Christ knew which Commandment was greatest?

Forsooth, the Trinitarians have been apt to accuse us Unitarians of Heresy
and Blasphemy, in denying the Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost. Bless me!
that Men can so grossly oversee their own Guilt; on the other hand, so as to
make nothing of Idolatrously equalling and worshipping them with the Father.

In plain terms, men that can cherish this Error knowingly, and, as I fear,
too many do make Interest and Reputation only their God, and the Almighty God
their Laughing Stock. And what could Christ say of the Pharisees of old, That
Whoremongers and Adulterers entered the Kingdom of God before them? And can such
our modern Idolaters expect a better Sentence? No certainly, if there be any
such a thing as Sin or Guilt in nature, they as much exceed our common Villains
and Criminals in it, as a Bankrupt a generous Robber, or a Popish Adulterer
that vows Chastity a common Fornicator.

To be short, well might Christ say, when the Son of Man comes, shall he find
Faith upon Earth? For were that time now, where should he look for it? What,
among the Heathen? If not, what, can a Trinitarian pretend to it, that dares
not even to value Idolatry and the first Commandment? We are reformed with
Luther, you say: Ay, just as men that love to follow a new Song, we admire him;
but I fear God will show us one day, that our Hearts are still as Popish as
ever.

XIII. Nay, I may say, the Guilt and Horror of this Idolatry has been so gross
in the all-seeing Prophecy of God, that he has marked it all along as the great
Characteristick of Antichrist. And thus Jurieu, and who I think also best
interpre^s the Prophecies, places the rise of Antichrist just about the time of
the settlement of this Mystery.

But not to rest on fickle Interpretations of that nature only, pray but mind
how the Holy Ghost even engraves this Doctrine on the Forehead of Antichrist:
Says he, Rev. 17.5. And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon
the great the Mother of Harlots, and the Abominations of the Earth. And unto
what, I pray, in Popery, can that word Mystery there so properly relate as the
Trinity.

Nor is this all; the Holy Ghost is yet more express: says he, 2 These. 2.11.
And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, etc.
And now I pray, what Lie in Faith has Antichrist but the Trinity?

And what then? Can we we see this? Nay, can we see Antichrist at every foot
branded for an Idolater? and no doubt for nothing more than this: For to
allege that the Papists worship their Saints or Images as Gods, is as
impertinent as false. I say, can we but see this, and not be fired with a just
Zeal to rescue the Honor of God?

Nay, for my part I declare, I should think my self mad to scruple at, or make
bones of the rest of Popery, if I could but once be persuaded to down with this
Mystery. But, good God! in the mean while where is our Conscience gone? In
plain terms, we had as good burn our Bibles, and fire our Temples, as thus
fling away a 7th of our time in Hypocrisy and Idolatry before God. What for
shame, can we think we serve him, when we thus spit in his Face?

XIV. Nay, and methinks he has winked at our Ignorance long enough in it: And
surely, were we not quite seared, 'twere enough to make us tremble to think how
sacrilegiously we have withdrawn his Honor from him. Strange! the Jews of old
would rather perish than suffer the Roman Ensigns to be put up for fear of
Idolatry. But, good God! what is become of such our holy Jealousies, who care
not how we treat our God?

But what then? If some men blaspheme God and his Holy Revelation with a Faith
fitter for Madmen than Christians, and wilfully persist to do so, shall not
others dare vindicate his Holy Name, in publicly professing his Truth? Christ
came to preach to us to a fine purpose, and we are baptized as hopefully to
fight under his Banner, if we are excused for dangers sake only of
entertaining, and professing his Truths too where they are offered.

Yes truly, and the Church it self too, that Christ has prophesied should
endure so long, would quickly be in a hopeful condition, should every little or
great Revolution of Persecution silence us from our acknowledging our God and
his Worship to the World, if some had not hazarded more for the Glory of God
than so before us, one might easily guess what fine Christians we should have
been by this time.

To be short, the Israelites in setting up a Calf for their God that brought
them out of Egypt, were not more guilty of Idolatry, call it in a mistake,
Mis-speculation, or how you will, than our present Trinitarians. And what then?
is it not enough for every little Lukewarm Heart to hear Christ's Sentence,
That whoever confesses not him nor his truths before man, neither will Christ
acknowledge him before his Father and the Angels, to the deterring of him from
smothering thus as well the Fountains of Truth as Christianity. Besides that,
we have in Example the manifest approbation of God, of Phineas, and several of
the Kings of Israel for their attempting the Reformation of the Church, though to
their hazard, to encourage us to do the like after them.

Nay, and what though with Socrates and others in such case a man hazards Death
for his Reproof, what? may not a man be a Soldier, and venture as wisely and as
freely for his God, as many others do for their Prince? I know the World's too
cowardly and irreligious; generally their Love to God proves too cold, and
their hazard too certain, and that it is makes 'em turn their backs in this
matter, if not quarrel with them that put them on it: But surely if Martyrdom
it self been't Folly, this course, especially for this Truth, is blameless.

XV. But, good God! then does it not deserve our pity, to see how on the other
side some men rather shipwreck Conscience, than not write any thing to varnish
over an old rotten Error for Preferment, and that right Mountebanklike, so that
they can but be confident and bold enough to gull the People, nor care what
they say nor what they tumble down, but per fas and nefas, either by Sophistry
or Butchery endeavor to make all good Catholics. Bless me! Are not these Men
far enough from hazarding all for the Truth?

So some also as they know, that commonly the best Sophister passes for the
best Christian, and a bold and wicked uncharitableness for the best Argument
What, do they not deal with us accordingly? And thus, if at any time they argue
with us, is it not rather to wrangle and banter, than seek for Truth? Yes
surely; and O! if they can but fall on the Authors Person, or some trifling
Faults in his Writings, matters possibly as Foreign from the thing in hand as
Light from Darkness, yet straight what a Victory you hear of!

So also, if they can but persecute a Man to recant a little, Good God! how
they boast of their Cause upon it! But bless me, that the World should have so
little Sincerity in it! Heu terras Astraea reliquit. But why do I wonder! when
some men are even seared against Truth and Conviction, and dare dispute even
Demonstrations.

Nay some, as if Truth were impertinent, and Sincerity ridiculous with them,
even baffle them in their strong Holds, yet their Hydraheaded Arguments will
rather multiply upon it than die, tho never so absurd. In plain terms, it seems
as a Witchcraft and Possession upon them, and as if incurable but by the
immediate Power of God himself: And what, are not these lamentable sights to
behold then?

And yet after all, to show you that they are not so unsensible neither as they
would seem, it is only when that they are attacked by some home Truths, that
they rave, and shufflle, and cut thus: Forsooth, if some trifling Sect only
scratch them with their Pens as devoid of danger, they can bear it with a
tolerable Patience; but, as if stung by a Tarantula, to the immortal Honor of
the Reformation, a poor Woman must be their last Sacrifice to Heresy, since
she proved to be so notorious a Creature as an Unitarian Arrian.

Nay, and I Will maintain, that by these Arts, and a little other holy Juggle our
Priests have made the very Name, much more the Argument of Unitarianism more
odions to their Followers than ever Hobgoblins were to Children. The Papists
paint Devils on the backs of the Heretic Protestants they burn, to persuade
their Followers what is within by what is without. And our modern Papists are
little better at heart; for by their consents, and if they could, they would
damn all that talk, ay, or but think of Unitarianism.

XVI. And yet they are not without their Subtilties neither, for, for fear some
bolder Spirits should scorn such their childish Bugbears, straight their silly
Whimsies are styled Mysteries. But, good God! that Men can be so blind as to be
gulled so. God has revealed a Mystery to us that is something unintelligible.
Bless me! what a Revelation we have got!

But forsooth, we have learnt upon occasion with the Church of Rome therefore
wisely also to couple a little Persecution with our Mysteries. Alas! the Holy
Ghost has marked the Antichristian Church by way of caution with Mystery in her
Forehead, and Men are grown too sensible by long experience, that such Trash
will never go down, unless driven by a little honest Compulsion.

But bless me! that men should thus still continue to be cheated by the old
Gull of Mystery; that constant Trick of Priests in all Ages, that clouds all
Truths, and stops all free reasoning, that has supported all the Absurdities of
Idolatry, and that by leading men into a brutish blindness, has become every
way rather serviceable to the Devil than God.

You say you entertain the Sum of your Religion in Mysteries, and why not this
Liberty to be allowed in Heathenism as well as Christianity, or in Popery as
well as Protestancy? blind Trust is the same whether in Truth or Error: Or if
not, wh^ then in God's Name ought not every Cause to have a fair hearing alike?
But no, s^^e^ght here steps up some other Trinitarian Shuffle; and I Will
maintain, for Interest or Prejudice they shall wrangle out the Truth, though
never so clear.

And what, is not this our Trinitarians case, who almost all rather perversely
and presumptiously cavil on for their Cause, than think of embracing or
entertaining Truth, if found or offered against them? They may think too that
this is Calumny; and when any two of them either explain or understand this
infallible and damning Doctrine alike, I Will grant it; but when only Interest
makes them hang as in a string by a set form of Words, and their new Variances
and Heresies among one another would be endless, had not they us their common
Enemy to vent them upon. What can move one to spare such a ridiculous damning
Infallibility.

Thus one shall tell you, that the Creed it self is not Athanasius's, but
forged some years since. A 2d renounces the Damnatory Sentences, as if
hethought that there the Creed had overshot its self. A 3d acknowledges the
Filioque to be an unreasonable Imposition; and a 4th destroys the whole purport
of the Creed, and by a wily Construction defends it, just as an Unitarian
would, but that the Gentleman seems a little too serious to burlesque it.

Thus Dr. W's 3 Persons are 3 somewhats in God only, and not 3 adequate
self-conscious Persons; and what? is not the Socinian Holy Ghost, or the
Inspiration of God such a somewhat? And was not the assistance of God to the
Son incarnate such a somewhat? And pray then, is not Dr. W. a Socinian in
Masquerade?

Well, but what, cannot Dr. W. succeed? Surely then L. M. shall: I am sure,
whoever is, he is no pert smatterer in the Controversy; for if others have the
faculty of writing short, I know nothing that he has done, but strove to puzzle
the Cause by tediousness, and make men sick on it; but no we have been threatened
a long time by a whole Cabal of London Divines, and they will assuredly do the
business. Alas! I am afraid they are many of them sick on it, and fear 'twill
rise in their Stomachs if they attempt it.

In plain terms, I declare it is really to be wondered at, to see how such a
Doctrine as this has been able to pa s muster through so many Centuries,
especially among Protestants, and in such a searching Age as this pretends to
be; we may boast our selves, if we will; but for my part, I think, if this be a
spice of our Wisdom, after Ages will not want to wonder to see what blind and
conceited Dotards we were.

To shut up all, our Protestant Churches are massacred, are pla^ned with Wars,
persecuted, overcome and ^^^fled; and well they may, when thus even yet
embodied in Antichrist. What? Can we expect either Peace, God's Protection or
Blessing, as the Israelites of old, and yet not think to live accordingly, and
be equally jealous of his Honor?

The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord.

Psalm 50.16, 17. But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to
declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth,
seeing thou hate instructions, and casts my words behind thee, etc.

FINIS.

