A DEHORTATION From all SIN, BUT Particularly the Sin OF DRINKING.

And when thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren.

Luke Chap. 22. Ver. 32. By George Freman Son to Sr Raphe Freman Master of
Requests.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. Anno Dom. 1663.

A Dehortation from all Sin, etc.
READER,
IF thou have been hitherto careful to lead a good life, according to the rule
of Gods Word, I entreat thee to persevere for the Lords sake unto the end, that
thou may receive the end of thy ^ope even the salvation of thy soul; which
upon thy continuance in well doing, thou shall most certainly accomplish, to
thy unspeakable comfort: but if thou art a captive to the false, and deceitful
pleasures of sin, as I have been; hearken unto me, who can upon too too long an
experience (Lord pardon my many relapses) assure thee, that what fair
appearances soever sin presents thee with in its first approaches, it will
leave a sting behind, and after the commission of every sinful act, thou will
most certainly be so far removed from God as the greatness of thy sin was; and
as the testimonies of a good conscience decay, so will the accusations of an
evil one come in their room, till insensibly thou fall into horror and
despondencies of spirit, one of the least of which is far too dear a price for
all the pleasures the world can afford thee. These are the entrances of Hell
into thy soul, upon the withdrawings of God and spiritual consolations;
without which the soul languisheth, as the body faints upon a decay of the
animal, or vital spirits: this must thou look for after the continuance in
any known, and presumptuous sin, but if thou find it not, thy condition is
dangerous, for the obduration, or hardening of the heart is the threshold of
Hell: look quickly then and seriously into thy soul; labor to get a sight of
thy sins in the Book of Conscience, whiles they may be blotted out; pray
earnestly to God for a true sense of them, (for prayer is the Key of Heaven;)
consider often of Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; think how odious the sin
of ingratitude is between man and man, and that unthankfulness for the Blood of
Christ is the highest of that kind: think of the shortness of man's life, and
the great business is to be done in that little life: that thy short life is
posting to an end; O the folly, and madness of sin! it is a continual acting
against reason, a treasuring up of wrath with the God of all power, a providing
for the society of Devils, and damned souls, who will be cursing their Maker,
and one another to all eternity; it is that which only is dishonorable to man,
a disturbance to Commonwealths; it is the satisfaction of Devils (if they could
have any,) the trouble of Angels, and blessed souls, nay the grieving of the
holy Ghost, and the continual murdering of the Son of God. I have no design
in this short Discourse, but the Glory of God, the conversion of souls, and the
discharging of my own Conscience, by testifying to as many as I can, the
detestation of my former life, that so the ill consequences of my example may
be in some measure repaired by this publication of my self: and therefore wish
to that end that all may see this, that saw my debauchery: and I beseech God to
give me boldness in the confession of my faults, and to make me only shameful
of recommitting them. Above all things I advise men to beware of immoderate
drinking, which duls the understanding, and makes the soul impatient of
contemplation: it disposes vehemently to the pleasures of sense, and to a
gigling impertinent mirth; it precipitateth to the acts of uncleanness, and
exciteth all the Passions, exposing men to many and daily hazards both of soul,
and body, and rendering them unfit for any employment either in Ecclesiastical,
or Civil affairs. And since it is so, that some men's bodies by their
temperament do require strong drinks more than others, it is not a total
abstinence but a moderate use of it which is expected: for which end I think it
a very good rule by which to set some observable bounds to drinking; that men
would drink so far as to cherish the stomach, but not to the least elevation of
the brain; and the stomach is satisfied with a small quantity, unless a man lie
under the cheat of a habit: but when the spirits of the wine, or any strong
liquor, begin to mount up to the brain, from whence the soul does principally,
and most immediately act; the contemplative power begins to be disquieted, and
unfixt, and the soul now to fluctuating, as it were, and wavering in her
motion, (her best, and steady operations being hindered) pleases her self with
being conversant about outward things, and trivial objects, and lies more
exposed to the danger of frequent temptations: this which I speak of is but the
first change of the brain, when it is altered from its usual tone and
composure; and although a man may drink to this pitch, and yet carry civility
about him, and a favorable correspondence with men, because his tongue does
not falter, neither is his understanding so obscu'rd, as to fail, at least in
matters of common converse; yet this person who has done nothing unacceptable
to the world, has so changed the Scene within himself, that he is now more at
the command of his sensual appetite, than before, and his noble faculties
begin to lean toward the world, and stagger in the sight of God, though his
legs stand firm before the eyes of them that see him: I appeal to the
consciences of any such plausible drinkers, whether they do not find themselves
more cold in acts of devotion, more fond of outward pleasures, more affected
with the thoughts of temporal honors, and the favor of great men, more than
the love of Jesus. Whether the contemplation of eternity and the estate of
their souls in reference to that being, does so well relish with them at that
time? If they did so, why do they not wave a Stage Play, and go to public
prayers, which are at that time? Why, instead of going to a wrangling
Gaming-house, do they not study the game of Christianity, that they may beat
that experienced Gamester the Devil, and win their souls, which lie continually
at stake, and are in eminent danger of being lost? What a sad thing is it that
so noble a creature as man, should rest in, and be contented with trifles, for
whom are prepared the glories of eternity, if here he will take upon him the
easy yoke, and light burden of Christ? Now although many men that drink not,
may, and do often these things, and far worse; yet drink betrays them more
easily to vanities, and idle pastimes: therefore be careful to avoid this
degree of drinking, and thou will then be secure from the scandalous sin of
visible drunkenness, which is the beastly consummation of the former: I do not
speak this to persuade men from society, and cheerfulness; as if Religion, and
mirth were things inconsistent; since I know that true mirth is found no where
else: but we do for the most part mistake mirth the most of any thing:
accounting that it consists in laughter only; whereas properly a man may be
most truly merry when he laugheth least: for none laugh more than Idiots, and
men of weak understanding, and sensualists; while men advanced in knowledge,
and quieted in mind, by serious and due reflections on themselves, do it but
seldom: but none will deny but the latter sort, have the greater cause for
mirth, and consequently must needs be more truly merry; for true mirth is a
complacency of the mind, arising from the apprehension of our personal
happiness; yet while we are in the body, laughter is natural, and if it be
kept within its bounds, and placed upon right subjects, is both allowable, and
conducing to health; but is not tied to the Glass, or Bowl: This caution
against drinking, concerns those chiefly whose bodies require strong drinks in
some small proportion, (for none do much) since those who are of another
temperament, will abstain without any man's counsel, or any virtue of their
own, which is only seen where there are propensities to the contrary; though
some men of this sort may contract habits to themselves, contrary to the first
requisites of nature. I cannot methinks dissuade men enough from this sin,
because I have so often drawn others into it, and therefore hope to make some
reparation for the spiritual hurt I may have done them who are yet living,
whiles for those of my associates who are departed this life, I hope the
mercies of God did overtake them* and I wish from my soul that the spiritual
dangers which I have experimented, and do know to be in that which we call good
fellowship, or a chirping Cup (two seducing terms) and the great scandal,
besides the sin it self, which is in staggering drunkenness, may have such an
influence upon those who have no account to make for any thing that they have
yet done as to this sin, that they may never commit it; and for those who have,
and do yet continue in it, that considering the great dangers attending upon
it, which (though now drowned in the lavours of the Grape) will one day rise up
and show themselves to their terror, they may start from it with as terrible
apprehensions, while they may prevent the danger, as the reprobate will do at
Hell when time is past, and he cannot escape it. For my own particular, I have
habituated my self to this vice from my youth, and of later years have
continued in it upon a misapprehension, that the predominancy of my temperament
being Melancholy, which is cold, and dry, it did require the supply of some
accidental heat to correct it: but I do now think I have mistaken my self all
this while, since looking back upon my beginning, I do not find I was so when I
was under tutelage; and therefore do impute it to a habit contracted since, and
some intervening causes of discontent: but since it is so easy a thing to be
cheated into an ill custom, and so dangerous to be under it, it behooves us to
be very vigilant against this adversary, which comes in the shape of nature,
and has such great advantages upon us. Custom has an interest in the actions
of the whole world; in good men it disposes them to goodness, though the first
principle that moves in them is a principle of Grace; but when the sanctified
soul has made some progress in a good life, custom comes in, and promotes it,
and facilitates our perseverance: in bad men likewise it disposes, and
enclines them the more strongly to vice; and you shall find, that men who
accustom themselves to a constant afternoons-draught in the Week days,
seldomest go to an afternoons Sermon upon the Sunday, if they go at all;
because the ill habit prevails so strongly, that the vitiated stomach must have
its false wants supplied, though the soul miss of her spiritual repast.

To prevent the contracting of this habit upon such as are yet free, and to set
those at liberty who are enslaved by it, I shall propose this general remedy;
Be always employed in lawful exercises: It is an Epidemicall disease amongst
the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, to be sick of their time; which is such
a burden to them, that being tired with the tediousness of the day, they must
either drink or trifle it away to avoid a surfeit; this as it is a
disparagement to their judgments, so it is an exceeding detriment to their
souls; for since man has a soul which must be eternally saved or damned, he is
a fool that thinks he wants employment, and he does every minute draw nearer to
the ruin of himself; therefore let none of us ever pretend that we want
business: If I have no accounts to take concerning my estate; no Lawsuits to
follow; though I am not a Magistrate, or a Divine, though I have no Office at
Court, though I have the Gout and cannot walk; though I am blind, or shut up in
a dungeon from conversing either with men or Books, or whatsoever can befall
me, yet still I have a soul which is in her militant estate, and in the worst
of these conditions I can do acts of repentance, reflecting with sorrow and
detestation upon my sins past, and renewing my purposes of amendment: I can
meditate upon Gods Mercies and all his Attributes; I can perform acts of Praise
to him: and for those public actions which I cannot do if I am denied the
liberty of my body, and the society of men, yet I can have them in voto, and
desiring to do what I am denied, and so I can keep on my journey to Heaven,
though I lie sheckel'd in a dungeon. But indeed employment is as generally
mistaken as mirth; for most men think they want it, if their time be not spent
in some bodily exercise, or upon some slight or common subject; but for
meditation upon God and the soul, the concernments of it, that is accounted a
symptom of Melancholy, and reading, writing, or discoursing of any thing that
is serious, or profitable, which comes the nearest to it. A great cause of this
evil arises, either from the carelessness of Parents in not giving their
Children a literate education, or their own neglect of improving it, when they
are at liberty from their Tutors, or Parents, or whoever had the charge of
them: for as the principles of Learning and Knowledge do wear out, so the
delight in superficial things grows more strong and prevalent; because the
knowledge of any one thing, and the delight in it, always go, and come
together; since we cannot take pleasure in any thing which we are ignorant of:
therefore Hawking, Hunting, Horse-matches, Gaming, Stage Plays, and the like,
are made the business of our time, in which our delights do terminate, which
should only be used to unbend the mind, and give it relief after serious
employments; and to exercise the body for the preservation of health, being
altogether subordinate to greater ends; and this is one reason why Taverns are
so much frequented; because Libraryes are out of request, and holy, learned, or
serious communications do not relish with us: but this is not sufficient to
excuse them: for though men either want education, or stifle it, yet they
cannot extinguish reason, and lose the principles of Religion, which they have
in their Catechismes, in their Bibles, and by Preaching; and therefore upon
that account it is expected by God, that they yield obedience to him
proportionably to this common, and general Knowledge; which if any man fails
to do, want of education will not be a sufficient plea, because it will be
found to be an act of his will, running contrary to these degrees of Knowledge:
if any man shall say at the Tribunal of Christ, that he spent his time in
drinking, and idle pastimes, because he was not brought up to Learning, what
will that avail him, who did live under the means of Grace, which were
sufficient for his salvation? for though he had no knowledge in Tongues, and
Sciences, yet he knew the Commandments of God, and could not plead ignorance
in presumptuous sins; and though he that cannot read and understand Greek, or
Latin, yet if he can read English, let him spend a part of his time in reading
the Bible, and other good Books, and though he cannot discourse in Natural or
Moral Philosophy, or in the Metaphysics, nor much in practical Divinity, yet
let him speak within the limits of his knowledge, let him reprove common sins,
and give all encouragement to the generals of a holy life, both by word and
example: and if he be sooner tired with discourse, than men of greater
knowledge would be; then let him betake himself (as I advised before) to some
honest divertisements; but not to any thing that has the least appearance of
evil in it; the result of this is, that whether a man be literate, or
illiterate, he may serve God: and those Gentlemen of our Nation that are not
members of the Commonwealth of Learning, may yet be members of the Mystical
Body of Christ: and though their delight in great Studies, in Polemicall
discourses and Meditations are lost, proportionably to the decay of their
Knowledge, yet their time may be the more spent in the Agenda of Religion, and
they may be allowed a more frequent use of lawful recreations, but not of
drinking though but to good-fellowship; which though the word sounds finely, a
man can hardly do it and secure his innocence: but since the remedy of
continual employment is not sufficient for an accustomed drinker, he must
unravell the habit by little and little, to which the shunning of idleness will
very much help him. To conclude, Let us be careful to resist all the species
and kinds of sin whatsoever, for it is only sin which can deprive us of the
favor of God, which if once we are excluded from, we are eternally lost; but
especially the sin of Drinking, which is the unhappy Parent of all other sins:
and therefore the more carefully to be withstood; which care if this short
Admonition may but stir up in one soul, I should more rejoice to know than to
have the greatest honor of the Nation conferred upon me. Now to God the Father,
God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, praise and
adoration, given by me, and by all his creatures, from hence forth to all
eternity.

Amen.
FINIS.

