Imprimatur,

December. 27. 1692. Edmund Bohun.

SELECT ESSAYS Tending to the Universal Reformation OF Learning: Concluded With
The Art of War, Or a SUMMARY Of the MARTIAL PRECEPTS Necessary for an Officer.

By William Freke, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Minors, in the Inner-Temple-Lane. 1693.

THE AUTHOR'S Apology.
DEo, Patriae, tibi, seems a Common Motto, that all Mankind are equally fond,
and ambitious of; I will not say, that they all Answer it* alike: But the
Character which is so universally approved of, surely* needs no Apologies for
its Entertainment: And yet, after all, I know a Censure that will as naturally,
as unjustly, follow it; What! Saul among the Prophets, or a Man attending
Business in Print? And so, O Sir! you are an Author! And why not? What is the
shame of it? Is not a good Author a Master of as great Charity as an Almoner?

An Author not Licensed by Common Vogue, as well as Authority* looks like one
with the Plague Sore upon him; and every one that passes by him, is ready to
Write, Lord have mercy upon him on his Door; and not a Man-Gossip, but what is
for passing his Verdict upon him. But, whatever others imagine, for my part, I
am none of Captain Tom's Followers, nor ever will be: I shall never think any
Man, for that Reason alone, to be Reflected upon in his Business, because
withal, he is a Master in Science, and Notion also.

Besides, it is no more agreeable to my Constitution than my Inclinations, to
glide away insensibly, and leguile my self of half my Time at a Tavern: I know
there are a great many petty Arts full as advantageous, as real Skill in
Professions; but use them who will, I am resolved not to ^n-man my self for
Interest: and I neither can, nor will buy* Favor at the rate that it is beneath
me, to purchase it at; if it come in a more regular w^y, it is welcome.

It Is a much more pleasant Exercise to me, thus to bestow my leisure hours in
curing the several Errors of my Mind: And, whatever others may fancy, I shall
never think it loss of time, nor barely a diversion, pertinently to improve my
Understanding: True Sense is a Sword to him that Commands her; and he is an ill
Master of her, that having once got her, is not able to turn her to all
Advantages upon Occasion.

I know it is a prudent Rule in Life, not to ramble out of the way in needless
Excursions: Nor do I think that in this I have transgrest it; it is my design
but to perfect my Notion, and in what is absolutely useful, and not to run to
either Folios or Trifles: Nay, and even this is not a Work as of to day with
me. The Papers I Present the Reader with, are not new, I have had them Years by
me; and what I have done of late, has been only to Correct and Revise them a
little for the Press.

But, Do I seem too Pert, or Pragmatical in what I Write, in pretending so
Confidently to Instruct our Seniors and Masters? why I have just the same
Excuse that all other Authors have had before me: You may be sure, I had never
Wrote what I have, had I thought it had been, Impertinence and Arrogance only;
and, after all, Will you say I am deceived? truly I have no other Answer for
you neither, than that Authors seldom call a Council, to know whether what they
Write, be all just Orthodox or not.

So, Do you think, in Humility, I ought to have forborne presuming thus? Why
truly, and as to the Point too, I am a little conceited, I must confess it;
nay, I were an Ass for Printing what I have done, if I did not think it to the
purpose. But what! after all, I am mistaken in my mighty Imigination; and it
may be so: but surely then also, I have done no more, than what a whole heard
of Fools has done before me.

And yet, after all, the World may be deceived, and find my matter better than
they expect it: All Perfections are entailed on no Man, and there is many an
excellent Spokesman that makes a bad Writer, as well as there are a great many
good Writers, That, as St. Paul and Moses Write* of themselves, are neither of
Voluble Tongue, nor Extraordinary Presence.

It may be too, you think my Style too light; and truly if you do, I shall not
alter it, nor quarrel with Nature for not giving me another Genius, or
Disposition: Alas! our Style is like our Stature, no more to be altered by our
Thought, than our Bodies: suppose, with the same Reason, you should quarrel
with the Features of my Face, or the Gate or Mien of my Body; And why may not
I, with as much Reason, Complain, and be aggrieved at the sight of yours?

After all, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Rimer's Mettled Styles to me, look with full
as much Native Beauty as ever a slow-paced Don's in the Universe: Every thing
in its way; it is as natural for the Choleric, and the Sanguine, to be daring
and sprightly, as it is for the Melancholy and Phlegmatic to be heavy and dull.

But will not all this please you neither? Truly, I shall not cramp my self to
a Spanish Cut to do it; if it will not, I have wrote what I have, and I have
thought it worth Publishing: accordingly, I have published it; and I hope, I
have no need to be ashamed to Father it; I have delivered it in my own way, for
I am resolved never to turn fool by an unnatural Imitation.

After all, I have made my Title, Apology, and Book, all of a piece; if thou
likest it, it is at thy service; if not, I am resolved not to be melancholy
upon it: I will not say, Ad captum Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli; for I am
willing to submit the Judgment of my Book to the Readers, and to allow it no
greater weight than he is pleased to standard it at: but surely, I might add
also, That a great many good things have been lost in the world, because men
have not known the value of them.

And, however the World may relish it, yet surely, I think, I may say too,
That there is a Gift of Thinking and Digesting, as well as Flourishing and
Bantring, or writing tedious Tomes or Volumes either; it is not every tall Boy
that can jest with flashy Wit and Thought at random; nor every Author that can
appear in Folio, that can either speak, write or judge of Good Sense, or true
Wit; and though even such may prove Master Critics in a Coffee-House, or
Well-Titled in a Booksellers Shop; but then, Ne suitor ultra crepitum.

In plain terms, the haughtiest Combatants through the mere dint of Extempore
Natural Parts only; and the greatest Mountebanks disguised with the false Paint
of Learning, prove but as Pigmy Drolls to a moderate Man at Arms, and one truly
accoutred with the Weapons and Defense of good Thought and Literature.

Non Cicero, Cicero, nec Appelles, natus Appelles;
Id, quod uterque fuit, fecit utrumque Labor.
After these, I know no other considerable Apology, but that thou pass by some
roughness. Perhaps thou may be offended at too frequently in my Style: I tell
thee beforehand, it is greatly collective; In the Temple Church there are
Stones that they say are cast, and many composed out of one; alas! we have
lost the Art: And when thou considerest therefore, that the Building I am
rearing, lays it is Foundations as wide as all the Knowledge of the Universe,
thou needst not wonder that every stone in it is not melted or cemented as into
one, or carved, or gilded and adorned, like bawbles in Ladies Closets.

Surely, he is a good Workman in such case that joints his Building well, and
that handsomely pursues his Draught and Designs: If therefore the sense and
sincerity of my Work has been full and just, I think I may well leave the
Fretwork and Chequering it to an after part. Perhaps I know as well as another
Man, what it is to have my Style heavy, bodg'd, and incoherent; but he must be
more than a Man, yea an Angel, that can perfect so laborious a Task as I have
designed, without such faults.

To be short; As to the substance of my Attempt, I hope I have answered it to
the full; as for the rest, Reader, use thy pleasure; thou see I unde^eive
thee before hand; and therefore if it displease thee, be angry at thy self, and
not me: And yet, I hope, I shall not vex thee so much neither by it; for I have
not taken a little pains in the matter, to make my coherence as polished as
needful.

To shut up all; Are you offended that I write so little of Logic, and so much
of Censure and Reputation? Heads that seem to be but as Trifles, when compared
with a Science; and so in many other the like cases. Why truly, at present you
must consider, That you are with one that sets up for a Reformer, and perhaps
at last, thou may be convinced by him too; not only that too many of our
Sciences are trifling, but that there are many other Subjects that require far
more of our care than any of the little Kick-shaws, that the Schools have
dressed up for us; if not, I can but again tell you, the Reformer may err as
well as the Science-maker.

To conclude; after these, I might add, I expect a whole Troop of petty
Carpers, Critics of the most noise, but just of as much judgment as to be able
to make Errata-men for the Press; and truly, as for these, the Author is
willing to let them applaud themselves in their Kackling; their Censure is not
likely to do either much harm or good; if it were, he would tell them, he does
not pretend to be able to correct every Comma, Letter, or little Variance in
his very sense, by the Press from his Copy: But, as for these Men, the Author
is rather of Opinion, That they want an Apology for what themselves do, than he
in Vindication of himself against them. And so he bids all

Farewell.
THE ENTRANCE OR THE Digester.
THE Turkish Spy tells us, the Arabians say, That a Man must forget twice, and
learn thrice, e're he can expect to be perfect. If that be a good Rule, I am
persuaded these Essays will please; for if to perfect and lay by, and then to
mend and lay by, and then to correct again and lay by, be the way to render a
Book complete and useful, I am sure these Essays cannot be defective; which
like the Venetian Vessel, have suffered through time, so many Corrections and
Alterations, that the Author himself hardly knows, whether there is ever an
Original Piece lost in them. Painters ordinarily present you with your Picture
after twice or thrice sitting. Books are the draughts of our Souls; and why
then should we be less curious in the Pourtraictures of our Souls than our
Bodies?

Some Men again think it enough, if their Porch be well adorned, and their
Reader when first ushered in by a brisk Sally, wheedled with the hopes of an
Entertainment accordingly; but surely, how agreeable soever such Methods are
for the interest of the Bookseller, the Author gets no Reputation by such Arts:
For my part, I declare, there is not an Essay herein, that to the best of my
knowledge, has not cost me full as much pains as this Entrance; and I don't
know of one thought that I have inserted throughout, that I would not have
expunged, if I thought it would nauseate with my Readers; that in some cases I
am a little larger in explaining my self, surely may be very well allowed: Are
all Men's Capacities either equal to receive Instructions, or their Prejudices
easy to be rooted out?

As for the design of my Book, it may seem to interfere with a great many
lately published. We have every day Journals of Abridgments, and the
Philosophical Transactions, the Authors of the Universal and Historical
Bibliotheque, together with the Athenian Society, have obliged us with large
Volumes of Abstracts; but none of all these is what I have here proposed and
designed. They abridge Books, I Subjects; they refer you to Authors at large,
and Analize several on the same Subject; I on the contrary have endeavored to
extract the Marrow of all, by all to render each Subject entire, and to trouble
the Reader with neither Catalogues of Authors, nor Quotations, but purely the
very heart of his Subject entire, or Reflections in what is useless in it.

And shall any one after this, acquaint me, that my Performance is short, that
my Design is large; alas! he forgets what I propose is but in Essay, nay, that
the Perfection of Knowledge is more than human; and that more than Essay is not
modest. If therefore by these short Essays, I can prove a faithful Remembrancer
to the Learned, of the present State of Knowledge, and a happy Guide to the
Student, through the several useless Labyrinths, introduced by Pedantry into
human Knowledge, to keep him from those unhappy Rocks, that have Shipwrack'd
many Excellent Parts, I think my brevity in it will be the more acceptable, and
my design such, if well answered, as all the World must cherish.

For my part, I could wish I were even yet shorter than I am, it is the bane of
good Books, when their length makes them tedious: But to be more brief, I as
much despair at, as to be more perfect. The whole Field of Wisdom and Science
is my Subject. What Man so vain, as to think to contract it in a Sheet? So that
Body of Knowledge that has puzzled whole Ages of the wisest, who is so weak as
to arrogate the Masterdom of it alone in himself? Surely, one might as well
expect to decipher a Court in a Cottage, as Universal Science in a little
Tract; nay, the Bounds of Universal Wisdom are such, that the best of us know
but in part; and GOD has made it one of the Bonds of the Universe, that we
mutually rely on one another in our Imperfections.

But to pass by all further Apologies, and to descend into the very reasoning
of our Methods, both of our Writings and Studies, let us consider a little: We
Study, but why? that our Knowledge may be profitable to our selves and others,
and benefit Posterity. But instead of this, and for want of a due Method, what
do we do, but entangle our selves in the Cobwebbs of nicer Notions, and even
confound all that follow us?

Alas! the very Source of Wisdom is almost corrupt amongst us; and a Learned
Man is a Chimera we have now no Idea of. Show me one in a million that can tell
you the Bounds of Learning, that can tell you Abstract from Pedantry, how much
is fit to be known, and that can satisfy the mind, that all further Enquiries
will be needless?

A Youth that is now bred a Scholar, is like a Vessel launched at Rovers, and
in the midst of the Ocean, without either Pilot or Rudder; he may do well or
not; but if he does succeed, it is through the Vigor of his own Parts: For, as
for the Directions and Helps he is to expect, they will rather amuse and
distract, than lead him right.

We enter upon Languages, and their Criticisms are infinite; so we proceed to
Sciences, and there we are lost in a Wilderness of Subtilties; our Metaphysics
puzzles us, our Logic fetters us, and our nice Mathematics is a Field, where
even our greatest Masters are lost.

Nor is even our Morality better; our Virtues and Vices are lost in endless
Schemes and Subdivisions; and our Divinity is wrangled to Pyronism, so that
when we look about us, we know neither where to begin, nor where to end; and
when we would proceed, we do not know where we are.

Hence also, if a Man be Learned, yet he is never known; there is no Standard
to try him by. And hence it is, that there is no Encouragement for real Wisdom;
all that the World looks for, or knows how to esteem, is but the little Cant of
Pedantry; and if a Man leave that, though on never so good grounds, he is more
likely to get the Name of a proud illiterate, than of a Scholar or Wiseman.

But where is all this while then our real improvement of Wisdom? Alas! this
is but a more perplexed and subtle Ignorance, and a Chaos of Literature. And
what does not this Lumber require a Digester then? Indeed a Man of Vigorous
Parts himself may dispose it some way to his use; but how many become mere
Scholars, and are lost in the Confusion, and that dare not so much as look out
of this Cloud?

What a shame it is, that Man that was made to be as a Lord of the Creation,
should thus be lost even in his Dominions over his own Notions! And what shall
we call this Art that leads us thus? no, it is a laborious Distraction. Were
this an Art, 'twould facilitate our Actions; whereas, instead of that, it clogs
them, and impedes our natural Force. A Bird that is wild, sings better than one
ill taught.

Besides, can that be an Art for the use of life that would require even two
Ages of us, if we had them to attain them? Or shall we ever esteem that as an
helpful Speculation that must drown us in the Theory, before we can come to
Practice? And is not this too true in the common Circumstances of Learning? Is
not what we call a moderate competency of Knowledge, now become almost even a
work for our Lives?

Who can almost enumerate, much more think to peruse the infinite Volumes of
Science? Nay, let us but state any one of the Arts and Sciences in the whole
Enciclopaidion, and let us see who has the command of all her Branches, and to
whom we may not add; nay, let us see, how many are imperfect Plagiarys, and how
much is wanted in the best, that might be added on the perusal of all.

Let us see likewise what vast Bodies the Sciences even contracted compose, is
Alsteds Epitome, in his Enciclopaidion, fit to be enlarged: Or can we reduce
the Schoolmen to a Nut-shell? Nay, or can we complete the usual Tables, much
less an absolute Curses Mathematicus, in one managable Volume?

And what then! Are all these fit for a Scholar to study? or can we not obtain
a competent Idea in these things without our Leaders melancholy Schemes and
Niceties? Alas! if we Cant, we had better banish Studies, and burn our Books,
and live like true Philosophers altogether, Secundum Naturam.

The mischief of it is, we have a sort of men Title and Table learned, who
because they can manage the inconsistent Scraps of Authors, to get themselves a
Reputation by it, cry up, and endeavor to support this Gallimaufry; and
without one had a 1000 mouths to outcry the little Beagles, that these men
raise up to support their Reputation, one had as good save ones Breath as
speak, though with never so just a Cause.

I must confess for my own part, I have not been wanting to study, and may be
as much as the best of them, and that in the whole Body of Learning too; and
whatever Mountains others can espy in it, I declare, I am unfortunate and
thick-sighted, for I can find but few.

This I find indeed, that the weight of Universal Learning, as it now stands,
is too great for mortal Shoulders, too long for their perusal, too nice for
their Memory, too various for their Imagination, and too confused for their
Judgment; but this I must declare withal, I see not why it may not bear a
rational Contraction; for the most part of it is merely curious and
impertinent, or at least it seems so to me.

So curious may I say, that could any Man foresee the fruitless Labor that our
Pedantry would cost him, before he would be able to lay by her Spectacles, as
he should do, he would as soon go into an House of Correction, as undertake so
irksom a Task, as to be a Scholar, and so impertinent. That in the most of his
Studies, could he but judicially see what he was doing, he would as soon busy
himself in catching of Butterflies.

But the Matter is, when a man enters thus amongst the Crowd of Learned Fools,
it is a Thousand to one, if ever he keep his Senses longer for to be able to
bring him back again. And hence it is, that we have few or none to lead us from
it, whilst we have almost infinite Examples to encourage us in the Dotage.

And thus when I first begun my Studies, I could quickly see that there was a
World of Pageantry that ought to be laid by, that our Books were even composed
of a specious Empty Vein, and which beguiled us with Appearance in stead of
Substance: but how to separate this Dross from the Finer Oar, or how to cut off
the Excressence, and preserve the Body, that seemed a work almost as difficult
even as Alexander's in Conquering the World, I may say Herculean, and harder
than to cleanse the Augaean Stables.

I plainly saw also, that as the Present State of Learning was a Vail for the
Hypocrite, being too dark to let Men really Ingenuous, be otherwise than
Modest, and leaving full room for Confidence and Ignorance to vent their
pretenses; so I saw plainly that there was a sort of Men in the World, that
would oppose any such attempt, were it only to keep their own Blindness from
being exposed.

But as withal I saw, that if such a Work were finished, it would even force
its own way in the World, and illustrate its self; and, through its use, turn
its own Advocate in proving so Beneficial to Mankind; so I was resolved to see
what I could do about it; and as I was satisfied of the Lawfulness and Charity,
nay, and I may add, Goodness of my attempt, so I durst trust the Success of it
to God, in duty to whom I designed it.

As for my Method in it, I have not exactly followed the excellent Des Carts,
I never yet engaged my self to a Nine years Oblivion of what I formerly Read,
nor have I tied my self to any Principles whatever, absolutely, whether Divine
or Moral; I always thought both those courses of little advantage to him that
studies Wisdom, in truth rather Obstacles than Assistants.

Indeed in this I have imitated him, I have Meditated most freely; but withal,
I have both Read and Heard too: for my part, I have neither feared Errors, nor
been jealous of my Genius; but I have trusted it freely, as it were upon a
Promise, in my Judgment, that at all hazards 'twould be sincere to me, nay, and
in all cases, and against all prejudices whatever.

And to this purpose I perused all the Books I could come near; nor did I care
on what Subject, so they were Excellent; for my Designs were after an entire
Reformation of Learning; and though I designed, in a manner, to Re-build all
anew, yet I did not think to be so ill an Husband, as to tear up all the Old
Foundations, where I found them sound and ready before me.

So that, by this means, I Collected almost without end; I took the Notion, and
left the Dress; nay, and I carefully separated what I thought might be of use,
and left what I saw as needless: I did it but in Sentences indeed at first,
because I looked for only Matter, and not Form: but then I did it carefully,
that if possible I might not leave any thing material that I should not reduce
to its proper Head.

Indeed, in my Method how to deliver it to the World, I was not a little
confounded; for as I saw that to heap up Precepts without Order, were to make
them useless: so on the other hand, I observed, to tie my self to a clear
coherence, were a burden intolerable; and besides* not consistent with those
perpetual Additions that would be necessary to a growing Idea.

I chose therefore a Mean for my Digester, and as such a loose Essay, a Body
that could either Retract or Dilate, so I chose also rather to deliver my
Essays in Confusion than Order; for since so vast a Subject could not
rationally seem to bear an orderly coherence; I did not see why I should affect
it, especially when I considered, that such a careless change and variety,
would not only ease and delight my self, but my Reader also.

To be short, Wisdom, in full perfection, is too great for Man: and, as one
would reduce that useful part of her, that is within our capacities, to an apt
and pertinent brevity for use, so withal, one would not arrogantly think to
force her to Bounds too exact for the reach of Mortality: as I despaired
therefore of ever attaining any pre-eminence in her, by the vigor of any
single attempt, so I rather chose to leave my Method freely to an easy
looseness, that might be apt for any Addition or Amendment.

Whether what I have now done, may be ever done fuller or better, I cannot
tell; I am sure it has mine own full Vigor in it, and I should have been glad
with all my heart, could I have met with a Companion, to have improved and
assisted my Designs: but it is generally the Misfortune of Men, who are
Charitable in so great and laborious Undertakings, to be forced to walk alone.

I have no more to trouble thee with in this place, except it be that thou
excuse the Roughness of my Style; remember it is Collective, and though by pains
I might make it more Correct, yet I hope already it is sufficient for Use, if
not for Ornament. Oratory was never agreeable to the rigidness of my Genius, I
could never yet leave Matter to catch at Butterflyes, and gather Flowers.

Besides, the Niceties of Curious Discourse are infinite; and I am sensible,
that after my greatest care, I must Write with a Style and Method imperfect, or
not venture at Five Words a day: Pure Perfection in all things in only God's;
and when a Man has once achieved in any thing the full strength of his Genius,
what he attains after, is but by Sallies, and at best makes but Abrupt,
Imperfect, and Incoherent Efforts.

But why should I Court thee thus with Apologies? if thou art Ingenious, thou
can not but follow thine own advantage; If thou art Humoursom, I had as good
endeavor to embrace the Wind, as to move thee. Whether therefore thou likest
me or not, I am not deceived in thee: That Man must think of Reconciling
Contraries, yea Impossibilities, that aim at Captivating all Men, the Perverse
and Tractable, the Contradictious and the Modest, the Virtuous and Vicious,
Pious and Wicked, Learned and Ignorant, with the same Discourse.

Of BOOKS.
A Good Author should have the Style and Courage of a Captain, the Integrity of
a Dying Man, and so much sense and ingenuity, as to impose nothing, either weak
or needless on the World.

Some Men thrust out their Bratts amongst us, e're they are at the Stature of
Wisdom; and not knowing the present growth of Learning, oblige Men with
Crudities instead of Discoveries: But who suffers most by it? the Reader can
easily lay them by.

So some even Fire the State to get Books suppressed, and they are in the right
where they are Seditious; or else sure Man has an equal Right to Writing as
Speaking; or, if not, Why one more than another?

Does the Variety of Books offend you? surely it has at least this good in it,
it hits all Humors. Do they overwhelm you with their Number? Certainly you
mistake; and rather want Judgment to discern what are proper for you.

So, Does an Ignoramus present you with Mushrome Thoughts, and cannot you lay
them by? Must none but Civit-Cats have leave to sh --? and, if not, Who shall
sever the bad, without endangering the good?

Nay, I may add, The best of Authors are not without their Faults; and if they
were, the World, I fear, were too purblind to entertain them, as they would
deserve. Enoch's, the first and best of Books, are lost.

Thus one, by a long Preface, cools the Fancy e're he entertains it; a second
frights his Reader by his Voluminousness. Alas! we must consult the weakness
of Man, as well as the Mere extent of our Subjects.

Nay, did the real dignity of our Subjects lead Books, they would be short
enough, while sprightly hints would more delicately pourtraicture our Minds
than the largest Circumlocutions.

And surely therefore I may add, there is an empty Wantonness in all the
profuse Embroideries of Authors. And what are our Legendaries, our varnished
Comparisons and Explanations, but a beggarly and tedious Tautology in a better
dress?

Thus the pedling Canter never wants a Nosegay of Virtue or Religion, be his
Text never so barren; and there is not a Subject that he shall not screw in his
whole stock of Knowledge upon it.

On the contrary, your finer Poets have made but six Verses a day, and a late
famous Author would return back to his Study again, but to secure some more
excellent Notion from Oblivion; and yet there is an Error even in this also.

One keeps his Book Seven years by him ere he Prints it, as if it ripened by
lying, and not Care, Examination and Perusal.

A Second cites Euclid, to prove a Circle Round; and a Third condemns the whole
Body of Wisdom for some little pedling Nostrum.

A Fourth Enamored with the Whimseys of the Ancients, had half his Book
Quotations, and creeps along by the Shore of Authors, as if he were afraid to
trust himself to the free Compass of Reasoning.

Surely I would no more Quote Authors by Tables thus, than slight their
Assistance altogether, by laying New Foundations. When thou Read my Book
therefore, I expect thou look for my Sense, not Aristotle, or St. Austin's.

So shall I Write nothing that is not purely my own: alas, there is nothing
New under the Sun; nay, And why have not I as much right to my Thoughts, as he
that Wrote them a 1000 years ago?

Should I say, I borrow nothing from no Man, Who could gainsay me? I have the
same circle of Creatures, and I must needs therefore track after others, and
surely therefore our invention about them is equally ours also.

Succeeding Ages feed upon one another; and the Sense and Flesh I have
digested, are as much mine, as they have been others before me, or else may be
I cannot say I have either Sense or Flesh at all.

We have all our appointed seasons to enjoy Wisdom, and the Sun in; our
Ancestors have but beat the Track before us, where our Posterity would follow
of course; And who can claim a Common Road?

Where then is the injury of Plagiarism, does an Author deserve his Merits
must preserve him, nay and they will too, if he has them: Who shall add to a
Picture of Apelles? Ex pede Herculem.

At worst, is Honey the worse for being gathered from many Flowers? Indeed to
theive meanly is ungenerous, and to follow Parties, corrupts all; or else is
not my diligence in Collections to be preferred?

But alas, after all, the Fountain Error of Authors is vanity; and that
which puts them upon the Tenters, is, that they seek Eternity; but surely it is
one thing to have it, and another thing to deserve it.

You think your Truths will make the World commend you whether they will or no;
alas, you must prostitute you honor to obtain the common Vogue.

A Man had as good be a common Hangman, as an impartial Moral Monitor: and as
for Speculative Knowledge, the Man that found, but that the World was round,
was treated, even by St. Austin, as an Heretic.

As my Lord Bacon rightly says, the World, like a River, bears up things swollen
and empty, while Gold and Jewels sink; and thus Vainglorious and Romancing
Ovid no doubt survives many a better Author.

Of CRITICS.
A Critic to a good Author, like the Refiner's Fire, but Purges his
Imperfections to make him shine the brighter, whilst the Answerer, like Don
Quixot, exposes himself with post-absurdities.

Shall we say of a Garrisoned Army of Thoughts, that'tis taken, because the
enemy has defaced the Walls with dirt, when the truth is, the Answerer like the
Viper, by gnawing the File, has but bit his own Teeth away.

Critics, like Bald-pate Boxers, while they attack others, generally take care
to Print nothing of their own, they maliciously root up all they can, thought
they Plant nothing in the World of Learning themselves.

Critics, the Robbers, are only excellent in a Plunder, and in which case,
their only Game is to Magnify themselves by Exposing others; their Armory the
whole Field of Malicious Railing and Wrangling.

Surely if our Brother is weak, we ought rather to pity him, than abuse him;
nay, is he Perverse and Fallacious? yet can it either become us, or our Cause,
to Confute him otherwise than with Humanity: that Conquest is to our Credit,
where our Adversary is duly Magnified.

What says the Scripture of Pious Frauds?

Will it let us hold the Truth in Unrighteousness? No, we may not do ill that
good may come; if we do, we are assured our Damnation is Just.

Some Men indeed are so linked to their Errors, that Charity, which loves to
Answer all with Tenderness and Softness, would be glad to part them; he that
errs, through Frailty, is at least out of the harms-way of Error; but he that
offends Presumptuously and Obstinately, must need fall together with it.

But the meaner Critic that even hunts for Slander, and delights in Contumely;
the generous Mastiff should teach us to scorn such Currish Yelping; indeed it is
a Reflection on a Man of Sense, to give a Common Rayler but the hearing.

OF DIVINATION and ASTROLOGY.
THere are certain Truths enough in the World surely, to improve our
Understandings by, that we need not confound our selves so much by Conjectural
ones as we do; it is true, the Influence of the Sun and Moon might tempt one to
an Essay in this matter, but when it has been so long successless, I don't know
whether the prosecuting it further will argue rather a Madness and a Folly,
than a Presumptuous Contempt of God's Commands, in prying into those things he
has so designedly concealed.

Nay, did Men understand themselves aright, the very vanity of these things
were enough to make them hate them, and they would sooner be idle then squander
away their time so impertinently; but above all, had they any Conscience, they
would regard God's Wrath against our deluding Diviners, if they had not the
Wit to see how they were imposed upon by them.

It Is full time now to sweep away these Cobwebs of Superstition, and Relics of
Paganism; were we to contract with the Devil, then these Little Blinds might be
wisely set to Disguise the Predictions he acquaints us with, and to seem to
tell that little Foreknowledge he has, by our own Skill; but for us otherwise
to dive into Senseless, Groundless, and Irrational ways of Prediction, I
declare, in my Opinion, is such a mere stupidity and weakness, that we had much
better cast the Dye for our Fortune*

So, would not a Man of Moderate Thought be ashamed to imagine, that God has
given an Extraordinary Power of Conjuring by his Name Tetragrammaton Adonay
Sadai, etc. So, Who but a Madman would think the Number Five Cabalistically
sanctified, because a Man has Five Fingers, Five Toes, etc. And so who but one
that has more Fancy than Judgment would mind the Climacterical Years, when
indeed the year is since much lengthened? yea, several days since that Whymsey
was first broached, so that 61 now would have been 63 then.

So, that shall I say of our Common Crosses and Charms? the Devil fights with
us, like a Parthian, flying; pretends himself to be vanquished by us* that he
may the better Conquer us through Superstition by his flight? So what shall I
say to your Set-form of Words, the Seeve and Sheers, and your other Trifles and
Gewgaws? If words do any thing really, it must be through Faith, and if Faith
be once so powerful, it can easily effect without a Set-form, like Conjuring;
but if Words prove powerful without Faith, Latet anguis in herba, we have all
the Reason in the World to apprehend some Delusion from our Common Enemy the
Devil.

Nor indeed, with all the Power of the Devil himself, are we likely to do or
know much, whatever our Corruption and Rebellion may promise us; Alas; the
Devils are under perpetual Chains of Darkness, the best of their Oracles were
always doubtful; and if God has denied the Foreknowledge of things even to the
good Angels themselves, as Christ assures us, How is it likely he should show a
greater Favor to the Wicked Apostate Spirits?

So we are curious in other Predictions; we are desirous of an exact
Foreknowledge; alas, Shall we never be contented with the plainer
Dispensations of Providence? Is God obscure and mystical in his Prophesies,
even to lead his Church its self? And shall we desire presumptuously a
Prerogative he has not vouchsafed even to the Universal Church; nay, and when
all the Pious and Learned Men of Ages have not been able to unfold those Holy
Prophesies that in the Revelations, and otherwise he has given us? Can we be so
mad to expect, or rely upon more certain Predictions of their own?

In short, if there be any Divination lawful, it must be through the signs of
Natural Causes; thus Christ himself allows to Divine by the Face of the Sky.
Sero rubens coelum cras indicat esse serenum.
Si mane rubescit ventus vel pluvia crescit;
and so we may guess when a Western wind blows, or that a Rainbow looks pale,
that Rain is likely to ensue; and that when the Rainbow looks clear, that it
is going away; but what is beyond this, must be either Sin or Delusion.

But to proceed a little to particulars, and so first

Of Astrology.
Our Astrologers pretend, that the Bodies above are the Male, the Terrestrial
the Female; and the Creatures on Earth are the Offspring engendered between
them: But pray, who shall declare their Generations? I do not doubt but that
there is such a Art as Astrology* in some degree; But who is the Artist? What
are the set-Bounds of influence? And how are we to gather it? How far does
Providence and its Free-Agents interrupt it? And what Stars are more
particularly eminent in their influence.

Let our Star-gazers allege what they will, the Reviewing Histories past in
the Stars would have perfected this Art absolutely before now, if it had been
attainable by the Wit of Man; when alas, consult but your Astrologers, and you
shall not find two to Prognosticate alike: After all these advantages, Read but
their Books, they agree not in their Methods; nay, if they foretell the Weather,
which is more immediately under the influences of the Stars, and which Grace
cannot be supposed to alter their influence in, to give them their old Sham,
Astra regunt homines sed regit astra deus: yet you shall find that they as
often miss as hit, and which, in my Judgment, in plain terms, declares mere
Chance.

St. Austin's Confessions give us an excellent passage of the impertinency and
fallaciousness of this Science: It seems the Mistress and the Maid were both
with Child by their several Husbands at the same time, and an Astrologer being
willing to Predict the several Fates of their Children, ordered care to be
taken of Marking the exact time of both their Births; now so it happened, that
Mistress and Maid were both brought to Bed at the same instant, and their
several Messengers met at the just halfway, to give each other accounts of it;
And what think you then ought to be the success of this Chance, ought not these
two Sons, as they then happened to be, to have equal Fortune and Success in the
World, at least with respect to their several Circumstances? yes surely: but
alas, the Stars failed their Artist, the Servant was born and died a Servant;
whilst, as St. Austin observes, the young Master afterward became vastly
advanced in his Fortunes.

But I give Astrologers too much ground when I trifle thus upon Experiments;
let me hear them reason a little; thus what particular virtue is there in a
Sextile or Trine, before the Quartile or Opposition? besides, if there were,
like Blockheads, they take the Trine of appearance, and never mind the real
one; thus a Retrogradation shall imaginarily give you two Trines of Saturn and
Jupiter, when, in reality, neither of those is the true Trine; so what stuff
your direct Retrogade stationary and swift are, when, in reality, the Planets
have no such imperfections; and all that Trumpery we conceive, forsooth,
because we will follow the blind Mazes of our Ancestors, and their Errors in
Astronomy, and which made them make them in their Astrology also.

Further, how ridiculously they have framed and ordered out their Twelve
Houses, and attributed their several Powers to them, according to the two old
Latin Verses, 1 2 3 4 5 6 Vita lucrum fratres genitor nati valetudo, 7 8 9 10
11 12 Vxor mors pietas regnum benefactaque Carcer.

What Nonsense it is to give the Ascendant most power, which can scarce have any
Operation for Distance, and vapors upon the Native, whereas, in truth, the
Mid-heaven, and the Planets most Southerly, and the Stars in the Zenith, ought
to have the greatest Operation in all reason; and so in case of their being
Perigeon, and Apogeon; so, how absurd it is to give Saturn a greater influence
on the Native, than even the Sun, that in truth is the very Earthly giver of
Life.

Besides too, were Astrologers* true to their Rules, and Examined all
Significators, Planets, Houses, and Fixed Stars, with their several Aspects,
Applications and Transits, they would find themselves so confused, that they
would never be able to pick out a Judgment: And what if you add to all this the
part of Fortune, the part of Honor, and several other parts that Nice
Astrologers order to be Calculated, as well as the capat and cauda Draconis*
all Castles in the Air; Where could you and your Judgment be able to be fixed
amongst such almost innumerable significators and their Applications.

Nay further, one tells you your Fortune by a Horary Question, another by a
Revolutional Figure, another by your Nativity, another by Profections: Now if
you examine it, all these Figures shall, nay must be different, and yet your
Artist, from the Latitude of Foretelling, I before described, must by one
Significatour or another* serve them all up to one Tone, and whether the Devil
may not sometimes inspire them in this Chance to their Delusion, I very much
Question.

Hence also if you consult them, one shall cast up your Significatours
stronger, another weaker; one measures the time of Accidents one way, and
another a second; a third Person does not like your Common Tables of Houses,
and yet forsooth all these must speak, and write as infallible in their way,
although no Reason can reconcile them, or show one more in the right than the
other, nay, though they contradict one another; yet alas we must believe them
all, as the Infallible Oracles of Truth; H^^ quanta fides Hominum*

I have Studied this Art my self, and I have flattered my self often in Chance
predictions; but when I have considered that in all things there is but a wrong
and a right, and that all Men naturally favor, and even Deifie Divination, I
cannot but see, and detest my own Weakness in regarding it; indeed, if
Astrological Predictions were certain, they would by their fatal necessity
destroy and consume Religion, and all the Arts and Sciences with it.

To be short, if Men must have their Prognosticating Whimsies, were it not
better rationally to frame them from the Noble Hypothesis of Des Carts, than
from such mere Maggots as our common Artists do? Thus Spots growing in the Sun
rationally would foretell ruin to his Sphere, and Comets Prognosticate a
Disorder, would follow in Nature; but to lay such weight on mere Chymera's, as
the Imaginary Houses* Nodes and Fancies of Astrologers are, at best favors of
a little tincture of either Melancholy, or Imposture, judge which you will.

Of the Dependants of Astrology.
But besides its self, it is scarce conceivable what a pack of Brats and
Monsters Astrology brings forth with it; it marks you out Natural Magic by
Planetary Influences, and Characters on Herbs; it tells you Men's Fortunes by
Figures, the Planets make through Moles, Lines, and other Marks; and hence it
teaches you Chiromancy, Physiognomy, Metaposcopy, nay Augury depends on the
same Root; and not a Bird that flies to the right, but portends Ill-luck,
though to a Thousand Spectators: indeed, there is not a Man, either Mad,
Bewitched, or Prophesies, but straight the Astrologer will give you a Reason
for it; though by and by again, to save himself at a Fault, he will tell you, a
Good Man is above the Stars.

Thus Telesmes, or Talismans also, and our Divining Rods, are a Spawn of
Astrology; but, in my Judgment, of just as much force as Powder of Post,
without the assistance of Witchcraft, and then I don't know but a Man may do
feats, like the Egyptian Magicians, but by the power of the Devil, and not by
our little Conjectural Blind Arts, unless Ceremonially; for my part I once made
a Telesme of Venus my self in Silver, but found no more effect in the Metal
than before. So Brown in his Vulgar Errors, says, he tried the Divining Rod,
but he found it all Cheat and Deceit.

Further, Geomancy is another Offspring of Astrology, indeed her very Ape, for
she follows her into her Divisions and Partitions of Houses, etc. Cornelius
Agrippa wrote a Book of this; and in his Treatise of the Vanity of Arts and
Sciences tells you, he believes it as good as the best; but withal, that it is
all Lies. And indeed, What an odd Chymera Foundation this Art has, that Men, by
making Points backwards, with their Left-hands upon the ground, should fancy
the Stars should lead them, by drawing those Points into Figures, to Predict by
them; a Man had better by half bestow less pains, cast a pair of Dice, or dip a
Leaf in Virgil, if he is resolved to be Superstitious, and so discover his
Fortune that way, rather than run himself to the Niceties of Geomantick Houses,
and Fathers, your Laetitia, etc. for it.

So I cannot but wonder too, what Intelligence, and of what Planet it was that
taught us the Jurisdiction of Planetary Days and Hours? 'twas very happy the
Natural Day was not divided into Twenty Hours, as it is now into Twenty four;
for if it had, our Divinors had been forced to have made a New Computation;
besides, that as it is, every Planet has not his equal share in the day, And
why should he not have it in the Day, as well as he has it in the Week?

Astrology therefore, if it serves for any thing, it is to be as the Devils
Lure into the more obscure and black Recesses of Magic: I my self remember too
well, what Studies it wheedled me into, when I gave it the favor of my
Thoughts; as first, to seek to the Planets intelligences for my Knowledge, and
after to other Spirits: Now, though I resolved to pay an exact deference to the
Duty I owed to God all the while, yet I could not, in a long time, persuade my
self, but that such Arts, as in the case of Balaam, might be lawfully
attainable, though at length I was convinced they were presumptuous.

But where shall we end the further Whimsies of Predictions? Pythagoras's Lot,
Predicting by the Number of our Names, the Jewish Caballa telling Mysteries,
and Prognosticating from Titles, Numbers and Letters; your Rosacrucian
Figments, what shall I say, Do not Men deserve to be deceived, when they employ
themselves to catch such shadows of Wisdom? indeed, it is their due reward, that
they miss and lose the substance by it.

So what shall we say to Hydromancy, Puromancy, and Aeromancy, nay and
Alectromancy, that fore-tells by the pecking up of Corn by a Cock, Are they not
trumpery, that scarce deserve the naming? So of Palmestry; How shall we
reconcile the giddy and senseless contradictions and variations of Authors
about it? So in Physiognomy, Who but one that had it from some Spirit, or
Star-Intelligence, could be brought to think any useful or certain ground in
it? Only Man that runs a Whoring out of the Ways of Truth, seeks to, and
believes every thing he should not. Or else who would fancy, that Mars must be
thrust into the Palms of the Hand, while little Venus and Mercury have the
honor to possess in chief, with the grand Planets, the Thumb and little Finger?

But besides these, there are Omens also, the weakest of all Fore-tellings; but
how often of fatal consequence, not from the Prediction I mean, but from the
deadning the spirits of them that superstitiously believe them, I need not
mention; indeed they are so uncertain, that their very Interpreters are forced
to fly to the Mind of the Person Omen'd, and what conception he had of the
accident, to Construe it; and which is, in short, to make Men's Thoughts and
Fancies Predictions.

William the Conqueror was an evident confirmation of this Truth; at his first
Landing in England, his Foot slipped, and he fell flat on the Earth; and the
Morning he fought, his Esquire put on his Backpiece before, by mistake. Now
these Omens daunted some, but the Conqueror Interpreted them best, who merrily
said, the Fall showed the Earth was willing to be acquainted with him; and the
change of his Armor showed, he was to change his Dukedom for a Kingdom, as it
after happened.

As for Prophesies, when they relate to State Affairs, they are dangerous; and
have deservedly drawn down many good Laws to suppress them, not that they are
so formidable in themselves neither; but that which gives them credit, is,
First, That Men mark when they Hit, and never when they Miss. Secondly, The
Nature of Man, which loves to turn all to Divination, calls even probable
Conjectures, and obscure Traditions, Prophesies; And Thirdly, and lastly, that
almost all of them being near infinite in number, have been Impostures, and by
idle and crafty Brains, merely contrived and feigned, after the event past,
with some evil design and influence on the present times.

But why do I stay so long upon Particulars? Where shall we end the more
noxious Methods of Deluding and Superstitious Theurgy, Devilish Geocy and
Necromancy? as if the Devil could not personate a Ghost: So where shall we
conclude, with the Faeiry Sisters, the Invisible Ring Witchcraft and
Conjuration, the use of Christals, Pentangles, Circles, and an Hundred other
little Devilish Machinations, wherein, though the Devil does not Immediately,
as in Witchcraft, draw Men to Express Covenant with him, yet as by many sad
Experiments has appeared, he gradually sinks them into all manner of
wickedness, and in the end drowns them in Eternal Despair; and thus he tempted
our Savior at first, only to fall down and Worship him: He is a subtle Enemy,
and knows very well how to bait his hook suitable to the Persons he intends to
catch by it.

Of MEEKNESS.
SUrely Meekness needs no Praises: Meekness is the Moral Paradise, nay,
Meekness is the only Cement to the Faults and Errors of Humanity; What can we
do without bearing with one another?

Meekness was the Perfection of Christ, and Peace is the very Attribute of God
himself; and can any thing be wanting then to make them amiable?

Alas! Do not we every day, without thinking, commit a Thousand little faults
against others? And will we not give the Charity we cannot but desire?

And yet after all, the Subtilty of the Serpent must be mixed with this
Dove-like Innocence; it is a strange Temptation Men have, that see they can
wrong us with Impunity; And why should I, by a too great softness, proclaim my
self a prey to all?

The World may call such Submission, Virtue and Clemency; but, alas! it is
Facility and Fear that lead to such Cowardice, and not Meekness. True Virtue is
a straight Line, that neither virges for Laziness nor Glory.

So the Imperious Commander, the Dogmatical Opinionatre, and the Morose Cynick,
who desire all to be enrol'd among the Virtuous, are Men that would seem too
perfect to be born with; but, alas! who want the Meekness and Patience of
others more, who err more, and yet preserve the Peace less?

I have not an Interior Peace in a union of Thoughts and Opinions with my
Brother; But must I therefore in Self-conceit break the Exterior Peace in the
Devoires of Humane Civility?

Does my Brother err? And why may I not as justly quarrel at the Diseases of
his Body, as the Imperfections of his Mind? nay, Why am I not as angry at the
imperfect variety of the Weather?

To reform others perfectly, is as impossible as vain: What have we to do then,
but to despise all little Capricious Humors, and to amend our selves?

Do I hazard the Peace in rebuking my Brother? And why may not he be as rough
to me? at least, may he not as justly resist so unjust an Imposition?

I am obliged to love my Brother; And how may I then make him look coldly on
me, through my crossing him; is this my Humility, in doing as I would be done
unto?

I. S. has different Opinions from me; And what then, ought I not to have all
the Consideration that Truth or Charity will permit me for them: Indeed is it
fit that I should cavil with him about them?

I have condemned my self in Errors often; but I cannot say so of my Brother;
Is it not just then, that I rather humbly and submissively prefer his Judgment
before my own, than be angry at the Variance?

Of CONTENTION.
A Contentious Spirit is both Barbarous and Brutish: What is the benefit of
Humane Reason, unless in Humanity? And are not Humanity and Contention
contraries?

Contention either Infects us to a Likeness, or Cankers out our Spirit with
Cowardice: What, all the day in Battle, and neither Fly nor Fight?

Christ says, to call our Brother Fool Contentiously, is as Damnable as Murder;
Can he that delights in Provocations be assured what will follow them?

The least Evil of Contention is, that it abates our Virgin Respect, and
Civility for one another; And is it a slight matter for us to traduce each
other to Contempt?

My Contention is in Revenge; And what then? Is Revenge, either a Christian or
Moral Apology, or is there not a just and modest Vindication of my self without
it?

Do we think, through Contention, to back every Wild Colt we meet with? nay,
And can we otherwise then expect some time or other to meet with such Swine, as
will turn again, and rent us?

Surely, gentle and soft Applications are best for Conviction; and as a
Contempt passes to our Persons through Contention, so to our Instructions also.

Does Seneca wrangle with a Fool? he degrades his Philosophy by the equality of
the Contention; But does Seneca advise, and is the Fool stubborn? Indigna est
Caesaris Ira.

Of CONTRADICTION.
DOes my Brother Contradict me, he has as much right to it, as I to speak to
him? And why then am I concerned? but he does it, you say, unjustly; And are
you as assured that you do not as unjustly provoke him to it, by requiring too
hard things of him?

I have a right to hold my Tongue, and be silent at all times; but if I speak
to my Brother, I have not right to make him Answer me just as I please.

But my Brother is Cross and Perverse you say, and will unjustly contradict me;
And what then? Whose fault is it that he is uneasy to me? Am I Mad to dispute
him when he is out of Humor? Or do I want to see how he can Cross me, or I vex
my self?

Besides, Alas! there is no end of some Men's Perverseness, and it is in vain to
expect to cure it; Should even God himself Write or Speak, he would no more
want an Answerer, than the Devil in the like case, an Advocate.

And yet after all, and for all this, though I can see my Brother is in an
Error, and I am obliged to use agreeable means to set him right, yet can I
discern his heart to say, He lies, is false, or that he is perverse?

Surely God only, who fearches the heart, can lay such charges to my Brother;
and what though in such case I may contradict him, yet, in Charity, I wrong
him, to say, he is either false, or lies? I see but the Mistake.

Thus, though I have the strongest Natural Duty on me to Reprove my Brother,
and nothing but his Malice for it can discharge me of it; yet does that give me
either power to Judge, or Force him in his Actions?

The Wise and Good indeed have a rightful Dominion and Empire in reigning over
Men's Thoughts, and we are bound in Conscience to submit to it; but surely every
confident Contradictor has not the same Reason for our Submission?

Lapis Errantium; or the Stray-office: For all manner of things Lost, Found, or
Mislaid within the Weekly Bills of Mortality of the CITY of London.
IT is not my business at present to run out upon the Ancient Use of this
Office in other Kingdoms, which, by its very Name, I am persuaded a great many
Learned Men are not unacquainted with; I shall wholly confine my self therefore
to show, of what a General and Great Benefit such an Office must needs be to
this present City; and, in doing that, I shall fully Answer my End in this
Little Treatise.

And that I may the better do that, therefore, First, I shall, briefly as I
can, give the particular State of such an Office. Secondly, I shall Answer all
manner of Objections against it: And Thirdly and lastly, I shall show the
wonderful Conveniences of it; And in all these I shall be the shorter, because
the very hinting at the Great Uses and Conveniences of it, will be sufficient
to excuse all need of other Apologies for it.

The State of the Office I shall Represent briefly thus; First, In a Set-Table
of Rates and Fees, to be Paid and Allowed to the Finder and Office; And,
Secondly, in some few Reflections on them.

l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. If the Thing Found be Valued at 0 0 6 Then the
Finder to have of it for his Honesty and Care in Bringing it, 0 0 2 And the
Office to have for their Keeping it. 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 4 0 0 2 0 2 6 0 0 8 0 0 4
0 5 0 0 1 0 0 0 6 0 10 0 0 1 6 0 0 8 0 15 0 0 2 0 0 0 10 1 0 0 0 2 6 0 1 0 2 0
0 0 5 0 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 9 0 0 3 0 8 0 0 0 16 0 0 4 0 100 0 0 10 0 0 2 10 0

My Reflections upon this Table, are these,

First, That all things Found shall be Valued, at a Rate, by Appraisement, and
that if any Difficulty arise between the Finder and Loser, so it shall be
decided, each of them choosing an Appraisor, and if they shall not agree, nor
find an Umpire in two days, that then the Office shall do it for them; and that
shall be Decisive.

Secondly, If either finder or looser, or the Lord on Escheate, in two days
notice refuse to appoint their Appraisors; that then the Office upon both or
either of their Defaults, shall be able to get Appraisors to set a value, and
to give the finder his due thereon, and to keep the Goods, or sell them, if
perishable, and keep the Money till the Looser, or the Lord of the Royalty shall
allow him both his, and the finders Fees.

Thirdly, That all things enclosed, as Writings in a Box, Money in a Bag, or
Clothes in a Trunk, shall not be opened till the Looser come, or the Lord of
the Royalty claim them; but that then the Finder may have them to be opened, to
be Apprais'd, or otherwise as he shall desire it, before they be delivered out
of the Office.

Fourthly, That all things of real value, the Office shall be ready on bringing
in to receive, and to give the Finder his due immediately; but for Dogs
Pocket-Books, and Keys, it shall reserve them to give an account of them, or
else make an Entry where they are to be found, as the case shall reasonably
require.

Fifthly, If Goods, perishable are found, that then the Finder and Office shall
have power in convenient time, to sell them by Appraisors, and so to be
answerable for the Money only.

Sixthly, That if any thing above 20 s. value be found, that it remain in the
Office at least a Week, that the Right Owner be not cheated by a Collusion of
the Finder; So if Goods, or Money, above 20 l. value be found, that they remain
in the Office a Months, before they be Delivered, except the Pretended Loser
give in Security for their Forthcoming; but after a Month, that they be
delivered him only on a Note of the Losers place of abode and quality, to
inform after Claimers.

Seventhly, That all Pocket-books, or Dogs that are found, shall be valued as
at 5 s. and Keys of all sorts, as at 12 d. to avoid all Disputes; and that
Bills of Exchange, by which the Money might be received, shall be valued as Money.

Eighthly, That all things under 20 s. value shall be forfeited to the Lords of
the Royalty, if not called for in six weeks; and all things under 10 l. value,
if not called for in a Quarter of a year: As for all things, of a greater
value, to remain a Year and a day, as the Law directs before, the Lord to have
them.

Lastly, Let no Man think that to allow to the Finder and Office, in this case,
12 l. 10 s. in the Hundred, is too much; for, as when he is in hazard of all,
it is well if so little will procure it; so indeed, less will not be sufficient,
either to encourage the Finder, to bring in what he has discovered, or to
Answer the trust and hazard of the Office in Keeping and Registring it.

The Objections that seem likely to be made in this Case, are these;
First, That such an Office will destroy Royalties.

As to that I Answer; 'twill rather vastly promote them: For, as now, all
Findings are Concealed; so, by this Means, they being Discovered, they will be
assured of them: indeed in this case they will be forced to make some allowance
to the Office and Finder for their Care; but that surely will be Reasonable,
when it is no more than is required of the Loser.

Secondly, That the Gazette will be wronged in their Publications.

But as to that I Answer; It must needs be very inconsiderable; For
Publications there are generally of Dogs stolen of Value, and of Horses, and of
other things lost in the Country; and, as to those, you see, this Office gives
no diversion.

Thirdly, That this may be apt to encourage Thieves; but, as to that, I say, on
the contrary, that it cannot but be the greatest disincouragement to them
imaginable; for when they who have lost, or been robbed of their Goods, shall
repair to this Office, and make their Entry of them there, not only the Office
will be ready to seize them, but every one that happens on such Suspicious
Goods, will know speedily where to repair to know whose they are, and whereupon
a Discovery must necessarily follow.

Fourthly, That we shall want power to make the Losers, and Lords of Royalties
allow the Fees of finding, and the Fees of the Office; but, as to that I
propose, we may be effectually helped by an Act of Parliament; if not, by the
King's Patent.

Fifthly, But you will say, What Security shall the Loser and Finder have, not
to be wronged by the Office? I say, they shall have a Public Security given in
by him that keeps the Office, to see that what ever is left there shall be
forthcoming, and the Office-Books lying always Public, they shall make their
Entries, if they please themselves; and if Goods of Value be found, the Office
shall be responsible to the Finder, that it give him notice to have a just
Appraise^nt, if he desires it, before the Goods are delivered to the Loser; and
in the same manner shall the Lord's Right be secured also.

Sixthly, But you will continue to Object, that Finders will still conceal
their Goods and Money notwithstanding: I say, to prevent that, a Clause in such
an Act of Parliament, That if the Finder bring not in the Goods or Money within
a Week after they are found, he shall not only lose the Profit of such his
Finding to the Informer, but be liable to an Action of Trover, with treble
Damages on Conviction; I say, such a Clause would make it almost impossible
that any thing should be concealed from the Office.

The Benefits of such an Office, would be such as these.
First, You see this Office will be as a General Place of Notice for seizing
all manner of Suspicious Goods.

Secondly, This Office will as well Encourage, as Threaten a return of Found
Goods; For when Men see they may have honestly a good Reward, they will scarce,
by being dishonest, hazard the losing all, and paying for it too, by an
Informer, which, in the present Case, they will be in great danger of,
especially when we consider, that Finders have generally too much Joy to be
Silent.

Thirdly, An Informer, in this Case, would be so far from a contemptible and
servile Office, that it would not be too mean, even for a Gentleman to
undertake; and, though he might give his Reward to whom he would, yet, in
honor, he might assist any one, when so basely and meanly injured.

Fourthly, As nothing is so inconsiderable, that some People have not a Fancy
for; so nothing scarce can be of so little a value, that this Office would not
draw to it, a little, sure, and honest Profit would tempt thither, even things
of Six pence worth; and he, that in such case, will not care to carry the thing
to the Office himself, will not want some one or other, that he might oblige by
it.

So that the benefit of such an Office must needs be, I may almost say, past
Expression; in short, 'twill make this Great City and Suburbs to have the
Correspondence almost of a Family; and it should be no small Recommendation of
this Office, to a considering Man, that it has been in another Nation before,
and therefore consequently to be presumed to be of success, as well as of most
considerable public benefit to this.

In short, if Use and Innocence can recommend any thing, this Office has all
the advantages possible; and I shall say no more of it, because no Man can look
into his own Thoughts, and not be convinced of it, and that even in many things
not here mentioned.

The PROJECT; or, The Method of putting this Office in Practice.
First, That for the ease of Finders, there be four or five places appointed
for the Receipt of Found Goods; As at, 1. Charing Cross. 2. Temple-barr. 3.
Leadenhallstreet. 4. Southwark. And


Secondly, That for the ease of the Loser, these be only places of Receipt; and
that one Chief Office being appointed, as at Temple-barr, that all Found Goods
and Money be fetched daily from those places of Receipt, about the hours of 8
and 12 each day; So that Goods left in the Morning shall be ready for the
Owner, for a certainty in the Afternoon; and those left in the Afternoon, the
next Morning at the one Principal and only Office of Delivery.

Thirdly, This Method to continue all the Week, and all the year round, Sunday
excepted.

Fourthly, That several Books for Entering such Goods and Money be kept as well
at the several places of Receipt, as the Principal Office, and that they be in
four Columns, and under four Heads in manner and form following.

Things Lost. Place where. Finder. Loser.
Fifthly, That when such Goods are fetched from the said several places of
Receipts, that then a Duplicate be brought with them of all their several
Entries, to be Recorded in the General-Office; of all, which Duplicates, the
General-Office may once a Week, take an Account, by comparing them with the
several Books of Receipts.

Sixthly, All the Office-Books to be Marked; and lie Publicly; so that if the
Finder see but the things Entered, it is impossible but that they must come to
the Losers knowledge; and it is as impossible that any Lords of Royalties should
be able to lose their Rights.

Seventhly, The Goods being thus removed to the General-Office, the Finder may
receive notice when to meet at an Appraisement, if he has not received his due
before; and the Loser may know what his demands are; so that, if he agree to
them, there will be no more, but that the Office receive the Money.

But as for the Entry of Suspicious Goods to be seized, that as it ought to be
in a distinct Book, so for the Readier Recourse, it should be only done at the
Principal Office at Temple-barr; so the like for a Caution Entered for Goods
Lost, that the Owner may have Notice sent him if they come to this Office; and
for this the Office is to be particularly paid, according to the length of
their Entry; but where the Goods are found, no other Fees are to be paid for
the Entry, than in the Table before.

Of CVNNING.
THe Cunning Man and the Wise Man differ not only in point of Honesty, but
Ability. He that can pack the Cards does not always play well.

Cunning Men, like Juglers, are only versed in two or three Little Tricks,
while Wisdom excels in the whole Ring or Circle of Action.

But is Wisdom to be despised, because others sculk through their Cunning?
Shall a General abandon all Discipline, because his Parthian Foe fights flying?
No; rather discovering his petty shifts, let him destroy him in his Wiles.

Surely, Cunning Men are too weak for Council; for Practice, and Understanding
Men, indeed, they may do well enough; but he abuses himself that turns them out
of their Channel, and trusts them.

Were Men always Skilful, they would never use Craft or Treachery: Alas! that
Men are Cunning, is from their little Minds, which, if it can conceal its self
in one place, quickly discovers its self in another.

Hence the Cunning Man is as ridiculous as odious; while the greatest art of
such Subtle Men is, to conceal their Skill; the wiser sort of them know
therefore their interest, and are Subtle only on some great Occasion, and for
some great Advantage.

Besides, he that is out of the plain way to deceive others, has not so ready a
prospect of the Cheats designed against him; so that not only a Man is soonest
deceived, when his conceit of Cunning beats him from his Guard; but Cunning Men
are afraid of us, when they see an exact simplicity.

And thus it is the Perfection of Wisdom, to seem to fall into Snares laid for
us, for fear of worse, and yet to avoid them; but, by Subtilty, it is as easy
to deceive ones self, and not perceive it, as it is difficult unperceived to
deceive others.

Usual Tricks of Cunning, are, to surprise, and fascinate with the Eye, to
propose in business, when our Friend is in have, to surprise with bold
Questions, and to foyl, by Ungrateful and Unseasonable Desires, the thing we
would not have done.

Of WISDOM.
MAN is not more above a Brute, than the one above the other, through the
advantage of Wisdom. Plus posse, surely is also Nobilius Esse.

Wisdom as from a Tower, gives us the true prospect of things. Where the higher
we climb, the clearer we see, and the fairer is our View.

And yet Wisdom consists not in trifling Curiosities and nice Speculations.
Wisdom not only solidly pourtraictures Virtue, but gives it practick Life also.

The Fool hates Wisdom as exceeding his reach; the Sluggard envys, instead of
attaining it, while the wicked Man abhors it, as the Touchstone to his
Actions. But surely he that hates Wisdom: hates his own Soul with it.

Wisdom is as our guard assigned us by God. Wisdom clears our mind of
undigested Thoughts and Resolutions, while she looks down with Contempt and
Unconcernedness on the little tumults of Fancy and Passion below.

Reason hastened in the digestion by Fancy and Passion, the giddy Apes of
Judgment and Courage, like Fruit gathered unripe, sets the Teeth on edge,
whilst Wisdom leads us without Repentance.

Our Savior tells us, Qui sequitur me, non ambulat in tenebris: And surely,
not without the justest cause; if the fear of the Lord cannot be the beginning
of Wisdom, what else can move us to act or judge impartially?

Surely, 'twas by Wisdom, that holy men approached to God, and became Prophets,
Wisd. Sol. cap. 8. Can we think, we shall not answer to God for it then, if we
omit to improve our Reasoning?

Was it nothing, that Moses was skilled in all the Learning of the Egyptians?
Surely, God had neither gathered his Prophets into a College at Bethel, nor
made the Learned St. Paul, the chiefest of the Apostles, if he had not regarded
even our industrious self-improvements?

But alas! what are all our improvements without the grace of God, and
sincerity? Solomon tells us, Wisdom will not enter into a malicious Soul, Wisd.
1.

The perverse, be he never so ingenuous, yet by degrees will he vitiate his
Principles by his Practice; the corrupt Man may shift and be a good Sophister,
but never reason well; to be wise and good, are reciprocal.

The Seeming WISE.
REason has not more Admirers than there are Hipocrites; who admiring only the
Profits of Wisdom, approve just so much of her, as can be agreeable and
serviceable to their ends.

Some indeed see but the Appearance of things, their Thoughts and Resolutions,
perpetually tripping up one another; and they deserve our pity. But how many
set up the Hypocrisy of a formal Gravity, above all the Reasoning of Man?

How many through a wild Banter and Paradox, content themselves in mere endless
and giddy Extravagances? A decaying Merchant has not more Tricks for his
Credit, than such Persons for their Sufficiencies.

Sometimes they are so close and so reserved, that they will not show you their
wares, but by a dark Light, hinting as if somewhat more weighty were concealed;
and they would at least have you think, that they understand more.

So sometimes they are shrewd by Countenance, and wise by Signs; while they
bear it out by speaking a great Word, and being Peremptory.

Is any thing beyond their reach? it is easily exploded as curious or
impertinent; and then even their ignorance seems Judgment. But alas! Can such
shuffling appear otherwise than ridiculous to any Man of sense?

Some are never without a difference, and so amusing Men, by a subtilty blanch
the Matter; so they find it easy in deliberations to affect the negative side:
When Propositions are denied, there is an end of them.

But certainly, this affecting of objecting and foretelling Difficulties
wholly, is the very Bane of Wisdom. There is an harder work indeed in
perfecting our Contrivance; but surely for that reason alone, a Man somewhat
absurd, is better either for Business or Counsel, than one either over-formal
or exceptious.

Of LOGIC.
IF any thing can excuse the superfineness of our present Logic and
Argumentations, it must be the depth of their Wisdom, and the state of the
Universities in using them; and yet even then in my sense, they were better
laid aside, or at least more regulated, and more pains spent in the exact
definitions of Words, and settling ultimate Principles and Maxims, than the mere
Forms of Reasoning.

In truth, the Schools have rendered the Niceties about Syllogisms almost
infinite: So that when we have looked for the Purity and simplicity of truth
through their Disputes, we have found our selves mazed by our own Forms, and
Rules in our search, and instead of being helped out in our difficulties by
them, we have discovered our selves sunk deeper by the weight of our Guides:
And when we should consider about the substance of our Argument, we are taken
up with thinking whether we may say properly, Negatur Minor, or no.

I shall not therefore descend into the little Niceties of Logical
Propositions, their Categoricks, Hypotheticks, Disjunctives, Universals,
Indefinites, etc. nor into their Formalities of their several Argumentations,
their Enthimems, Inductions, Exemplum's, Sorites, Dilemma's, and Syllogisms.
Let them that have a mind to catch Butter-flies pursue them if they please, for
my part I will not.

So, what shall I say of our ordinary Logical Fallacies, as Quod emisti edisti,
Carnes crudas emisti, ergo, etc. so Duo and tres sunt par and imp^r, quinque
sunt duo and tres, ergo, etc. Would not a Man of any judgment be ashamed to
think, that one should be put to a formal distinction in terms to answer such
trifles, to be forced to have set Topics to discover the Mystery of Nonsense:
In truth, were most of their Arguments but reduced to writing, nothing would be
more ridiculous* they are nothing but a few empty Catches in mere Words at
best. And the Excellency of a Sophister, as I find, is not to fly to Principles
of Truth, but Quirks.

In short, therefore in my judgment, and I think I judge right, this Sophistry
is so far from an improvement of the Understanding, that it is as a Crop of
Thorns and Weeds in our Ingeny; and tho the forms of Argumentations, and their
several Rules, as Barbara Celarent, etc. may have a great deal of Art in their
Regulation and Composure; yet, no one, at best, can deny, but that they are
rather curious than useful; that a Disputation may be very well brought to a
just Crisis without such formality; and consequently, that the great study and
labor about it, might be better spared about something more material.

Its Parts.
But to descend more particularly into its parts; And so, first, as to its
Predicables, Predicaments, and Ante-predicaments: Would not a Man think, that
those Termini comprehended some Divine matter? Surely one would: But, when it
comes to the Test, it is all Trifles. Thus what a ridiculous and obvious
distinction is Vnum vagum ut aliquis lapis, unum determinatum ut Johannes, unum
Demonstrativum ut hic arbor, and unum Hypotheticum ut hic filius Senior: Is
this Quibling, in trifling distinctions, worthy of a Philosopher? if it is, let
my ^riend peruse Dr. Wilkins's Universal Character, and he shall have enough of
them, though by that Ingenious Author designed for a far better purpose.

So for your Proprium's quarto modo; As, 1. Proprium soli non omni ut hominem
esse doctum. 2. Omni non soli ut hominem esse bipedem (Plato's Goose.) 3. Omni
and soli sed non semper ut ridere. 4. Omni soli and semper ut risihilitas in
homine: Is not this pretty stuff, that a Man must be bound to tell another he
talks Nonsense, by the Rule of Proprium 4to. modo? What is this but Pedantry?
indeed but a kind of Brutality, and unworthy of the liberal and generous search
of a Rational Soul.

Indeed, the Rule of genus, species, and difference, might be of excellent use,
were it in proper place, as in a Treatise of Method, or Analysis, but disguised
in such Cant, with a summum subalternum simpliciter; or, secundum quid; in
truth quite defaces it, and makes it to become all of a piece with the rest.

So further, What shall we say to the Ante-predicaments, the Equivocum,
Vnivocum, Analogum, and Denominativum? And why may not we as well bring in the
Metaphoricum, Ironicum, and an 100 more? And so for your Voces abstractae,
concretae, simplices, complexae: Why may not you as well add, finitae,
relativae, and infinite others? In short, Is not this mere Trumpery, and fitter
for a Dictionary, or a Castaneus's distinctions at best; but surely, not worthy
of a Philosopher, to strut up a Science withal. Indeed it makes Logic appear
like a Gouty Leg, in respect of the Body of Wisdom.

So the Predicaments in new Philosophy, are: Men's, mensura, quies, motus,
positura, figura,
Sunt cum materia; cunctarum exordia rerum.


And why may not these do as well as Aristotle's 10. Substantia, Quantitas,
Qualitas, Relatio, Actio, Passio, Vbi, Quando, Situs, Habitus: Ludovicus Vives
is of opinion, that you may add many more; and for my part I think 'twere no
hurt there were none at all; indeed if they are of any use, it is to help
invention: and as for invention it ought to be treated of distinctly, at least
it belongs more to Rhetoric than Logic.

So also, what Predicamental Distinctions we have got, as Quantitas Entitativa,
and quantitativa? So that there are five intellectual Habits under Quality,
viz. Intelligentia, Sapientia, Scientia, Prudentia, and Ars; whereas they may
as rationally make fifty, and by the same reason distinguish every several
Object of Wisdom into a several intellectual Habit.

And to shut up all I have to reflect of this nature, I shall add, what has
Logic to do with Definitions? She is only to teach men to reason: Let the
Vocabulary help them to Terms, particular Sciences to Principles, and
Definitions; her business is only to cast up the Account. So what has she to
do with Divisions into Universals, Essentials, Integrals, Subjects, Accidents,
etc. Let her leave all to their proper places, to Analitica and Method, and the
Principles of the Subjects she disputes of.

Of Arguments.
But as we would thus take away our too formal University Disputes, as the
Mothers of Quibling and Wrangling; so on the other side, one would leave so
much to Art as might be able to lead a Dispute to a Crisis. Thus we ought to
let our Descriptions, Definitions, Genus and Differences, be laid down as
Postulata or Principles; and if they be denied, prove them from the Fountain
Topics of Sciences.

So we ought to skill, how to run an Argument to a Contradiction or Absurdity;
not I mean a Nice and Logical Contradiction and Contrariety, than which nothing
is more Pedantick; but to a real and obvious Contrariety and Inconsistency, and
under which every one ought to submit, and not to dispute on, as if he aimed at
Victory, and wrangle, rather than to search for Truth; and therefore, in
sincerity, we ought to desist, as if we had no further Reason for what we first
affirmed: Where we are sensible, we are not able to make any thing further
appear.

But as for your common Logical Contradictions, as I have said nothing, is more
impertinent: Thus, that two Negatives make an Affirmative, can only be from
custom. Indeed, did Men follow the true Concatenation of Thought, and were they
not more Artful than Wise; two Negatives were Nonsense. So what need have we of
the puzle of Contrary, Subcontrary, Subaltern, and Contradictory; is it not to
maze us?

So when two Dispute, is it not much easier to bring all to the Test of a plain
Contradiction to find Truth, than to stand quibling, Quidam homo est doctus,
quidam homo non est doctus? Indeed, as Cornelius Agrippa well reflects, Logical
Terms and Niceties are like the Trojan Horse, which tho not powerful enough to
enter by force of Reasoning, yet when once admitted, and taken for granted,
will at least baffle and destroy your Cause, by their starched and empty
Formality.

And yet this we must needs grant of Arguments in general, that they are as
much better for the growth of Wisdom, then Lectures as many Heads are than one.
As the Understanding is more lively when whetted and sharpened by Contention,
than when flat in its self; but yet your single Discourses are better than
Disputes, when debauched to a perverse Wrangling: And hence, how often have our
wisest men reflected on the Formality of Syllogysms?

In the infancy of Philosophy indeed, such a show of Wisdom were tolerable; but
such Pedantry at these days, that the two or three first Years of a University
Students time, should be spent on such Trash, as I remember too well, is
intolerable.

In short, therefore as nothing but Perverseness and Malice can come from
Contention and Wrangling; so if you dispute, let nothing provoke or confound
you. Is your Adversary hot? be calm and slow; measure your Words as it were by
the Pendulum of a Clock. Is he interrupting and violent? Let him alone; it is
easy after an hours Discourse by three or four words quite to confound him, if
he is in an Error; and remember there is a way to Answer short and smart.

But as in Set-Disputes, for the better progress, we ought to limit each ones
share to a proposition or two at a time. Thus suppose it were only by
Enthymems, that we entertained our Disputes; so we ought never to admit of
Metaphors or Similes in a rigid Argument; to let a man dispute us so, is to let
him fight in a Cloud, when he ought to appear on equal Terms, and naked; and so
to grant the least point in dispute wrongfully, is a confusing Folly; and so
not to be able to reduce your Argument to particulars; what is it, but to make
it recoyle in its self?

Are you in a Dispute therefore, and do you find your Adversary perversely
through a Spirit of Wrangling, to withstand you in clear and evident Principles
of Truth? Never suffer him to move you to further Argument after that. If you
have no Moderator, cease for good and all, standing firmly and eternally on the
first Error. He that admits the least corner of a false Foundation, forgets
that his whole Building will surely fall by means of it; and besides, that
Sophistry in its self, is Divelish; and when it has other ends than a fair and
candid search for Truth, is to be hated and avoided by all.

Further in Arguments: Without you are sure to speak alone, and not to be
interrupted, as in the Pulpit, never multiply Reasons; for since one or two is
enough for Conviction, and sufficient most times for an honest Mind; to allege
more, what is it but to leave room for Perverseness, and to give the better
opportunity for Wrangling?

But above all, in Disputes you must remember to proceed from Words to Sense;
for it is in vain to argue, when you do not understand one another Terms: Nor
is it less necessary in your method to proceed first to some Fundamental
Principles, such as Self-Preservation, Demonstration, etc. To think of arguing
otherwise, is weak and foolish; and tho one would explode and banish the
Formality of Syllogisms, yet if one takes away the method of Reasoning of
clearing first Terms, and granting first Principles, one had better never speak
than argue; for it must be endless.

I proceed to the last part of Logic or Method.

Of Method.
Several Subjects and several Genius's delight in several Methods; in which
case, what is clearest and easiest to all, is undoubtedly the best. It Is a
fault in Method to give more Labor than Benefit. Method is for Matter, and not
Matter for Method. I must confess, as to general Learning, I wholly esteem
Essays, first, as by their short and pithy fullness, they are more apt and
assistant to a complete Judgment: And, Secondly, as by their looseness, they
are most ready for Corrections and Additions.

To write too largely of a Subject, scatters and distracts the Sight, and to
write too little of it, leaves determination to a Lottery: The best method
therefore is to be short and full, to give most large and ample general
Directions, and to leave the judgment to manage lesser Corollaries,
Particulars, and Consequences; and as for the advantage of such good Methods,
it is scarce expressible; you will not think how gently, and with what ease,
even the difficultest parts of Wisdom well ranged, will lie in our minds by it.

And in this one may justly say of Knowledge, the Diamond or Jewel is not
immediately ready so soon as it is got; it wants polishing and trimming, yea,
and beautifying, and setting at last also: And even so in Wisdom, the Labor is
not inconsiderable, even after it is gotten and obtained, by exact Method and
Order, to address it, and set it out to the best advantage.

In truth, Method is not much less considerable than Matter its self; it is
obvious every day to observe how much deliberate and orderly proceeding,
confounds even truth when irregular. Indeed, Method is a sort of Truth, and
Confusion a Lie, and as generally Men judge of the Cause by the Proceedings, by
a kind of precipitancy and haste in Judgment; so those truths had need be very
bright, that can shine and command attention, under the vail and disguise of
Disorder.

As for the form of Method in General, it is best to pursue the Order of Fact,
and to connect all the parts of the Discourse duly; thus to acquaint Men first
with the Informing, or Explaining part, that they may know the better how, and
to what to bind their Attention, and then to proceed to the several Parts of
Discourse, as they best agree together; and there to take care that nothing be
either wanting or abound, but to make every part of the Discourse agreeable and
suitable to the Main End.

Of Genesis and Analysis.
But that you may the better Skill how to form a Subject into exact method, I
shall here present you with the Pattern of an exact Genesis and Analysis; in
which case, the right forming of a Subject in Discourse, is called, the
Genesis; and the Anatomy or Dissolution of it to its prime Heads the Analysis;
the Head dividing we call the Genus; the Heads divided till they come to
Particulars Species; but when Particulars, as Peter, Paul, John, etc.
Individuals.

Notions. Abstracted. Ideas Pure Relative.
Words, Discourses.
Real. Vniversals of GOD, creature, Body, Spirit.
WORLD.
Particular Substance, Animate, -- Rational. Peter, James, John.
Sensitive, Exanguious. Insects. Sanguineous. Beast, Bird, Fish.



Vegetative. Imperfect, as Stone, Metal

Perfect. Herb, Shrub, Tree.




Accident. Quantity Magnitude, Space, Measure.
Quality, and so either Habit, Manner, Natural Power, Sensible quality,
Sickness.

Action Mixed, Simple. Corporeal, Spiritual.

Relation, Private, or Oeconomical i^ Possession, Provision.
Public Ecclesiastic, Civil Judicial, Military, Naval.



As an Ingenious Author well observes, Algebra is the Pinnacle of Argumentation,
and Analitica is the Gage of Men's Parts; and, in which case, though several
Discourses may be equally adorned in being Florid; yet it is only by the
Analysis, or Anatome, that you are able to discern the Wisdom, and the Solid
Matter, and Composure of a Treatise.

Nota, If you would see the exact Distribution of such an Analysis, through all
Subjects, you must peruse Dr. Wilkins's Universal Character, and Alsted's
Encyclopaidion, where you have an unspeakable Variety in it.

Of ANGER.
THere is an Anger from Pride, and an Anger from Complexion more excusable, but
surely neither tolerable when raised to a Passion.

The Picture of a full Passion'd Anger is a Tiger bathed in Blood, assailing,
fierce, cruel and inexorable: And can any Provocation then justify a Vice so
inhumane, and barbarous?

As Seneca says, Anger appears like ruin, which breaks its self upon all it
falls. While the Man in Anger is out of possession of his own Mind, he is like
the vexed Be, that stings all, nay equally the next unconcerned Person, as his
Enemy: Annimamque in vulnere ponit.

But above all, Malice and a settled Hatred are most pernicious. If Anger is
able to endanger our Quiet and Safety; What must Malice do? Surely a settled
Anger, or Malice, must needs tear up the very Roots of Humane Society.

Besides, Anger leaves neither room nor mercy for failty or mistake. Be there
but a possibility that the Adversary is in the right, yet is the Angry Man in a
temper to consider and do him Justice.

The Scripture says, Be Angry and sin not. Learn to turn the course of your
Anger therefore, and instead of showing a bitterness, and an irrevocable
resentment of Indignation, learn the Courage to change it to Pity.

Above all, beware of revealing Secret, and of Bitter Words, whether Railing or
Satyr in your Anger; For why should you be perfidious in the one case, and add
needless fuel to an unreasonable fire in the other?

Alas! Man is such a touchy thing, and yet so unconstant, that almost all his
Passions depend upon his opportunity and temper. To day he bears Abuse, without
measure; and, to morrow, every circumstance of Contempt and Reputation whets
the Edge of his Resentment.

Undoubtedly therefore, Anger is the Child of Weakness and Baseness. Is it
agreeable to a well-ballanc'd temper and courage, and a due resolution, to make
even desperate efforts of resentment for trifles?

Women, Children, Sick Men, and Old Folks, we may justly allow them to be
Angry, as fit Subjects for the Weakness of Passion; but Men should be above it,
and learn to make others tremble, while themselves stand unmoved: The
Superlative Courage answers to Aquila non capit muscas.

To be short; Are you provoked? therefore Repeat the Alphabet; nay, rather bite
off your Tongue, then let him make it a Billinsgate-Scuffle for you; not only
for the ungenerousness of it, I mean; but when you begin with evil words, Do
you know what actions they may lead you to?

Of MVRDER.
HE that intends to avoid Murder, must shun violent Anger also, or else he may
set his Guard too late. Can you reasonably expect to stop the stream, that you
are not able to keep within its banks?

The Scripture says, He that hates his Brother is a Murderer. And you see, not
without a cause; if we once let Vice get the Reins in managing our Actions,
Need we wonder that we are to Answer for all the Consequences thereof?

The Laws of God and Man allow us even to kill another in our own defense; nay,
whether Chastity, or a Limb be only threatened; yet even then we are excusable:
But shall I destroy my Brother for a Blow, or an Affront only?

What though mine Enemy is desperate in his Malice, yet shall I meanly distrust
the Providence of God in my Protection, so as to kill him for it therefore?

But above all, the Self-murderer is the most stupidly presumptuous. What,
shall I fly in the Face of my Maker, because of his Trials of Patience, and
other Virtues, nay, and for which he has Promised to Reward me in another World?

What, now that I am as Gold in the Furnace to be tried, will I rather Rebel
against his Will? nay, and if I do, What can I think my God to be, either
Rational or Just, and not expect but that as he at first gave me a Talent of
Life, so he will Resuscitate it again to an unhappy Immortality for my contempt
of him?

The World, I know, has Sainted some Self-murderers, as for Chastity, and
otherwise: But can the World excuse such shuffles to the Masculine Trials of
God's Afflictions? Are we to live and die to God, or to Fantome Honor, and
Humor?

To be short; It Is easy and light to die: The Women in some Countries burn in
Complement, with their Deceased Husbands; And what then, shall we be less
grateful to the Lord of Life, who pretend to be of the Nobler Sex?

OF REVENGE.
REvenge is to be Rooted out as Wild Justice. A first wrong does but offend the
Law, but Revenge puts the Law out of Office: Surely when Government is once
established, Revenge belongs to none but the Law and God.

And yet the Vice of Revenge shall not keep me from a lawful Resentment; nay, I
am as strongly bound to Self-preservation, as against Revenge; and even St.
Paul would not refrain Appealing to Caesar to Redress his Injuries.

So the same Christ that bid us turn the one Cheek when the other was smitten,
yet could himself Whip out those that defiled the Temple: And even so I, while
I bear another Injuries, through mistake or frailty, surely I may well choose
to refuse to let him slave me by it.

It Is true, Providence can reign in even the furiousest Tyrants, to Protect us,
but shall that Enthusiastically make me surrender my self a Prey to corrupt Men?

But has my Brother, as I have said, injured me through inadvertency, or
repents? it is noble to forgive him; Revenge would equal us, but Pardon makes me
Superior; and besides, is it prudent to rub a Sore to keep it from healing?

So, Does your Enemy Vow to be revenged on you? Answer him, I Vow I will
persuade you to be better Minded if I can. Whatever others are, Can that excuse
you of your invincible Christian Charity?

To conclude, I will dread Revenge where I have injured my Brother; but when I
have offered him Reparation, I Will force my self through a Christian Magnanimity
to Satisfaction and Content, and only be sorry my Brother has so much Malice as
to be my Enemy.

OF REFORMATION.
ARt thou sorry, my Friend, that Christians have such Variances and different
Ideas? Thou art sorry then because they are not Angels: for, as we are Men, we
cannot but Err; and if we Err, it is impossible but that we must differ. What
remains then to Reconcile us, or preserve Peace, but Charity? Divine Charity!
let us follow that therefore, and not seem to quarrel with God, because he has
not made us otherwise. In truth, Were the Apostles themselves ever free from
little Animosities, Acts 15. 38, 39.

Think of this therefore, my Friend, and pity Mankind in their Weakness; do not
enter into Contention, but bear with a Mercy like God's; nor despair, but do
all that thou can to Reform them; nor be angry if they are not exact, for
it is more than Human to be so: Nay, if thy Designs miscarry, be not
discouraged, for thou must do thy best always, and yet expect still that God
work his own way. Remember what Luther said to Melancton, when he was too
anxious about the success of the late great Reformation, Desinat Melancton esse
rector mundi: Why should Melancton take upon him the Cares proper to God? For
though Man may Reason even Divinely, yet it is only God that can give
Conviction, and dissolve the stubborn Heart.

Besides, as a Rational Man, I may modestly give my Advice to Reform the World,
as it is every Man's Duty, where he lawfully may and can: But I am presumptuous
against all the Laws of Nature, if I seek to Impose it on others. Is the World
Corrupt? why, and even my very Knowledge of its Corruption is uncertain: And
how dare I then presume too freely to be its Reformer? I may do well to Pray to
God to Inspire apt Persons in a lawful way therefore, or else I sin; that with
my known weak Performances I increase the Confusion.

You think what you would enforce thus, may be of use and benefit; and it may
be so; But will you on the hazard of that presume on all the Consequences of
your Proceedings, and how far you may stir up others to disturb the Peace by
it? Nay, speak from your Conscience, Do not you often vary even in your own
thoughts, and with your self? And can you expect then to set up a better Sect
than some already are? Or if you can, Can you assure your self the benefit will
exceed the Blood and Divisions that may be occasioned by it?

Alas! our best and only method to reconcile these our Differences in
Religion, is, by setting up, or imposing nothing on no hand, but reassuming the
Ancient and Apostolic Liberty; more especially a compliance is fairly and
humbly to be desired, where most likely, and where there is most Judgment; and
therefore I may add, that if the Magistracy to whom we ought to address in this
case, and who ought to be the strong Trespass on their weaker Brethren, by
imposing on them, though never so innocently, the People will hardly ever be
induced to a submission to it, though never so reasonable, be it almost only
for the very Imposition sake.

But for Private Reformers, and Quacks in Religion, Who shall set any bounds to
their Giddy Methods? In truth, one may say of all such Men, that they have
rather Essayed than proceeded in any thing like a Reformation, while the
Imperfect Embrio has turned to a Monster in the Womb: Alas! the best of them
have not said sufficient Fundamental Precepts to support or continue it by;
and, in truth, when I consider this, I wonder not that their Flocks go astray,
when even as the Poet Sings, Their Guides themselves know not the Way.

Besides, I have a fair System, says one, and a second sets up another, and so
infinitely, etc. And pray what must the State do in this Matter? She is in
equal Peril if she disregard either, and all have an equal right to her
Hearing: Nay, one tells her, she is Jure Divino; a Second, That she has the
Spirit; A Third, The Dominion is founded in Grace; And a Fourth, translates the
Supremacy: In short, all would fain make the State a Property, and Rescue the
Sword out of her Hand.

If She accept one, She Is Damned by the rest; and if She accepts none, like
young Vipers, rather than fail of their Birth, they will eat through their
Mothers Womb: And what then, ought She not to crush such Cockatrices Eggs in
the Embrio, and confound their Sanctified Treasons for God's sake? And so, if
She suffer them to Clamor each other, She Is in danger even by that also. So
that till you can convince us Mankind will never disagree in Reasoning these
Methods and Principles of Reformation so apparently against the Peace of
States; must needs be Seditious and Unlawful, and after that I need not add
Irreligious.

You say, alas! what you do or propose has none of these Evils in it; you do
not think to give any General Disturbance, or to offend the State: But why do
you Write then what She will not bear, and Publish Doctrines without Her
License? Either you Write to be regarded, or not; you are not so ridiculous I
am persuaded, as to say the latter; if not, can you assure your self to Rule
all your Followers, to say, thus far you shall go, and no further? or, if you
are so ridiculous to think so, Is the State bound to believe you, and sit still
while you Sow your Seeds of Discord in her Bowels? No, from a small Spark may
rise a mighty Flame: And they who will not destroy the Lions Whelp, may strive
in vain when the Lion's Grown.

Besides, we forget our Savior's Advice, That we ought first to cast ought the
beam out of our own eye, before we can expect to see how to cast out the mote
out of our Brother's: And hence, methinks, considering the Corruption of the
World, 'twere hard to expect a Reformation Perfect, semel and simul, especially
without the Immediate Power of God; and yet, methinks, we might all have had
the Wit in Common, not to be offended at Trifles, and to have Joined against
the Roman Wolf: But alas! our New Reformers are Reformed into as great Errors
of their own, and our Corruptions will not let us Unite.

But you will Object then, What, is it never lawful to Reform Publicly, but
when the State will give you leave? No, surely: And, in truth, Can you justly
desire it? Can you value your little private Opinions before the Public Good?
you see plainly, that if this Liberty of Zeal be allowed, it must Destroy the
State: The case then is, Which must stand, Religion or Government? I mean your
little Model of Religion, or the State? Surely, as Populous as the World now
is, we had better have none of your Religion, than no Government: And therefore
if we consult the Good of God's Creation, we ought rather to omit our little
Speculations, than Disturb the State with them.

Besides, if every Prejudiced Reasoner were allowed of himself to Disturb the
State, and to set up a New Religion, Would it not rather Distract than Help the
World? But, no, you say, you are sure you are in the Right: No, you are Proud:
What! Did you never err? and if you did, What Assurance have you that you do
not now? Nay more; were you sure you had even the Standard of Truth; yet ought
you not to take this Liberty? Not, I mean, that any Man can reach that
Perfection; but to Anticipate all Proud Thoughts, I say, we ought to forbear
such a Liberty: For what, Might not many Men think they might justly leave your
Standard Truth, and yet follow your Presumption.

Nay, and if I undertake to reform Men, and know I can do it but Imperfectly,
What do I do by it, but give Offense? Christ refrained Doctrines, because Men
could not bear them, though he knew how to Instruct them: And what shall we
Essay then to Teach, what not only Men cannot bear, but what we know not how to
instruct? I would Reform the World therefore, but I would not put it into a
greater Confusion: I would put my Neighbors House in Order; but, I would not
Fire it about his Ears. And what do I do otherwise, if I so much as Countenance
every little Reasoning to be able Saucily to Disturb the State? Farewell
Government! farewell every thing! If this may be allowed, who shall stint how
high such Liberty may arise, and what Effects it may produce? Nay, may be at
last, even to resist the Government its self, on pretense of unlawful process
against such Reasoning, and consequently to Anarchy?

Nor is it enough in such case to say, that the State is bound to see, that
they prohibit nothing but what is unlawful; for as Good and Evil in this case
is doubtful, so the State ought therein to have an entire Power or Liberty
given them, or else you had as good take all Power from them whatever; when
alas! in truth, as I have said, 'twere better there were no Printing than no
Government; and no humane Teaching, or religious Instruction, than no Laws.

Government is the great and only humane Foundation of Religion: To destroy
Government therefore, or to disturb it, without a particular Revelation to
advance Religion, What is it but to tear up the Foundation for Materials to
raise the Building? nor is it enough in such case, to say, that you have a
Charity for men's Souls, and that such Opinions are damnable. For pray, how come
you to judge so of Opinions? or what, have you got a particular Warrant to show
us, That God has flung all the Care of the World on your Shoulders?

If Christ's, or any others Revelation, have threatened the wilfully ignorant or
perverse, yet where is your Warrant either to limit exactly their Damnatory
Sentences, or to raise new ones of your own? If you modestly and peaceably
offer your sense in such case, you oblige Mankind in reforming them, and they
are engaged to you for your Charity. But if you endeavor either by Might or
Calumny to force them, may they not most justly ask? And why have we not the
same Right of force on you also?

But you say, your Zeal to God moves you; Does it so? And how are you sure that
it does not move others as well as you? Besides, that is strange too; Can the
God of the World be better pleased that you destroy his Creation, than that you
omit every little Speculation that you think will tend to his Honor? And what
do you do otherwise, when that you but endeavor so dangerous a Work, as thus
violently to innovate either in State or Religion, against the leave of the
Government?

You say, God has wrought Deliverances by such Reformers; sometimes it is true,
and so he has by Tyrants and Usurpers also: But must that justify their
Methods? or what think you, that God cannot stir up Reformers where he sees
good, without our presumption?

Men should therefore think it enough, that they are so happy as to have
freedom in themselves, and thank God that they have the Truth; and if they have
a Charity for the World, they should show it regularly, and in Prayers, that
God might send as lawful and real Reformers; and not thus pragmatically
confound us by such unaccountable Presumptions of their own.

And besides, scarce one in the hundred of such Reformers, but what have
miscarried; and if ever any have got Success in remedying Evils, they have too
often promoted new ones, and as bad of their own, if not degenerated again to
the first State; so that at best, generally they have done more hurt than the
good proposed. And, thus we see how many have reformed of their own heads, and
we see the effects of such Reformations, instead of reducing the Church to a
Primitive Purity; by them they have but rent her into uncharitable and
senseless Divisions, worse I may almost add, than even Popery her self.

In short, Can I expect to prevent all Corruptions in my self? or if I am so
proud as to think, I can, am I able to do it in my Followers? if I cannot,
therefore before I hazard the mischief of a Change, let me consider to what
degree of good I can expect to Reform? nay more, may not God be willing, that
this Generation should have just such a Dispensation of Knowledge? and what,
shall I cross Providence then, or destroy my self to reform Mankind, whether
they will or no?

God allows you to reprove personal Vices where ever you see them provided, but
consistent with your safety; and so national ones also, where you are not in
danger. But when a Man or Nation becomes so unhappy as to turn again, and rent
you for your kindness, methinks you might rejoice that you are quit of your
Office, in leaving them to reform themselves. And thus also, there is a lawful
Liberty for Writers, and there is an abuse of it; and there is a convenient
Liberty of suppressing Books by a State, and a pernicious one: And thus it is
either the misfortune or the wickedness of a State to suppress those Books that
might give them good Advice. But if it is either, who shall call the State to
account for what it does?

But to turn the method of mine Argument a little: Am I not presumptuous to go
before God sends me? And who has required these things at mine hand? And
indeed, were God resolved to have such a Reformation, might not I as rationally
expect he would empower some person orderly in his Providence toward it, as he
has done before, through Moses and Christ, without my presumptuously going of
my own head?

And indeed, were not this God's instituted method, Why should God complain,
that men came that were not sent, and threaten them for it, as he does by his
Prophets, if it were no Offense? and the common mission of the Law of Nature
were sufficient, in truth a warrant that needs no more to confute it, than to
consider: Should every man take the full liberty of it, what a World it would
make?

Not that I would mean from hence, Neither that the Law of Nature is not
sufficient to direct every man privately in his Duty: I am not so much a
Pyronist as that comes to neither. Nay, I think, that by the light of Nature,
and the common Assistance of God's Spirit in our Consciences, we may very
justly take the liberty to advise and reprove one another; yea, and more that
publicly too, when the Law prohibits not. But as I have said, Shall this
general Commission only Authorize us to be idle to other things, to teach
others, or endanger the Public Quiet or Peace by it? Surely we need a Warrant
from God, like Christ and his Apostles, as well as a bare Conviction of
Consciences, to proceed thus far?

But you will say, this is cowardly, and not to the bravery of a Martyrdom. I
say, it is: For though every man is bound to stand to the truth, and confess it,
even to death; yet no man is bound to preach it, or spread it to this degree,
till he has a Call to it; nor is it enough to say in this case, That because
Christ would not let him be silenced, that preached in his Name, that therefore
we may follow him without some order; for if God will not destroy our Trials,
so as forcibly to obstruct us in our Ignorances, yet he does not therefore
require us to continue in them.

Thus even Christ, did not go about purposely to preach publicly, till he had
the Warrant and Protection of a Mission; nor did Moses or Elijah hazard
themselves till God commanded them: And what, would I seem braver than they?
Would God have chosen Moses, if his flight for being a Deliverer, had been
Cowardice and not Duty? Surely not; and that because the Apostles lived and
continued in this hazard, was withal, because they were sent.

In short then, should I not be a Self-murderer to run my self into the fire?
and should I not forfeit God's Protection from Enthusiasm, to arrogate
Spiritual Power, and to pretend to be a Guide where I am not? What, can God
order me to live by Miracle without express notice? nay, and am not I an
Enthusiast, to run my self even into the very jaws and pit of Destruction, in
hopes of his Help, and that even in inevitable Dangers?

And indeed, what has made God let so many well designing Men be sacrificed in
this case, but Presumption? And if I attempt any such thing therefore of my
self, can I expect either to fare better, or have other success? In truth, if I
do, thus I go of my own Errand, and I must not expect the protection of God to
bear me out; nor will it be enough for me to suggest in such case, that such an
Error is considerable, or not; for if we admit that, we admit all; for all
Immoralities are equally pernicious, and the least were no more to be born with
than the greatest.

Nor indeed is the Vice of such a seditious Practice worse than the Vanity of
it: Am not I an unstable doubting thing my self? and how can I expect then that
I, as the Blind, should be able to lead the Blind? When I am commissioned from
God indeed, I may justly presume on his Warrant, or else my Fallibility will
make me a Deceiver, tho never so sincere.

It is the real Duty of every man therefore to say, I will not move an inch
beyond private Advice, till God shall give me Authority; nay more, no faint
Dream or Vision shall empower me, and all the presumptions of this nature, that
I have been guilty of before, shall remain as Monuments in my Memory, to keep
me from the like for the future.

Indeed, may I say, is it not a ridiculous thing, to see a little petty
Reformer fond of his trifling imaginations, and really ignorant of the true
state and nature of Religion; neither knowing of what nature Catholic
Communion is, nor what is the guilt either of Heresy or Schism, blindly to run
himself and others into amaze, that he no more knows how to get out of again,
than how first he got into it: Alas! what a miserable Spectacle may I add it
is, when such men take fire into their Zeal, and lay a necessity, either that
they destroy the State, or the State them.

But this ESSAY being on a Subject somewhat singular, I have thought fit to add
a Passage of the Incomparable Archbishop of Canterbury's, much to the same
effect; to confirm it, see Tillotson's Sermons, Vol. the 3d. p. 372.
AND to speak freely in this matter, I cannot think (till I be better informed,
which I am always ready to be) that any pretense of Conscience warrants any Man
that is not extraordinarily commissioned, as the Apostles, and first Publishers
of the Gospel were; and cannot justify that Commission by Miracles, as they
did, to affront the Established Religion of a Nation, tho it be false; and
openly to draw men off from the Profession of it, in contempt to the Magistrate
and the Law. All that persons of a different Religion can in such a case
reasonably pretend to, is to enjoy the private Liberty and Exercise of their
own Conscience and Religion; for which they ought to be very thankful, and to
forbear the open making of Proselytes to their own Religion (thou they be never
so sure that they are in the right) till they have either an extraordinary
Commission from GOD to that purpose, or the Providence of GOD make way for it,
by the permission or connivance of the Magistrate; not but that every man has
a right to publish and propagate the true Religion, and to declare it against a
false one: But there is no obligation upon any man to attempt this to no
purpose; and when without a Miracle, it can have no other effect, but the loss
of his own life, unless he have an immediate Command and Commission from God to
this purpose, and be endued with a Power of Miracles, as a public Seal and
Testimony of that Commission which was the case of the Apostles, who after they
had received an immediate Commission, were not to enter upon the Execution of
it, but to stay at Jerusalem till they were endued with Power from on high. In
this case a man is to abide all hazards, and may reasonably expect both
extraordinary Assistances and Success, as the Apostles had, and even a
miraculous Protection till his work be done; and after that, if he be called to
suffer Martyrdom, a supernatural Support under those Sufferings.

And that they are guilty however of gross Hypocrisy, who pretend a further
Obligation of Conscience in this matter: I shall give this plain demonstration,
which relys upon Concessions, generally made on all Hands, and by all Parties;
No Protestant, that I know of, holds himself obliged to go and preach up his
Religion, and make Converts in Spain or Italy; nor do either the Protestant
Ministers, or Popish Priests think themselves bound in conscience to preach the
Gospel in Turkey, and to consute the Alchoran to convert the Mahometans; and
what is the reason? because of the severity of the Inquisition in Popish
Countries, and of the Laws in Turkey; but does the danger then alter the
obligation of Conscience? no certainly; but it makes men throw of the false
pretense and disguise of it: but where there is a real obligation of
Conscience, danger should not divert men from their Duty, as it did not the
Apostles: which shows their case to be different from ours, and that probably
this Matter was stated right at first; so that whatever is pretended, this is
certain, That the Priests and Jesuits of the Church of Rome, have in truth, no
more obligation of Conscience to make Converts here in England, than in Sueden
or Turkey, where it seems, the evident Danger of the Attempt has for these many
years given them a perfect Discharge from the Duty in this particular.

Of WIT.
THE common abusive Wit, what is it but the crude Digestion and Excrement of
Reasoning? What can I call a Talking Thing, when the truth and sincerity of
it is Judgment is gone, but a Parrot at best?

To Ridicule, to Droll, to Banter, etc. what, are all such Contentious
Railleries, either to be commended or used for? is the best of them agreeable
either to Sense, Justice, or good Manners?

In short, Raillery is a false Theater Jewel; and whereas true Wit stirred up,
does Wonders, and becomes as a Cordial to alleviate the Cares of humane Life.
Raillery confounds and embitters all.

Besides, such little pedling Satyrists cannot show themselves without the
company of Blockheads, and yet not but that they will rather sometimes be
speaking evil, even of themselves, and their best of Friends, than not talking.

But are not all such Scoffers then taken deservedly as common Enemies? nay,
and are any more ridiculous than such, to men of sense, especially when they
are unmasked, or as the Player, e're he is in his Disguise?

But as for real Wit, there are undoubtedly many pretty things, which the mind
searches not, and yet finds in its self; it seems they are hidden there, as
Gold and Diamonds in the Bowels of the Earth, and which when produced, even
dazzle and enamour all Mankind with their luster.

And yet, there is a general Revolution of Wit, that changes its Fashions, as
well as the Fortunes of the World; and whilst all her little Idolaters to
magnify themselves, support her in them, they too often sacrifice their very
judgment in complement to her.

Politeness of Wit in general, is a frame of Mind, as always presents us with
things genteel and delicate; and gallantry of Wit, what is it but an easy way
to please, whilst as for its deceits, they are as many and various?

Thus, it is not fruitfulness of Wit, which makes us find out many Expedients in
one Affair; but it is rather a darkness in the Understanding, which makes us lay
hold on all that Imagination presents, and hinders us from seeing presently
what is proper for us.

To be short, it is the Character of a great Wit, to make a great many things be
understood in a few words; and in recompense of it, I may say, the little Wits
have a Talent of talking much, and saying nothing.

To conclude, the general Excellency of Wit is in diversion, and on a ready
turn, while its mischiefs are, that its Delicacy is too often apt to destroy
the laboriousness of Consideration, and its lightness to offend in Seriousness
and Business.

Of REWARDS.
GOD has put it in the power of Princes to encourage us by Rewards: Punishment
and Revenge whets but on one side of the Edge of Virtue, unless Rewards be
added to sharpen the other.

Nor is it less the duty than interest of great Men, in such case, to bestow
such Rewards duly. Surely, neither an Aesop nor Socrates should be neglected,
if we would encourage Goodness and Virtue truly.

You give your Pimp his hire, and he in gratitude, like Timon's Friends, seeks
thy ruin to be rid of the Obligation; had he any real worth, he would rather
starve than pimp for thee: Can he be faithful to his King, that is not so to
the King of Kings?

So surely, to give for a Jest or a Trifle also, is to be prodigal, and not
reward; but alas! how often are true Abilities and Merits suppressed, lest their
Luster should eclipse the false Lights and Deceits of the World?

Of PEDANTRY.
THere is a common and lazy Asilum in Learning, Ars longa vita brevis; Men's
Judgments are so dazzled with the Curiosity, the Fine Dresses and Excursions of
Authors, that they think Learning as bad as infinite; and lazily and sluggishly
rest in a confused view, in despair of all Perfection. But why? because they
know not how to separate the Gold from the Dross, and to encumber themselves
only with what is really material.

I must confess my Genius is too hardy to approve of Trifles; and as I hate all
Superfluicies, so such little Formalities have been of no annoyance to me: I
have flung aside all such Embroidery of Science as Nonsense; I cannot bear what
cannot be digested to use; my Reader therefore must excuse my freedom, if I
have laid aside all such looser Thoughts, as Deluding Chicanery and
Speciousness, and presented him only with the main and solid Substance. But to
proceed:

Among the rest therefore, it is the particular work of this present Essay, to
show wherein such trifling Pedantry consists, and that is it I am now to Write
of.

Now, First, As the Chief among these Disguises may be reckoned our Terms of
Art, the Cant of Learning, that makes Trifles Mysteries, and obscures even
common Sense, the rise whereof, one may justly say, is all Hypocrisy; we would
magnify our Reasoning, and we would rather, like Gipseys, be shrewd for our
Gibberish, than nothing.

So for our Distinctions also; how preposterous it is to set up Terms of Art
paramount to Sense; Terms to Sense ought to sit like Clothes to the Body,
Usefully and Ornamentally; but never so as to cramp its motion; So, What a
Senceless thing it is to Explicate by Distinction that, that is obvious to every
Reason? An admirable way to reduce Learning to Studied Ignorance and Trifling,
but the only course to divert the real growth of Wisdom.

For my part, Words are my Counters, and I make my own Criticisms on them;
surely if a Notion make me wrest a word a little, Terms may well bear a
compliance to Arts: If besides the weight of Sense, you bind an Author to the
nice and endless Criticisms of Words, you are unreasonable; if my Meaning be
good therefore, surely you may well enquire a little into my peculiar Sense of
Words, and then you leave me a freer liberty for Invention, and to digest my
Matter.

Nor were even the Teaching of Arts and Sciences in this matter difficult
neither, were they but reduced from Pedantry, a little time would suffice;
while it is the Weight and Formality of our Rules, that not only ruins the
Perfection of our Ideas, but obstructs their Communication also. Thus, what but
this has made Cornelius Agrippa and many others rayl at their vanity in
General; not that I think them in the Right neither; for surely, that Abusus
tollit usum is a most Barbarous Maxim, and we should rather Reform Wisdom,
than fling her quite aside for it.

So amongst the rest, one of the greatest Blemishes of Learning is, that Men
have made her stoop to Trifles; so that when a Man comes and expects to find
something, as it were Divine, instead of Philosophy, he is entertained with
their Picking of Straws, Notions so idle, and yet so particular and superfinely
nice, that they seem rather designed for petty Jugling-Tricks, to puzzle idle
Wits withal, than to be of any real use or benefit.

And from whence but hence comes that common, but too true Reflection, that the
most exquisite Folly is made of Wisdom spun too fine; and we are never made so
ridiculous by the Qualities we have, as by those we affect to have; and indeed
one may justly add, that Pedantry is the very Plague and Contagion of Learning,
that diverts and mortifies all good Parts, with the pretense of assisting them.

'Twere an Heroic Act therefore, would some Prince dissolve these Cobwebs in
our Voluminous Rubbish Libraries; and by a select Committee, collect, perfect,
gell'd, and reduce them into a manageable and useful form: I should rejoice,
could this my little Rationale be subservient to so excellent a purpose: But,
alas! I am afraid this is a matter we must rather range under the desideranda
studii, than really expect.

And, in truth, the Fault is rather in the Will than the Understanding; alas!
Men will not reduce their Sciences to Purity, and to Sincerity and Truth, their
Prejudices will not let them; they are afraid of the Light, because their Deeds
are Evil. Our Sciences indeed ought to repair the pure Image of God that we
have lost, and they would too, did we pursue them right; but we make use of
them only to lead our selves into greater Darkness.

You see therefore I have the Fire of the greatest Charity to spur me on
herein; nor is there any difficulty to demonstrate the usefulness of my Design:
How many ingenious Men would not only have been good Scholars, but exceeding
serviceable to their Country also, were but Learning to be achieved with a due
case; whereas, as it is now, in a despair, they leave it to a pack of Perverse
and Wrangling Sophisters to make their ends of it, while Mankind suffers
equally by their Villainy and Ignorance?

Like a good Physician; An honest Man cannot pretend to that Knowledge he has
not; while the Quack, that knows little or nothing, will Swear you, he is
infallible: the one, if you converse him, shall acquaint you, Learning is at
her Perfection; whilst the other modestly shall let you know, that his
industrious Labors have found it imperfect; nay, so far, that he questions
almost in Conscience, whether he may use the little Skill of his Profession.

So if you examine Men of integrity, the common Idea of the Arts and Sciences,
as they now stand, is a Sea of Learning, and hardly ever to be Fathomed;
they will tell you, Our Books run in Formal Tracks in Quest of them, but never
take care of their full and true Reasoning; that is a Gulf that few or none
have been so hardy as to dive after.

And yet even this has not discouraged me; I have resolved to hint at least, at
the Leading Substance of all Arts and Sciences, not only toward the better
completing a Body of Wisdom, but that I may be the better able to Censure what
is impertinent in all. I hope my Reader will excuse me therefore, if when I see
a Science drawn even Cobweb-fine, I enquire her Merits, as what portion of our
Memory, or Judgment she really deserves; and that we may no longer imprudently
squander away our pains in dividing Fractions, and Atoms to Infinity.

Nor need a Man be accused of Satyr, to say, almost all our Sciences are
Pedantry; indeed Science and Wisdom ought to be really one; but as Learning is
now degenerated, it is as unnatural as uneasy; and he that will reduce it to
its full power and substance, must envigorate it with brevity, and by docking
it from its superfluous Pedantry.

In truth, it is the Sphere of Wisdom only to give a general and clear Idea, and
a Universal Prospect of the Sciences; fully to trace their nice particulars,
were not only to be tedious and volumnious, but to cloud your clear and
brighter leading Truth; whereas the general and leading Ideas, well fixed, will
lead, of course, the lesser Corollaries. When a Prince gives an Ambassador
Instructions, he only gives him General Orders; and even so Wisdom, whom she
enlightens, she Teaches General Precepts; and Accidents, as too many for
Instruction, for fear of a greater Confusion she leaves to Discretion.

To be short; Both Arts and Sciences are then only good, when they are useful;
when they Answer to our Service, and the Circle of Creatures about us; and even
as a Watch, though it have Wheels, yet if the Teeth are not fit, and placed apt
for Motion, is good for nothing: So Arts and Sciences not disposed for
Practice, become, not only a Burden, but an idle Evil; nay, and indeed, as
Piety is the only Rule for Arts, so, whatever is purely curious, is evil also:
And what shall we say then to those, who Write Volumes about Genealogies, and
whole Libraries of Notions purely Speculative? Do they not rather deserve an
House of Correction, than a Reward for their Encouragement?

As Hobbs well Notes, we have now but one true and real Science, to wit, the
Mathematics, that begins well, lays down Principles sure, and proves its self,
as it proceeds; and yet not, but that were other Arts and Sciences managed, as
they should be, we should not let their Principles neither be so precarious as
they are; but, founding them on Undoubted Truths, give them a certainty, at
least, near equal to Demonstration.

Nor is this little Cant less pernicious in our Languages and Schools, than our
Sciences; I may add almost to turn our Reason to Madness. If Ovid does but cry,
Omnia vincit amor, though the Sense and Words were but worthy of a Schoolboy;
yet straight, by Pedant Spectacles, we are Ravished by an Elaborate and
delicate Adage, with a lofty and incomparable style, and purity of Language;
nay, and a Mystery shall supply the Sense, rather than fail; and, as if the
Sentence were delivered Personally by some God, and Mortals durst do no other
than commend it.

And thus also, Who can Write a Poem, but he must straight invoke the mighty
Nine, the Muses, and by and by, we must have some Heathen Gods, Bacchus, Mars,
Vulcan, or some one or other to Agrandize our Style, when, in truth, the surer
Reason why they are brought in, is not so much in Conceit of the Elegancy, but
that they are as lazy Topics to supply the imperfection of our Invention.

But in Reality, What is it but to drive away Richer Notions from our Heads, to
fill up our Discourses with such Formalities of the Furies, as Fatal Sisters,
and the Graces, etc. we were pardonable, did we do like Hackney-letter
Scriveners, who Write all Epistles in one Form, for that were to confess a
Downright honest plain Sense: but we forsooth would strive to be Elegant, and
to Charm the World by our Wits, when, at the same time, we ride none but the
Hackny-fancies of Thousands of years standing.

So, our Gods, Victory, Music, and such Hieroglyphical Statues and Emblems,
are fit enough to set out the Great Mock-Prince at Versailes; but to imagine
them Learning, or to think to get much out of their Story or Moral, surely is
an impertinency too great for a Philosopher; or, at best, if we must value this
petty Sapientia veterum; Cannot we take the Substance of the Advice, and spurn
away the little fairy Stories of their Gods.

Nor do I think it a less Vanity, though more common, that Men, at every turn,
must confirm what they say, with Stanza's from Virgil, etc. to make Men think
they are skilled in the Poets; Alas! What is my Opinion the better for
bringing sententiously every Man's Fancies to support what I Write? I say, let
every Man's Work stand and fall by Reason, and by the mere dint and force of
Justice, Sincerity, and Truth.

So in Sciences also; What are your common little formal Analysses, wherewith
they are Patched up, but Pedantry? And what your little set, and cramp Forms in
them, but so many Mysteries and Blinds, to keep the Understanding from Truth?
it is true indeed, such trifles hardly deserve to be taken notice of; and yet
even trifling, when it appears in Formality and Method, deserves a Censure,
nay, and that even to a Ridicule, lest at Weak times they prevail upon us, and
by their mere Speciousness bias our Judgments; and yet not that they deserve
to be Carp'd at, or Answered, so much as Laughed at.

I have perused Alsted's long Enciclopaidion, sincere it is true, but besotted
to all the little forms of Pedantry: there you have even all Mechanism reduced
to Sciences; indeed Arts infinite, and Definitions and Niceties without end: in
his Method seemingly short, yet too full for a ready recourse; nay, so
Voluminous with Distinctions, Glosses, Philosophic Notes and Quotations, that
to peruse him orderly, would, at least, require two years Work: And, is this,
think you, a fit Body of Wisdom for use?

Nay, I will say more for Alsted, though he handles all Subjects in General,
yet in most particulars he is so excellent, that I know few single Treatises
that exceed him, even at their own Mark; but especially in his Rhetoric; and
yet for all that, they that can bear Pedantry in Piecemeal, will be even sick
when they peruse his Mass of it, though never so Correct.

To be short; his heaps of Analysses's, and his incoherent Florilegiums, would
even Distract a Man to Comprehend, or reduce them to use: I would as soon think
to reduce the Ocean, as to bring in Order every one of his little Notions:
Indeed, a Wisdom so nicely pursued in an Angel were somewhat, but in a Man,
it is as if we would try to carry a Mountain on our backs, besides the
Impertinency of it in a great many Parts: What, if a Melancholy Genius,
Hag-ridden by an Art or Science, dwells, and raises Castles in the Air on it,
Must I be bound to follow the Dance of his Frenzy?

Nor would I be thus Uncharitable to quarrel at the Body of Learning, had I
not, at the same time, essayed to make it more perfect; but now I hope I may be
excused, that I endeavor to display its giddy confusion: Alas! What a Scene
it is to see? here lies one Man confounded and sinking into Sceptism; another
satiated like Cornelius Agrippa; sits down and spews up all that he has Read
again, because he cannot digest it: Another Rails at, and Undervalues all,
because it is so Intricate he cannot reach it.

Hence nothing in the World confounds Wisdom like Pedantry; nay, and when Men
are once seasoned with it, it is as hard for them to unlearn it, as it is to
learn what is Real Knowledge; nay, to root out a rotten Leven of Principles,
and to rectify formal Errors, is more difficult than to dive into Simple
Knowledge; Natural Folly is bad enough in Man, but when he has got Letters and
Sciences to maintain his Madness, his Frenzy is intolerable.

But, alas! I am afraid, after all, I Write in vain; Men are so bewitched to
the borrowed Counterfeit Ornaments of Learning, that when the Devil Pedantry is
cast forth, they will be even offended at the Innocent Simplicity of Wisdom,
and slav'd to their old Pageantry, they will not be able to relish, even
Substance, without their old Forms.

Men delight to continue in the Maze they are Educated in, they hate to come to
the Light of Truth; So that I may justly say, this One Accursed Knot of
Pedantry has baulked all the Improvements and Amendments of Learning: So that
when Men have once laid this rotten Foundation, because they are unwilling to
bestow the pains to New-lay it, as Wisdom and Folly can never Piece together,
so they run, like Sheep in a Flock. I have known Men following Meditation, hit
of Truth exactly; but Pedants, like Wild-geese, follow one another in Trains,
for fear of losing themselves; the Reason is, they have not Truth, nor any
other Method to keep themselves in a Body, but to tread in one another steps
only.

And hence all those that have pursued the Natural Powers of Reasoning
sincerely, have even done Wonders; whilst Pedants, sneaking Pedants, whatever
blind Path the first happens to enter, you shall see Ingenious Men, and even
Men of Parts, afterward make up the Specious Train of Fools.

Nay, and I do not know whether I may not justly add, that as such Blunderers
wander on, our Learning as we generally have it now, rather corrupts and
disables, than helps or assists a Wise and Active Life of Employment: and I
think, the Turks are the only Wise Men in this, in rejecting all our petty
Sciences, since they are clogged so far with Artful Vice.

And, to shut up all; Whence but from hence is it, that one cries Learning is
infinite, and will trouble himself to know nothing: A Canter comes, and will
only know Christ; he Rails at Archimedes for Dying in a Study; as if Man were
not made to be Charitable and Serviceable to his Country, as well as to Worship
God; and so all have Racked against one Rock or other, and not one in a Million
has had the Courage to reach after the Haven of a True Humane Competency, or
Perfection of Knowledge.

Of PITY.
WHat is Pity, but the sense of our own Miseries in another Subject; while we
lament others, only to engage them to succor us on the like Occasion: Surely
Pity therefore, for the most part, is but as a good turn done beforehand to
our selves.

And thus, alas! an Hypocrisy is in all our Afflictions; we lament our dead
Friend, But why? we weep for our selves; we bewayl the loss of our Pleasure,
and Esteem, in the Person Deceased; So that I may truly say of most of our
Tears, that they fall for them that shed them.

At best, we are apt to respect the Misfortune more than the Cause or Person;
the sad Spectacle prevails on us, and we Weep as Men Laugh, or Yawn for
Company: But, deserves such a Pity as this then to be called a Virtue?

So, some Weep to get the Reputation of a Tender Heart, others to avoid the
Shame of not Weeping, or to be Weep'd for again, while others aspire at Glory,
through an Eminent and Immortal Grief; away with all these Deceits.

Give me the Friendship that is not so weak as to be Soft-hearted, that has a
tenderness as Lasting as Moderate for me: if I Dye, yet let my Friend be happy;
Can his Anxiety bring me back from the Grave again?

We can easily hear of others misfortunes, when at a distance from us; nay, and
time abates the greatest of our proper Griefs; And why should we then, either
through Weakness, or Hypocrisy, support that Concern and Passion that is
manifestly so unaccountable and unreasonable?

Of PARDON.
HAs my Brother offended me? 'twas one he took for me; he is misinformed of me;
And, What shall I leave no room for his Misunderstanding? No surely, I will
have Mercy to the last: what shall I Condemn, where I am not sure that God does?

Nay, nor is it less Christianly and Generous, than Prudent, to Pardon our
Enemy: Christ could say, even on the Cross, Father forgive them, they know not
what they do. And it makes Men Desperate, while we leave them no hopes of
Forgiveness.

Besides, Is it not Cowardice, either to have Malice, or seek for Security
through Vicious Means? Have I Rivals? I have Society then worthy of my self.
Have I Enemies? let my very good Behavior reduce them to an esteem of me.

But shall we forgive no body that offends us, either through surprise or
mistake? Surely, then we shall no sooner forgive our selves than others. St.
Peter denied his Master, and St. Paul was a great Persecutor, and yet both the
greatest Apostles.

Certainly, God the Prototype may be our best of Examples in this. I will have
mercy therefore to the last, but I will not destroy my Justice by passing by
the Injuries I have received without Repentance; but who shall charge his
Brother on mistakes?

To forgive before Repentance, indeed is never to take offense; if such had
been Christ's Doctrine, why should he have added, That if our Brother offend
us, we should tell the Church of him? and that if on that he repent not, he be
to us as an Heathen or a Publican.

I may add, in this it is to be harmless as the Dove, and wise as the Serpent,
to guard our selves from known ill men; and yet, were mine Enemy the bitterest
Villain on Earth, I would not only love him, but trust him again, were I
assured of his Conversion.

But shall I pardon out of necessity, or save a Murderer to cut my Throat?
alas! it is Cowardice, not pardon, to pretermit without Repentance.

To pardon in general is to encourage Vice; while there are Laws indeed, I will
pass by Revenge, but the least escape of due punishment is unjust; and how can
we forgive, where Mankind has the right of Vengeance against a Villain?

Christ bids us indeed, to part with our Coat, and to go two Miles where
compelled one, but to regulate a contentious Claim, and to preserve Peace, and
not to destroy either Property or Justice.

So the same Gospel that bids us love our Enemies and forgive our Persecutors
withal, forbids us casting Pearl before Swine, and not flying from City to
City to avoid them: But do I fly my Persecutor, while I repose too dangerous a
Trust in him?

To be short, I love my worst of Enemies; he shall not want the common Dues of
Humanity from me; nay, and I forgive him too, as to private Malice and Revenge;
but I owe to my Self and Family, to sue for Reparation for the Injury he has
done me.

Nay, and if I have Reparation, I have but my own again; indeed, if I sue for
Trifles, I have Malice, and I forgive not my Brother: but in weighty Injuries,
I am no more obliged to pass by my amends, than to trust him that deceived me
again.

Of RHETORIC.
Rhetoric is the Art of speaking delightfully, and pretily tickling and
pleasing men's Passions by our Discourse; its Instruments are quaint, active,
and moving Figures and Modes of Speech, but the greatest Skill lies in managing
them, sometimes lowering our selves, and sometimes again raising a more lively
Imagery to continue always in the same strain; be it what it will, at least
cloys and satiates, if not lulls the Auditors attention asleep.

And hence, we should have a graceful Embroidery, not a daubery in Expression;
the Crisis of an Affection should be gently touched, and not over-worded, lest
we corrupt it. The best Mean in this case therefore indeed were, to intermix
Sentences; the first material, the second only diverting and circumstantial;
the first weighty and deliberate, the second easy and voluptuous; and thus to
continue through the whole Speech. For why should we pall the edge and sense of
what we intend to recommend? and yet even in this I would not be superfluous
neither.

True Eloquence consists in saying all that ought to be said, and nothing but
what ought to be said, and in giving every Sentiment a several Tone of Voice,
Mien, and posture of the Body, which is proper to it: Nay, I may add, it is this
Agreement that makes good or bad Comedians; and other persons please or
displease us in their Discourse: And thus there is an Eloquence in the Eyes,
and the Air of the Person, which persuades as much as that of words; and there
is as much Elegance in the Tone of the Voice, as in the choice of words
themselves.

The common Error in Rhetoric, is to make every Quirk in Speech a Figure; now
the best method is, to have a few and choice Figures, Precepts sufficient to
adorn our Speech, and yet not to burden our Use or Idea: So for our speaking, a
composed Discourse by Memory may have a more set and formal style than another;
but it will want much of the lively coherence of a Discourse delivered
Extempore; the one commands all the helps of Invention which happen during the
Discourse, whilst the other, besides the insipidness of Formality, quite cutts
off all Advantages that of nature.

To be short, a Man would no more use himself always to repeat a Form, than he
would to walk with a Staff; when I am either too young or too old, I will
support my feeble parts with props: but when I am Adult, tho I will never speak
without a condign deliberation, yet will I not too far confine my Speech
neither: I will remember my Method and Analysis, but I will not manacle mine
Imagination; I will rather with a generous Freedom, keep it ready against any
new Emergency.

Of Delivery.
And even so for my Delivery also, I will not think to excel by Loudness; were
I in a Dispute, should I be willing to put the Crisis of my Controversy on
scolding, an Expedient excellent for him that is foolish or in the wrong, but
madness in a wise or good Man? Indeed, an Emphasis sometimes answers to a rise
and fall in Music, and carries a kind of Charm on men's Passions, but a
continued Baulling can have no Original or Sourse from Wisdom.

Men are like Violins; if you strike the Note right in one, the other
immediately answers you, and the Affections and Passions move together with the
Music; but if you lay too much Emphasis on your Words, and more than the
Affection will bear, what do you do but viciate your Delivery to a Cant? A Man
may have a zeal without knowledge, as well in Wisdom as Religion.

By the same reason also, it is not good to be short or abrupt in our Speeches,
as Loquacity is, like a noysom Fistula in the mind; So short Speeches are like
Stabs, and seem by their fierceness and quickness too near a kin to fire:
Besides, as by a long Familiarity and deadness of Speech, we level our selves
too much to Censure, by abating too far the edge of Men's Respects; so by a
Speech too abrupt and short, we let men answer us before they duly weigh the
deference and esteem they owe to us, and the Truths we deliver.

Above all therefore, we ought to keep a Mean in our Discourse, neither to let
Fancy run us a-drift from one Subject to another where ever she pleases, nor to
let our Delivery run a gallop, too swift for the care of our Thoughts (like
Schoolboys that long to be at the end of their Lesson;) but rather, as we
ought to avoid a Poynancy, so we ought to regulate our Fancy by Discretion, and
our Celerity by a due presence of Mind: Nay, is our Discourse like to be long?
It Is a pretty skill in Speech to refresh our Hearers by Pauses. Such little
Rests revive Men's apprehensions; and not only give leisure for their
Refreshments, but pre-occupy a season for their Conceptions also.

So it is of excellent use in our Discourses, to condescend to the Customs and
Capacities of our Hearers; the Vulgar admire their own Phrases, and applaud no
truth so much as what is in their own Dialect; just as when we talk to
Children, to please them, we lispe, and bring down our Voices in imitation of
theirs, to persuade them we are rather going gently to lead them, than
violently to force them on with the harsh and manly Voice of Authority; and yet
a Voice loud, clear, and distinct, is of excellent use, where we talk to men of
Courage and Judgment.

As for our Method in this matter, I think our old way of Rhetoric is well
enough: Thus, first, to begin and enquire demonstratively An sit, and when we
are fully satisfied of the reality and considerableness of our Subject, and
have satisfied our Hearers withal, then we should proceed to deliberate, Quo
modo sit, an bonum facile aut necessarium; and if bonum, an jucundum utile aut
honestum; and after we have done this regularly and perfectly, we may boldly
speak our judicially, and cry, Sic sit.

Of Persuasion.
I shall now proceed to Persuasion, in which case as it is most successful and
safe to sail with the Tide, so it is a singular Art in Persuasion, where we
find our Auditors Affections engaged against us in what we are about to speak,
first to plead for a candid Audience, and to stay the entering on our Subject,
till we have moved a convenient stream of Affection in them, to carry and
entertain our Discourse: For why should we labor in vain? And indeed, who but
one besides himself, is so hardy as to engage, when he has both the Wind of
Passion, and the Tide of Inclination to oppose him?

In truth, one may say the Passions are the only Orators, which always
persuade, they are a kind of Art of Nature, whose Rules are infallible, and
which once moved, are strong both in Hearer and Speaker; the veriest fool moved
to a true pitch of Passion, persuades more than the greatest Orator without; so
that, could men at all times command such accidental Advantages of their
Passions, they would never be without them; but the matter is, we are fearful
to do those things in Temper, that in Passion we make light of.

But to proceed a little more particularly: to persuade to a thing unknown,
first insinuate your self by things known, and and yet doubtful, and then
without Hyperboles, relating what you would have believed, urge it with a meet
confidence; and yet, taking care as you do it, first to show a due caution,
That you be not taken for a Babbler; secondly, to show your grounds for your
'diffidence, that you be not judged as credulous; and lastly, to fix all, yet
with so meet a confidence, that you be not taken for a Dissembler.

And besides this to persuade, we ought to skill how to lay hold of men's
particular Passions, and so to know to which they are most obnoxious: Thus the
Miser was cured of his Lethargy, by being made jealous and watchful of his
Gold; and thus the Milesian Virgins were cured of the Humor of hanging
themselves, by dragging the dead Bodies of the like offenders through the
streets; and thus Selenicus took away Women's gorgeous Apparel, by an order,
that no one should be allowed to be a Whore, but she that was so and so
dressed, and had such and such Attendance.

But, if you would persuade one that is obstinate, and that neither Sense nor
Arguments can immediately prevail on, straight turn your Reasoning, and seem to
follow and admire his Methods, and then by pursuing them on as his friend, run
him as at unawares on absurd consequences, and so fright him by those
Reasonings in you, that in himself he will not admit to be examined.

Thus the Mobile in a certain Common Wealth, being enraged once at the Senate,
yet voluntarily put themselves into the hands of a Friend, to be judged by
them; and he thereon advising the Mobile first to choose a new Senate for fear
of mischief, before they proceeded to the cutting off of the old one, straight
thereby he begun to show them the consequence of Upstarts; so that they
immediately agreed, to continue their old Senate on again.

And yet, as when we have not men's Passions of our sides, we must thus by
Preambles, Apologies, Preparatories, Mollifiers, and other Topics of Argument,
endeavor to root out the old Biass of men's Prejudice, and to implant a new and
truer Idea in their stead; so on the other side, when we have men's Inclinations
on our sides, we may avoid this prolixity, and begin freely, triumphantly, and
openly, or else, till we have engaged a party of thought and Passion of our
side, we are imprudent to launch too freely into the Ocean of Discourse.

And yet even in all Cases, we ought to know, how to limit our persuasions too:
Thus I would not seem too fond, lest I make men believe the interest I persuade
them to, is more mine than theirs, as appears by my concern; and yet I would
neither want Fancy nor Vigor enough to express a thing fully, nor to
illustrate what is more rare and singular to the life; but yet then, no more
than is fit; for why should I seem either so interested or poetical, as to
deaden the Edge of my persuasion.

Nay, and tho abruptness generally be a Vice, yet sometimes little hints are of
excellent use in Persuasions; it sets men to beat out our Notions in
themselves, and they are ever more fond of Bratts of their own Brain than
others: Besides, that setting men so upon such a Scrutiny, makes them engage in
a Party for us, and nothing obliges men more than to let them seem to be their
own contrivers.

So further, it is good to know the force of every Argument and Figure: Thus for
instance, a Repetition or Recommendation by Figures and Allegories, can command
the Affections, and charm the Passions; but only Reason without Art, and with
Sincerity and Truth, are able to move a durable and steady Resentment and
Courage: Indeed, Figures are but for Ornament, and he mistakes their very end,
that makes them Substance, or that disguises his Discourse by using them too
far. Ornaments are to recommend and beautify, and not to blind or deform, if we
have not skill enough to apply our Ornaments therefore, we had better neglect
them altogether.

But above all Ornaments and Figures in Speech, there are none so useful as
Parables, Fables, Metaphors, and Allegories; when Reasoning will do no good,
when the mind is quite blind and deaf with Prejudices, Allegories and Parables
can revive it, and by Paralels confirm it. Thus Nathan convinced David's sin in
Vriah, and humbled him, and brought him to Repentance, by the Parable of the
poor man's Lamb, when the bare sense of the Action alone could never do it.

But indeed after all, as I have said, no Rhetoric is like Honesty, and no
Speech like Reason; if we have Truth on our side, that is all, and enough, if we
take but care to illustrate that sufficiently; only this we ought to remember
in prudence, to let our last Words be most forcible, as they are most likely to
be of the most lasting Impression: And indeed, to leave truth and follow
Colors too much, is like Aesop's Dog, by catching at the Shadow to loose the
Substance.

I will not rely therefore on Fancies or Figures of Speech; but if I use them,
it shall be as by the by; but my main Weapon shall be clear sense and reason;
if men have either any judgment or truth, my very Sincerity shall force their
Attentions; and while Flowers only dally to delight the mind; by a lively
apposite Expression with Notion, I Will even strike to the Quick.

So it is an Error in Persuasion also, to multiply Reasons, and aim at Conquest
by Numbers; the best arguing is from few Topics and from general Heads, the
retreat of the Discourse the easier, and the Management the better; nay, and
the Memory and Passions of the Hearers are the more easily captivated by it,
whilst as for Figures they may be used but seldom: it is better to be regarded
for Matter than Form, Reason than Words, and yet it is not convenient neither
to let our sense want a suitable Dress.

Parts of Discourse.
But as it is the misfortune of a great many persons to make a good Cause
ridiculous by their ill Proceeding, so it is good to know also, what order is
decent in an Oration; and if it be written, to mark it as it proceeds, for the
greater clearness with your Topics in the Margent: Nay, and not only so, but
to be sure not to neglect the Cogent Topics of Recommendation, as praising
your Judges, or at least assuring your self, that they have so much Honor,
that they would not hear you, if they were not resolved withal to give you an
impartial Sentence.

And thus in an orderly Discourse, I may say, there ought to be five parts:
First, A Preface pertinent and short, to open your design, and to prepare the
minds of the Hearers. Secondly, The Narrative true, and well circumstantiated
to instruct them. Thirdly, A Confirmation, and that solid, to convince them.
Fourthly, A Refutation nervous and strong, to refute all Colors for them. And
Fifthly and lastly, A Conclusion pathetick, and forcive to move them.

But if we extend our Discourse beyond an Oration, that is, if we write a Book,
then a more perfect Method ought to take place, and we ought to proceed by the
exactest Rules of a complete Genesis; our very method ought to be so
conspicuous as to supply the part of an Index; and every Clause, Sentence,
Chapter, and part of our Discourse, whether greater or less, ought to be framed
so naturally, as to fall into a beautiful Body, and joint its self, so as to be
able even actually and orderly to force the Readers Conviction.

And when I consider this, I cannot but reflect, that had men either any
Reverence for themselves or others, were they cautious of their own Reputation
or others Trouble, they would not thrust out their shapeless Cubbs upon the
World as they do, but would lick them into some order before they did it; when
alas! were some Discourses but dissolved to their first Principles by
Analysis, what would they contain too often? scarce a Chapter, nay, or a
Sentence to the purpose, that the Authors seem to be blind, or they could never
publish what they do.

What you enter their Book, their Title speaks you fair, and makes you fancy
they will perform as well as promise; but when you come to peruse their Substance
and Solidity, you find your self fooled and never the wiser for the Subject;
and our Author who has a world of Humor and Fancy, when may be not three
grains of Digestion, gives you a broadside of Maggots; and if he confounds and
mazes your Reason by them as bad as his own, he is satisfied and is wise in his
own Conceit, because he is a fool in Company.

I shall add no more, but that our Fable and Emblem Writers deserve no better
Censure: It Is true, an Example or Metaphor occasionally in Precepts, is of
excellent use; but it is an Elaborate way of making Learning intricate and
confused, to turn her in pursuit of such laborious and disorderly Excursions
and Trifles, as far from the clear sight of Knowledge, as a Cloud, or a Maze,
or a Veil.

Of Invention,
I proceed to Invention in Rhetoric: Now to help that; our best Method is, to
have recourse to General Topics; Examples whereof I shall give you as follows.

Topics Intrinsic.
1. Definition. 2. Destribution into parts. 3. Etymology. 4. Conjugates. 5.
Kind, Genus species. 6. Form. 7. Similitude. 8. Dissimilitude. 9. Contraries.
10. Adjuncts. 11. Antecedents. 12. Consequences. 13. Repugnances. 14. Causes
Efficient Material Formal Final Instrumental
15. Effects. 16. Comparison. 17. Possibility. 18. Bonum Honestum. Vtile.
Jucundum.



Topics Extrinsick.
1. Prejudication. 2. Report. 3. Laws. 4. Oaths. 5. Torture. 6. Witnesses. 7.
Scripture. 8. Learned Men. 9. Circumstance. Time. Place. and Person
Predicamentals, as 10. Substance and Person. 11. Quantity, and Demonstration.
12. Quality ordinary, or not. 13. Relation. 14. Action. 15. Passion. 16. Place.
17. Time. 18. Situation. 19. Habit.



Of Figures.
Figures of Rhetoric are either in Words or Sentences; the Usual are as
follows; Figures of Words.
Metaphor, as Vir gregis. Irony, as O^ bon^ vir. Epizeuxis, as Vicimus,
Vicimus. Anaphoras, as Nobis voluptati, nobis solatio. Epistrophe, as Ibimus,
pugn^bimus, triumphabimus. Epanalepsis, as multa promittis, prestare teneberis
multa. Climax, hoc animum, animus virtutem addit. Epanados, Non vivo ut edam,
sed edo ut vivam. Polyptoton, as qui memorat, quod ille meminit.
Conversion. Complexion. Conduplication. Disjunction. Equality of Cadence
Numbers. Adjunction. Gradation. Paranomasia. Repetition. Synonime. Syncohdoche.


Figures of Sentences are,
Augmentation, He Beat him, he Murdered him, he Crucified him. Apostrophe, as
audite O cali, vos eritis mihi testes. Concession, as sit humilis ortu, at est
probus. Correction, tacebo? Imo loquar. Diminution, He Beat him, he Fillup'd
him, he Touched him. Exclamation, as O Tempora, O Mores! Interrogation, Sicoine
fieri opportet? Preoccupation, dicat aliquis, sed regero. Prosopopeia, as Egone
Sol luceo, ut vos dormientes altum stertetis? Reticence, as plus possum dicere,
sed de his tacebo.
Allegory. Antithesis. Communication. Deprecation. Distribution. Dubitation.
Ethopeia. Expolition. Hypotiposis. Imprecation. Interpretation. Irony. License.
Preterrition. Sermocination. Subjection. Sustentation. Transition.


Thus, you see, I have given you here a Catalogue of the more Eminent Figures
of both sorts; but I have not given Examples but of some few that I thought
more Useful: indeed, whoever peruses Alsted's Enciclopaidion, will see such a
multitude of Figures, that they are not only almost without number, but that
there is not a Quirk in Speech scarce, but what that by one Author or other, is
reduced to some Figure: So that indeed this Exuberancy now seems to require
some Limitation.

Lastly, For the use of such Figures, I shall only say this, one would Read
them sometimes cursorly, as so many several Patterns to form one Speech, and as
so many Moulds to be committed to our Memories in Reading, to shape our
Utterance and Delivery by; but to think otherwise, to force our Thoughts just
to such a precise Form, or Cut, is to make them more unacceptable in being
unnatural, then all the Ornaments of Art can add to them.

Of JVDGMENT.
WHatever intuitive Knowledge, or Divine Ideal Truth Adam had, his Posterity
are forced to Plow the Soul for Wisdom, as well as the Earth for Fruits.

We must track Truth step by step, and weigh as well Ideas as Propositions to
attain her: He that takes Truth by the Gross, or Jumps into her without a due
Comparison of things, at least knows not in Judgment, whether he is right or
wrong.

The true Judgment is Mathematical, Reason's the Scale, and Propositions are
the things weighed, while Judgment, like Justice, favors the heavier Scale.

Where there is most Consideration, therefore there are likely to be most
Propositions, and consequently the more assured Decision of Judgment; while to
Judge without Propositions forethought, is like weighing with the Scales empty,
and Shooting at the Mark Blindfold.

As for the Errors of Judgment, they are either want of Consideration, or
Irresolution: The inconsiderate Man leaves all to happy Chance; while the
Irresolute is like a ruffled Skein of Silk.

In Truth, Judgment, like an Army, ought to March slow, with full Trains of
Imaginations, and not a Concatenation of Thought ought to be unconsulted for
fear of the Ambushes of Error.

To conclude, were Poets as happy in holding the Scale, as in their sprightly
and vigorous Sallies of Fancy, Poets assuredly would have the best Judgments,
and accordingly make the best Philosophers: but our experience shows us the
contrary, and where they fail.

Of HAPPINESS.
FOr all the difference of Estate and Quality among Men, there is
notwithstanding such a common allay of good and evil, that all, in the main,
are equally happy.

Felicity, alas! is in Content and Opinion, not the things we Possess. Thus
it is what I Love, and not what another Conceits, that makes me happy.

And thus, indeed, what but our Pride makes us Miserable, and restlesly
Ambitious? Our great concern, in truth is, to show, that a Man of Desert is
unfortunate.

It Is not to be disputed, but the Blessings of Health, Wealth and Friends are
valuable; But are they comparable in the making of us happy, to Virtue and
Content?

The best of such Enjoyments are casual, momentary, and disgusted by Conscience
and Passions; But can any thing rob us of Virtue?

Pleasures enjoyed with innocence indeed, are real; But can there be any
satisfaction with regret, to catch at the baits of Sin and Vice.

Nay, were there no Hell, the Epicure should be moderate for his Gusts sake; so
that we are doubly brutish, to pall our Palates by Luxury.

The Virtuous enjoy Pleasures truly, and can thank God for the Refreshment,
while neither Satiety nor Passion annoys them.

Besides, a virtuous Soul, I may say, is as a Rock against the Waves and Storms
of the World, while she looks down with pity on Giddy and Mudling Mankind below.

I want to Coach and Dainties; And what then? Are not Walking and Temperance
wholsomer? But Oh, I love Fine Clothes; And what am I not ashamed to be so like
a Peacock?

Prithee Friend tell me; Can thy Gold or Purple keep out Diseases? Or thy
Guards, Garrisoned in Iron, repel bold fears and despair?

Virtue, indeed, as she is indifferent against such Trifles, so is she hardened
to evil; Virtue turns all Misfortunes to Martyrdom.

What though mine Enemy Rage? Can he move a foot beyond Providence? Does he
intend to kill me? And cannot I rejoice to be so soon with God?

Does he torment me? And have I not God and a brighter Crown of Martyrdom to
support me? Nay, or can my despondency relieve me?

I will allow a Man Groans to relieve his Spirit, and an honest Submission to
appease his Enemy; But shall I surrender my sincerity to him, and give him
opportunity to destroy both Soul and Body too?

But, alas! thou art Grieved to Dye so soon; And what art thou afraid to be
with God? The Apostle could desire to be dissolved: And, Art thou, on the
contrary, so unwilling, as to repine at the call of his Providence?

Surely, faithfully to love God, and observe his Laws, therefore as they are
the great end of Man, so are they his greatest and best Methods to happiness
also; and in which case, the quicker and sharper our passage in prospect, the
more desirable; without we think there is no God, or future State, to reward us
in what we do and suffer.

Of PRESENCE of MIND.
WHat good will all the Precepts in the World do whilst a Man wants his
Presence of Mind, the necessary clue to lead him through them.

Surely our Senses ought always to keep due Sentinel, and our Understandings as
readily to attend their summons: Can he Fence well that is not on his Guard?
Archimedes died for being too busy to give an Answer.

Carelessness and Disattention therefore undoubtedly are the Daughters of
Folly: Certainly the Judgment ought to be in readiness for every new Object
that approaches. I may add, What is Madness but such a Debauch of Thought, to a
greater degree, and when an Idle Soliloquy disjoynts the whole Reasoning of the
Man?

We ought therefore to avoid all such Violence of thought, as Poison; at least
the Plow of Thought, Clogs and Cuts but heavily, that is never sharpened by rest.

Nay, even for the very unseemliness one would avoid such flurts in Reasoning;
for surely it is as disagreeable to others, as pernicious to our selves.

And yet after all, certainly there are Diseases in the Mind, as well as the
Body; and after our best endeavors, our Sense will slacken, and our Styles
vary, do what we can: What! Are we not Men?

Of SECRETS.
THe Mind, like the Body, exposes its self, by appearing naked; it discovers
its weaker parts, and lies more liable to Injuries; undoubtedly therefore
Secrets ought to be embraced as Armor, and admired as Sovereign Prudence; but
yet then, we ought to remember also, that we cannot be too wary in them; our
Looks often speak as well as our Tongues, and we must be careful our Nakedness
appear not through the little Vail of its Clothes.

So, though Secrecy and Silence thus be undoubtedly Virtues; Dissimulation,
whether in Words or Actions, is the furthest from it imaginable: Dissimulation
is an act with an intent to deceive, a downright Lie; Dissimulation is the weak
art of those, who have not judgment enough to manage a concealment.

As for the difference between Simulation and Dissimulation, it appears in the
Old Latin Verse, Quod non est simulo, dissimuloque quod est; their Benefits
are these,

First, They lay Opposition asleep.

Secondly, They leave a room for Retreat.

Thirdly, By their Lying, they draw out Secrets.

Their Mischiefs are;

First, They spoil business through Fearfulness.

Secondly, They bar the Assistance of others.

And, Lastly, They take away all trust and belief, while, as for secrecy, it
has all the Prudence, and none of the Vice of either of them.

But to return; if we would keep a Secret, we are bound, in pain of
Indiscretion, to discern who we trust with it; indeed, How can we hope another
should keep our Secrets, if we cannot keep them our selves; So we ought also to
stand in Guard, even of our Servants, and not to make others jealous of us, by
being too busy; on the one side Cardinal Richleiu took care wisely to turn away
that Man that he found looking into his Letters; and, on the other side, How
can we expect that others should not enquire after, and guess at our concerns,
when we seem to busy in our jealous inquisitiveness at theirs?

But, besides this General prudence of Secrecy; Secrecy is a Sacred Obligation,
even in Discourse also: thus, when Two Discourse, they render each other mutual
Depositors or Thoughts, and which they trust one another withal; so that, let
it be that we require Secrecy, or not, in such a Case, our Discourse is always
as a Pawn, which ought never to be disposed of but according to the intentions
of him that trusted it.

And yet the Rule of Secrets seems to be this also; though what I am told, I am
bound to keep as a Secret; yet if I knew it before, that cannot make that a
Secret to me, that was none before; though with regard to the Relator, that I
make not him the Author, it is, and yet not, I fear, but that this Liberty has
been often abused; and many that have not known a Secret before, yet have
pretended they have, to salve their Reputations in breaking it.

But then, it is an undoubted Exception from all the Laws and Obligations of
Secrecy, when any one acquaints us with a wicked or criminal design; for
Friendship loses its Obligation in Wickedness, and there can be no tie between
God and Belial; a Man ought therefore to have wit and honesty enough to discern
of what he speaks, before he requires Secrecy, or else it is at the peril of his
Imprudence to betray his own wicked Intentions.

To be short, unless in case of these few Exceptions, when we enter into a
Discourse with a Man, we begin a Friendship with him, and which, at least,
includes the Obligation, not to abuse his confidence; now, though this
Friendship continue but for a Minute, or for an hour, year, or years, under
greater or lesser Trusts, yet the Obligation to Secrecy is still the same, and
all one, whether in an hourly, or a perpetual Friendship.

In truth, a good Christian is not only no Man's Enemy; but in this, he loves
all Mankind equally; that he shows more kindness to one than another, is from
the Providence of his Association, his outward Compact, or Friendship; but this
general tie of Humanity to Secrecy, is, what nothing can dispense with in us.

To attain Secrets.
As for the particular Methods to obtain Secrets, there are several: Thus some
have gotten them by frightning with a contrary dangerous design; and thus the
Priest that would know whether such a man frequented the Church or not, got it
out of him by accusing him of a Contempt of the Service.

So have you employed Informers to find out Secrets; and would you know whether
they deceive you or not? employ such as can have no manner of Acquaintance with
each other, and then in what they all agree, you may be assured, they are in
the right.

Some have attained a Secret by pretending, they knew in part of it already;
and thus men to save their own Bacon, jealous of others treachery, have been
the first Informers themselves.

Some, when they have not been able to attain the Secret desired, have fished
for some other, and by that tempted the persons Friends, as by Tokens to reveal
the other: And thus the Grand Seignior, by asking a Prisoner when he lay with
his Wife last? by that as with a Token, drew the Confession of the Prisoners
Guilt from his Wife.

Nor is that other Method less certain of obtaining a Secret by a Secret, for
men when they think they have possession of others Secrets, presume that they
have so much advantage of them, that they may safely trust them with their own:
And thus by Dissimulation and Trifles, sometimes the weightiest Matters have
been discovered.

Sober men you may fathom by obstinate and reproachful Controversies; by which
means their very Passions will open them, and as for their Tempers you may know
them by what they were at School; but as for Drunkards the only way to fathom
their Speeches, is to examine them by their other Frolicks, whether they have
not been for a constancy foul-mouthed or Lying, etc.

So, to know whether a suspected person be guilty or not; do but charge him
with things false and true at the same time, and you shall see it quickly by
the different manner of his Vindication; for as sound sleep, a composed mind,
and careless behavior, are great presumptions of Innocence; so you will easily
discover him as not concerned at the fictitious Forgery.

A King of France being willing to destroy a Treacherous Noble that was in
company with him among others, if he could get the consent of the rest, put
forth the Nobles Treachery in a Parable like David's Lamb; whereupon
understanding all their Resolutions, he made the Application of it as it were
by all their consents upon the Lord that offended him.

And now I have wrote thus much about the Discovery of Secrets, I shall add a
little also about the management of them, and occult Writing, and conclude.

Occult Writing.
If to be Secret be lawful, which indeed the strictest Morallist and Religious
cannot deny; for, in truth, Secrecy is one of the considerablest Branches of
Wisdom, and we are taught to be subtle as Serpents, as well as harmless as
Doves: If Secrecy I say therefore, be not only lawful, but a Virtue, besure
unsearchable ways of Writing must be of excellent advantage, since by such
occult Writing, we can communicate Secrets to whom we please, and conceal them
from every body else.

Now to enumerate the several Methods of secreting our Sense in Writing, were a
work as frivolous as endless: I take it therefore for granted, that if I
describe some of the best Methods, and leave them to be improved, altered and
changed by every man's own invention, 'twill be far better than to tire him
with all particulars; for when once the Mystery of an Art is unravelled, there
is no difficulty to copy it a Thousand ways by our own Invention.

Some make a new Alphabet, and alter only the Characters of the Letters, as
suppose I wrote English with Arabic Letters, not understood in this Country;
others alter only the signification of Letters, and use the common Characters,
as suppose I should all along write a for b. b for c. c for d, etc.

Thus for Example, were I to write the word ( and) it must be by z mc. for z
goes for a. m for n. and c. for d. being all the immediate Letters before them,
and consequently ought to take their places as so; but this method is easily
discovered by the Vowels and short Words; and yet it may be blinded too, by
inserting insignificant Letters, and multiplying the Characters of the Vowels.

Some will invent a peculiar Cant like Jipseys, which is indeed like making a
new Language; others will cover their designs in a dark Metaphor; as suppose I
treated of a Common Wealth of Bees to reflect on Government, or cited some
anitent Historical Passage to represent the present Scene of Affairs, and the
correspondence between them: And this is the method used by the Prophets in
Scripture.

Some will write with common Letters, and in common English, but alter the
placing of the Letters; thus suppose I wrote Moses said, I write the Odd
Letters in the first word, and the even Letters in the second; and so it will
be Mssad Oesi; and so I go on with every two words till I end what I write.

Others dispose every 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, or 12. successive Letters,
according to a Table of Chimes for Bells, and then divide them into words at
their pleasure; and after all to make it the more intricate, you may dispose
the words in Sentences by the Rule of such Chimes, as you did before the
Letters in the words; so that without you Key, the Table of Chimes, it is
impossible to read what you write, since at this rate by double Chimes you may
vary your Letters a Thousand, nay, I may say, Ten thousand ways, if you please.

But all or most of these ways are imperfect; for as they cannot but infallibly
breed a jealousy and suspicion, so many times they are as mischievous and
dangerous, as if they were revealed: And therefore those methods of Secret
Writing are most beneficial, that cast a Blind before Men's Eyes, and by giving
them a fair and seeming Sense to read, take away all Imagination of their being
a Secret couched under it.

Thus some will write you a common and civil Letter, but do it by the Key of an
Alphabet of Synonemas for every word; so that when you examine it by your Key,
every word in the Epistle shall give a Secret Letter, which being collected in
order, shall give you a secret Sentence; but if you read it in the ordinary and
current sense, you see a plain familiar Letter, without either doubt or
difficulty in it.

^ a g n t b h o u c i p w d k q x e l r y f m s z

Some again will write by Muscial Notes, and so make love by a Song; thus the
words shall be what you please, but the Notes shall carry the Secret: For in
this case the six Spaces or Lines shall signify the Letter you desire to write,
according to your pleasure; and the Notes of time which shall distinguish them,
being Four, ^ make just 24. the Alphabet, being multiplied by 6. the Spaces, as
above.

Note, You may prick your Notes or put them on the Line or Space at your
pleasure.

Others, will make the first word in the first line; the 2d. in the 2d. and the
3d. in the 3d. etc. to contain the Secret, while the other words in the several
lines are ingeniously contrived, with the significative words, to make a good
and common sense for the disguise sake.

Others will cut Papers in Figures, and then all that is not wrote within the
compass of such Figures, is superfluous; others will write what they would have
read with Black Ink, and reserve the Secret to be written in a by-place or
corner of the Letter, with a white Ink, etc. others again will refer through
Numbers to the Letters, or Words in a known Page and Line of a particular Book,
and so endite.

But in short, the best and least suspicious way, is to reduce your Secret to
one or two words, and then having several Keys to write it by, to intimate to
your Friend by what Key you write, by the manner of Writing your Name: And thus
you may make a few such Letters blacker or bigger than ordinary in several
lines, or make seeming accidental Blotts, and so discover your Sense.

Of COLLECTIONS.
SUrely, it can avail us nothing to quote Authors in Catalogues, and to raise
large Folio's with Recitals. What is Wisdom, if too long for use and
recollection? or what are Precepts good for, when scattered in Libraries?

Good Precepts it is true, are like Rocks and Anchors to the instability of our
Thoughts. The perfection of Virtue indeed, consists in the Uprightness of the
Will; but what is the Will without an Understanding accordingly?

Nay, what will the most excellent Understanding avail us, without agreeable
Precepts, and those ready and at hand? The best of us dose, dote, and slumber
at times; and among huge and numerous Volumes, where shall we find what we
want, unless in the Meridian of our Reason we store up Precepts for Old Age?

Alas! we have seen the force of an Extempore strain, in its imperfect Essays
toward it, often enough; we see how far the Waves of proud Fancy can reach;
nay, we are not ignorant even of what Enciclopaidians can do.

But what! Can a little whifling Treatise command Respect? Surely, a Body of
Philosophy and an Army of Thoughts much more; nay, what is even a Library, but
an undigested Rubbish, to pure and select Precepts?

Has man leisure to peruse or pursue every current of Thought nicely? Surely,
he cannot even survey all the Books that are, and are not the Extracts and
Spirits of Thoughts then, far more eligible than your flat and endless
Corollarys.

No doubt, a general Body, if so prepared, were of admirable use, the Universal
View would clear our Prospect, and lead and direct our Notions and Actions;
nay, and Error and Vice would appear through their dissonancy to the whole Body
of Knowledge.

To conclude, Reasoning like figured Silks and Clothes, is only truly to be
judged of in the whole piece, while the composition of our Precepts, like a
Garrison, should be for strength, and use only, each place defending its self,
and defended by another.

Of PRECEPTS.
THere are several methods to Virtue; but surely Precepts excel all. Can an
Harrangue make you good; and why not the Precept in short?

Examples are lively it is true, but time alas! will allay all their Emulation;
while as for the close Reasonings of Precepts, can they ever fade?

The Man's a false Proselyte that does not love Virtue for Virtues sake; and
are long Examples then comparable to brief and wholesome Precepts?

What avails it, as I have said, to have Volumes of Cautions one knows not
where to find? By Precepts I will store up Wisdom against Age; nay, I will
fortify my Virtue by Reasons impregnable, the Quintessence of Wisdom.

Our first* Thoughts are too crude for Wisdom; Nature does not give Virtue: And
it is a kind of an Art to become good. Nay, without Precepts our Wisdom is
brutish, and our Virtue, Constitution and Inclination, not judgment.

While petty Virtues sink in their Trials, Precepts will level every wrinkle
that disturbs the Tranquillity of the mind.

Pure Precepts will smell sweet, when the little Gusto's of Fancy shall fade. I
know the World love to hide their Vices under the broken Fragments of Morality;
but are not wilful Ignorance and Disobedience equal, as well in Morals as
Divinity?

Besides, Can any thing excel good Precepts? or is any thing more desirable?
Nay, is not Wisdom the Unchangable Good of God himself?

True Precepts will compose thy Spirits beyond Music, and lull thy Passions
asleep. True Precepts are a perfect Antidote to Vice, if thou but use them duly.

The true Philosophy is clear and self-evident; it leaves neither Difficulties
nor Scruples, but chears the Mind, enlightens the Understanding, and confirms
the Courage, where e're it comes.

Some admire Precepts; but why? they want Variety and Change. Alas! they want
but diverting Strains: True Precepts are one, and eternal.

Can true Virtue be ever out of fashion? Surely then, it is a defect in God,
that he is not vicious for Variety; if not, I will not be giddy in my Precepts,
lest I become giddy in my Morals also.

In truth, Is Virtue such a Trifle as to be sacrificed to Novelty and
Curiosity? or am I so wretched as to think so of her? No: let her be as
unchangable in my Breast, as she is pure and chaste in her self.

Neither Reading nor Meditating, neither Study nor Discourse, neither Passion
nor Zeal, therefore shall give me that advantage, that I will not secure by
Precepts; but then to perfect, not to change my Virtue.

To conclude, I may add, It Is even ridiculous to see what slight Passions can
discompose us, when Reason does not Rule. Surely therefore, good Precepts are
as Armor, and the only way through which to attain the Perfection of our
Nature.

Of SINCERITY.
I Am sorry, I may say too often, our heart by habit is apt to cheat our
Reasons, while our Sincerities become but as a more curious Art, to draw a
Religious Respect to what we say.

The true Sincerity is good without a witness, and can love unfashionable
Virtue? The true Sincerity never fails: Is it frail? yet at least it keeps in
the Track of Virtue.

A pure Integrity has no Reserve; she dreads not the Scrutiny of the best of
men; she will not do evil even that good may come: her Loyalty for Goodness can
serve her without either Livery or Dower.

Will thou be good therefore? let no Temptation impurify thy Will: or if thou
would be wise, let not the least Error blemish thy Judgment. Is a Castle ever
easier maintained, than when without Breaches and Disunion!

Alas! the exactly Sincere is so between God and himself only: the World has
but the Color of Integrity; The true Sincerity would not be hired from the
Paths of Virtue.

How earnestly do some men seek Excuses to be corrupt? But can we say, that man
is good, that does not wish and endeavor to be better? Surely, God and Virtue
elect by our Wills, and not by our Powers or Actions.

Pure Virtue is even in the bottom of the heart: Christ says, He that lusts
after another Wife commits Adultery with her. Indeed, why should I tantalize
my self so with Lusts, did I not love the Temptation?

When I reflect on the integrity of Seneca and Marcus Antoninus, and other
Heathens, methinks I am ashamed to hear corrupter Christians say, That such
Divine Men are damned.

Are we the better for knowing or believing only? and, Why not the Devils also,
who tremble with it? Are we rich in grace? alas! we forget that God accepted
the Widows Mite.

To be short, the true sincerity will even in this life benefit us; it leads us
to Truth, and it gives us credit; nay more, 'twill add us respect also. 'Twas
Christ's sincerity that made him speak as with Authority.

Nay our sincerity will benefit us, tho in a mistake: Thus what but Integrity
could bring St. Paul from the greatest Persecutor, to be the greatest Apostle.

Surely, both Piety and Virtue lie only in sincerity; if Action without
Intention were valuable, we should even make Bruits virtuous also. And if any
thing be Virtue, or there be any Virtue, it is mixed with sincerity; for
Sincerity is really the great and only Touchstone both of Religion and Morality.

Of VOWS and OATHS.
ALl Vows, of that which is unlawful, are void; Nor availes it in such case,
whether the thing Vowed be a greater or lesser evil, since nothing can oblige a
Man to what is really evil: it is as unlawful to tell a Lie to fulfill an Oath,
as it is to Murder a Man: And as it is impossible that God should love to have
ill done, so it is impossible that he should engage us to it, purely because we
have Vowed or Promised it.

I may add, the Nature of Good and Evil, still remains, notwithstanding the
influence of any Vow, Oath, or Promise whatsoever, and is in the eye of God and
Reason only Obligatory; and therefore according to Scripture, and the best
Casuists, it is, that it happens, that the Vows of a Servant, or Wife, may be
good in part, or void in part, as consistent with their Prior Duty; and so also
where there are two Oaths, the Prior ought only to take place.

And, in this Case, that the Superstitious Notions of Vows and Oaths have been
wrong, ought not therefore to make us to follow them: it is true, in the
Reformation, we ought to preserve Piety, and not to contemn what is really
Sacred; and yet we ought to examine matters so sincerely also, as not to leave
our selves partial, blind, or confused in the Search.

What shall not a Man pay his Debts, because he has Vowed he will not? And must
a Man Starve, or Murder himself, because he has Sworn it? This were for him to
set up a New Law in opposition to God's Sacred Law of Nature; and, by Artifice,
to subvert the most holy Will of God: And thus I may add also, Humanity and
Charity are as great Debts even as a Bond; and therefore if I Vow not to pull
off mine Hat to another, that is even void also.

Upon this therefore, I conclude, that no Vow can change our state, or bind our
liberty; to confine our selves against a prospect of Good, is an ill; and it is
the only power of a Vow to bind us to a known Duty, from a known Evil, or in a
thing indifferent; nay, if any thing be indifferent, if the confinement fret us
to the injury of Body or Mind, from that instant it becomes ill, and ceases to
obliege us as not indifferent also.

And thus a Vow may engage me to the greatest self-denial, so as consistent
with my duty, but not to the least evil, though even but of imprudence: A Vow
to fling away my Wealth into the Sea, is void; but I may well Vow all I gain to
the Poor, and yet even then I must reserve me Maintenance, and bestow it with
Discretion.

So I may bind my self from Wine and Flesh; but if so, their want impairs my
health, I must use them: And so I may bind my self from going into the Country,
till my Health, or a better service from God and my Country require it; but I
may never thereby obstruct the advancement of any greater Good or Talent: And
so, though I Vow to go to Rome, if I cannot propose some good by my Journey,
the imprudence of it makes it void, in idly neglecting my Business; and so
also, though it were but to go half a Mile, the evil is the same.

So also to serve a Man's Country in the best employ he is capable of, is every
Man's Fundamental Duty; and to neglect it, is to bury our Talents: For any Man
therefore to Vow such a Vow, as engages him from his best capacity of Serving
his Country, as to lead a Monks Life, etc. is of it self unlawful, and, ipso
facto void, as it forbids an apparent Duty, and renders us little better than
Drones in the Commonwealth we live in.

Nay, and such breaches of Oaths and Vows, in such case, like that of Corban,
are no sin; that we need not fear not to keep them, they being of themselves
void; the rash making of them indeed was a sin, but they have not the guilt of
a black and wilful Perjury, as the World too often mistakes, but rather a
rasher resolution only in them.

A False Witness is guilty of a wilful Contempt to God, and Injustice to Man:
but, in this, we have nothing more to repent of, then that we called God too
lightly to Witness to a Resolution not well weighed and understood: And, if
this were a sin, How could the Jews leave their Vows to the Law on Christ's
Converting them? Or how can the Husband break his Marriage-bond, by Divorce, as
even Christ gives leave for Adultery, and be guiltless?

So, if I make a Vow, it does not bind mine Heir; Or if as an Officer, it does
not bind me as a Private Person; So, Are you a Prince, and would you know how
far Your Parliament-Oath engages? all the Power not transferred to You remains,
the Law of Nature makes all States complete in themselves, though by Compact it
may be limited.

So also, as it is impossible to think of all necessary Conditions, as Life and
Capacity of the Parties, etc. so we must have an Implicit regard to such
Conditions, in whatsoever Vows we make; and yet on the other hand, Christ
Teaches us, That though I Swear but by my self, yet am I as much bound, as if I
Swore by God; so though I Swear by false Gods, yet my Obligation to Verity and
Sincerity is still the same.

But to return; Though there may be many things that may thus make a Promise
void, although confirmed by an Oath, witness Adultery in Marriage, etc. yet
Justice, in many Cases, will bind a Promise much stronger than a Vow, because
of the Expectance and Dependence thereon, and it is necessity in Commerce and
Conversation; and yet little pety and deliberative Promises to ones self only,
as, I Will go to London to Morrow; or, I Will buy such an Horse, have no Obligation
at all, but leave the Speaker free to his discretion.

So also a Mutual Promise is not valid till accepted; and yet even so, I am
bound steadily to my offer as a Proposer; but if Matters after change upon my
Promise, and before acceptance, I am not then bound, till you make my first
Terms good: Thus if a Person be offered, and I accept to Marry, if she fail me,
I am Released of my Promise; if not, I must stand to it: And thus God resolved
to destroy Nineveh, when, on their Repentance, he Revoked their Sentence.

Further, I am bound by the Promise of my Ambassador, Deputy, or General, to
the utmost of their Commission, and that though against private Instructions;
and yet if by their Commission I leave them the Power only to Treat for me,
none but the Sponsers are engaged beyond express Order; so I am bound, by my
League, though even to an Heathen, so far, as to preserve him: But, as wicked
Leagues are void, I may not fight for an Heathen to destroy Christians, for
that is to add more sin to rash Swearing, like the Death of John the Baptist to
Herod's Foolish Oath.

So also, no Promise can engage me against Self-preservation; it is not lawful
for me to lay down my Life even to save my Friends; I owe my Life only to God;
and yet I may join with my Friend even to Death in a good Cause; but then I
must Martyr for the Cause of God, and not my Friend: So, though I Promise to go
a Journey, yet I may not go if there happen a Dangerous Tempest at the time to
endanger my Person.

But indeed, a Man has generally little need to add all these Cautious
Limitations to Promises; we are too apt to promise according to our hopes, and
perform according to our fears, without these Encouragements; but surely, in
truth, all our Promises, whether confirmed by Oath or not, ought to be equally
Sacred: and though, in one Case, we are in danger of Perjury only; yet ought
not that to beguile us into a conceit that a Lie is of a weaker Guilt; and yet
not but that though I may neither Equivocate, nor strain the Words, I promise, or
declare, if they are proposed me knowingly doubtful, I may justly take them so.

Where ever therefore we have made Promises, and we have reason to Judge them
faithful with whom they are made, we ought strictly to observe them; but when
they are made with persons false, either by Practice or Principles, they are
void, though confirmed by Oath, as being contrary to the most Sacred Law of
Self-preservation; and yet, in such Case, I offend God, by Treachery, indeed
Black Perjury, by offering to engage my self falsely where I cannot.

Thus, for Instance, it is impossible to make a League with a Papist, who cannot
only, by Principle, Swear what he intends not, but disengage himself from
Oaths by Equivocations, or otherwise, at pleasure; for, as Leagues and Promises
are mutual in their Obligation, and are otherwise of no force; so is it
impossible that there be Faith Obliged to, with such Men; and if there be any
Method therefore to make Agreements with them, it must be by Securities and
Hostages; witness the late Persecution in Savoy.

So also, if a Man has been known to be false to his Promise by practice, or
otherwise, no Mutual Obligation can tie us to Fidelity with him; and yet even
then, if there be no danger of Life, but only of some Temporal Damage, and I
make a Single, not Mutual promise, I am bound to Fidelity. So in a Mutual
promise, if the false person has actually performed his part, without he give
me a Release, and then I am Discharged, though on Oath.

Of CENSVRE.
THe better to deliver what I have to Write concerning Censure, I shall
distribute my in Discourse into Four Parts; The First Part of my Essay, to show
the Nature of Praises; The Second, to show us what Contempt is; The Third, to
add a few Words concerning Libels and Satyrs; And, the Last, to add some
Reflections on all manner of Rash Judgments and Reports whatever: But First, as
for Praises.

Of Praise.
We Censure others to be Commended our selves; and, in truth, it is rather to
exalt our own Judgments, than the Merits of those we Praise, that we enlarge in
their Commendations; so that at the bottom we Praise our selves, when we would
seem to Praise them. In plain terms, one might almost conclude, That neither
Vice is blamed, nor Virtue commended, but out of Interest; and, that for
Interest we can admit any Praise: and so also, the Modesty which seems to
refuse Praise, is indeed, nothing else but a desire to have it in a way less
visible, and more delicate.

Thus also we do not love to give Praises, nor do we bestow them but rarely,
except for Interest. Indeed, I may say, Praise is a concealed and delicate
Flattery, that satisfies differently him that gives it, and him that receives
it; the one takes it as a Recompense of his Merit, and the other gives it as a
Mark of his Equity and Judgment; and yet Praises have at least this good, that
they serve to fix us in the Practice of Virtue; and the Approbation that is
given, to Wit, to Beauty, or to Courage, at least augment and perfect them, and
make them do more than they were able to have done of themselves.

But, besides this, some Men too often use poisoned Praises, and which show, by
a side-glance, the Faults of those they Praise, and which they dare not to
discover otherwise; thus they exalt the glory of some, thereby the better to
lessen that of others; and give Men a little Commendation, that they may be the
better able to Accuse them also.

And thus it happens sometimes, that there are Praises that Reproach, and
Reproaches that Praise; and yet there are few people that are wise enough to
love the Reproof which does them good, better than the praise which betrays
them; and yet* they shall refuse praise too; but yet then it is as with a desire
to be doubly praised.

Upon the whole, he that always praises me, is undoubtedly a Flatterer; but, he
that sometimes praises, and sometimes reproves me, is probably my Friend, and
speaks his Mind: And yet in such case, did we not flatter our selves, others
would do us no hurt; but, when Men take shelter under the Arch-flatterer ones
self, then it is that they injure us.

And as Men are thus apt to be fond of praises, so are they no less inclined to
be avers'd to contempt: In truth, I may say, nothing makes Men greater slaves
than Mockery; yet not but that Flattery is more dangerous than Contempt, though
less acceptable: Contempt at least keeps us in the Methods of Plain-dealing;
whilst Flattery carries multiplied Mischiefs in it, and not only cheats and
cozens us, but eats out and destroys the very fountains of Truth in us.

To be short; Well might Augustus lament for Varrus's death, because, said he,
I have none in my Country that dares tell me Truth: And, if any thing upon
Earth can make us miserable, surely it must be to be fooled and cheated by the
false Lights of flatterers: I do not mean your little common flatterers, that
seek no deeper than into a few General pleasing Attributes only; but your
Arch-flatterers, and such as are too common in Courts, and who, perverting the
whole course of Sincerity and Truth, aim at nothing else but scruing up all
things, just to please and delight the party Courted.

Of Contempt.
But on the other side, as for Contempt, one may say, the Rich and the Poor
have the same appetites and passions, only differently expressed and disguised;
and all people, nay even the meanest, are alike impatient of Discountenance or
Contempt, be the person never so great from whom they receive it.

Nay, and we all agree further in this, that we are more impatient to have our
Understandings reflected on, than our Manners; and we can better bear the
imputation of Vice than Folly; the reason is, we value our Credit and Interest
more than our Honesty, and we had much rather save our Estates and our
Pleasures, than our Souls.

But indeed, had we courage enough to be wise, we should regard Resentments
only from their Reason, their Depth and Weight, and not from Popularity and
Opinion: Now, should we do so, I say, not only our greatest concern would be at
Vice and Sin, when they reproach us, but, as it is evident, that Contempt,
Scurril and Laughter, are but as the Froth of Reasoning, and have no other
bottom, but Vanity and Folly; so they ought not to be regarded in no sort, but
as the effects of Weakness, and want of Judgment.

Wisdom bids us be Charitable, and bear with others; nay, and not only so, but
assist them in their Infirmities: How contrary then must this Malicious
Resentment of Contempt be, which Delights and Rejoices in others Misfortunes,
and endeavors all it can, to advance them?

Besides, Contempt is a set, stubborn, and resolute aversion and hatred: Now, I
say, as this can neither with Justice or Charity be paid to any thing but Vice
or Sin, so we are unjust to give it to any thing else: And hence, What though a
Man be Vicious, and his Crimes deserve all the Contempt in the World; yet his
Person, and as he is our Brother, he rather deserves our Pity?

And, in truth, we are Rash Fools to hate any thing that God does not; he only
and wholly ought to be the standard of our Affections; and besure as he neither
does nor can hate us for our Misfortunes, as indeed it were to hate us for
being his very Creatures to do it, and which is impossible; so the only
occasion of his contempt of us, is our Misaction, and our Aberration from his
Law; and yet even then also he has Mercy: and we, if we will be like him,
surely ought not to be without it.

Nay more; Is any one weak and foolish, it is my positive duty to pity him, and,
in Charity, where I can, to advise him, much more not to despise him? So, Is
there any one Wicked, it is my duty to Reform him, and not harden him by
Scoffing at him? And, indeed, Christ, by his Example, shows us, That we ought
to Pray for, and Advise, not only our Enemies, but our Murderers also. And,
With what Arrogance then shall we presume to leave our Stations, as Creatures I
mean, in continuing in invincible Brotherly Love; and, to take upon us, like
God, through a rash and peremptory Contempt, to Judge, Censure and Condemn, as
our little Fancies shall lead us?

Of Libels.
But, above all things, in this matter, our Personal Satyrs and Libels are the
most Pernicious, the most Vicious and Uncharitable: I might say, nothing
deserves Satyr, but Sin and Satyr. And if a Man would ask the Question, When a
Wicked Man most resembles the Destroyer of of Mankind? It Is when he is
Maliciously dipped in the Barbarous Guilt of Satyr, and flinging Firebrarnds
about him, to the Distraction and Confusion of all he Converses.

Nor know I any Remedy against this Pest, but such a scorn and contempt as it
deserves. Some have prescribed Humility; and say, a Flint is easiest broke on a
Feather-bed: Others, to avoid it, like Sir John Sucklin, have Laughed at
themselves first; but, my sense is, they deserve none of this care. What a
Wasp, a Child, or a Fool fleers at my Actions! and he understands no more a
true Reason for his Censure, than a Parrot; only he is well-skill'd at the
Elegancy of Railing; and, for prevention, cries Blockhead first.

And, hence it is as a Secret belonging to the Wise, to give full liberty to
the Malice and Envy of such, the baser sort, and to let them vent themselves in
Calumnies, and false Reports; so that when they have spoken very ill of brave
and worthy Men, at length finding their own Reputation and Fortunes to lie at
stake, for fear of Revenge they may be brought to forbear.

And, indeed otherwise, the only Remedy against Satyrs and Libels, is a
Contemptible Silence: Nor can you half so much vex their Authors, by a Witty
Retort, as such a Neglect: By the first, you at least acknowledge their Power,
and you may be sure they will not be without hopes or endeavors to be even
with you again; for, they have seldom that Charity as to forbear abusing you,
while, by the latter, you shame them, and irretrievably condemn them as
Billinsgates.

Upon the whole, our best Lesson that we can learn from hence, that I see, is
to know the true Value of Contempt, and Reputation: Now, as the only benefit of
a good Name therefore is like Clothes to defend us from outward Accidents, and
the only real mischief of Contempt, the Impediment of our Affairs; So, Why
should we value it further? Alas! What is a Name when we are dead? were it not
to advance our Children and Posterity? the Honor otherwise that is not paid us
in person, vanishes into idle Air: And what, though our Names remain, our little
tickling and fond Vain Glory, which is the only itch we aim to satisfy,
perishes with our persons.

Of true Satyr.
And yet after all, not but that there is a Satyr as excellent and profitable
as innocent; a true Juvenal shall lash men out of Vice as fast as ten serious
Sermons; but then withal, it ought to be against Things and Causes, and not
Persons; against Vices and Errors, and not their Subjects or Professors: Thus,
like Elijah, we may innocently droll at Ahabs false Gods, and say, they are
sleeping, talking, or gone a journey, and therefore they cannot hear us; while
our Charity at the same time, shows all tenderness for our Erring Brethren, and
that we are ready with him even to a Miracle, if in our power, to reform them
of their Errors: But otherwise, who can write or speak Satyr, and be guiltless?

And just so in our ordinary Writings also, when we take care to give all the
Dues of Charity to our Brother; it is a modest sheepishness not fully to rescue
Truth from his Clamours; Vice and Errors deserve their true Characters; and
it is false Reasoning, not genteelness, to speak easily and smoothly of
Wickedness, to sooth men in their Corruptions: Give me the man that dares give
all Subjects their proper Colors; I hate the style that nautiates with too
many broad Words; but the mincing Frenchify'd style that Complements all
things, and ruins the Partition Wall of Truth, what is it but lying and
impertinent, in that it wants the true and opportunely life of Satyr^ in it?

I might add, to what end do we let such harsh words pass like current Coin
amongst us, if they have not perfect Ideas? if they are Chimera's, in God's
Name, let us fling them quite aside; but if we must hate the word Poison for
the thing, if we must not speak a word that is not Alamode and Agreeable, for
fear of grating dainty Ears, let us also for the same Reason, neither see nor
converse, lest we meet with those very Objects themselves that are more
disagreeable. In plain terms, these finical Sir Courtly Nice Wits want
Judgment, not Elegancy for their Apology: Alass-a-day! we must not speak out
broad Vice and Whoring, for fear of touching their guilty Consciences.

This I grant, I would not rip up unknown Vices, lest their very Repetitions
should breed Contagions: In that indeed, there is some Virtue in being modest
and obscure in our Discourse; but in known and every day practiced Crimes, to
lose the vividness and force of half our Notions, by a tedious circumlocution,
and beating of the Bush; is in plain terms, no other than a mean and cowardly
sneaking to a worldly false idea'd Honor, a gilding the way to Hell, and right
Devil-Advocate like, a means to destroy all those true Ideas of Horror, which
genuinely and naturally quadrate to the setting forth of the odiousness and
deformity of Vice.

If any one think I write too bitterly in this case, let them know, I think,
even this very sheepish Insipidness as great a Vice as reigns in our Age; and
let them not wonder then, that I treat it accordingly: Our Savior, and the
Apostles, and Prophets of Old, treated their Generations of Vipers in Styles
answerable to their demerits; but we forsooth are afraid, in genteelness to own
their Whore of Babylon, as Monsieur Jurieu well reflects; though all the
Scriptures require it at our hands, to brand her for her Fornications and
Adulteries: But let such Cowards and Lukewarms (that the holy Revelations
sufficiently threaten) do what they will; for my part, I shall always condemn
Vice and Sin, in as gross and harsh Characters as the monsters deserve. To me
it is no wit either to lie, or write insensibly; and what do we do else, when we
do not pourtraicture all the things and notions we treat of to the full life?

Should a Painter draw the Picture of a Bear, and omit his Claws, or his Brawny
Muscles; or should he Decipher a Tiger like a Lamb, or slim the Wild-Boar to a
Greyhound, and omit his Tusks? Should we value the Pictures for their insipid
genteelness? No: the grace of the Bear were in his Terror, the beauty of the
Tiger in his active Fierceness, and the whole Life of the Boar in his Horror
and Deformity: And even so in the Pictures of Sin and Vice also; it is all the
Art in a true Morallist and Religious, exactly to delineate their Tusks, their
Claws, and their Jaws; nay, it is the object of Elegancy, to be nice in those
Parts; and not to be afraid to display them for fear of offending silly Women,
weaker Men and Children.

The Vulgar indeed, like unskilful Dawbers, spoil this Liberty, and are so
bewitched to painting Bears through their Malice and Railing, that they can
hardly draw a Man without some Bestiality; either they add Claws to him, and
make a Beast of Prey of him, or Gay Feathers, and turn him to a Peacock, or add
him a Tail, and turn him to a Monky: But what! must their Blunderings make us
paint nothing but Beauties, their Deformities make us deal in nothing but
Angels? Surely, after all, and in all cases, the true good Picture answers the
Life, and neither Humor nor Fancy can change their Natures; and, if on the one
side we will avoid the Billinsgate Colors of the Mob, on the other the
Proverb, Stulti dum fugiunt vitia in contraria current; will certainly hit us,
if we do not draw the Owl and Batt to the life, as well as the Dove and Eagle.

Of Rash Judgment.
But to return, and proceed a little more particularly to false Judgments and
Reports.

Most people see nothing in others, but the Repute that they have in the world,
and what their Fortune merits; and yet they are as confident in their Censures
of them, as if they had Windows into their Hearts. Indeed, we are perfectly
known only by our Friends, and yet our Enemies and Strangers will judge us
most, and who know least the truth of what they Censure.

And one might say in such case, our readiness to be evil without examining, is
pride and laziness in a Medley. We would willingly find persons guilty, but
will not give our selves the trouble to examine their Cases: But alas! had we
no Faults in our selves, we should not be so apt to observe them in others: I
may say, we are naturally apt to disapprove in others what we think in justice,
others may disapprove in us.

To cure this rash Judgment therefore, I may add, We should take care as well
to rectify our own Faults as our Reasonings: In our Reasonings we should be
rather slow to speak, and considerate, than fiery and precipitate. In our
Errors, should we but have perpetually Memorandums of the Failings of our
selves before us, we should not be so apt to have so little mercy for others;
but alas! we are neither so just as to reflect on our own Faults, or the
Excellencies of the Persons we would condemn.

And hence indeed, I may add, were our principal Quarrel at Reports for the
Injustice of their rash Censure, and not from Self-love, we should be equally
cautious and concerned at their Injustice to others as our selves; but really
our general Grievance is, when our selves are the Object of them; and so in
truth, all our Judgment of them is partial.

Nay, and we are the more concerned at such rash Censures, as if we fancied our
selves the only Objects of them; and whereas indeed, we are not: but all the
World in general, are apt to judge by Appearances; and whoever has such and
such Appearances, or where ever they happen, just such a Censure follows,
whether in our selves or others, of course.

So that, I may say, till we can hope to rectify this common, but unjust
Judgment, by Appearances, and which to me seems next to an impossibility, we
had as good fancy, that common Robbers had a particular design upon us, that
meet us, and rob us, with all that they meet in such a Road: For just so Men
censure such and such, that they find marked with such offensive Qualities.

Nay, and it is even Ridiculous therefore to expect to be the only Person the
World will spare, since Christ himself was nor priviledg'd in this case: Can
you walk the Streets and not expect to be dashed? Surely, if such Judgments can
put us out of Humor, we shall never be pleased.

So also, suppose that any man tell thee of such a Censure; what is it, but
that a whisper is revealed to thee, and a giddy Report Published? for thou art
beside thy self, if thou expect there should be no Censure of thee; and if so,
no wonder that some of them happen to be Published, of thee, and to thy
disadvantage.

And besides, do we expect an Universal Love? we are unjust, and there is none
of us that deserves it; nay, and as there is nothing more free than Love, so we
ought not to pretend to purchase it by Complaints and Reproaches, but Love and
Complaisance: Nay, and suppose we deserve not this Love, yet would we put a
force on Men's Passions, and make them to love us whether they will or no?

Nay, and indeed suppose we really deserve to be loved of Men, but some light
appearances make them Censure us, we ought rather to complain of their weakness
and lightness, and of the frailty of Humanity than of their Injustice; it is not
he that mistakes, but he that wilfully Censures wrong, that is Unjust.

Besides, some love us not so much that we deserve their Love, as that they
fancy an Idea we have such Qualities as they esteem amiable, and which possibly
we have not: Suppose then that Truth were settled in Censure, we should lose as
much Love as Hate; for Mankind is giddy and unsteady, and has not set the sure
grounds of Piety and Virtue for their Censure; for indeed those Qualities are
only really amiable, and all other Friendship unstable and fleeting.

But to proceed, if such rash Judgments and Censures of any sort really injure
us, it is more that they join with our imagination, and by them affect us and
disturb us, then that they have any real Power in themselves; alas! in
themselves generally they are but Air, and their Love and Flattery is more
hurtful than their Spite and Mischief; for that too often poisons our hearts
with a mortal sweetness; while as an indifferency leaves our Journey toward God
with more liberty.

And besides, if others are faulty in their Censures, their injury is to
themselves and not to us: It deserves our pity, not our complaint. When we do
our Duty to others, we do it for God's sake, and frustrate our ends; when we
expect our Reward, and return from Man, we should be glad, that God gave us the
opportunity therefore; and we should dread a recompense from the World, lest
our hearts should accuse us, and say, This was not done purely for God's sake.

In short, when you are charitable to the poor, Do you expect they repay you?
and so, when you are charitable to the Slandered, to the poor in Fame, must be
return your Complement? Well may God, may I say, punish us by their
ingratitude, when we so basely translate the true end of our Actions from
himself to his Creatures; and indeed, what Fools are we to value a Complement
and Trifle, before the great Rewards of an All-sufficient God.

Of Reports.
Therefore, I think, that by this time, we may very well conclude that.

Lastly, As for Reports, it is a common, but grievous Error among Mankind, that
Justice should let Men's Tongues loose to a full liberty, in respect of them,
more than in the more solemn distributions of Meum and Tuum; whereas certainly,
in truth, and if Men would but duly consider their Duty, they would find, that
Justice and Charity engage them equally in Reports as in Commerce.

And thus, suppose any person of Credit informed me, that such an one was a
Cheat: I say, I have no Title hereby to condemn or call him so, no more, than
to hang a Fellon through common Fame: and yet I may justly refuse thereby to
give him any great degree of Credit; nay, and to indempnify my Friend from him,
I may acquaint him with the just grounds of my Jealousy, but then it must be to
preserve his real interest, and not maliciously; and therefore, I am bound in
Justice not to add to the Story I have heard.

Nor is it a less Vice in Reports, to commend wicked Persons more than they
deserve, than to defame and blemish the Reputation of the Innocent; for thereby
we Authorize and make an Example of what is abominable: And surely, nothing can
be more pernicious than such a Course! Thus we ought not to praise the Devotion
of a Man that is a known Cheat, nor the honesty of a Robber or Pyrate: Can we
assure our selves how far the influence of such our Commendation shall extend?

But to strike at the Bottom of Reports; Did we proceed with Justice, we should
do like Judges; and not condemn one side, till we have heard the other, till we
have examined Witnesses and Proofs, even scruplously on both sides. I am sure,
no man but would think himself hardly used with other Measures in a Court of
Justice; and why not in Reports also, when we presume with confidence to affirm
groundless Scandals of one another?

I may add, How often are the Sense and Coherence of Men's Words wrested, quite
contrary to their Primitive Intention? And who is more apt for such an
Injustice than a captious and idle Talebearer? So, how often are the best and
fairest Actions represented even as Vices? And if so, What care can we take
sufficient in our Censures and Reports? or what real value can one place on
Reputation, when one considers the Inconstancy and Injustice of the World?

To conclude, When Reports therefore are faulty of us, we ought rather to pity
the World in their Weakness, than to be angry at them: For is it not a
spectacle full worthy of our Compassion, to see men love to ruin one another
Reputation? and if they entertain an esteem of any one, it is as it were against
their Wills, and in spite of them, and they are glad of every little Scandal
to blemish the fair Character.

Upon the whole, defame not good persons, though for accidental Blots in their
Actions, in justice to the rest; and for evil persons, though never so mean, do
not too easily defame them, in justice to thy self, and left they be revenged
upon thee, remember Aesop's Beetle could fling down the Eagles Eggs; and though
it is true, Innocence is a Breast of Steel against Malice and ill Fame, yet only
in our own Consciences; for it will not preserve us from outward Mischiefs.

Of POETRY.
THE Traffic of Poetry is but in the froth of Reasoning, and the colors of
Morality. I must confess, for its Light and careless Touch to the Mind, like
Music, it is an excellent Recreation sometimes; but for any Man to set his
Genius upon it, is to Trade in Cockle-shells, and to catch at mere empty Noyses
and Shadows.

Give me the Diamond that is true Brilliant cut in its self, and that needs
nothing of the Golden Caskanett, to set it off, or adorn it: I may say, it is a
kind of Whoring of true Wit, to dress it in Poetry; and if a true Poet hates to
see the Plot, and turn of his Play fumed away by Opera into Show and Noise;
much more may genuine and vigorous sense, scorn to be cramped and manacl'd by
Verse, for the sake of a little paultry Rhyme and Meter, to set it out with.

And to me therefore, it appears no other, than a Reflection on Mr. Hobbs, who
would otherwise seem a Philosopher to translate Homer; not that I would so much
undervalue Homer neither, as the employment of his Judgment, and that he should
squander away so much time in a mere Diversion, and the endless gingle of Words.

Would you know why Poets are poor; I think it is their due Reward; for when
men weakly are too much enamored with Butter-fly Fancy, it is fit, as a piece
of natural Justice, that Poverty, as an armed Man, should come upon them, and
force them to Reason, and to worldly and heavenly real Cares to employ them
better.

And yet, to show the Vanity of Mankind, it is wonderful to see how they are
bewitched to the Charming Rhymes of Verses; but more especially, if they are
Satyr, men are naturally envious, and love to admire themselves, chiefly, in
the degrading of others: And hence it is, that you shall find a Lord R --
malicious Wit, cried up for a Miracle, when may be a fifty times greater or
diviner in a good Man, is scarce discernable.

But above all, what infinite Lies and Fables our Poets, Ancient and Modern,
have filled the world with? Who can end the Stories of their Gods, their Ryots,
and Metamorphoses, etc. the most pernicious means in the Debauch of the Old
Heathen Morals; and so even now, Who looks into a Poem and expects truth? And
alas! What is it but our common Plays and Poems that paint Vices for Virtues,
and turn even the Devil to an Angel of Light?

And what, shall we call these Poets Prophets then? No: if their Rage be
inspired them, it is by the Devil; if they deal in History, they sophisticate
it; or if in Morality, they rhodomontado it: So that in truth, Poetry may very
properly be called Vinum Daemonum, and deserve no manner of respect with men of
Judgment; for though the Subject be good and pious, yet who delights to see it
strained beyond truth? Surely, Poetry when it is excessive, deserves rather to
be called a Madness than an Art.

As for the Laws of Poetry, it is idle to set fixed Forms or Bounds for Rhymes or
Meter either, since the only Rule for Poetry, is the adding the Delight as it
were of Chyming Words to the Sense; nay, and that may be as well without Rhymes
as with. Witness Milton's Paradise Lost, and the Latin Poets, or without set
Meter, as Horace and Cowleys Pindaricks, or indeed, any other way whatsoever.

And, so as to the Feet of such Meter, whether Dactils, or Spondees, etc. and
as to the bounds of such Meter, whether Jambicks, etc. the search is both idle
and endless: Indeed Alsted reckons up no less then 124. several Feet; so that
Custom is only able to limit them, and Pleasurableness is their greatest
Excellency. Smoothness even in Oratory is necessary, that its Roughness may not
interrupt Attention; and more even in Poetry, is idle.

So, What shall I say to our several sorts of Meter also; your Acrosticks, your
Anagrams, and an Hundred other little Bawbles; as Echoes, Riddles, Meter,
composed in the shape of Pots and Crowns; so your Verses that are to be Read
backwards, and that contain the Year of the Date in Roman Letters? Are not
these endless and innumerable Trifles, and fitter for a Toy-shop, than a Wise
Man's Head?

So also, What a sputter we have to know the Long, and the Short of a Syllable!
forsooth, we must have Whole Volumes for the sake of such a Trifle: So, What a
Noise we have to know the due Bounds of a Poetica Licentia, as if there were
some Mystery, or Divinity in the Impertinencies of Poets; Risum teneatis amici?

And yet after all, not but that Poetry not abused, may be both pleasant and
useful too, in its time; but then it ought precisely to follow Truth in Story,
and not be cramped in the Meter: To be short, the two great Faults, in my
Sense, and that generally destroy the Air of most Poetry, are, when Men either
cripple it with too Nice Rules, like Aristotle; or, in stead of presenting us
with an even current of Thought in it, patch it up to us as with an endless
Fardle of Fancies.

Of Preface and Dedication.
OUr common Preface-makers tell us, That a Book without a Preface, is like a
Face without a Crevat; But, suppose a rugged Spaniard is avers'd to this little
Alamode de Paris; I hope the true Englishman will not refuse to Converse with
him therefore.

Just so, if the Preface be the Crevat, surely Dedication is the Beaux-string;
and the Man is as no Body, that cannot prostitute himself Genteelly and
Delicately to Rhodomontade and Flattery in it.

In plain terms, Men use their Books like Begging-passes, more to procure
themselves good and easy means by the way, than to hasten themselves really to
the truer ends of Life by them.

So our Dedications also run in a strain, as if they were to beg a Protection
to our Books; but alas! consult the Authors real Sense in the Matter, and
he will tell you, he has rather done an honor, than expects such a favor by it.

I will not say, That all our Prefaces and Dedications are Composed of such a
Medly as this; but surely too many of them are so impertinent, and so luscious,
that the Authors have often spoiled a good Book by them.

The Zealous Puritan, that will not so much as Smoke a Pipe of Tobacco without
a Grace; yet, when more solemnly he comes to make a Publication to Instruct the
World, his Interest shall make him Sacrifice all his Cant to some profitable
Brother or Sister.

God smote Herod for taking the Honor of his own Speech to himself: Alas! we
are infinitely more Arrogant than he. We Dare so great a Property in such our
Glory, that we can presumptuously transfer it to another; it is well we live not
among the Primitive Dispensations of Judgments.

What a delicate medly it is; a Book full of Raptures of Devotion, and a
Dedication as vile and wicked, as Unmanly and Ungenerous in its Flatteries.

Did you approach, by a gracious permission, the Presence of a King? And would
you be so Saucy, as to make the Noble favor and honor done you, only the
occasion to Complement some little petty Courtier before him?

Much more, dare you appear in the Presence of the King of Kings, in solemnly
presuming to declare and deliver his Laws, and at the very Footstool of his
Throne, presume to exalt the Merits of any Mortal Man?

Surely, if e're we take God's Name in vain, it is then; and when we rob the
Divine Majesty of a suitable Reverence; But who has the loss by it? And who
suffers by our bringing the Sacred Deity into contempt? surely our selves: If
we reverence him not duly, it is we shall suffer for it: Alas! he himself
stands in need of none of our honor.

Some Heathens have never delivered the Name of GOD but in Great Letters; nay,
others have never Printed any other Word in the same Line, least the hasty
Reader should heedlesly pass it over; but, Can this be to the honor of us
Christians, who thus care not how we treat him?

Were we to Write the Life of Alexander the Great, and after some singular
Praises and Encomiums, should Dedicate it to some illustrious, overgrown, and
singularly well qualified Mouse; Would not this redound, by way of Matchless
Honor, to Alexander?

Even so, when we treat with the Great God of Heaven, Is it decent to magnify
even Princes in his Presence? nay, Is there any Parity between Finite and
Infinite? and the dishonor to God and Alexander in such case?

Surely, all our private Dedications are, at best, but an Injustice to God
therefore; but such as these a manifest Contumely to him: We ought not to Name
the Name, much less to treat any thing relating to the Divine Being, without
the greatest sense of his Majesty.

When we Name therefore the Invisible, Infinite and Eternal Maker of all
things, Is it suitable, even to Aggrandize the whole Earth in his Presence? and
to whom the whole Globe is but as a drop of the Bucket?

When we deliver his Truths, Is it suitable to any sense of Providence to
crave the Protection of any Man on Earth for them? Good God! How great is the
vanity, as well as the Impiety of these flatteries?

He that alone endures for Ages, that disposes of Kingdoms at his pleasure, and
in whose hand, are, and have been all the Mightiest Men upon Earth; Needs he an
Assistant, least his eternal Will should fail? And, if it is not his Will,
Who shall support it?

To be short; I wish what I Write could Persuade Men to a more truly Religious
frame in this Matter; if not, I yet shall be content, that I have done my duty
in Warning them, and to the Will of God be left the Success on it.

But, for my own part, I declare, were I either to lose or gain the Indies by
such Methods, I would sooner burn my Self and Papers, than stoop to so mean and
corrupt a Practice.

I will not say, that like the Apostles, we may not justly write Epistolarly to
a Church, or Brother; for certainly, so long as we preserve the due Decorum of
Decency and Verity, that must be most Innocent; but surely, whatever exceeds
that, must savor either of Vanity or Evil.

Of STVDY.
STudies serve either for Delight, for Ornament, or for Ability; for Delight in
Retirement, for Ornament in Discourse, and for Ability in Judgment, and
Disposition of Business; and yet to spend too much time in Study, is sloth; to
use them too much for Ornament, is Affectation; and, to confine our Judgment
too precisely to their Rules, is Formal and Pedantick.

And thus likewise, Reading makes a full Man, or copious Notion; Conference a
ready Man, and a temper Conversable; and Writing an exact Man, or a Complete
Idea. Indeed, there is no stond, or impediment in the Wit, but that may be
wrought out by fit Studies: And if there be any knot, that I cannot by Study
work off at one time, Meditation shall do it at another.

But he buys himself but a melancholy slavery, who Studies more than
necessary: Now, such our necessity appears by this, either in attaining
agreeable accomplishments, or in preparation for business, or in a Charitable
instruction of our Brother: But rather than Study beyond these ends, we ought
to confine our selves even to set-hours, and to times and seasons.

To be short; Crafty Men contemn Studies, as the longest way about, and, as
true Wisdom is too laborious for them; simple Men admire them, as it is their
very Exaltation to be in Wonders; and Wise Men use them: they perfect Nature,
and are perfected by Experience: for Natural Parts, like Natural Plants, are
the better for Pruning and Grafting.

The Method of Study.
But, as we love to do nothing in vain, and are not willing to bestow pains,
where it will not make us any return; so, no Prudent Man will venture on any
course of Study, till he has first thoroughly settled the exactest Measures of
his Method.

And thus, if you Read, observe nicely to do it deliberately, choosing your
times, when you are not likely to be disturbed; but, above all, be sure to
maintain a continued and steady apprehension in whatever you do; and whenever
you find that disturbed, or destroyed, never distract your self further, but
cease Study, least you lose as much in the Confusion and want of Method, as you
get in the Quantity.

Indeed, I may add, to Study more than four or five hours a day, except it be
purely in Copying Writings, is too much; it precipitates our Judgment, and
sowrs our proceedings; And, what Improvement can you expect then, when as you
increase in the Mass, you lose in the Digestion; nay, and may be, for want of
Consideration, indiscernably engage your self in nothing else but Trifles.

Nay, and besides, What is it that makes our Studies uneasy to us, but when we
are thus careless in Examining their Circumstances? if we are too violent in
them, well may we be confounded and fatigued; and if we Thoughtlesly set about
them, in the midst of Interruption, Can we justly charge it on the Nature of
Study, when we complain of its uneasiness?

So in Reading, Can you think that when you gallop over a good Author, you do
not flatten him, and lose half his Life and Substance? surely you do: Alas! if
you intend to be a Student to effect, you must learn to pursue your Subject
with Patience, and Discipline your self to a laborious constancy; but, above
all, if you intend to Study much, rise early, and have time before you, For why
should you impair your Health by it for want of Exercise?

Nor be discouraged, that thou can not succeed in thy Studies immediately, or
at the first engagement; if thou aimest at Perfection, thou must not
Mushroom-like, think to spring up in a day, no, nor a Year; no, alas! thou
must cut thy way even through Mountains of Errors and Prejudices: And, though
thou may patch up a Cottage in an hour, yet a beautiful City of Thought, a
new Rome, fit for an Humane Soul to reign in, is not to be hewed out of the
Rocks, reared and adorned in a day.

And, in this case, had the World been as diligent in a sincere and impartial
Meditation, as they have been in their Pedantry, I am persuaded that by this
time, Knowledge had been Quadruple to what it is; not that I would have Men
wholly fling aside all former helps neither; but I would have them make their
Reading as subservient to their own digestion; for my part there is nothing that
I have either received or borrowed, that I have not reduced to my own Method
and Disposal.

Hence some Books are to be Tasted, others to be Swallowed, and some few to be
Chewed and Digested; some Books may be Read by Deputy, that is, by Extracts:
But, in all our Methods we ought never to Read, to Contradict and Confute only;
nor to believe, nor take for granted, nor merely to find Talk and Discourse;
but duly to Weigh, Consider, and Digest also.

And, in this Case, I may add, that, as an ill Stomach craves for more than it
can digest, so it is an irregular Student that Reads more than he Considers how
to Command: and, as he that in such case, eats more than he Digests, breeds
Humors; so, surely, I may as justly add, that a Reader, beyond the true
Capacity of his Comprehension also, breeds Errors. And, to carry the Simile a
little further.

As the soundest Meats prove the best nourishment, though they are often
difficult to digest, so the Intricatest Notions commonly prove the Students
best Informers, though for a little time they may amuse his Conception; for, as
Marrow lies in bones, so Valuable Secrets lie generally wrapped in Difficulties;
besides that, any one Difficulty left unconquered, is enough to cloud and
confound the whole Idea of our Studies and Notions that follow it.

As for Collections in Writing, and without which, to Study by Reading, is but
to try to fill Proserpina's Seeve: Think first with your self, what will be
really material and substantial in them; and learn to distinguish Dressing from
Subjects, and Ornaments from Things; the first may be Abridg'd, and Comprised
in short, while the latter is various, nay infinite, and consequently
impertinent: Thr first is the composure of solid Judgment, the latter but the
Froth and Wantonness of Fancy.

As for your Method in Collecting therefore, let it be clear, short, and
well-advis'd; clear, that you may make an easy recollection, and easily
continue your course; short, that you may not bestow more pains in Shadow than
Substance; or Method than Matter; and well-advis'd, that you may proceed
without Repentance, and that you may not be perpetually employed in laying of
New Foundations, but be able cheerfully to build your Superstructure on.

For my part, till I purified thus my Method, the more I studied, the more I
was confounded; but thus I have not only preserved my Idea entire, but one part
of my Study has helped the other, while my whole Body lies easy for me, either
for Correction or Improvement, and as hereafter I shall see occasion. But
besides this, we ought to consider to keep our Studies within the bounds of a
due Limitation also.

The true Limitation of Studies.
And thus, first, we ought to limit our Studies to our use, and to fit them to
supply our defects; Thus Histories will teach us Wisdom, through Experimental
Precepts: Poets will make us Witty, but Light and Flashy; the Mathematics will
make us Subtle and not Credulous; Natural Philosophy Deep and Reasoning;
Morality Grave and Good; And Logic and Rhetoric will teach one Faction, and
make one able to Contend.

Hence also, if a Man's Wit be wandering, let him Study the Mathematics; for if
in Demonstrations he go never so little aside, he must begin all again; so if
he be not apt to distinguish, Read the Schoolmen; or if he be not apt to beat
our Matters, or to call up one thing, to prove and illustrate another, let him
Study the Lawyers Cases, and so every defect of the Mind may have a special
Receipt.

So if he be apt to be Idle, let him borrow the Books he is to Study, for a
time, and that will make him either diligent, or want; nor let him, in
Studying, only Meditate or Read, for that is but to see his Face in a Glass,
and to leave fleeting Characters in the Memory only, and that will instantly be
blotted out; whereas by Writing also we draw a more lasting Picture.

So likewise Reflection on Conversation is far better than crude Books, and too
much Reading; in Truth, one may say, Not only that Book-learning is commonly
too Pedantick and Formal to benefit; but indeed, that Books, in themselves, are
almost as idle as infinite; and so that, in Truth, it is a matter greatly worth
our examining, how far to Study, and what to Read; and also, what to fling
aside as superfluous.

And thus the knowing what is fit to be Studied, saves half the pains; and, in
such case, just enough in Charity and Necessity is sufficient: We are not here
to get Knowledge for the other World, as some idly have imagined; our sincerity
indeed will stand us in stead there, but our knowledge not in the least. Alas!
the Present state of our Nature and senses is Probationary, and not to last.

Before therefore we descend into the several branches of Humane Learning, it
were the highest prudence first to discern between Knowledge, profitable and
useless, curious and solid; and in which case, in general, as I have said, it is
equally vain and foolish, to think to arrive at a nice perfection of Wisdom,
the prerogative of God; and we should confine our selves therefore, as well to
what is rationally within our powers, as to what is useful.

And thus the Philosophers Stone, supposing it acquirable, yet it were both
lazy and an unindustrious encroaching on the public property to attain it; and
therefore, deservedly punishable by Laws. And thus, there are some things also
more directly unlawful to be studied, as I have already shown, and which will
much shorten an Universal Idea, as Witchcraft, as Rebellion to God, and
superstitious Magic, as tempting him.

But, besides these greater Evils, How many may I add, spend their time about
Words, and never dive into Sense? How many please themselves rather with the
slight imaginations and fancies of other than trouble themselves to look for
truth? I say, we need only reflect, how easily we may dispense with these, and
many others sorts of Knowledge, and not envy the Possessours of them; and
indeed, what but such Exuberances in Studies, make our present Philosophy a
mere idle Chimera and Vanity?

To be short, the true end of Study, as of all things else, is the glory of
God, and the good of his Creatures: Now, as we cannot say, we pursue either of
these ends, when we study Trifles, so are such employments sinful; and though I
would obtain a complete Knowledge, and raise its Banks too high for the Storms
of raving Wit and trifling Error, to be able to destroy; yet withal, I would
not bestow the least pains on what might look either unnecessary or evil.

Of the Choice of Books.
And thus also we pity our loss of Books; alas, fond Fools that we are! What
is lost that occasional industry and necessity cannot retrieve? Besides, we are
mistaken to seek for Wisdom in the multitude of Authors; we had as good look
for it in the Mobile, where some are mooney'd, some purblind, some confident,
as Mountebanks, and others, perverse even as Devils.

Nay, when we consider the mere multiplicity of Books, though I would allow my
self to consult the choicer for my Assistance, yet in general, I would as soon
hear every Man's Dream as read his Works; and I ought therefore, rather first
to consider what Books I ought to read, and next, what may be convenient for me
by way of resort.

Now, as for the Election of Authors, I know no other method than the Vogue of
the Learned; in Morality and Divinity, those whom Time and Antiquity have
commended, and who have stood the Censure of Ages, are to be chosen; and not
every Modern Author, whose gaudy Titles and popular Prejudices make him better
at Noise than Reasoning: But as for experimental Wisdom, as interest is likely
to improve the World with her Age, so the latter Authors are there to be
preferred before blind Antiquity.

But would thou know a more particular Test for good Books, I mean moral
ones; they are such as have Learning and Sincerity, but more especially
Sincerity: And hence the Scriptures which no one can esteem, to exceed in
regular Learning; yet as being most pure and transcendant in sincerity,
infinitely exceed all other Books: Alas! it is not Notion but bright Sincerity,
that duly and justly gives the Preference. Indeed, what good can a sinister,
cunning, or Pedantry do us?

Upon the whole, 'twere too tedious for me here to give you long Catalogues of
Books; and besides, my designs is rather toward a general Advice; if the
Student want particular Authors Names therefore, let him consult the proper
Artists, and the perusal of Books themselves; and yet let him even then rather
choose a few and choice Books than a Library; for a multitude will confound us,
where a moderate Quantity will assist and help us; and in truth, Masters of
great Libraries too commonly like Booksellers, deal no deeper than in Titles.

As for the encouragement of diverting needless Studies, I shall only say this,
it is fit a Gentleman should have at least an insight into all things; he need
not aim at being a Master in all, and yet he may take a slight View or Lanskaf
of all: for though he intends but one thing as his business, yet he may justly
make the Survey of all, the Ring of his Recreation and Diversion: For who can
distinguish things better than he that has the largest prospect?

And yet in such looser Studies, I would not read a mean Book: Suppose he help
thee to a good Notion or two, will that avail thee for thy pains and loss of
time? Nor needst thou doubt in such case, but that if thou readst the choicer
Authors upon the same Subject, that they will give thee the same thing, and in
much better order, than a little pretender shall. I may say, our dozing our
selves with an unprofitable reading, What is it, but like poisoning and
cankring our minds, and which induces us to dote away our time in perpetual
maze and confusion?

When thou have therefore tried some few pages in an Author, and can not like
him, reject him: for as it is impossible for a man to read all Books, so it is
enough if he do the best; and it is our Unhappiness if a Pearl lie scattered in
an unproper Soil: and if a good Notion be lost, because delivered by an ill
Author, I say, it is a misfortune in discretion inevitable; for the Man is mad
that thinks to read all Books: and yet, if an Author lie in a good method, a
little pains may serve to Examine him.

Further, there is a weak and cowardly prejudice in men, I mean, when the dread
of being seduced by ill Books, makes them afraid to read good ones, if they
have but a bad Name: But why so, I say? If what an Author write be true, Why
should I be Bug-beard from an opportunity of being wiser? if false, Am not I a
fool so to question the integrity or strength of my Reasoning? and thus is it
not a shame, that an Hobbs should fright an University worse than a Monster?

I am afraid, the too common and Fondling Notions of the World are a little
rotten at the heart, or else methinks their Abettors need not be put to these
shifts and burnings, to confute their Adversaries: Alas! Truth, like the Sun,
of its self, and without force, is able to clear all the Fogs of Fallacy and
Sophistry; and nothing but Error and Prejudice need dread the Combat of
Argument, and the Test of Examination.

An affected singularity indeed in all colors, is odious; but this
Perverseness in the popularity of the World, makes it, that if ever we intend
to study Truth, we must be singular sometimes, and dare converse with Men and
Books that are so; or else at last, we may find to our loss, that we shall
explode Truth and Sincerity too often with such Authors. I shall add a little
in general of Speculation and Practice, as the main rule of our Study, and
conclude.

Of Speculation and Practice.
Our Speculation in general, ought to be so far subservient to our Practice,
that I may say, we profane Precepts as well as Piety, when we take their words
into our mouth, or transcribe them with our Pens, and do not live and act
accordingly. In Divinity nothing is more dangerous than Knowledge without
Obedience: Christ tells us, That he that knew his Masters Will, and performed
it not, should be beaten with many stripes: And he that pretends to Virtue no
otherwise than in Notion, is no better than an Hypocrite, or at best a Chymera
Book-worm.

It Is true, we ought not to neglect Speculation; and yet as Practice is the end
of Speculation, surely no man will prefer the means before the end. Practice
without Speculation at worst, makes us but imprudent; but mere Speculation
renders us unprofitable, and drones: And in truth, Virtue, by mere Speculation,
is confounded, and only ripened by Action.

Nay, Knowledge without Practice, is but a Lust of Curiosity; and the man that
cannot propose a good Moral End in his Studies, had as good divert himself with
the Purling of Brooks and Pibles, as the mere change of Words and Notions; and
yet it is the curse of your dreaming Speculatists, that they not only have no
taste of real Wisdom, but mispend the time that should lead them to it. Wisdom
is Folly, and Prudence Madness, in such a man; and yet, Hypocrite-like, he
shall read their Precepts even with delight, as long as their Novelty lasts.

The measure therefore of our Speculation, ought to be this; sufficient to
advance our Practice, and not impede it, of things useful, and not of
unprofitable Whimseys, of bettering Life, as Virtue and Religion, and not
turning men into thinking, and reading Melanchollists; it is a Vice to procure
that knowledge that is not of advantage when had; and we misemploy our method
of thinking, if we engage it purely in a puzzle of Thoughts: Indeed, the Mind
working on matter, produces worthy Notions, but on its self nothing but
Cobwebs and Trifles.

And thus also, there are some men so weak as to look for Morality even in
Plays and Romances; but alas! they but flatter themselves, and seek but for
the Colors of Virtue, while they dare not the Brave and Nobler Self-denial of
her purer Precepts: Poor Pretenders! Why do they shuffle so? a courageable
Enemy is better than a Bastard Friend: Think you ever to reconcile Good and
Evil, or God and the Devil? Surely, the man that even carouzes in his Lusts, is
an innocent to such as Hypocrite.

Upon the whole therefore, you see I may make my self learneder by reading, but
only wiser by moderating and regulating my Actions: I will not therefore spend
all my Vigor in Discipline, in the Dressing Room of my Soul: I must live as
well as think; and yet, as I know Error is too often to strong for me, I will
always leave room for Repentance, Amendment, and new Precepts.

And, as our Speculation therefore ought not to be continual, so at length, I
would have a man say, Lectum, consideratum, and Scriptum est, and nunc vivam;
when once I have made my Rule to live by, I Will see how I can draw my Life and
Actions by it; Wisdom was never intended to be acquired only, but enjoyed; and
that Knowledge is Folly, not Wisdom, that does not apply its self to the uses
of Man.

And to conclude; the only Reason that makes Speculation and Practice differ so
much, comes from the vicious and chimera Prejudices of Mankind: indeed, were
our Knowledge reduced sincerely to the due bounds of Wisdom, we should find our
Precepts would be like to Demonstration; and a man would no sooner read them,
but he would be convinced beyond all doubt, to act by them.

Of CONSTANCY.
ONe may say, the Sun, the Air, and all things about us, contribute to make us
what we are in every respect; but our minds, and the purity thereof, so that
indeed, who ever loves us on any other account than that, their love must needs
be transitory; for being made what we are by our circumstances, and they
changing as they perpetually do, we become others than we were; so that in such
case, it cannot be justly called an Unconstancy, to change our Affections, when
the Objects themselves have changed.

And hence it is, that our Constancy in Love, What is it but a perpetual
Inconstancy, and which causes our hearts to incline successively to all the
Qualities of the Person that we love, giving sometimes the preference to one,
and sometimes to another? So that, in truth, the best of our Constancies,
except to God, want a Foundation; and really, what are they but our
Inconstancys limited, and unreasonably bound up in one Subject, by an
unaccountable Obstinacy?

And thus, What but this is it, that makes us seek for new Friends, and fresh
Faces every day, and yet not but that that which makes us love new
Acquaintance, is not always so much a weariness of our old, or the pleasure of
Change, as the Distaste which we have, that we are not enough admired by those
that we know too familiarly, and the hope we have to be more admired by those
that know us but a little?

But to return; there are two sorts of Constancy in Love; the one is, because
we find perpetually in the person we love (as in an inexhausible Fountain) new
Causes to love; the other is, that one holds it dishonorable to change or
break ones word; and so also, there is an inconstancy which comes from a Levity
of mind, and which changes every moment its opinion, or out of weakness, which
makes it receive all the Opinions of others: and so there is another
Inconstancy, which is more excusable, and which comes from the things
themselves, through their losing their relish.

Nor is such an Inconstancy, except in Virtue or Friendship to be discommended;
for why may not I justly follow my Inclination, and the change of Things? But
he that is false to his friend, or that complains of his friend, that he may be
able before hand the better to justify his own levity, is guilty of a perverse
Treachery; or else, I may say, our perseverance deserves neither praise nor
blame; for indeed, it is no more than a continuance of our Taste and Thoughts,
and which we may as innocently as justly be able to remove from us, or change
at pleasure.

But as for our constancy in Goodness, Sincerity, and Truth, it is the chief
and crown of all Virtues, and even the best of Virtues: Virtues themselves
degenerate to a Vice without it; if we have either Bravery or Goodness
therefore, let us remember to crown all such endeavors with Constancy.
Constancy will make even condemned Innocence glory in her Virtue; and Patience
and penitent Guilt submit and cooperate with Justice. Whilst I am constant to
the Tracks of Virtue, my Breast shall be immovable and easy, and neither Crowns
shall make me proud, nor Rags ashamed.

Nay, and while I thus mix Constancy with Wisdom, my Affairs shall be in order,
and Prudence shall cut out their seasons: I Will foreknow the variety and
difference of business, and neither Accident nor Novelty shall confound or
surprise me; indeed that man ought not so much as to presume at the name of
prudence, that by a steady perseverance in St^^ly and Meditation, has not
strengthened and garrisoned his Reason, and given it an entire prospect above the
common little Mountains of Prejudice and Inconstancy.

To be short, I would even hate my mind till I make it speak the same thing to
morrow that it does to day; my certainty and my faith shall be the same, and I
will have an equal regard for them at all times. Cannot human Frailty bear
this? purified Reason and Precepts shall.

My Ideas shall not be fleeting and changable at every blast of Reasoning, nor
my Resolution wavering; I will know the certainty of Piety, Virtue and Truth;
if they have no bottom, I Will never hamper my self with them; if they have, if
possible, I will follow them; nay, and I hope by the help of God, by the same
rule, to be able to reduce my Notions to Principles that shall last as long as
the Sun shines.

Have I misfortunes? and what then! does not the same reason of things always
continue? or was I ever so weak as not to expect Accidents? if not, Why is my
Mind and Resolution changed? is not my Reason the same still? or what! must I
commit my self to the Wind, and be as changeable as the Weathercock; be a
Philosopher to day, a Fiddler to morrow, and every day find some new Whimseys
for my Entertainment?

No, Constancy is the most potent and crown of all Virtues; and through
Constancy I will, nay I doubt not, but to conquer all things. Constancy even in
drops wears Stones away, while nothing is more weak than a Pretender; if we
have never so great an Appearance in our Actions either of Virtue or Courage,
yet if we want Constancy and Perseverance, our Profession is idle, and our
Pretenses are vain; nay, and they reflect more upon us, than if we were
absolutely negligent.

And yet, though nothing can recommend its self more to us than Constancy, yet it
ought to be with this Limitation, in what is good, and truth only; and not in a
lie, or evil. Constancy in Vice enhances our Guilt, and Perseverance in Error
after Conviction, be it on any pretense whatever, is the sure method of Folly
and Ignorance. Indeed, Constancy is only in good things; and it is Obstinacy
that fixes us in evil, and that makes Sin and Vice eternal, and that forbids
Repentance for fear of Change.

OF THE Art of War.
Of the Lawfulness of WAR.
TO God alone belongs the Prerogative of Life and Death; and who art thou, who
presumest to assume it? Art thou a King? even a King ought to be a Father to
his Subjects, and not a Slaughterer: but is that for Trifles, to drown them in
Blood? Surely, they forget King Phillips Monitor; Remember thou art a Man
therefore, who can too easily engage themselves in War?

And yet though hence we ought to abhor War, yet we ought never to forget it, no,
not even in time of Peace: if the rigor of our Discipline cease, yet at least
our Military Precepts should be preserved pure; for nothing surely can
Disengage us of our Self Preservation.

And yet not that, not to be backward in just Wars, should forward us therefore
to Rapine or Murder neither; God certainly has Plagues and real Causes of Wars
enough to ease the World of being over-peopled by, without our Presumptious,
Murders and Desolations: Have I therefore the justest cause of War, if
possible, I will stifle it.

Thus, Is my Merchant injured? I will satisfy him by reprisal. And, have I
wronged my Neighbor? I will acquit my self before God, in tendering him
satisfaction.

Indeed, Princes should consider the hardship of an unjust War upon their
Subjects, before they begin it. I might add, Is the Right doubtful? And what,
will not an Arbitration serve and save humane Blood?

In truth, War without Cause is predatory and brutish, and a mere Soldier is
worse than an blangman; a Generous Officer sure would die rather than fight
without a good Cause declared. In doubtful cases indeed, I Will obey my Prince;
but shall he make a Man-Butcher of me?

Not but that War undoubtedly may be most lawful too; for even the same Christ
that could abolish the rule, of an eye for an eye, etc. in forbearance and
mercy; yet himself could once think a Sword necessary, Luke 22. 36. and Lash
the Thieves out of the Temple.

To be short; God has given us a Being, And shall we not value his kindness, by
all the lawful ways of self-preservation? And what, may we not then justly
resist all violent Aggressors, and avenge our selves of our secret Enemies, to
incapacitate them in their evil designs?

Nay, and if this be the Law of Nature; Pray where is it abolished? and surely,
it is such, nay, and to that degree, that a People may lawfully Raise a War of
Self-defence of their own heads, and without the Authority of their Prince,
where it is necessary, even as all Casuists allow.

And yet, not but that I may wickedly Prosecute the Justest War too; War should
be managed, as by a Judge, to Pay the Original Debt, and not as by a Robber, to
Murder and Plunder.

Thus I have a just occasion of War, when I see another assault me, nay, when I
have a good Ground of Jealousy and Suspicion, I am not bound to wait the first
Blow: But are my Suspicions weak, and his Preparations trifling? Peace and
Charity commands me to entertain no ill opinion of them.

So, Do I see my Neighbor's Subjects miserably distressed? it is my Duty not to
see Piety, Honesty and Innocence discouraged; and yet, though to Relieve the
Oppressed for Religion, may be a good cause of War, yet, to propagate it, can be
none.

So, Is my Brother Ignorant, or an Heathen? Charity will let me advise him, but
not force him: But does my Brother Sacrifice his Children? Is he a Sodomite, or
a Murderer, as Benjamin? surely I, with Israel, may War with him, to bring him
to a better temper.

So Papists, by their Principle, That no Faith's to be kept with Heretics,
give an Immortal cause of War: We sight a more generous and open Enemy, And are
not we Bewitched to forgive one, Bloody, Barbarous, and Inveterate, as the
Devil himself is then?

It Is pity, indeed, we don't Indulge their Tender Consciences, and let them
Murder us; it is their Principle and Religion: If it be their Religion, I say,
it is from the Devil, and let us fight them till they alter it: What! Profess
our selves Sheep for the slaughter? I don't know whether Protestant States may
not Answer for it to God, as Self-murderers, that they have tendered such
Vermin-Principles so long.

So, surely, I have a right to take a Sword from a Madman, to Arbitrate my
Neighbor's Popular Commotions, and to interpose toward settling the Peace of
my Neighbors.

Thus, If my Neighbor begins a War, though with another Neighbor; the Wolf
shall not think, by my standing Neuter, to devour me next; and yet I will not
help a too Potent Prince abused neither; For why should I assist him to destroy
my self?

Thus 'twas the War of Righteous Abraham to reduce those Conquerors that
carried away his Brother Lot. And yet, if the War for my Brother be too
desperate, I am not bound to fling away my Life for his sake.

But are only my Merchants Injured, and by private Persons? I have no cause of
War, if either satisfaction be tendered, or the Offenders delivered up; but
such an Injury, by a Commissioned Subject, is a complete cause of War.

So I may Naturalize a Subject of my Neighbors without offense; but if I offer
to Naturalize a Town, or to encroach but one foot on his Dominions, he has a
just Cause of War against me; and yet even then he ought not only to demand a
Reasonable Satisfaction, but solemnly to denounce it, e're he begins with Acts
of Hostility.

Of Generals in WAR.
ONe ordinary General is better than two excellent ones; for nothing is more
pernicious than Confusion and Irresolution: And yet it is hard to trust the
courage of one General only; the Mean seems the appointing Three several
Commanders, for Van, Main Body, and Rear; and changing their Commands each
Week; and so you may not only be assured of a General on all hazards, but as
well secure their Fidelity, as relieve their Courages.

Nor were it amiss also, for the same reason, once a Year for a General to make
all his Underofficers change their Commands; and which, to avoid offense, he
may do by Promotion; for so he will not only instruct all, and make Military
Discipline familiar, but hinder all Corruption in False Musters, and prevent
all Factions in his Army whatever.

As for the Skill of a General, it has two advantages, Duty and Stratagem;
Duty, to know the force and order of Military Discipline, and therefore a
General must be a Soldier; and Stratagem, to prevent and secure future
Accidents to his advantage; and, in this, it is his own ingenuity; and a Council
of War must aid him.

Nor is any thing more worthy a General's care in this case, than the choice
and management of his Council of War: Does he fear Treachery in it, and cannot
he talk of what he will, though he never resolves on it then, and seem to doubt
in what he most intends?

But above all, a General ought to esteem his Life as the whole Armies; indeed,
he acts the greatest public good in preserving it; nay, he ought in this, to
be so nice, as to be always in temper, and never suffer himself to be harrass'd
out; he is the head of the Army, and therefore ought never to be without
vigorous Thoughts and Counsils for every opportunity of Stratagem, or Service
that may offer.

And, in this, a General ought to remember also, that in all extremities he has
a Commission from the Law of Nature, as well as his Prince; not, I mean, but
that in affronts and trifles, he should choose to let Time give him
satisfaction; but, in imminent dangers, his own discretion, as well as his
Princes words, ought to be his Rule.

Further, a General ought to be most severe, and yet most just also; severe, to
awe his Enemies, and preserve his own Discipline; and yet just, that he provoke
neither to hatred: And, indeed, in this matter, nothing is better than that the
General be beloved: and yet, for a Prince to permit his Army to choose their
own General for their Loves-sake, is to Dethrone himself.

But, Does a Prince see the Army hate their General? he will do well to choose
them a better: So, does a General see his Army jealous of him? let his Friend
head the jealousy, and expostulate satisfaction, who, besure, will be more
tender than if his Enemies were to Judge him.

But, Does a General find his Prince jealous of him? his only way to anticipate
it, is, by laying down his Commission; and when he is so ingenious, he need not
fear further mischief. Princes know the evil consequence of ill-treating such
great Officers: if he punish one too easily, the next he may expect to secure
himself, by going over to the Enemy.

Of WAR in General.
WAR is the decision of a Right too high for Judicature; wherein, Arms is the
Trial, and Conquest the Judgment. To begin a War after Conquest perfected, and
Mercy shown, is a piece of perfidy, that deserves no Quarter.

Are you a private Man, and have received Mercy, through yielding up your
Right? surely, you Merit a Thousand Racks if you ungratefully reassume it
again: you might have died in the Field, or now continue Neuter; but, Is it
nothing to fight against that Benefactor, that has given you your being, and so
spill innocent blood?

So to allow Quarter, when asked, is both a Christian and a Humane duty; while
to execute Men by Law-Civil, forgiven by Quarter Military, is most barbarous.

But does some Hen-roost Garrison withstand a Royal Army? they deserve no
Quarter, or at least they ought to be decimated; it is not Generosity, but
Madness, that makes Men prolong Wars, and destroy one another without prospect
of Relief.

So, Is mine Enemy perfidious? it is his fault that our slaughters are endless,
who, by his Treachery, has put it out of our power to believe or trust him.

Not that Stratagems are disallowable, or that Victory is the less honorable
for them neither; it is Jesting, not Fighting, to proclaim every blow we intend.

'Twas a generous Custom of the Ancients indeed, to give notice of Battle by
the sound of a Bell; the course of late is more wary, but not less bloody, to
secure Frontiers by Garrisons, and spin out Wars by the Tricking of Armies.

Wars are usually of two sorts, either of Conquest, or like Moses's, to root
out the Inhabitants. In a common dispute* the Decision of a Goliath, or Horatii,
may save blood; but, an extirpating War, and such as Papists and Protestants at
this day are, can safely admit of a Peace on no Terms.

Thus, Am I entered into a War, and am I like to engage with a stronger State?
by Garrisons I will stop mine Enemy, till either by Diversion or Assistance I
can withstand him; but if neither my self, nor Allies, can probably resist him,
I will rather generously fling my self under some agreeable Protection, than
stand with a silly Sullenness to be destroyed.

But are your Forces equal? and are you well fortified? Admit the War in your
own Country, where you may command both Men and Provisions upon a loss, and
which abroad may be fatal to your Army. Thus the Suiss that can fight an
^00^00. at home, strain hard to maintain but 40000 men when abroad; and yet
without Forts, your whole Country's destroyed.

So, is your War with a Trade-State? pen them but in, and stop their Course,
and you make them ruin themselves: But is such a State too powerful for you?
Either buy your Peace, make in with its Enemies, or distract him by some
intestine Commotions; perhaps some of the Royal Family have a Claim to be
assisted.

Would you delay a War? Send an Ambassador with Proposals of Peace; but with
such perplexed Terms, as may judicially require some time to deliberate them.

But are you resolved on a War, and in the mean time would blind your Enemy
while you are preparing? Amuse your Enemy by Secret Counsels and close
Ambassadors; nor need you be wanting in Congratulatory Complements and
Civilities. Must I presume, my honest Demands will create a War, and may not I
wait till I am duly enabled to make them?

So, Is a War begun? Invite your Enemy by mercy, and fright him through
severity. Have you two Armies? By the one block up Forts, while the other
enters on the Enemy.

So also, are you forced to proceed by Sieges? Blood will save Blood, and by
destroying every Man in the Garrison, where there is not a Surrender on
Summons, you will make a quick dispatch of the War.

So also, to manage Secrets well, is a great point in War; and so for Precepts
and Orations, to bear up men's Courages. One General on his Death, for this very
cause, ordered a Drum to be made of his skin, only to hearten his Soldiers.

So, as for punishing Warlike Offenses, nothing deserves a greater care:
Cowards alas! are not worthy of Death; let them rather live to expiate their
Disgrace: but as for the false and treacherous, let them be no sooner
discovered, than sent to the Father and promoter of Perfidy, lest it prove too
late for you to destroy them in their second Wiles.

Of CONQVEST.
A Pious Conqueror ought but exactly to do Justice and Right to himself; if he
acquires new Dominions, it should not be out of ambition but necessity, and
because that his Enemies are perverse and implacable.

As the Pirate notably answered Alexander the Great, What are great Conquests
but great Robberies? So surely, one might as justly be guilty of a Robbery as a
Conquest, unless one had the justest cause of War to move one to it.

For my part, had I the Empire of the World through Conquest, yet like Lycurgus
with Sparta, it should be but to settle their States the better by it: Did I
root out a Tyrant, yet like the Old Romans, would I not rob his Heirs; or
should I subdue a Commonwealth, t'should be but to reinstate them in their
Ancient Purity.

Surely, I but pretend to War for my Neighbors Relief, while I make a Prey of
him. Indeed, if a State be so corrupt, as not to be able to bear to be
reformed, I will rather take the Conquest into my own protection, than leave it
weltring in Anarchy and Blood.

To be short; Robbers and Murderers of thousands in Corruption and Flattery, we
admire without regret, while the more innocent Rogues from necessity we destroy
in this World, and damn in the next; but surely, God will be more just to them.

But to proceed, Would you secure a Conquest? you must root out the ancient
Governors, or the Mobile in Faction will reinstate the worst of Tyrannies: so,
would you transform a corrupt Commonwealth? you must either raise their chief
Cities, or transplant their principal Heads, or else the first advantage that
offers them will confound your Establishment.

Thus also, a Conquest where there are NOBLES, is easier than where all are
SLAVES; the Turkish Vassals will be forced unanimously to withstand you, tho
when subdued, your Conquest is entire and secure; while English NOBLES, that
may assist your Victory, will withal by the same Hereditary Power, render your
Conquest as ticklish.

To preserve a Conquest therefore: First, Reside personally sometime upon it,
the better to prevent all Plots: And, Secondly, On pretense of kindness, take
some of the NOBLES Sons as Hostages with you when you depart: Thirdly, Continue
Titles of Honor to the Natives, but keep all Offices to your own Servants:
Fourthly, Let your Ministers be only seen in harsh things: And Lastly, take
particular care of all popular Meetings, on any pretense whatever.

To be short; All alterations naturally leave a toothing for new Changes; and
therefore the best way to secure what you have got, is like the generous Romans
also, to make one law of Nations: And so, if you let Humanity Crown your Peace,
as Valor has adorned your War, you need not fear but to govern without danger.

When your Conquests find themselves united to you by Marriages, their Taxes
eased and remitted, and their whole States changed for the better; when you
change not the customs of their Provinces, and your impartial Justice gives
them not the least jealously of their Rights, you will find men are not mad to
embroyle themselves.

And yet, Are your Conquests in different Languages? your vigorous beginnings
must not end in too supine a negligence; you must have a jealous Eye on
Neighbors, least they join the discontented Natives; and in this Case, if you
cut off Seditious Heads, yet withal you must pardon and reward as generously,
but especially your NOBLES.

But lastly, Are you so necessitated, and would you secure your Conquests by
force? Do it rather by Colonies, than firing them against you through standing
Forces; he that by right of Conquest is Master of all, surely may command any
little particular part, and dispossess the Natives of a few convenient
fortified Towns for Colonies.

Are a few dispossessed, do you object? it is for the good of the whole, and they
become too poor to be formidable; and as they are, you may make them
satisfaction in another place, if you please, and which is best; or if not,
others enjoying their Rights justly, will never assist them.

Of Stratagems of WAR.
THere are many advantages of Stratagems; but above all, that they breed
confidence in your own Army, and dismay your Enemy: He Will dread to take the
advantage of your Miscarriages, while he fears the Reputation of your Designs.

Nor is it the least Excellency of Stratagem, to alter at every turn your
methods. Thus, if sometimes a Cap on a Staff be made the Signal of Battle, as
well as the Sound of the Trumpet, etc. how can your Enemy measure your
intentions?

So, to encourage your Army, print sometimes a hearty Speech to your Soldiers,
with the promise of Rewards; so do they dread your Enemy? Skirmish him with
some of your best men, to make him familiar to them.

So, Would you make your Soldiers unanimous? let them do but the Enemy some
considerable mischief before they Mutiny, and fear will do the work.

Hannibal finding his Soldiers desert, in a Speech told the rest that staid,
That those that had left him had leave, and went as Spies to the Romans; the
Romans hearing of this, cut off the Deserters right hands, and sent them back
to Hannibal again.

So by Letters or chance words in Embassies, to insinuate that the Eenemies
Generals or Officers are false, will give just the same jealously and distrust
as if they were so.

Above all, Spies are greatly to be feared; are they run-aways? command but
every Man to his Tent, and they are discovered immediately; but Spies near your
Counsels are most pernicious; if an inconsiderable Enemy can so far undermine
you, you may justly dread at last, least he destroy you by Stratagems also.

Some to feel an Enemies Pulse, send Ambassadors often with good Soldiers in
disguise; while others to blind such discoveries, continue their number of
Tents, and draw their parties out of the whole Army.

To obtain your desire on your Enemy, counterfeit but that you fear or desire
the contrary, and you need not doubt his readiness to cross or disappoint you:
But would you avoid fighting him? besure keep at least 50 Miles from him.

So, does he streighten you? amuse him by some Truce or Stratagem; Thus some
have driven Oxen with combustible matter fired on their horns before them, and
so escaped.

Nor, is it inconsiderable, the skill and Command of Posts and Passes in this
case, and yet not but that to repose your whole trust on them is as ruinous.

But has your Enemy distressed you already in Stratagems? use the following or
like Remedies.

Thus, does your Enemy encompass you gather your self close and break through
his weaker sides; does he press you between two Hills? make but a Trench behind
you, and you may fight which half of him you please: does the other half come
round upon you? a wooden-Bridge made, and laid cross the Trench, frees you of
all.

So, does he stop you at a River? either privately send out a Detachment to
make a Bridge cross to secure your passage at another place, or divert the
Channel, and so make it fordable; some have laid combustible matter in their
Trenches, while others have turned the River and drowned their Enemies with it.

Some have counterfeited preys and fears to draw an Ambush, while others have
set up Sails on sticks, and shown their Baggage retinue on an Hill, to
terrify their Enemy with the approach of Succors.

Some by favors to Captives, have divided their Enemies, and by little
Messages, soothed them in their divisions; but then remember, that to attack
them too soon upon it, is to unite them; and here a General's dispositions and
passions are to be regarded.

Some also have let their Enemies enter, and take Towns, and assaulted them
when weakened by garrisoning; others have waited only for some advantage over
him, as his passing a River, etc. but in all cases, a General had better fight
than baulk his men by too much caution.

But to proceed; Is your Army at leisure? ravaging is the best employ: Seiges
are uncertain, Conspiracies loss of time, storming Towns is dangerous, and
Battles more hazardous; but the best Plundering is under the Enemies Colors.

But above all, the Reputation of a Geneals justice, his clemency and severity
to perfection are most useful; he that is gentle to all but the stubborn, and
implacable to the obstinate, has a double force to beat his Enemies with.

And yet, after all, a possibility of Retreat, and a Backdoor to Cowardice,
ought to be left to the most Obstinate; 'twill influence your own Soldiers
with Fear, to deal with an Enemy, desperate, and beyond all power of escape:
And thus Caesar would not let his Soldiers see, that a Town they besieged was
reduced to a Bread of Herbs.

To reduce your own Men to a necessity therefore, were much the rather to be
chosen. Thus, I would Burn my Ships, if I Invaded an Island to make my Men
desperate: But, if I stormed a Town, I would Proclaim, not to kill a Man that
laid down his Sword, rather than to suggest I intended no Mercy.

So also, it is dangerous after a Battle, to fall upon the Conqueror, unless he
has had a very hard Victory of it. Slaughters are generally in the flight, and
not in the field; and it is therefore no little disadvantage to attack a flushed
Victor, and one just practiced in ready fighting.

To conclude, Histories may teach us more and better Stratagems than these; But
where shall we find them? Has a General leisure to consult Volumes for the
result and occurrence of an hour? Surely therefore, even in this, Precepts
exceed History also.

Of Plunder and Slaves.
NOt only the Goods, Slaves, and Lands of the Conquered, but their very Persons
also, by the Laws of Conquest, are at the discretion of the Victors; and yet,
not but that at worst, they owe them all the freedoms and duties of Humanity;
nothing can excuse us of Rapes, of putting Women or Children to death, or Men,
except Soldiers, or actually in Arms.

Nay, if even Soldiers become your humble Suplicants, and surrender on
discretion, only the Principal Guiltists among your Enemy ought to suffer
Death, I mean in Prudence, as well as Justice; for sure, the Mercy that can
soften your Enemies, is highly to be esteemed of.

In the partition of Plunder, it is not agreeable the State should have all;
surely the Soldiers deserve the price of their blood: but then let an Oath be
Administered* for every Soldier to bring in his Plunder to be divided; or else,
not only they may lose the day, through the Avarice of Plunder, but the worst
of Soldiers will get most; while the General, and other Officers, that deserve
best, will want even an equal distribution.

In the Roman Distribution, the State had the Lands, Houses, and Goods Royal of
the Conquered, while other Goods were distributed to the Merits and Dignity of
the Officers and Soldiers; a share being always reserved, as a Reward for all
singular Bravery.

But Free-plunder is most Barbarous, and, of all Military Offenses, deserves
Death: Nor is the Maxim less Brutish, of spoiling Countries where we come, to
stop the progress and advantage of our Enemies, to destroy dangerous Castles
and Fortifications, and the Fruits of the Earth, has some Sense in it; but, to
Burn Houses, and ruin Temples, and Plantations, What is it but a Cowardice, and
a Malicing the very good of Mankind?

Does mine Enemy overcome me? therefore let me bravely let his Valor have such
fruits of his Conquest, as may reward it; and, if it be my own happy lot, is
not a Country Dressed and Civilized, better than Ruin and Destruction?

Of SOVLDIERS.
NOthing more Embroyls a State, than a Standing Army; if they have not Work,
you will quickly find they will make it, though even as in Turkey, by Domineering
over their very Princes: Besides, Is there any truer Method to Barbarism?
Could Experience ever show us, that Soldiery did not destroy Property, and
corrupt all Virtue?

And yet, nothing is more unsafe than to Disband a great Army all at a time; it
oftentimes creates a New Disease in a State; the better way therefore to move,
is by degrees, and to Casheer those that can live without pay first, and the
other after.

But, Are you to Raise an Army? choose your Officers of the Gentry, and, if
possible, Volunteers; yet still, provided they be not profligate, or dissolute;
for such Men are no fitter to be Officers, than of any other Employment.

So, let your Soldiers be hardy, your Horse from the City, and your Foot from
the Country; their Age between 17 and 40. As for their Strength and Activity,
you would do well to Exercise them before you List them.

To choose an Army of your common Volunteers, and Miscreant Fugitives, is the
most imprudent; an Army ought rather to be a Body of Martyrs: Debauched Men are
fitter for an House of Correction, than to be of an orderly and designing Body,
though in an Army.

So a mean Militia and Army of your own, is much better than a great Mercenary
Force: By good and constant Discipline, you may inspire the worst of Men by
degrees, while Foreigners damp the Courage and Estimate of your own.

Besides, How many States have felt the Ruin of Auxiliary Forces? if you trust
them, they either give up your Cause, or Prey upon you; at least they are
interested but to Fight in Jest for you; as in Italy, they shall not suffer
your saucy Bombs to disturb their rest at night in their Sieges.

Further, Forces of your own you may Command at your pleasure; while
Foreigners will be only desperate for their own ends. Are you necessitated to
Foreigners therefore? front them in your Army, or mix them so as to force them
to Fight.

As for the breeding Soldiers, liberty only can give us good hearts: The old
Roman Peasants durst face Kings, and make Generals in the Field: their Country
was as worthy their Love, as their Courage; while Men cowed, can slave to all
Tyrants alike. Hen. the Seventh therefore, politickly settled Farms of such a
Size, etc. to breed good Boors by.

As for the sorts of Soldiers, your Granadeers are a Body of Men designed for
any extraordinary occasion; they wait at the Flank of your Army, as the
Dragoons do; and they are often as well Horse as Foot; and on sudden and
desperate Emergencies very needful.

As for Horse and Foot in a well-disciplin'd Army, experience has shown, Foot
doubly to excel Horse; indeed, Foot with Pikes have often beat double their
number of Horse. Horse, it is true, at a Rout, or, as Scouts, or to raise
Contribution, or to confound a weak Enemy, are excellent; but, to think a Spur
can force an Horse upon a Pike, is as absurd as dangerous.

So, What are Pikes, or Muskets either, without defensive Arms, for Head,
Breast, Arms, Thighs and Legs, with a Buckler? Men thus Armed, put by your
Pikes, and come in with ease upon your Men with naked Swords; nay, if such Men
Ride but as Dragoons, they attack you more speedily, and even just where they
please.

Nor is this a Fiction neither; the Romans, who by use, made such Defensive
Arms tolerable, withal Conquered the World with them: And if either the best
Politicians, or the best Historians be to be credited, this sort of Men, for
all our Firearms, are not even yet to be despised.

Of MILITIA.
THat Soldiers are Voluptuous is not always so much from their Corruption, as
that Perils ask to be paid by Pleasures: To dye a Soldier, surely is a kind of
Martyrdom; and he that blames the Profession for the Abuse, forgets, that on
sudden approaches of Enemies, and Invasions, it is every Man's duty to be a
Soldier; but more especially the Young, and Unmarried, Luke 3. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 7.

But then I would rather be a Volunteer, than a Listed Soldier: Surely it can
never be lawful to kill Men purely at the Call of the Ambition of Princes.

Soldiers in War, are Sinews to the Body-Politick, in Peace its Fever: Not
that it is safe neither; quite to lay aside your Warlike Discipline in Peace;
But think you there is any Justice for one Man to live sluggishly on the Labor
of another?

The justest Mean therefore must be, a well-manag'd Militia; and if we are for
Teaching Warlike-discipline in Peace, Why do we not also turn our University
Speculative Mathematics to the more useful Improvements of Fortification and
Enginery?

But, in a Militia the Disciplining a few Men, and they every time strangers,
and drawn, with Charge, from remote parts, to meet in a Body; surely, such a
Martial-discipline can avail little or nothing.

Let it rather be, that every Man of such an Age, and Stature, be a Soldier;
that every Parish be a distinct Body of them, having its proper Officers in
it is self; and, that no one, capable on any account, be exempt from Discipline.

This would force our Gentry, as their Officers, into esteem; and, if by any
means, make a Nation Invincible: And surely, 'twould rather be a delight, and a
diversion, than a Charge, for such a Militia, (like as at our Ancient Wakes) to
meet and Exercise an hour or two in a Week.

And, do you fear in such case such Disciplines being superficial? How easy is
the Cure, by the Examination of Commissioners for Hundreds and Counties, etc.
And, Do you want an Army? How quick does every Parish proportion you a Supply?

Nay, and such an Army you may easily Disband with a Donative; and, every Man
knowing his home, is welcomely received; while you are out of danger of being
pestered by Vagabonds, indeed if any such should happen to be disabled, 'twould
be a Generous Charity in the State to provide Hospitals for them, or else they
are provided for, with a kind welcome to your hand.

Donatives to Standing Armies are most pernicious, even to make them at last,
State-robbers; but Donatives here would be the justest reward of our Brethrens
Blood.

Besides, such an Army would have Humanity and Christianity; nor need we doubt
but that their constant Exercise would make them brave, as Soldiers by
profession; besides, that Soldiers thus raised, would know truly how to value
their Liberty.

To conclude; The constant and universal Exercise could not but whet their
Spirits and Courages in Emulation, and make them familiar to Force and Arms,
while every Soldier employed, would, like the Romans of old, know how to Fight
heartily for that Peace he knew what 'twas to enjoy; and especially, if when
Maimed, they were assured of a comfortable Subsistence in their several
Parishes.

Of BATTLE.
ARe you suddenly to give Battle? Publish a Speech against Cowardice: Alas!
Are not all our great slaughters made, when Men run away? And can you want
Topics?

So, if possible, before you fight also, give your Men, from some Hill, the
prospect of your Enemy; by that you may deride their Discipline, and expose
them to the Contempt of your Army: Fear is seldom so considerable, as when of
something unknown.

So, when you Fight, make their Ensigns carry their Pay, and that will make
your Soldiers vigorously defend them: Nor be without Rewards or Punishments;
Thus, to kill a Captain, so much; a General, so much; and, to Mount a Breach,
so much, etc.

Does a Regiment offend? Decimate them. Are they Cowards? Mark them with a C.
and let them live to the Disgrace: Are they Treacherous? give them the death
they deserve. And yet, to avoid Sedition, let the General but give them a
little blow with a Wand; for when you make a Soldier pass the Pikes, the Army
are their own Executioners.

As to Figures, Armies are generally drawn into Three Lines; and the Turks use
the Crescent; but surely, the Ground and Circumstance ought, in this Case, to
be considered.

Thus, Is your Army biggest? fight in open field, and try to compass your
enemy? Is it little? flank your self with Trenches, and fight close. Have you
no Horse? seek to enclosures; but, above all, beware of the Wind, or Sun, in
your Faces.

So, Are you assaulted in a Wedge, to distract you? become a pair of Sheers, to
cut off your enemy. Are you inclined to compass him? equal his breadth, advance
gradually your Wings, and retreat your Front; but this is a dangerous Work.

When the Battle begins, Generals, by Drums and Trumpets, Order their Soldiers
to the field, and Great Guns attempt the first Execution, while the Dragoons
Attack them; and e're a second discharge, the fight begins, and they become
useless.

Thus, Are the Guns in the middle of their Battalions? divide your Army, and
you avoid them; the first shot is distant, and goes over, or under; or your
Infantry, by their wide ranks avoid them, while your Horse are secure in their
Rear.

After this, Shouts join both your Dragoons; who, bearing the first shock, make
room, by retiring to your Flanck and Rear, and while more silent Orders join
the Battle.

And now the Pikes advance to keep off the Horse; while the Armies once joined,
the Pikes withdraw within the Bucklers, and your Bucklers worsted within your
Pikes.

Muskets serve a shot or two, till the Fight is closed, but then your Man at
Arms, with Sword, Buckler and Armor, does all; who, if the first Rank but
kneel, their very Bucklers keep off the Bullets; But, What can fence your
Rapier with Armor?

The wise Romans had their Ranks wide, their Hastati, or Young Men, bore the
fury of the Battle; if worsted, they retired among their Principes, or strong
Men, and they again among their Triarii, or Old Soldiers.

Your Horse, in the mean time, engage at the side of your Army, while your
Dragoons retire to take care of your Camp: the proportion of your Foot is; Have
you Ten Battalions? Five Hastati, Three Principes, and Two Triarii; the benefit
of such Orders is, your Men are refreshed by the new support of your best Men
at last; while a square Army runs, and is defeated, before half can fight.

But now, Why do I stay? the fight's begun, Stratagems follow, Pits,
Ambuscades, False Allarums, Surprises of Novel Words, Engines, Shouts, and
Appearances of Succors.

Officers fling their Colors among the Enemy, to reward the Soldiers that
fetch them again; while the General minds Intelligence, and Orders Succors to
the side that is oppressed, and the Dragoons refreshed; return to try to flank
the enemy.

After all, Have you worsted an unequal enemy? either perfect the Victory, or
snap at his disheartened Terms of Peace: The only time of slaughter is, when Men
are disordered, and lose their Confidence in one another; to let them Rally,
spoils all.

So, Was your flight doubtful, and parted by Night? carry off some Dead, to
dismay your enemy, through their fewness next morning; such a Night cannot but
be a Night of Dread, and the least push will be likely to give the Morning's
advantage.

But are you beat? to hinder pursuit, fight where you may retreat; at worst,
retreat part of your Army orderly first; and so your Enemy not daring to
divide, appoint a common place for the rest to meet at: but are your Soldiers
forced to fly? yet at worst, let them detard their Pursuers, and save their
Lives by scattering their Treasures.

On the whole, in a pitched Battle to be first in the Field, is of great use;
you choose your Ground, and you hearten your Soldiers by it; but even on this,
nay on Victory, beware of a too careless Success; for that almost ever ruins
the day, and too often sacrifice all, (while the Soldiers are careless, merry,
or plundering) to some trifling Reinforcement.

To conclude, As for Engines, surely Archimedes's Arrow-Engine must needs, even
at this day, gall Horse worse than any Guns whatever. Arrows not only are of
equal execution, but fret Horse doubly more than Guns can; but as for your
Scithe Charriots, they are now become of no use, being so readily stopped by
Stakes.

Of Military Discipline.
I Shall not trouble you with the mechanic Rudiments of Discipline, as
Shoulder your Musket, advance your Pike, etc. a Formality not without its use;
for how can men charge together otherwise! But this I shall say, You should
keep your Rancks at 6 foot distance, your Files at 3. lest you cramp your
Motion; so your Colors and Drums between your Muskets and Pikes, your Captain
with the Pikes, and your Lieutenant with the Muskets.

So, the general order of Martialling Soldiers, is to every Squadron, or Ten,
a Sergeant or Corporal to head, hearten, and command; to every 100. a Captain;
to every 1000. a Colonel; and to the whole Body a General. Or, in Battalions
of 6000. thus, 10 Companies in a Battalion, 450 in a Company; and which making
4500. the remaining 1500. are to be 1000 Pikes, and 500. Velites extraordinary.

So the proportion of a good Army, should be in 6000 men, 3000 with Bucklers,
2000 with Pikes, and 1000 with Muskets; as for your Ranks, the closer the
better, as not so easily broken; yet still provided, that they leave convenient
space for motion, and that their Files be so constant that their Soldiers
never want to find out their Post again.

If your Company contain 400 men, you may draw them up 5 in a File, and 80 in a
Rank; or, if you would reduce them to a square for fighting, it is but casting your
first File into your second, your third into your fourth, etc. and then there
will be 40 Files of 10. and so you may bring them to 20. of 20. if you please,
to be ready to answer which way soever attacked.

And, as inferior Officers ought to reduce Soldiers to a readiness in such
Discipline, to be able to answer their Generals Commands upon occasion; so
ought they to enure their Soldiers to hardship also, that they be not dismayed
in extremity.

Thus, to let them carry their own Corn, will not only help, but strengthen
them; so for them to learn to swim, may save them on occasion; while to drown
them in luxury and ease, What is it but to soften and effeminate their very
Courages withal, to their Destruction.

As for your disciplining Dragoons, there needs not so much care; they being
designed rather upon extraordinary occasions than in any thing like a regular
fight. Your Horse indeed should be more orderly; thus, suppose 300 in a
Battalion, of which 150 to be men at Arms, and 150 to be Light.

Your Pikes are to front the square of your Army, and as 5 Ranks of them is as
many as can well charge at once; and as the Fight begun, and the Army secured
from the Horse, they fall to make room for the Men at Arms; so 7 Files of
Pikes, that is, 1 or 2 to be ready to supply falling men, is as many as you can
have occasion to front with.

The manner of Commanding an Army, is, the Soldiers follow the Colors, and
they the Drums; the inferior Officers command the Sentinels, and the
Superiors them, while the General governs all. A bad General, or a bad Army
therefore, are equally dangerous.

On the whole, an 100 men in Military Discipline, and convenient Arms, are a
match for two in confusion; the one helps each other; the other promotes but
one another's destruction, while the culled Angular men of Officers and
Corporals in an Army, bind and hearten the whole regular Number as into a Body.

Of Marching an Army.
TO march an Army through a Foreign Country, observe these Rules. First, that
the Prince have due notice, that Quarters may be provided, and a sufficient pay
prescribed. Secondly, That the second Body go the same way that the first did,
and that if they are in great Bodies, they march not every day.

Thirdly, That damage done by Soldiers be made good. Fourthly, That they
approach no prohibited place within a Mile. And lastly, That they do not
quarter in Cities or Towns that are entrenched.

The usual method is, your Dragoons march first to scower the Road, then your
right Wing and Carriages are to follow; then your Body with its Carriages, and
after those your left Wing with its Carriages, and after all your Cavalry.

And, thus withdrawing a little your Carriages, you are ready for the Enemy any
way, and he cannot well attack you in your march if you are circumspect, but
that he will be at as much disadvantage as your self.

Your Dragoons who scower the Road, guard your Pioneers also, who are to plain
your ways, and make Entrenchments for your Camp; and in this, not to multiply
Men needlessly, your own Soldiers may serve as Pioneers, and who, when an Enemy
approaches, may retreat to their Arms; your Spades and Pick-axes being carried
by for them in Carts.

If you march where you may be straightened in Provisions, have at least a
Months necessaries before hand, and take continual care for Supplies; and to
this end you may have a Market with Sutlers in the middle of your Camp, while
your Cattle laden with Corn, are driven by your Bakers, Butchers, and Cooks,
after them.

Above all, take care to march in exact order; and if a few Men assault you,
and fly, or a Prize of Cattle appear, do not let them decoy you into an
Ambushment; a General must anticipate Stratagems as he marches.

So, Do you fear surprises or ambushes? beware of Hills, of Woods and Hedges,
and you need not fear but that either Scouts, Dust, or Birds, will give you
notice, that you may at least provide your self of Advantage against their
attack.

Further, when you march, never acquaint your Army with the enterprise, lest it
perish through the discovery; but rather getting a Chart, pick up some Country
Guides, and make them yours through threats and rewards to conduct you.

As for the size of your Army, the Romans by their Conquests seemed best Judges
of fighting, and they thought 24000, or at most 50000 Men a double Army enough;
indeed, more not only confounds and devour one another, but are not well
manageable, nor can they conveniently march in the Field.

Of Treachery, etc.
IS an Enemy Treacherous or extreme Bloody in his Wars? Does he break his Word,
or lay Countries waste causelessly? He has flung up his Right either to Treaty
or mercy from thee, and the mildest Quarter that he can expect upon it, is,
that he be decimated.

Now the Treacherous are not only such as are faithless, and observe no
Treaties, but those that War like Robbers without the least apparency of cause
to justify it, or those that abuse our Ambassadors, or any other way violate
the sacred Laws of Nations.

Not, but that the just right of War leaves me all the liberty of Stratagems to
bribe or divide mine Enemy whatever; nay, I may send Spies to Assassinate him,
as well as Parties to Plunder him; but if I am once either false or perfidious,
my Enemy has no tie of mercy to me till I am naked in his Power.

So I may use all the honest means of simulation; thus I may justly seem to
fly, to draw mine Enemy to an Ambush, and so I may plunder under mine enemies
Colors, and make falls Alarms; alas it is not fighting, if I am not allowed by
false Passes to draw mine enemy from his Guard, the better to make a real one.

The true Rule therefore is, all known signs of Treaty, whether by Flag, or
otherwise, I am bound in veracity to stand to; but in other matters, even
Christ himself gave us another Example, after he was risen from the dead; and
set his Face as if he were going where he was not.

Nay, Does even a Nest of Pirates reform to a Government, and our
Treacherousest Enemy begin to leave his Perfidy? I will not too far hazard the
Wiles of the Fox, but after a moderate self-justice and reprisal for my
injustice, I am bound to treat both and either as my Brethren.

But, above all Treachery, beware of trusting Exiles too far, in leading your
Expeditions; consider how dearly such Men may value their own Country, and how
redily they may be apt to purchase their liberty at thy expense.

Of Fortification and Sieges.
FOr a Fortification, take some Rocky Nap in a Plain, that is neither blinded
by Hills nor Woods; the Walls if possible, are better natural than raised; for
if cut out of a Rock, neither Batteries nor Mines can destroy the Hill.

As for the thickness or height of Walls, or the number of Redoubts, they are
Matters wholly at discretion. Can you make a Castle like a City? Surely, your
works ought to be suited to your own size and proportion of Ground, and to the
Enemies approach, and not a Figure.

A Fort of two or three Angles only, is of no value; but after that, the more
the better, provided if not like Babylon, too big for Intelligence: But the
silly imagination, that the strength of a place depends on every Mathematical
Figure, is trifling.

A Fort not strong by Nature, cannot receive much by Art; Now by Art the Walls
ought to be three yards thick at least, and Towers built at every 200 Yards.

For Ditches, two are best, without and within; if you have one only, it is best
within, and that of 30 Yards broad at least, and 12 deep, with Artillery to
scour them at every 200 Yards; and so it is better without Water than with; if
your Water freeze, the Town is gone at an instant; and if not, a Bridge of
Boats is easier made than another.

Is your Ditch to Water, or Rock? there is no possibility of mining your Wall.
Is it in the inside? there is no way to come to fill it up; your Wall in
Battery will fall the other way: and so that your Ditch will be good when your
Wall is flat.

Further, in Forts, let your Houses be low, so as not to hinder your prospect;
let your Gates be secured by Ravelin and and Portcullis, and let your free
passage be secured by Drawbridge, or at worst by a Timber-stand from the
bottom of the Bridge, and which you may command by Cannon of your Inner Redoubt.

Little Entrenchments without the Walls are most mischievous, the losing and
retreating from such little Bastions, are perfect Baits of Cowardice to your
Soldiers; and surely, it is no good Lesson to teach them to give ground.

Further, in founding a Fort, the Air and Water are greatly to be regarded, as
also an agreeable Country, and Roads near it; if built in too fertile a Land,
it may luxuriate it; if in too barren, not be able to provide against a Siege.

The beauty of Forts in Buildings, or otherwise, is not much to be regarded;
but Frontiers that are like to be disturbed by War, will require all the
encouragements imaginable: Now such are, 1. Free-trade, 2. Easy Justice, 3.
Asylum, etc.

A Fort thus settled, the Inhabitants by the Law of Nations, owe the Government
a Right to defend her; and in which case, though a single person may desert it, a
Prince may justly withstand a general departure, provided he fear not their
Treachery.

But is a Siege begun? Due order is to be observed: Let Women and Children keep
their Houses to avoid disturbance; and the men be distributed into three parts,
1. to be on the Guard, 2. ready as a reserve, and a 3d. taking their rest. Some
add, a Mastiff Dog to their Sentinel, full as serviceable as a Man.

Nor let your Discipline be neglected on any Account; Towns have been stormed
even at Dinner time; and yet not but that in such case, when they have, the
Besieged sometimes by Showers out at their Windows, and sometimes by firing the
Town, have made their Walls good again against the Besiegers.

Some on the other hand, have seemed to leave the Walls, as if the Town were
fired by some Bomb, only by a false Fire, the better to draw the enemy to a
disadvantagous Attack; and while at the same time, the Walls have unseen, been
doubly guarded.

But does the Siege proceed? and would you avoid mining? Digg holes every 10
Yards, like Wells by your Walls, and they will give vent; or sound the Mine,
and countermine it. So, is your Ditch in the outside, and your Wall flat? make
but a Ditch within of 30 Yards broad, and the Breach is as easily kept as the
Wall.

Some, when a Siege has been drove hard, have shot in empty Bombs those
propositions, that the Officers would not acquaint their Soldiers with, while
others seeming only to march near a Town, have fallen upon it at unawares, and
so surpised it in Disorder.

Some have seemed to fly, and leave their Camp, and so drilling out the Enemy,
surpised the Town; while others poisoning their Camp-Victuals, have destroyed
the Enemy that way.

So, Where a Town has stood doubtful, t'has been secured by begging to receive
some sick Men, while the stoutest men have been sent in disguise into it.

So some have poisoned Waters, others drove in the Besieged's Friends, to
consume their Victuals, while some have been relieved by Nutts floating down a
River.

Caesar made a Bread of Herbs for his Soldiers; and Londonderry fed on Starch
for Bread, and Leather boiled soft for Meat.

But are the Besieged come to a Treaty? It Is neither honorable nor safe for a
Governor to parley in a Siege, nor to accept other Terms, than at least to go
out Armed, and in order. Surely, He Is mad that can trust himself naked with a
Triumphant and Revengeful Army.

Nor is it a little imprudence for a General to divide himself to destruction in
besieging little Henroosts before a Royal Army; and if there be no such Army,
Forts alone cannot hinder your Army from ravaging your Enemies Country.

To conclude, Forts are only of use against Enemies and on Frontiers; it is a
Self-destructive Policy to think to retain Subjects in Obedience by them: the
wise Romans chose rather to demollish them; but while you have Forts, Military
Discipline is as necessary; for your Garrisoners in their Sallies, as your
Field Soldiers in their March.

Of the CAMP.
THE Order of your Camp ought to be, as if you were ready to charge your Enemy;
only you may stand a little wider, for the convenience of Streets and Air, and
for the benefits of reintrenchments, but always in the same manner, that the
Soldiers may naturally know their home, and the whole seem a moving City,
constantly with the same Gates and Lodgings.

Nor ought your Camp, if near an Enemy, to want either Water or Provisions; nor
if your stay be long, a good Air; above all, streighten not your march by want
of securing Passes; nor lie too near to Hills, lest your Enemy incommode you.

Your Ditch ought at least to be 6 Yards wide, and 3 deep, together with
Half-Moons for your Artillery, to flanck your Enemy as he approaches; and so
your Camp may be better for conveniences, than either as on a Hill or by a
River.

Further, While you are encampt, beware of Surprise; and while your enemy is
near, besure watch all comers and goers; nay, a third part of your Soldiers
ought to be continually Armed; and a fourth of those, perpetually on the Watch,
some at the corners, and some on the Patroll or Search, lest your enemy either
Stratagem or Besiege you in your Camp.

Lastly, In decamping, the usual order is, the General Sounds his Trumpet
thrice the first time, to give notice to take down Tents, and pack them up; the
second, to load their Sumpters; and the third, to march away.

FINIS.
THE TABLE
THe Entrance, or the Digester. P. 1. Of Books. p. 15. Of Critics p. 20. Of
Divination, etc. p. 22. Astrology p. 26. -- Its Dependants p. 31.
Of Meckness p. 38. Of Contention p. 40. Of Contradiction p. 42. Lapis
Errantium p. 44. Of Cunning p. 55. Of Wisdom p. 57. The Seeming Wise p. 59. Of
Logic p. 61. Its Parts p. 63. Arguments p. 66. Method p. 70.
Of Anger p. 76. Of Murder p. 78. Of Revenge p. 80. Of Reformation p. 82. By A.
B. Tillotson p. 97.
Of Wit p. 100 Of Rewards p. 103. Of Pedantry p. 104. Of Pity p. 118. Of Pardon
p. 120. Of Rhetoric p. 123. Delivery p. 125. Persuasion p. 128. Parts of
Discourse p. 134. Invention p. 137. Figures p. 139.
Of Judgment p. 142. Of Happiness p. 144. Of Presence of Mind p. 147. Of
Secrets p. 149. To attain Secrets p. 153. Occult Writing p. 155.
Of Collections p. 161. Of Precepts p. 163. Of Sincerity p. 166. Of Vows and
Oaths p. 169. Of Censure p. 177. Praises p. 177. Contempt p. 180. Libels p.
183. True Satyr p. 186. Rash Judgment p. 189. Reports p. 194.
Of Poetry p. 198. Of Preface and Dedication p. 203. Of Study p. 208. Method p.
209. Limitation of Study p. 214. Choice of Books p. 217. Speculat. and Practice
p. 222.
Of Constancy p. 226.
The Art of War.
Of the Lawfulness of War p. 231. Of Generals in War p. 236. Of War in General
p. 239. Of Conquest p. 243. Of Stratagems in War p. 247. Of Plunder and Slaves
p. 252 Of Soldiers p. 255. Of Militia p. 257. Of Battle p. 260. Of Military
Discipline p. 265. Of Marching an Army p. 268. Of Treachery p. 270. Of
Fortifications p. 273. Of Camps. p. 278.
ERRATA.
PAge 34. Line 17. read, together with your Rosacrucian figments.

P. 64. l. 1. r. quatuor modis, for Quarto modo.

P. 85. l. 13. r. That dominion, for the dominion.

P. 112. l. 12. r. with such formalities, and the like as.

P. 124. l. ult. r. of That nature, for that of nature.

P. 130. l 14. r. Judged by him, for judged by them.

P. 189. l. 17. r. currunt for current.

P. 193. l. 2. r. fancy and Idea, for fancy an Idea. 23. r. their indifferency,
for as an indifferency.

P. 224. l. 15. r. Hypocrites, dele as.


