THE ROYAL MESSAGE FROM THE PRINCE OF ORANGE TO THE PEERS AND Commons in
England, To advertise them of some dangerous Plots of foreign Enemies,
undertaken by Don Keevalo Caris, and others, to invade this Kingdom.

With his desire, that all the Ports and Cinque Coasts be fortified with strong
Arms and Ammunition.

As also how he freely proffered himself to resist both them and the Irish
rebels.

Prnted for Tho. Powel. 1641.

A Royal Embassage from the Prince of Orange to the well affected Subjects in
England.
WE having maturely considered of the disloyal opposition, which have been
reflected on our Father, the manifold endeavors of your unwearied vigilancie,
and the obstacles that interrupt the same, with the multiplicity of
distractions wherein your Kingdom is dangerously involved did forthwith
according to our indulgent affection, think it expedient to premonish and
advertise you of the numerous perils which are imminent and impendent over you;
it struck a repercussive griese and careful solicitation into our Princely
mind, as soon as we had intelligence concerning the same; and that their
Stratagems might prove abortive, for the prevention thereof we thought good to
show our zealous duty to his Majesty, our respective affection to his
Parliament* and the future security of his Royal Throne and Realm.

And first we predictate unto you the obscurely hatched conspiracies of the
King of Spain, the object of whose sole intents have principaly aimed at the
destructive ruin of your Nation: We have had credible intelligence, that he
is suddenly resolved to raise a strong and formidable Navy (scarce inferior
to that almost Invincible Armado) and with a rushing and unexpected throng
invade the Land. Don Pedro affirmed this to be true, and has conducted many
paper-messengers to Us concerning the absolute ast pulation and credible
assertion of the same. Don Pedringano likewise (my singular and intimate
Friend) did certify the same unto me: Wherefore we lovingly, yea and
obsequiously too, premonish you to be circumspective and cautious: For to our
certain knowledge Don Keevalo Caris is in great preparation to ruse and
augment his Fleet, as appeared by the Notions of our dearest Friends, But
besides this trap, there is likewise a dangerous snaredistended against your
Kingdom, which both do violently threaten a most precipitious destruction; My
intent is not mysterious or enigmaticall, but rather very perspicuous to be
interpreted. I mean ths Frenchmen, who, like the Egyptian Locusts who are
resolved to swarm in the realm suddenly, and so imbrew their inhumane hands
in the off^sive blood of the Protestants.

These with the auxiliary assistance of the rebels in Ireland, being link
confederates, and once conjoined in the cruel concatenation of Tyrannical
conspiracies are able to to precipitate the whole Kingdom at one stroke, if
Gods omnipotent and do not ave^t it, and your vigilant endeavors prevent it.
Sed mal orae speramus, we hope and expect a more happy, favorable, and
propitous event t Yet notwithstanding without any (...) procrastinati^n we
humbly beseech for your own safety particularly, and the Epidemicail security
of the whole Kingdom, that you would with Judicious maturity of Cou^cel^
serious^y c^^sider the perilous precedent (...) and you may then cl^^te, that
the (...) very dangerous. W^erefore (...) ^^sp^ct our humble our humble advice
that you would be gr^ciously pleased to (...) the chief Coasts and Cinque
Ports with Military Arms, and strong Ammunition in defense of the Kingdom,
for otherwise nothing can be expected but ruinate and precipitate destruction.
Likewise, that you would gravely consider and appoint, that the City of London
be strongly provided, and the Tower soundly searched, least any intestine plot
should be somented at home. As also, that all Military Ammunition be provided,
and it be forthwth ordered, that the Train Bands should daily wait for
prevention of any conspiracy that should ensue. Thus as we have presented our
present care and indulgent solicitation for the safety and welfare of the
Kingdom: so likewise we presume to commend respectively our petitionary desire
to your Honors: First, that your Honors would be graciously pleased to
condescend to his Majesty's pleasure and Just Command, without repugnance and
opposition; for a distracted varience betwixt a King and his Subjects, is the
first Ground and principium of confusion to a Nation. Therefore we humbly
imlore your honors to conioyne with his Majesty in a reciprocal concord, that
the knot of peace and tranquillity may be tied so securely fast, that all the
hell-guided Conspiracies of Foreign Enemies may be annihilated and abolished.
That you would likewise endeavor to concatenate the affections of the people
to his Majesty, that his Royal Prerogative and Imperial Throne be not
violated, and trampled down by the malicious aspersions of such as are ill
affected and dangerous persons in the Realm. That the divisions and
distractions in the Kingdom may be allayed and assuaged, to the comfort of his
Majesty, the honor of his Parliament, and the perpetual peace and prosperity
of the Realm. In the mean time my diurnal prayers assiduous Supplica^ions
shall be invocated upon the mighty and Almighty assistance and auxiliation of God
that all your deliberations and determining Councels may be directed to the
right object, And for my part I will confirm my resolutions, and am fully
intended to assist you with my full power and Forces; and I shall likewise
diligently endeavor to repel and detrude those foreign Enemies: And for the
Irish rebels we shall labor to qualify, and by Gods divine providence
assisting us we shall crown England with an Olive Branch of Victorious
Tranquillity in the Kingdom.

His Majesty's Consent for the Princess Mary's going to HOLLAND. And her
Majesty to accompany her thither.
HIs majesty being very much pressed by the States Ambassador to send the
Princess his Daughter im mediately into Holland: And being likewise earnestly
desired by his royal Consort the Queen, to give her majesty leave to
accompany her Daughter thither; has thought fit to consent to both desires,
and to make this his Majesty's resolution known to his parliament.

FINIS.

