THE DOCTORS PHYSICIAN: OR, DIALOGUES CONCERNING HEALTH.

Translated out of the Original French.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His ROYAL HIGHNESS, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill, 1685.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
WHen I observed that most Nations who pretend to the greatest Knowledge and
Sense, and abound most in Wealth and Plenty, are strangely fond of Physic and
Physicians; I could not but think that there must be a great deal of integrity
in the Professorss, and usefulness in the Art: But meeting with this little
Book, written by an unknown French Author; which endeavors to confute these
general opinions, as vulgar errors; I have thought fit to Translate the same,
for the same reasons which the Author has given for Composing it in this his
following

PREFACE.
MY design at first in beginning this little work, was only to laugh at some,
who eating and drinking to excess, did afterward abandon themselves to Physic,
for remedying the bad consequence that attended their intemperance: But it is
so difficult to put a stop to the vein of rallery, when those who love it, have
a knack that way; that I could not but make merry also with such as are sick,
with the fear of Falling sick: Nay I have not spared the Doctors, who sooth up
these fanciful Patients in their Visions and Whimsies. This has insensibly led
me to speak of Physicians and their Art, that those do say who througly know,
but never make use of them, Instead then of a simple touch that I intended to
have with junketting and intemperance; I have engaged in a quarrel with the bad
practice of Physic; yet all along with the Foil, and not at Sharps, for it is no
more but an Assault in a Fencing School, and not a real Combat I engage in:
Besides, I do confess that I should not have pursued my raillery so far, if I
had been the first who had opened that career; but coming after a great many
others, I must needs take all the liberty I have used, that I might give a new
Face to so old and beaten a Subject. Nevertheless all that is intended by it,
is only to prove, that if a Man of a good constitution be any way Patient and
Sober, he may without the help of Apothecary or Surgeon, enjoy perfect Health
as long as he lives.

These Dialogues are not of the nature of those Plays, which for some years
have pleased the Public at the expense of Physicians. Here the Heart, Stomach,
and other allegorical Persons speak; much after the rate as our old
Romance-makers have brought the Virtues and Vices into play. Or, to say better,
as the Fable feigns, that the several Members of the Body complain of the Head.
Yet if the invention be not altogether new, the method however, and disposition
is not common: For the Subject which links these Dialogues to one another,
makes them as so many Scenes in a Comedy. Now, though in the first, many times
nothing is to be found but trifles, without Ornament or Life; yet they contain
nothing but that agrees with him that speaks, and which tends to the mark aimed
at, without losing the allegory. It will be easy likewise to observe, that the
more the matter is sifted, the more also things are said which require some
attention. So that the last Dialogues are pretty different from the first,
which will not a little contribute, if I be not mistaken, to the rouzing of the
Readers attention. The tenth is filled with new imaginations which require
application, and the Eleventh drolls upon the bad practice of Physicians as
much as civility will allow. As for the last, I thought fit to raise it a
little higher than any of the former, because in that, Nature was to speak of
the most sublime parts of Natural Philosophy. Perhaps some Philosopher zealous
for his opinion, having censured this in equality of style, will think it
strange that I should as boldly pronounce concerning Philosophy, as concerning
Physic. If it happen so, I shall be sorry for it; but I entreat him to call to
mind, that in such occasions every one is free to take what part he pleases:
Nor did I think my self obliged to betray my own Sentiments, to gratify those
whom I know not.

After all, if they may be believed who have read those Dialogues, I assert
nothing contrary to good sense, and which may not be practiced without scruple,
or complaiance: Nay, they will have me to be a living instance of the maxims I
propose for living in Health, and without any need of Physic. In fine, they
conclude that this little Piece, has Life and Spirit enough in it to make way
for it self in the world, and to gain credit there without the necessity of a
Protector in the Front, or of an Apology in the Rear, because they are
persuaded that whatsoever is said in jest, ought never to be taken in earnest.

DIALOGUES CONCERNING HEALTH.
First Dialogue. This Dialogue is supposed to begin at the end of a Plentiful
Dinner.
The Heart. The Stomach. Heart. AWay, away! with this intemperance and excess;
I have told you an Hundred times I can no longer endure it: Under pretext of
doing me service, you break all my measures; and so discompose the order and
method of my aeconomie, that if you go on at this rate, I foresee what will
become on it; nothing but qualms and dangerous fits; which being made worse by
the unseasonable prescriptions of Physicians, will degenerate into
insupportable pains, such as shall make us at every minute beg ease from Death;
when to complete our misery, Death will prove deaf to our cries.


Stomach. Alas! I thought it had been my turn now to complain; for in such
times of feasting, I have so little power to do as I would, that I am not so
much as heard, though I exclaim and remonstrate till I Am sick again.


Heart. When you have received as much as may satisfy us, why do'nt you
Command the Appetite to shut the Gate? and bid him tell them, if they will needs
be importunate, that the passages are stopped; and that no more must enter. A
Stomach that knows what is good for Life, should not, at Table; gage it self by
the capacity of its Neighbor, but by its own.


Stomach. Ay! It might be so as you say, if the first thing they did were not
to make the Porter drunk, before the first course be ended, he is already quite
out of his course, and then I am no more the Master; he suffers himself to be
tickled with strong ragou's; and what is worst of all, he lets every thing
pass, upon assurance given him, that their business is only to cheer up and
fortify the Heart.


Heart. And at that word I Will warrant, you yield, and are persuaded.


Stomach. Sure enough. Can I withstand any thing that is good for you? And what
would you say of me, should I deny entrance to that which has orders to go
straight to the Heart? your own conduct confirms me in this; for on such
occasions, you give me ground to think, that you are no enemy to good Wine, nor
strong Liquors.


Heart. I am not well known, I see; for were it not for some cheerfulness that
drink does inspire, I should not at all care for it; and if I sometimes bea^
with the excess of Wine, it is beaus^ it is not so dangerous for you to be full
o^ Liquor, as of solid Food.


Stomach. Be it as it will, we are much to be pitied, and it were to be wishe^
for both our sakes, that under color or o^ a civil Entertainment, they would
not engage us into all the disorders of Drunkeness and Gluttony.


Heart. And truly it is my intention, to take some course that these debauches
may not hurt us, and therefore without more delay, we must resolve against
those abuses that proceed from that quantity of meat and drink which they offer
and force us to take. For excesses of this nature are grown so exorbitant, that
all that the waters and soil of our Country produce fit for eating and
drinking, are now adays jumbled together upon one and the same Table, with the
Spices and Sauces of both the East and West Indies.


Stomach. Nay it is certain that the quantity and diversity of meats, jost le
us quite out of the right way of Health.


Heart. Do Men think, that because they outdoe that plain and simple way of
feeding of our fore Fathers, they are therefore more skillful in the dressing
of Victuals, than Nature her self, which in the several times of the year gives
all that is convenient for every Season; tempering the fruit with so just a
proportion, that one may say, they are such as they ought to be, for those that
need them, without any necessity of Addition or Subtraction to make them better
and more Healthful.


Stomach. I am persuaded of the truth of what you say; but --


Heart. Why, but? if Men think that Sugar is of great use for Northern people,
they are much mistaken; and an ordinary Prune delights a Laplander more than
the richest Conserve does a Genouese; nay Wine, Brandy, and Punch, would be
useless within the Tropicks, where it not that custom and intemperance had made
them necessary.


Stomach. If we pursue matters so far, we are like to launch out into a long
and tedious Voyage: And therefore, though your sentiments be very just, as to
the abuse of mustering together in one dish the productions of all the four
parts of the world, and the swilling down in one and the same meal the most
exquisite Liquors of all sorts; yet, be ruled by me; let us attempt no more but
some convenient moderation in the matter; for if it be observed that we skip
from one extremity to another, we shall be but laughed at.


Heart. Have Men then lost their Wits?


Stomach. Quite contrary, they pretend to have enough and to spare, nay they
maintain that the first Men were but Beasts, if Nuts, Medlars, and such like
Fruits served them for Food; so possessed are they that Nature does but
rough-hew our Aliments, and that Art must bring them to perfection. Whence
likewise they conclude, that nourishment being the fundamental Law of human
Society, they cannot eat and drink too often, seeing all sorts of Animals are
made tame with Food.


Heart They ought in that, at least, to observe the Rules of Temperance.


Stomach. Sure enough. But they fancy that to follow these Maxims, is not so
much to Live, as to Languish; that if Novelty, and the good dressing of
Victuals carry them beyond the bounds of Sobriety, they know how to remedy
these little disorders by speedy digestions; which not only ease and comfort
Nature; but enliven her, and make her stronger than she is wont to be, when she
is forced to go by the poise and Balance of Sobriety.


Heart. Great Doctors indeed, that speak very boldly of what they do not at all
understand.


Stomach. However I should not complain of their ignorance, but be willing
patiently to suffer, sometimes to be overcharged with meat and drink, under
what shape or figure the whimsey of the Officer, at the desire of Gluttons and
Parasites, might disguise them; provided these Surfeitings were not so
frequent, and that they were followed by abstinence and diet, for by that means
I might get clear of them, and come to my self again: But it puts me to despair
when next day after a debauch, such as this, I am made the Storehouse of
Cassia and Sena, accompanied with Rubarb and Scammony; and if that operate not
according as the faculty and College expect, I am condemned to purging Wine,
Chrocus, that is to say, to the ordinary and extraordinary Rack, which puts me
within a fingers breadth of Death.


Heart. It is not you that suffer alone, and complain of those ill-timed
prescriptions; and therefore, that we may remedy the same, let us begin by
declaring War against all those enemies of Health, who under pretext of coming
to our assistance, drain us of our Forces and Spirits, so that a whole Age is
hardly sufficient to retrieve us from the sad state we are in, when we get out
of the hands of those Poisoners and Murderers, authorized by Luxury, and
tolerated by the Government.


Stomach. Nay, the truth is, when Physicians cure a Disease, the Patient
commonly dies of the cure: You cannot think, how glad I am to hear the
proposition you make to me: But do you believe that you and I are strong enough
to engage so powerful enemies.


Heart. Never doubt it; let us but despise them, and we shall certainly get the
Victory.


Stomach. That will do well enough, for the enemy's without, but how shall we
reduce those that are within?


Heart. What you say wants not its difficulties, and I forsee, as well as you,
that it will not be an easy matter to surmount Mrs. Prejudice, which besets
our reason. For that fool has made her declare so positively in favor of
Epicurism and Physic, that one would think that her design of destroying our
Health, were only to enrich with our spoils the Traitor and the Physician.


Stomach. You speak of Reason as(...) you thought her capable to be impose
upon: Before we proceed farther,(...) wish you might come to a clearing wit^
her upon the whole matter.


Heart. I am resolved to do so, but i^ were to be wished that this clearin^
might be made in presence of Reflection and seeing now adays they keep n^ more
company together; that is the thin^ that puts me to a stand.


Stomach. And that which at prese^ puts me to another, is that I am ready t^
burst, and can hold no more. In the mean time I have advice from the Nos^ that
they threaten me with an od^ Ragou; from another hand I understan^ they are
about to regale me with a lust^ Brimmer, and then how to come of^ unless I
burst, I know not.


Heart. That Is a noble point of Honor, indeed, to drown one's self, when there
is no necessity for it; do'nt you perceive that they are about to make you the
receptacle of all the Bottles that remain i^ the Cistern? as if it were worth
the ^hile to know, how much exactly you ^re able to hold.


Stomach. I can no longer resist the evil that presses me. Help, help! I sink
under the burden.


Heart. Extreme Evils must have extreme Remedies: An Insurrection on such
occasions is a great secret; though I should even be reckoned the Author of it
-- Courage, we are now delivered from what lay heaviest upon us.


Stomach. Ha! how much I am eased.


Heart. In expectation of the return of the Appetite which is lost, I have just
now given order to Mr. Crap-sick to keep the door, and suffer nothing to enter
into your Quarters during the whole day. On my part I shall bravely second the
head-strongness of that new Porter: I Will demand nothing at all, and refuse
whatever may be offered me, in the mean time, to hinder the intrails from
interrupting us, I have ordered the Gall, to make an entire evacuation of the
place.


Stomach. Ha! make use of some other than of that blade; for if the Physicians,
who pry into every thing, percei^ that he is concerned in our affairs, they say
I have got a Cholera Morbus, and that will be enough, to make me in a moment
become an Apothecaries-shop.


Heart. Give your self no trouble^ only take your rest. I am going t^ recall
the Spirits from the Organs, that(...) may recruit and temper them, during(...)
long and quiet sleep: Afterward w^ shall take the best measures we can, tha^ we
may not again Relapse into such(...) disorder.


Stomach. I consent, and with pleasure betake my self to sleep: Alas, that the
heart cannot as well as I taste of these pleasures! but why do I regret! when a
Camp is beset with enemies, and the Soldiers must have rest, there is a
necessity that the General watch.


Heart. Say rather, that in a Town Besieged, and on all sides open, it is only
in the time of sleep, and during the darkness of the night, that the breaches
can be repaired.


Second Dialogue. Reason refusing to answer the motions of the Heart, makes use
of Prejudice to speak to him.
Prejudice. The Heart. Prejudice. TAlk no more of that? you shall never
persuade me, that we are able to judge what is good for the Health of the Body,
and far less that we know, what is to be done, to preserve, or to restore it,
when it is out of order or lost.


Heart. Were Reason here, we should hear another kind of Language.


Preju. I question very much that: For if Physicians skillful and Learned as
they are, call others to their assistance when they themselves are sick; how
can silly Reason that never studied, nor took a Degree, understand Diseases,
distingui^ Symptoms, and proceed to a Cure.


Heart. If the Degree made the Docto^ Physicians of whom you speak, would know
their own Diseases, and Cur^ themselves. There can be no greate^ sign of their
ignorance, than the^ begging assistance of others. Can(...) Lawyer know the
matter of Fact bette^ than the Party? on such occasions the question is not,
how to gild the Pil^ but how to Plead the Cause; and that(...) a thing very
well worth the labor.(...) is our Life that is concerned, and have we any
thing more precious? Conclu^ then with me, that the Body and Reason
constituting but one and the same person there is a necessity that when tha^
suffers, this should bestir it self for it^ relief.


Preju. These Chimerical unions were good in those days, when the Husban^ and
Wife were but one Body and on^ Soul; that time's past, and Reason i^ convinced
that no Man knowing him self, we must wholly trust our Healt^ to those who
labor day and night t^ find out a Specific and proper Remedy for every
Distemper.


Heart. Ho, ho! where are the Physicians, that Study to find out Specificks for
Diseases? They are Singing Birds whose skill consists only in a Note a Tone, or
a Cant that signifies nothing at all.


Preju. That Note or Cant has such Charms though, that it may be said to be a
Gold Chain which links the Patients Ear to the Physicians Mouth.


Heart. What false steps do you cause Reason to make: How do you lead her out
of the way that Nature has prescribed for enjoying perfect Health? How
dangerous is it to be possessed with Prejudice, and not to see but with another
Man's eyes? what have you got by delivering us over to the College, is our
Stomach the better for it? do I droop the less for it? Our feet are no longer
able to carry us, and the nodes and knobs of our fingers deprive us of the use
of our hands: See now, how the specific Bills of your Doctors, have completed
the ruin, which your debauches began with pleasure.


Prejudice. We know your Distempers and the causes of them better than you do.
They proceed only from the bad temper of your Constitution, and a complication
of your Infirmities. Could one quench the burning heat of your Bowels, without
overcooling your Stomach? or rectify the tone of this, without overheating your
upper Region?


Heart. Nay, rather say, that all our miseries proceed only from the draining
of our Veins, and the diversity of poisons that has been given us: And that is
the reason that in the midst of our career we suffer all the pains and
anxieties of the most decrepid and unfortunate Old Age.


Preju. If you suffer, blame the bad influences of your Ascendant for it, and
not your Physician, who has always timed his Remedies by the most favorable
Signs and Aspects. Hold your peace then, or talk more discreetly.


Heart. When Reason speaks, and gives me Counsel, I listen and obey. But so
^ong as she will not speak to me but by ^our Organ, and that in the Language of
an Almanac too, I shall only consult Nature, Patience, and Sobriety, with the
examples of those that live under their Laws; of them I shall make experiments,
which agreeing with the Stomach, are much better than all the raveries of your
Mountebank Astrologers.


Preju. We are much agreed upon the matter; for what have we hitherto done, but
followed the inclination of Nature, and gran^ed the Heart and Stomach whatever
they were pleased to demand?


Heart. You have not followed Nature, but your own Vicious inclinations; and
all the complaisance you have had, has been for your own irregular Appetites,
and not for the Stomach and me: This had never been, if you had not made Reason
transgress its bounds; but since by so doing, she has forgot her functions, it
is my duty to tell you of it, that you make her reflect.


Preju. How now insolence? but let it pass; the Heart loves to comfort himself.


Heart. Know then that Nature so soon as a Child is Born, being willing to
continue her work and carry it on to the end, which she has proposed to her
self; gives the Stomach new Orders to demand Food, and the Intrails, to make
good use of it. Now since Nature foresees that they will ask for more Materials
than they know what to do with, without altering or disfiguring her work; she
sets over them at the same time in quality of an Overseer or Conservatour, that
which is called Reason, with power to moderate the Appetites, and gently to
excite all the several parts of the Body, diligently to mind their functions,
upon pain of suspension, nay, even of deprivation of Health.


Preju. What does all this tedious speculation drive at?


Heart. To make yo^ understand, that when Reason which wa^ absolute and
independent becomes a slave, trusting others with the charge that was committed
to her, all things are presently out of order and in confusion. Health wherein
consisted the beauty of Life then retiring, we become deformed; our well days
are gone, and maugre all the vain efforts of Reason, that too late sees her
error, we are made a prey to Infirmities and Melancholy.


Prejudice. Can Reason Remedy every thing? where she cannot be present in
Person, her Lieutenants fight under her Banners; and in such engagements, she
has got the Victory ove^ many Diseases under the conduct and command of
Physicians.


Heart. If it be so, you are much in the wrong, that you have not erected a
Trophie to the College: That was an acknowledgment due to the efficacy of its
Remedies, and to the ^kill it has ^hown in doseing and dispencing them with so
much exactness and circumspection, that the blame was not to be laid at ^ts
door, nor yours, if we be not, as is ^ommonly said, cured of all Diseases.


Preju. Come, come, let us not joke at this rate: It is certain, that had it
not been for the luckey boldness of Physicians in draining all your corrupt
Blood, and clearing you from the malignity of your Intrals, at the very nick of
time prefixed by the Stars and Nature, you could no^ at present brag that the
Faculty hat^ made you a new Body.


Heart. A new Body of the Colledge^ making, is not so good as an old one tha^
never past through their hands: Yet I d^ not deny, but that Physicians may b^
chance, cure some slight Distemper^ when they work upon a good Constitution,
but it must be also acknowledge^ that we pay dear enough for the Cure.


Preju. What matters that, provide^ ye live?


Heart. Is that to ^^ve, when we com^ out under the Doctor^ h^nds, to leadi^
brittle and lang^ishing l^fe, that f^ the least deviation from the strict rule^
they prescribe, and which they themselves cannot observe, we fall into Relaps^
worse than the Disease. To undeceiv^ you then in one word, of the great opinion
you have of the vast extent of their knowledge, and the infallibility of their
Receipts. Know --


Preju. What can you say as to that, which I do not know?


Heart. That your Physicians, having consumed upon a poor Patient, the whole
stock of their shallow Art and method, without being able to Kill or Cure him:
It is not enough for them to lay the blame upon the occult malignities that
Reign in the Elements; but they must likewise quarrel with the Heavens and
Stars. At length, to slip the collar, they leave off Prescribing, and advise
the Patient to a Milk diet, and if he find himself no better for it, they send
him to Tunbridge or Epsom Wells, and then to his Native Air; for they are
mighty glad that he should die out of the reach of his acquaintan^e. In the mean
while the Patient gains by their Evasions, and recovering his liberty, gets
into the way of Nature again, and by that means escapes their Tyranny.


Preju. I can no longer endure tho(...) frequent and injurious Jerks,
against(...) faculty, to which the Heart that fin^ fault with it, owes a
particular oblig^tion.


Heart. What pray, has it done f^ me then?


Preju. Don't you as yet perceive, u^grateful Heart, that the Faculty hat^
rejected the speculation of urines, an^ trusts no more but to your motions(...)
that they inspire into her all the Oracle^ she pronounces; do ye reckon the
nothing?


Heart. Nay if it were possible less tha^ nothing.


Preju. And yet it is really true, tha^ Physicians now adays ground their
co^jectures, only upon the consequence^ that they draw from the march of the
Pulse, and prescribe nothing but according to the quality of the Blood which
they draw from the Veins.


Heart. It is in vain for the Physician to consult me, if he understand not my
L^nguage. Can he draw good consequences from my motions, if he be ignorant of
the cause of them? does he know that at every turn I receive unexpected Orders,
which make me change and alter my gate? do they know that Nature would have me
march slowly in good way, that is to say, when the Blood is thin and subtle,
and that when it is thick I should double my pace. In a word, it is with my
motions as with faces, which are all alike and all unlike one another. After
all, what judgment can a Physician make of Blood exposed to the Air, which by
being let out, loses what was essential to it with that which remains in the
Veins? and then, because he has seen my Blood look sometimes one way, and
sometimes another, can he tell the better for that, what Nature intends to do
with it.


Preju. Yes, he must needs know the better, seeing he rectifies Nature, and
turns her as he pleases.


Heart. That is easily said, but h^rd to be proved; take my word for it, a
Physician can better irritate Nature than rectify her: But it is a comfort for
those who have no commerce with him, that he cannot spoil the intentions of a
good Mother toward her Children, who takes pleasure to rectify their errors,
when they trust to her.


Preju. Who doubts but that Nature is helpful, and infallible in her
operations, and that she must be observed, and nothing done but in conjunction
with her? but when there is need of Remedies, to whom can we better apply our
selves than to Physicians who are her Children?


Heart. To Nature, I tell you, wh^ suggests what Remedies are fit for those
whom she governs, which are so much the better and more pleasant, that they are
earnestly desired, and prepared by her own hand. It'^ by that means alon^ that
we procure a settled Health, which lasts 'till Nature untwisting the threa^ of
Life, makes Death as soft to us as our Sleep. Whereas your Physicians, having
rent and torn us during the course of a long disease, deliver us up to Death
amidst a Thousand pains and tortures.


Preju. Will you never let those Gentlemen alone, whom you cannot reverence too
much? could you without them, enjoy that pure and fresh Blood, which they have
the goodness to renew every New Moon? without that prevention, you would be
furnished with nothing but adust Blood, which would raise your choler every
hour of the day. In fine, had it not been for them, you had long ago been
swallowed up by the vapors of your Spleen and Misentery.


Heart. O Heavens! what gibberish is this I hear?


Preju. Nay, what Language is this I hear? once for all hold your peace, and
remember that it belongs to Reason whom I represent to Command, and that it is
your part to obey.


Heart. Alas! what conduct is this! what will become of us.


Third Dialogue. The Heart dissatisfied with Prejudice, confederates with the
Stomach, for returning under the Laws of Nature.
The Stomach. The Heart. Stomach. FRom whence come all these sighs and sobs?
what is the cause of so great dejection? what is i^ that troubles you? is there
no way left to comfort you? I have discharged my functions: I am free, out of
all hurry, and though weak, yet in a condition to perform all that you can
desire of me^ Command then, what you would have done: Speak I pray: It seems
you have forgot that sadness is the Poison of the Heart. I must, cost what it
will, cheer you up.


Heart. Ah! I burst for anger, I Am undone, and e'ne reduced to despair. Shall
it be said, that the Heart must depend so long as it lives, upon a Reason that
says and does nothing but by the intervention of a headstrong and extravagant
Fool? no! she must of necessity either turn away that same Prejudice, or I must
shake off the yoke of her Empire. Ha! Prejudice, how much mischief have thou
done us? and how much art thou still like to do?


Stomach. You have already spoken to me of that Mrs. Prejudice, tell me, if you
can, who she is?


Heart. Why, she is the Daughter of that famous Glutton who has endeavored a
thousand times to make you burst at Table.


Stomach. What of that Parasite, whose approbation on a dish, Epicures more
eagerly court than a Glory-starved Poet does the permission of bringing into
the World the ridiculous Brats of his Muse.


Heart. Of the very same.


Stomach. But still; by whom has your Debauchee had that foolish Girl?


Heart. By the eldest Daughter of the College.


Stomach. What by that stinking nasty Pharmacy, Twin-Sister to pale Phlebotomy,
who by her old Husbands has had Epilipsy, Palsy, and Apoplxey; not to mention
Consumpsion, Dropsy, and Jaundice, the best of which six is not worth a louse?


Heart. By the very same, and that by this good token too, that she went but
Three Months with her, which was the cause that she was called Prejudice or
Prevention.


Stomach. How Three Months! that is a thing unheard, it cannot be: Or else she
must have thought that a big belly was just like some kinds of Physic that she
gives, which comes away as soon as they are taken.


Heart. Faith I ca'nt tell. But it is certain that before that, Physicians
thought it enough to say, that a Child of Seven Months might live, and by a
Miracle one of five. At present for kindred sake, they have concluded that this
might live at three Months, founding their judgment on this, that it was but so
long since the Marriage was Celebrated.


Stomach. Can you desire a more convincing argument? According to that
Aphorism, a Child of Eight days might live, as well as a Child of Nine Months:
But tell me what course has been taken to bring up that pre tended Abortive?


Heart. So soon as it was born, the College took care of it.


Stomach. Nay, that is not to be wondered at, for it is not of yesterday that
Grandfathers and Grandmothers dote upon their Grandchildren.


Heart. The first Nourishment they gave it was Physic, under color of purging
it from a venom that we bring into the world with us, which, as the Doctors
say, early or late puts us in danger of Death. But all this precaution has not
hindered, but that Prejudice is at present grown alittle vain glorious
Rattle-head, in a word, a giddy-brain'd thing, that takes pleasure to speak
sopperies, and to maintain them. Nevertheless, seeing she takes it of her
Father to be pleasant Company at Table, and of her Mother, to cajole and
flatter in sickness; she has managed those little talents so well, that Reason
has made her her Favorite.


Stomach. Her Favorite?


Heart. Yes, her Favorite, and so much her Favorite, that I can no ways come
to the knowledge of the sentiments of Reason, but by her means.


Stomach. We were so well governed without the help of Reason, during the first
years of our Life; that one would think we might still go on, and fulfill our
course without her enterfering.


Heart. We must not flatter our selves, if in our young and tender Age we
tasted the cream of a perfect Health; for Nature at that time took care of us,
and was our guide in the Infancy of Reason: And seeing we are not as yet come
to that Age, wherein Reason and Nature must give way to habit and custom, we
ought of necessity to obey Reason, provided she act fairly with us, and would
listen favorably to our grievances: But perceiving that she is obstinately
resolved not to unmask Prejudice, nor to govern us without disguise; I am
resolved at the Peril of my Life and Fortune, to acknowledge her no more; could
I be but assured of you, as I am already of a considerable number of the
members of our Empire.


Stomach. You may rely upon me, as much, if not more, than upon any other
whosoever.


Heart. But before you declare your self openly against the Faculty, consider
with your self if you be able, all of a sudden, to shake off the habit of
taking Physic; for I know very well you will be plied first with
Purgative-preservatives, then with corroborative-digestives, and lastly with
carminitive-aperitives.


Stomach. The truth is, this poor Body thinks it self very happy, when it
misses a day without Blood letting, or a lusty Dose of Physic; and that it is
excused for the Evening and Morning Service; that is to say, for a couple of
Glysters, with some usual Pills for a prelude to Dinner and Supper, without
which, they pretend we cannot live. Think what joy it would be, if we could
free our selves from this slavery?


Heart. They pretend very ill, and all these panick fears do scare none but
little Children: We Will remedy all these apprehensions, merely by laying a^
Embargo upon the mouth. But there is no time to be lost, we must speedily put
our selves in a condition to baffle the attempts, that Prejudice will surely
make to bring us under, so soon as ever she comes to understand that we are
Revolted against her.


Stomach. What hinders you from telling me what your thoughts are as to that?


Heart. That we may not be interrupted in the discovery of the secret that I
intend to impart to you, and in the measures that we are to take; hinder your
Appetite from making a noise, and shut all the doors so fast, that nothing may
be able to interrupt us. Above all things, let us have a care that the Liver
suspect nothing. I have some cause to mistrust him.


Stomach. And I to complain of him. However the orders are given, you may say
all you please; I listen.


Heart. Know then that I have had a long conference with Prejudice, and got so
little satisfaction therein, that I have resolved no longer to submit to the
Government of that Favorite: That is not all; I have engaged the noble parts
in our concerns, and generally all that live in the Region of circulation.
Besides, I have so well managed the Senses, by the mediation of Common Sense,
that they are resolved no more to hear not see Physicians, and far less to
smell, touch or taste any the least thing that comes from them, so that they
are all declared in our favors.


Stomach. A fair Progress, indeed.


Heart. That is not all neither, I have so far prevailed with the Brain, who is
provoked at the irregularities that Prejudice causes there, that he will follow
all my motions. And I have pusht on the matter so far, that Sleep, which by
turns disposes of the whole Body as well as Reason; and if one dare say so,
more absolutely than she; has promised me, for facilitating of our enterprise,
to anticipate as much as may be, upon the time allotted to Reason, thereby to
shorten the duration of her Reign: I tell you nothing of Dreams, though I make
great esteem of them: For you know they desire as much as we, the return of the
Golden-Age, of which they still retain all the ways of acting.


Stomach. But suppose every one do what they have promised; who is to be
entrusted with the management of the whole.


Heart. Nature, from whom we must all take orders.


Stomach. That Is well: But consider that Nature is a very simple kind o thing,
for the people who, as it is said, would see the Gods March before them And
therefore it would be convenient besides that Pilot, to give the people also an
Anchor, to which they might fasten their hopes, during the Tempest of Diseases.


Heart. That I intend to do hereafter, for I purpose to retrieve the honor of
Experiments, the name whereof is rendered Empirick.
odious by our enemies. By that means medicine will be brought back to its
original, and become so familiar and natural, that no body will need any other
Physician than himself, for applying what he shall find proper for his
Distemper.


Stomach. The Scheme is good, and the design pleases me very well. But seeing
States pass not from one kind o^ Government to another without danger* would it
not be convenient to appoin^ some substitute to Nature, who might be acceptable
to her, and take the conduc^ and Government of us in our first essay?


Heart. Nature has provided for that by suggesting to me to make use of
Sobriety and Patience, who understand the conduct of the Body perfectly well:
For if they be not the Mothers, they are a^least the Nurses and Governants o^
Health; and besides that, I Will pass m^ word for them, they are the declare^
Enemies of indispositions, nay and o^ most part of Diseases too.


Stomach. I know it, and willingl^ submit to their Discipline: To let yo^ see
how much I am persuaded by wha^ you say, I desire a favor of you* ^h^ Sobriety
would presently come and est^blish the Seat of her Empire with me^ You know, as
I ly most open, so I a^ the most convenient post for our enemies and therefore
I cannot be too well Fortified, nor too soon put into a posture of defense:
With her assistance I shall bridle Appetite, and perform my functions at more
leisure, and more to the advantage of those who are concerned.


Heart. I am overjoyed to find that you have prevented me. Since then Reason
neglects to possess the Posts of the Stomach when Men eat, and to go to the
Heart, when she would put in execution her great thoughts in the head: I think
it convenient that Sobriety take up her Quarters with you, and that Patience
have the charge to make head against Reason, to what side soever Prejudice may
turn her; considering the frequent Recruits and Assistances that we shall send
to Patience, it will be no easy matter to baffle her.


Stomach. If Patience be as well seconded by others, as Sobriety shall be by
me, make account that we shall obtain the Victory.


Fourth Dialogue. The Stomach pressed with Hunger, talks of good cheer, Sobriety
suffers it, the better to compass its ends.
Sobriety. The Stomach. Sob^ie y. I Hear, as well as you, the grumbl^ng of your
Guts, and I am very sensible of the importunities of your Appetite: But you
must be firm and resist their griping solicitations, till the hour when you
used to gratify them be past: They Will trouble you no more after. Come, courage;
let us talk of the pleasures that accompany Health,


Stomach. You say well: But consider likewise that a hungrey Belly has no ears:
The hour of eating is, when one is a hungrey: I am torn to pieces, I cannot
hold out, I die.


Sobriety. Are not you ashamed, to cry out for Hunger like a Child?


Stomach. Consider, I pray, that my Liver is so great and so hot, that he
cannot be put off with the amusements and excuses that abstinence makes use of,
to beguile that canine hunger which devours me. A crust of Bread and a Glass of
Wine, or I Am dead.


Sobriety. You Will revive that famous Glutton of Antiquity again, who finding no
one Body to stand by him for the space of a whole day, in eating and drinking,
made his four Meals, with four different clubs of Epicures.


Stomach. I do not talk of four Meals, but of one which may last as long as my
Appetite: Suffer not, I beg of you, that Fasting over heat my Choler any more,
unless you desire to see me fall into a rage or a fainting fit.


Sobriety. Is this the effect of all the fair promises you just now made to the
Heart? but I am not startled at those mean weaknesses: My orders must be put in
execution; and all the ways yo^ take to persuade me, are so many motive^ that
incline me to do nothing at all:(...) you be hot take a little water.


Stomach. What! water?


Sobriety. Yes, water.


Stomach. If you had said Strong waters it had been somewhat, but mere Element
common water; how is it possible I ca^ taste it, and not expire?


Sobriety. You shall taste it, and no^ expire for all that It is far better for
yo^ in the condition you are in, than the Oy^ that you would pour upon the
fire, which would consume you for good and all.


Stomach. Alas! where is now the time, when I began my day with a lust^ dish
of Chocolate, or a mess of heart^ jelly-broath; which, some hours afte^ was
followed by an Embassy of Pottage consisting of a dozen of plump young
Pigeons, swimming in Gravy, or other convenient liquor, and attended with
forced meats, cockscombs, palats, mushrooms, and the rest of that savory train;
which as Deputies from their principals come to complement the Taste and
advertise me, that whole Nations were upon their march to submit themselves
entirely to the absolute disposal of the Appetite?


Sobriety. How, do you still look back again? have you forgot, that you regret
the want of that, which has been the cause of all your evils? that the least
punishment which the excess of good cheer inflicts upon those who give
themselves over to it, is to be loaded with an hundred weight of useless fat?
These surfeitings are no ways excusable put in an old Scythian who desires to
be fat, that his Kindred may feed upon him with pleasure.


Stomach. If you draw these consequences from a mess of Broth, and a Potage,
what would you say, if you saw the same Potage flanked with all the dishes that
the four Elements and Season of the year afford as proper for the first course.


Sobriety. I would say that all the Dishes and Plates, are but so many sna^
laid for Health, and I should long(...) those delicious repasts, which consist
o^ in one dish furnished with one sort(...) meat, of which every one takes as
mu^ as he has need: For I am not sor^viving the custom of tying people up^
commons. I would have judgment(...) not necessity to be the carver for t^
Appetite.


Stomach. There are a great many, w^ care as little as you do for these prelud^
and who never fall to feeding in go^ earnest, till they see a jolly quak^
Pudding, or a trembling Mountain(...) dainty well dressed Beef appear.


Sobriety. In such dangerous occasion I commend those who begin and e^ with the
Beef.


Stomach. How is it possible to st^ there; for seeing these are served in h^
concocted, if they be but in the le^ moistened with Wine cooled in Ice, the do
no more but pass through us witho^ any stay. And it is well it is so; for ro^
meat and salads, crowned with flowers and green leaves, present themselves
^fterward with so palitable a mien, and ^o well disposed to follow that which
^ent before, that it is hard to determine which of these meats ought to be
allowed ^e favor of entering first. That is then ^e occasion when it may be
said, that ^ell cooked meats invite the Stomach.


Sobriety. You make them say and do whatever you please. Seeing you covet them,
you are before hand with them, and before they present themselves to the ^outh,
the eyes have already made way ^or them to the Stomach.


Stomach. That may be; though I am not always in a condition to admit of all
that the eyes devour.


Sobriety. For my part, I cannot comprehend how so much Victuals can find room
in so small a place.


Stomach. It would not be without ^ifficulty, were they not ushered in by a
^avishing steam which the smell devours; and if they came not afterward armed
^t Sharps, with Lemons and Oranges, seconded by the acrimony of Salt, and fir^
of Spices; being in that Equipage, yo^ see how easy it is for them, to force
a^ that stands in their way, either to giv^ place, or to fly for it.


Sobriety. I very well conceive, the the last comers chase the former; b^
seeing that is not done in an instant, ho^ do you reconcile the roast with the
raw(...) the burning hot. with the Ice-cold, the Pepper with the Sugar? for it
is imposs^ble so many different Guests can cotto^ together.


Stomach. Nothing truer, these differe^ aliments brought from opposite Climat^
and contrary Elements, impatient^ suffer the constraint to which they ar^
reduced. Judge then, what torment I a^ in, when that grows to excess, as it
h^pens almost daily, because the Laws(...) the Table slight all my grievances.


Sobriety. In the manner you speak(...) them, I fancy I see within you an Ar^
of different Nations, more inclined(...) mutiny and Revolt, than to the goo^ of
the service.


Stomach. That Is well said, but in that sad condition, were I to compare my
self to any thing, it should be to Charons Boat, after a bloody Battle, because
all those d fferent people you speak of, pour in upon me, maimed, torn, hasht
and cut, having endured all the rigor of Fire and Sword.


Sobriety. Does not drink make them friends?


Stomach. Not altogether, though all of them earnestly desire to be moistened,
and look upon drink as the solace of their pains. And thence it is that the
more one drinks, the more one desires pure Wine without water.


Sobriety. Whence comes that greedy desire of drinking without thirst, and
without water, seeing the civil debauches heretofore, would not have Bacchus go
without his Nymph, what does one get by being drunk?


Stomach. Why, it is because no drink but that which intoxicates, can ease the
troubles and miseries of Life: And the though Wine does not wholely dissipa^
the anxieties of the unfortunate, yet(...) suspends them at least; for if Wi^
discharge not the Debtor, it gives hi^ Letters of License: Nay it is even(...)
insolent as to set upon Reason and va^quish her: And of its own plenary pow^
without Commission, it enslaves the Mast^ and sets free the slave.


Sobriety. Wine, by what I hear from you, is a Sword in the hand of a m^ Man.


Stomach. It is nevertheless a sure mea^ to discover the make of Men's tempe^
and to pump out the secrets of t^ Heart.


Sobriety. Wine ought either to be pr^hibited, or reduced within the
bounds(...) cheerfullness and pleasure.


Stomach. Men are so satisfied of(...) truth of what you say of the fury(...)
Wine, and the moderation there oug^ to be observed in it, that it is put i^ the
keeping of the Servants, duri^ the time of meal, with orders not to ^ll any
unless it be demanded; in so much, that there is no excess committed so long ^s
the Masters are retained by shame, and the Lacquies by fear; but if the wine be
served with so much circumspection, ^t is not so with the Mushroms, Caviare,
Botargo, and Bolonia Sausages, with the Tarts, Creams, Custards, and in
general, all that the Season affords to delight and tickle the Palate.


Sobriety. Why don't they banish from the Table all that neeessity does not
require, as coming uncalled to the Feast?


Stomach. They are so far from rejecting what offers, that they find out things
which ought never to be served up, as Shallot, Rocambole, and moldy stinking
old Cheese, that offend the smell, and please nothing but a jaded and stupefied
Palate.


Sobriety. It Is a thing I cannot conceive, how that you not having the talent
of ruminating, can dishinguish one thing from another, in the disorder and
confusion they are sent to you, and I cannot imagine what course you can take
in that deplorable condition, for your ease and comfort.


Stomach. I have instantly recourse to Ice of all colors, and to the
Rose Water and other Sweet-waters, that are served up with the Fruit, the
humidity and cold whereof temper and allay the heat of the Wine, and the fire
of the Spices. I sip also of Rosa Solis, or some other pleasant Water, perhaps
of my Lady's own preparing, which bringing up the Rear, forces the straglers to
double their pace; but seeing these amusements rather soften and qualify the
evil than cure it, there is a necessity of using powerful Remedies, I mean,
that I am fain to comply with the Tea, and those boiling hot drinks, that have
been invented by strangers, which piercing through that great body of meat,
breaks dissolves and hurries it away into those places where I pretend not to
take cognizance.


Sobriety. What, don't you fear to precipitate your digestion?


Stomach. No, I can not moisten too soon, nor too warmly nor even too
abundantly; for the most liquid of my Cargo passing through at first; I have
often found by experience, that if I moisten not with those hot drinks, the
rest remains in a manner stranded, as a Ship upon the Sand when the Sea is out.


Sobriety. When that happens, why do not you expect the next tide, to get your
Vessel a Float again?


Stomach. It would be too long for me to suffer; for that heavy and undigested
Mass, consisting only of what I devoured to stay my craving hunger, one may
still hear the Bellowing of the Ox and the grunting of the Pig, these Bodies
never, being so divided or discomposed, but that they retain the qualities of
their last specification.


Sobriety. At that noise, do'nt your N^ighbours come to your assistance?


Stomach. They are in no small trouble, especially the Liver; but if through
weakness or any other accident, he performs not all he ought upon my account,
the Gall or Spleen supply his defect; after all I must confess that in my
greatest pressures, the Heart of all others is the readiest to bring me case.


Sobriety. Can it be taken ill then, that knowing all these disorders, I avoid
junketting where Health is in greater danger, than the forlorn hope in the day
of Battle: These Relations fill me with horror; However I excuse what you have
alleged; for it is natural when one is hungry to speak of good cheer. I am
therefore more than ever confirmed in my Maxims, and once again I beg of you to
take no more to day but a little Roast-meat, and some Glasses of small Beer, or
water colored red.


Stomach. I could not have believed not long since, that I could have so easily
obeyed you, I was so urged by Parasites that eat commonly at my Table; but now
that they are gone, I want nothing; I am out of humor; and perceive that it is
more by custom than necessity, that people eat to excess.


Fifth Dialogue. Prejudice that loves junketting, cannot endure Sobriety.
Sobriety. Prejudice. Sobriety. I AM either mistaken, or there comes our enemy?
let all be upon their Guard.


Prejudice. What, have you the insolence to take upon you, as if you were a
Sovereign? wretched spawn of fasting and abstinence, who dares neither eat nor
drink but by weight and measure; do you pretend to give Laws where I am?


Sobriety. Who are you?


Prejudice. Who am I? it is enough that I have authority from Reason, to make
you acknowledge and obey me.


Sobriety. I make it my Honor to acknowledge and obey Reason; but if she has
invested you with her Authority, give me a proof of it, by ordaining in favors
of a Body overcharged with fat, a suspension of strong food, and much Physic;
for that in the sequel, cannot but produce good effects: In the first place --


Prejudice. In the first place, hold you your peace: In the next place get you
gone: I neither love Speeches nor Speech-makers. Ho there! Appetite awake,
Senses bestir your selves, and Body prepare every part of thee for a rouzing
meal.


Sobriety. Nay, say rather, prepare for Death.


Prejudice. What, do I hear thee still walking Skeleton, do you forget you have
been Banished out of all such Houses a^ this, where joy and wealth abound? get
ye hence instantly, or I Will send you packing with a Volley of Glass Bottles
about your ears. None but such as tho^ art, who lead'st a wretched life, ought
to think of Death: Learn to reverence and Honor Reason in my Person.


Sobriety. You may have the power, but you want the Language of Reason, or you
make her act the part of Gluttony and Drunkenness: Never was their a Drunken
Fish-wench transported with more violent passions, nor more extravagant Freaks.


Prejudice. What will not you hold your peace yet?


Sobriety. No. On the contrary, listen rather to me, than to intemperance that
poisons your ears. Consider how little Health we have remaining, and put us not
in danger of losing that: It is impossible to reconcile voluptuous irregularity
with sound Health.


Prejudice. It is in vain for you to hold forth, no body will hear you It is my
pleasure, that forthwith, nay instantly, the Stomach prepare it self with these
nourishing Broaths, that the Tongue taste lickerishly of all these various
dishes, and that the Palate perfume it self with these delicious Wines.
Courage, my Senses, these exquisite dainties are so many Sacrifices which I
consecrate to your desires.


Sobriety. Had you to do with a Child whose Nurse you were, I should not think
it strange, that you made it your business to cram it with meat, that so you
might have time to take your pleasure whilst it slept. But what can Reason do
in a Body overcharged with meat and drink?


Prejudice. She triumphs over our mortal enemy Emptiness.


Sobriety. Strange depravation! the consequences of this must be prevented, if
it be possible I have taken care for all.


Prejudice. Whence is it that no body obeys me? why does the Stomach resist my
orders? and what can have made the Heart rise against Victuals?


Sobriety. That Is well.


Prejudice. A Physician, quickly call a Doctor; we must prevent the Distemper:
These are the fine effects of the ridiculous sufficiency of Sobriety.


Sobriety. You may speak as much ill of me as you please, but why must this
poor Body, having by a Miracle escaped out of the hands of the Cook and Butler,
be now delivered up to the Surgeon and Apothecary; do you think that it is with
Life, as with a Torrent, which as soon as it gets over a precipice scatters and
loses its self by its diffusion.


Prejudice. If a Body 'le take your word for it, fair Mistress Prate-a-Pace, I
should be like one of your Rope-dancers without a Pole, that cannot make one
step without being in danger of breaking his neck. I renounce all these
circumspections; a short and sweet life is better, than, like Tantalus, to
languish without eating or drinking, in the midst of plenty and abundance.


Sobriety. However, they that Sup^ with me have no Headake next Morning You
cannot go out of the right way without ruin. It is not my design t^ deprive
(...) of Food, but to put i^ in the (...) make the right use o^ it; for (...)
^gnorant that there i^ more danger (...) long fasting, than in much eating;
Reason taught me these Maxims, at that time when she put the Appetite under my
Government.


Prejudice. That time is past; Reason was then well served, now adays she is
betrayed; but soon or late she will revenge herself: For being Mistress of the
Head, she will reduce the Rebels when she has a mind to it, and perhaps sooner
than they think, to a true animal way of Living.


Sobriety. In a good time be it so, we'll willingly submit; and are so far from
looking on that as an injury, that we accept of it as a favor. Nay I can
assure you that we desire nothing more than that Reason were always in the
Head; for we shall thereby better dispose all that is necessary for the Organs
of Reason, and it shall be none of our fault, if she discharge not her
functions pleasantly.


Prejudice. You have the wrong Sow by the ear, if we willingly (...) ^nch our
selves in the Head, (...) we shall caution our selves against the rhumes and
distillations that might overwhelm us in that redout: And if Betony be not
sufficient to guard us against them, we shall have recourse to Tobaco, nay and
to Euphorbium. In a word, we shall leave no means unessayed to secure us from
your attempts.


Sobriety. Do you consider well what you say? your needless precautions move me
to pity. To avoid a natural dependence that has no bad consequences, you are
running into mortal slavery, which will drag you through a thousand corruptions
into horrors that I dare not name.


Prejudice. I scorn your Prognostics.


Sobriety. I cannot tell if you will scorn them always; but do not you imagine
that Nature will suffer you to pollute the seat of her Empire, by a shameful
commerce that you intend to have with those drugs.


Prejudice You are mighty knowing; like enough it is to you that Nature reveals
her intentions.


Sobri. I know enough to let you know, that it is the intention of Nature, that
the seat where she has placed Reason, should neither be hot nor cold, neither
dry nor moist, but that all these qualities should meet there, without the
Predominance of one above another. Now, if you pretend to trouble that
disposition, I declare to ye, in the name of Nature, and of all the parts of
the Body, that they will employ all their Forces to hinder it; and that so long
as they have one drop of humidity left, they will make it mount from the Heel to
the Head, rather than fail to purify it from your snush.


Prejudice. There is nothing that I more passionately desire, than to see her
make that career. As it is my whole business to drain the water out of the
Body, if I can but compass my ends by the virtue of Tobaco, we shall see what
Nature 'll do to get more.


Sobriety. Know that there is nothing impossible to Nature, when she endeavors
our preservation. If any internal impediment interrupt the course of our
Health, and that for reparation thereof, Nature stands in need of Water or Air,
she calls for it; and if she be denied it, she converts the food we take into
that which is proper for her. If the malignant humor be in any part of the
Body, where the Air, the humidity and ordinary transpiration are not effectual
enough; Nature forces these impurities to muster together in some place, where
being wisely disposed and ripened, the same Nature commands the skin to open a
Passage by which they are sent forth. And this is the way how she delivers us
from bad humors, in what Region soever of the Body they occur.


Prejudice. Well then! let us imitate Nature. Come dear Tobaco, come, and by
reiterated sneezings, open a Passage to the Torrent of defluxions* wherewith
they would drown the Brain^ dear Tobaco, is there any living without thee? and
were it not for thee, could our Life be happy?


Sobriety. That course you take do not ease but destroy the Body. It Is a
changing the order of Nature, to void the excrements by the Mouth and Nose:
Having giving you this advice, I have no more to say; but remember, if any bad
accident happen, which I do but too certainly foresee, you alone must answer
for it.


Prejudice. All in good time.


Sobriety. Farewell. I Will take a long with me what remains of Health and
cheerfulness, with the approbation of Men of breeding; and leave with you
nothing but nastiness and stink, with the aversion of civil people. You will
regrate the want of us when we are gone; for the value of a good thing is not
known, till it once it be lost.


Sixth Dialogue. Prejudice uses all her endeavors, to take off the Stomach and
the Heart from the Party of Sobriety.
Prejudice. The Heart. The Stomach. Prejudice. TELL me I pray, both of you,
what is the meaning on it that you do no more obey the orders of Reason? have you
forgot what she has done for you? answer me plainly.


Heart. Since I never dissemble, I Will tell you frankly, that we have no cause
to brag of the conduct of Reason, since she has given her self over to the
excesses of the Mouth and of Physic.


Prejudice. Physic is not the point in hand, though both of you stand much in
need of it, the question is, what ground ye have to refuse your Victuals; is it
that the Stomach pretends to digest no more, that it may give cause to those
who wait for its concoctions or digestions, to put all into trouble and
combustion?


Stomach. Do you your self think that a Stomach is like a Market, which is only
valued according to the quantity of goods that are carried thither and brought
from thence?


Heart. Has abstinence made us neglect our functions, or fail in our duty?


Prejudice. No: But both of you set about them so faintly, that if you persist
a little longer in your carelessness, I will not give much for our Life. Is that
the way to set the Belly and Reins to rights again, which for a long time have
done nothing without the help of Physic; what can the Stomach say to that?


Stomach. I blame my self for nothing, but that I was too late in opposing your
irregularities. Are not you ashamed to have made so bad use of your Authority?
you are the cause of debauching the Appetite, and of rendering that blind
buzzard independent of the Heart and me, which ought to have been obedient to
our orders.


Prejudice. Speak more civilly of the Appetite, without it what would become of
you?


Stomach. For my share, I pay very dear for the effects of his fickleness and
inconstancy; is he mad for some new object? hardly has he touched it, but that
he forsakes it for another; in the mean time I bear the but then of all.


Prejudice. You are very bold in daring to control his actions, he is not to
give account of them to you; but you are to give me an account of yours: Answer
then precisely to what I ask you.


Stomach. I know no obligation that lies upon me to you, nay nor Reason her
self when she rambles out of the Maxims of Nature, and acts not according to
her orders. So that, look to it, it is Reason and you that are in the fault,
and not I. For satisfying that unruly Appetite, which you foolishly justify,
you have made me devour and consume more meat within these Ten years, than
would have served a sober Man for a whole Age; and as often as I showed any
reluctance against that excess, presently I must be condemned to Physic.


Prejudice. How many lies now, do you pile up one upon another?


Stomach Nay, it is but too true, that I have taken so many Medicines and it so
many different ways, that it is a Miracle they did not kill me. For there is not
a Receipt in all the dispensatory, that to woeful experience has not been tried
upon me; and as if it were not enough for meriting the glorious Title of the
Martyr of the Faculty; that I have been a Thousand and a Thousand times
drenched and soaked with bitter drinks, and as often let Blood; they have
glutted us in Summer with hot water, and in the Winter with cold. They have --


Prejudice. They have ordered nothing for you in those Two Seasons, but upon
very good indications: Would you have such knowing and disinterested Men as
Physicians are, see ones Health in danger, and not reach it a hand; that civil
and officious way of acting has by my means so wrought upon Reason, that it
has conquered that Natural aversion which till then she always had for Physic.


Heart. How can it be that Reason has had so great an aversion to Physic and
yet have Sacrificed us to Physicians?


Prejudice. Had it not been for me, she had hardly resolved upon it, for in her
own Nature she is very irresolute; and you know that irresolution is not a
Disease to be cured by Age.


Heart. To be cured of that, the best Remedy is experience; and indeed few are
made wise by the experience of others.


Prejudice. Of what use can experiments be, when Two things never happen
altogether one way? what did hur^ yesterday, does good to day. One thing is
Healthful in infancy, which in Old Age is mortal; every thing in this World is
singular: So that consequences draw^ from the past, signify nothing for the
future.


Heart. These experiments however are less faulty than conjectures, because one
may far better judge of a Distempe^ by the effect of a Remedy, than o^ Diseases
by their causes, which ar^ unknown to us.


Prejudice. I see what you drive at; a^ that an able Physician says, though
founded on good sense, and immemori^ practice, is with you no more than(...)
Remedy prescribed at a venture, and pr^paired by a blockhead; from which o^ can
promise himself nothing but prese^ pain and certain Death. Whereas,(...) you
may be credited, an odd Recei^ given by the first we meet, is in yo^ opinion an
infallible Specifick^, an^ Universal Remedy: But these ordinar^ Specificks and
Universal Doctors, ar^ much like a flash of Lightning in a dar^ Night, which
having given us a glance (...) objects, leaves in us a greater obscu^ty than
before.


Heart. Do'nt take me up before I Am own, I can make good what I say without
your help; know then that by ^he word experience or experiment, (...) only mean
Natural and agreeable ways ^f living, which are followed by whole Nations, and
that successfully.


Prejudice. That Is to say, that according to these aphorisms, you would in the
Morning drink Coffee with the Turks, and with the Chinesses Tea after Dinner,
Chocolate in the Evening with the Mexicans, and Wine all the rest of the day
with some people of Europe.


Heart. Why do'nt you add to complete the round of the known World, that I
would drink Mil^ with the Tartars and Affricans, Mead with the Moscovites, and
Sherbet with the Turks; but ^ince it is not necessary for one Man to make use
of all the productions of Nature, ^or of all the emprovements of Art, it is
enough that every one in particular make some little experiments of wha^ agrees
with himself; there is nothing more easy than that: For it is not wi^ the
Stomach as with a Painters Pale^ which ought to be furnished with(...) the
chief Colors, if they intend to represent all sorts of objects to the Life
seeing of one simple kind of Food Nature makes flesh and bones, and Pain^ the
Lillies and Roses of the Complectio^ as well as the Or and Azure of the Eye and
hair.


Prejudice. These Poetical flourishe^ are wide of the subject. The question is
to know, if that be the way to redu^ the Stomach to the Animal Life which you
affect, by making it renounce(...) the preparations of Art, and only receiv^
from the hands of Nature Herbs and r^ meat, and eat Rice and Corn as the^ come
out of the Ear.


Stomach. In the sad state to which(...) constitution, that was once very go^
is now reduced, I could not witho^ difficulty leap from one extremity
to^nother; but yet allowing some e^ qualification, I could with pleasure ta^
the part of Nature; for the most simple ^ood is easiest to be found, and
soonest ^igested: To what end such Massacres of Oxen, Sheep, Foul, and wild
Beasts, that crowd of Officers, that number of Engines and dresses to disguise
them unto a Thousand shapes? when our Gardens furnish us with Strawberries,
Melons, Figs, and Grapes: However, (...) am still persuaded, that one may keep
his Health very well though he Taste of all, but not surfeit on any.


Heart. I should be of the same opinion, provided they would not oblige us to
take Physic, and would suffer us to renounce Ptisan and Barley-water.


Prejudice. You make me sick, both of you, by this groundless aversion you have
for Physic: Reason will not learn of you the way how to live, and if she have
occasion to change her course, she will consult those who are more knowing and
less headstrong than you.


Heart. So long as Reason acts by your whimsey, she will never bring us to a
reconciliation; that is too weighty an affair to be managed by so light a head
a^ yours is.


Prejudice. As light as it is, if the Gut^ will be persuaded by me, it shall
no^ be long before you repent that yo^ have offended me.


Seventh Dialogue. Prejudice proposes to the Intestine to enter into a
combination again the Party of the Heart.
Prejudice. The Intestines. Prejudice. YE are very still and quie^ below there,
my Master^ de'ye fear nothing that this calm thre^tens ye with a sudden storm?


Intestines. What are the three orde^ of Medicine at a consultation about then?


Prejudice. You have hit it, and it is already concluded, to make you in the
first place serve for the Funnel of a Chimney; for that end they are enjoining
the Mouth and Lungs to fill you with the An English Glyster.
smoke of Tobaco, and if that do not work, the fear that it will put you in,
will make you purge at least.


Intestines. You are about to tell us a tale of a It Is said, that Bird gives it
self Glysters, and that therefore the College of Physicians at Paris give
three of them in their Arms.
stork; who ever heard of washing the Guts with a Glister of smoke?


Prejudice. It'll be well for you if you escape so; there are other geats
matters a hatching.


Intestines. What can befall us worse?


Prejudice. What, have ye not ^s yet perceived, that the Heart and Stomach are
Revolted against Reason, with a design to render themselves Masters of the
Body, that they may govern it according to their fancy?


Intestines. You mean that manifests that was Published some years ago, with
the title of Ventriculi querela and opprobria.
The complaints and reproaches of the Stomach.


Prejudice. No, no, this is a new War, and of far greater consequence than that
you speak of.


Intestines. It Is then that other, called Every Man his own Physician, or to
say better, Every Man his own Murderer, since that ventures upon Physic as
well as the College.


Prejudice. You think you know every thing, and ye know just nothing at all.
These Two Books I tell you are not the question in hand, but the Revolt of the
Heart and Stomach against Reason.


Intestines. What, do they complain that they have not Victuals enough?


Prejudice. On the contrary, they complain that they are too much pampered; and
is not that do you think, a rare good cause of War: Nevertheless if they go on as
they have begun, the Body within a very little, will be no more but a bag full
of Bones and a living Carcass.


Intestines What'll they get by starving the Body? they will be the first that
suffer. There must be more or less in this matter; to judge well of it we must
give them a hearing.


Prejudice. Were they both here to speak for themselves, they would but confirm
you, that they are entered into a League with Sobriety and Patience, to turn
Appetite out of his place, and to discharge the Mouth to take any thing without
express orders from them. Nay they are grown so insolent as to have Published,
that whoever will join with them in the cause, shall have Health bestowed upon
him for a Reward. Consider how extravagant they are, to promise what they have
not: And indeed, they had as good say nothing, as to tell us that they have the
Heart upon the Lips, and that they speak with an open Heart no body will
believe them upon their word.


Intestines. A strange disorder, indeed, and may be of dangerous consequence.


Prejudice. There is not the least danger for you, however, though our enemies
were even become Masters of the Mouth; for Physicians are not without
expedients to make the Body subsist without it.


Intestines. How without the Mouth?


Prejudice. Yes, without the Mouth: For by the help of the smell alone they can
make us live like Gods, upon the scent and steam of Perfumes and Sacrifices.


Intestines. That 'll do well enough, for those that live on Smoke. But it must
be somewhat more solid, that will do our business.


Prejudice. Besides that expedient, the Faculty has also the Navil and pores
of the Skin, for putting relief into the place on all sides, by way of
Humectations, Frictions, Epithems, and Imbrocations; and though all these ways
should fail, you know, she has the command of a Passage, by which she can send
in Provisions for a long Seige; nor are ye ignorant that the Body may be fed by
as many avenues as it is purged.


Intestines. All that you say is but a tale of a Tub. There is nothing that
does the Body good, but what the Stomach receives by the Mouth: But do not you
admire, how b^isk and quick these grave Doctors are upon the matter? hardly is
the War declared but they begin to talk of coming to extremities. We therefore
conclude that if the Heart and Stomach require no more of us, but a little
Fasting, and will give us now and then somewhat to keep us from being idle, we
are resolved to be on their side.


Prejudice. What do you think that ye can hold out long, without solid Food
twice a day, and that in abundance too?


Intestines. There is nothing more common for Beasts of Prey such as we are,
than to spend whole days without eating.


Prejudice. A very Honorable thing, indeed, for a River of a long course to
run dry.


Intestines. To run dry, is not the thing that troubles us; if they were not
more disturbed above, than we are here below, we should not have the violent
Tides of the Ebbs and Flowings of the Ocean of Medicine to stemm twice a day,
which much interrupts the course of our Navigation.


Prejudice. Are these the thanks that are due for the Refreshments that are
sent you? You set up for Informers upon account of the Commerce ye have with
the missentery, by means of a great many little Vessels; but we will quickly see
if with Pinchgut you can make as much noise, as with full allowance.


Intestines. You are too happy aloft, if ye knew it, that we carry so fair with
your irregularities; and that by our continual application to separate the pure
from the impure, we lay up store for your plumpness and the fresh colors that
beautify your complexion.


Prejudice. If you do us a great kindness that way, we are not unthankful for
it; for there is never an one of us all, but makes a God of his Belly.


Intestines. If upon that consideration you have offered us any Sacrifice, it
is you that have all the pleasure and we all the pain. Nay you have found it to
be so, for we have not suffered without grumbling.


Prejudice. Do'nt repine at your condition; there is none amongst us more to be
envied; your Dominion reaches from one end to the other of our Empire. You
command the inlets and most frequent outlets of the Kingdom. The whole Members
of the State labor for you: So that in Justice and gratitude, ye ought to
declare in favor of Reason whom I represent. The Reins, Liver, Pancreas, and
many others are on our side; and we have already, according to the opinion of
the Ancients, acknowledged the Liver for the Original of the Blood, and by
consequence, of life: In so much that it has been resolved, that in that
quality he shall bear rule over the Body, next and immediately under Reason.


Intestines. It is not the first time a Log has been made a King.


Prejudice. That Log however will not suffer a contempt from the Frogs: Seeing
punishment and reward, are the great hinges on which the most flourishing
States turn, the Liver has resolved to feed and water the part that discharge
their functions well, with pure Bl^od, and pour out upon the Lazy, and the
Rebels the fury of his choler, which is a terrible Thunderbolt that Nature has
put into his hands.


Intestines. What will become of the Heart, in the mean time?


Prejudice. We Will keep him to his old task of laboring Night and Day, to rack
the Blood as Coopers do Wine, pouring it out of one Vessel into another.


Intestines. Confess the truth, there is a great deal of gall in your Party;
and you will be sensible e're it be long that your General uses mortal rigours.


Prejudice. And is the Heart without them? that is a thing in a manner,
inseparable from Government. If the Heart has no gall, he has his melancholy
and anxieties, which are full as bad. Delay no longer then, to list your self
for the Good Old Cause; if ye make but the least hesitation ye are undone.


Intestines. We are not afraid of you; all that we can do for you is to stand
neuter, giving free passage to both Parties; if you expect more of us, we
declare that we will stick by the Heart, who labors Day and Night to animate and
cherish all our Low Countries.


Prejudice. I know the Heart better than ye do: He is a braggadocio who
trusting to the advantageous Post wherein Nature has placed him, thinks he may
from thence huff and threaten all the World; but do but scratch him and he is
dead: Say but an angry word to him and he is all in a rage: Let him but see his
own Blood and he saints: Does he but pass his usual hour of eating and he falls
into fits: The least surprise puts him into a palpitiation: Has he a mind to
any thing, he puts all into trouble and confusion, without listening to Reason,
and even then too when he has not the least cause of complaining, nay quite
forgetting himself either gl^ts his brutish Appetite, to the ruin of the Body,
or he gives himself over as a Prey to his own Passions, which rend and consume
him: In fine he is a fool, and so great an enemy to repose, that he will neither
rest himself, nor suffer others to do so, and has so many odd and capricious
Freaks, that to teach him better manners, we will have him as well as the Stomach
to submit to the Liver.


Intestines. You think you have said wonders now, but to be free with you, you
are neither pleasant enough to make us merry, nor learned enough to make us
change our sentiment.


Preju. If I have not Rhetoric enough to persuade, I have power to make me be
obeyed: With the Rabble force must stand in the stead of Eloquence. Resolve
then instantly to follow the Party I propose, or I Will use you like miserable
crawling Insects, whose The Guts move like Earthworms.
vermiculary motions I know how to put a stop to, when ever I think fit.


Intestines. We fear you not, we are There are six Guts joined to one another.
Six Brethren, invincible because inseparable.


Prejudice. Is not this insolence in the dregs of the People, to be wondered at?
it will not be long before I see them reduced to a A Disease.
miserere; for they are so sullen and hypochondriacal that they strangle
themselves.


Intestines. If we strangle our-selves, you will suffer as much as we. And as to
the positive resolution you demand, know that your being on the one side, is
enough to make us of the other.


Prejudice. Ye imagine that it will be mighty convenient for you to have your
Channels contracted, and Sluices made in them, because ye fancy that ye'l have
the liberty to open and shut them when you have a mind: But deceive not your
selves, ye can never pass these Bars, whatever Abstinence and Diet may promise
you, without the assistance of the Faculty. Therefore stand no longer at SHALL
I, SHALL I; but spedily join in interest with her; ye know that she has always
looked upon you as the Basis and Foundation of her Art; if ye refuse, she will
rather suffer you to burst a Thousand times, than to give you a minutes ease.


Intestines. What can she do to us in time of open War, when she uses Fire and
Sword against us in the midst of secure peace. And therefore, That for both
your threatenings, there is Wind for ye.


Prejudice. What, do ye grumble, and have ye the insolence to mock the Thunder:
I wonder no more that you are in bad odure in the World. But it will be to much
purpose for you to hide your selves; we know how to find you out in the
obscurity of your lurking hole, and we shall see how ye'l behave your selves
at sight of Canon, and when the Petard is fastened to the Gate.


Eighth Dialogue. Prejudice is supposed to be coming out of the House of a
Physician whom we do not see, and that at the door she says to him.
Prejudice. Patience. Prejudice. YOu may rely upon me; all shall be punctually
done according as you have ordered: but fail not to come to Morrow Morning and
see the effects of what you have promised me: In the mean time accept of this
token of my Gratitude. Above all things -- ho, ho; so soon as ever they have
fingered our Money, they shut the door, and will hear us no more: My comfort
is, he has put somewhat into my hands that will revenge me on my Enemies.
Without loss of time, let us run then and put the Irons into the fire -- But
here comes Patience; we must carry it as if she were on our side, for fear she
escape us.


Patience. You go in great haste. Tell me pray whither do you run? who Presses
you?


Prejudice. Not you Lazy Lowt, who would have every Body go like a Tortoise as
you do.


Patience. But still, what Paper is that you hug in your Bosom, with so much
gladness?


Prejudice. It Is a Paper of great virtue, for it is going to restore the lost
Appetite and vigor to a sick Person that is in a desperate condition, and in
short to bring one from Death to Life again, who at present has neither Hands
nor Feet to help himself. If you are not satisfied, read it.


Patience. That is sooner said than done; ha! what is this? the oddest kind of
Writing, and most extravagant Hyeroglyphicks that I ever saw: There must be
something of the Black Art in this: It Is a Charm or Spell; and if it produce
the effect you expect from it, the Devil must be in it.


Prejudice. Well, well; the Charms and compacts you speak of, are only
practiced by Outlandish Doctors, The opinion of a Famous Physician, concerning
Talbors Secret.
who for the discovery of a Specific which they have brought over to us, have
not only given themselves to the Devil, but also covenanted to deliver up to
him, all those that make use of it. Now, I think you are satisfied that the
Doctors of the College would not make use of a Medicine till first they had
stripped it of all its Charms, and transformed it after their way.


Patience. What, do your Doctors fear Spells and Charms? they must be sent then
to Mr. Webster to be cured of the fear of Witches; but to come to this Paper
again, wherein I cannot understand a Letter, tell me who scribled it, for I
cannot persuade my self that it is the Handwriting of a Man in his Senses.


Prejudice. And yet it is the Writing of so wise a Man, that he deserves to be
adored.


Patience. Pray, what is there in him that is adorable.


Prejudice. Can there be any thing more Divine, than by the means of this Bill,
to see five or six Specificks made up into a little Pill; which without
nauseousness or pain entering into the Stomach, begin their work by quenching a
burning heat; which by intervals sent up thicker Smoke and Vapors than a
Glass-house; having scoured and well corroborated the ventricle, The Stomach.
they march out and divide themselves, some this way, some that way, for
putting their different Orders in Execution. One of them joins the Chile; and
following it through its long windings and meanders, accompanies it along the
Milky Veins till it arrive at the Heart; which it comforts and refreshes so
benignly, that the circulation thereby is rendered more quick and better:
Coming out from thence, it divides it self into an infinite number of
Particles, and following the fortune of the Arteries, it leaves behind it to
the disposition of the Glandules, all the Serosities from which it has
purified the Blood: This being done, it rejoyns the Brain, where it Refines the
Blood in such a manner, that it Transforms the same into a Nervous Juice, and
then into Animal Spirits, which dissipate and drive away those mists that
causes Vertigo's and Dilirium's. In the mean time the other Specificks are not
asleep. One takes the charge of emptying the Gall, and leaves no more choler in
it, than what is enough from Hand to Mouth, to serve for ferment and vehicle
for the march of Aliments. From thence it passes through the lobs of the Liver,
where it visits and repairs the Percolatoreis and Strainers of the Blood, in
the Neighborhood of this, one resolutely makes head against the Misentery,
there to quench another fire compos^d of Sulphur and Pitch, the malignity
whereof makes people Hyphocondriacal. Another labors in cleansing the Spleen,
and allaying its humors, dexterously facilitating the course of the pancreatick
juice, which had been corrupted by an inveterate obstruction. Having thus all
of them with emulation forced the gross humors to flight by the common rode of
the Guts, and thereby subdued the Intemperaries of the Intralls, they muster
altogether in the Region of the Reins: But before they enter them, they sport a
little, in draining the A^rabiliarious Capsules of a melancholy humor. In
fine, traversing the Reins, where they leave not the least impurity, by the way
of the Vretors they descend into the Bladder, from whence they victoriously
Sally forth in a full stream, leading with them in Triumph whatever opposed the
course of their Victory.


Patience. What a deal of ground have you beat, and how many discoveries have
you made? how skillful are you in the Geography of the little World? and how
nobly do you relate the exploits of your Hero's? An Historian that had your
Talents might impose what he would upon credulous minds: Nevertheless none but
Patience could have heard so many absurdities, without interrupting you. Is it
possible that one can invent such gross Fables, and dare to give them out for
truths.


Prejudice. I say nothing but what I know to be true, having seen it a Hundred
and a Hundred times. You ought therefore to believe me.


Patience. Since you are so very serious in your answer, I must be so too. I
suppose that for attaining to the knowledge you brag of, you have with singular
application, dissected in presence of your Doctors, a great number of dead
Bodies, and living Creatures. What have you discovered in all that labor? the
situation and conformity of the most apparent parts: What have you learnt by
seeing them? The simple Letters of the Alphabet of a true Anatomy: By
consequent, you are very far from being able to understand any thing in the
Book of the Body of M^n. For the proof of this, open that Book in what part you
please, and you will find that Nature who has Composed it, divides and
subdivides it self at first into so many little Particles, and so
imperceptible, that they immediately escape the nimblest fingers, and most
piercing sight: So that your adorable Doctors ought to be tossed in a Blanket,
if they maintain that one can attain to a certain knowledge of things, by means
of those minute Particles.


Prejudice. We do'nt talk of Anatomy but of Specificks, of whose virtues and
effects I brag, because I know them.


Patience. How can you know the Nature of Specificks, when your Doctors know
not to this day, why Seen purges Choler, or Chervill purifies the Blood? but
suppose you knew the virtue of Simples and of Drogues: Who has assured you,
that when they are mixed and blended together, their different virtues do not
destroy one another: And though they should not destroy one another in the
Pill, what is it that separates and disentangles them in the Stomach? who
guides them into the different Regions of the Body, where the Faculty has
assigned them their Province, whither you follow them step by step, and from
whence you return with them in Triumph?


Prejudice. You would not start so many difficulties, if you knew as well as I
do, that Nature does with extreme joy receive all that her dear Daughter the
Faculty sends her. It is that good Mother who releases the Specificks from the
constraint, to which the narrow passage of the Heart had reduced them, and sets
them at liberty to produce their several effects, as I have just now told you.


Patience. I imagined, that having found you so serious before, you would not
have spoken any thing more but what was real and solid; nevertheless you
relapse again into the Romance, not to say the foppery of Medicine: Have you
forgot that it is the part of an able Physician to assist Nature, and not of
Nature to second the whimseys and capries of an ignorant? he that would be of
your opinion, must renounce common sense, and confess that Nature dotes.


Prejudice. I shall not examine whither Nature dote or not; but I maintain that
Physicians are never out in the proceedings they have with her.


Patience. How could your Masters have fully instructed you in all those
particularites of Nature; when they themselves are not as yet certain, whither
the Blood be made in the Liver or in the Heart: Who call the Spleen a useless
part, and who cannot conjecture what can be the use and function of the
Pancreas.


Prejudice. What matters it, in effect where the Blood be made, and what need
we care for knowing the necessity and use of the parts you speak of? It Is our
part to look when the House is foull, how we are to set about the cleaning of
it. Provided one ease your shoulders of a Burden, what is that to you, how or by
whom it is done; it is enough you are discharged of it.


Patience. Pardon me there; it concerns me very much to know what course you
take to make clean my House: For the furniture must not be thrown out^ Window
with the filth, as it daily happens to you; and far less with the burden must
the Skin be pulled off of our Shoulders, as your pretended Specificks disguised
into Physic do.


Prejudice. I do'nt understand what yo^ mean, speak more intelligibly, if you
expect an answer.


Patience. Well, I Will explain my self; take it then thus: No sooner has the
Stomach notice that it must take Physic^ to Morrow, but the whole Body is
seized with sadness and horror, so that i^ enjoys no more pleasure nor repose.
Is the hour come when the Cup is to be drunk, hardly has Reluctance giv'^ a
minutes respite to the Mouth to take the Physic, but that the Heart rises i^
favor of the Stomach, to de iver it from the same; and when the Heart succeeds
not, all is in a stir and commotion, and the Hickock Rings the Alarm Bell.


Prejudice. There Is ridiculous stuff indeed.


Patience. In that trouble and agitation the good humors that are irritated,
move, and march to the place where the enemy appears, with design to stop that
Poison at the Fountain head, and make it turn back the same way it came. But
when Vomiting has missed its blow, and the main Body of the Medicine has
unhappily got into the Guts, the humors change their Battery, drive the
Physic before them, and pursue it downward with so much eagerness that most
part of them are lost with it. In the mean time the Doctor accustomed to impose
upon Nature, though he see by what is done, the mischief he has caused;
Proclames his Victory, whilst the Patient deplores his losses, though he has
vanquished the Poison.


Prejudice. You talk of humors and Physic, as a blind Man does of Colors.


Patience. However, I know by experience, that Physic serves not so much to
drive out the bad humors as to corrupt the good; for a Purge produces the same
effects in a sound Body, as in a sick.


Prejudice. Say whatever you can, I maintain that it is the Physic that drives
the bad humors out of the Body; and not the good humors that drive out the
Physic.


Patience. There is no talking of different humors, when one has Physic in
his Body, for it makes them all bad: Physic then in the Body is like dust
thrown upon a crawling Snail: The poor creature to deliver it self from that
unexpected obstacle, presently retreats within its shell, and with the loss of
its sweat comes out again delivered from the impediment that hindered it from
continuing its Journey.


Prejudice. You may say all that you please, but you cannot deny that Physic
restores the Patient to his lost Appetite.


Patience. If the Patient recover his Appetite, he is not to thank the Physic
for that, but Nature, which perceiving after the fight that I was just now
discribing, that the Patients Forces have been much weakened, orders the Taste,
the Smell, and the Appetite, to take whatever shall be offered them, for
recruiting, with all expedition, the losses sustained, that so, what the Poison
of the Physik has discomposed, may be instantly put into order and frame again.


Prejudice. Your fictions are fully as Romantic as mine, and all that can be
said is, that such Rebels as you are cannot abide Physicians.


Patience. On the contrary, we would have every Man to be his own: But our
Physicians are not like yours, who make both the foul and fair Weather, in your
Diseases. We would have our Physicians in all things, and at all times, referr
themselves to Nature, and make it their chief business to lay up a stock of
cheerfulness and delight, whereby we might season every thing: For we neither
take nor do any thing, if there be not somewhat of content and satisfaction in
it, so that we live, nay, and I dare say, that we die with delight. Delight is a
Coin that passes as current with us as it did in the Golden-Age: For we esteem
things no otherways but according to the measure of delight that they afford
us. In fine delight is a quintessence without which no enjoyment of Life seems
good to us, and we hold it for a maxim that cheerfulness and delight refresh
the mind, increase the vigor of Body, preserve Youth, and prolong Life.


Prejudice. No Body doubts but that delight and cheerfulness have all the
Virtues you name; the difficulty is only where it is to be had and how prepared.


Pati. You may easily believe that it is not to be found at the Droguists, nor
prepared in the shops of Apothecaries. But inform your self of all the innocent
pleasures that are in the World; in these pure sources, Nature would have us
look for delight, which every one of us according to our Palate should
accommodate to our own necessities,


Prejudice. If your Health be not more solid than your Physic, I shall believe
you to be in great danger when you are sick, for my part I Will stick by the
Mainmast, I find that the Faculty governs so well this Machine of Man, that I
think it cannot be committed to the care of better hands


Patience. So much and no more would a skillful Watch maker say of a Watch,
when he had examined all the pieces of it: But can a Physician do the same with
your pretended Machine of the Body? having taken it to pieces, can he set it
again in Motion?


Prejudice. You would not be much out of the way, if the Machine we speak of,
were made up like a Watch: It is enough that our Doctors have the Key of our
Machine, that opens and shuts the door to Health and Diseases.


Patience. Nay, truly I believe your Doctors have a Key that opens the door to
Diseases, and with a grim look, shuts it upon Health.


Patience. What do you say of a grim look? is there any thing so refreshing to a
sick person as the sight of a Physician?


Physician. A Patient that rejoices at the sight of a Physician, is sicker in
mind than in Body: And every Patient that willingly takes what his Physician
prescribes to him, if he be not his own Murderer, he is at least accessory to
his own Death.


Prejudice. He! who can oblige a sick person to take any thing against his will?


Patience. A Mother, a Wife, a Child, an old Servant, who being seduced or
frightened by a crowd of Physicians, change their love and friendship into
Persecution and Tyranny, all declaring for the Physicians whom they love not,
against a dying person whom they adore: So that striving to save the Patient,
they kill him; giving him no rest, till he be delivered up bound hand and foot,
to the Surgeon, and till he has swallowed down the quid pro quo, of the
Apothecary; for all know the Doctors hand, but no Body can read it.


Prejudice. You put me now in mind of my Bill, give it me again, I pray, that I
may put it into the hands of those who can make better use of it than you.


Patience. Take it, I know nothing it is good for; but I cannot conceive, how a
Man, that dares not trust his Purse to his friend, commits his Life to a
Physician whom he knows not.


Preju. I Will answer you another time. I have lost but too much time with you
already; farewell enemy of Physicians.


Patience. You Are mistaken, I Am only an enemy to their bad practice.


Prejudice. And for my part, such as it is, I reverence it, and am persuaded it
works good effects, let me then fly away with my dear Bill, and hear you no
more.


Patience. She is already got so far, that she cannot hear me; I must make the
best of her absence, and of a meeting that I am to have with Reflection, for
endeavoring the re-establishment of our little Empire. If this
misunderstanding continue any longer, It 'll undo us, and involve us all in the
common mi^fortune.


Ninth Dialogue. Reflection reconciles Reason with the Heart and Stomach; and
they resolve unanimously to renounce Physic.
Reflection. The Heart. Reason. The Stomach. Reflection. LEt not the Heart and
Stomach any longer blame the conduct Reason has for some time followed. She
has been Prejudiced, it is true, but as it is great wisdom to forget a fault,
so let us speak no more of what is past; and let there be no more rancour and
animosity amongst us.


Heart. Reason then, does at length confess that she is not infallible.


Reflection. Neither is she so guilty as you take her to be. Consider that it
was impossible for her to have acted otherways than she has done, during the
impetuositie of hot headed Youth; she was alone, and had none to stand by her,
without Experience, encompassed with bad examples, solicited by Appetites,
authorized by custom, and flattered by the Senses, how could she resist so many
powers?


Heart. Had that been all, she had been in some measure excusable; bu^ so soon
as she gets out of one Gulf, must she throw herself headlong into another?


Reflection. I am of the same opinion as you are of, that to remedy the
excesses of the Mouth, she had better have consulted Nature than Physicians: But
there are some things which appear so charming at first sight, that we embrace
them with pleasure; thinking our selves sure that the sequel will answer the
beginning.


Heart. That Is the case with those who are Prejudiced; they imagine that the
beaten Road is the safest way.


Reflection. Who can be armed against that, Reason gliding along with the
stream of Medicine; has been as a great many more, carried out into the open
Sea, contrary to her expectation and desire.


Heart. She who suggests to the wise, not to Sail but along the Coast, why did
not she put in to shore again.


Reflection. What can one do, the first time that he is tossed with Winds and
Tempests? so that it is no wonder, if in that confusion she abandoned the Helm.


Heart. But to whom did she abandon it?


Reflection. To those whom she took to be sincere and able persons, because
with extreme confidence they offered themselves in time of danger; but time
has made her but too sensible since, that all they sought for was to make
advantage of her misfortune, and to be instructed at her cost.


Heart. Nay, so far were they from serving her, that I know their doubts and
irresolutions have represented Death to her, nearer than the Winds and Waves in
the height of their rage have done.


Reflection. The truth is, these ignorant Pilots have put her into greater
danger by their bad working of the Vessel, than if she had only had the Storm
and foul weather to struggle with.


Heart. It could not otherways be.


Reflection. Be it as it will, all of them being now at their wits end, and
knowing no more what to do, they left themselves to the mercy of the Winds and
Sea, which having long tossed their Vessel, cast it at length shattered and
weather beaten upon the shore; so that they who were still alive, were not to
be known, they looked so like dead Men.


Heart. What said Prejudice to that?


Reflection. I forgot to tell you, that in the height of the Storm, a gust of
Wind carried her overboard, and she perished in the Sea, to the great content
of all: Insomuch that she has not been lamented by any.


Heart. That Is the fate of bad Favorites, who are not so much as pitied by
those whom they have obliged; Reason ought to be very well satisfied, in that
she is at the same time delivered of an unworthy Favorite, and Cured of the
malady of Physicians.


Reflection. The pleasure of a past danger is only sweet to those, who are no
more in fear of falling into another. All Reasons care at present is, how to
find means of giving vigor to a decayed Body, and of recovering Health at any
rate.


Heart. Probably, she is in discourse with the Stomach, since neither of them
have come to our conference.


Reflection It may be so. However tell me I pray you, what you think of this
change.


Heart. Seeing, we are in my opinion, more obliged to you than to Reason, for
the resolution she has taken, it is you whom we ought chiefly to thank for it;
but since they who most deserve praises, desire least to hear them, I shall
only tell you, that our Counsels tend to nothing else, but to beseech Reason
that she would preserve the Body from sickness, and the Mind from trouble and
anxiety.


Reflection. What must be done for compassing of that? for you have cut out a
great deal of work in a very few words.


Heart. Let her try all ways to reconcile us perfectly to Nature; engage her to
restore us to Health, and suffer us to enjoy it so long as we live; for we do
not live, if we be no^ well: For that end, let us by the mediation of Patience
and Sobriety, begin to Sacrifice to her that excess of flesh and fat, wherewith
the parts of the Body are overcharged, accompanying these Sacrifices with some
Liquors poured out to the Honor of the Gods in Sacrifices.
libations; lest the fire should with what is superfluous, consume also what is
necessary.


Reflection. What must Reason, in the mean time, do for seconding of Nature?


Heart. Let her give orders that we be treated like Children, I mean, that we
be fed with Bread, Milk, Fru^t, and all that Nature produces of her own
dressing, or that Art pr^pa e^ without much labor and pain: Imposing a Law
upon us to use them moderately, but with intention still, to allow us afterward
stronger and more nourishing Food, if need require.


Reflection. I doubt not but that is a good way of living, especially when we
have recovered our Health; for I am convinced, that a regular Diet, with a
constant and uniform way of Living, is the best means to settle our Health, and
avoid Diseases.


Heart. How? Suppose in sickness, Nature seemed to press you with an earnest
inclination, to commit some little excess, would not ye hearken to her and
satisfy her?


Reflection. Although these longings must be som^times hearkened to and
gratified, yet we should not give way to them so much, as not to be always upon
our Guard, and use a great deal of circumspection; for Nature being solicitous
for our relief, puts us incessantly upon the execution of what she suggests to
us, trusting to our own discretion, as to the moderation that is to be
observed, and the use that we ought to make of her motions.


Reason. Nothing can be better said; I agree wholly in opinion with Reflection
and the Heart, and am resolved so to confide in their conduct, that I will
apply my self entirely to the functions of the Mind: And therefore I Will only
make use of Sight and Hearing, and leave it to the Heart to do as he thinks fit
with the Taste and Smell, for the service of the Body.


Reflection. If you behave your self so, it will be said that you pass from one
weakness to another; you have not forgot sure, that Reason has not been given
to the Body only to do what pleases it self, but to serve for a counterpoise to
that? though at present it seems to you to be in an even Balance, yet how can
it resist the continual temptations to which it is exposed, if you watch not
constantly over its conduct.


Heart. To this you may add, that if Reason take no other care but to study and
exercise the Mind, the Body in a ^rice will languish and decay.


Reflection. This obliges me to tell you, that ye ought to act altogether in
confort; carefully to study Nature, and confine your pleasure to a submission
to her Laws. Let not Reason then, be any more seduced as to that particular, by
those who 'll come and rattle News to her, as if they were better informed than
she: They are fawning flatterers, who endeavor to tickle the Ear, that they
may become Masters of the Heart, let her above all things call to mind that
Health is free and independent; and that ye ought to use your utmost
endeavors, to maintain it in those privileges, when once ye enjoy it.


Reason. How blind was I, when I imagined that Reflection took pleasure to
mingle sower with our sweet; that we could not be happy when we listened to her,
and that to follow her Counsels was to be her Martyr? How do I regrate my
folly, in that I have so long acquiesced to what an ill-grounded Prejudice
suggested to me in favor of Surfeiting and Physic. For repairing of all these
abuses, and so extinguishing that misunderstanding tha^ has but too long
Reigned among us^ let us, I beseech you, be more closel^ linked together, for
our own satisfaction^ than we are by the bonds of Nature, for our Interests.
Seeing we have but one Heart and one Mouth, let us have also but one will and
one desire, that we may never be heard nor seen any more, but altogether in a
Body. The better to persuade you to this, I am resolved that as often as Sleep
shall seize the Eyes, and Dreams the Head, I will retire into the Heart, whilst
all the Body but he takes their rest, to the end I may remedy the alterations
and discomposures of the Body, which happen during the day.


Reflection. That Is a thought and resolution worthy your self, by that means
you will cut off all these disp^tes, which from time to time arise about the
pre-eminence of the Heart or Brain; and under the cover of Sleep you will in
that new place, make good use of the leisure it bestows upon you.


Reason. I tell ye once more, I Will allot the Night to all that concerns the
inside of the Body, and employ the day about the matters without. I hope the
Heart will not disapprove this regulation?


Heart. I approve and consent to all, but I die.


Reflection. What makes the Heart to Sigh so, whence proceed those long gapings
and yawnings?


Heart. The reason is, because some angry Spirits stir within me, and the
advices that are brought me from the Regions of the L^ver and Spleen, assure me
that others of the same temper kindle combustions in all parts; and seeing they
have ma^e the Diaphragm also to rise, I can expect nothing but Death.


Reason. Alas! we are undone, the Heart is without motion.


Reflection. I know the cause of that disorder, it is no more but the remains of
an old quarrel against Sobriety: Let us not be Allarmed at it, all will do
well. Though these mutineers should pursue their rage even to a fainting of the
Heart, we must not be startled at it; in all great changes we are ever to
expect some small mortification, before things be set to rights.


Stomach. If I may have my will, none can calm that Storm sooner than my self.
I have just now received a supply sufficient to quell and subdue all these
mutineers, who have a design to mount to the Head, under the conduct of
Restlessness, to hinder Sleep from entering the place.


Reason. I know the Commander of that Party, he is a Debauchee, whom Prejudice
and Intemperance have introduced amongst us, and who is the cause of most of
our troubles. At first he is agreeable to Youth, who love mirth and pleasure;
but it is dangerous to suffer him to usurp too much Authority, because his
Ambition thursts after every thing, and if the Stomach can fairly rid us of
him, it will be no inconsiderable service.


Stomach. The business is done, the heat of these Spirits relents, and Sleep
that advances apace will quickly reduce them to Reason, that it may entertain
you with a diversion, equivalent to all the pleasures that are to be desired in
Life. Let it but be represented in Comedy, and that is enough to ravish you with
admiration.


Reflection. I know what the matter is, I have been just now told it: And you
may give Reason a little hint of it, since she is not to be present at the Play.


Stomach. My M^mory has given the argument to Fancy, which will have the Play
to be acted by the Company of Dreams: If we will believe the Imagination, she
never Invented so surprising Scenes and Machines before, and all with design to
Represent our perfect and happy Reconciliation. Let Reason then, if she please,
that she may not disturb the Play, descend into the Heart, to the end that the
Senses being excused from acting abroad in her service, Silence and Tranquillity
may favor the design.


Reason. Along dear Reflection; let us go and take up our Quarters in the Heart,
let us, in the mean time, give way to the Imagination and Dreams to delight the
public, and let us leave the conduct of their Eyes to Fancy. When the Galley
has Rowed all Day long, it is but reasonable the Slaves should take their rest
in the Night, if one would have them tug at the Oar, and do their duty next day.


Reflection. I like the thought of letting the Slaves take Breath, and
suffering Sleep and Dreams to sweeten their pains, I likewise commend you for
giving the Imagination liberty to do what she pleases; she has been long in
possession of the right of Banishing Judgment out of the Dominion of Dreams:
And indeed, there is nothing more inconsistent than Judgment and Dreams.


Heart. What need all this talk? what are we concerned, let them do wh^t they
will, provided Sleep allay our evils, and confirm our reunion? The Stomach
promises us, that; he knows how far Sleep is engaged to restore the Body to
Health, and since Morpheus is already upon our Eyelids, let him do his duty:
It is no small affair to give us Health. Let us quietly expect the effect of
these promises. The secret of our Medicine is, to put the Patient in the same
state he was in before he was sick.


Reflection. Be it known to all the Inhabitants of the little world, that they
instantly submit to the Laws of Sleep; to the end, that next Morning they may
be all in a condition to return to the diversion of their ordinary employments,
and so to continue, until the Muses come in the Evening, and mingle their
consort with the pleasures and liberty of a civil and sober Entertainment.


Tenth Dialogue. Sleep renders Health to the Body.
Sleep. Health. Sleep. WHat desire soever I have to acquaint you of what
passes, yet you should still be in the Company of Dreams, if the urgent and
reiterated Orders of Reason and the Heart, had not forced me to call you from
these diversions, and to propose to you in their name, something that is more
solid.


Health. Why do you listen to that ambitious couple? if you do but in the least
comply with their judgment, they will disturb the quiet of our retreat, and banish
you, as they have done formerly, out of the extent of your own Dominion. You
know when that happens, that I can have no pleasure in staying here without you.


Sleep. But if there be an indispensable necessity of listening to the
sentiments of Reason, and following the motions of the Heart; how can one
refuse to answer them?


Health. Well then, if they must be answered, let us plainly tell them, that
since we pretend not to the Honors and Glory which they so fondly possess, we
pray them not to disturb the innocent Pleasures which we enjoy: For it is no
less the happiness of Life to slight what one has not, than to know the right
use of what one enjoys. Alas! could one be more happy than I was without them,
when you began to speak to me in their name?


Sleep. Without doubt you were wholly taken up in Dreams; what pleasant piece,
pray, did they represent to ye?


Health. It Is very true, I thought my self to be an Amazon Queen, who returned
Victorious from her Enemies; but just as I was about to enter in Triumph,
amidst shouts and acclamations, unto a Palace of Rubies hanging in the Air, and
gently moved by the Wind, I was seized with fear; and though I was encompassed
with Mirth, Music and Dancing, yet nothing but Sleep could re-assure me. That
you may know what kind of pleasure it was, I thought that I Clothed you in my
Garments, and that at the same time we were closely linked together by Chains
and Flowers. Now though I was exceedingly delighted at this, yet for all that
it broke my Dream. What d^ye imagine to be the signification of it?


Sleep. That Is easily interpreted. The Amazon is Health, the Enemies of whom
she Triumphed, are Physicians and Intemperance. The Palace of Rubies moved by
the Winds, is the Heart, where Reason would have me carry you, and the Chains
that bound us so fast together, are our embraces at parting.


Health. Nay, now I perceive you are fonder of Reason, than she was of her
Favorite; and I foresee that it will be none of your fault, if both of us
renounce not our Independance, and wholly submit to our pleasure.


Sleep. Not so neither, I Am only solicitous to inform you, what share you are
to have in that reconciliation, and to put you in possession of it.


Health. I believe I know as much of that as you do: Be ruled by me, let us let
Reason and the Heart alone to torment themselves as much as they please, in
finding out measures to repair the disorders of their dissentions, and let us
take our rest.


Sleep. That would do well enough, if without you they could put in execution,
what they are resolving betwixt themselves. They are so convinced of the
necessity of having you, that they cease not to send me one Courier at the
heels of another, praying me to restore Health to the Body. Will ye refuse me
the satisfaction of conducting you to the Heart, and of seeing you triumph
there, as you do in all other places where you take delight?


Health. Why should I any more appear in those places where I have received so
bad usage? have you forgot, that if it had not been for your Protection, I had
been long ago out of the World? why then will you undo, what you have so
kindly preserved?


Sleep. No, I will not undo you, nor so much as expose you to the least danger: We
are not now, about to conduct you to the Heart as heretofore, accompanied with
the sparks of Youth, which might, in effect, cause your destruction, or at
least disturb your tranquillity: You are expected there, without ostentation and
magnificence, we are only to acquaint you that Reason is no longer Prejudiced
against you, and to give you all manner of assurance that she will determine
nothing concerning you for the future, till first she have consulted Reflection
and the Heart about it.


Health But if she consult not you also, I shall be in no less danger. No, I
wont part from you; I cannot be secure without you. Why have you so many
Charms? Why does one taste so many pleasures in your Company? Having accustomed
me to a still and solitary Life, would you now again Embark me in trouble and
confusion?


Sleep. You have no cause any more to apprehend these agitations; they have
separated pain from them, and left you only the pleasure: Nay, and if that
pleasure work in you but the least disgust, give me but a wink, and I shall
presently come flying to your assistance: And though nothing should happen that
may p^t you out of humor, my tender care of you shall not suffer me to delay
till Night, the paying of you a visit; I Will come and steal some moments for you
even in the middle of the day: If the Feasting and Plays that they are
prepairing for your Entertainment, hinder me not from approaching you.


Health. The preparations you speak of, instead of obstructing your design,
will facilitate the means of your putting it in execution. I shall even prevent
them, if I can, for I have no pleasure but in your Company, and especially at
that time of Day, Physicians may say what they will.


Sleep. You are then resolved to grant Reason what she desires of you?


Health. When Reason formed the design of alluring me to the Heart, it ought to
have been represented to her how changeable and fickle he is How that after the
first congress he will take no more notice of me. The truth is, he passionately
desires what he wants, and sets no value upon what he enjoys. In a word, he is
in all things so much upon extremes, that what he will do to cheer me, will only
serve to alter, and perhaps to undo me.


Sleep. That diffidence will Vanish, when I have told you what has been done
as to that, for your security and Glory.


Health. I desire to know no more; well since you will deliver me up to the
Heart, I condescen^. Only tell me how I can be able to bear the grief of our
parting.


Sleep. Could I, as well as you, appear abroad in the day time, we should be
inseparable, but being destined to be sometimes asunder, do'nt fear that a few
hours absence can have any bad influence upon so strict a friendship as ours.
Consider that it would be a shame for us to mind only our own repose and
pleasure; that is a thought not to be pardoned but in a foolish Love. What
trouble soever then, our separation may cause us, let us support it constantly;
and let us do so much good to all, that all may love us as much as we do one
another.


Health. Well to complete what you have begun, let us go to the Heart.


Sleep. You do me a singular kindness, but let me tell yo^, th t ^n the
reconciliation that Reason has just now made with all the part^ of the Body,
it has among other things, been ^greed upon: That so soon as Sleep all seize
the Eyelids, Reason shall leave the Head and descend into the Heart, there to
labor in concert with him, about what concerns the Domestic and internal
affairs of the Kingdom.


Health. hy has she chosen that time and place?


Sleep. Because the Night gives Council, and all that is done in the Heart is
kept more secret than what is acted elsewhere.


Health. That ought to bring down the pride of the Brain, who bragged that he
alone had the Honor of being the Seat of Reason.


Sleep. Ay, and it ought to vex him somewhat more, that they talk of treating
of nothing in his Apartment, but of Foreign Affairs: But, what solely concerns
you, so soon as Vigilance has guided Reason from the Heart to the Head,
Gladness is to put you in possession of the Heart, where joining your Talents
together, you will have liberty to make your self desired and cherished of all.


Health. Notwithstanding that I have wholly resigned my self to your will, give
me leave to tell you once for all, that I cannot conceive how you can love me,
and yet bestow me upon another?


Sleep. I have said nothing of giving you to another; that word would wound our
friendship: I have only engaged my self to leave you in the Heart, so long as
Reason shall be in the Head: For when Reason descends from the Head into the
Heart, my design is to bring you thence; and not to leave you, so long as she
is there. Consider what pleasure we are like to have, in discoursing at leisure
of our impatiencies and disquiets: What felicity in visiting the Bounds of our
Empire, in scattering our favors in all pl^ces, giving to those you have a
kindness for, full Brimmers of Sleep, which drives weariness out of the
Travelers Foot, and out of the Tradesmans Hand: Which strips the Heart of his
Passions, and the Mind of its most cutting cares. When I endeavor to assuage
the sharpness of pains, you shall pour a healing Balsam upon the most desperate
Wounds: And whilst I release Slaves from their Chains, you shall give them
vigor to carry them when they awake. In fine, if there be any thing wanting to
those whose troubles and miseries we would sweeten; we shall order Dreams to
afford by Night, what their adverse Fortune denis them by Day.


Health. So that leaving every where tokens of our beneficent inclination, we
cannot be upbraided, that any are sick and unfortunate in our Empi^e: Since
they shall never suffer, so long as they are under our jurisdiction. But that I
may fully understand all these regulations, inform me what Reason is doing with
the Heart.


Sleep. They are making no new Laws, but are reviving those which were in a
m^nner extinct; they have already enacted that if the Health be in the least
out of or^er, the Stomach shall demand nothing; that all the parts of the Body
shall listen carefully to hear what the Voice of Nature prescribes; and whilst
they wait for her suggestions, the parts that are overcharged, may ease
themselves.


Health. Now that it is day, and the Sun is going to appear, what does Reason
do to prepare for her depart.


Sleep. She sollicites the Spirits that are dispersed over the Body, to betake
themselves to their duty, and with pleasure considers how busy they are to
fill the Organs of the Senses, and all the Faculties of the Body, to perform
their functions: Just as a General delights to see, how at the first sign
given, his Well-Disciplined Soldiers run from all parts to their Arms, and
draw up under their Colors, ready to fall on at the least Signal.


Health. When all these Spirits are drawn up in Rank and File, as they ought to
be, what does Reason then do?


Sleep. She leaves the Heart, attended with the Virtues and an infinite number
of Spirits, judgment ushering the way; just so, as in the Spring, we see a
swarm of young Bees fly confusedly about their new Queen.


Health. You give me the description of a very Charming Court.


Sleep. That Is not all, Reason entering the Head, finds presently all the
Idea's which are the Inhabitants of that Empire, Ranked and Drawn up, as
Reflection thinks fit to Command; and as exactly as such an innumerable
Multitude, with so vast a Train, can allow of in so small a Plot of Ground as
the Memory is.


Health. You fill me with curiosity.


Sleep. All these Idea's march in little Bodies, like the cluster of a swarm of
Bees. Each little Body consists of Idea's of the same kind, or near to it, and
altogether muster in the Air in form of a Rainbow, which yields the loveliest
Prospect in the World. As all these Idea's are overjoyed to see their Queen, so
they strive to get to the outside of their Companies, and the motions they make
for coming thither, makes a very pleasant variety.


Health. Has it only been since Reason retired into the Heart, that she is
received in the Head, in the manner you tell me? for I was Banished from thence
so young, that all is News to me.


Sleep. It has been so in all times.


Health. Whither went Reason then, whilst the Dreams under your Government,
possessed the Head, and disposed of the Body?


Sleep. Opinions are divided as to that: Some thought she slept; and others
that she left the Body to go visit the Place of her Original; for my part, I am
in a manner assured that she shut her self up in the understanding, that she
might have no hand in the disorders which the Animal part, in conjunction of
Dreams, sometimes committed during the time of my Reign.


Health. Let Us return I pray, to our Idea's; what do these little Mirmidons do,
when they perceive their Sovereign?


Sleep. They make it their business to observe her, and according as she is
melancholy or merry, they cloth themselves with joy or sadness, and that
happens as often as Reason changes her countenance: So that more diligent
Courtiers are no where to be seen.


Health. What does Reason do upon her Arrival?


Sleep. Sometimes she makes a review of her Troops, commonly she does but
consider the new comers; but one thing, which I cannot very well express to ye,
and which requires your best attention; scarcely is Reason seated in her
Throne, environed with the Virtues, but they become all so resplendent, that it
is difficult to behold their Luster.


Health. I very well conceive that the rays and light of the Mind, supply he
place of the Sun in this little world, which being reflected upon that numerous
Court, renders it so Majestic: But how does Reason act in ordinary Affairs?


Sleep. Whether Reason think within herself, or that she make^ apparent abroad
what is doing within at home, she makes use of two Ministers. The Will is one,
which governs the Original of the Nerves, like one that plays upon the
Virginals: And the other is Memory, which with unconceiveable swiftness mov^s
the Idea's that are in little Bodies. This being supposed, when Reason acts,
she is to be considered as reciting a Lesson of Music, whereof the Will and
Memory make the parts: By that means, whatever Reason intimates, the part of
the Body which has the greatest Relation to that Thought, is presently
acquainted with it by the Will, which touches its Nerves. And if there be any
thing past that quadrats to that thought, the Memory presents the Idea's of it,
which the Virtues turn into all views, to set them off in their lively Colors.
So that every one has a share in the spectacle, and there is nothing better
connected.


Health. But how can Memory bring forth an Idea that is confounded with a
million of others?


Sleep. In the same manner as in an Army drawn up in Battalia, no Soldier
answers, but he that is called, or his next Neighbor for him.


Health. You describe to me a very singular Harmony.


Sleep. But a very just one too: For judgment which beats time, mark the
determination of Reason, that are like the Periods of the Cadence in ordinary
Music, to which the Organ of the Voice beneath from Time to Time makes answer,
accompanied with the gesture of the Hands, and motion of the Eyes; all which
together supply the place of the Chorus, in that kind of Natural Opera.


Health. That sure requires a great deal of time.


Sleep. Not at all, the business is done in an in instant, and all these
motions are quickes than Lightning.


Health. Are these things always performed with that exactness and promptitude
you say?


Sleep. In such a great consort as this is, it can hardly be, but that there is
something many times out of Tune: Nay and sometimes it all is false, even from
Reason it self to the Organ of the Voice; but when the evil is of no long
continuance, it passes but for some little clashing, which great Courts are not
Allarmed at, because they are subject to them.


Health. But what when these jarrings continue?


Sleep. Then all is out of order, and the State in danger.


Health. What is the cause of these errors, and what course is taken to avoid
them, and to stop the Progress?


Sleep. Such great disorders never ^appen, but when Reason is drawn away ^y the
violence of some predominant Passion, which usurping a share in he^ Sovereign
Authority, discomposes the State, and puts it often in danger, which you have
seen, so long as Prejudice was in favor.


Health. Why do not the Virtues stifie that disorder in the Birth? for it is
for that end alone that they are given to Reason.


Sleep. Is there any one that performs what is enjoined him punctually? Though
Wisdom hold the Virtues linked together, to oblige them neither to rise nor
fa^l; it is hard however to be prevented, but that when some certain o^jects
present, they will run Riot: And that is the reason that Libera^ity sometimes
breaks out into profusion, an^ that Frugality so often borders upon
Covetousness.


Health. Who puts a stop then to their impetuous motions?


Sleep. The great Virtues, which have the power of correcting one another(...)
Prudence moderates Courage; and Reason herself takes Counsel from Reflection.
Besides Modesty has the Inspection over all the Virtues, with power to lay an
Arrest upon those that Trangress, delivering them up to Confusion, which is a
mercyless Jailer, that exposes them to shame under a Purple Veil, which amongst
the Virtues is a most severe Punishment.


Health. What course ought Reason to follow, that she may not fall into such
perplexities.


Sleep. To remain indifferent, and rely only upon simplicity and sincerity; to
take truth for her guide, and never to look back; that she may avoid the
ghastly looks of Sorrow and Repentance. To speak always with the Heart upon the
Lips, Integrity attending both, as a surety that answers for all, and justifies
the demeanor.


Health. I admire what you say, but cannot conceive who can have taught you so
much?


Sleep. I am obliged to Reflection for this, whom I often assist in ordering
the Acts of the Assemblies, whereof she keeps the Records. And therefore I lodge
with her, until Reason appear, and take Possession of the Head, with all the
Train that I have just now described to you.


Health. If I take it, I think I see a crowd of Actors, filling the Scene of a
stately Theater, and impatiently expecting the drawing up of the Cloth, that
they may begin to Act.


Sleep. It Is exactly so, for so soon as the Eye lifts up the Eye Lid, they
begin to Act and Vanish.


Health. Though I believe all this to be literally true, yet I dare not brag of
it; for what comes from you, passes commonly for raving amonst people that are
awake.


Sleep. Let them think what they please, what does that concern you? Truth
needs no approvers; but in my turn, give me leave to tell you, that I cannot
conceive neither, what can have moved you to have put so many questions to me;
for I never took you to be very curious.


Health. Wonder not at that; for so long as you did not talk of parting from
me, you were to me instead of all things; but now that you turn me over to
others, I would not have it said, that you had taught me nothing. The truth is,
I am very ignorant; I love not that Learning which requires Study, and when I
am not p^t to it, to defend my self against Intemperance an^ Physicians, I mind
nothing but cheerfulness and pleasure. It shall not be so for the future; I
have a Thousand Questions more to put to ye, concerning Reason and her Court,
which I must be informed of.


Sleep. You may to day satisfy your desire; I know you will be called up, and
Reason will enlarge in your Praises: Nay she has resolved for your better
Entertainment, to confute the Physicians before your face, that you may be
revenged on them for all the mischief they have done you.


Health. If their defeat be worth the while, we shall Triumph over them at
Night; but do'nt you perceive that we are entering into a very hot and sultry
Air?


Sleep. That Is because we are hard by the Heart, nay I hear Reason speaking to
him; but seeing I am prohibited to enter there, let us stop hear a little, I
pray you, and listen to their discourse.


The Sequel of a DIALOGUE betwixt Reason and the Heart.
Reason. THe truth is, we cannot be too sensible of the good office that Sleep
has done us, in having protected Health at a time when I cruelly Persecuted her
by Feasting and good Cheer; and in that he is about to restore her to us, at
present, when we want nothing but her Company to complete our felicity, what
can we do for Sleep, in acknowledgment for such a piece of good service?


Heart. As Sleep has given a place of retreat to Health, during the
irregularities of the Body, so let us propose it to Health, that she may do the
like kindness to Sleep, when the Body flies it: As they love one another
dearly, so I make no doubt but they will gladly embrace the offer.


Reason. If it be so, let us Marry them together, that so they may be
inseparable.


Heart. That would be an admirable good Proposal, if the question were how to
punish, and not how to reward them. Believe me, that is an insupportable Yoke:
The Beautifullest Palace in the World, if we be confined to it, is a more
dreadful Prison than a Dungeon, if the door be open. Love adm^ts of no other
constraint but what it imposes upon it self.


Reason. Well then! I give consent that Love may unite them by its strongest
bonds, upon the conditions that Sleep and Health are willing themselves to
prescribe. But if I may have my will, Sleep and Health shall be no more Two,
but one and the same thing, which the Body is to Reverence under Two different
Names.


Heart. That is to say, that in the day time they shall appear under the name
of Health, and in that quality be respected, so long as the eyes are open: But
from the moment that the eye lids are shut, they shall be considered under no
other notion but that of Sleep.


Reason. Manage that as you please, I am pressed to be gone: I leave this door
open to our Lovers, and will go out by the other; my presence suits not always
With those who are desperately in Love, and therefore I Will lay no constraint
upon them. Receive them as you use to receive those whom you respect most.


Health. This is the true Interp^etation of my Dream, that I should cover you
with my Veil, that you may lack nothing on my part.


Sleep. Your Dream imports also that our Arms and Hands should be the Bonds and
Chains that render us inseparable.


Health. Add for the completing of our happiness, that the Heart receiving us,
hugs and unites us closer together, than all the Bonds and Ties of Love can do.


Eleventh Dialogue. All the parts of the Body are here supposed to be joined
together, under the Name of a Patient; that is in conference with a Physician,
who does not think him Cured.
The Physician. The Patient. Physician. What Is this I see in that Close-stool?
ha! what a deal of filth and corruption? I know full well you should not escape
me: I have caught you, at length, and now you are where I would have you.


Patient. And where I would too.


Physician. In troth you have reason, do you see that ferrugineous
Orange-coloured stuff, which I touch with the Point of my Wand, it is the very
substance of the Vesicule of the Gall; and these streaks and lays of concocted
black matter at the side of it, give us good assurance of the disopilation of
the Spleen; ye must needs find your self much at ease?


Patient. And so I am.


Physician. And much refreshed?


Patient. Sure enough.


Physician. Having turned over and over again that vast mass of slimy,
concocted, sanguilent and glutinous matter, I find, that it is no wonder your
Reins and Bowels were so overcharged; but now, thanks to good Physic, we are
in the right way to a speedy Cure; and three or four small subsequent Potions
diversified according to the indications of time and of the Disease, will show
us the bottom of the Bag, and make us Masters of the Ten^c^ty of that
Mesentery: Well, poor unhealthy Creature, what do you say to it? would you have
all that filth, and those Poisons in your Body again?


Patient. No I Will swear, and that is the very reason why I never took it.


Physician. Did you not take the Physic which I orderd you last Night, to be
taken this Morning?


Patient. No.


Physician. How no? what I see then is the effect of the Glyster you took in
the Evening, and of the Julep, when you went to Bed; for this last finding
Nature moved by the former, might very well have expelled these laudable
matters; in that case you did well to delay your Purge, though I find still
great plenitude in this lower Region.


Patient. Be satisfied, I have taken nothing at all, and all these Medicines,
Glysters, and Juleps, you speak of, so soon as they came out of the Hands of
the Apothecary, have been thrown into the Pan of that Closestool; it were to no
purpose for me to tell you what effects they have wrought, since you your self
have told that so particularly.


Physician. What do I hear? who can have so poisoned your mind, as to make you
think of daring to disobey my directions?


Patient. Nay, ask me rather, who has given me an Antidote against your
Poisons; for I would have you know that for the future, I intend not to charge
desperately through Blood and Physic, without I well know the cause and
quarrel.


Physician. Ha! I begin to smell a Rat, there must be some Chemist, Empirick,
and Mountebank in the case. Well, well, we will see what'll become on it in time,
and when you have paid sufficiently for your experience, you will be glad at your
heart to have recourse to us, when these ignorant Rascals have brought you to
the brink of the Grave.


Patient. They say as much of you, and not without Reason too; for there is
nothing more certain, than that since the College has been convinced that these
pretended Empiricks have absolved those whom ye condemned to Death, ye have
gone to Law with them about it, and resolved amongst your selves no more to
abandon your Patients, until ye have cut and slashed, and as they say, given
them an Hundred blows after they are dead; and what is cruellest of all, you
put that charitable resolution in execution.


Physician. How come you to be in this merry humor I pray? doubtless you have
held your Nose over the Books of some Medela Medicinae Siduham's first Book de
Fe bribus, which condemns the Jesuits Powder; with many others.
false Brethren, who have been so base as to Publish in English some Secrets of
our Art. But Patience, you have not got your ends yet: If I have any Interest,
the College shall invent a new Gibberidge, which no body shall be able to
understand, and then we'll find ways to revenge our selves, and our Enemies
never be the wiser for it.


Patient. That 'll not do, unless ye add to that new way of Conjuring a
Declaration, enjoining all Men to make use of a Medicine that you alone can
prepare and distribute. That ye may be surer also of your revenge, and at the
same time, glut your Avarice, bring your Pharmacie in play: Insomuch that no
Medicines may be bought but from Apothecaries, who are to have a Board hanging
at their shop doors, with this Inscription in great Gold Letters.

THE OFFICE OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, FOR The Dispensation and Sale of all
sorts of Purgatives, Vomitives, Sudorificks, Diuretics, Anodines, etc.
Physician. Courage! when Children cannot reach the Nuts, they throw stones at
them. I desire no more to put a stop to this tattle of yours, but a slight
Cold, or the smallest fit of an Ague. Till that happen, Reform your Plea; if
any other beside my self heard you, they would Laugh at ye.


Pa. I doubt that; but if it did happen so, I should pity those that might be
in the same error I have been in. Physicians have made a fool of me so long,
that I think, by turn, I may also Laugh a little at them. The discoveries and
demonstrations of the Close-stool have pleased me exceedingly; and indeed, when
I see a Dozen of you at consultation together, I fancy I see so many blind Men
throwing at a Cock.


Physician. Hold there, enough is enough; should I leave you now to your
reprobate sense, what would become of you poor wretch, who know neither the
quality of Aliments, nor the quantity that is convenient ^or you, nor the time
when you ought to take them? who foresee, no more than a Beast, the Diseases
that threaten you: And being ignorant of the way of prevention, that might
divert them, you would at every turn be exposed to all kinds of Distempers,
were it not for our provident care of you.


Patient. How dare you boast of prognosticating the future, when you cannot
tell what it is you see, touch, and smell? you had need speak of prevention
indeed, you who render it so often dangerous and mortal.


Physician. Enough is as good as a Feast, hold there, I say.


Patient. No, the least Creature that is, knows more than you do, what belongs
to precaution and feeding; for without any other advice than that of the Smell
and Taste, it avoids what is contrary to it, and sticks to that which is good:
Nay, suppose it may perchance eat more at one time than another, forbearing
afterward its Food for some little time, sets it to rights again.


Physician. But what becom^ of that Animal, if it fall sick? it dies like a
Beast without any relief.


Patient. On the contrary, if it be any ways indisposed, it lies still, and
forbearing (as I told you) to eat, commits it self to Nature, which not being
thwarted by Physicians, nor interrupted by their Physic, Cures it without any
sharp pains; and conducts it from youth to old age, free from any great
infirmity.


Physician. I am glad to hear a Man Rank himself among the Beasts, and to
submit his Reason to their instinct.


Patient. Not so neither; I do not think my self more skillful for the
Preservation of my Bodily Health than Beasts are for the Preservation of
theirs. If their reasoning be short, it is solid, and if ours be large, it is
the more wavering. Whence I conclude, that if there be fewer Wheels and
Movements in their Clock than in ours, it is the truer for that; and all our
strikings and Allarms, our Minutes and Seconds, with the Moon and Tide, serve
only to put us the more out of order.


Physician. I confess the Wheels of your noddle are a little too much out of
order; you must of necessity be let Blood, and that quickly too, in the Foot,
and in the Arm successively, without interruption.


Patient. Nay, since the matter requires so much haste, you might have sooner
said in all the four Limbs.


Physician. You Laugh, but it is no Laughing matter; nay, if Blooding you in
the Arm and Foot be not enough, we'll Blood you in the Neck, in the Tongue, and
all over, if we have a mind to it.


Patient. It is not said without ground, that it is far better to do as
Physicians do, than to do as they bid you do.


Physician. This Itch of tattling, shows a depravatian of the Organ, and a
great tendency to a sudden Frenzy. To prevent this volubility of Tongue, an^
swiftness of the Pulse, we must proceed by speedy and Specific ways. Quickl^
then, go call the first Surgeon, warm some water, make ready bands, bu^ chiefly
let us raise this Head, and appl^ a Live Pidgeon to it with all its Feathers,
to fortify the weakness of the Brain.


Patient. If the last Remedy you speak of be good, it is more proper for you
than me: But it is strange that you forbid others to make any noise about sick
people, and yet keep such a stamping with your Foot, and a bawling with your
Directions, which will not be obeyed. I am so weary of hearing you give your
Directions, and so sick of obeying them; that I Will have my turn of ordering
too. Hold your Tongue then, I command you; or I Will make you be quiet, for I am
Master here.


Physician. Hey day, here is sawciness indeed! The World's turned topsie turvie.
Fire, fire, where shall's find enough of Nenuphar water, and of the Salt of
Saturn to assist the Boiling and effervescence of a Blood and Choler, which
send out Fire and Flames into all parts. Arides quickly, hey, to curb these
Alcalis: And that we may join Topics to internal Medicines, let a cooling bath
of Frogs Spawn be forthwith made ready, but above all things let their be
Calves and Lambs in readiness, for this will not be over without transfusion.


Patient. Can there be more extravagancy said in fewer words?


Physician. What a deal of Veal Broth, and Chicken Broth must pass through this
Body? not to reckon the Emulsions, Apozems, and Soporificks, which go before
the use of the juice of Chervil, and of Whey clarified with Fumetory.


Patient. If we'll believe one Sect of Physicians, all Diseases proceed from
heat, and stand in need only of Blood letting and cooling Medicines. Consult an
other sort, and they will tell ye that the same Diseases are caused only by the
extinction of the Spirits; and that, very far from Blood-letting, the Natural
Heat is to be strengthened and increased. These Prescribe Wine, Cordials,
Nourishing Food and open Air. Those again, at first cut you short of your
commons^ blash your Stomach with cold Liquors* and thin Broths, and choke you
up in(...) close and stifling Air; as if outward cooling were more dangerous
than those Drenches wherewith they inwardly chil^ the Body: What is to be done
in such(...) contrariety?


Physician. You confound the offensive with the defensive. A Conqueror cannot
signalize himself without effusion of Blood.


Patient. The Question here is not of making Conquests. I pretend that every
sick Person is upon the defensive, and that by consequent he ought to imitate
the example of that great General Who by delaying Re-established the
Commonwealth.
qui cunctando restituit rem. Besides, seeing Cold is the Symbol of Death, were
it not better to quicken and increase out Natural heat, than to diminish and
extinguish it? at least, I find my self so well with this Maxim, that I Will keep
^s I am.


Physician. In what condition then do you take your self to be?


Patient. Nay I ask you that Question?


Physician. How can I know if you do not tell me?


Patient. You do'nt know then so much as a Farrier, that Cures Horses without
making them tell him what they ayl.


Physician. Fie, Fie, are not you ashamed to say such mean things, I should be
madder than you, if I did take notice of that old impatience.


Patient. Leave those slighting terms to your Physicians, from whom they have
been borrowed. One should never say Fie, Fie, but of Physic, and all that
belongs to it.


Physician. Ha! spare your Quirks, I am not for idle quiddities, but solid
Reasons. Tell me then seriously, if you can, you who talk so much of Nature and
Sickness, what Nature and Sickness are: For I will so stop your Mouth, that you
shall not have so much as a Pun or quibble to say.


Patient. It Is a very easy matter to satisfy you, as thus. Nature and
Sickness are the heads of two contrary Parties: You are for Sickness, and I for
Nature: You fight for Death, and I for Life.


Physician. What do I take the part of Sickness, who make Medicine consist in
waging War against it.


Patient. Call you that to make War against Sickness, to pitch upon the time
when Nature is engaged with it, to fall foul upon her, robbing her of her Blood
when she requires strength, and giving her Poisons to fight with, when she is
ready to succumb under her Adversary? to this you may add, that if in the heat
of this War, Nature makes a Truce to take a little Breath; presently you Cupp,
Scarifie, Probe, Glyster, and so alter the state of Affairs, that Victory which
inclined to Nature, turns to the other ^de, to Death.


Physician. And ye pretended Cham^ions of Nature what do ye do?


Patient. Seeing we have not the vanity ^o Impose any orders upon her, we do ^o
more but send her the Assistance she demands, and without puzling our selves ^o
know if the Enemy be in the Blood or ^n the Humors, when we have well
re^ruited Nature, we are certain that she will overcome the evil, because no
force but that of Nature is able to subdue Diseases.


Physician. Who doubts that? and therefore our whole intent is so to manage the
strength of the Patient, that we may gradually bring him to Health again.


Patient. Nevertheless your practice is quite contrary. Are Physicians called
in the beginning of a Sickness; they come prepossessed, that the Town is full
of none but Enemies; and in that persuasion, as soon as they enter they Charge
all they meet with, without distinguishing the good from the bad,(...) the
innocent from the guilty. Seeing(...) they propose to themselves is the cle^
evacuation of the place; when they have got their ends, they cry, The Town our
own, imagining that it will be as eas^ for them to re-people it with new
Colonies, as it was to drive out the old Inhabitants. But the Land of Church
yards rises in Judgment against these mortal practices.


Physician. I see you know not wha^ metal Physicians are made of, if yo^ knew
them better, you would not speak of them as you do.


Patient. I know them so well, that i^ you please, I Will give you a Character of
them in two words.


Physician. Let Us hear that.


Patient. They are Blades fee'd to entertain the Patient with cramp words and
flim-flams, until Nature Cures him, or Physic kill him.


Physician. You are a fool in the highest degree, and nothing less than a
Miracle can Cure you of your Frenzy.


Patient. I am not at all afraid of my Distemper; but I should have cause
enough to be afraid of Physicians, were I fool enough to trust them any more:
call then what you please, the condition I am in, I am not resolved to change
it.


Physician. Keep in your fools Paradise. However tell me, why are ye so great
an enemy to Physicians?


Patient. I Am an enemy only to their practice. I cannot endure that they should
insolently impose upon credulous minds; and that under the veil of Nature, they
should follow a rotten method, which makes them prescribe the same things in
all Diseases, without respect to Sex, Age, Constitution, Climat, or Season; And
that trusting to their Privilege, and that the Law obliges them not to take
out a Pardon under the Great Seal, they kill all indifferently both Friends and
Fee^.


Physician. You think then we have no conscience.


Patient. Not so altogether; but i^ may be with your Consciences, as with the
Dogs to whom your Anatomists cu^ the That Is a very ordinary experement.
recurvent Nerves to hinder them from Barking.


Physician. And so you conclude that the Faculties is like the That is a story
well known, and mentioned in the History of the Holy War.
Old Man of the Mountains and his Asassins: I mean that she breeds her Sons, if
not with design to dispatch all Men, yet at least with prospect of killing
methodically all our Patients.


Patient. No I do not think you kil^ them deliberately and with design; no,
your ignorance is more to be blamed ^han your malice for such Murders; and we
are persuaded that it is no fault of yours, if your Patients and their
Infirmities be not immortal.


Physician. To hear you speak, a Body would think that Physicians never Cured
any Man.


Patient. Nor are they, indeed cut out for curing the sick, but for comforting
those who survive the dead.


Physician. Nevertheless, were I to engage in open War against the Heretics of
Medicine, such as you are, I should desire no other aid for overthrowing of
them, than the assistance of those who owe their Life to my skill and labors.


Patient. In that case, I should look upon you to be so ill accompanied, that I
would make Conscience of bringing a second with me; because the Laws of Honor
do not allow two to fight against one.


Physician. If all were of your mind, I perceive, we should be once more
banished the Commonwealth.


Patient. That would not be now to be done, if at present Men desired, as then
they did, to have Families numerous in Children; but seeing now adays they are
thought most happy who have none at all, and that ye contribute much to the
attaining to that felicity; ye are looked upon as a necessary evil; nay it is
the present mode too, that every one dy^ after your way. And to complete your
good Fortune, the Dead who ought to call you to an account, are not
revengefull; and the Widow and Heir who ey^ the Estate more than revenge, let
you live in peace.


Physician. And so at one clap we are both accused and Sentenced, and may a
next step be hanged up too, if any Body will be at the charge of it. But have
you forgot that golden Sentence Honor the Physican for necesity sake.
Honora medicum propter necessitatem.


Patient. No I ha'nt; and for proof of that, Honor the Physician in Greek,
signifies pay him his Fee, which I never failed to do, that I might confirm you
in your Aphorism, Galen gives Riches.
Dat Galenus Opes. But have not you likewise observed in the same place were
you had your Golden Sentence, that the Lord having promised long Life to those
whom he Loves, adds that to be avenged on him that offends, ^he will make him
fall into the hands of Physicians?


Physician. Sure enough, to the end the Physician may render him good for evil.


Patient. However, if you will believe a great Corn, a Lapide, Ecclesiasticus c.
38.15.
Commentatour upon the pass^ge, he will make it out to ye, that a sikness is like
a criminel procass; that the Patient on that occasion is the Prisoner, the
Instruments of Surgery, and the Potions of the Apothecary, the Engines of
the Rack and Torture; the Lord, the Judge, and the Physician, the Executioner.


Physician. These Doctors fancy that the Books which they comment, are like the
Ringing of Bells; and it is an old saying ye know, As the Fool thinks, the Bell
clinks.


Patient. To justify these Authors, I could load you with an infinite number of
uncontroverted instances, but I shall content my self with these Two Verses.

The King and Queen of ENGLAND died by the hands of the Executioners. Cromwell
put him to Death, and the Physicians her.
Carnificum periere manu Rex Anglus and Vxor,
Sustulit hunc Cromwell, sustulit hanc Medicus.

Physician. These Citations suit very well with your temper; Physicians are
certainly much to be pitied! what Miracles soever they may work, they still
procure more blame than praise, so unjust and unth^nkful is Man naturally. Does
any one fall sick? we are sent for in all haste, and received in Triumph. Is
the Party Cured? they send us back, and avoid our Company as if we were
miserable wretches; and many times cheat us of our Fees. So that having in the
beginning of the Sickness reverenced us like Demigods, in the Recovery from
it, they look upon us as Devils.


Patient. I am not of the mind that ye are so much to be pitied as you pretend.
On the contrary, I know no Profession more happy than that of Physicians. Is
any killed by them? the Earth presently Buries their Crime; does Nature save a
Patient out of their hands? they claim the Honor of it; and the Sun
illustrates their pretended Victory.


Physician. Oh, injustice! can we Cure all the World? are Men immortal? are
there not incurable Diseases, sudden Deaths, where we cannot come in time, and
far less foresee them? what shall I say, The Gardens afford no Remedy against
the power of Death.
Contra vim m^rtis non est Medicamen in horts.


Patient. It Is your negligence and not the Disease that is incurable; had you
thoroughly studied the Ancients* and Modern, who have searched Nature, to her
very Center, you might have preserved those in Health, whom you have deprived
of Life; but ye are so headstrong and opinionative, that ye had rather die, than
suffer the use of a Medicine, which Hippocrates and Gallen have not recommended
to practice.


Physician. These searchers of Nature are silly blockheads. Not one of these
Bellows-blowers but has a Million in his head for a Penny in his Purse. They
never see a Patient, but that they imagine his Body to be a Furnace; his Heart
a Crucible, his Blood and Humors, Sulphur and Mercury; and making use on all
occasions of the Lungs for Bellows; they pretend by the force of bubble, and
that to persuade you, that there is nothing more easy to be sound than the
Philosophers Stone; and if you will not believe them, they desire a Crown of
you to buy Bread. I am so tired out with their impertin^nces and your follies,
that I Will hear no more. Besides my other Patients want the time that I loose
here. Especially I am concerned for the hungry Convalescents, whose greedy
Appetite may serve us an ugly trick. Relapses are worse than the first evil


Patient. Never vex your self upon that account, your Patients suffer less in
your absence, then when you make them loll out a Foot of Tongue, and squeze and
press their hypochondres. As for your Convalescents, you will be with them soon
enough, to assure them, as most important News, that they shall have the little
Chicken Broth, which you promised them last Night for Dinner; to which you will
add as a singular favor, the permission of sucking and chewing the little
bones of the Boiled Chicken and Veal. And as a transcendent kindness, they
shall have for desert, the half of a little roasted Apple, or a little of the
liquor of stewed Prunes, with a little piece of Biscuit. All this delivered in a
coaxing tone, and with a smirkling Mouth, which is not to be endured but in a
Nurse that looks bonny upon her Babe, when she has a mind to play and fool with
it.


Physician. I would willingly know of you who pretend to so great skill, what
you would Prescribe to one upon a Recovery from a sickness?


Patient. To eat while he is a hungry, and to drink while he is a dry, of what
he has most mind to, allowing him for company at Table Taste, Appetite, nay and
the Fever it self.


Physician. A fair way to dispatch more, than we kill according to your own
reckoning.


Patient. Pardon me there: For I would not keep a sick Person in a slip during
the whole course of his sickness, seeing I Would give him leave to eat and drink,
he would not fall into that canine hunger, which devours your Convalescents,
and if by chance, he committed some little excess, it would be an easy matter
to make amends for it by Patience, Experience, and Abstinence.


Physician. Ho, ho, do ye speak of Patience and Abstinence, that is A Secret
not to be revealed.
Secretum non Revelandum.


Patient. And why is not that Secret to be revealed, if it be good? Be ruled by
me, shut up your Physic Schools, or model your Faculty after a Parliamentary
manner; let it have an upper house to punish the Rich Nobles, who have eat but
too much, when they were well, with hunger and fasting; and a lower house
appointed for the inferior people, to oblige them to eat and drink of what is
good; making the Rich Man's Ordinary, the Poor Man's Physician; and the Labor
and Abstinence of the Poor, the Rich Man's rule of Diet. That Is the only way to
work good Cures, and to regain your Reputation.


Physician. We are not to be advised what to do by such an empty skull as
thine. Consider a little, that you cannot be without us; and that if you do not
instantly make me satisfaction, I Will have an Action of Scandalum against you.


Patient. Of what use do you take your selves to be to a sick Person? you are
just to him wh^t a Passport is to a Merchant Traveling upon the Frontiers of
an Enemies Country; if he meet with no body, his Passport is of no use to him,
and if he fall upon a Party of the Enemy, trusting to his Passport, he runs
headlong into the Ambush, and is killed, before ever he be asked who comes
there. In the mean time they come off with, it is pity he is Dead, but his
Passport was up ranuated, and he ought not to have trusted to it rashly, as he
did.


Physician. And what do you conclude from this extravagancy.


Patient. That Physicians are like Rails on Bridges, which are useless to
Passengers, who have the wit to keep from the sides.


Physician. There is no end of your insulting calumnies. However your Frenzy
has such singular Symptoms, that I Will observe it to the end, that I may be
able to entertain the Public with an Idea of perfect folly.


Patient. I should willingly also make a Collection of the Impertinences of the
College; if Tyranny went not so far as to force those who in their Writings
speak of Physic, to bear the marks of the Faculty.


Physician. Could it do less for putting a stop to the insolence of those who
Publish, that we do no more but let Blood, Purge and give Glysters.


Patient. Yet for all your defenses, you are daily exposed on the Stage with
the Habit, Look, Tone, and Gate, which ye affect most.


Physician. What you say of the Stage, we'll give for a Song; we our selves
have furnished the matter; and though you should publish all that you have
said, it would no more move us than the jangling of Bells. Nothing but Truth
gives offense, Invectives and Satyrs cannot annoy Learning and Wisdom:
Farewell. We must do good for evil, I am going to prepare for you, an Elixer of
the five Hellebores, with Agarick; and all to p^t a stop to the Distemper of
that rackt Brain. If that opperate not what I expect from it, I Will go hire you
a Lodging in Bedlam, for I pity your condition.


Patient. Keep your Hellebores and Bedlams for those that trust in you: You
know that Physic is Mortal to a Body that is in Health, and though I were as
much disturbed, as you would have me to be, the best Remedy still would be
Rest. I order it then, and I Will take it. As for you, it is my advice, that you
would renounce the Art you profess; because it is not lawful to follow a Trade
that one understands not, and give your self wholly to the study of Nature;
that is a better Advice than I ever had from you. However I am obliged to you
for your Compassion; for it is a rare thing to be pitied by a Physician, Adieu.
If you come in my way again you shall not escape so well.


Twelfth Dialogue. The Physician spoken of in the foregoing Dialogue, having
been long in search of Nature, at length finds her among Savages, he speaks to
her, and submits to her Laws.
The Savage. The Physician. Nature. Savage. AS I take it, that which you call
Nature, is the same that we call The Soul of the World. But if you have rambled
and wandered long without finding her, tha^'s nothing to me; because I am
some^imes admitted into her presence, must I therefore have power to make her
do what you w ul^? you have desired me to guid^ you into those places where we
use to s^eak with h r, and consult her; and there we are: If Nature have an
aversion either to your Person or Profession, can I force her to answer you?


Physician. No. But if perchance my Profession displease her, which I do not
believe, I am willing to lay it aside. Take, there is my Gown, Cap, and Diploma
of Doctor, wherein consist all my Learning, Dignity, and Estate; I make a
voluntary Sacrifice of them to her, and shall think to have got by the bargain,
if she will vouchsafe to speak to me, after that she has Triumphed over my
Trophies.


Savage. Lord! how light and superficial is this pompious Attire that rendered
you so venerable. Men are very short sighted, that cannot perceive through this
outside of Fur and Scarlet, the emptiness that is underneath.


Physician. Such as these Trophies are, I freely part from them, and joyfully
Dedicate them to Nature; having done so, I can see no reason why she should not
comply with my desire; for we are not so empty and unprofitable as you would
have us to be, we are courted by the greatest Kings, and at every turn give
them our advice.


Savage. Like enough; but by your discourse, I find that the first thing I have
to do, is to give you a prick with a pin in the Head, to let out the
presumption and vanity that it is full of. Stand fast.


Phsician. Ouf. Ye hurt me.


Savage. Hark, how violently the Wind comes out! observe how the Air is
darkened with the vapors that exhale from you: Keep off your hand till all
these malignant blasts be out.


Physician. Alas! I am all in a surprise. I thought I had a head, and I find it
is but a Bladder. Stop the orifice, I pray you, least I should turn all into
Smoke.


Savage No, I shall not do so, would you be like most Men that carry puff-paste
for Heads?


Phisician. By no means. Indeed I did not perceive that I stood in need of that
Opperation; but I know some that need it more than my self.


Sav. We'll teach you how to do it, not only in the Head, but also in the
Tongue, Heart, and elsewhere; for all Men have not their wind in the same place.


Physician. I am surprised to hear you, I thought I had understood every thing,
and I perceive I understand nothing at all.


Savage. You may expect praise for that sincere confession, when you have set
that left Arm and right Leg at liberty. You conceal gulfs under these bands and
clouts, where a vast number of Spirits are corrupted and lost. In this place,
all things must be free, and without constraint.


Physician. If these Fountains must be dry, I shall be instantly choked and
overwhelmed with humors.


Savage. What nonsense is this? have not you holes and Emunctories enough,
without increasing the number of them? what must run in the Channel of our
Rivers, that are so necessary for the commerce of Life, if you divert the
rivulets? Away, away, also with these stomagers and girdles that you use for
fortifying your Stomach, and cooling your Reins, and throw your self Naked into
this well.


Physician. How, stark Naked.


Savage. What are ye afraid off? here is a great deal a-do indeed. Courage. Now
that I have dipped you, and made you drink of those waters, and eat of those
fruits, tell me how you find your self? I am much mistaken, if you talk not in
another strain.


Physician. Ha! where am I? I am overjoyed, my Heart's as light as a Feather;
but what do I see? my old skin fall off, my wrinkles are gone, and my flesh is
as plump and smooth as that of a young Child; my gray ha^^ fall off and black
^ome in their place: What Vigor! what Strength! O, how glad and pleased I am.
I always thought that the fountain of youth was but a Chimaera, nevertheless I
have found it, who could have believed it? but now who can doubt of it, when
they see me so fresh and young?


Savage. Besides, all these wonderful advantages, have not cost one drop of
Blood, nor any thing that looks like Physic.


Physician. On the contrary, I have taken nothing that has not seemed to me
more delightful than Healthful.


Savage. Seeing you are persuaded of the truth of these things, where can you
better erect a Trophie of your spoils, than upon this Mountain, from whence the
whole World may be seen? for that end make use of that lovely Tree, which is as
an umbrello to those healing waters, that shading us on all sides, makes us
enjoy the pleasure of that agreeable verdure which crowns the Banks.


Physician. With all my heart. For I make no doubt but that of all places where
Nature delights herself, this is the chief because of the variety of wonders
that occur here. The Plants do not only crowd together, to rob us of the sight
of the Earth; but by sending out flowers strive to outvie one another in the
Glory of pleasing the eyes, and perfuming the Air. What charming consorts do
the gentle breezes and little Birds which sport in the Bushes make? I am
transported with joy, ravished with delight, and nothing can match my felicity.


Savage. The more you express your ecstasy, the more do I join with you in
admiration of the virtue of our waters, and the excellence of our Fruits. I am
hopeful also that you shall not rest there, and I foresee that after this
first transport, which you could not hinder, you shall obtain what you have so
long wished for.


Physician. There my Trophy is hung up; will this way I have placed them in do?
and do you approve of these few words which I have put upon the Branch that
carries them.

THE TROPHIES OF VANITY, DEDICATED TO THE SOUL of the WORLD.
Savage. Of Vanity, that is not enough; for seeing you told me at your first
coming, that you were one of the College of Physicians that must be put into
the Inscription in Greek and Latin; for it is said, that your excellency
consists only in that.


Phy. Will you now put me to despair, after you have given much cause to boast
of your civility. Vanity and the Faculty or College, is here but one and the
same thing: And then to what end Greek and Latin, if no body in this Country
understand them?


Nature. Make no alteration in the Inscription; I am satisfied with it.


Physician. Who is this I hear?


Nature. Thou hear her whom thou call The Soul of the World, who touched
at thy Confession, am resolved to answer thy demands: Speak only in a few
words, without Ceremony or preamble.


Physician. What Is the reason, that of late Men have so little regard to Life,
that they will make no more use of Physicians.


Nature. Because Men love to live, and Physicians kill them.


Physician. I am very well satisfied that a Man of Sense, who has studied his
constitution, may during the whole course of his Life be without Physicians;
for if one turn but in the least in the little Circle of our ways of acting, it
is easy to observe, that the revolutions are always the same.


Nature. If Life consisted only in making several turns in one and the same
Circle, it would happen that instead of turning Children, Men would turn young
again: Life is not what you take it to be. When I light a Lamp, I fill it with
Oil, and leave the conduct of it to Reason, which preserves it from the
accidents to which it is obnoxious: Nay I suffer her to dispose of her match as
she thinks fit; and thence it is, that they who double it, consume it sooner,
than they who divide it into small threads.


Physician. We say the same also, that Men cannot husband too well the radical
moisture you speak of, as of an Oil or Balsam, and therefore I think that in
all thinks we agree with you.


Nature And for my part, I think by your discourse, that we agree in nothing at
all. Give him the other prick with a Pin, to let out the rest of his vanity.


Physician. At least, this is common to us both, that we Cure the Patient who
calls for our help.


Nature. Make a sieve of his Skull, if he still persist in these foolish
presumptions. Art thou ignorant that I abhor Blood, and have thou forgot that
Physicians thirst after it, who never enter the House of a Patient but by force
of Arms, Terror going before, and Death following them at the heels?


Physician. And how do you enter there?


Nature. I am there before the sick Person, who calls me, perceives it; of my
self I dart a beam of hope and gladness into his Heart: And if the desire which
I suggest to the Patient he not thwarted, I show him in my train Health
conducted by Patience.


Physician. Who dares to thwart you?


Nature. Such a Physician as thee, who neither understanding the Disease, nor
the Remedies that are proper for it; busies thy self about the Patient, in
doing the Office of an ordinary Cook, ordering Broaths, Jellies, and
Barley-water, as if thou labored to increase the sickness, by what the sick
person has the greatest aversion to.


Physician. Can one do better at first, than to use light Food, and benign
Medicines, expecting the Critical d^ys, that we may observe what course you are
about to take. Afterward, following your foot steps, we proceed to Purgatives:
For it is prudent not to hasten any thing in the beginning.


Nature. When one falls, can he be too soon raised up again? Acknowledge
frankly, if thou would be instructed by me, that it is thy Ignorance, and not
the Disease, which makes thee temporize.


Physician. I confes^, that in the beginning of a Distemper, we have but very
confused Notions of the evil, and of the Remedies that are proper for it; so
that you would do me a matchless favor, if you would have the goodness to
inform me in what manner Creature^ act, from their Birth, to the time o^ their
Death.


Nature. For that end, thou must address thy self to the Agent which I have in
every Creature. He it is that directs it to the end which I have proposed to
it, and disposes so absolutely o^ it, that through him only it subsists.


Physician. What you call Agent, i^ that which we call Reason in Man; Instinct
in Beasts, and Virtues in Plants.


Nature. What I call Agent, is my self; I animate and dispose the Matter
according to the intentions and Idea's that are unknown to thee. So that one
Spirit moves all the different specifications in the World; as the same Wind
makes all the different Pipes of an Organ to play.


Physician. Till now I always thought that an Animal was nothing but a Machine
of parts, all the Art of which consisted only in some certain Springs which
made it move, without being sus^eptible of pain or pleasure.


Nature. Supposing it to be so, tell me who made that Machine of parts? And who
puts it in motion? For there is no effect without a cause, nor any motion
without a mover. If thou answer, that ^it is I; who has revealed to thee that
I am made up of pointed, globular, and chamfered Particles? And who has given
thee the power to measure me by Circles and Squares, as if I were a property of
Mathematics? I, who inform all that is contained in the Elements.


Physician. Instruct me then, how I am to speak, that I may not displease you;
for I will exactly perform all that lies in me, that I may come to the
knowledge of you.


Nature. If thou studiest me, thou shall know me as much as man is capable of,
and as is needful for him. But never expect to attain to it, so long as thou
see not by the Eyes of the Mind, what the Elements contain; for the Elements
which thou see are, to speak properly, but the bark of the Elements, which I
use in the Composition of Creatures. Have thou never observed, that so soon as
a Creature is dead, if the Fire be suffered to send back the parts whereof it
was composed, unto their several places, there will remain no more but a few
ashes, all the rest, escaping thy sight, enter again into the bosom of the
Elements from whence I took them.


Physician. The Notion that I have of the Elements, is, that they are in
continual War one with another, whether they act of themselves, or by means of
that universal Spirit you speak of, which inspires the same dissension into all
Creatures.


Nature. That Spirit is so great an Enemy of Disorder and Destruction, that so
soon as ever it is united to a new Creature, it conceives so violent a love for
it, that it applies it self solely to the conducting of that Creature to the
end, which I have proposed to it. And though for the perfecting, preserving,
and ^efending the same, it must use a great many different means, nay, even
wiles, and new stratagems, yet it omits nothing that is to be done in
p^rforming what is prescribed to it, because nothing can divert it from its
Duty. But seeing self-love might render the Creature so will, as to become
independent on Soci^ty I impose a necessity upon it of having ^eed of another
to perpetuate it self.


Physician. I cannot comprehend how one Spirit can at the same t^me act in so
many different and contrary ma^ners; and a^ little conceive wh^t mat^er that
is, which escapes our sight, and whereof you make use, in the Composition of
all Creatures.


Nature. For unde^standing of both, consi^er those Vapors that rise o t of the
Sea, a^m^re the b^auty ^f the Clouds which the (...) ^e, w^i^h having lo g
hovere^ (...) ^r and ^een dri^e^ to and ^ro^ (...) ^sts, that they may be the
(...) and impregnated by the beams of (...) ^ng, (...) length, unable to bear
any lo^ (...) of the rich spoils where (...) ^e loaded, you see how they f l^
(...) thirsty Earth in gentle showers, (...) in gratitude for that kindness,
sends forth a perfume more delightful than the odor of Flowers. Scarcely have
these so much wished-for showers refreshed the Fields and Gardens, but they
produce almost as many different effects, as the Clouds contained drops of
Water. In the mean time, these drops of Water meeting together, gather
themselves into a body, return to the Sea, and laying aside their mud, recover
their saltness again. If then by means of the grossest parts of the Elements, I
can produce so many wonders, judge what that Spirit must be, that animates and
keeps them in motion.


Physician. I fancy that these showers and dews only refresh and moisten the
Earth, without contributing any thing else to the productions you speak of.


Nature. That Is because your mind reaches no farther than your sight. Consider
that the Virtues of the Sunbeams, though they be conveyed under ground by the
Rains, yet lose not the disposition they have of returning to the place from
whence they came. As these Waters then are filtrated in passing through the
Earth, so those Spirits disengage themselves, and are detached. Now, if in
mounting upwards again, they meet with any Seed, or young Root, they cleave to
it, as a ready way to facilitate their ascent to the Region of the Air. But
their motions and agitations in these Seeds and Roots, instead of opening their
Prisons, lengthen only their Chains, and serve to make the different
extensions and growth of Plants, Trees, and, in a word, of all Creatures.


Physician. I admire what you say, though I do not fully understand it.


Nature. Wonder not at that, the Body of Man is not a Vessel solid enough to
confine a mind capable of knowledge. Thou can only receive a slight tincture
of it, because Men are filled only with Opinions.


Physician. But is there no Knowledge mingled with Opinions?


Nature. If men's Opinions contain any Knowledge, that Knowledge is like Willy
with the wisp in a dark Night, whose light is more apt to make Travelers lose
their way, than to set those right who have gone astray: Whereas the Knowledge
I speak of is like the Sunbeams, which burn every thing they touch, if they be
in the least contracted.


Physician. Our Opinions however are founded on Reason that springs from our
Understanding.


Nature. If Man had Understanding, Reason would be of no use to him. Man is
blind, and makes use of the Art of Reasoning as of a staff to grope the way
with. Hence it is that he does but nibble and feel so long as he lives, without
being assured of any thing.


Physician. What judgment is then to be made of all those great Men, who have
left us Books full of so profound knowl^dge, that no new thing c^n be
discovered in the Theory or Practice of our P^ofession, which may not be found
in these Works, provided one do but dive into them.


Nature. The Learning of the Doctors which thou esteemest so much, is but as
Perspective in Painting; the nearer we approach the Picture, the more we are
undeceived; let us touch it, and there is nothing of those great distances that
reached out of sight. Would you wholly b eak the Charm, scratch but the Cloth,
and thou shall find by discovering the thread, that that which thou take for
a depth, has not so much as an appearance of it.


Physician. But to return to our Knowledge; could you not so temper the beams
of it, that I might feel some sweet influence of the same?


Nature. That is not to be done in the sense you imagine, which is to know a
thing by it self.


Physician. What can you then do for me?


Nature. To inform thee that I have enclosed in every kind of Creature a simple
Reason, or Art of Living, which stands it instead of a Knowledge how to
subsist. Now I have diversified that Talent in such a manner, that not one way
of living is like another; nay, even so far, that the same way of living, in
one and the same kind of Creature, has its diff^rent practices, according to
Countries, Seasons, and Chances that happen. Nevertheless, all these ways of
living proceed from the same source, and center there again.


Physician. I have always been told, that Nature was simple, and without Art.


Nature. I am not without Art, but without Artifice: For I call the Art or way
of Living, that Natural Light which I give to every Creature to be governed and
conducted by whilst it remains in being.


Physician. That Is to say, that you distribute more or less of that Light to
every kind of Creature, according to the inclination that you have for it; and
that the irregularity which is observed in them proceeds from that.


Nature. I love all my Productions alike, and the Virtues and Wonders which
they contain within, and exert without, though they be different and opposite,
yet yield to one another in nothing. For instance, is there any thing more
precious and less corruptible than Gold? Nevertheless the great need that Men
have of Iron, makes this as useful to them as the other. Is there any thing
upon Earth endowed with more incomprehensible Virtues than the Loadstone? And
yet the smallest Seed that springs, grows, and returns again to Seed, is a
subject more worthy of Admiration. For I would have thee know, that the Plants
thou treadest upon, are so many precious Boxes, variously painted and figured,
which contain as many different Treasures.


Physician. What! make you no difference betwixt an Insect that is produced of
corrupt matter, and a Perfect Animal, the Fruit of Generation?


Nature. Thou talkest of Corruption, and know not what it is. All are
produced after the same manner; and in that, one Creature has nothing to boast
of more than another. As to Insects, which thou slightest without Reason, my
Art of Living appears in them better concerted and followed, than in Creatures
of a bigger Volumn. For all Creatures, which cannot without the assistance of
their fellows, provide for their necessities and security, unite together,
labor in Society, and live in Common; and that is the reason why a Company of
Bees or Ants, nay, and of Beavers or Badgers, effect things of greater
Admiration, than all that can be done by a Stag or Wild Boa^, a Tiger or a
Lion, which lead a lazy and solitary Life in the obscurity of Dens and Woods;
without building Palaces divided into several Apartments, without providing
those Victuals which are the delights of an innocent Life; and in fine, without
employing the stratagems that the greatest Generals practice for the Defense of
their Country. Thus a single spark is nothing, but when many join together,
they make a flame.


Physician. You conclude then, that the Reason of Man is but a bare Art of
Living, just so as Beasts have theirs.


Nature. I thought I had made thee sufficiently to understand by what I have
said, that in all this Discourse I only speak of the Animal part of Man, for
that is the only thing here in Question. Thou know by thine own Experience,
that in thee I discharge the functions of the Body, and never perform them
better, than when thou medlest least in them. So every Man that is wise trusts
me with all the little Offices of the Organs. Seeing he cannot comprehend the
structure and perfect Harmony of the Body, he thinks it enough to give Praises
to him who has made him the Keeper of so precious a Masterpiece. But since
that is not the precise point in hand, let us return to the Arts of Living,
wherewith I gratify living Creatures.


Physician. Well then, tell me, I pray, what is the end you propose to your
self in all these different Arts?


Nature. The conservation and propagation of Kinds. I stamp that Impression
upon all that has Life, and even upon things which to thee seem destitute of
sentiment. But I inform them in different manners, and by ways that thou
know but little.


Physician. Either that impression wears out, or you are not obeyed; because
your Creatures destroy one another, and seem to acknowledge no Law, but that of
the stronger.


Nature. I have already told thee, that that which thou call destruction, is
but the execution of the different ways of Living amongst Creatures: For there
is not one of them which for preservation of its Life, does not stand in need
of a peculiar Food; now, when it finds it, it takes it, even to that degree,
that in case of need, it devours Creatures of its own kind, and in an urgent
necessity, feeds on part of it self.


Physician. To prevent such cruel extremities, could you not make your
Creatures subsist on Air, Water, and Earth, without being obliged to destroy
your Masterpieces, for Life's sake?


Nature. I do so, in regard of some Animals, which live merely on what they
draw from the Water and Air; but seeing others want more solid Nourishment than
respiration, I diversifie the Food I prepare for them a hundred, and a hundred
ways; yet still with that care, that the more of this Food is consumed, the
more it increases and multiplies. Now, I allow not Plants, Insects, and
desenceless Animals the Privilege of a speedy growth, and excessive
multiplication, but on condition they should imitate Fountains, Brooks, and
Rivers, which so soon as they come out of the Earth, run all over the World, to
quench the thirsty; according to these Orders, Aliments thus specified present
themselves to the Creature that needs them, to the end, that by eating of them,
it may add to its Lamp the sparks of Life, contained in those little
Productions.


Physician. Man may justly then kill other Creatures for Food.


Nature. If it were injustice to eat living Creatures, it would be no less to
feed on the Seeds of Plants, Fruit of Trees, and Eggs of Fowls. Man may then,
without scruple, make use of the Productions of the Earth and Water. That Is to
s^y, of Wild Beast^ and Fish: For as to those which thou breedest at home, and
h nourest with thy Protection, be satisfied that they re^ay with Interest the
care and food thou b stowest upon them, seeing they strip themselves to enrich
thee with their Feathers and Fleeces, and that they feed the with their Eggs,
and quench thy thirst with their Milk. Not to mention the pain they suffer in
laboring thy Land, and in carrying from one place to another the fruits of
their labor: Not to mention neither the Pleasure they afford thee when they
are Young; the eagerness wherewith they accompany thee to Game, and in all
places, and their faithfulness toward thee even to their Death.


Physici^n. Seeing you have said, that part of the Creature only nourishes
that other that feeds on it, what becomes of the rest? Is it lost?


Nature. There is nothing lost of that which is cont^ined in a Vessel that has
no opening; though their parts change their place, their color, and figure,
yet they are not ann^hilated. ^o^ped water blown upon with a gentle breath,
produces an infinite number of bub^les, which successively ^estroy one another.
In the mean time, nothing is lost nor diminished; what breaks off from the rest
of the matter falls back into it again; and as it is the same Air that moves
these babbles within, and environs them without; so the Spirit that animates
Creatures, and that which is got loose from the shackles of Specification, is
but one and the same Spirit.


Physician. Suppose nothing of matter is lost, yet these various changes ought
to alter it.


Nature. If a piece of Earth or Clay may an innumerable many times come under
the hands of the Potter, and come out again always in a new shape and figure;
by stronger reason the mass of the Elements is capable of all these
transmutations without being altered. For my part, I sport and play in these
vicissitudes.


Physician. I believe so; but what is the reason that we see the Potter prepare
the Earth, and that we perceive not what you are a doing, till your work be
pretty far advanced?


Nature. The Reason is, because the Artificer is without his Work, and I am
within mine. Nor can he imitate more than the outside of the egg, to me only
it belongs, who am within, to form and animate the Chicken.


Physician. Might not we see the disposition of things at that time when you
intend to specificate matter?


Nature. Yes, by the Eyes of the Mind, but not of the Body, because I begin my
work in an unperceptible point; and from thence, as from a center, I trace to
my self a Circumference proportionate to that center, which I fill as I ought,
under the cover of a Veil; for no man ever saw me openly at work, insomuch,
that my work is more than half done, when it begins to fall under thy Senses.


Physician. What Is the reason of that?


Nature. Why, because the matter I make use of from first to last in the
composition of a mixed Body, cannot be perceived by bodily Eyes, though it be
clothed with the Elements. Now that matter is no where to be found in greater
abundance, nor more within my reach, than in the Air: And therefore, it is the
Storehouse of that precious Treasure. Out of that vast Reservatory then, which
is above thy Head, and without the reach of thy Senses, do I form the multitude
of the Waterworks which embellish the Grass-plot of the World, and which rise
higher or lower, according as they draw their Influence from on High. For thou
must know, that Life is but a gentle dropping of Living Waters, of which the
Stars are as the sources, and which falling from Heaven upon Earth, spurt out
in all places upon this Theater of the Universe.


Physician. I admire you, and am lost in the maze of thoughts which your
O^acles suggest to me.


Nature. Do thou begin to comprehend any thing of this?


Physician. I cannot tell. But thus much I Will say, if you will give me leave,
that at present I look upon you as an immense Spirit, to which the Elements
which our Senses perceive not, are instead of a Body; that all Creatures are
its animated O^g^ns, and that it is only by their Actions that we discover you.


Nature. Thou conceivest then how I animate the Organ^.


Physician. Not fully, but making a judgment of you by these Actions of the
Organs, I fancy that your Body Corporifies your Spirit, and that your Spirit
sp^ritualizes your Body: However it be, I am ravished to see with what
dexterity you open the hardest stone of a Fruit, from whence, as from a point,
you bring forth a Creature of a vast bulk and prodigious weight, the Earth, in
the mean time, which bears that Date-tree, or Oak, neither diminishing nor
sinking under the burden. And, which is still to me more incomprehensible, with
admirable skill you bring ba^k and reduce the Essential parts of that
production into as small a point as that from whence it sprung; with this
astonishing Circumstance, that it was single when first it grew, and that
during whole Ages, it yearly produces innumerable numbers of Vegetables like it
self.


Nature. Could thou but penetrate into the secrets of that point, there thou
would find in Abridgment thine Oak and Date-tree, with all their
proportions. But I only wish you were so sharp-sighted, as to discern the
texture of the parts of Insects, that thou might judge of their true harmony
when they are in motion. If thou could enter into that profound scrutiny,
thou would confess that the meanest Particles of which thou art composed,
cannot be more distant from what thou art at present, than thou in the state
you are in, art from that vast space contained within the Firmament.


Physician. I know enough, to make me adore the Hand, which in so small a
compass, has so skilfully fitted all things necessary for such strange
performances, that Insects, almost imperceptible, can trace themselves ways in
a hard skin; that others can skip and jump in the Air a thousand times higher
than themselves are in bigness. And that there are some, who in the Night time
sound a Charge, and fall cruelly upon Lions and the stoutest of Animals,
insomuch, that I am convinced that you deserve greater Admiration in your less
Productions, than in your greater.


Nature. You say too much.


Physician. Alas! what would not I say of your inexhaustible fecundity and vast
reach of forecast, if by letting me see you openly, you had taught me to
praise you as you deserve. All that remains to me to be done, is to cry out in
ecstasy, O the power and wisdom of that Spirit! which can dispose and shape so
many different Bodies in the manner they ought to be, for the execution of so
various and opposite ends and desires.


Nature. These are praises which do'nt belong to me; the power which I exert is
nothing in comparison of the Omnipotence of him who has trusted me with it. If
I dispose the Elements, it is by Orders from him. His Power is equal to his
Will. Does he will a thing? It is. Does he call that which never was? It is
present, and subsists so long as he pleases. No sooner did he say, let the
World be, but the World started out of nothing. So also when he speaks, the
Heavens hear, the Earth hearkens, the Winds stop their breath, the Sea smooths
the swelling of its Waves, the Mountains shake to the very Foundation, and fear
seizes all living Creatures. I my self pressed in Duty, wait but the word of
Command for Execution of his Orders: For it is with me, in respect of him, as
with Lightning, which, though it seems to go before, yet indeed comes after the
Thunderclap.


Physician. What! is there a Deity superior to thine? Tell me, I pray you,
where it is, what it does, and what it says.


Nature. Do not thou understand what the different Revolutions of the Stars,
wherewith the Heavens are adorned, speak of the Author of the Universe? See
thou not how the Earth testifies its gratitude to him by the return of Seasons
crowned with Flowers and Fruit? Does not the Majesty of the Sea imprint upon
thee a respect toward him? What do thou think of the Regular Motions of the
vast Ocean? What say thou of all the Creatures, which those great Bodies,
either sustain or contain? Art thou deaf to all those Divine Languages?


Physician. No. I begin to distinguish what till now I always confounded. I am
so Illuminated with this new Light, and so transported by these great truths,
that now I am convinced that the mind of Man is not capable of Knowledge. I
cannot hear nor retain any more, for now I am satisfied and contented.


Nature. That Is not enough. That I may fully Cure thee of thine Error, I will
have thee precisely to know the difference betwixt the Sovereign Being and
Nature. The Almighty Creates, and Nature produces. I animate Creatures, but it
is he that gives the stock of Life, that takes it away, and restores it. And as
Art strives to imitate Nature, so does Nature labor to attain to the
perfection of the Creator. But it is in vain for me to torment my self, because
I depend on Principles: All that I can do then, is to put the Creatures in
motion, and so to govern them, that, if it be possible, before they have
finished their course, they may be in a condition of leaving others after them
that may trace the same footsteps. But seeing these courses are unequal, hence
it is, that it is to be observed in me, that at the same time, and in the same
place some Creatures are born, and some die; that some corrupt, and others tend
to perfection; to which, as I have just now said, they cannot attain; for my
Power is no less stinted in the end than in the beginning of all my works.


Physician. Now am I so well instructed, that I perfectly conceive that it is
with you as with the Sun, who in all the moments of his Course, rises and sets
somewhere; so that your continual motion, as well as his, is a certain proof of
your dependence and subordination.


Nature. Thou have hitherto said nothing better, though the comparison of the
Sun quadrate not exactly in all senses: For to speak properly, that Luminary
never rises nor sets. He is a Fountain of Life, whom all the Planets, who stand
in need of his fire, strive to wait on, that they may rejoice in his Light; nor
do they absent themselves, but with regrate from him.


Physician. These things are a little too high for me: Have the goodness only
to tell me, if the defects that are to be seen in Creatures, be an effect of
the limits that are set to your Power.


Nature. The faults which thou observest in Creatures, is never occasioned by
me. The Order on my part is good, but the Matter cannot always answer what I
demand from it. Nevertheless, however a Creature appear to thee in its
imperfection, yet it still contains more wonders than thou art capable of
comprehending so long as thou live.


Physician. Alas! our life is so short, that it is hardly sufficient to give us
a glance of you; however, I heartily consecrate to you the little remaining
time I have to live, if you will but condescend to tell me, how I ought to
employ it.


Nature. As to thine Animal part, imitate the Animals, who learn by observing
what others do, and never transgress the bounds set to their kind.


Physician. Do the Animals any thing worthy of Observation, or of the imitation
of a rational Man?


Nature. On the contrary, they do nothing but what deserves your best
attention; study their fore cast, and the pains they take to gather and
preserve their Provisions. Admire their skill in making their Nests, and
placing them securely; the circumspection they use, and hazards they run to
save their young ones; how neatly the Dam brings them up; how dextrous she is
in finding them Food, in preparing and dividing it amongst them. In fine,
observe the kindness that Animals have for those who do them good; the
satisfaction they take of those who injure them; their Courage, Generosity, and
above all, their Constancy in one kind of Life, and thou wilt find in their
conduct enough to rectify thine own.


Physician. For one Animal that does any thing regularly in appearance, or by
chance, there are a thousand that live disorderly.


Nature. No, I tell thee: Most part of Animals when they have eaten, if they be
Young and at liberty, they play; if they be Old or weary, they take their Rest,
and of Actors turn Spectators. When Hunger seizes them again, they seek out
how to satisfy it; and the Exercise they perform for procuring their Food,
seasons and makes it better for them. In fine, they lead a quiet and peaceable
Life, and have no Quarrels one with another, unless sometimes during the heat
of their Amors.


Physician. Is it not so with Man, who is never more tractable, than when he is
most Amorous?


Nature. Give me not Man for an instance; he is, of all Creatures, in all
things the most irregular, and especially in his Amors, in which he burns and
consumes like the Phoenix, hoping to spring up again anew from his Ashes: Or
otherways he is a Boulter, which being continually tossed and shaken, retains
nothing but the Bran.


Physician. I perceive you would conclude, that we ought to imitate Animals in
their Duties, their Plays, and above all, in their Moderation, and Uniformity
of Life.


Nature. It is true. But I would that thy Reason, which is above the Elements,
should act with that pre-eminence and excellence which is suitable to so
exalted a condition as thine is, that surpasses all things visible in the
Universe.


Physician. I know very well, that what you have told me of the Body, is
addressed to Reason; but what Road shall I follow to come to the knowledge of
the Virtues which the Elements contain, and of the manner how you inform them?
For what you told me of it by the by, makes deep impression upon me.


Nature. To know how the Elements act, trust us with the Treasure of your
Granaries, and observe the steps that we shall take, to render thee the hundred
fold of it better and more lovely: If thou would see that Operation under
other shapes, by your care and labors invite us into thy Vineyards and
Gardens, and we will there entertain thee with Delights and Plenty, whence thou
may draw found consequences for the most desperate Evils.


Physician. Since you are willing to make me participant of your Riches, I
heartily renounce all the Treasures of the World.


Nature. Thou shall not be the poorer for that. I have furnished all the
Countries of the Earth with what is convenient for those that Inhabit them and
love me. I give them the free enjoyment of every thing, which is all that I can
do for Man, because he can possess nothing in proper. Farewell, make good use of
the Acquaintance of that Savage; study his Conduct, and practice what be does;
that is the way to live long, and enjoy Health, without being burdensome to
ones self or to others. In fine, be persuaded that the way he takes, is that
which I most approve. Adieu.


Physician. What! must I hear you no more?


Savage. How does that agree with what you said not long ago, that you could
not hear nor retain any more. Since that, have not you been told enough? You
ought to be content.


Physician. No, I am not. Confirm by one word, I beseech you, what now you have
inspired into me. One word, I pray, after that, my desires and fears shall be
at an end.


Nature. Though thou should have no cause to be afraid of others, yet
distrust thy self; and that you may be above the reach of the injustice of Men,
renounce thine own Will and Interest, lead an innocent and quiet Life, pity the
Evils of others, without exaggerating thine own. In fine, do good to all Men,
and always speak the truth.


Physician. With all my Heart. Can any Man do better than what you suggest?


Savage. At length now you are satisfied.


Physician. No Man can be more. But I am so afraid I shall forget what I have
just now heard, that I am impatient till I write it.


Savage. The only Caution you should use, in respect of the Seeds wherewith
the Soul of the World has enriched yours, is to weed out of your Mind the bad
Plants that the School has raised in it, that they may not choke the Simples
of Nature.


Physician. That Is not enough: The Murders I have committed, and the precious
Talents wherewith I am now entrusted, require that I should go and offer my
Head to those whose Relations and Friends I have killed, that by Discourse and
Example I may persuade them to submit to the Laws of Nature: For I shall never
die satisfied, until I have made my gratitude to her appear, by the pains that
I will take in reclaiming Men from Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and in Curing
them of the Evil of Physicians, and of the Errors of Medicine.


FINIS.

