A NEW LETTER FROM WINDSOR, FROM A Person of Quality, TO HIS Friend and
Correspondent at LONDON.
Honored Sir,
THough it be a Matter of vast Moment, and mighty Consequence to Rule well, and
know how to dispose the Reins of Government so justly to the Subjects Tempers,
that neither the Mild be cast down, and trambled on, nor the Unquiet and
Turbulent, through too much Remisness, become Insolent; the Loyal not
discouraged, nor the Factious have Reason to rejoice: A Task, which none but
such to whom Nature has given Understandings equal to the high Dignity, to
which they are Born: such I mean, whom Providence thinks Worthy to be its
Vicegerents on Earth, are able to undertake, much less perform; Though I say,
that Qui been gubernat est Deo similimus, He that Rules well, is the Truest
Image of his Maker; And Consequently, it may be thought an unpardonable
Arrogance in me, to presume to meddle in a Matter as far above the Capacity of
a Subject, as is the Almighty KING of Heaven above his Viceroy, amongst Us;
yet is not any Man debarred from declaring his Sentiments in such a case, so far
as he neither pretends to Instruct his Prince, nor by prying into his
Cabinet-Council, betray the Failings, or Derogate from the Authority of his
Royal-Master, which has of late been the Deplorable Effect of too too many
Pamphlets, whose Authors purpose, if truly Searched into, was only to spread
Sedition, and foment Rebellion; a thing so different from my Principles, that I
had much rather desist from an Enterprise Eminently hazardous, than either in
Thought, Word, or Deed, injure my King, were He the worst of Tyrants, much less
the present KING in whom concenter all those Virtues that Compound a Good,
Pious, Just, and Merciful Prince; and make Him almost an Object of Adoration,
to all His Subjects that do not look upon him with Malicious, and (though
Unjustly so) a Disaffected Eye. However, in this Juncture of Affairs, when the
KING's Prerogative seems on all sides to be forgotten; and the Liberty, and
Property of the Subjects, becomes the Chief Business of the Nation: I think it
the part of not only every Loyal Subject, but of all that can pretend either by
Birth or Nature to be Englishmen, to Vindicate their Prince, under whose
Gracious Government, they enjoy all that either Subjects can Modestly require,
or a King without Derogating from His Authority can Grant. Yet has it been the
Endeavor of not a few Malignants to insinuate into the Minds of the Ignorant,
Unsteady People, a disliking of the present Government, persuading them that
Arbitrary-Power is breaking in upon them, and that unless they quickly stand up
in Defense of their Just Privileges, they will be for ever Sold to Slavery and
Popery; two things as generally Abominated by the Vulgar, as the Thoughts of an
Inquisition; and I dare Aver as far from the KING's Intentions, as the
introducing of Mahometanism. But however, the KING is extremely Obliged to them
for their good Will, in taking such great Care of His Person; and for their
unspeakable Zeal to make Him a Glorious Prince: But, How do they set about it?
Even by Alienating the Hearts of His Subjects from Him; and by Possessing their
unthinking Heads, with Groundless Jealousies of mighty Dangers, from whence
they know not; but, Who can be Ignorant that this is the ready way to make Him
like His Blessed Father, a Glorious Martyr in this, and a King Triumphant in
the other World? For they need but Cry out against Tyranny and Popery, and the
Business is more than half Effected; Cry but Liberty, Liberty, and their needs
no Drums or Trumpets to Alarm them; for then they will Swarm like Bees to the
Banner of the Good Old Cause: nor shall they need Encouragement to Fight the
Lord's Battle; for there shall Arise in the Camp, Men that from the Pulpit
shall Justify their Proceedings, and by Inspiration (no matter whether it be
from Heaven or Hell) tell 'em it is Meritorious to Fight against, nay, to Depose
Tyrants: a Principle so near a Kin to that bugbear Popery, that naught but
their Ignorance and Illiterateness can Testify, that they were not brought up
at St. Omers, or some other Popish Seminary. And when Matters are brought to
this Head, when the Vulgar are Run Mad with Devotion; 'twill be very difficult
to reduce them to their Right Sense of Loyalty and Allegiance: And when their
Minds are Fermented into a Lump of Rebellion, naught but the Mill of Oppression
under a Grinding Commonwealth, can restore them to their first Purity. But
Heaven be Praised, things are not yet grown so Desperate, but that by Applying
present Remedies, the KING may Maintain his Prerogative, and the Subjects not
lose their Privileges; a Cure that can be performed by none, but a Moderate,
Sober Parliament; and such it lies in the Peoples Breast to Choose, as neither
prefer their own Privileges so high, as to overpower your Reverence to their
King's Prerogative.

We have been now near Three Years under the Sense of a Popish Plot, which has
possessed the People with so panick a Fear of the Popes Supremacy, that they have
almost forgot the Allegiance, and to the greater Amazement of the World: At
last, when every one seemed so well Satisfied with the Truth of it, that none
durst distrust it; that Party which seemed most to Prosecute the full Discovery
of it, and did with so great Zeal Persecute the Actors in it even to Death, are
found Com-Plotters; and I doubt, are as deep in the Mire, as the other in the
Mudd; for it has been the continual Practice of some of no low Degrees, to Hunt
with the Hound, and Run with the Hare, one of whom has often served as many
purposes as he Looks ways at once. But I shall leave the Discovery of that, to
Providence and Time, when no doubt the People will be Satisfied, that striving
to avoid Scylla on the one side, they run into Charybdis on the other; that
shunning Popery on that hand, they betray themselves to the greedy Jaws of
Phanaticism on the other; whose Proselites (not to abuse the Scripture Phraise)
compass Heaven and Earth to Create new Ones, whom when they have Gained, they
make Ten times more the Children of Hell, than themselves; and I hope, when the
Curtain is drawn from before their Eyes, they will clearly See how they have
Lived almost in Egyptian Darkness, and Benighted with Ignorance, have been Led
into the Paths of Eternal Destruction.

Having now pursued my purpose, as far as I believe my Readers Patience will
hold out; I shall set down this, as an undeniable Maxim, That Loyalty, and
Honesty is always the best Policy; and they that make these the Pole Star of
their Course, shall never Split on the Rocks of Damnable Rebellion.

Thus having given you in Short my Opinion, I remain in all Candor and
Sincerity,

Your, etc, John Freeman.

London, Printed in the Year, 1681.


