Free, Regulated Trade, Particularly to INDIA, THE Interest of England: Being
the True, Natural Means, to Promote The NAVIGATION and RICHES of this Nation.
FORTS and CASTLES in INDIA, notwithstanding all specious Pretenses, are
Occasionally proved to be of Uncertain Advantage, but of Certain Inconvenience
to Us. Discoursed in a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
HAving formerly endeavored to make it evident to you, that Companies in
Joynt-Stock were unnecessary and inconvenient; and that a Free Trade to India
under a Regulation was the Interest of the Nation; I am inclined to give you
the trouble of some more Thoughts upon the same Subject, and by the way to let
you know of how little Use, Forts and Castles in India are toward the Security
and Support of our Trade there, notwithstanding the great Noise made in that
matter. The Dutch East India Company having for above forty Years past, divided
no more than Nineteen per Cent. per Annum on their Original Stock (and it is
plain that was the most they could do, for a fifth of those Dividends were in
obligations on themselves to remain at Interest) that Companies Actions would
never have been raised to the present esteemed Value of 500 per Cent. had it
not been driven up by the Cheating Trade of Stock-Jobing, begun in Holland; and
therefore it is surprising (considering the many advantages the Hollanders have
in that Trade above other Nations, and withal the little Profit of not 4 per
Cent. it brings to the present Adventurers) that we should so much value their
Dutch Management, as to make use of it as an invincible Argument, that because
they do, we must also carry on our Trade to India in a Joint Stock. The other
great Argument for a Joynt-Stock, the Necessity of maintaining Forts, is what
has always been the Bane of the Dutch Company, the Expense being so vastly
great as obliging them to send out annually 12 or 1500 Men, to recruit their
Garrisons, and much Shipping to attend them with Ammunition, Stores and
Provisions, besides all other incident Charges; and this being so
(notwithstanding the reason they have to be at this Charge, to keep the
Spice-Islands to themselves, by which means they supply the whole World with
Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves and Cinnamon, at their own Price) it is absurd to assum it
essential to the supporting our Trade to India, that we (that have no such
Foundation for it) must be also at the Expense of maintaining Forts, and that
too when almost all our Trade thither is confined to the Mogull's Dominions,
where the Dutch (upon whose Example we lay such mighty stress) have not any one
Fort or Castle; and that their Trade thither is as great as ours ever was, will
appear by the following Cargo of six of their Ships arrived thence last Year,
being all Commodities procured within that Emperor's Territories, except the
Pepper, which was bought on the North Coast of India.

lib. 2170977 of Pepper. 23049 ps. Silks of div. sorts. 974 ps. Sulgees. 159852
Indigo. 3000 ps. Golgas. 1678 ps. Albances. 9715 Borax. 600 Silk Gowns. 8073
ps. Pho^^sees. 3142 Aloes. 100 ps. Restas. 7240 ps. Ginghams. 92811 Coffee. 218
ps. Alegais. 8570 ps. of Crevats. 37190 Cardemoms. 250 ps. Atlasses. 136^5 ps.
Chinis. 150 Gum Oppoponan. 600 ps. Morees. 18^46 ps. Romalls. 2775 Salarmoniac.
3300 ps. Salampores. 50003 ps. Coroots. 1280 Wool. 3600 ps. Betillees. 6120 ps.
Berms. 1050 Skins. 400 ps. Orisalls. 6480 ps. Chiadees. 37640 Floret Yarn. 2280
ps. Perculles. 1200 ps. Canckins. 32687 Cotton Yarn. 7495 ps. Cossas. 5280 ps.
Baftas. 1534400 Salt Peter. 4970 ps. Dorees. 100 ps. Tanjeebs. 247604 Sapan
Wood. 4523 ps. Mulmuls. 1200 ps. Cachies. 124432 Caliatour Wood. 937 ps.
Therindas. 2000 ps. Tapekankenias. 78203 Cowries. 931 ps. Adathaes. 3315 ps.
Sianters. Pearls of diverse sorts. 4084 ps. Humhums. 13100 ps. Nicanees. 32 oun.
Ambergris. 498 ps. Zaanes. 2820 ps. Long cloth. 138232 lb. Raw Silk. 4510 ps.
Garras. 5940 ps. Sail cloth.

Wherefore I see no reason why we should not trust to the Mogul's Protection as
well as the Dutch, which would be a much better Defense to us than a Fort or
two, for in such Case our Factories could not be insulted by any, but they must
make War with the Mogull as well as with us (and then only in open defenseless
Towns) which will hardly ever happen; for we have taught the World, that to
make War at such a distance with so great a Prince, is to be at a vast Expense
to no purpose, and the Dutch who are the best fitted for such an Attempt, have
always showed an aversion to it: And were not all this true, yet our Fondness
for Fort St. George and Bombay is very unaccountable, since the first is
situated where is neither Port nor Harbor, only an open Road, where no Ships
can ride upon breaking up of the Monsoons with any tolerable safety; nor is
this Road well commanded by the Town or Fort, which for want of Water, besides
its other defects, cannot hold out a Siege of ten days, and is the worst
seated for Trade, or to make investments of Goods, of any place on the Coast of
Cormandell. Bombay its true is more defensible, there is a Port, and it may be
relieved by Sea, yet its altogether as useless as the other, except to make War
again with the Mogull, which would be a Folly so fatal, that it ought to be
abandoned purely to secure us from the being tempted into such a Misfortune;
but its a place without Commerce, and the safety and convenience of Ships
Harboring there would be the same, were there no Fort. Now these places being
so very incapable to be made useful to our Trade to India, we ought to desert
them, although their Revenues were what the present East India Company pretend,
(which perchance might otherwise render the keeping of them very easy to a
Regulated Company) because they destroy so many of our Soldiers and Seamen,
being extremely unhealthfull, especially Bombay; and were all the Dead-Lists in
the Companies possession examined into, the Mortality would be found very great.

But it is very probable the Mogul will soon ease us of the Trouble and Expense
of Fort St. George, he having now a Right to it by his Conquest of Golcondah,
(that King having only made a Temporary Grant of it to the Company, paying him
some acknowledgment) and this is the rather to be suspected, the Mogul having
Declared he would suffer none to possess any Fortresses within his Dominions:
And Bombay being Leas'd to the Company by King Charles the Second, at Ten Pound
per Annum, (and a hard Bargain they then thought it, and have since experienced
it to be) I cannot comprehend wherein lies their Property to these Places,
about which they have made so loud a Noise: And if they have better Pretensions
to St. Helena, that is very well known to be only a Place of Refreshment for
their Ships homeward bound, and may be kept with little Charge: And Bencoelen
is no other than an ill Fortified Magazine, permitted to be built for the
procuring of Pepper, which is not always to be had there neither, but is so
Mortal to all that go thither, that it seems a Sin to keep it, even if there
were no Pepper to be had elsewhere; but Carwar, Calicut, Bilipatan, and Quilon,
etc. on the North Coast of India, did always, and can supply us with great
quantities of that Commodity, and the difference of the Cost of it will be more
than countervail'd by saving the Expense of a Fort, and the Lives of so many
Men that must continually be Sacrificed to Garrison it, and of Seamen that
Navigate thither.

How great Provision would be made for the younger Sons of the Gentry of
England by a Regulated open Trade to those Parts? how large a Compass for the
exercise of Parts and Industry do those Territories afford? where at present
none raise their Fortunes, but at the pleasure of a few Men; where few go but
Men of broken Fortunes, or Youths to be bred up at mean Sallaries. Certainly it
seems a Paradox, that Trade to Countries of so vast extent as are mentioned in
the India and Affrican Companies Charters, which is nigh half the World, should
be limited and given to them, exclusive to all other English Men (when every
other Nation does, or may Trade thither) and to Countries where our Growths and
Manufactures may be in great quantities Vented, and with them may be purchased
most of the Useful and Noble Commodities that the World produces. Indeed it is
unaccountable that we of this Nation should be forced to bury our Talent, and
not give full scope to that Genius we have to Traffic and Navigation, but must
erect Companies and Monopolies to carry it no farther than just what their own
Interest leads them to; and it would be against their Oath, should they prefer
the Public Good in prejudice to the Joynt-Stock, which such Companies were
never known to be guilty of, always exporting and importing no more of any
Merchandise than what would yield them their stated Profits; when particular
Merchants who cannot make Combinations, will carry out and bring home much
greater quantities of all Commodities, because they can and must afford them
with less profit, and sometimes must content themselves with Loss, and yet will
return to the same Voyages to see to recompense themselves, and thus rendering
all Goods cheaper will naturally increase the Vent of them, and we shall undo
our Foreign Monopoly Competitours by Underselling them, which will be a
benefit to the Public, whereas Companies in Joynt-Stock do Tax the Nation, by
setting their own Price on all they export and import.

The increase of Commerce, the certain consequence of laying open a limited
Trade, will as certainly increase Navigation, the advantage whereof will be
very great, from the length of the Voyages to India, besides the employment our
Shipping will find in those Seas, the Banian, Moors, and other Merchants there,
coveting to employ English Ships, though at great Freights, (which is too
intricate a matter for a Company to concern themselves with, unless sometimes
by necessity) and by this we shall learn more experience, and daily make New
Discoveries of the Commerce of those People which may prove of great advantage
to this Nation.

And therefore I cannot think that those Merchants (when the Trade to India was
free to all) who desired the Establishment of this present Company, had in View
the Kingdoms good, but their private Interests; for to put in a Stock in this
Company might then be more beneficial to those Persons, than trading
particularly, especially if they were brought in to be Managers, as some of
them were, and made a good Use of it too, by being Pensioners to the Dutch,
whose Interest it is that our Trade to India and Guinea should be limited by
Joynt-Stocks.

But granting the Establishing of an East India Company with a Joynt-Stock was
then useful, yet the Case is altered now, for we are much better acquainted in
those Parts of the World, and the Stock of the Kingdom is greatly increased;
and tho there may be inconveniences in an absolute open Trade, a Regulated
Company will obviate them.

And since the present East India Companies Affairs are reduced to such ill
Circumstances, there can be no reason why the Nation should not make the
Experiment of a Free Trade under a Regulation; for it is morally impossible but
that it will have all the happy effects I have proposed.

These, Sir, are my real Sentiments of this Affair, at this time so much
controverted, and I am persuaded you do not think my Judgment has been in any
manner influenced by private Interest; and indeed there is no room for such a
suspicion; for if such Regulation were made, I could have no other advantage by
it but what must be common to all.

If the present East India Company will not part with their Forts but on
exorbitant Considerations, I cannot tell why they should not remain with them
to make the most of their great Revenues they so much boast of; for (except St.
Helena) none of them can be thought worth the purchasing by either another
Joynt-Stock Company, or a Regulated one, except to make a Present of them to
the Mogul, to ingratiate themselves with him.

FINIS.

