Freemen Inslaved: OR, Reasons humbly offered to the right Honorable, the
Commons of England in Parliament assembled, for the taking off the Excise upon
BEER, and ALE.
First, BEcause the way of raising Money by Excise, is contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of this Land, and never known to be practiced in this Kingdom,
until these late years of distraction and confusion, it being always thought
in former Ages, by Free Parliaments, a more honorable and equal way of raising
moneys for the supply of his Majesty's great Charges and Necessities by way of
Subsidies and Fifteens, which charged only those of his Majesty's Subjects who
were most able, and had visible Estates; Whereas this Levy by Excise, does
principally burden the poor, especially that intolerable impost of four
shillings in the pound on Beer and Ale.

Secondly, Because in the first attempts to introduce the Excise 3 Caroli, it
was adjudged by that Parliament a horrible Monster, that would devour Trade,
and therefore rejected, And deci no sexto Caroli, in four Declarations, Votes,
and Remonstrances, the Parliament then revived and approved of the former
Judgment of Parliament against it. And in October. 1642. when it was but
reported, the Parliament was about to impose Excise, the Parliament did then
declare that those that reported it, should be brought to condign punishment. O
quantum mutatum ab illo!

Thirdly, The Materials of Beer and Ale being of English growth, and that
Commodity (next to Bread) the very stay and staff of the poor; it will be most
for the Nations advantage and encouragement of English Manufacturies, to take
off all Impost from Native Commodities, and lay (in case of necessity) the
charge by way of Subsidy and Fifteens, whereby it will be born by the abler
sort of this Kingdom.

Fourthly, It is most reasonable that no greater sum of money should be raised
upon the people, then will answer his Majesty's and the Kingdoms just
Necessities; but in the collecting of this new Impost, one eighth part is
wasted upon needless Officers; whereas the good old way by levying moneys by
Subsidies and Fifteens, only known to our forefathers, brought in the whole
into his Majesty's Exchequer, at an inconsiderable expense, not exceeding two
pence in the pound.

Fifthly, It will be esteemed an act of high grace and great favor (as well as
of Justice) to the impoverished Brewers and Victuallers, and other poor
distressed Tradesmen who have chiefly felt the weight of that insupportable
burden of Excise, for his Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament to put a
period to that Grievance, especially now when the people are full of
expectation of their just liberty and ease from their former burdens.

Sixthly, The continuance of this heavy imposition of Excise, will be
dishonorable to the Parliament, in that they ease themselves, and the Gentry,
and rich People of the Nation; and lay the burden on Corporations, and the
meanest of his Majesty's Subjects.

Reasons further showing the inequality of the imposition of Excise upon Beer
and Ale.
First, Because by the pretended Laws of Excise, the Brewer is made the
Collector thereof at his great charge and pains, for which he has no
recompense.

Secondly, Because the common Brewers, (whose Families are numerous, as also
the poor Victuallers) pays Excise for that which is expended in their own
Families; whereas all other housekeepers who brew for themselves, are
Excise-free.

Thirdly, Because the Victuallers are much impoverished by this burden of
Excise, being unable to raise that great charge, dealing much with poor people,
and restrained by former Laws from selling at higher Rates, whereby they are
rendered insolvent, to the Brewer, both for Excise and Principal, it often
happening that the Brewer pays Excise where he loses all.

Fourthly, Because the allowance of two barrels and half in twenty two and a
half, for Ale; and three barrels and half in twenty three and a half for Beer,
granted for Returns, Lecadge, filling, Christmas-beer, and other wafts and
Accidents incident to the Trade of Brewing, are no way answerable to the great
loss they receive thereby.

Fifthly, Because that by the pretended Laws of Excise the Brewers are to clear
their Accounts weekly for the said duty, whereas they seldom receive the Excise
of the Victualler until the Ale and Beer be retailed, and sometimes but once a
year, which is an increase of the Brewers dead stoek one fifth part, and cannot
be remedied by reason of the Victuallers inability to advance moneys.

Lastly, Because lately the Excise is increased six pence per Barrel upon Beer
and Ale more then formerly, there being no possibility for the Brewer or
Victualler to advance it in any proportion in their smaller Retailing measures.

Reasons against the illegality in levying the Imposition called the Excise.
First, Because the Commissioners and sub-Commissioners are both Judges and
Parties, they having Poundage out of the very income of Execise, according to
what they are pleased by their Officers to extort of the Brewers.

Secondly, The Commissioners and Sub Commissioners, are both Judges and Jurors,
they judging both of the Law, and also of the fact, and that for their own
advantage, denying us Trials either by the Judges of the Land, or Jurors, which
is our birthright.

Thirdly, Because the Gagers and other Officers of Excise, have a Power at
unseasonable times, by night, and by day, to enter into our houses, to our
great disturbance, contrary to Magna Charta, which says, Every man's House is
his Castle:

Fourthly, Upon Levying of their fines by way of distress or imprisonment* we
have been denied Replevins, and likewise our Habeas Corpus, and consequently
the benefit of the Common Law due to freeborn English men.

The Brewers of LONDON not obtaining the Privilege of having their Petition
read in Parliament, do humbly offer these Reasons to consideration, praying
that such a way may be thought upon for the defraying the public Charge of the
Nation, as that every man according to his Estate and ability, may bear his
equal and just proportion, and no more; That so your Goodness may be Universal,
your Justice Impartial, and that the Cry of Oppression may be no longer heard
in our Streets.


