FRESH NEWS FROM COCKENY: For the Information of all such as are not sick of
the Sullens.
Cockeny, Thursday, etc.
THis day the Senate has named Commissioners to regulate the Custom and Excise
of imported Cutling-stones; a Commodity, which (if this Frost last till
Candlemasse) will infallibly allay the boisterous Pride of Barley stingo, and
chamber the keckling of Hens loadened with eggs. It Is a most glorious fight to
behold the daily splendour on the Nore loch of Edinburgh: and such, who
remembers of the Olympic Games, by way of transmigration, says, they were but
pupper Plays in respect of our frosted Carrozols. The names of the Deputies
are as follows, Augustus Apple Tree, Catiline Crab-tree, Agamemnon, Anderson,
Sigismundus Sympson, Petronius Paterson, Publius Bublius Buy, Hadrianus Hodge,
Sempronius Skeuch, Coriolanus Cowy, and Mr. Corderius Contter for their Clerk:
all Persons of spotless integrity. But they are limited, not to admit of any
exceeding the Carrat of two hundred pound weight; because oftentimes young men
endanger their Back-sprents with the vanity of ponderous Stones. This Commit
was no sooner established, but there came a Letter from Humphrey Hood, our
Shellfish Agent at the Hague, by which you may perceive the reason our
Musselskape is not yet planted in the mouth of the Meaze. The Letter you have
here set down.

For the Right Sapient, the CONSULS and TRIBUNS of the SENATE of COCKENY.
Most Shientick Patrons,
THe States here are in such confusion about their differences with England,
that I can bring to no perfection our Mussell Project. There be some Jews that
would bargain for a parcel of those which hatches Pearl; But I told them, It
was express against our Laws, because they are only destined to decore our
Wives and Children with Neck-laces. I find it will be to no purpose for me to
waste longer time here; for there is never one of the Hoggin Moggin, when I
motion any thing of business, that answers me to the purpose. As for example,
When I demanded a return of my Memorial from their Secretary, he thrusts into
my hand a Speech of one of their Members, which because it possibly may
convince you of their discomposed, condition, I have here sent it translated in
the most (...) English ^y Secretary could reach; for the truth is, a simple
Version of a Low Dutch Jargon would puzle a greater Ling^^st than ^^ll^pine.
This (with the enclosed) is all at present from

Your Servant, Humphrey Hood.


The Speech of Mijn Heir Snip Snap van Rugg, a Barber in Delph, and one of the
States Generals: as it was delivered at the Hague, on the Feast of Innocents.
My Lords,
IT is now any time, this twenty years, that I have been a witness to all your
political Trimmings; and let me tell you, without flattery, though their
Frislings and Curlings were above the Pincers of my Conception, yet I was
infinitely pleased at the craftiness of their contexture: And upon no other
account, My Lords, but because they were nine Points to the Southward of my
comprehension, which, as I am informed, is the only understanding a la Mod. But
as to the Question in debate, Whether it were better for us to have Peace or
War with England? there lies the business. Certainly, My Lords, it would much
conduce to your satisfactions, to have the Dispositions of the People sounded:
and that is to be had, either in a Mill, a Country Forge, or in a Barbers Shop
in a Town. In my opinion, My Lords, the latter is to be dreferred, the other
two being only Rendezvouses of Clowns: but that of the shaving Faculty, to my
certain knowledge, even in my own Theater, there is of all stations that resort
there; nay, even from the Tarpalian, that has his Cox-comb rounged with a
wooden dish, to the Spruce Gallant, whose Antlers are starched with Gessimine:
and without all doubt, those are the Waterfowl that continually flutters and
dables in this our plantation of soused clods. But, My Lords, not to keep you
up from my intended discovery of their present inclinations, I shall briefly
relate the Observations I made in the last three Saturdayes Dressings, not
forgetting the Humors of the Jews on the preceding Fridayes: and in order to
the Discipline of the House, whilst some are wet, and others shaving, the Clash
was held up with these raskally ingredients that supports the confusion of a
Commonwealth. The first that broke the ye, was Dick the Snyder of Delph, a
worshipful Botcher, that has taken the length of Usurers feet, but still
within the limits of clouting Stockings. This same Fellow, I say, with a dark
hollow voice, and a great discontented belch, declared his aversion to their
preparations of a War with England: for, says he, those who are most concerned
to defray the expense of the War, are these who are least concerned in the
Quarrel. Must all the Commons of the seven Provinces be pinched, to maintain
the vanity and avarice of the East and West India Companies: and against a
Neighbor and Benefactor, who redeemed us both from the Name of Rebels, and the
contemptible Title of, The low and distressed States of Holland? No, no,
Heavens forbid we should be such ingrate wretches. This was no sooner said, but
Yerk the Cobbler swore (by the Keistril of Crispine) that all his brother
Botcher had said was true. And besides, consider, when Dunkirk, Ostend and
Newport were upon our Nose, what difficulties we were at in the point of Trade,
and what charges for Convoys. I pray, what will it be when all the Coast-Towns
of England are such, with the advantage of a Fleet-Royal all the days of the
year to protect them. Its true, no place can well subsist plentifully without
Trade; yet England has, and can subsist, when there is no Trade at all. Its far
otherwise with us, for the least obstrnction of Trade cuts us off from natural
subsistence; For our Country, of it self, yields scarce so much Grain as will
nurse Anxv Maria Shurmans Poultry: and for the fishing that is of our own
property, except some accidental peeks of Prans and a few muddy Eels, we have
nothing but at the discretion of Neighbors. Its true, there is a proportion of
Butter and Cheese, but not to feed the ten thousand mouth. The Cobbler had no
sooner spoke, when straight an aged Brocker, formerly a Professor of History at
Loydan, with staring eyes, and a bellowing voice, assented to all what was
said; only he was displeased, that she who was the ornament of the Low Dutch
Learning, should be compared to Hen-wives; which Wives (in other parts of the
world) has the rank reputation of Witches. However, the good old Man's choler
was soon allayed, being the comparison flowed from illiterate Bruits: but
withal, very gravely, after he had stroaked down his breast and beard, he held
forth as follows; I remember, Neighbors, eighty years ago, when this
Commonwealth, before it bulged to the dreadful Title of Hoggin Moggin, had no
other repute but that of a despicable crew of fish Hamelets, and might have
continued so, if at the same juncture of time they had not met with the
Novelties and Followers of some Runagado-Ecclesiasticks, which gave both life
and being to our rebellious Foundation. About the same time, I say, they
report, that, as Philip the second being in a dumpish mood about this Revolt,
there was a State-projector very formally addressed himself to his Majesty, and
advised him, never to enterprise the reducing of us by a Land-war, but convert
all his force for the constant entertainment of an hundred Friggats, and so
crush our Trading: and this he made appear to be no great task, considering the
King had as many Towns great and small, that one with another could defray the
expense of the design easily. As the Broker was upon this discourse, I was just
circumstexing the whiskers of a hotheaded Dantzick Farther, when upon a sudden
the Angry Copman sprung out of my grips, and swore by all the Tarr in the East,
and the great Pudding of Spruce, that whoever he was gave that advice to the
Spaniard, behoved to be a Jesuiter, in regard it had so pernicious a
consequence. And if the King of Britain light upon the same design, as he may
much more easily do, the want of Trade to such a multitude of mouths, would
speedily render us miserable. He was going to enlarge upon the subject, but the
authority of the reverend Broker procured liberty and attention to return to
his discourse: so he continued. This counsel, as I told you, of the
Policy-monger of State, was most attentively listened to by Don Phillipilio,
insomuch that he not only stroskt up his Bigots, but witnessed his satisfaction
with three extraordinary Prudentiall Nods: and happily the motion might have
taken effect, if the Duke of Parma at that time had not been at Court,
accompanied with all the Warlike Nobility both of Italy and Spain; that were
drunk with hunting after Land-glory: Besides, its thought the King was
indifferent; and having his Treasures coming tumbling from the Indies, he
thought he could not distribute it better than by erecting a School of War in
Flanders, to breed Officers for his other Conquests. And let me tell you,
Neighbors, it was no small support to our new patched up Republic, that this
same Southern Monarch was the envy of the Northern parts of the world; for by
most he was regarded as the fiercest of the whose bunch of Antichrists, Dragon
heads: and such was the zeal of the mortified Ladies, that no reformed Gallant
could be entertained in his amors, unless he had served three Campagnias in
Holland, and brought away nine hairs of the Mustachoes of a Castilian Diego as
a Trophee of his valor.

Our Broker was again interrupted by a little Tersell of a Levite, who all this
while was tuning my Daughters Cittern to the Notes of a Geneva Jigg: And after
he had, in a great passion, flung his Water-camlote Cloak under his Arm, he
began and roared against all what had passed, alleging that they intended
nothing, but to lessen the strength and reputation of the Pious and Godly
States, that was the great receptacle of all tender consciences. He had scarce
uttered these words, when upon a sudden, a Schoolmaster took him up, and said,
Novimus and quite: My life upon it, that you and some of the Scots non-conforme
Brethren has been kneading Lectures together at Skeedames-dyke. Like enough it
has been so, said a Blacksmith; for his flattering strain speaks no less.
What? replies a Scrivener, are these the companions are so nimble at making of
Garden-knots? The very same, says a Cutler; For, put me half a score of these
fellows in a peaceable Kingdom, and though there be a Garrison in every Family,
yet they shall work mutiny up to that height, that nothing but the steel edge
of a broad Sword is able to charm it. All what you say is most certain, says
the Broker, and if the rest of the hotch-potch Religions, to whom we give
shelter, were as contentiously disposed as they, our Commonwealth had been
long since split: But thanks to our Summum bonum of refined cheating and black
usury, that keeps under hatchets the zeal of all other professions, Now when I
speak of Religions in that point, we are wretched; for, by most part of the
world, we are in the Category of Jews and Infidels, especially our East and
West India Companies, who for the most part, are professed enemies of Christ,
which, in this our Engagement with England, may unhappily stand in our way; for
it is not to be supposed, that his Christian Majesty, who is the only probable
Prince in the world, to enterprise a Croysada, that ever he will countenance a
tribe of Hebrews, to advance the standart of Circumcision. At the hearing of
this, out springs a Greenland Swaber, and swore by all the blubber that grows
on a fat Whales jowle, that rather then Fadderland should be in jeopardy, he
would yet again kindle his courage with Brandy for its defense. Fadderland
replies an Inland Bumpkin, there is none of you that inhabites Towns can
pretend any thing that way, there being none of you all can say your
Grandfather was a Hollander. It is most true, cries another Clown; for it is
we only can claim that right, and you are no other then so many Paddock-stools
or Mushromes, issued out of the steam of a Dunghill, as French Angelots
hatches Magots. I am apt to believe that, says a Cowper; for my father was a
Swine-herd in West Phalia: And, because my mother entertained unnatural
jealousies, he was forced to come here for protection. And mine, says a
Goldsmiths, was a Tinker in Sweden; but one time, for his divertisment, as he
was transmuting the natural metal of the Country into silver, whereon he was
engraving the King's Image, he was forced to fly for a false Coyner, And my
Grandfather, cries a Skavinger, was a Friar of Etfoord in Germany; but, for
scandalous toping of a Tailors Wife, he was forced to flee to Amsterdam, where
he was preferred to be a Lay Elder. In good faith, says a Glazier, I am of the
opinion, at best, that all our forebearers within two generations, were either
Criminalls, Runagadoes, or Banquerupts; for my father was Cash-keeper to a
Genowes Banquier: But in regard the ballancing of accounts did not hit, he was
forced to change both Climate and Religion, All that is nothing, quoth an old
toothlesse Furrier, and therefore listen to what I say; for, though I mumble my
words out of a heard like a Mavise-nest, yet my mouth is not so muzelled with
Morpions, but I can make it appear in the teeth of the greatest Virtuosi, that
Reucks, Cheats, and Trippanners are the only ingredients to compose such a
Commonwealth as ours, whose greatest subsistence depends upon the ruin of
Neighbors. Say you so, says a Traveller? Then it is high time for me to shift
so pestilentions an air.

This, My Lords, was the sum of the observations I made among my Christian
Clyants: My Jewish Customers again were a little more close, yet I overheard
one say to another, that he much doubted the success of the War, since the
King of Britain concerned Himself so vigorously, and that the strength of an
English Monarch is unknown, when he is likewise Sovereign of the affections and
concurrence of His People, as it was now the case of His present Majesty: And
which is worst of all, there seems to be a perfect understanding 'twixt him and
the French King. Why then, replies the other, in such cases the States should
breath the veins of their Tons of Skat, and bleed among their Courtiers. Tush
says the other, these knacks are to be done with Bashawes at Constantinople,
or in republics like Venice or Geneva, or in the Minority of a King: But
believe me, it is dangerous to be found tripping with two such clear-sighted
Princes as these of England and France; besides, their Courtiers are (of late)
become such nice Christians, that they will hardly touch Holland cash, for fear
it were deeply mixed, and stunck of our usurious and circumcised Purchase. This
is all, My Lords, I heard among our Talmudicall friends: I am informed that if
your Wisdoms would appoint Emissaries to frequent the Sky Skooles up de
Burgwall, and there you will find News and State matters as gravely debated in
the time whilst they are plumping, as they are at London, in these houses where
they stew their eyes and noses with the vapor of Coffee. I am afraid, My
Lords, that I have trespassed upon your pickled patience; for I hear the clink
of the Hair groat bell, and it being now high time to skaffe up, your Worships
will dispense with your humble Beads-man.

After this speech was read, the Senate thought it inconsistent with their
honors to entertain any more comerce with such a durty generation of
Water-Rats, and therefore resolved to recall their Ambassador.

From Amsterdam.
THe Ambassadors that went out from our Committee of Conjurers, are returned
from Lapland: their Wizards and we agree that this Meteor is a femall Comet,
because of the length of her tail; and that same dreadful shaking of her
shaggy Group over the Netherlands portends nothing less than that, for all our
leather ears and brass countenance, yet we shall be darkened with Clouds of
live-haired Periwigs.

This wandering Whore took the occasion of the beginning of the year, and with
a Wassinghole has ranged about all the twelve Houses of the Heavens; at last
she is got betwixt the horns of Aries, where its thought she will expire, and
with her snuff stiffle that Cuckoldly Constable, who used to be such a violent
persecutor of her Sister Errants of the Galloping Gang.

ADVERTISEMENT.
ALl such Doctors, Theologues, and Philosophers; that did not understand the
last SCONT of Cockeny without a Key, are recommended to read Democrites
Commentaries on Merlins and Thomas Rymers Prophecies; and there they will find
mention of a Manuscript in the king of Fairies Library that will discover the
secret.

Printed at Dumpender-law, for the Company of Stationers in Glads-moor.


