FREE THOUGHTS of the PENAL LAWS, TESTS, and some Late Printed Papers touching
Both. In a Letter from a Person of Quality.
SIR,
I HAVE carefully perused all your Private Reasons, as well as the Public
Prints you sent, to convince me of the present Expediency, if not Necessity of
Repealing the Penal Laws.

As to the Prints, I cannot but stand amazed to see such inveterate Malice, and
open-fac'd scorn, as most of those Papers carry in them, so confidently walk
abroad, and that sent forth by Men of pretended Sanctity, Orthodoxy, and pure
Christian Zeal; for such the Protestant Dissenters claim to be; and indeed I
have known not a few of them, for the main, very exemplary in all those
qualities. It is prodigious to think that men so implacably (and upon rational
grounds many of them) set against the Corruptions of Rome, men who hold it as
firmly as any part of their Creed, That the Papal Power and Church is the great
Antichrist; who but as yesterday were with one mouth exclaiming and writing
against many of the Church of England as Apostates from the Doctrine of the
Reformation, for otherwise interpreting the Prophesies touching Antichrist; who
since that, seeing the Constancy and Strength of the Church of England's
Testimonies against Popery, have professed their sorrow for their late
overcharging her Clergy as too nearly allied to Rome, and Popishly affected;
who have some of them confessed the Episcopal Church to be the great Bulwark
against the Power of Rome: It is prodigious, I say, to think that those men
should in a moment turn tail, and with such Zeal and Indignation at the poor
Church of England, offer themselves unanimously to join with Rome, to pull down
their forsaken Mother; professing more liking of a Public Toleration of the
just-now abhorred Popery, than of the English Constitution, and thereby
verifying what they have so long complained was falsely and injuriously laid to
their charge, that they were the People which would bring in Popery, if ever it
came in. The incredibility that these men should act thus, makes me, I confess,
rather believe that these Papers are generally writ by some Crafty men (of
another persuasion), in their Writings, if not otherwise also, personating
Protestant Dissenters, and that perhaps amongst other ends, to possess the
world, there is, even in the best sort of the Dissenters, more Rancor and
Uncharitableness than ever most of their Adversaries conceived to be in any of
them. This the A-la-mode Smartness of the Style, the Relish of the Arguments,
the want of a Sense of Religion, and the waving good Conscience throughout the
whole management, together with several Marks, (which I will not now name) in
most of the Papers, further induce me really to believe. Upon which belief I
shall take no further notice of them, hoping all sober Nonconformists are
sensible how abominably themselves are wronged by such dealing; and if I am in
an Error touching them, that they accepting my Charity, will pardon my mistake;
I choose to err on the best side; only this I must say of those Prints which I
have seen, Besides Bitterness, and shameless Calumnies against the poor Church
of England, there is little of moment in them for me to take notice of, or
answer: There is not one writ with any tolerable Temper; nor can certainly the
Blessing of Peace, or of any tolerable good success on their side, attend such
virulent and unpeaceable Writings; Dominus increpet.

As to your private Arguments, they are (God be blessed) quite of another vein;
and for my own particular Sentiments, I had thought you well knew much less
Argument needed to have persuaded me, how unmeet a Motive to Christianity any
kind of Compulsion is. I ever was of the mind, not only that Faith ought not to
be compelled, but that it cannot. You know my constantly avowed Maxim, It is
not in men's powers to believe what they will: Penalties may make a man a
Hypocrite, they can never of themselves make him a Believer or good Christian.

Nor does it at all satisfy me, that some say, Men are only forced to the
means of Faith, as to go to Church, to hear Sermons, and the like, but not to
Faith itself; for besides, First, That this Plea is false, (to Swear, Abjure,
take the Sacrament, etc. are the most solemn kind of Professions of Faith
assignable, and not at all means to convince a man of Truth): Besides this, I
say, Secondly, Even to come to Church it self (that is, to be present, and by
Presence seeming to be communicable in the Liturgy) is what many judge in their
Conscience unlawful, or are not satisfied of the Right thereof; it is therefore
contrary to their Faith, or a kind of act, professing to believe what is not
believed: The case is the same, if for Faith I had put Conscience; for
Conscience, as it cannot be supposed subject to the attempts of force, being
nothing but an inward sense or persuasion of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
Human Actions, differs little or nothing from Faith, in the acceptance wherein
I have above used the name: And so in truth, neither can Conscience be forced,
tho a man may be forced to act against his Conscience; which as it is a sin of
the most heinous nature in him who does it, so do I not see how we can excuse
him from the breach of the Law of Charity, who compels it.

Nor are generally the Authors or Maintainers of Penal Laws, I suppose,
ignorant of this: for all such Laws allow unto men the Option of Suffering, or
the choice of the Penalty, which the Law inflicts, in case of nonperformance
of its positive part; by which choice men may preserve their Consciences
inviolate: And forasmuch as there is and will be to the end of the world,
different Judgments amongst men, that is, all men's Consciences touching the
several Rites or Modes of Worship, and other controverted Points in Religion,
will never agree: Whether therefore the Civil Government, and common Peace can
be preserved, by leaving all sorts of men to the free exercise of their
Conscience, without some Laws to restrain some of them (which Laws if effectual
to the aforesaid Ends of Peace and Government, must be Penal) is the great
Question, upon the resolving of which, the having or not having Penal Laws,
must be determined.

And that which increases the difficulty of resolving this Question, as some
would have it resolved, is, That Faith and Conscience signifying things
invisible, and not to be known but by the Searcher of all hearts, it is
impossible always to discern between them, and the pretenses of them. Now
Factious, Turbulent, and Wicked Men, tho they may be, and commonly are
Atheists, having indeed no Faith or Conscience, yet they never will want most
specious Pretenses of both, and those suitable and accommodate to their own
ends: From whence it follows, that tho it should be possible to preserve Peace
and Government, allowing Liberty to the Exercise of Conscience truly so called,
yet it will be utterly impossible to preserve either Peace or Government,
allowing Liberty to all pretenses of Conscience; for this is to allow Liberty
to Faction and Villainy: And by reason of the aforesaid invisibility of
Conscienee, it will be also impossible to allow perfect Liberty of Conscience,
except we together allow Liberty to the pretenses of Conscience.

From hence it seems necessarily conclusible, that they who will consult the
public safety, and the Interests of Government (even abstracted from the
interest of Religion) must allow some restraint upon the exercise of
Conscience, and consequently some standing Penal Laws.

But to take in a little the Interests of Religion; whether a Christian Prince,
allowing such a qualified Liberty to the Exercise of Conscience, as may consist
with the security of Government, ought to allow men Liberty to have no
Conscience, or to be of no Religion, or even to be of such an one, as does
overthrow the Common Christianity, will be another Question worthy of
Consideration; which yet I think every Christian man will resolve in the
Negative. Distinctly, I mean, that tho we grant men are not to be compelled to
the exercise of any one Religion, yet may they not be allowed openly to profess
Atheism (that is, no Conscience) nor to Blaspheme, and in the same breath allow
Religion to be true, and yet endeavor to scoff it out of the World; nor yet to
Profess or Practice, that is, to propagate such a Religion, which is apparently
inconsistent with the Common Christianity, as Judaism, Mahometanism, Paganism;
and if there be any other like them, as I think Muggletonism, and somewhat a
kin to it.

The sum then of what we have said, is this, That some Penal Laws ought to
stand against Irreligion, Blasphemy, and such apparently ill Religions, as
these mentioned.

Again, If there be any Sect of Christian Religion (at large so called) the
Fundamental and Characteristical Principle of which consists not with the
Security of Civil Government; such as I think, is the Doctrine essential to the
Fifth-Monarchy-men, of the Reign of King Jesus, and his Saints alone, which is
also the Opinion of several of the Anabaptists, and was of many of the Quakers
in the year 1660. and will be struck for, whenever these Sects are powerful
enough; and how desperately, Venner with his forty men against the Train'dbands
of the City, and His Majesty's Lifeguard, will be an eternal Instance. Such
Sects ought not to be allowed the free Exercise of their Conscience (for that,
as before said, is the propagating their Religion;) and therefore, against
these Sects, Penal Laws ought to stand, at least in some measure, for the
restraint of their free Exercise of their Conscience, as they will pretend, or
call it: I mean for the restraint of their assembling to hold forth, and
propagate these accursed destructive Doctrines.

And now we are come to the Point that has long pinched, and perhaps still
does; Whether the Religion of Thorow-papists (as some distinguish them) that is
of those, who hold the Popes full Supremacy over Princes, even within their own
Dominions, be any more consistent with the Security of Civil Government,
generally taken, (that is, let the Prince be of what Religion he shall) than
that of the Millenaries, or of any other like sort; and consequently, whether
Penal Laws ought not to stand against such Papists or Catholics, as they will
call themselves?

It seems to me, that those of them who think their Religion well consistent
with Civil Government in general (be the Prince of whatsoever Christian
profession he shall be, suppose a Protestant;) those I say, should not be
against, or contend for the laying aside, or not having an Oath of Supremacy,
as to Temporals at least; for whosoever appears against such an Oath,
manifestly professes thereby his Religion will not suffer him to be obedient
even in Temporals, to that Governor, whose Supremacy in Temporals he avows he
cannot, or which is the same, refuses to acknowledge.

It is sure, both the Body of the Distinct. 22. c. Omnes sive. Ubi etiam vide
glossam. Er Did. 96. Duo sunt. Et 1. Qu. 4. Quia Praesulatus.
Canon Law asserts, and some Nicolaus, Gelasius, Leo IV. ubi supra, aliique
Popes have expressly decreed the Supremacy of the Chair of St. Peter, even in
Temporals, to be of Divine right and matter of Faith; so as that to believe the
Contrary is Heresy and damnable Sin. And whatever some do believe or declare,
(as I have heard some of them swear, that should their Father Confessor, or the
Pope himself, command them to take Arms against their King, they would not
obey;) yet it is also sure, that many Roman Catholics, and perhaps more Orders
of their Religious than one, do to this day so believe; and tho many of their
Confessers may not press the Popes Supremacy in Temporals on the Consciences of
their Devotes, yet no doubt others, except they are for sworn, do it. Further,
the said XV Qu 6. c. Alius item. Et c. Nos Sanctorum. Et c, Jurator milites
Canon Law allows the Pope may Absolve Subjects and Soldiers from their Oath of
Allegiance, and Duty to their Kings or Commanders; and several Gelasius,
Zacharias, Gregor. VII. Urbanus II. locis proxime jam citatis, aliique.
Popes have decreed as much, otherwise it could not have come into the Body of
the Canon Law; nay, they have actually done it. Wherefore it would seem, tho
not for Religions sake in general, yet for the sake of Civil Government, Penal
Laws ought to stand against such a strain of Religion also; at least, against
the free Exercise of it. Whether this will conclude Jesuits, and those whom
some call Jesuited Popists, themselves best know; I will not now insist on
their fourth Vow.

The Result of all is, that an absolute Repeal of all Penal Laws in the case of
Religion, or even of such Penal Laws which affect either Catholics, or
pretended Protestant Dissenters, taking Catholics and Dissenters for all that
call themselves so, is not safe for the Government, nor agreeable to Christian
Conscience; but a Qualification of such Laws, or some explanatory and
mitigative Act, which might secure all peaceable conscientious men of
whatsoever Persuasion (those Antichristian and Turbulent ones before mentioned,
being excepted) in their Estates, Lives and Liberties, while they Worship God
according to their Conscience, were to be desired, and is to be endeavored by
all who would approve themselves genuinely Christians. And I am not without
hopes, that those who declare themselves so much for the Repeal of the Penal
Laws, will acknowledge this to be their Sense.

But as I have hitherto endeavored to be in general, just both to the King,
Religion, and all Parties concerned in my impartial considering and stating the
case of all, in reference to the Liberty desired; So I must be yet more in
particular just to those who are in Possession of an Establishment by Virtue of
the Laws; and consider while they concede so much, what is fit to be conceded
and assured to them by the indulged Parties.

First then, Seeing it is expected of the Church of England, that she consent
to the Repealing all such Penal Laws which affect the Estates, Lives or
Liberties of such Roman Catholics and Dissenters as before specified;
therefore it must needs be judged but fit and equal, that the Church of Rome
revoke all such Laws, which alike affect all peaceable Protestants. Those who
pretend that Church has none such, may be excused if they speak it out of
Ignorance; but they are unpardonable who go about to impose so impudent a
falsehood upon the World. The Church of Rome has for many Ages not only had
Sanguinary and Penal Laws; but also bound, and daily does bind by the most
sacred Oaths, and under the severest Penalties, most of her Sons, Sacred as
well as Secular, to the Execution of such Laws, to their utmost Power; Behold
some of those Laws, and the legal Method to be proceeded in against all, who
own not the Faith of the Church of Rome.

We Excommunicate and Anathematize every Heresy which sets up it self against
this Of which Faith, as appears by the first Canon of the Lateran Council, out
of whose Decree this Chapter is transcribed into the Body of the Canon Law (the
Chapter being indeed the third Canon of the said Lateran Council under Innocent
III.) of which Faith, I say, two Points amongst others were Transubstantiation,
and that there is no Salvation out of the Roman Church.
holy Faith which we have above expounded, condemning all and singular
Heretics, by what Names soever they are reckoned, having indeed their Faces
different ways, but their Tails tied together, because as to matter of falsehood
they agree in the same thing.

And being thus condemned, let them be left to the present Secular Power, and
to their Bailiffs to be punished Animadversione debita.
with due Severity or Execution; Clergymen being first degraded from their
Orders, so that the Goods of such condemned Persons, if they be Laymen, be
confiscate; but if Clergymen; be applied to the Churches whence they received
Stipends.

And as to those who shall be found Sola suspicione notabiles.
challengeable only by Suspicion, except according to the nature of the
Suspicion, and quality of the Person, they shall clear their Innocence by a
proportionable purgation, let them also be struck with the Sword of
Excommunication [or, of an Anathema] and let them be avoided by all Persons
till they give condign Satisfaction: So that if they continue excommunicate one
whole year, they be from thenceforth condemned as Heretics.

Further, Let the Secular Powers of whatsoever degree be admonished and
induced, and if need be, compelled by Ecclesiastical Censures, that even as
they desire to be reputed and accounted faithful, so they take publicly an
Oath for the defense of the Faith, that they will endeavor Bona fide.
faithfully [or in good earnest] according to their power, to exterminate out
of the Lands of their Jurisdiction all such as are pronounced Heretics by the
Church: So that from henceforth, whenever any one shall be assumed into Power
Spiritual or Temporal, he be bound firmly to swear to this Article.

And in case any Temporal Lord, being required and admonished by the Church,
shall neglect to purge his Country from Heretical Pravity, let him be by the
Metropolitan and Comprovincial Bishop innodated in the bond of Excommunication.
And if he shall neglect to satisfy within a year, let them signify the same to
the Pope, that he, from that time forth, may pronounce his Subjects absolved
from their Allegiance, and may Terram exponat Catholicis occupendam.
set forth his Country to be seized by Catholics, who, having exterminated the
Heretics thence, may possess it without contradiction, and keep it in the
purity of the Faith, with a saving to the right of the principal Lord: provided
he have put no obstacle in this matter, nor given any other hindrance: The same
Law nevertheless being observed as to them who have no Principal Lords.

Further, Let all Catholics, who, having taken upon them the badge of the
Cross, shall have applied themselves to the exterminating Heretics, enjoy the
same Indulgence, and be possessed of the same Privileges as have been granted
to them who went to succor the Holy Land.

Moreover we decree, That all Adherers, Receivers, Defenders and Cherishers of
Heretics lie under the same Excommunication; firmly ordaining, that after any
such Excommunicate Person shall have, one whole year, neglected to make
satisfaction, he from that time become in Law infamous, and be not admitted to
any public Office, Councils, nor to choose any others, nor so much as to give
his Testimony in any Case; that he also be intestable [or have no liberty or
power to make a Will] nor be allowed None of our late Tests match the Severity
of this Law.
to come in succession to any Inheritance. Furthermore, that none be compelled
to answer him in any Suit or Business, but that he be compelled to answer all
others. And in case perchance he should formerly have been a Judge, his
Sentence shall have no strength, nor shall any Causes be brought to his
Audience. Or if he were an Advocate, his Pleading shall be no-wise admitted. If
a Public Notary, all Instruments made by him shall be of no force, but damned
with their Author: The same also we command to be observed in like cases. If he
be a Clergyman, let him be deposed from all Office and Benefice. And if any
shall not forbear to avoid such Persons, after they have been pronounced
Excommunicate by the Church, let them also by Excommunication be compelled to
fit satisfaction. Further, let no Clerk administer the Church Sacraments to
such Pestilent Persons, let them not presume to give them Christian Burial, nor
let them partake of any Alms or Oblations: or in case they shall, let them
[that is, such Clerks so offending] be deprived of their Office; to which let
them never be restored, without a special Indulgence from the Apostolical See.
In like manner, let all Regulars observe so to do: upon whom, otherwise, let
this Penalty rest, that their Privileges be vold within that Diocese wherein
they have presumed to commit such Excesses.

Thus far the Lateran Council (under Pope Innocent the Third, An. Dom. 1215.)
transscribed into the Extra. De Haereticis Cap. Excommunicamus itaque, etc.
body of the Canon Law; which, with the Church of Rome, is above all other [at
least Humane] Laws, and it were to be wished, that it were not too often
observed above God's Law also.

But though the Council stopped here; after another short Chapter the Decretals
go on again thus under Gregory IX. Cap Excommunicamas, etc.
We Excommunicate and Anathematize all Heretics, the Cathari [or Puritans] the
Patarens, the Poor of Lions [and others there mentioned, now perhaps unknown]
and all others, by whatsoever names they are reckoned, having Faces looking
different ways, etc. as before.

Being thus condemned, let them be left to the Secular Judgment to be punished
with due severity, etc. as before.

But if any of the aforementioned Heretics, after they are convicted, will not
return to perform condign Penance, let them be kept in perpetual imprisonment.
And as to them who adhere to their Errors, we adjudge them alike Heretics.

The next Chapter is short, but Substantial. Let them know that they are
absolved Cap. Absolutos se noverint.
from all Debt of Fidelity, Dominion, or Obedience, whosoever were bound by any
Compact, howsoever strong, to any Persons fallen into Heresy.

More of like nature might be easily collected out of the body of the
Canon Law. Now that by Heretics those Laws do not understand merely Manichees,
Valentinians, Arrians, or some such gross People, but universally all such who
submit not to the Roman Faith, or even to the Supremacy of the Roman Bishop,
is, besides what was above-noted, plain from another Text of the said Canon
Law. He [that is Christ alone] has founded this [the Roman] Church upon a
Rock, who committed to blessed Peter, the Keeper Distinct. XXII Omnes.
of the Keys of Eternal Life, the Rights both of the Earthly and Heavenly
Empire -- So that whosoever endeavors to take away from the Roman Church the
Privilege given her by the Supreme Head of all Churches, such Person without
doubt is fallen into Heresy; and whereas others [who violate the Privileges of
other Churches] are to be called unjust, such Person is to be styled an Heretic.

As to matter of fact, how these Laws have been Executed, and in some Countries
how they still are, is disagreeable to my Design of public accord to insist:
only because we are considering of terms of accord, I must not wave that point
of matter of fact, that all Protestants are excommunicated afresh by the Pope
every Maundy Thursday, Bulla Caenae.
and that every Prelate, which is consecrated, at his Consecration, amongst
other things, severe enough against us, swears in these words, Hereticos,
Schismaticos and Rebels Vide Pontisical. Roman.
eidem Domino nostro vel Successoribus pr aedictis, pro posse, persequar and
impugnabo. That is, I will, according to my power, persecute and impugn all
Heretics, Schismatics, or those who rebel against our Lord [the Pope] and his
Successors aforesaid.

I will not here meddle with the Doctrine of many Casuists, who tell us
ordinarily, that all Heretics being de jure Excommunicate, any Catholic may
safely kill them; Nor that in all Catholic Kingdoms de Consuetudins, Burning
alive is the proper Legal Death for Heretics: for which last, it were to be
wished, there were not yet Statute-Laws in force, in some of his Majesty's
Dominions. I rub not, I say, on these Sores, but content my self to have
mentioned the general Penal Laws above recited, which are sufficient to prove
the Romanists have such Laws.

And these being the Laws, and such the present obligation generally to all
Catholics in power (whether Ecclesiastical or Secular) to observe them, it is
reasonable, that before Fenal Laws against all men of this Religion be
Repealed, they of the Religion obtain from his Holiness some Repeal of these
and the like Laws; at least a Bull, exempting all the Protestants of England,
Scotland and Ireland, from being comprehended in the number of such Heretics,
who are thus to suffer; and together absolving all Persons, who have taken
Oaths for Exterminating Heretics, from any obligation to perform those Oaths as
to the Protestants of these Countries; For till then, we have just so much
Reason to hope for security from such Catholics, as we have assurance that they
will ever forswear themselves, or all their days live in wilful Perjury.

There is another Law amongst the Roman Catholics, which tho not Penal to us,
it is to be feared may be one day most dreadfully Penal to as many of them as
observe it, and which seems to oblige them to persecute us: I will call it the
Law of uncharitableness, the revoking of which also, it seems fit, should be
made a condition of Repealing our Penal Laws: The Law I mean is that, whereby
every one, who will be of that Church, is required to swear to the Tridentine
Creed, in the close of which Oath he avows, No one can be saved out of the
belief of that the present Roman Catholic Faith. By this they plainly damn four
fifth parts of all Christendom. I know there are some Gentlemen of that
Communion, who are more merciful to us, and the better Catholics are they for
it; God bless them, and increase the number of them: But I as well know, there
are others so stiffly hold to this, that they frequently, and even in their
ordinary conversation, as well as in their writings, use it as an Argument to
persuade men of our Church to come over to their Religion. As to these, I crave
leave to say only this one thing, That men can repose very little confidence in
their kindness, who prejudging to God's judgment, have already damned them
beforehand: Wherefore I conceive they who would have any kind offices pass
between us and our Roman Catholic Countrymen, or intend we should live
together as Christians, ought to abandon this rigor, and if possible to
procure from the Head of their Church an abatement of it, as to the Protestants
of these Countries at leastwise.

This will appear yet the more reasonable, if we consider of what Communion
they were that first introduced into these parts of the World Penal or
Sanguinary Laws in cause of Religion. The Protestants in this matter can only
be blamed for following an ill Example, which also they have industriously not
come up to. They found Sanguinary Laws; and the severest of them, in England,
they have repealed: If any other than those Penal-Laws were made, (as it is not
to be denied there were) it was rather upon the score of the State, than of
Religion. A Sanguinary Law made particularly against any sort of our
Non-Conformists, I never yet knew any: Nor against those of Rome purely for
Conscience sake. But the Laws above mentioned out of the Roman Canon Law are
Purely upon the score of Conscience; and even where they extend not to Blood,
they are, as we see, much severer than any of our Laws or Tests against them.
In a word all persons who will be just, must allow to others the Liberty and
Security that they desire should be granted to themselves, which is the Height
of this our first demand. I prae, sequar: Let those who were first in the
guilt, first amend; certainly Protestants will meet them in kindness.

Secondly, Inasmuch as they of the Established Church do not in the least
suspect the truth of their Religion (all the Writings of their Roman
Adversaries discovering their Roman Faith, where differing from the
Protestants, instead of a Rock, to be built only on Air) and inasmuch as it
cannot be justly expected, that merely to gratify our Adversaries, we should at
once betray both our Religion and our Interest; it is but just, that together
with such Statute as shall take away the Penal Laws in Contest, there pass
another for security of the National Religion, that it shall not be altered;
and of the regular conformable Clergy and their Successors, that their Rights
shall not be invaded. It is told us indeed, we have His Majesty's Royal word
many times repeated. I humbly return, that I know no true Church-of-England-
Man who does not rely upon His Majesty's Word, during his Reign (which God long
continue) for the security of our Church. But Succession is a long Train; and
Laws, if standing, may keep posterity in peace, when Promises with their
Authors are fallen asleep. He is not just to the present Age, who is not to his
power just to Posterity, however remote. It is therefore reasonable, fit and
necessary that such a Statute, as is desired, pass.

As to what you conclude with, That the Clergy of the Church of England are
very ungrateful to His Majesty for his repeated Promises of Protection, and
together uncivil to him, in not fully acquiescing in his Royal word so often
given for the security of their Religion, Rights and Privileges; and not
offering to concur, according to his desire, in the Repeal of the Penal Laws: I
take the liberty to aver, that I know not one Clergyman of that Church who has
not solemnly under his hand given His Majesty thanks for those Promises. All
the Addresses we made in the year of His Majesty's accession to the Crown, were
so many humble Testimonies of our Gratitude, and Zealous Vows of our Loyalty;
and if Addresses of mere Thanks, and Vows of Loyalty would be accepted, there
is not an English Bishop, Priest, or Parish in the Three Kingdoms, I believe,
but would present them most gladly. But who sees not the Declaration, for which
it is expected we return Thanks, consists of more parts than that private
Subjects can justify their approbation of the whole? And as to the sacred
Veneration we have for His Majesty's word, I have spoken already.

Give me leave for a Conclusion to tell you a new and very true Story. A Friend
and Neighbor of mine, being very intimate with an eminent person of a certain
Religious Order, and knowing well the Principles of that Order, asked him in a
good hour, what they meant by this furious driving on an Universal and
Unlimited Toleration? The answer he received was, that they were now
Scaffolding. My Friend understanding him not, desired he would explain himself;
but could get no more out of him than this, that they were yet but Scaffolding.
After further importunity for a more explicit resolution, the good Religious
person answered, he would not tell him more; but bid him go to such a person (a
Master-Bricklayer, or Mason, be-like) and ask him what Scaffolding was? He went
to the Man assigned, and received this Answer, Scaffolding is setting up Poles,
and Boards, and such rough stuff, which serve us to build, and when we have
built, we throw them aside.

The Story I avow to be true, and leave the application of it to all those
parties whom it concerns; very well remembering, that Scaffolds are ordinarily
made for more uses than one: However according to the Interpretation given, the
Toleration now promoted seems not by its Agitators designed to stand long.

But to make an end: On what terms, I conceive the Penal-Laws in question may
be Repealed with justice to the present and succeeding Ages, you may easily
collect out of this long and hasty scribble; and so you have my Free Thoughts
in this so hotly agitated Question. God preserve the King, and grant we may
live to see the days, wherein all Laws Penal to Peaceable, Conscientious men,
and together all uncharitable Laws, on all sides, may be for ever abrogated.

I am your Humble Servant

Printed in the Year 1688.


