A FREE CONFERENCE Touching The present STATE OF ENLAND Both at home and
abroad: In order to the DESIGNS of FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. MDCLXVIII.

Whitehall the 21. Jan. 1667/8.
Let this Discourse be Printed.

By the Appointment of the Right Honorable the Lord Arlington, His MAJESTY'S
Principal Secretary of State.

Joseph Williamson.

TO THE READER.
THIS Conference being imaginarily Scened, and yet really performed out of the
Treasure of a very great Minister of State's Capacity; it was thought fit to be
published now, and not before, because that respect ought to be paid to the
Secret of his Majesty's Affairs, so as nothing should anticipate the King's
own labors, to give the people satisfaction in his due time touching the
tender care that He is graciously pleased to take of all his Subjects in point
of Honor, Safety, Freedom, Union, and Commerce: which nothing could more
advance than the Conclusion of the Treaty newly made betwixt England and the
States of the United Provinces; which without flattery may be demonstrated to
men of understanding to aim at nothing but the Good of his Subjects in general,
exempt from all manner of private Interest whatsoever. Blessed be God then that
it is so happily concluded; and that we have a KING whom nothing can ever
alienate from the true Interest of his Realms, nor no corrupt Counselor (let
him be thought to be never so powerful or crafty in order to his own
Advantages) prevent the Wisdom and the Integrity of such a Prince from
prevailing above all the Artifices and Frands of those who would persuade the
Nation, (were they competent Masters of their Art enough so to do) that those
Counselors who are not interested can be less prudent or successful than such
as did make it their business to appropriate all to themselves, and nothing to
their Master. The French King is much commended for his Parts and Activity: but
let us see him out do the King of England in this particular of the Treaty,
both in courage and conduct, and then I shall be apt to attribute his Grandeur
as much to natural Abilities as extraordinary Fortune, but not before.

A FREE CONFERENCE Touching The present State of ENGLAND, Both at home and
abroad: In order to the Designs of FRANCE.
THE Adventure which happened unto me lately is of so extraordinary a nature,
and contains so many important Discoveries in relation to the public Good in
its Progress, that I should prove defective toward my Country, if I did not
heartily publish all the Passages, both touching the Occasion, and the Effects
of what followed from this Accident.

Know then, that a Peer of the Realm of England, and one whose Merit, Quality,
and the Place which he holds in the Administration of the Affairs of the
Kingdom are remarkable; did invite sundry of his Lordship's best friends to a
magnificent Feast, and amongst the rest he had the kindness not to omit me out
of the number: where the excellence of the Cheer which he made to his Guests,
after a most noble manner, put the whole Company into such a refined humor of
conversing together, that the Entertainment was but one entire pleasing Debate,
how to express our complete enjoying of each other. I was not wanting with the
uttermost of vigor and solace to uphold the Genius of this Conference. But as
the freest speakers do commonly come by the worst in discourse, and are the
soonest exposed to enterfiering lashes; I found my self to be attacqued in so
many places at once with the swiftness of other men's reasons and wits, who held
the opposite Arguments, that although I were something heated, yet there
remained unto me presence of mind enough (and success of Intervals) to get
insensibly out of the Press, whilst the Disorder and Confusion lasted, (which
is usual at such Meetings) into another Room. I retired then, pursuing the
opportunity, into a fair Gallery, which surprised my eyes with the rich
Ornaments wherewith it was furnished; but not without trouble neither, and a
Curiosity beyond the Optics of the place, which increased there; so as I was
diverted from any farther consideration of the Furniture, because the place
seemed to lie too near the Enemy, to dwell any longer upon those Objects.
Wherefore I went into another Chamber hard by, which instantly filled me with
new Apprehensions, by the means of several large Looking-glasses hanging on the
Walls, which showed me my own proper Figure at length on every side, and from
thence imprinted in my wounded Imagination as many Adversaries as there were
angular Reflections out of each Mirror; that appeared to pursue me so
furiously, that I ran on violently with my head forwards, in order to some
Escape, to the door of another Chamber adjoining thereunto, which opened with
such resistance, when I thrust against it, as if it had been forced with a
Petard: And thus falling in the attempt, I was so stunned, that it was a good
while after before I could come to my self again. But at last having partly
recovered my spirits, I was surprised with a fresh astonishment, as much
amazing me as the former had done that I repeated: For when I began to open my
eyes half way, finding that till then they had been altogether unuseful to me,
I attributed the disorder to want of Sight, often feeling, in regard of the
darkness of the Room, to try whether they were still in my head or not. Yet
perceiving, betwixt discerning and doubting, that all I essayed of this kind
was to no purpose; after having deplored the bitterness of an imaginary loss, I
groped on more and more in the dark, until I chanced to come to an Alcone,
where feeling with my hands I took fast hold upon the Alcone, and grasped the
pillar of a Bed, which had I not lightt upon, I must have fallen the second
time. For, thrusting hard against one of the Posts, the Counter-stroak of the
Wood threw me all along into the middle of a Couch, where I remained stretched
forth like a Coarse without any motion, in the same posture of a precipitate
Swoon. And then it was that the vapors of my body, which were disturbed by the
first mistake, confusedly did stir through all the parts in the agitated
fluctuancy of a sterm; though by degrees growing to be undeceived, Sleep, which
appeaseth all the Mutinies in humane creatures, did naturally and more
agreeably seize upon my Faculties, and compose the Tempest with perfect
tranquillity of Mind and animal Operations, as if I had never been so
discomposed. It Is impossible to tell you how long I continued in the state of
this Interregnum betwixt life and death, nor what care the Company took to
learn what was become of me, but in vain; blaming me for having left them, or
rather the War begun, using all sorts of means to find where I was, and bring
me back to the Combat.

I shall only tell you by the way, that about Sunset, a great noise was raised
by two of the servants of the House, who entered suddenly into the Chamber where
I lay; which assured me as I awakened that I was yet living; and the blazing of
the Wax-tapers, which they set upon the Table and Cup-boards, made me extremely
joyful at the restoration of my sight, which in my opinion till then was
absolutely gone from me. But then a third apprehension seized on my Powers,
first, to be catched in such a Posture, and exposed to the innocent jeasts
which might be made by the Guests on the subject of my strange Disorder, and
precipitated Flight from them. But as I sought my eyes once more, to stealaway
out of this Society for all night, and not be seen by any body, another noise
obliged me to keep close where I was upon the Bed, and draw the Curtains home,
not to be discovered. I was not long in this Concealment, when I saw come into
the same place three Persons, whose Deserts in this Relation must be better
known than their Names, and the importance of their Interests in the State, by
what I am going now to say of those particulars, because I am strictly obliged
not to reveal them. These Strangers the Master of the House did very civilly
introduce into the Chamber, who without many Complements sat down on the seats
which were prepared for them near the Table. My Sleep had digested those Fumes,
and dissipated all the Clouds of my Understanding: therefore judging that the
Cause that assembled such great Personages together there in this secret
Entertainment could not be but of the highest importance; both the Curiosity,
and the shame of having them witnesses to my Disorder, obliged me to keep firm
to my Post, within the cover of the Bed, and to lend an attentive ear to all
their discourse. For the Master of the House began the Overture of the
Conference in the terms following.

In that part which we do hold of the Government of the State, it is not enough
that a sincere Amity does link us in one band of Interest and Esteem
particularly to each other, if we be not also united in the same Judgment as to
all which concerns the public Good. In our former Conferences we used to take
just measures how to rectify things within the Realm; but now it rests with us
to agree upon some Maxims which are to be maintained in regard of Foreign
matters, to the end that in these Rencounters, wherein we are to give counsel,
we may act in all things with a perfect Concert: which no doubt will give a
great weight to the Resolutions which shall be formed thereupon and the present
Case; since never have any Counselors treated of nicer Points, nor more
serious ones than those which are to be debated among us to day. The Fire is
already kindled in our Neighborhood; the Monarchy of Spain is just upon the
brink of falling to the ground, if it be not succored; and France in a
condition to avow the vast Design which that Crown has long meditated, as well
against the Peace of Europe as the Commerce of our Navigations, if a powerful
Fence be not quickly made, to keep the French within their Bounds. Wherefore
all the rest of the Forces of Europe stand at gaze, expecting the Result of
what England does determine herein, considering us as the Counter-balance,
which time-out-ofmind has held the scales even betwixt those two Great
Monarchies, for the safety of all the rest. They wait but our giving of the
Sign to join with us in the common Defense: and the better share of them seek
it from England; and the others have their eyes open toward our Conduct, to
take their measures also by no other model but what we shall trace out unto
them.

There is no need of a Providence extraordinarily enlightened, to judge which is
our true Interest in this Conjuncture; but the present state of our Affairs
does not leave us the same facilities to follow it, in which we do abound as to
the knowledge thereof.

Meanwhile the Mischief presses forwards, and does not afford place nor time
sufficient to expect a benefit of other Vicissitudes, which run sufficiently
against us; nor to Regulate our Resolutions by those Events, which take too
impetuous a part in the Cause on that side which we ought most to fear.
Therefore it is more than season to form our fundamental Maxim, on which all
our Conduct is to move in this present Conjunctures; and at this very Instant
decide, whether we will choose to be simple Spectators, or take some part to act
in this Tragedy: since the Resolution which we shall fix thereupon will be the
Center, from whence we must draw all our Lines afterward. Which is the proper
Point that we are to discourse of now among our selves here, before we do give
our Opinions on the whole matter to the Public; and in which particular I
desire the rather to be enlightened by your wise Reasonings, by how much the
more I am assured, That the sole Good of the State is the only Rule and Object
of all your Counsels.

As soon as ever he had uttered these words, one of the Three, after casting
down of his eyes, and pondering what he was to say to the rest, with having
thought before he advised, began his discourse thus:

If late Experience had not taught us enough to our cost, that it is much
easier to begin a War than successfully to get out of it when once it is
commenced, I would enlarge my self on that Subject, to represent unto you piece
by piece the Dangers, Incommodities, and Losses which such a Resolution usually
does carry along with it; where frequently the Conqueror finds he is more
charged with Debts than with Trophies, and the people always have cause to
mingle their Acclamations with Tears, in the course of such expensive Triumphs;
since before any Edifice is begun, the Dimensions how to settle a solid
Foundation to undertake the War upon, should previously be considered, by
measuring our Means and Forces as well as those of the Enemy with whom we are
to fight; and the like touching their Power, whose Interest we intend to
embrace.

Our Forces and Means you all know are already exhasted with long and sharp
Wars, both at home and abroad; and by the Hand of God, which has been heavy
upon us in the late Pestilence and in the Firing of the City of London:
Wherefore it is but now that we begin by the means of Peace to breathe again;
which Peace also is not firmly established. Time then is requisite for us to
take breath and recover in, after so terrible an Agitation: nor can any thing
be so dangerous unto this State as a Relapse in the midst of Amendment. If the
noise of our Neighbors does awaken us, our Weariness likewise invites us to
seek some Repose: and in case there be danger to suffer the Growth of a
suspected Power, there will not be less peril in the checking of that power
unprepared. You know, as well or better than I can tell you, the Condition of
the Revenue, and the excessive Expense of this Realm, which inevitably must
carry the War from home, unless we mean supinely to be destroyed: and therefore
of necessity must our Wings be suffered to grow again after this clipping,
before that we do offer to make a new Flight. You cannot be ignorant too, that
Commerc^ i^the Soul and the Life of this Kingdom, which is the Chanel from
whence the Abundance of it flows: And the Wealth which we formerly enjoyed, and
rendered us so considerable in the World, beside the fresh Experiment of the
Disorder and Interruption which the War brought into all the Traffic of the
Land, has made us clearly see, that for Merchant-mens Fleets to be changed
into Naval Armies, and the Substance of the people melted into Magazins
unusefully, which might more profitably be employed in rich and gainful
Navigations, cannot be the proper Interest of England.

If we consider the present State of France, We shall find that all the rest of
Europe bows under that Power; and those who are the most concerned to succor
Spain bleed at the Nose only, without being able to break the Impostume within.
The Intelligences of France and their practices make their way everywhere,
either with Bribes or by Address; Victory waits still on all their Motions: and
by having redressed the Abuses of their Exchequer, they have laid an
unexhaustible foundation of Money within themselves. Over and above that, the
French are a Nation, or rather a Seminary of Nobility and Soldiers, so versed
in the trade of War, as this provision puts them in a Posture never to be
savingly justled.

I grant, Their Designs are Vast, and their Pretensions ill-grounded: but how
can we take cognizance of that? are we Knights-errant, to expose our lives in
the revenging of other men's Quarrels? The large interposition of Sea, which
divides us from the rest of the World, may shelter us enough from their
Attempts, without founding of our safety upon the Conservation of our
Neighbors.

But suppose we had such an abundance of Charity to spare, as to hazard our
own safety in favor of another's; we should at least be secured beforehand,
that when we are at a second Charge of succonring them, it might prove
profitable unto them; otherwise the mischief being grown to that point of
Extremity where now it rests, all insignificant Remedies of this nature would
but anger them the more to no purpose. And Spain being deeply engaged in the
War of Portugal, which is alone able to give the Spaniards work enough, as the
Spanish Counsels stand divided, and according to the flowness of their
Operations, their Treasure being exhausted likewise, and the principal places
of Flanders in the hands of the French, and those which remain unconquered
hardly in a condition to make any Resistance when they shall be attacqued,
which disposes that Crown to seek a Peace with France on any terms; and the
Propositions in order to a League offensive and defensive with them, which they
make to us, being tendered only to England as a wily Lure to oblige the French
to conclude it the sooner, out of an Apprehension that we may resolve to assist
Spain; why should we rashly, I pray, thrust our Sickle into this blighted Corn?

Indeed, when Inconveniences are visible on all sides of the Prospect of such
Treaties, the wisest Counsel sure is to suspend the Resolution awhile. For on
which part can we place our Interest thus, without incurring blame justly? The
Party of Spain is weak and unlucky; that of France is unjust, and contrary to
our good: shall we then sacrifice our selves for Spain, which for three years
together has stood Idle, with their arms folded across, without so much as
proffering to help us, whilst three of the greatest Powers of Christendom let
one another Blood, and thus were only Passive in our Ruin? Must we then join
with France, which were so lately combined with our Enemies to destroy us, and
that tore the Victory out of our hands when we had it sure? Shall we contribute
the Liquor of our Veins to facilitate their Progress, which ought to be so
redoubted by this Nation, and so become instrumental toward the erecting of a
Coloslus which must certainly tread us under soot with the weight of it? All
these Considerations, which I submit to your Prudence, oblige me to conclude,
That there being no Part to be taken in this War which is not destructive; the
best will be to take no Part, but sit still, and observe how the Game is
played, and in the mean time to provide for the repairing our Revenues, and
quieting of Disorders at home, by conciliating and re-uniting the minds of the
People, the Re-establishment of Commerce, and to put our selves into such a
Condition, that the Conqueror may not be able to make a wrong use of his
Victory to our prejudice. And in the mean time, not to remain altogether Idle
in the common Danger of Europe, we may contribute our endeavors to obtain a
Peace, and by a happy Accommodation stop the course of these Conquests, which
give us such just Jealousy.

He had scarce made an end of speakieg, when a little murmur arose among the
rest of the Conferrers, which made me conceive that they did no ways approve
of what he did urge. Wherein I found that I was not deceived neither; because
he which sat right over against him answered him presently after this manner.

If Peace were a Benefit which always did depend upon our own Choice, and if
War were not, ordinarily speaking, a Mischief as necessary as the other is; the
Question which we do treat of now might easily be resolved, and would not
require any longer deliberation. But it is not enough to conserve Peace, to
have a pacifick Spirit, if our Neighbors likewise be not of the same
disposition toward it; which in effect is to reckon without the Host, by
founding the hopes of our future Quiet, barely on the promises of our own
Moderation; since those who are the most in love with Peace are oftentimes
involved in the opposite Agitation, whether they will or no, by some violent
motion of Fortune; and so frequently stumble upon War in the Flight which they
make from it, and thus suffocate the Peace by too much avoiding War.

I do avow that the Reasons which were alleged before could not be answered,
if he who did so well deduce them were able to assure us upon good grounds,
that in keeping our selves Neuters in this War of the Low Countries we might be
sheltered from the storm of another War, both in the present and the future
tense of such Vicissitudes; or peaceably and long enjoy so happy a Tranquillity,
which makes him believe that we ought to despise, for that speculation, all
manner of useful occasions which Fortune does daily offer unto us. But in
truth, my Lord, Would you venture to be Caution thereupon to the State, and pawn
your Faith to the Kingdom and your Honor concerning the Event? For my own
part, I hold you to wise and too quick-sighted, to imagine merely on the
presumption of unsolid hopes, that there can be the least shadow or color of
safety remaining for us, if one of these two Monarchies which are at this time
engaged in a War should fall under the absolute power of the other, or if they
do re-nnite again by an Agreement, in which possibly, as we have handled the
matter, we may very well not be comprehended. In case you will avow this Truth,
which all the World knows to be so, it follow that you must grant, that all
those Inconveniences which were already alleged to to keep us out all kinds
of Engagement are not longer valid, when there is an indispensable Necessity,
and the Welfare and the Safety of the State are at stake.

I shall not enlarge my self hereon, to represent unto you that our
Predecessors ever held this to be a fundamental Maxim of their Conduct, to
hold the Balance equal between these two Great Monarchies, and that on which
side soever they turned the Scales, Victory did usually follow that
Counterpoise, which never failed to put things into that just Temperament that
preserves the Health of this Realm. By which means in some sort they made
themselves the Arbitrators of Christendom, because by afforing their Help unto
one of the two Parties, they became in effect Masters over them both: by still
keeping one of them at their Devotion, and in our Dependency, through the
prospect of those Succors which they do continually need from hence; and the
other, with the apprehension of this Assistance. For thus the English, what
with the force of their Arms, and the power of Arbitrating in Treaties, have
always been the Lawgivers to the Success both of their Friends and their
Enemies, by holding within the palms of their hands the Results of War and
Peace, finding both in the one and the other those Advantages and Safeties
which this Nation most desired.

But laying aside these old absolete Maxims, from which notwithstanding wise
men will not willingly depart without the pressure of some invincible
Necessity, to come to the Circumstances of the present time; It is evident that
the War of the Low Countries cannot possible terminate otherwise than by the
Fall and Oppression of one of the two Parties, or by an Accommodation made
betwixt them. If they do agree, and that England has no share in the Treaty,
Who will assure us that they will not unite for our Ruin; or at least, France,
which cannot remain long without War, will not turn their Arms against us? But
if Spain falls, we shall then be like Dancers of the Ropes that have lost their
Counterpoise, and so are ready to tumble down every step they make. What good
opinion soever we have of France, it cannot be denied, notwithstanding, that in
this Case, after the French have triumphed over Spain, they will be Masters
over our Fortune too; and that our being thus must entirely depend upon their
Moderation. For, Gentlemen, do you think that we can take rest securely upon so
weak a Foundation as the Giddiness of their Charity is? since it is certain that
the most Christian King has too much Ardour and desire of Glory to dwell in
Idleness at home, after such a Conquest. And therefore, seeing his Dominions
and Reputation not ably increased, he will form to himself new Idea's of
enlarging the bounds of his Empire both by Sea and Land, according to the
knowledge which we have of the diverse Inclinations of his Court; whereof some
will put him on to become Master of the Commerce of Europe, and employ those
vast Treasures he has heaped together in order to that Design this way;
others, to engage him in the finishing of his Conquests over all the Low
Countreysj and some likewise, to begin by us to open the Path to the Subduing
of all other States which may probably oppose this Design. So that which advice
soever of these he does embrace, 'twill be equally dangerous as to us here, and
perpetually oblige us to stand upon our Guard, with the Burden of a continued
Expense on our backs, as well as the Incommodities of a War, though we seem to
be in Peace with him.

On this Position then I say, that the worst Party for England that can be
taken, whether by choice or necessity, is that of sitting Neuters. By uniting
with Spain we do follow our ancient Maxim and Interest, which has ever been
successful to this Nation, which is, to be still Masters of the Balance betwixt
these two Monarchies, as I urged before. Should we therefore embrace the Party
of France, we may hope for a considerable portion in the Spoils of Spain. And
both in the one and the other case we shall find our Surety and other
Advantages in the Treaties of Peace which shall be made. But by remaining
Neutral we must needs equally offend both; and so cannot eschew being exposed
friendless to the Resentments and the Ambition of the Conqueror, as well as the
Scorn and the Reproaches of all the rest of Christendom, for having insipidly
abandoned our proper Reason of State, without being either good or wicked in a
matter of such universal Concernment, whereby the name of Englishmen will
remain so much in the Oblivion of Europe, that no body will scarce remember
there is such a Nation in the World; excepting only those who have a mind to
Conquer us.

I read in the Scripture, so base a Character of none as of them who are
neither hot nor cold: And able Statesmen have always reproved this kind of
Tepidness or Half-conduct, to be both unuseful and dangerous. Media via nec
Amicos parat, nec Inimicos tollit. Wherefore England must of necessity either
preserve the Low-Countryes, against the Usurpation of the French, which is our
Bulwark; or raise a new Fence, that shall shelter us from being Conquered.

To preserve the first then, Spain must be assisted from hence; and to make a
new Rampart, we must divide the Spoil with France. Experience has sufficiently
shown us, that our Ports are not inaccessible; and Reason demonstrates, that
those can never be secure from the like Attempts, but by keeping a powerful
Fleet out at Sea, that we may be absolute Masters there. It Is a Maxim also
which admits neither of exception nor diminution, That a well-governed Kingdom
is obliged to arm when War is kindled in the Neighborhood. And though we
should resolve to take part neither with the one Interest nor the other; yet we
must be in a Posture to hinder the Torrent from coming upon our Land, that so
the Conqueror may not have a mind to extend his Conquests hitherwards. Here
then is the Charge of Arming, which on this Conjuncture is inevitable, the
equipping of a Fleet, and raising of Soldiers to be mutually entertained at
the Charge of the People, if we do not speedily take some Party; and all this
Expense without Glory, or hope to get any fruit by so unprofitable a Counsel,
wherein our Soldiers will never learn the Discipline of War, or extract any
Utility from such Prizes, as being incapable after this manner to share in the
Booty, or in the Victories and Treaties of Accommodation, according to their
several events. Whereas by taking part either with Spain or France, the Charge
would be much less, because he whom we aid would largely contribute toward it;
and the Prizes gotten at Sea might help to discharge the Expense both of the
Naval and the Landforces. And thus would our Soldiers be exercised, and our
Nation make a noise again abroad, and regain the Reputation which we have of
late but too ignominiously lost in the World. For when our men shall be trained
up daily in strict Discipline beyond Seas, we shall by this means establish a
Seminary of good and able fighting men at the Cost of others, which will be the
firm Pillars of the Party, and render us considerable in the eyes of all our
Neighbors. Besides, this Course may be a vent so to discharge the Realm of ill
humors, and a great company of Idle persons, which now, being without
Employment, are a burden to the Public, and who one day are capable too of
disturbing the domestic Tranquillity of the State: whereas, on the contrary,
what Success soever this War shall have, we shall always find our Account in
the end of an Accommodation, whereof, being thus prepared, we cannot fail of
having the principal Benefit and part.

All these Considerations then seem unto me to be so convincing, that they do
oblige me absolutely to condemn the Opinion of Neutrality, as inconsistent with
our Glory, Safety, and Fundamental Reasons of State; by concluding positively,
that we ought to lend an ear to those Propositions which shall be made unto us
from all Parties, and embrace those which shall be found to be most agreeable
and convenient to the Interest of the Kingdom. And in the interim, to be the
more considered by both these great Parties, and better assured against all
manner of Attempts; my Advice is, That without any longer loss of time, a
strong Fleet should be presently got ready; and that as many days as we have
to spare before the next Campaign, since now every hour is precious that is not
well spent as to this purpose, may be employed to render us hence forwards
necessary unto them whose Cause we shall resolve to embrace, and as formidable
to those against whom we intend to declare: so that on both sides we may be the
Commanders of the whole affairs, and give it respite or motion by the sole Rule
of the Interests of England.

After that he had spoken thus, I did observe by the Countenance of the other
two persons that had not yet spoken, that this Discourse did not displease
them; wherefore without any farther reflection, one of them briskly began to
speak to this effect:

Your Reasons, said he, are so convincing, that I do not only render my consent
unto them without any Reply, but mean to make use of them to serve as the Basis
and Foundation of that Edifice which I have a long time meditated upon, in
order to the fundamental Maxims of State of this Nation. Therefore, without
more ceremony or delay, I see that we must act, and take one of the two
Parties. For any other Counsel would be dangerous and destructive, by exposing
of us to a thousand Inconveniences, which all the humane Prudence imaginable
cannot be capable of preventing or avoiding in process of time. I remain also
agreed with you, that in the choice of which Party we are to take, we ought not
to consider more than just what our own Interest properly is, which is the Rule
of that Conduct of Monarchis, that, as the Soul and the Spirit vivifying the
whole Figure before us, gives it motion in the Body of the State.

It rests then to form the Consequences upon these Principles, and decide which
of the two Parties is the most convenient. France offers Roses unto us; Spain
nothing but Thorns. The first presents us with a Scheme of Conquests without
Dangers; the last with a prospect of Dangers without Profit. The one invites us
to be their Companions of assured Victories, of which they have already beaten
the way; the other does solicit us and implore our Aid only to help them out
of the mire, without any other Benefit than, as the old Proverb says, There Is
your labor for your pains, at the price of our Blood and Lives. If we shall
engage in the Assistence of Spain, in succouring them we run a Risco of being
lost our selves, without yet being able to re-establish them: But by joining
with France, we shall partake of the Spoils with them, which we can never by
force be able to take out of their hands; since the Progress of France is now
arrived at such a point of Effect, that all our Powers combined together are
not sufficient to stop it; and then both our Resistences and Succors will
serve but to ruin the Spaniards the sooner, and bring the Vengeance of the
French upon our own heads. And if Spain comes to sink under the weight of the
War, all the Burden of that Fall centers upon England alone. In fine, it is
agitated therefore singly as to this particular, Whether we will needs choose to
embark in a Vessel so driven with storms, or in a Ship which sails at ease with
full Sails, seconded with the favorable Gales of Fortune.

But in case all these material Objections cannot divert us from engaging in
the ill Fortune of the Spaniards, let us see on what Terms at least we can
assist them usefully. If we shall send Troops into the Low Countries to their
Aid, it is, in effect, to overwhelm them by the very weight and charge of those
Succors, and sacrifice so many of our own Subjects to Famine and misery, as we
do thus send Soldiers unto them; because they have neither Country enough
left to Lodge them in when they come thither, nor the Means to Entertain them
after once they are there.

If we succor them merely by Sea, that kind of help will not hinder France
from taking of their Towns in the mean time one by one; and so though we should
a little incommodate France, we shall not ease Flanders at all, and such an
Assistence will in conclusion prove none, because it is an Application of the
Plaster too remotely, and on the wrong side of the Wound.

If then the Loss of the Low Countries be inevitable let us do what we can,
were it not much better that we should have our share in the Parcels of so
great a Shipwreck, than to suffer France to ingross them all to themselves?
since, upposing that we do divide Booties with the French on this occasion, the
Places which by this means must necessarily fall into our hands will be so many
new Bulwarks to England, which may shelter us for the future against their vast
Designs, of which the Partisans of Spain make a Chimaerical Monster, to
intimidate the English from taking part with their best and properest Interest
in the Case. But when once we are entered into a Communion of Conquests with the
French, the subduing of Flanders will serve us as Ladders to arrive at other
Projects by, wherein we may probably hope to find our Profit and Satisfaction
mutually together, as well as the Pleasure of a just Revenge. I set aside he
Conquest of the Indies, which we could not fail to encompass, whilst France
does hold all the Forces of Spain in play both by Sea and Land, and so
occupied, that they will never be able to retain what they hold in the New World,
no more than that remainder of Territories which yet they stand possessed of
nearer hand.

Wherefore as to what regards the Interest of this Kingdom, what I have last
urged methinks might suffice to make you of my Opinion. And if we do
impartially consider that of the Royal Family, What can be more important and
convenient for it, than to have at their Devotion a neighboring Power hard by
which is so Formidable, and that is able to protect them in a few hours from
all manner of Revolutions that they may (and perhaps not without cause neither)
apprehend at home, by thus commanding both the Treasures and the Armies of
France whenever they shall have any need of them, to put a Bridle in the mouths
of all such as do seek to check their Authority?

I avow that our properest Interest were to hold the Balance equal between
Spain and France, if we could; but we should then have thought sooner of that
whilst these matters were in a condition to be disputed: For at present, the
Weight of the Case inclining totally* to one Side, so that we can no longer
oppose France with Spain, as a Barricado against their Designs, we must now
think how to become our selves the Counterpoise of France and the Defense of
Europe, by establishing of our Power beyond Seas on solid Foundations, that all
other Princes may consider us hereafter as the only People who are capable of
resisting the Design of the Universal Monarchy; and so as France it self may
not be able impunitively to thwart England in this Resolution, because then our
Safety will be much more firmly settled by our own strength than with the force
of others; and all those who apprehend the Progress of France will conjoyn with
us, and become tied to the Fortune of England, as they would be at this instant
to Spain, if they saw that Monarchy in a Condition to be able to maintain them.

So that all those Reasons do oblige me to conclude, that we must no longer
hesitate on this point of taking part with France, and accept of those
advantageous Offers which the French make unto us, both in respect of the
public good of Christendom, as well as our own particular security; since by
being united to them in a Knot of such inseparable Conditions, and on a
Conjuncture of Affairs, because of which they dare refuse us nothing that we
ask, what need we fear from the opposite Conjunction of any other parties?

All the Assistents at this Conference began to express Indignation against
this part of his Discourse, and showed by their Unquietness all the while that
he spoke thus, that they had much ado to keep from interrupting of him, or to
refrain from answering Tumultuously, before that he had made an end. But as
they offered to reply in heat all at once, to deliver their thoughts on this
subject, the Master of the House, who had not yet delivered his sense to the
Company, broke silence, and with a little smile, which had something in it
grave, and scornful, dexterously intermingled together, addressing himself to
him who had spoken with so much length just before, held on the Debate as
follows.

I know your prudence, my Lord, too well (says he), and your Lordship's
disinteressed zeal for the good of the State, to believe that you can mean
seriously what you have urged on the behalf of France; but rather am persuaded,
(and that easily too) that with an ingenious Artifice you have thus disguised
your own true Sentiments of this Case, the better to penetrate into the bottom
of ours, and so give opportunity to see clearlier through all the Reasons and
the Doubts which may be formed there upon touching this Matter, of which we do
now treat; since the truth of any Argument does never so well appear and endure
the light, as when it is sifted to the very root, and that the Reflection
thereof is exalted by the opposition of the contrary sense. So that in
combating with your Opinion, I shall still think that we do not disagree, but
rather to dissent in the Exposition of a vain Phantasm, which you erected for
sport sake to divert us, and give the Company Recreation.

Allow me then to tell you, that this project, upon which you have thus
exercised the acuteness of your wit with so good a Grace, is both unprofitable
and Chimaerical, no less than shameful and unjust, and ruinous toward England
to all intents and purposes whatsoever: whereas the design of succouring Spain
is facil, honorable profitable necessary, and suitable to the Fundamental
Maxims of our State. And if you please to afford me never so little attention,
it will not be difficult for me to prove unto you very clearly according to
your own Judgment, what I shall propose of this nature; that we shall perfectly
accord in one and the same Result, and convince you fully of the truth thereof.

The Design which you mention, is of the like nature, that it were to demolish
an old strong Edifice, to build a new Castle in the Air; or like his, who, to
renew his youth, consented to be cut into pieces, and put his several members
into an Alembick of Glass. To follow your Counsel then, we must alter the whole
Constitution of our Politics, form innovated Interests and Foreign Maxims, by
turning all things upside down, even from the Accidents to the very Genius of
the Nation, and distill more modern Blood into the veins of the people than that
which they have hereditarily received from Father to Son. But let us, I beseech
you, examine on what Ground, and with what Materials this new Edifice is to be
raised. That Earth which you have proposed unto us to make it out of, is a
moving sort of Sand, or a Floating Island, in which we can never fix on any
firm Bottom. It Is upon France that you would have us establish our Fortune, to
found a power which one day may counterbalance the power of the French, or at
least shelter us from their vast Designs. Nay, you will needs have France made
the Instrument of a greatness in a Neighbor, which they ought to suspect, if
they be not besotted by so putting England into a state to be able e're long to
stop their progresses, and erect a Bulwark in us against themselves. As if
France, that is our hereditary Enemy, and has so often tried what we are able
to do against the Enlarging of their Empire; who have graven deep in their
hearts the injury of the Title which (to their shame) England carries in all
public Treaties, and her Trophies in reference to that Crown; this very
France, which has no greater desire than to take the Dominion of the Sea from
us, and the precedence in Commerce, will help us (as you believe) to conquer
the Indies, in which one third part of his Realm is interessed, and of which
they do suck away all the Marrow with the semination of their Baubles, by the
ill husbandry of the Spaniards; She who just now comes from Joining with our
Enemies against us, after she had first contrived how to broach the Quarrel
between England, and the States of the United Provinces under diverse false
motions; who snatched the Victory out of our hands, when we were morally
certain of beating the Dutch; who reduced the Bishop of Munster to a necessity
of separating from us in this War, after that he had received our Assistence in
large sums of Money; debauched Denmark from our party; hindered the Swedes to
arm in our favor, and contrived the whole Fabric of that Affront which we
received in the River of Thames: Can you, after all these demonstrations of the
Rancour which they bear in their hearts against England, be so uningenuous as
to believe that the French will make a Bridge for us on the other side of the
Sea, as sincerely intending by this means to make us participate of their
conquests with them, or ever to unite in a sound Amity with our Interests? For
God's sake then disabuse your self, as soon as you can, out of this gross
Error, if it be so that it has got the least Fixation in your mind; since you
cannot cordially reason thus, or have the least hope of such an Incongruity in
the Reason of State of other Nations, without conceiving at the same time that
the French have lost both their wits and Judgment; of which yet there is no
great reason why we should think, as they have handled us in the matter of
Negotiations of late: for therein I am sure that we do find them to have more
than common sense.

France indeed will be glad to have us for the Instruments of their Ambition,
but never for Companions of their Glory, or Rivals to their Greatness. The
French do, I confess, seek to make use of us to pull the Chestnut out of the
Fire, to save the burning of their fingers; but when that is done, the French
will not endure that we should eat any bit of the Kernel. And the work which
they do now make for us, both at home and abroad, is so incompatible with our
Interest and Designs, as well as their own, that their professions toward us
at this time cannot possibly be sincere; except they be grown so kind on a
sudden, as to overthrow all their Fundamental Laws, and in favor of England
change the the whole face of their Designs which they have hitherto bin forming
upon Europe.

They pretend that the Low Countries are entirely fallen to them by the right
of Devolution, which France has forged to belong to its self. Then are all
those Provinces by consequence united to the French Crown, nor can their King
divide or alienate any part of them.

If this be true, to our advantage, though he would never so fain, but that it
must be subject still to return again to their Tribunal, they have annulled the
Renunciation of the Infanta of Spain, and thereby have formed a Right to the
succession of that Monarchy, i^ case the young King should come to fail of a
Successor. So that the most-Christian King can give us no share in the
dismembring of Spain, without doing prejudice to a Right which he pretends to
be acquired unalienably to his Crown, and whereof he himself may not otherwise
dispose.

Next, let us view the Materials which we are to have, to build this new
Edifice with. Either we must undertake this War at our own Charge, or at the
Expense of France. If it be undertaken at the Cost of France; we must be their
Hirelings (at best,) as the Tartars be to the Ottomans; and cannot move one
step beyond What and How they will have us act: France, on these terms, will
always hold the Bridle in our teeth, and the Cavesson upon our noses, to make
us stop, turn and wind, in the middle of the Courses, just as they please. From
the very first moment that we shall grow burdensome unto them, they have but
to withdraw their Supplies, to make us fall headlong to the Ground; and then
the Share which we pretend in their Conquests does purely and arbitrarily
depend on their discretion.

But if we shall undertake to carry on this Design out of our own proper Purse,
who shall furnish us with the Means of doing it? Do you believe that the
Parliament and the People will give away their Substance to act against the
true Interests of the Realm? and that they will Bleed, to quench the ambitious
Thirst of the French? or destroy Spain, from whence all the abundance of our
Commerce is derived; and which even at this Instant grants unto us such notable
Advantages by a Treaty which is solemnly ratified?

The part which France does offer us in the Conquests of Ostend and Neuport is
a vast Liberality indeed, but still of other folks Goods. It would become them
far better to restore back Dunkirk to England, which they cheated us of by
Surprise; or the Town of Callis, which they have dismembered from our ancient
Dominion. They take from us what is our own already, and present us with
nothing but what is not in their power to give; because they cannot bestow
either the Title or the Possession of what they do offer in this Kind upon us;
which if we will have, we must gain it by the point of the Sword. And this
Train which they do show us, is of the same nature with that sort of
Temptations with which the Devil tempted our Savior from the top of the
Pinnacle. But do not you discover that this is a subtle Artifice to imbroil us
again in a new War with the States of the United Provinces, who have the
Interest to defend these two places as much as if either Amsterdam or Flushing
were so designed upon? And without an absolute Naval Victory we can never hope
to conquer them; and such a Conquest at Sea too, as shall put the Hollanders
out of all manner of possibility to afford any Succors in this Case. This is a
very hard bone which France does cast in for us to gnaw, whilst they eat all
the Marrow out of it. In fine, when the Arms of France, joined to our Forces,
shall have put us in possession of these two Places; yet they will be totally
unuseful to England, when France is possessed of all the rest: Because thus the
French will shut us quite out of the whole Traffic of the Low Countries, and
will be always in a Condition to drive the English away from thence, unless we
do resolve continually to keep a Fleet at Sea for the conserving of them.

If this Design be hollow and visionary, it is not less shameful than Airy and
full of Injustice. We have no manner of Pretension on the Monarchy of Spain,
nor is it our Genius to whet our spirits to form Castles in the Clouds of
Chimaerical Rights. What Glory can it be to our Arms to help to oppress a King
in Minority, of six years old, by surprise; only because we find him now to be
rudely attacqued and unprovided; on a frivolous pretext, immediately after the
French had given the Queen his Mother, and his principal Ministers of State at
Madrid, such solemn Assurances to the contrary, as well as at Paris, touching
the inviolable continuation of a good Peace and a sincere Friendship? The
manner which Spain has held and acted with us newly in relation to England,
when we were assaulted by three powerful Enemies at one time, ought to oblige
us, at least to be deaf to the artificial Allurements of France. For although
the French have tried by all the ways imaginable, and with Offers incomparably
more advantageous than those which they do make to us at present, to the end
that so they might have gained the Forces of Spain to unite with them to our
inevitable Oppression; yet was it never in their power to shake the unalterable
Amity which the Spanish Nation have for us by a kind of natural Sympathy, which
one knows not how better to express than by the Immutability of it, whether we
do oblige or disoblige them. Would it not then be an Ingratitude totally
inconsistent with the Honor and the Hospitality of the English temper, so soon
to forget this Kindness; since at the same instant that Spain was the deepliest
engaged against Portugal, they did notwithstanding openly oppose the Designs of
France which seemed to the prejudice of England, by refusing them (in
contemplation of us, firmly and with great resolution) Passage for those Troops
of theirs which they sent to ruin the Bishop of Munster, our Ally and
Confederate then. We cannot complain of any Injury or Attempt wherein the
Spaniards have tampered against England. No League nor ancient Treaty does
oblige us to second the Designs of France; and we cannot conclude new Alliances
with the French to this purpose, without directly contravening that Treaty
which we have lately ratified with Spain. Let us see then what the Herald is to
say to the Spaniards that shall be sent to denounce War unto them on this
occasion from England; or with what Reasons we shall be able to fill a
Manifesto which we would offer to the Public, whereby to justify the Causes
of this Rupture. Wherefore I leave the Care, my Lord, to you, being that you
seem to be the Author of this Counsel, to found it well in the point of
Justice. But pray, see that you perform it better and with more grace than the
Writer of the Queen of France's Pretensions has done.

I say farther yet, That this Design is both prejudicial and destructive; and
that it carries along with it most pernicious Consequences, as well in the
present time as the time to come. For from the very moment that we do break
with Spain, our Commerce will cease, with the effects of all those great
Advantages which the Spaniards have By the Treaty last ratified at Madrid by
the Earl of Sandwich, His Majesty's Ambassador there.
newly granted unto us: and the Merchants of this Realm, who trade there, will
justly be confiscated; since all the Profit that we draw from thence must on
these terms infallibly redound in favor of the Hollanders, whilst our Arms do
busy the Spaniards in the Low Countries; and the French, as they do their
utmost against Spain, at the same instant will seize their principal Ports into
their power, and thus become absolute Masters of the Commerce, by putting
themselves into a Posture to erect a Dominion over the Sea, which we can never
afterward be able to resist. Not above three years ago France was hardly able
to set forth Twenty Ships, (that is to say, Men of War;) now they have Sixty
large Vessels, ready furnished and well armed, and do apply all their industry
and pains in every part to augment the number. Could the Ghost of Queen
Elizabeth return back into the World again, she would justly reproach us who
are the Ministers of State here in England, for having abandoned her good
Maxims, by tamely suffering before our eyes a Maritime Power to increase, which
she so diligently kept down throughout the whole course of her Reign. Whereas
you are so far from opposing the Growth of this Power, that you rather seem to
desire England should facilitate the ways to make it grow the faster, and
render it yet more formidable than it is, by the Acquisition of the Seaports,
which in conclusion must infallibly bring France to be Mistress of the Commerce
of the Indies. All the World knows the vast quantity of Money and Arms which
the French have accumulated to that End alone out of the richest Purses of that
Kingdom. I agree to what has been said before very prudently in this
Conference, that our Power and Greatness does principally consist in the matter
of Commerce; and therefore I conclude even from thence, by an unerrable
Consequence, that Commerce ought to be the chief Object of our Jealousy, and
that we are bound to be as tender of the Conservation of this Benefit as of the
Apples of our Eyes. But then we must look far off how to prevent whatsoever may
hinder the Progress of Trade, or diminish the abundance of this Commerce. We
have nothing to fear in this particular on the account of Spain, which applies
little toward Traffic, and leaves almost all the Advantages thereof freely
to the English in their own proper Ports. But if this Interest should fall into
the power of an industrious and active Nation, and a People covetous of Gain,
as the French are, we are not to expect any share of the Utility, or to partake
with France therein; but rather that they will prescribe the Law of Commerce
unto the English, according to their own will and pleasure. As soon as ever
it is known that we do treat of Conjunction with France, one of these two things
must necessarily happen: either that Spain, finding it self incapable to resist
the Union of both Forces, will send a Blank to the French King to make such
Conditions with them as he thinks best, by conceding unto him all their Portion
in the Low Countries; or that all the rest of the Powers of Europe, justly
apprehending so terrible an Union, will join with Spain to stop the Torrent of
our Designs. In the first state of the Case then, we shall quickly find our
selves taken for persons deluded in this Negotiation, and France only gather
all the fruit of the Couzenage; of which the Shame of having been so grossly
cheated can only remain to us, when the whole World discerns that the desire of
Prey has prevailed with England above the Faith of those solemn Treaties which
we have made with the Crown of Spain: and thus shall we obtain no other
Advantage by having made such a false step, than to have facilitated the means
for France to unite all the Low Countries to that Crown without striking one
Blow, to the eternal and irreparable damage of the Crown of England. For who
can assure us, that from the same instant when we do declare unto France our
intention to unite with them, the French, instead of uniting their Party with
England, will not rather prevail the sooner in their Pretensions with Spain, to
make the Spaniards, because of this Apprehension, disposed to accord to
whatsoever France shall demand? which is, as the old Proverb says, to keep the
Mule at our Cost, and hold the stirrup unto the French; or play a ridiculous
part, in making use only of Scare-crows, and give a false Alarm to favor the
Designs of others.

Next, who shall secure us that after Spain has yielded, because of this
Apprehension, the Low Countries to the disposition of France, That the
Spaniards and the French shall not then straightly unite together, to be
revenged of us, and bring us down? The affinity of Blood, Religion, and the
hopes which the most Christian King may found to himself upon the Succession to
this Monarchy, (if the Renunciation of the Queen once comes to be annulled) are
strong Links that may very well unite them together; and the Principle of the
Division which is at present betwixt them, having no other foundation but
reciprocal Jealousy touching the Equality of their Power, this Emulation will
expire as soon as ever that France does see Spain in a Condition to be no
longer able to dispute the sovereign Arbitrage of Christendom with them; and
the Cause of their hatred being taken away, all the Effects thereof will cease
likewise. And then the common Interests of both will unite them in a Bond which
is inseparable any more, from whence our Ruin must infallibly arise; because
the Substance and Surety of England solely depends upon the Emulation of these
two Powers, as the Temperament of a humane Body consists in the opposition of
the Elementary Qualities.

But what shall we say of the States of the United Provinces? Can we reasonably
believe that they will remain without Motion, or that they will not awaken at the
noise only of this Negotiation, which we shall carry on with France to the
Destruction of Spain? Since it is evident, they have no other course to take
than to prevent us, but by joining themselves with France before we have
finished this Treaty, or else to bind their Interests fast with the Spanish
Crown and the Empire on the first occasion. And then are we excluded from all
our Pretensions, and all the hopes of our vast Conquests, which we have fancied
unto our selves. And in the next place also shall we be replunged into a long
and dangerous War; from whence we came but just now, as it were, to escape with
so much difficulty and damage. France has yet proposed nothing unto us
directly touching the Ports of Ostend and Neuport to be given to the English;
and it is apparent as to England, by sundry authentic Documents, that the
French have no mind to treat seriously with us on this Point, unless that they
do find us disposed to unite with Spain and the States of the United Provinces
for the common Defense. Whereas it is no less certain that the French have
expressly made the very same Propositions, and more advantageous ones, unto the
said States, by soliciting them to re-combine with France in order to their old
Design of dividing the Low Countries mutually between each other, to the entire
Exclusion both of us and the Spaniards, being fully agreed as to this
particular at the beginning of the War past.

Whereby it is clearly to be foreseen, that France considers us no farther than
as the worst of their Prospects, and that the French will always be ready to
buy dearer the Amity of the States of the United Provinces than ours. Would it
not then be a great imprudence in us, to serve them as Instruments on such
disgraceful and disadvantagious Terms, to contribute toward the engaging of
the Hollanders to their Party? It being out of doubt, that the Jealousy which
we should so give them of our Negotiation with France would be a powerful
incitement to the States, to put them upon being beforehand with us in this
Treaty, and cut the Grass after this manner under our Feet. But admit all this
should cease, I do not see what Measures we can take at this time with France,
nor what Assurances or Precautions the French may give us in a Treaty, so as to
shelter England from the Danger of that known Maxim of theirs, which is, In all
Confederations to be bound by no other Rule but their Interest merely. I avow
that the Rupture of the Pyrenean Treaty frights me, and the remembrance of
their Proceeding held with us heretofore throughout all the Course of our late
War with Holland has made me so incredulous, that they must show me many
Miracles, and evident ones too, before I shall be converted to have the least
good opinion of the Sincerity of their Faith and Dealing.

That which you have alleged touching the Support which the Royal House of
England may particularly hope for from the Amity of France, is both a delicate
and a dangerous Stone to stir, The Glory and the Safety of our KING does only
consist in the Love of his People, and a straight union betwixt His MAJESTY and
his present Parliament, since He has no other sound Interest to rely upon but
that of the Kingdom, having need of no other Arms or Assistence. The hearty
Affections of his Subjects and his own Royal Virtues will be as so many
Gittadels erected to maintain his Authority; and any other project is contrary
both to his Genius and his admirable Prudence. For all those who shall dare to
inspire any other thoughts into His MAJESTY, will infallibly undergo the weight
of his displeasure, as Enemies to his Fame and Quiet. But at the Bottom of all,
what help can he rationally expect from France, should he come to need it,
(which God defend) after their unworthy abandoning of the King his Father in
his greatest Distress, and of the King which now is likewise, when the Wheel of
Fortune ran against them, even to the Exstirpation of the Royal Line, had not
He by whom Kings reign, wonderfully restored them to the Throne of their
Ancestors? It was that shameful Treaty which the French ratified with those
Usurpers then, that sacrificed CHARLES the First to the Ambition of the Tyrant
Oliver Cromwell, who had snatched the Scepter from the right Owners and
Proprietors thereof. Nay, to such a degree was the Inhospitability of France
grown at that time, though his Father were thus execrably Murdered before the
eyes of the French, our King's own Cozen-german refused him a Retreat that
might be secure for his own Person. Therefore it is fit that the English should
be disabused once for all, by being better informed, since France is so far
from being assisting or useful unto us upon this Conjuncture, that in truth
they do seek only to increase our Divisions and Troubles.

For it is both their Interest and Maxim so to do: which Conduct has been
exactly and hereditarily observed in their Counsels for many Ages together,
(and newly in the last Civil War here) since all the Baits which they do
present unto us are but so many Apples of Discord which the French Emissaries
cast up and down among us, purposely to embroil us with our Neighbors, or else
with one another.

Next, let us consider at present whether we shall find our Account better with
Spain. It Is evident that solid Reason of State does totally incline us to leave
that other way; and you cannot but all acknowledge this to be our true
Fundamental Maxim, whereby we may keep the Balance in aequilibrio; and that our
Safety does most consist in such an aequilibrium: why then should we swerve
from thence out of vain hopes, or quit the Body for the Shadow? The Interest of
Commerce no way invites us to take part with France: and this Truth is so
notorious to all the people of England, that there is no Eloquence able to
persuade them contrary to their own Experience therein. The Cause is just and
favorable: A young The KING of SPAIN.
Pupil unworthily oppressed; a Peace so solemnly and picusly established as
lightly violated by a Process of Cavils and Legerdemain, by a Proceeding
thereupon full of Surprisals and Violence, as well as Pretensions unjustly
revived after an Authentic Vide The Buckler of State and Justice, Article 4.
Renunciation; are so many voices which speak to the Root of our Consciences,
to call us to that which we owe to Justice, Pity, good Neighborhood, the
Public Cause of Christendom, and our Selves. For in this matter is concerned
no less than the Case of Royal Successions, which France will needs have
submitted to the Customs of ordinary Citizens, and the Conservation of that
Bulwark which is common to all these parts of Europe, against this Torrent
which threatens the whole Vicinity with a great Inundation, and the assuring
the Tranquillity of the Christian Republic against an unquiet Nation, that
will never desist from disturbing of it until their Insolence shall be abated.

The Foundation then being so solid, because we shall in this Opposition have
to treat with a Nation that makes profession of Honor and Generosity, which
has never yet been accused to be guilty of having violated any public Treaty,
and that would rather The remarkable Integrity of Spain.
hazard the loss of their Monarchy than their Reputation; the Advantage is
both secure and considerable: whereas on the account of France we shall appear
but as little Accessories, and the French will carry us on as the First Motion,
only according to the rapidness of their Progress, by applying us merely in the
course of their Game to their own Ends: and thus shall we become the Ministers
of their Ambition, and be made use of like a pair of Stairs, on which they do
mean to tread in order to their obtaining the Universal Monarchy. In fine,
their Interests, if that we are still predestined to be thus grossly deluded,
must be the Rule of ours, and our future Conduct too and Operations. But in
taking part with Spain we shall be the Arbitrators of Peace and War, and
enabled to give the whole weight unto the Resolutions of each Party. Then will
France consider us with terror and the apprehension of what our Arms may do,
and Spain by the addition of our Succors. If we do desire Conquests, we cannot
hope for more lawful ones, nor easier Victories, than to reunite by this means
our ancient Dominion in France, which have formerly been dismembered from the
Crown of England. But if we shall limit our Designs to the sole establishment
of a Peace, we may find the Account both of Glory and Safety likewise therein:
since it appears by authentic Letters of Monsieur de Lionn's writing, that
France is resolved to be content with Reason, as soon as ever they do see
England fixed to join with Spain and the States of the United Provinces. So
that it is in our choice whether to make an advantageous War, or procure an
honest Peace, at the first appearance of our preparations in Arms. Whereas, on
the contrary, it is evident by the Interception of the aforesaid Dispatches,
that they will despise all manner of Offices and Mediations that are not Armed,
but rather pursue vigourously their Course whither Fortune shall drive it on,
so long as they do meet with no powerful Obstacles in the way.

Therefore, because you seem to believe that Spain is reduced to so low a
Condition, that our Relief would be altogether unuseful to them, and serve for
nothing but to bring down the Vengeance of France exasperated upon us; for
God's sake, cure your self of this Pannick fear as soon as you can. It Is France
endeavors to erect a formidable Power, if she finds no Opposition in the
approaches thereunto; and Spain probably must sink under the burden, unless
that Crown be succored: though it is as true also, that the Mischief is easily
to be prevented, if Remedies be applied thereunto in due time, and before that
the Inconvenience root it self too deep. All the Advantage which France has
gained in this last Campaign, is no more than an effect of their Address, and
the overgrown Credulity of Spain, rather than of their Valor and Power. All
the Places which they have conquered in Flanders, are but great Countrey-Towns,
where the People being ever the strongest, he that is Master of the Field
carries always the Keys of them at his Girdle, to enter when he pleases; and
the winning of one Battle recovers them back again.

France has constantly yielded in every thing where she has found a real
Resistance, without gaining any thing beyond what the fright of an incommodated
Multitude has helped them to acquire by such a Surprising Invasion. Spain has
yet great resorts to recur unto, provided only they can gain time, and the
means of making them meet together, and thus recover their Spirits. We know
that she has made Contracts for considerable sums of Money, and that the
Spaniards are now about to put themselves in a way to be able shortly to
withstand the strongest Shocks of this War: and by the little Diversion of the
Forces of France which we may make without any prejudice to England, we can
certainly put Spain into a Condition of attaquing the French, as well as of
defending it self, and so shall we reduce France into a necessity of demanding
peace. Spain is not unprovided of Friends nor Allies. The Emperor does already
make a great step in favor of the Circle of Burgundy, by taking of it
entirely under his protection, as a Member of his Body. The States of the
United Provinces are not asleep neither as to their own proper Interests upon
this Conjuncture; and after having tried in vain the sweeter ways of appeasing
the Tempest, they will not abandon themselves on so pressing an Occasion, being
that they do see well enough their Safety depends absolutely upon their
Resolution. We know that they desire a sincere Alliance with us, and that they
would make all the progresses necessary toward it, could they but discern in
us any real disposition not to reject the Offer. Sweden, which is weary to
serve but as an Instrument to the Interests of France, to the prejudice of
their own Affairs, will nodoubt also follow our Motions: and the most part
(whom rather Fear than Love does tie unto the Motions of France) will
questionless take off the Mask, as soon as ever they shall see a considerable
Power on foot to Protect them: France is a Body replete with ill humors, which
will easily degenerate into an universal Corruption, when the French are never
so little shaken. The Jealousy alone which our Fleet will give them, must
needs oblige them to employ the better part of their Troops to furnish their
Maritime Coasts; and consequently render them the weaker everywhere else.
Besides, it is plain that in this last Campaign, in which they thought to
swallow all up at a bit, they made all the Force that they were able, and yet
were not able notwithstanding to bring into the Field above Forty thousand
men, after having drawn out of their Garrisons and the Provision of their Towns
all the Strength almost that they had there, whereby their Frontiers were left
naked. Judge then to what point they will be reduced, when they will be put both to
furnish their Places on all sides, and divide their Troops too, in Alsatia,
Italy, the County of or Catalonia.
Rossillon, and Flanders; and that in all these Countries they will meet with
Enemies to fight against, as well as a multitude of Malcontents at home, no
less formidable within the Center of their own proper Bowels. For thus they can
build no longer upon the strength of their Army, which is destroyed very near
already by Labor, Sickness, Diseases, and want of Pay. Wherefore they must
begin anew, and with fresh charges raise more men, because the ill usage which
their Troops have received does render them so barren of Soldiers, that they
are compelled to seek Recruits and as it were beg Supplies, with vast sums of
Money, from other States. And this Imaginary Fountain of Treasure of theirs,
which here is thought to be unexhaustible, will be found to have a bottom when
our Fleet does disturb their Commerce, the Credit which till then they may get
with the Partisans, by means of oppressing Which is the same thing as our
Banquer and Farmers of the Customs.
the people, with Tax upon Tax, will fail. The men of business and the Natives,
being pressed to unsupportable extremities, will quickly either cast off the
yoke, or sink under the burden and the weight of those Impositions. Their
incapacity to hold out any longer is well enough seen, by the impossibility
wherein they now find themselves to make good what they have promised the
Portugueses, whose Friendship has been formerly so necessary unto them. And if
Spain, as it is hoped that it may do, once shall take a resolution to be
delivered of this intestine War with Portugal by some Accommodation, the
Spaniards will soon be in a condition of being useful to their Allies, and
feared by their Enemies. But if we do suffer the Designs of France to pass by
undiscovered, and impunitively to permit them to conquerthe Low Countries
toward the total oppression of Spain; then I cannot but avow that France thus
will be most terrible unto us. And in case at present we are afraid of drawing
their Revenge on our heads, then shall we have much juster cause to apprehend
the future effects of their Ambition. Wherefore at the Bottom of all these
Reasons, it seems to me that by the same Principle of apprehension which you
have of the French, we are obliged to oppose these Progresses of theirs, which
if not stopped would yet render them more redoubtable.

If so be that we do fear them in the Field, having so many Friends that do
tender their Alliance unto us, our fear were much more justifiable, if after
the rejecting of all those Offers, we alone were exposed to their mercy; or
that our moderation could exempt us from their out rages, but on the contrary,
rather give the French better Conveniences of putting these Violences in
Execution, should such an insipid Counsel prevail; for they will never consider us
farther than we do make our selves Considerable. They have Printed Books of
their Pretensions to England. Experience teaches us (even to this day) that
it is enough with them to ground a War, without giving them any other cause of
Hostility, That we have Scotland and Irleand.
Kingdoms belonging to this Monarchy which may very well fit their Designs;
which is enough to invite the French to attaque them whilst England is weak.

History likewise does show us, how that all our Alliances with the house of
Burgundy have still been glorious and useful, and all those with France,
unfortunate and prejudicial. It Is ever more dangerous to go out of the beaten
Road, to travel through By-lanes, unknown and dark untried Paths.

You Will easily agree with me, that the Union of the United Provinces with France
is the thing of all others which we ought the most to apprehend as fatal to our
Crown: and therefore, by consequence, nothing can be more safe for England than
to disunite them. Heaven furnishes us now with an occasion of doing that, which
we shall never be able to recover again, should it be neglected: and if we do
suffer it to slip away we shall bring that Republic into a necessity of tying
this fatal Knot with France stronglier than ever it was fastened before. This
Union therefore above all others must be the Object of our Care, as it has of
late demonstratively been the cause of our misfortunes.

I conclude then upon solid Foundations, without hesitating, That, in the first
place, we must necessarily take part in this War, either with Spain or France:
and next, that we must not engage blindfold, without taking right Measures
with those who have the same Interest that England has in the Case: thirdly,
that we must knit our Party firmly together, and get all the Advantages we can
in this Treaty with Spain, as well as all the Security possible with other
States; without yet exacting from Spain things which are intolerable unto them,
whom the loss of the Low Countries for fear of being reduced by the Exorbitancy
of our Demands, may plunge into a necessity of according to whatever France
shall require.

This Discourse being ended, I observed by their Countenances, that the two
Persons who spoke first applauded this Opinion, and that the third man was much
shaken. They had some farther speech together; but so softly, that I cannot
well collect the sense of it: after which all the Company embraced, and gave
one another their hands, with a reciprocal promise of secrecy, as wel^ ^s an
Union in the same Design. And thus they separated each a several way, with
evidence of great satisfaction and friendship. And as soon as ever theywere
gone, I slipped back insensibly again into the former obscurity near the Bed,
without being seen by any of the Domestics. And thus whilst these particulars
werefresh in memory, I did set them down in Paper, and all that I could
remember of their Discourse, only to satisfy my own Curiosity, and the
Cariousness of my Friends.

THE END.

