A NARRATIVE OF THE Settlement and Sale OF IRELAND.

Whereby the Just English Adventurer is much prejudiced, the Ancient Proprietor
destroyed, and public Faith violated; to the great discredit of the English
Church, and Government, (if not re-called and made void) as being against the
Principles of Christianity, and true Protestancy.

Written in a Letter by a Gentleman in the Country, to a Nobleman at Court.

LOVAIN, Printed in the Year MDCLXVIII.

A LETTER.
My LORD,
I Have in obedience to your Lordships Commands, set down in brief, the sad and
deplorable state of the Irish Nation, and the apparent injustice, and
innequality used in the present Settlement of that Kingdom; which, in my
opinion, (as I formerly told your Lordship) has chiefly occasioned the heavy
Judgments of God, which our English Nation has sensibly felt these many years
last past, and is to be feared, our Sufferings are not yet at an end, if we do
not take a speedy course to humble our selves, and appease the wrath of his
Divine Majesty, who may punish us farther, with as much Justice, as we have
(contrary to all Justice) hitherto oppressed the Irish.

It cannot be denied, but that the Roman Catholics of Ireland have infinitely
suffered, during the late Usurped Governments; But they have done it
cheerfully, and perhaps not without some comfort; having had all that time, as
Companions in Suffering, not only some of the Nobility and Gentry of England
and Scotland, but the King himself, and all the Royal Family; Far quam Sortem
patiuntur omnes, Nemo recusat. But now since His Majesty's happy Restoration,
and during the universal Jubilee of Joy over all the British Monarchy, that the
Irish alone should be forced to mourn, but condemued to a perpetual Sufferance,
far surpassing those they formerly endured under the Government of Cromwell; is
a Calamity rather to be deplored then expressed. And yet I find very few of our
Nation any way touched with a compassion of the Miseries snstained by those
their Neighbors, and that the Irish are not only vigorously persecuted by
their Constant Enemies, but that they are wholly abandoned by their former
Friends (I mean their fellow sufferers for the same Cause) who do not now
concern themselves in their sufferings. This consideration alone, together with
the zeal I have always had for Justice, and the commiseration which nature
imprints in every Man, are the motives (next to your Lordships commands) which
induce me to undertake this subject. I shall therefore, by setting down matter
of Fact, and by examining the title of the present Possessors, as also of the
ancient proprietors, discovered the wicked Artifices hitherto practiced, to
deprive the Irish Nation, not only of the benefit of His Majesty's Mercies, but
also of His Justice.

Broghil and Coot having by several Emissaries sent into England, felt the
Pulse of the English Nation, and finding the People generally inclined to
concur with the Loyal and Successful endeavors of the Lord General Monk, in
order to the Restoration of His Sacred Majesty, convoqued a Convention in
Dublin, of Persons newly Interested in that Kingdom, to consult upon the best
and safest course that might be taken to prevent the restoring of the Irish
Cavallers to those Estates which the Conventionists and their Partisans enjoyed
by the Usurpers bounty, and which they had great reason to believe, would be
immediately restored to the ancient Proprietors upon his Majesty's
Re-establishment. In order to this resolution, it was agreed upon, that all the
Gentlemen of Ireland should be committed to close Prison, to render them
incapable of contributing to His Majesty's Restoration, in case His Majesty
would choose to pursue His Royal Right by dint of Sword, rather then to
condescend to such disadvantageous conditions, as the Conventionists did hope,
and were fully persuaded would be imposed upon him by the Parliament of
England. It was also concluded, that a man of Parts and Faction among the
Presbyterian Party, should be employed into England, to prepossess the People
there, with the Dangers and inconveniences which the restoring of the Irish
Natives to their Ancient Estates, would infallibly bring upon the new English
Interest in that Kingdom. In pursuance to these resolutions, all the Prisons in
Ireland were filled with the Nobility and Gentry of that Nation, whom no
imbecility of Age, nor indisposition of body could excuse, nor any offered
Security answer for: Sir John Clotworthy, (a man Famons for plundering Somerset
House, Murdering the Kings Subjects, and committing many other Treasons and
horrid Crimes,) was dispatched into England. This Person, who was always
accounted as violent against the Irish, as he was known to be Seditious, and
ill-affected to Monarchy; No sooner arrived in London, than he filled the
peoples ears with such dreadful stories of a new Insurrection in Ireland,
(where counterfeited Letters were read on the Exchange and several Copies
dispersed over all the corners of the City) that His Majesty was warm in his
Fathers Throne, when both Houses of Parliament (grounding their belief on
Clotworthy's assertion) presented unto him a Proclamation, to be signed against
the Irish Papists, who were said to be actually in Rebellion, murdering his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, violently intruding into other Men's possessions,
with many other Characters of Infamy, rendering them odious to all Nations. This
Proclamation was published in London on the Third day of June 1660.
notwithstanding that it was very well known at that time, that there was not an
Irish Man in arms in any part of Ireland.

Clotworthy, encouraged with the good success of his first Essay, and
strengthened by a new landed recruit of Convention Agents (among whom Broghil
himself made one) having observed that a general Act of Indemnity was ready to
be passed to all His Majesty's Subjects, and fearing that the Irish (if
concluded therein) would be consequently restorable to their Estates; presented
a Proviso against them, to be inserted in that Act; But this Proviso seemed so
unreasonable to both Houses (especially after that His Majesty had made a
Speech to them for comprehending the Irish in his general and Gracious Pardon
(that they were fully resolved to extend the Act of Oblivion to the Irish
Papists, as well as to the rest of his Majesty's Subjects. But the
Conventionists, after some conference with the The D -- of O -- has added as
much to his own ancient Estate, by the new settlement of Ireland, as would have
satisfied all the Claims of the just Adventurers. And Anglesey and Kingston
little less.
D -- of O -- (to whom, as it is said, (with what trust I know not) they offered
that great Estate, and vast sums of Money which wrought so much upon his
Grace, that, in the House of Lords he made a Speech against comprehending the
Irish Papists in the Act of Oblivion, saying, that the King had taken that
matter into his own hands, notwithstanding that His Majesty had but few days
before clearly declared himself for their being comprehended in his General
Pardon: so that it was carried a-against them, to the great astonishment of all
persons of Honor and Conscience, that were informed of the corrupt ways
whereby they were excluded.

Neither, my Lord, was the exclusion of the Irish out of the Act of Oblivion,
so satisfactory to the Convention Agents, if all other passages to his
Majesty's further Graces and Favors were not shut up against them: And in
order thereunto, they prevailed with the first Minster of State (whom they had
gained to their side, by what colored Arguments he knows best himself) to
re-call the Commission of Lord Deputy, which was formerly given to the Lord
Roberts, a person of known Honor and Integrity; The Conventionists having,
observed that his Lordship was not to be won, upon any account to forward their
Design. This grand obstacle being removed out of the way, Broghil, Anglesey,
Clotworthy, and Mervin, (with the assistance of Steel, Roberts and Petit) after
three Months labor, brought forth that monstrous issue of their brain, which
was exposed to the World under the Name and Title of His Majesty's most
Gracious Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland. This was their
Masterpiece, and has been ever since the groundwork of all subsequent Acts
which were established for the farther Settlement of that Nation.

The first branch of the Declaration confirms the Adventurer in his possession;
the Second secures the Soldier in his Debenture; the Third satisfies the 49
Men; the Forth assures unto the Transplanted Irish the Land Decreed unto them
in the Province of Conaught, and County of Clare; The Fifth makes mention of
those Irish Officers who served his Majesty in Flanders, as also the Generality
of the Nation who pretend to Articles. My Lord, is not this a blessed
Declaration, which provides in so large a manner for so many different
Interests? A Declaration that satisfies the Natives, and yet dispossesseth none
of the Cromwellists.

To understand it well, we must mount a little higher, and call to our
remembrance how the Rump-Parliament divided the spoils of that conquered
Nation, in the Year 1653. Ten Counties were allotted to the Adventurers, Twelve
conferred on Cromwell's Soldiers, and three of the Barren Counties given by way
of charity to the transplanted Irish; These, by computation, make up 25
Counties, the remaining seven (for Ireland contains in all but 32 Counties)
together with all the Cities and Corporations of that Kingdom, were reserved to
the Commonwealth. Now this Declaration confirms the Adventurers, Soldiers,
and transplanted Irish in their present possessions; And moreover, it assigns
to several other uses, the Seven remaining Counties, and all the great Towns of
Ireland, which were not disposed of by the Commonwealth: One of the Counties
being designed to supply the deficiency of the Adventurers Lots; another, to
satisfy the Encumbrances on the Lands already laid out to Adventurers and
Soldiers; The third to reprize such as were removed from the Lord Duke of
Ormond's Estate; and the other Four Counties, with all the Cities and
Corporations of the whole Kingdom, (a pretty grant) being assigned to the
Protestant Officers who served His Majesty in Ireland at any time before the
year 1649. After this Solemn division and distribution made of every House, and
every Acre of Land, over all the Kingdom of Ireland. Some 500 Irish Gentlemen
(who also served his Majesty in Flanders) are named in the Declaration, to be
forthwith restored to their ancient Estates; but not, until Lands of equal
value, worth and purchase, are first found out to reprize the Adventurers,
Soldiers, and the rest now in possession; a work no more nor less feasible,
than the creation of another Ireland.

My Lord, this Declaration was published on the 30th. of Novomber 1660. and at
the same time Broghil created Earl of Orery, and Sir Charles Coot made Earl of
Montrath; were joined in Commission with the Lord Chancellor Eustace, as his
Majesty's Lords Justices of that Kingdom; Sir John Clotworthy (who was also
created Lord Viscount Masserene) Sir Audley Mervin, and some others of the
Convention-Agents, staid at Court, to draw up privare Instructions for the
better executing his Majesty's Declaration: And because Innocents, viz. Such as
never offended his Majesty, or His Royal Father, were the only people to be
restored without previous reprisals, the Conventionists made it their grand
work to qualify an Innocent, that it should be Morally impossible to find any
such in rerum natura, virum, innocentum quis inveniet? Eleven qualifications
were ordered for their Trial and those so rigid and severe, that Clotworthy and
his Companions (who had the wording of them) did verily believe there could not
be a man found in all Ireland that should pass untoucht through so many Pikes:
For, not only the inoffensive persons, who never took Arms, who never entered
into the Confederacy with the rest of their Countrymen, if they did but pay
them the least Contribution out of their Estates, if they did but reside in the
Irish quarters, although in their own own houses; not only these, I say, were
declared to be no Innocents, but such as lived all the War-time in England;
such as were with Hi^ Majesty at Oxford, and served in his Army, if they
received any Rent from their Tenants in Ireland, were by virtue of one of the
Eleven Qualifications, to be held for Nocents.

But among all the other Qualifications, that of taking an Engagement (which
was administered unto all his Majesty's Subjects in the three Kingdoms) was a
very notable one; This Engagement was forced upon the Irish in so high a
nature, that those who would not take it, were debarred, not only from the
benefit of the Law, but also exposed to an innevitable danger of death, the
Soldiers of Cromwels Army being commanded by public Proclamation* to kill all
they met on the Highway, who carried not a Certificate about him, of having
taken that Engagement: Commands which were cruelly executed on silly Peasants,
who, out of Ignorance, or want of care, having left their Tickets at home, were
barbarously murdered by the merciless Soldiers: My Lord, it is very
remarkable, that they who devised this Engagement, who heartily subscribed unto
it, and forced others to take it, shall not be questioned or held criminal; and
that those who never saw it before it was ministered unto them, who abhorred it
in their hearts, and were forced to sign it, to avoid a bloody and violent
death, shall be declared Nocents, and an irrevocable sentence of losing their
Estates given against them; and the Estates so forfeited, to be conferred on
those very Persons who compelled the Proprietors to that Forfeiture. By this
Qualification alone, a Man may judge of the rest.

To Crown this grand work of settling Ireland, the Conventionists (having
worded the Declaration and Instructions to their own advantage) prevailed with
their great Patron, to have themselves named the only Commissioners to put in
Execution his Majesty's Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland, This
un-usual, and perhaps never before heard of course of Justice, (one of the
parties being made Judge of the Case) appeared so ugly and terrible to the
Irish, that many of them could hardly be persuaded to believe, that his Sacred
Majesty was restored to the peaceable and free possessession of his Crown and
Kingdoms, seeing the very same persons who tyranized over them during Oliver's
Reign, were now not only confirmed in their formed in their former charges, and
advanced to places of greater Trust; but also newly Commissioned with an
unlimited power, to give a final and decisive Sentence of all the Titles and
pretentions of the unfortunate Natives. This preposterous way of proceeding,
having not only incensed the interessed Irish, but also scandalized all the
moderate men of England, another course was judged fit to be taken, less
shameful in appearance, but in effect the very same: The new Court of Claims
was annulled, and the Lords Justices were ordered to call a Parliament, which
met on the 8th. day of May 1661. The Lower House of this Parliament was all
composed of Cromwellists, and but very few of the Irish Peers were admitted to
sit in the House of Lords, under the pretense of former Indictments. This
Parliament made the first Act of Settlement, which they entitled, an Act for
explaining His Majesty's Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland. This Act
decides all the doubtful expressions of the Declaration in favor of the
Cromwellists, and to the disadvantage of the Natives, it allows only a
Twelve-months time for the trial of Innocents; But those Irish Gentlemen who
served His Majesty abroad, together with the generality of the Nation
pretending to Articles, (half a score persons only excepted, who were
particularly provided for) are for ever debarred by this Act, to recover their
Estates without previous Reprizals, which is a thing not to be had in nature.

My Lord, I cannot omit minding your Lordship of a remarkable expression in the
preface of this Act, that the Irish Rebels were conquered by His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, in his Majesty's absence. These Irish Rebels when they
were conquered, fought under the command of the Lord Duke of Ormond, His
Majesty's Lord Lieutenant in Ireland, and after under the command of the Lord
Marquess of Clanrickard, His Majesty's Lord Deputy for that Kingdom; and those
Protestant Subjects who conquered them, were called Cromwell Ireton, Jones,
Reynolds, Broghil, Coot, Venables, Hewson, Axtel, etc. who vigorously pursued
the Irish Rebels for no other reason, but that they constantly denied the
Authority of the pretended Commonwealth, and unalterably adhered to the
Interest of Charles Stewart, (for his Majesty's now Protestant Subjects were
wont, in that time of conquest, to call Our Gracious Sovereign;) but now adays
they sing another note, and speak quite another language; having established
for a fundamental Law, that the Irish Rebels were conquered by his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in his Majesty's absence. This being passed, and the Royal
assent given to it, Sir Richard Rainsford, and the rest of the Commissioners
appointed by his Majesty to decide the claims of the Irish, in pursuance of
this Act, landed in Dublin, about the of 1662. And having some time to study
the Act, they plainly understood, that none of the unfortunate Natives could be
restored to their Estates, but the Ten persons who had particular proviso's
inserted therein, and such others as would prove their Innocence in open Court.
The Commissioners began their first Session on the day of February, and the
Court continued until the of August following. During this time the Claims of
near upon a thousand Irish were heard, whereof the one half were declared
Innocents, notwithstanding all the rigid Qualifications against them. The time
limited for ajudging Innocents being expired, In the Province of Ulster, but
Three of the Natives restored, viz. My Lord of Antrim, Sir Henry O-Neil, and
one more of an inconsiderable Estate. In the Province of Conaught, but Four
viz. the Earl of Clanrickard, Lord of Mayo, Coll. John Kelley, and Coll. Moor.
Sir Richard Rainsford (a most just and upright man) would proceed no farther,
expecting an enlargement of time to hear out the rest, who were 7000 in number,
and who had as much reason to pretend a title to their Estates, (until they
were heard, and condemned) as those who were already judged; For every man is
to be held Innocent until he be convicted, and especially those who durst
venture upon so severe a trial: For, that part of the Nation (which was
involved in the War) did not pretend to Innocence, but claim the benefit of
Articles. But this enlargement of time being flatly denied by the first
Minister of State, the Court of Claims was at an end, the interessed party made
Judges by Clarendon, and indifferent men not admitted, and the Parliament
prepared an aditional Bill of Settlement, Which the Natives call the black Bill,
which came into England in the of May, 1664.

By this additional Act, it is decreed, that no benefit of Innocence, or
Articles, shall be allowed from henceforth, to any of the Irish Natives. The
words of the Text, page 8. l. 22. are these; And it is hereby declared, that no
Person or Persons, who by the qualifications in the said former Act, has not
been adjudged innoieut, shall at any time hereafter be reputed Innocent, so as
to claim any Lands or Tenements hereby vested; or be admitted to have any
benefit or allowance of any future adjudications of Innocence, or any benefit
of Articles whatsoever.

To salve this grand breach of public Faith, the Law of God, and Nations, and
to give some color of Justice, to an action which is evidently repugnant to
Magna Charta, and the Fundamental Laws of England (to condemn so many thousands
before they are heard) it is ordered by the same Act, that some Fifty four
persons of the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, (who likely deserved his
Majesty's particular favor, and whose names are specified in the Act) shall be
restored unto their several and respective principal Seats, and unto 2000 Acres
of Land thereto adjoining; provided always, that the Adventurers, Soldiers,
and 49 men who are to be removed, shall be first satisfied by some other
forfeited Lands, in equal value, worth, and purchase; The transplanted Irish
are purposely left by this Act upon very doubtful terms, that in case of
necessity (if the stock of Reprizals should sall short) their present
possessions might serve to Reprize the Adventurers, Soldiers, 49 Men, and
Grantees already removed by the restored Innocents, and the Ten Proviso-men in
the former Act, or to be removed by the nominees, and some three or four
persons more particularly provided for in this additional Act. The Forty Nine
men are expressly forbidden by this Act, to set or Let by way of Lease, or
otherwise any part of their Lots within the walled Towns and Corporations, or
at a certain distance thereunto: to any Irish Papists, under the penalty of
loosing what is Let, and forfeiting as much more, there is a general Clause in
the Act, that all Clauses and provisoes therein contained, which admit any
doubtful expression, shall be always construed to the advantage and favor of
the English Protestants, and several other provisons are made, all tending to
the designed extirpation of the Natives.

This destructive Act, after many long consultations, wherein the first
Minister of State did always employ the utmost of his uncontrouled power, to
countenance the Cromwellian party, and the Kings Solicitor General (who had the
penning of the Act, made use of his Rhetoric and Knowledge in the Law, to
plead in their behalf, (the favor of the one being easily gained, at the rate
of several vast sums of ready money, and the promise of an Estate of 6000 l. a
year for his Son; and the pains of the other, being modestly rewarded by a
small Fee of 8000 l. sterling.) This Act, I say, so well supported, was Signed and
Sealed at Salisbury on the 25th of July 1665* (notwithstanding all the
opposition given thereunto,) and this in a time when the hand of God visibly
appeared in the great Mortality, which then began to increase in the City of
London; and when I heard many moderate men say, we are justly punished by God,
for the injustice done to the Irish. It is now more than two years since the
Act went over into Ireland, and the 52 Nominees who were to be restored as they
verily believed) to their chief houses, and 2000 Acres of Land, have not yet
got the possession of a Cottage, or of one Acre of Ground; which agrees very
well with Ororye's railery lately expressed, That it was intended by the Act,
that they should be only Nominees, nomine restorable, but not re, for that was
never intended; and yet the same Orrory assured to the King, that there was a
sufficient stock of Reprisals to satisfy all Interests.

My Lord, this is the true state, in brief, of the Irish Case, as to matter of
Fact, since the first day of his Majesty's most happy Restoration, to this
Instant. Let us now examine matter of Right, and see what Title the several
Interests obstructing there establishment of the Irish can justly pretend to
the Estates of the distressed Natives. These different Interests can be reduced
to four principal ones; the first is, that of the Adventurers, the second of
the Soldiers, the third of the Forty nine Men and the fourth of the Grantees;
We will begin with the Adventurers.

These are certain Inhabitants of London, who in the year 1641. pretended to
venture their momes to reduce the Rebels in Ireland, (but intended, as
afterward appeared, to destroy the King) upon the assurance of getting such a
quantity of the Rebels Lands in proportion to the sums they laid out, and in
pursuance of an Act of our English Parliament, which then passed to that
effect. By which Act, it is ordered that the money so laid out, should be
employed in the Service of Ireland; and that, (after the Rebels were declared
by both houses to be wholly conquered) a Commission should issue forth under
the great Seal of England, to make a strict enquiry through all the Counties of
Ireland, of Estates forfeited by the Rebellion, to be disposed of for the
satisfaction of the Adventurers. Neither of these conditions were hitherto
observed, for the money laid out, was all, (or at least, for the greatest part)
employed to buy arms and ammunition to fight against his Majesty in England.
The Rebels were never yet declared by both Houses of Parliament to have been
conquered, nor any Commission issued forth under the Great Seal of England, to
enquire after Forfeitures: It is true, that the remaining Members of the House
of Commons, made an Ordinance in the year 1652. (without the concurrence of the
House of Lords) that the Rebels were wholly conquered; And that consequently
assigned Ten Counties to the Adventurers, without issuing forth any Commission
under the great Seal of England, to examine whether the Lands therein contained
were forseited or no. Of these ten Counties, the Adventurers of the doubling
Ordinance (who were to have for their respective Sums laid out, double the
quantity of Land assigned to the first adventurers) have proportion, because
their money was given to the long Parliament in the year 1644. When they were
in actual Rebellion against His Majesty.

The late King understood very well the nullity of this act having never made
mention of the adventurers interest in all the Treaties of Peace which passed
between His Majesty and the Confederates in Ireland; which certainly so just a
Prince as Charles the First was known to be, would never have done, if he had
conceived himself any way obliged by that act to provide for them. But
supposing that the act of decimo septimo Caroli in the behalf of the London
adventurers, had not been defective; can those of the doubling Ordinance expect
any benefit by that Law? Can the first adventurers whose Moneys were disposed
to other uses than the relief of the Protestants in Ireland, pretend any
advantage by that act? nay, can those few Persons of the first Rank (whom we
call the just adventurers, and whose moneys were really employed in the Irish
War) lawfully enjoy the Irish Land, until the Rebels be declared by the two
Houses of Parliament to be wholly conquered; until a Commission issues forth
under the great Seal of England to examine who are the Rebels, and who are
Innocents; and until, after the performing these essential Formalities required
by the Act, they receive by a just and legal way of proceeding, their
respective Proportions of the Forfeited Estates?

The first Minister of State (a Lawyer by his first profession) cannot be
ignorant of these varieties; especially when he persuades his Royal Master to
speak after this manner, in his Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland, page
7. Therefore in the first place, in order to the settlement of that Interest
claimed by the Adventurers, alth^ugh the present Estates and Possessions they
enjoy, if they were examined by the strict Letter of the Law, would prove very
defective and invalid, as being no ways pursuant to those Acts of Parliament
upon which they pretend to be found, but rather seem to be a structure upon
their subsequent assent, both to the different Mediums and ends, than the
observance of those; yet who being always more ready to consult, etc. Can any
thing be spoken more plain to prove the nullity of the Adventurers Title by the
Act of 17. Car. 1? And could the supreme Judge of the Court of Equity give a
more unjust sentence, than to say, although this Party can pretend no right to
the Estate in question, yet I am pleased to adjudge it for him? The matter in
dispute is no less than the land of ten Counties, the parties pretending are
the Irish Proprietors, and the London Adventurers: The first enjoyed it for so
many ages, they have their Patents and Evidences to show for it, and they lost
it at length upon the account of Loyalty, fighing for the Kings Interest
against the Murderers of his Royal Father: the last (as it is acknowledged by
the words of the Text) have no other Title but what they derive from the
Ordinance of an usurped Government, for having disbursed vast sums of Money to
countenance Rebellion, to pull down Monarchy, and put up a pretended
Commonwealth. And yet the Land is adjudged for them, and confirmed to them and
their Heirs for ever:

The Second main Interest obstructing the Restoration of the Irish, is that of
Cromwell's Soldiers, who are not mentioned in the Act of 17 Caroli; neither
indeed do they pretend any other Title to their Estates, but that of the Sword,
which they have always employed against the late King, and his present Majesty,
enjoying as a Sallary for their service, all the Irish Estates in twelve
Counties. I do not think any man will be so impudent as to justify this
prodigious Title; I am sure their greatest Patrons never durst say they were
just, but they said very often, it was convenient to confirm them in possession
of other Men's Land. And perhaps we shall not find many other Statesmen (among
the Followers of the Gospel) who will allow a convenience so apparent against
Justice: Ruat Coelum and fiat Justicia, is a Motto which better becomes a Lord
Chancellor; Then, let us not do what is just, but what is convenient.

It is indeed a most wonderful convenience to dispossess the Ancient Proprietor
who Fought for the King, and give his Estate to a Fanatic Soldier who Fought
for Cromwell.

To suppor this pretended Convenience, the first Minister of State made use of
a strong Argument, derived from the great power of the Cromwellists in Ireland;
and thus he makes it out:

The English Army is very considerable now in Ireland, they have Swords in
their hands, and they are in possession of all the great Towns, and strong
holds in that Kingdom, it is not therefore safe to irritate them; Nay, there is
an absolute necessity (as the case stands) to confirm them in their present
possessions, For we must not do what is just, but what is is convenient. These
words were often delivered in Council, as so many Oracles, and perhaps the
greater Statesman did not seriously reflect, whether the same Argument might
not serve as well to confirm all the Cromwellists in England, in their unlawful
Acquisitions of the Crown and Church Lands, and so many Cavaliers Estates,
whereof they were dispossessed upon his Majesty's Restoration, without any
great noise, and less danger; and yet they were then very considerable: They
had Swords in their hands, and they were in possession of all the strong holds
of the Kingdom, etc.

My Lord, I have been all over the Kingdom of Ireland, and assure your
Lordship, that the old Inhabitants and Natives of Ireland, are Ten for one, and
far the more considerable Party; But large Sums have made that corrupt Minister
say any thing that seemed advantageous to support that other Interest: I am
confident, My Lord, admitting them as inconsiderable as he would have them, it
cannot be half so formidable, as the power of that party was in England when
the King came in. These were all disbanded in less then Six Months time, and
now it is more than Seven years, that the Fanatic Army is maintained in Ireland
without any necessity, which, occasions that his Majesty receives no Revenue
out of that vast and fertile Kingdom; Nay, he is obliged to send yearly a
considerable sum of Money out of England, for the maintenance of that Army: For
my part I cannot nnderstand how the King might safely reduce the English Army,
and that it should be dangerous for him to disband the Irish Forces, who were
not half so numerous, nor so much to be feared as those in England. If the want
of Money hindered their disbanding at once with their Brethren in England and
Scotland; might not they reduce by degrees, and by Regiments, in eight years
time? I think it is sufficiently evidenced that the Cromwellian party in
Ireland have no more power than what his Majesty hitherto is pleased to grant
them, by the advice of his first Minister, who upholds that Fanatic Army for
his own sordid, if not wicked ends. Let that Favorite that persuades his
Master to tolerate Injustice and Oppression, upon the account of a Servile
Fear, have a care that he be not one day convinced either of ignorance. Rex est
qui posuit metus, and diramala pectoris, quem non ambitio popularis, and
nunquam stabilis faveur Vulgi praecipitis movet.

The third grand interest, and the most destructive to the Natives, is that of
the Protestant Officers, who served his Majesty (or the Parliament) in Ireland,
before the year 1649. Whose arrears have been cast up, and stated to the vast
sum of Eighteen hundred thousand pounds sterling. in satisfaction whereof, the
part of a whole Kingdom (which certainly is worth many Millions) is conferred
upon them. They are entitled to all the Natives Estates in four great Counties,
to all the Cities, Corporations, and Walled Towns in Ireland, to all the Land
situated within a mile to the Sea, and to the River of Shanon in the Province
of Conaught, and County of Clare, to all the Debts, Leases, Mortgages, and the
Reversions of the Irish; for not only the real Estates, but also all other
pretensions and Titles of the unhappy Natives are forfeited: And leest all this
should come short to content this insatiable Party, the last act allows them
one hundred thousand pounds out of the two half years Rent from Adventurers
Soldiers, and restored Irish. Though the Roman Catholic Officers have always
faithfully adhered to the Kings Interest, and never deserted his service (as
all, or most of these Protestant Officers in Ireland have done, when the
Usurper prevailed) yet they being Papist, disables them from any satisfaction
for their service, which was a Qualification not imposed on the Catholics in
England, etc. But since the Cessation of Arms concluded in the year 1643. There
was no more fighting between his Majesty's Protestant, and Roman Catholic
Subjects, which makes a great difference between their Loyalty in the point of
merit, and that of our Cavaliers in England, who, out of a generous resolution,
without any necessity, or consideration of private Interest, did freely embrace
his Majesty's Quarrel, siding always with the best, although weakest party,
which they maintained, for the space of Six years, at their own charges, with
the loss of so many thousand brave lives, who were all Sacrificed as unspotted
Victims on the Altar of Loyalty. How comes it then to pass, that a handful of
Irish Protestants should be allowed 1800000 l. for two years service, and that
our English Royalists, who were a hundred times more numerous continued thrice
longer in serving the King and whose pure Loyalty was never tainted with the
mixture of any treachery or private Interest, should get among them all,
without distinction of Nation or Religion, but 70000 l. to be distributed among
the Needy Cavaliers, (who had neither Estates of their own, nor any public
Chrges or employments) to keep them from starving? Upon what account should the
Officers of the Four or five Garrisons in Ireland that plundered ten times more
then their pay came to, enjoy four large Counties, and all the great Towns and
Corporations of a Kingdom, whilst the whole body of the Royallists in England
are so much slighted that there is not one Parish in the Country, nor Street in
any City, conferred upon them? Will not the Irish Forty nine Men allow us, that
Prince Rupert, the Duke of Newcastle, Montross, Bristol, Barkley, Middleton,
Rochester, Gerard, and several other Noblemen of England and Scotland, deserve
to have their Arrears stated and satisfied, as well as the Grandees of Ireland?
I, there any convenience, (for I am sure there can be no Justice) to provide
for the one and not for the other? It cannot be said that his Majesty is
obliged by the Act of 17. Car. by his Declaration from Breda, or any other
Covenant, to recompense in so large a manner, the mercenary service of his
Protestant Officers in Ireland, without any regard to be had for the
innumerable Sufferings, and present want of so many Indigent Cavaliers in
England, who have not bread to eat, nor a house to lie in, and scarce a Rag to
cover their Nakedness.

To give some color to this apparent partiality, the first Minister of State
is forced to betake himself to his last refuge, telling, as for a final reason,
that the Protestant English Interest cannot by maintained in Ireland, without
extirpating the Natives. And therefore, that the Counties and Corperations
undisposed of by the Commonwealth, must not be restored to the Natives upon any
account. The preservation of this Interest is now become ultima ratio, and the
non plus ultra to all political Debates; and seeing the Learned Gown-man will
needs establish it for a first Principle not to be denied, is not amiss to
consider more attentively this Idol, that occasions so much impiety. As for the
Protestant Interest, I must confess his Majesty's bound to maintain it in all
his Kingdoms and Dominions, as far forth as the Glory of God requires, and the
Law of Nations, and the several Constitutions of particular places will admit.
Certainly, no Man (though never so zealous,) will say, that his Majesty was
obliged, when he held the Town of Dunkirk in Flanders, to expiate the ancient
Inhabitants, and place new English Colonies in their room, for the preservation
of a Protestant Interest. True Religion was ever yet planted by preaching and
good example, not by violence and oppression: An unjust intrusion into the
Neighbors Estate, is not the right way to convert the ancient Proprietors, who
will hardly be induced to embrace a Religion, whose Professors have done them
so much injustice: And as to the present Settlement of Ireland, it is apparent
to the World, that the Confiscation of Estates, and not the Conversion of
Souls, is the only thing aimed at. If by the English Interest we understand the
present Possession of the London Adventurers, and of Cromwell's Soldiers, there
is no doubt it is inconsistent with the restoration of the Irish, neither can
the New English Title to Land be well maintained, without destroying the old
Title of the Natives; even as the Interest of the late Commonwealth was
incompatible with Monarchy, and Cromwels Protectorship was inconsistent with
the Kings Government But, if by the English Interest, we understand (as we
ought to do) the Interest of the Crown and Cavaliers of England, I see no
reason why it might not be preserved in Ireland for 500 years to come) as well
it was preserved there for 500 years past, without extirpating the Natives. Why
could not the English Interest be maintained in Ireland, without extirpation,
as well as the Spanish Interest is preserved in Naples and Flanders; the French
Interest in Rossilignion and Alsace; the Swedish Interest in Breme and
Pomerland; the Danish Interest in Norway; the Austrian Interest in Hungary; the
Venetian Interest in Dalmatia; and the Ottoman Interest over all Greece; and so
many other Christian Provinces, without dispossessing the Ancient Inhabitants
of their Patrimonies and Birthrights? Forts, Cittadels, Armies, and Garrisons
Punishment and Reward, were hitherto held the only lawful means for the
Christian Princes to maintain their Authority, and secure their Interest: Such
an extirpation was never yet practiced by any Prince that followed the Law of
the Gospel.

But, supposing that the preservation of an English Interest were so sacred a
thing, that it may be held lawful in that regard to extirpate the old
Inhabitants of Ireland, who have received from the hand of God that Portion of
the Earth for their Inhabitants; upon what color of Title can our rigid
Statesman design the extirpation of so many Families in Ireland, or the English
race and Extraction, lineally descended from the best Families in England, and
those Ancient English Colonies who first brought over that Interest into
Ireland, and maintained it there for so many Ages? If this Cannibal English
Interest, gives no better quarter to the Children of English in Ireland, what
can Strangers expect? Nay, what assurance can be had for the prosperity of
those very Adventurers and Soldiers, that after an Age or two they shall not
be likewise devoured, or displaced to make room for a new swarm of English
Planters, upon the account of securing a new English Interest: And those new
Colonies also within an Age after, shall extirpated upon the same score; For
the Children of those who were planted in Ireland, about the beginning of King
James his Reign, are now destroyed, for the better security of an English
Interest, as well as the posterity of the first English, who Invaded the
Country in the days of King Henry the Second; so that to the Worlds end, if we
follow this Rule, we shall never be able to secure the English Interest in the
Kingdom of Ireland.

The Grandees are the Fourth and last in order, that obstruct the Restoration
of the Irish Natives: Their Title is soon examined, being only founded on the
Kings free Grant; for it cannot be said that His Majesty was bound by any
former obligation, or pretended convenience, to confer on his Courtiers and
Favorites the Land of other People. Can there be any convenience (not to speak
of Justice) that the Kings only Brother, and Heir apparent to three Crowns,
should enjoy so many thousands a year in Ireland of poor Gentlemen's Estates,
whereof some had the honor to serve under his Command in Foreign Countries?
And is it fit to expose his Royal Highness and his Princely Posterity to the
many inconveniences, and heavy Judgments which commonly follow illegal and
unjust acquisitions? It is a remarkable passage, that Miles Corbe^ and other
Regicides, who went over into Ireland, got a large proportion of Irish Land,
for no other service, but the execrable Sentence of Death which they gave
against our late Sovereign, and that the Duke of York should now enjoy all that
Land, by no other Title but that of the Regicides. The Land was given them by a
Tyrant, for murdering the King, let the World judge of the goodness of their
Title; certainly whosoever comes to inherit them, can have no better. I shall
make no mention here of so many Courtiers of a lesser Sphere, who have got vast
Estates in Ireland, by his Majesty's free Gift, and whom the first Ministers of
State have purposely interressed in that Kingdom, to engage them against the
Natives; whereby the Restoration of the Irish is rendered impossible, and the
satisfaction of Adventurers and Soldiers already disposed by the Decrees of
the last Court of Claims, is much obstructed, so many fresh Grants exhausting
the stock of Reprisals.

My Lord, I have hitherto set down in brief the hard usage extended to the
Irish since his Majesty's Re-establishment, and examined the Title of the
several Interests obstructing their Restoration. Now it remains to say somewhat
of the undoubted right, and indisputable Claim of the Natives, to those Estates
which by Cromwels Decree, and his Majesty's confirmation, are kept from them.

I will not take upon me to justify their first rising, (although I have seen
a Treatise in Latin proving the lawfulness, or rather the necessity, of that
War on their side, having begun it in their own defense, to prevent the general
ruin and destruction designed against the Kindom and themselves (by the
Presbyterian party both in England and Scotlana) I shall not excuse any
Subjects presuming to take Arms, upon any account or pretense whatsoever,
without the Authority of their Prince; I will only say, that by their
Insurrection (how bloody and barbarous soever some are pleased to print and
paint it) four hundred English could not be found murdered in Ireland, as
appears by the proceedings (and Records yet extant in Dublin) of the Usurped
Powers severe inquiry, and their Court of Justice, that for want of Men did
hang Women, not only without legal proof, but without probability that they
could or would be guilty of killing Soldiers, or Innocent English. The Irish
insurrection, I say* has not been accompanied with that Insolence and Malice
in the beginning, nor with those sad and dismal effects in the end, which other
Rebellions have been guilty of, and some Pamphlets have charged the Irish with.
They were scarce 22 Months in Arms, when they yielded to a Cessation upon the
first notice given of his Majesty's pleasure, although they had then the upper
hand of their Enemies; and it was known the Protestant party could not be well
preserved without it. This Cessation was enlarged from time to time, until a
final Peace was solemnly concluded in the City of Kilkenny, in the year of our
Lord 1648 by, and between the Lord Duke of Ormond, his Majesty's Commissioner,
in the behalf of his Majesty; and the General Assembly of the Confederate
Cathol^cks of Ireland, in the behalf of the said Confederate Catholics. This
peace was no sooner published, than all the Garrisons, Forts, Citadels
Strongholds, and Magazines of the Irish, were put under the Command of the
Kings Lieutenant; all the Nobility, Gentry, and Magistrates, both in Cities and
Country submitted to his Government. And though the English Rebels have been
ever since very succesful in all their attempts, yet the Irish, notwithstanding
they were offered any conditions by the Usurper, held out, with an undaunted
Courage, until the last Town, and the last Fortress was lost, and until they
received express Orders from his Majesty to yield to the times, and to make the
best conditions they could for their own preservation. It is remarkable, that
this peace was concluded in a time, when the Irish Nation was in a most
flourishing condition, having Armies in the Field, and most of the Cities and
great Towns in their possessions, and more than three parts of the Kingdom
under their command, when they were courted by the Parliament of England, and
solicited, by some Neighboring Potentates, and when by espousing his Majesty's
quarrel, (who was then destitute of all humane support) they were to draw on
their Country all their united Force and Power of the Victorious Rebels in
England and Scotland, and consequently expose themselves and their Posterity to
the danger of an unevitable ruin and destruction.

I know their Adversaries have practiced all the artifice that Malice could
invent, to persuade the World, that his Majesty is no way obliged to make good
that peace which was concluded by the Authority of his Royal Father. And
Solemnly confirmed by himself. Those Articles, they say, were forced from His
Majesty by the Irish Confederates who ought to loose the benefit of all his
Majesty's gracious concessions, having banished the Lord Duke Ormond, His
Majesty's Lieutenant, out of Ireland. It is easily proved, that the King was
forced to take the Solemn League and Covenant, when he was environed by the
Presbyteriam Army in Scotland: But I do not understand how it can be made out,
that the Confederates of Ireland were able to exort that peace from his
Majesty, who was then in France. It will seem very ridiculous to say, that the
Lord Marquess of Antrim, and the Lord Muskry (employed by the Consederate
Catholics, to solicit, in a most humble manner, for those Articles which only
contain a pardon for the past, and the liberty of Freeborn Subjects for the
future) should come to Paris with a train sufficient to force a Sovereign
Prince, lodged in the Louvre, who was Cousin German to his most Christian
Majesty The other Assertion, that the Lord Duke of Ormond was banished out of
Ireland by the Confederates, is very false; His Lordship being driven out of
the provinces of Leinster and Munster, by the power of Cromwels. Army, and
forced to retire to the province of Connaught, from whence he took Shipping for
France, to inform the Queens Majesty of the sad condi^ion of that Kingdom, and
to implore some succor from abroad, (which if timely obtained) might probably
give a stop to Cromwels conquest, and render him unable to bring his Victorious
Forces out of Ireland, and defeat his Majesty at Worcester, His Lordship having
appointed the Lord Marquess of Clanrickard to Command in his absence, as the
Kings Deputy, to whom the Nation showed all due obedience and submission) is a
manifest argument that his Lordship was not banished out of the Kingdom by the
Confederate Catholics; for whom he named, a Commander in his own absence:
neither can it reflect upon the generality of the Nation, what was decreed by
some prelates convened in Jamestown, whose unseasonable zeal was soon after
condemned, and protested against by a general Assembly held in Loghreagh, of
the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of the whole Kingdom. And the advantageous
proposals then made by Cromwels Agents, were generously rejected by that
Assembly, the Nation having unanimously resolved to rise or fall with the Kings
Interest. But what need we any other Evidence to prove that the Irish did not
generally violate the Articles of that peace, then His Majesty's own words, in
the preamble of his Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland. And therefore we
could not but hold our self obliged to perform what we owe by that peace to
those who had honestly and faithfully performed what they had promised to us,
etc.

The Irish being at the last overpowered at home, though they lost their
Country, they did not fail in their Loyalty, most of their young Nobility and
Gentry having followed his Majesty into Foreign Countries, and resorted from
all parts to side with those Princes who favored his Interest; when the King
was in France, they quitted the Spanish service; and when he came to Flanders,
they abandoned the French service and flocked in great numbers about his Royal
Person, having made up in short time, a handsome body of an Army, which rendered
his Majesty considerable to his Friends abroad, and dreadful to his Enemies at
home. These are verities that none dare impugn, seeing the King himself is most
graciously pleased to own them in his Declaration. And in the first place, we
did, and must always remember the great affection a considerable part of that
Nation expressed to Us during the time of our being beyond the Seas, when with
all cheerfulness and obedience they received, and submitted to our Orders, and
betook, themselves to that service which we directed as most convenient and
behooveful at that time to us, though attended with inconveniency enough to
themselves: which demeanor of theirs, cannot but be thought very worthy of our
Protection, Justice and Favor.

My Lord, Is it not a sad case, that the Irish Nation who sacrificed their
Lives, their Estates and Fortunes, and all the Interest they had in their
Country for the Kings service, who followed his Majesty abroad, and stuck to
him in his Banishment, when he was abandoned almost by all the rest of his
Subjects in the three Kingdoms, should now be in a far worse condition, than
they were reduced unto, during the Usurpers Reign? For then their Estates were
kept from them by violence, and the un-resistable power of Cromwell's Army; but
now they seem to be legally adjudged against them by two Acts of Parliament.
They were then in hopes that God would one day Re-establish his Sacred Majesty
in a peaceable and entire Possession of his Crown and Kingdoms, and
consequently restore to them their ancient Patrimonies, which they lost upon
the account of his Interest: But now, they behold his Majesty seated in the
Glorious Throne of his Ancestors, and themselves out of all hopes of ever
enjoying their Estates, which are conferred on their (and his Majesty's)
Enemies, by a final sentence pronounced against them; and (which surpasses all
the misery that can be Imagined) they are eternally condemned by a Messiah, in
whom they hoped for redemption, and for whose sake they sacrificed their lives,
lost their Fortunes, quitted their Country, and forsook all that was dear to
them in this World: And this done by the corruption and covetousness of two or
three persons, whereof one was the first Minister.

The extraordinary merit of this Nation in his Majesty's service, was fresh in
his Majesty's memory when he spoke after this man-to the House of Peers, on the
27 July, 1660. Touching the Act of Indemnity; I hope I need say nothing of
Ireland, and that they alone shall not be without the benefit of my Mercy: They
have showed much affection to me abroad, and you will have a care of my honor,
and what I have poomised to them.

My Lord, to pass by Honor and Gratitude, (which some Statesmen little value)
how shall we excuse the Injustice of these proceedings? Suppose the Peace
concluded in the year 1648. was invalid, and that his Majesty received no
service abroad from any of the Irish Nation, can he in justice condemn 7000
Innocents, (before they are heard) inoffensive Persons, who never offended his
Royal Father, nor himself: Let us suppose farther, that an Innocent person
could not be found in all Ireland, that every individual of that Nation were an
obstinate Rebel from the beginning, and that none of them ever deserved the
least favor from his Majesty in point of Conscience, Honor, or Gratitude; can
our prime Minister and his adherents say, that so many thousand Widows and
Orphans (though never so criminal) are not fit objects of his Majesty's
Compassion and Clemency?

That Kings are the Anointed of the Lord, and his Lieutenants on Earth, is an
infallible truth received among Christians; and as they derive their power
immediately from God, so they ought to imitate him in their Actions. But of all
the Divine Attributes, his Mercy, as it is above all the rest of his Works,
Misericordia ejus supra omnia opera ejus, so is it that alone which Princes are
most concerned to follow. It is by this Heavenly Virtue, that good Kings have
been always distinguished from Tyrants, and that they appeared to their
Subjects as the very Images of Divinity. I do not think that the English Crown
was ever worn by a Prince more Benign and Merciful than Charles the Second, I
am confident there is no King now living on Earth, who has given a larger
Testimony of his natural propensity and inclination that way. How great then
must be the Guilt of those Ministers of State that cunningly obstructed the
effects of the Bounty and Clemency of so good and gracious a Prince toward an
Innocent people; and perhaps not the least deserving of his Subjects? Their
gettings by the Bills of Settlement spoils their plea, and pretense for the
promotion of protestancy. It will seem a paradox to posterity, that the Irish
Nation, which in all Insurrections has been pardoned, and preserved by the
Royal Bounty of Kings, merely English should now be condemned to an eternal
extirpation by a King of old Irish extraction (lineally descended from
Fergusius a Prince of the Royal blood of Ireland) who of all the Kings that
ever Reigned in England, was most obliged to the Irish Nation, and that during
the Reign of Charles the Second, (the most merciful Prince that ever wore a
Crown) so many thousand Innocents should be exempted from a hearing, and others
from a General pardon, which by a Mercy wholly extraordinary, does extend to
some of the very Regicides.

These are verities not to be doubted of in our days, which after Ages will
hardly admit, seeing the like was never before Recorded in Annals, or mentioned
in any History: For, since the Creation of Adam to this day (and perhaps our
posterity to the Worlds end, may be as far to seek) we cannot produce another
example of the like measure extended to a Christian people, under the Government
of a most Christian Prince. The most bloody Tyrants of former Ages, even those
Monsters of Nature, who seemed to be born for no other end, than the desolation
of Mankind, did never extirpate their old Friends, to make room for their
reconciled Enemies: So that it must be a very difficult matter to persuade
those who are not Eyewitnesses of the Fact, that the Royal Authority of our
Gracious King, which here in England maintains the Peer in his Splendour and
Dignity, the Commoner in his Birthright and Liberty, which protects the Weak
from the oppression of the mighty, secures the Nobility from the Insolence of
the people, and by which Equal and Impartial Justice is indifferently
distributed to all the Inhabitants of this Great and Flourishing Realm; should
be at the same time made use of in his Kingdom of Ireland, to condemn Innocents
before they are heard, to destroy so many thousand Widows and Orphans, to
confirm unlawful and usurped possessions, to violate the public Faith, to
punish Virtue, to countenance Vice, to hold Loyalty a Crime, and Treason worthy
of Reward. The bloody and covetous Statesman who chiefly occasioned all this
disorder, was very often heard to say, with a fierce countenance, and
passionate tone, the Irish deserve to be extirpated, and then he would (after
his usual manner) come out with a great Oath, and swear, they shall all be
extirpated, Root and Branch. Good God, what a Heathen expression is this in the
mouth of a Christian, who is expressly commanded to love his Enemies? Does he
think that the Divine Providence, which orders the growth of Herbs, the fall of
Leaves, and appoints an Angel for the guard of every individual person, takes
no care to preserve an entire Body of a Nation? and that it shall be in the
power of one man to destroy the work of God at his pleasure; of such a Man that
could not prevent his own disgrace, not avoid the many other inconveniences
which are like to fall upon him.

This proud Haman, who, jointly with some few others, to get Money for
themselves, and Estates for their Children) contrived the general extirpation
of the whole Irish race; but before he could fully compass his wicked Design (I
must confess he went very near to do it, and if God had given him a longer
continuance of power he would undoubtedly make good his word) was forced for
his own safety, and the preservation of his life, to quit his fine House,
forsake his Family, and bid his Country farewell, and to travel in his old age,
in the dead of Winter, through so many dangers at Sea, and incommodities by
Land, to seek for some shelter abroad, seeing he could not be secure at home
Justu es, Domine, and justum judicium tuum. He is gone with all his Greatness,
and the miseries of the poor Irish do still continue; however they are yet in
being, and live in hope that the fall of their Mortal Enemy may be a beginning
of their Rise, and that his Majesty will now seriously reflect upon the
unparalled usage hitherto extended to that Nation, who are deprived of the
Benefit of Law, Justice, and public Faith: The cries and tears of more than an
hundred thousand Widows and Orphans, being worthy his Majesty's Princely
consideration. And certainly there can be no great difficulty met with to
dissannul two illegal Acts, which are evidently repugnant, not only to the Law
of God and Nature, contrary to the common reason, and consequently void in
themselves) but also to all sound Policy and reason of State; For that the true
Interest of England (as relating to Ireland) consists in raising* he Irish as a
Bulwark, or balance, against our English and Scotch Presbyterians. The Irish
Papists agreed so well, and lived so peaceably with our English Prelatiques,
during the Reign of King James, and Seventeen years of King Charles the First,
that they seemed to be of one mind in all matters: And when the Presbyterian
practices and Covenant began to disturb these Kingdoms, the Papists and
Prelatiques in Ireland (as well as in England) joined their hearts and hands
against Presbytery for the King. The great Earl of Strafford judged it was a
true Protestant Cavalier Interest, to raise an Army of Papists in Ireland
thereby to keep in awe the Presbyterians of Scotland and England. And indeed
the Presbyterian designs could never have had been compassed, if the King had
not been forced to disband the same Army Then the Earl (now Duke of Ormond
(thought it was the true English and Cavalier Interest, join in Parliament with
the Roman Catholic Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, against the Presbyterian
Lords Justices, and their Faction; and therefore jointly with them, resolved to
secure their persons, and seize upon the Castle and Magazine of Dublin, for his
Majesty; But this their Design was quashed by an inconsiderate attempt of some
Northern Gentlemen, which occasioned the late Rebellion and encouraged the
presbyterian Lords, Justices to force the Kings Loyal Subjects into desperate
Courses: But no sooner were the presbyterian Lord Justices deposed, and
imprisoned by the Kings commands, but the Roman Catholics, returned to their
Duty, first by a Cessation, next by a submissive peace, delivering the whole
Kingdom to the Duke of Ormond, and joining with the Cavalier party against the
Kings Enemies, and so continued until both were overpowered by Cromwell.

Another reason why understanding men judge the Irish ought to be preserved,
and their Interest preferred before that of Cromwels Creatures, is, that the
English of Ireland are not able to defend themselves against the Scots in that
Country; If the Irish be Neuters. The Scots are a people so numerous, so
needy, and so near unto Ireland, so cunning, close, and confederated in a
common Interest, that some of our Statesmen apprehend, they may soon possess
themselves of the whole Island, they being at this present, not only Masters of
Vister, but spread over the other provinces, and very well armed. Now, if
despair should dictate to the destroyed Irish, that it is their convenience to
join with the Scots against the English that possess their Estates, without
question the English Interest will be lost in Ireland. It is better therefore,
that the Irish Nation be gained, by restoring them to their own (such only
excepted as had their hands in murdering English) than that a few presbyterian
and phanatick up-starts be made great by other Men's Estates, and the whole
Kingdom endangered to be wrested out of our hands, and separated from the Crown
of England.

You see, my Lord that there seems to be as little convenience as Conscience in
my Lord Clarendon's, and his covetous partners Settlement of Ireland; yet I
must confess this Domestic affair agrees well with his policy in Foreign
Negotiations. Until his time the Statesmen of Europe (particularly the
English,) made it their business to keep the scales equal between France and
Spain, least either of those two potentates might aspire unto an Universal
Monarchy; But the Earl of Clarendon made it his business to utterly destroy
Spain, and exalt the French King to such a height of power, that in a short
time he might be Master of the Netherlands, and find no opposition in his way
into England; And indeed had not our Kings Conduct and Courage been
extraordinary, in closing up a new Defensive League so seasonably, and in
concluding a peace between Spain and Portugal, no part of Europe that is worth
the Coveting, could be free from the French command. I hope, that as God has
inspired his Majesty to prevent (by this League and peace,) the dangers which
corrupt Ministers drew upon us, so He will move him to establish a lasting
peace in his Dominions, by a just repeal of the Irish Act of Settlement; And
thereby to quash all the Designs against England, That France or any Foreigner
may endeavor to ground upon the discontents of a destroyed, and desperate
people.

Now, my Lord, that you have had this account of the transactions in Ireland
since his Majesty's Restoration, it were an act worthy your Lordship (being a
leading Member in the House of peers in England, and much relied upon in the
House of Commons (to make it your request to his Majesty, that the Business of
Ireland may receive one public hearing, and all parties concerned appear by
their Agents, which if your Lordship prevail to get done, if the Settlement as
it is now Established, be deemed Just, will be happy for the possessours, and
take away all Calumnies that the Irish do over all the World east on the
Managers of that Settlement; But if it appear not to be a just Settlement, then
Justice in so high a degree will become the King, and his Highest Court, and
will evidence the Truth or Nullitie of what has been here been offered to your
Lordship, by,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and most Humble Servant F. D.

FINIS.

