A Friendly Letter TO ALL YOUNG MEN, Showing the Benefit of a Religious and
Friendly Reproof, Conversation, and Admonition;

And not only to live good Lives themselves, but to encourage others to do the
same. With a Letter to Masters of Families.

To which is added, A Specimen of the Rules and Orders of the Religious
Societies, as now Practiced in the Cities of London and Westminster.

The Fifth Edition.

Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, Eccles. 12. 1.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by W. Downing in Bartholomew-Close near
West-Smithfield, 1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Bookseller being upon Printing another Edition of the Friendly Letter to
all Young Men, I thought it might not be amiss, in order to the Increasing
these Religious Societies, to prin^ those Excellent Gospel Rules and Orders the
First Edition speaks of, being such as have been approved of by many Eminent
Divines of the Church of England, and which are agreeable to the Practice of
the best Christians, in the first and purest Ages of the Church, and such as I
hope will induce the Reader to set up such a Religious Society amongst his
Neighbors, where much good may be done, as there has already been by them in
the Cities of London and Westminster, and several other Places in this Kingdom,
as well as in Ireland; (by which means great Numbers of poor Housekeepers have
been Relieved, poor Children kept to School, and after put Apprentices.) The
Bishop of Sarum, in his Essay on the Memory of our late Gracious QVEEN, page
118. gives this Account of her Opinion and Satisfaction of these Societies in
these Words; She did hearken carefully after every thing that seemed to give
some hope that the next Generation should be better than the present, with a
particular Attention: She heard of a Spirit of Devotion and Piety that was
spreading it self among the Youth of this great City, with a true Satisfaction:
She enquired often and much about it, and was glad to hear it went on and
prevailed.

Some of these Societies have (by their pious Examples) influenced Dissenters
to come to Church, and several Anabaptists and Quakers to Baptism; and have
been a means of preserving from Popery several Unsteady and Wavering people, in
the late times: And being not unsensible of their own and others Infirmities,
they keep up these Societies, in meeting together once a Week, that they may
reinforce on each others Minds the great Principles of Christianity, in order
to the carrying on those good Works they are already engaged in, and which, I
hope, will induce the Reader to an Imitation.

My Design in this little Treatise is only to assist the Ignorant, and those
who are willing to form themselves into Societies, they being so very
beneficial to Youth, as well as to those of Riper Years. For as there is
nothing in its self more Excellent than Religion; so you cannot imagine the
unspeakable Advantages a Pious Youth gains by the Practice of it in these
Societies.

Do but consider how welcome a Young Convert is to God: It was to young Samuel
that God revealed himself, to show how much He honored a young Propher, 1 Samuel
3. 1. And you know that St. John, the Youngest of all the Disciples, is the
only Person of all the Twelve, who was permitted to lean on our Savior's Bosom
at the last Supper, as dearest in Affection to Him, and who is called, the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, John 13. 23. And this is suitable to that Gracious
Promise which God has made, to encourage all Young Persons to serve Him; I
love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me, Prove. 18. 7.

O Young Man, whosoever thou art, that read this Promise, let it excite in
thee a great Zeal to seek God, and to seek Him early; for if thou do seek,
thou art sure to find Him: thou art sure when thou have found Him, he will love
thee, and thou shall reap all the happy effects of God's Infinite Love, and of
an early Piety; and the Pleasure of well-doing that thou will at present feel.

Think if you can how unconceivable a Joy it will be to you, when in your Elder
years you can reflect on your well-spent time, and the Innocence of your Youth;
how great a Consolation it will be to you when you come to your Deathbed; how
easy it will render your Accounts at the great Day of Judgment; and how much a
whole Life spent in God's Service will increase your Glory in the other World.

Therefore consider the vast Necessity and the Advantage there is of beginning
to be good betimes; for we know not but that the next moment may determine our
Everlasting Fate; and the hopes of Heaven, which we have now in our Hands, may
slip from us before to Morrow Morning, and so leave us desperate for Ever.

Therefore consider what a dreadful venture you run, if you delay your Time of
Salvation, or put it off from Day to Day; and the longer you delay, the more
averse you will be to it; for your Lusts will every Day grow dearer and dearer
unto you, and you will find your selves more and more unwilling to part with
them: Therefore make no delay, but take the Wise Man's Advice, and make no
tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put it not off from Day to Day.

And let this Consideration engage you further, to think what Engagements you
ly under to an Holy Life by your own Profession, Promises and Vows; for you
profess and call your selves Christians, Followers of Christ, ought you not
then to follow his Example, and obey his Commands, if you will make good that
Name? You will think it a great Disgrace not to be taken for Christians, but
for a Turk or Jew: Beware then, lest you bring this Disgrace upon your self by
an unchristian Temper of Mind, and ill course of Life; for if you are False, or
Cruel; Covetous, or Lustful; Proud, or Revengeful, like a Turk or Heathen, it
matters little what you call your self: For he is not a Christian, that is one
outwardly; but he that has the same Mind and Spirit that was in Christ Jesus:
For God will not, at the Last Day, Judge Men by their Names and Titles, but by
their Hearts and Lives; only it will go much worse with a Man that calls
himself a Christian, and lives like a Turk or Infidel. Therefore make no Delay
about a Holy Life, but strive, and use your utmost endeavor to make your self
what you will wish to be when you come to die.

And one great means to effect this will be, to keep such Company as are
already engaged in a Holy Life; for to hear the Discourse of Religious Men
delights us, and their Company is the most Beneficial; and it is That which I
recommend in the following Letter, and that I would desire you to read
seriously over and over again, not as Schoolboys do their Lessons; but apply
it to your self as you read, and consider whether you are of such a Temper or
no that this Letter recommends; and if you are, persevere in it to the end,
remembering that gracious Promise, He that endures to the End shall be saved;
if you are not, make no delay, but strive to find out some of those Men that
live good Lives, and they will be a Help and Benefit to you: But above all,
acquaint your self with a sober Minister, and consult him with the great
concernments of your Soul: Remember always that this is a Work that must not be
delayed; for we know not what a Day may bring forth: Therefore take St. Paul' s
Advice, with which I shall conclude, Romans 13. 12, 13, 14. Let us therefore cast
off the Works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk
Honestly as in the Day* not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our
Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, Make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his Sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Friendly Letter TO ALL YOUNG MEN, etc.
DEarly Beloved Brethren, and Fellow Members of the Church of England, it is to
you that I now Write, as a Friend and a Brother; for such we should all be one
to another; and our Savior makes it the great visible Badge of Christianity;
By this (says he) shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love
one for another.

Now, this Divine Grace of Love and Charity being the Foundation of all
Religion, let it show its self that it is in our Hearts, by a true and sincere
Desire of doing Good to one another, and to all Men, to their precious and
Immortal Souls; and let us look upon it as our Duty, the Endeavoring to save
them; and the only means whereby to effect that Work is, to promote Godliness
in the World, and Holiness of Life; for without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord.

Now, to the Promoting of Godliness in the World, nothing is more effectual
than the frequent Conversation of Christians with each other: This is a Truth
that may be manifested from diverse Arguments: This is that therefore which in
this Letter I would chiefly recommend to you; to wit, Christian Conversation
and Society.

Man is a Creature made for Society; it is by That that he eases his Mind, by
Communicating his Thoughts; it is by That that he receives Comfort, by the
Counsel of others, and gets Wisdom by their Admonition and Advice; nay, it is
by That (as an Instrument by which the Holy Spirit does work) that he gets
Grace: For all Conversation is of an assimilating Nature; that is, it makes Men
become like to those they converse withal; and, consequently, the same effect
may be reasonably hoped for from Christian Conversation. And this may be
further manifested from the Practice of Satan, whose Business it is therefore,
in the first place, to divert Men from Christian Conversation; and this he
effects, First, By bringing Reproach on such Assemblies, as Phanatical, and
tending to Schism, thereby affrighting weak Christians, who have not strength
to endure Shame for the Name of Christ, or that have not Judgment to determine
rightly of Enthusiasm and Schism. And, Secondly, by Furnishing of Men with
Diversity of other Conversation; and for this End he has set up Profane and
Atheistical Clubs in Taverns and Alehouses, and other Merry Meetings, which
tend much to the Promoting of his Kingdom; because (beside other Evils) they
keep Men from serious and pious Discourse; for, see what is the Discourse of
every Tavern-Club, of every Coffee-House-Table, of every Merry Meeting. What
Discourse do you there meet with that is seasoned with Grace, and to the use of
Edifying, which, the Apostle tells us, all our Discourse ought to be? It were
to be wished, that it were no worse than Idle; and yet, for every Idle Word
that Men shall speak, (our Savior assures us) they shall give an Account at
the Day of Judgment. And if there should be some good Christians among them in
such Places, yet, How are they daunted? How little Courage have they to promote
any spiritual or savory Discourse? How ashamed to reprove any Profaneness or
filthy Talk? till, by degrees, from using to hear such, things without
Reproving them, they grow cold in their Zeal for Religion, and, at length,
become insensible: so very true it is what the Apostle says, that Evil
Communication corrupts even good Manners: It is like an infectious Disease, it
gets into our Nature, and we know not how, and spreads its self into all our
Words and Actions.

This is a true Reason why Christians are so cold in their Devotions, so tardy
in their Journey Heavenward, even because they converse too much with the Men
of the World, which, the Holy Ghost assures us, is Enmity to God: because they
are so far taken with one Man's Wit, another's good Humor, a third's Raillery,
as to wink at his Profaneness, his lewd Jests, his impudent Slander; and so by
growing cool in their Zeal for Virtue, Piety, and the Glory of God, they at
length sink insensibly into an unthinking State; whereas if we followed the
Apostle's Advice, with a Brother that were a Fornicator, or a Worldling, no not
to eat, we should then be sure of keeping alive that Fervor and Holy Zeal in
our Hearts, which alone denominate us Christians.

Now since it is most manifest, That nothing does more promote the Kingdom of
Satan than these public Clubs, Why should not good Christians countermine
them, by making Sober Societies among themselves? For in Company with Religious
Persons, one is tempted to utter those good things which weak Christians are
ashamed to speak before the Wicked; and we should have great Encouragement to
speak what might be to the use of Edifying, and ministering Grace to the
Hearers, and should our selves soon find the Benefit of keeping such Company. I
am (says Holy David) the Companion of all those that fear Thee, and keep thy
Righteous Judgments.

Can a Man touch Pitch, (says the Prophet) and not be defiled therewith? Can a
Man carry Fire in his Bosom, and his Clothes not be burnt? So neither can a Man
walk in the Path of the Ungodly, but if he have not out of it, he will soon
come to stand in the ways of Sinners, and, at last, to sit down in the Seat of
the Scornful; to mock at all Religion, and then his Case is desperate.

I cannot sufficiently caution you against so dangerous a Temptation as that of
Ill Company; and especially, because there are so many Snares to draw Men into
Company in general, of which the chiefest and (as is commonly thought) the most
innocent is, To divert and pass away the Time. But, O consider what a sad thing
it is to drive away that Time which flies away too fast. Consider that your
whole Life, if you were sure of its duration, is but a short time for to fit
and prepare your Soul for an Eternity; in which, if you should miscarry, you
are for ever Wretched and Miserable.

That Word, Pastime, is a Word of the Devil's making; the Holy Scripture says
the direct contrary, Redeem the Time. Consider the difficulty of the Work you
are to do, and then you will think the Time but too little. You are to become a
New Creature throughout, changed in every respect from your present vain
Conversation: Your Immortal Spirit came pure out of God's Hand, you have here
polluted it by the Vanities of the World, which are at Enmity with God; you
must return it to Him either Innocent, (which is impossible) or washed with the
Tears of Repentance; which Repentance does consist in a Change of your present
Course, and a Turning to God. So that your Will must be first changed before
you can be accepted of Him. You are therefore to be renewed in the Spirit of
your Mind; to mortify and subdue all those Lusts and Affections you now so
study to please: you are to root out that Revenge which you Now think so
justifiable upon an Affront; and to take up that Meekness which you Now so much
contemn for Cowardice in others: you are to break off that pursuit which you
Now make after Riches; and instead of being so careful for the Morrow, you are,
in the sober Use of proper Means, to cast all your Care upon God, to put your
whole Trust and Confidence in his Providence, and in all your Undertakings
contentedly leave the Issue to Him.

You are to endeavor the Change of your whole Nature; to rejoice in
Tribulation, which is Now so grievous: to distribute liberally the Wealth you
Now hoard up: to mortify and keep under the Flesh you Now pamper: to merit, by
well-doing, the Hatred of the World, whose Applause you Now so much seek: to
contemn all those Pleasures in which you Now consume your Time: and when you
have done all this, and a great deal more, there is yet a bitter Cup of
Repentance behind, for all those sinful Thoughts, Words, and Actions, which,
through Frailty or Wilfulness, you have (through the Strength of your corrupt
Nature) been drawn into; and also for those Numberless Sins of Omission, which
so few think of.

This Work of Repentance is so much the Duty of our Lives, that it is the very
Condition of our Salvation; for by it only is Christ's Redemption applied to
us; that is, He has, by his Death, made our Repentance available for the Pardon
of our Sins. How inexcusable then are we, who thus have, by God's Grace, the
Means put into our Hands of qualifying our selves for the Pardon of our Sins,
and, consequently, for Eternal Happiness, if we shall fool away that Time in
which this great Work must be done, and then think to set about it when Time
shall be no more; when all Means of Reconciling our selves to our offended God
shall be removed far from us?

What Multitudes are there now in Hell, who sought for Pastime in their Youth,
and thought to Repent when they grew Old? Woe! be to them that are with Child in
those days! (when the Days of Tribulation are come upon them) that conceive
good Resolutions; but the Days of Darkness overtake them before they bring
forth any thing. Consider this therefore ye that forget God, lest he pluck you
away, and there be none to deliver you. If you stop your Ear now to his Call,
(and even This is one of his Calls) and are resolved to Enjoy the Pleasures of
Sin, which are but for a Season, a very short Season, the Time will come when
you will call and cry, and then He will not hear; but then He will laugh at
your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes.

Would you then escape the Terrors of that dismal Day, that Great and Terrible
Day of the Lord, the Doom of which shall last to all Eternity? Be instant in
Prayer to God for his Assistance, to work that Change in you which I
beforementioned, and then set about it your self with the utmost Diligence;
lose no Time, but Flee for thy Life, (as the Angel said to LOT) and look not
behind thee. Work out your Salvation to Day, while it is called to Day, before
the Night comes, when no Man can work; for unless you do beget in your Mind a
Love to Heavenly things while you are here, (and which cannot be done all of a
sudden) Heaven will not be Heaven to you when you come there: You will not, you
cannot then relish what you have been so unacquainted withal, and the contrary
to which you have been all along so used to and delighted with.

Now one of the best Means to do all this is, To avoid evil Conversation, and
to seek for Good; for, as I said before, the Nature of Man requires
Conversation and Society: And, in a Christian State, he that will travel alone
in the Way to Heaven, because it is narrow, will often want a hand to lift him
out of the Mire of Temptation, a Companion to support him in the Storm of
Persecution, and even a Guide to admonish him to avoid the ruggid and rocky
Ways of Imprudent Zeal, and to help him out of the Thorny Paths of a Scrupulous
and Doubting Conscience; to all which, a Christian Conversation is the greatest
Help in this World.

Christian Society is like a Bundle of Sticks laid together, one kindles
another, and that First even by Example; To see an Injured Christian, Meek; a
Rich one, Charitable; a Great one, Humble; a Mean and Ignorant one, Obedient,
and Thankful for Instruction; an Infirm and Sickly one, Thirsting after Heaven,
and looking down with Pity on the Vanities of this World; a Christian can
hardly be in such Company without Edifying his Soul thereby.

Art thou Dejected through Losses, or Disappointments in thy Fortune? Lo here
another much Poorer than thou, yet giving God Thanks for his Bounty to him: Art
thou Tempted by Lust? Lo here another Christian Lustier and Stronger, who yet,
by Mortification and Self-denial, by Fasting and Prayer, keeps his Soul and
Body Pure, and the Fit Temple of the Holy Ghost: Art thou grovelling in the
World, and eating the Bread of Carefulness? Lo here a Heavenlyminded Christian,
having nothing, and yet possessing all things; that can say, I know how to
abound, and to be in want; yea, I count all things but Dung that I may gain
Christ.

But though this be a great Benefit of Christian Conversation, for our Example
thus to see in the same Person, the Christian Mixtures of Greatness, and
Humility; of Suffering, and Meekness; of Poverty, and Contentedness; of
Knowledge, and Modesty; of Pain, and Patience; which nothing could unite but
that which will make the Lamb and the young Lion to lie down together; yet the
Hearing of the Ear in this is yet of more Benefit than the Seeing with the Eye.

Indeed the silent Arguments of Example work even upon the Natural Man; but
Discourse edifies more the Christian by Grace; for Faith comes by Hearing. And
therefore, in the Second place, one Christian kindles another by Consolation,
Counsel, Admonition, Instruction, and Reproof, which, though it be every ones
Duty to do, yet none performs it but the true Christian; he who has a greater
Love for other Men's Souls, than for their Favor or Esteem. For want of the
Discharge of this one Duty alone, How many Thousand well-disposed Persons are
utterly lost? who cannot of themselves see the Sin that does so easily beset
them: Witness David, who could not see whilst himself was Party, and lived near
a Year insensibly under the Guilt of Murder and Adultery. Certainly Miserable
is the Man that has no such Friend, and none can be such a Friend but the
Christian; for, he that does not cast the Beam out of his own Eye, before he
pretends to take the Mote out of his Neighbors, his Reproof will be taken for
Envy or ill Nature, and so will Exasperate rather than Melt.

But, Thirdly, this Christian Conversation might be yet more highly improved,
and rendered much more beneficial to our Souls, if we would, in conversing
together, so seriously consider the the Graces we want, and the Blessings we
enjoy, as by God's Ordinances of Prayer and Praise, and the Reading of his
Word, to bring Christ into our Company, to have Him in the midst of us, O how
happy would that Meeting be! (and even this we have his sure Word of Promise
for;) then would our Meetings be every Day for the Better to us, and we should
rejoice to come often together, and even enjoy that Communion of Saints which
we hope to be of in Heaven. A Zeal for God's Glory, a Thirst for his
Ordinances, a tender Love and Pity to the Souls of Men, and a Strictness of
Life, would then insensibly grow upon us, so that we should be habitually
prepared for all Holy Duties, for the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
and even for a sudden Departure out of this World, if it should please God so
to call us hence; and might hope to be reckoned of the Number of those of whom
the Prophet Malachi speaks, saying, Then they that feared the Lord spoke often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his
Name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make
up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a Man spares his own Son that serves
him.

I know there are those that would count you Troublesome, and Busybodies, to
give them Advice, or to pretend to concern your selves about their Souls; but,
however, let not this discourage you; for, of those you give Advice to, or
admonish, if but One in Twenty hears you seriously, you have no reason to
repent the Loss of your Labor in all the rest: Nay, if even that it self
should not happen, yet for Religion's sake you should not hold your Peace; for,
Shall Men be Impudent in the Devil's Service, and shall we be Ashamed to own
God's? Is the Great God and our Maker become so inconsiderable in our Esteem,
that we dare not stand by Him, when Men dare stand up for their Vices? Is
Eternal Salvation so indifferent a thing, that we should be unconcerned for it?
Do we see the Vices of the Age Growing and Spreading, and shall not we stand in
Opposition to them? Therefore, since one teaches another Vice, let us teach
each other Virtue; since one guides another to Hell, let us help one another
forward in the Way to Heaven; and as they make one another Profane, let us
teach one another Righteousness in all our Conversation and Friendly Societies;
and let us encourage others to do the same by our Advice and Example, that
Religion may once more become a general Practice; that our Churches may be
fuller, and the Public Prayers more frequented by all that are true Members
thereof; and those that name the Name of Christ may depart from Iniquity.

For if it be Charity to direct the Blind in his Way, or when we see our
Neighbor in danger of being Robbed, or his House in danger of being Burnt, if
to run and help him is Charity; then certainly it is greater Charity to
instruct the Ignorant, by showing them the right way to Salvation. And
therefore, if you see your Christian Brother, your Neighbor or Fellow Servants,
in danger of being Ruined by keeping ill Company, or their Souls in danger of
Hellfire by Profaning the Lord's Day, by Neglecting his Laws, and Forsaking
his Commandments, to help such, by Godly Advice and Admonition, is a great Deed
of Charity; nay, it is your Duty too; for thus says the Lord, Levit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. Be not Guilty then of this great Crime
upon any Pretense whatsoever; But Exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day, lest any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin; knowing
that he that converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Ways, shall save a Soul
from Death, and shall cover a multitude of Sins.

All the Texts almost of the Holy Scripture point to this Duty, either by
Exhorting or Commanding us to set about this Necessary Work, first to lead good
Lives our selves, and then to encourage others to do the same. I do not exhort
you to Controversy, nor to meddle much with those of another Persuasion, for
that is the Minister's Work; but this is your One thing needful, to meddle with
those that own the same Church, and profess the same Faith, and yet act
contrary to it in their Lives and Conversations. Put these in mind of their
Baptismal Vow; How they then promised to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, and yet do live within the Embraces of them all. Ask them, How they dare
blame others for their Unbelief, while they live like Atheists themselves? How
they dare condemn others, for separating from the Church, when their own Lives
and Conversations are quite contrary to the Holy Doctrines thereof? How they
dare reproach others for want of Seriousness, when they live loose Lives
themselves: and are so far from Remembering their Creator in the Days of their
Youth, that they forget Him and his Laws all their Days? But entreat them to
take the Wise Man's Counsel, That they make no tarrying to turn to the Lord,
and put it not off from day to day. Put them in mind of the great Benefit of a
Holy Life and early Piety, and what a Pleasure it will be when they come to
die, to look back upon a wellspent Life, and be able to say with Hezekiah upon
a Deathbed, Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and
with a perfect Heart, and have done that which was right in thine Eyes.

And you that have already tasted those Joys which arise from a good
Conscience, and the Pleasures of a Godly Life and Conversation, fall not from
your own Stedfastness; and since you see Wicked Men take such Pains to serve
their Lusts, to please their Senses, and gratify their Appetites, be you at
some Pains also to serve your God, to advance his Glory, yea, and to encourage
others likewise to do the same. And if there be but Two in a Street that intend
really to serve God, to frequent the Sacrament, and the Prayers of the Church,
let them make it their Business to persuade Two more to do the same, and let
your Prayers be frequent and fervent to God, that He would increase the Number
of true Believers, and that it would please Him to bring into the Way of Truth,
all such as have erred and are deceived.

This would be one great Means to mend the World, and without this it will
hardly be done; it is not good Books, nor good Preaching, that will reclaim a
Profane and Profligate Wretch; for such Persons will neither read good Books,
nor hear Sermons; they are out of the reach of all other Methods, except
Counsel, Advice, and Exhortation, and oftentimes they refuse that too. But when
good Men are as Bold as evil Men are Impudent, and as openly Good as others are
Bad; when Piety has Authority in it, and frowns Profaneness out of
Countenance, then the World will mend; and if not grow Devout, yet at least,
grow Modester and Civiller toward Religion, when Virtuous Men give good
Evidence that they do believe in good Earnest, by endeavoring the Punishment
of all vicious and open Offenders, as the Law directs.

And although Piety is nowadays laughed at, and Religion out of Fashion, yet
(that I may now show you how to Practice what I have been hitherto
Recommending, (I mean a Christian Conversation and Society) I must tell you,
that there are some Christians in this Barren Age, and those of considerable
Rank and Quality, who think it is so far from unbecoming them, that nothing is
more acceptable to them than Pious Discourse, and the Company of such Men as
endeavor to make the Word of God their Rule to walk by.

And I have both known and heard of some Numbers of Religious Men in this City,
who Meet at one another Houses, usually every Week, or as often as Occasions
permit, and there make it their Business to enforce upon one another Minds the
great Principles of Christianity; to live up to the Doctrines of our Church; to
frequent the Holy Sacrament every Lord's Day; and the Public Prayers every
Day; they having a quick sense of Piety, and a great concern upon them for
another World; they endeavor to preserve this Temper in themselves, and to
propagate it to others; and many good Rules they have among them; and by their
frequent Meetings they take Notice of each others Virtues, and so they strive
to imitate each other. In one, there abounds the Grace of Meekness; in another,
is a great Christian Courage and Zeal to stand up for God's Glory; in another,
Patience; in another, Self-denial and Mortification; in another, a Zeal for
Peacemaking; and this makes them the more to desire each other's Company, as
being Monitors to one another by their Example. And this is one of their Rules,
Never to speak Ill of one another; and if, at any time, they hear Ill of one
another, or of any other good Christian, they first go and see if it be true
what envious Men do report of him, rightly considering, that as one Man may do
amiss, so may another more easily speak amiss, that being the Sin that does so
easily beset every Man: and also, that as Society is the Excellency and great
Blessing of Mankind, so Slander and Reproach, Censuring and Evil-speaking,
poisons and destroys all Love and Charity in the World: But if it prove true
that such an one has been overtaken in a Fault, they take the Apostle's Advice,
and restore him in the Spirit of Meekness, considering themselves also may be
Tempted.

At these Meetings there is no Discourse of News, nor Trade, nor Worldly
Business, or Controversy in Religion; but they take care that all their Speech
be seasoned with Grace, and to the use of Edifying, and may minister Grace to
the Hearers: And therefore they apply themselves to the constant Reading and
Studying of the Holy Scriptures, that the Word of Christ may dwell richly in
them, that so out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth may speak. They do
often, at these times, confer about the State of their Souls: they do examine
into the Growth and Decay of Piety in general, and also particularly among
themselves; and each shows what does most affect and influence him; and every
one does frequently inculcate and stir up to Perfection.

Those that were Gentlemen, and had Leisure, made it their Business to order
their Conversation so as to adorn the Gospel, and publicly to discountenance
Vice, by the Promoting the Making of good Laws, and the Putting of them in
Execution, knowing that their Example was necessary to influence Tradesmen to
be Sober, to be Religious, and to be Just in all their Dealings, and to imitate
their Burning and Shining Lights.

Those that were Masters of Families acted in their Stations like Men that
believed in good earnest that there was a Judgment to come, a Heaven and a
Hell; and that God would call all Men to an Account, what Good they have done
in their Generation. This made them never to omit going to Prayers in their
Families, and telling their Children and Servants what a Benefit it will be to
them to live in the Fear of God, and serve Him in their tender Years.

Those that were Officers in the Parishes they lived in, would suffer no
Disorder in the Streets, nor no Night-Walker, no Drunkard, no Swearer, no
Prophaner of the Lord's Day, to go Unpunished: And this was one end of joining
themselves into Neighbourly Societies, to consult upon Methods whereby to put a
stop to Vice, and bring Men to a Sense of their Duty to God and Man: And thus
they acted like Honest Men in their Offices, without Bribes, or Feasting upon
the Parish Charge.

There was likewise another Sort of Religious Societies, and those were of
Young Men, that were Apprentices, Servants, and Journy-Men; and these strived
to outdo the rest in Zeal and Piety; being not engaged in the World, they
endeavor to Dedicate themselves to God in their tender Years. To this end they
joined themselves into Societies, and there met once a Week, perhaps in some
Upper Room, to excite and stir up one another to avoid the Sins of the Age they
lived in, and to imprint likewise upon other Men's Minds a Sense of Religion; to
this end they set up, on the Lord's Day, Sermons at Night, and the Sacrament in
the Morning, and the Prayers every Night in the Week in diverse Churches, that
they might have Opportunity to go without wasting their Masters time; (and
Instructed, at their own Charge, many poor Children in reading English, and in
the Grounds of the Christian Religion) and where there was but one or two such
in a Street, they made it their Business to get two more to do the same, so
much was every one concerned for his Brother's Soul; and where they saw a Young
Man in their Neighborhood that had no Sense of Religion, but lived in Neglect
of it, they strove to reclaim him, and so did increase the number of True
Believers, and make the public Prayers more frequented; and this makes
Religion revive again, and come something toward its Primitive Institution. I
have been but too short in giving you an Account of those Men, considering what
other good Works they have done for our Example, whom we have great Reason to
imitate, as you may see in the Reverend Mr. Woodward's Book of the Rise and
Progress of the Religious Societies; as also in another Book, Entitled, An
Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners.

And though you have perhaps seen or heard, that some few who have thus begun
in the Spirit, have ended in the Flesh; yet let not this discourage you; for he
that endures to the End shall be saved: but take our Savior's Advice; for He
tells us in St. Luke, That no Man having set his hand to the Plough, and
looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. And therefore, as you have begun
by your Baptismal Vow, and by the Christian Profession you have since made,
endeavor to go on from Virtue to Virtue. And you that have found the Comfort
of leading a good Life, the Joy and Pleasure of a good Conscience, the
Advantage and Benefit of frequenting the Blessed Sacrament, and the public
Service of the Church: You that now see the Odiousness of those Vices that
others wallow in: That see the Beauty of that Virtue which others despise, and
the Charms of that Grace that others laugh at: You that see the Reasonableness
of Christ's Precepts, which others count an intolerable Yoke: In a word, You
that have some Sense and Hopes of another World, while Thousands live as if
there were none; O let not these Comforts be hid within your Breasts; but
knowing your selves Converted, strengthen your Brethren, as is commanded by our
Savior in St. Luke; and St. Chrysostom tells us, To know the Art of Alms, is
greater than to be Crowned with the Diadem of Kings; and yet, To convert one
Soul, is greater than to pour out Ten Thousand Talents into the Basket of the
Poor; therefore, according to St. Paul's Advice, Warn them that are unruly,
Comfort the feeble-minded, Support the weak, be Patient toward all Men; see
that none render Evil for Evil to any Man; but ever follow that which is good,
both among your selves, and to all Men; and if you be laughed at for your
pains, consider, that Blessed are they who shall be reviled for Christ's sake.
You may possibly cast your Pearl before Swine; but let them know, that mock at
Religion and Piety, what a sad after-Reckoning They shall have, when the
Judgment shall be set, and the Books opened, as in the Fifth Chapter of Wisdom,
Then shall the Righteous Man stand in great Boldness, before the Face of such
as have afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors. When they see it,
they shall be troubled with a terrible Fear, and shall be amazed at the
strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all they looked for. Then they
repenting, and groaning for Anguish, shall say within themselves, This was he
whom we have had sometimes in Derision, and a Proverb of Reproach. We Fools
counted his Life Madness, and his End to be without Honor. How is he numbered
among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the Saints! Then in sorrow and
grief of Heart shall they cry out upon themselves; What has Pride profited us?
or, What good has Riches with our vaunting brought us? All those things are
vanished like a Shadow, and as a Post that passes by; but the Righteous live
for evermore, their Reward is also with the most Highest. Warn them therefore
by these Terrors of the Lord, that they stand in awe and sin not; but that they
Die unto Sin, and Live unto Righteousness. Entreat them to consecrate the
Morning, the Youth of their Age to God; and that they think it not enough to
give Him the sleepiest Hours of the Day, while they bestow the liveliest upon
the World: nor to Sin as long as they can, and then turn to God. For, How many,
alas! have been cut off in this foolish Stupidity, and know not by how small a
Thread the Sword of Justice hangs over their Heads? for though God is Merciful,
yet it is only to the Penitent; but he is also Just, and rewards every Man
according to his works. He has Magazines of Vengeance, Storehouses of Curses,
and can ruin a sinful Creature a thousand ways; and yet, How Merry,
notwithstanding all this, is the Drunkard over his Cups? And how boldly does
the Swearer send up his dreadful Oaths to Heaven? and all this, because God is
Merciful and Long-suffering. But, O let them know what a terrible Abuse it is,
to let God's Mercy provoke them to Wantonness, and his Patience to cause Sin to
live in their Souls; that his Goodness should tempt them to be Foolish, and his
Compassion prompt them to affront his Glory; that his Kindness should prove
their Bane, and that the Meat he gives them should increase their Corruption;
that his Corn and Wine should be turned into Contempt of his Majesty, and that
they should make use of the Ease he gives them to Fight against his Laws; that
the Plenty they enjoy by his Providence, should encourage them to make War with
Him, from whom all their Plenty flows. O what monstrous Provocations are these!
If their Children or Servants should use Them so, what Punishments could they
think too great for them? And must God put up Affronts which they will not? O
bid them consider how He waits for their Repentance, and invites them to it;
Turn ye, turn ye, says the Lord your God, Why will ye die? and yet they
frustrate his Clemency. He is Patient, and would have them prevent the Blow;
and yet they are ready to pluck it down on their heads. To such the Apostle
speaks thus, Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art unexeusable, O Man, whosoever thou
art, that despisest the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and
Long-suffering, not considering that the Goodness of God leads to Repentance.
Make them sensible therefore of the Benefit of Subduing their Lusts and
Passions: Beg of them to restrain their inordinate Desires, and their sensual
Appetites; to curb their Anger, and to put away all Hatred toward their
Fellow Christians; to root out their Covetousness; to advance in Charity toward
their Neighbors; to grow Eminent in the Love of God; to keep Holy the
Lord's Day; to honor his Name, and obey his Laws. Put them in mind to come to
the Public Prayers of the Church, and tell them, that in the Public
Solemnities God opens his Treasures, and pours out his Grace more abundantly
upon them. Private Devotions, and the secret Offices of Religion, are like the
Refreshing of a Garden with the distilling and petty Drops of a Water-Pot; but
the Returns to Addresses made in the Temple, and Services offered up in the
public Communion of Saints, is like Rain from Heaven. Advise them to behave
themselves decently in the House of God; for to be rude and talking, to laugh
and gaze about, or to do any Indecency in that Place, is to affront the
Almighty to his very Face: And for their more devout Behavior in the Church,
recommend to them to read Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple; and another
thing put them in mind of, not to repeat the Absolution, for that is to be
pronounced by the Priest alone; and this I urge, because I have observed some
saying the Absolution along after the Priest, as if we could pardon our selves:
nor to repeat the Commandments in the Church; but we ought to hearken to them
with Reverence, as if they were then spoken from God: neither should they
repeat any of the Prayers with an audible Voice, except the Lord's-Prayer and
the Responses, because they give great Disturbance to others in their Devotions.

And I would particularly recommend to every one, to buy and acquaint
themselves with the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, that they
may lay a good Foundation, and have solid Principles to go by: I am afraid that
some that think very well of themselves, do not rightly understand the
Principles of their Religion. These Articles are as Sea-Marks, to show what
Rocks and Sands you are to avoid; and by being well acquainted with them, you
will be able to give a good Account of the Doctrinal Part of our Religion; and
this is an excellent Foundation to build the Practical Part upon.

And of all things, let me warn you that you do not, in any Religious
Conversation or Society, or elsewhere, say or do any thing to the Disparagement
of the Ministry of the Church of England, but ever preserve a due Respect for
that Order: In all greater Difficulties resort to them, and pay them that
Obedience and Honor which the Holy Ghost requires of you. And though there may
be some bad Men among them, yet learn to distinguish the Order from the Defects
that cleave to some of them; and for all the ill Lives or Weakness of some, do
not condemn the rest, nor erect your selves into Teachers; but, with great
Humility, edify and encourage one another in Duties and Virtues, which belong
to all Christians. Pride and Self-conceitedness will ruin your Religion; and
if Order and Decency be not preserved, your Meeting will become a Riot, not a
Christian Society. Nothing will adorn your Piety more than a due Submission to
your Pastors; and those that would entice you to despise Them, are certainly
not your Friends, but Enemies: Therefore take the Apostle's Advice, Heb. 13.
17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves: for they
watch for your Souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with
Joy, and not with Grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

AND now, in the last This following Part being took out of a private Letter a
friend of mine designed for his Brother, I thought it might not be amiss to
recommend it to you here.
place, there is one thing more that I would particularly recommend to you that
are Masters of Families; which is this, That you would make Conscience of going
to Prayer with your Families at least once or twice a day; a Duty I think we
may trace from our Father Adam; for he was no sooner fallen from his Innocence,
and a Happy State, but was sensible God was Angry with him; and he thought it
necessary to implore the Offended Deity by Prayer and Invocation, by Sorrow and
Repentance, Offerings and Sacrifices; and instructs his Children in the
Knowledge of Divine things, and maintains Religion and the Worship of God in
his Family: For we find Cain and Abel bringing their Oblations; and Seth and
Enos called upon the Name of the Lord; and Enoch and Noah walked with God, Genesis
4. 4. 5. 26. Genesis 6. 9.

It cannot be doubted but that the Holy Patriarchs were careful in this Duty,
as appears by that Character God gave of Abraham, in Genesis 18. 19. I know him
that he will command his Children and his Household after him; and they shall
keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment: to which they joined
Prayers and Praises, as a necessary Duty: And David says, Morning and Evening,
and at Noon will I Pray; and you know Joshua's Resolution in this Duty, but as
for me and my House, we will serve the Lord, Joshua 24. 15.

These Men did not comply with the sinful Neglect of the Times: And, indeed,
it is no thanks to be Religious, or go to Prayer with your Family, when it is
the Humor and Fashion of the Times; for then you would be ashamed to neglect
it, by reason others do it: The greatest Trial is, as it was with Noah, when we
live in the midst of a corrupt Generation; for it is the Crown of Virtue to be
Good, when there are all manner of Temptations to the contrary, when the
greatest part of Men go the other way, when Virtue and Honesty are laughed at,
and censured as an over-wise and affected Singularity. Thus it was with Noah,
he contended with the Vices of the Age, and dared to own God and Religion in
his Family, when almost all Mankind, besides himself and his Family, had
rejected and thrown it off.

And although Masters of Families are so careless of this Duty, now it is grown
out of Fashion, yet it is a Duty still. The Primitive Christians did Pray with
their Families three times a Day, and looked on it as a great Sin to omit it;
and, What can we expect from you who do not care to Worship God at all! Our
bare being of the Christian Religion, or calling our selves Members of the
Church of England, will avail but little without this Duty; and our Savior
has intimated so much unto us in the Lord's-Prayer, by teaching us to Pray for
our Daily Bread; and I need not tell you that you have Daily Wants to be
supplied; Wants for your selves, and Wants for your Children and Servants: Have
you not Daily Infirmities both in your Self and Family to be healed? Are you
not Daily subject to Dangers and Temptations? And do you not Daily Sin against
God? And is it not necessary then that you Daily Pray unto God for the Supply
of all your Wants? for the Healing of all your Infirmities? for the Preventing
the Danger you are Daily subject to? for the Strengthening you against all your
Temptations? for the Pardoning of all your Sins? Surely your Daily Wants, your
Daily Infirmities, Daily Dangers, your Daily Temptations, and your Daily Sins,
do all call upon you for your Daily Prayers in your Family: For your being a
Member of that Church, I am sure will not excuse the Neglect thereof.

Besides, this I may be bold to affirm, That there is no Church this Day in the
Christian World, that, in her Doctrine, does encourage real Goodness more, or
strive more to keep the Balance even, that God may have the things that are
God's, and Man the things that are Man's, than the Church we now live in: And
how you will vindicate your self in the last day for this Neglect, I cannot
tell: When you are exhorted in the Church, told in the Pulpit that it is your
Duty, and God threatens the Neglect thereof with not owning you at the last
Day, if you do not Pray with your Family at Home, as well as bring them to
Church. Why will you profess your self Her Member, if you will not obey Her
Doctrine? What do you go to Church for, only to drive away the time, or to act
the part of a Hypocrite? Do you think the Minister is sent to Preach to you in
Vain? If you think he does not Preach the Truth, why will you go to Hear him?
If he does Preach the Truth, why will you not set about to Practice what he
says? Do you think that God takes no notice of the Neglect? or that He will
not call you to an Account for it? Yes, yes, God takes Notice of you, as He
said to the Prophet, They came before thee as my People, and they hear my
Words, but will not keep them; and what our Savior says, in Luke 19. 27. to
the Unprofitable Servant, may be said here; But those mine Enemies which would
not that I should Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Men
perhaps cannot see this Neglect, but God and Angels see it; yes, and Devils
too, which will all be Witnesses against you in the last Day of Account. O how
will you wish, when you come to Die, you had performed this Duty more your
self, instead of Laughing at those that do it; as too often I have heard some
Men blame the Dissenters for their using Extempore Prayers in their Families,
when they themselves use none at all in theirs; and think their bare being a
Member of the Church of England, and going to Church once a Week, is a
sufficient Service for Almighty God. If I am not mistaken, this has been your
Fault, Brother; And will not this be an Argument against you in the last Day?
And will not their using Extempore Prayers in their Family, condemn you for
using none at all in yours? For while you condemn all those that are of another
Persuasion, who are only Mistaken or Misled in some Texts of Scripture, or
false Notions of other Men's, you condemn your own Neglect; and this all Men
will allow, That he that is Misled in matter of Judgment, is more to be excused
than that Man who lives contrary to a known Command; for the last is condemned
in his own Judgment, if he will but take time to consider it.

And let me tell you, Brother, you will find it a very beneficial and very
easy Duty, when Love ingageth the Practice of it: for, What can there be more
easy than to pray to God, and to represent our Needs; and that we have our
Needs supplied only for asking and desiring passionately and humbly? Can we buy
any thing cheaper than at the rate of an Humble Prayer? Consider how many
excellent Promises are made to Prayer; and that nothing disposes us more to
receive the Grace of God, and a Blessing upon our Family, than Prayer: What can
be more pleasant than this Duty of Prayer? when Christ unites them to his own,
and bids us come for Relief and Pardon of our Sins: For Prayer can open the
Gates of Heaven, and shut the Gates of Hell; it can open the Treasures of Rain,
and soften the Iron Rocks till they melt into Tears: It is an Act of Grace, and
the highest Honor that we Dust and Ashes are admitted to speak to the Eternal
God, to run to Him as to a Father, to complain of our Burdens, to explicate
our Scruples, to beg Remedy and Ease, Support and Comfort, Health and Safety,
Counsel and Salvation.

And what can be more unreasonable than to neglect this Duty, upon which so
many and so great Blessings, both upon your self and Family, do depend? How
Unkind are you to your self, and not only so, but Unkind to all that are about
you? I mean, Unkind to their Souls, and extremely Uncharitable, to take no care
at all of this Duty; for the Neglect of which God often sends great Judgments
upon a whole Family, either by sore Jer. 10. 25.
Affliction, or sometimes, which is worse, Hardness and Blindness of Heart; for
the Word of God will certainly be fulfilled; he has said, That the House of
the Wicked shall be overthrown, Prove. 14. 11. And may not that be said to be a
Wicked House, when neither Thou, nor thy Wife, (which should be Lights to the
rest) nor Children, nor Servants, make Conscience of this Duty, to Worship God
by Prayer? or if you or they chance to do it when you are in the Bed, it is
with that Coldness and Sleepiness, that I may call it none at all, or at least
Lip-Service, when the Heart is a Sleep; and by your Example, perhaps your
Children and Servants think it not their Duty to go to Prayers at all, neither
Night nor Morning; and so they go to Bed, and rise the next Morning, like
Brutes, without Calling upon that God, in whom we Live, and Move, and have our
Being.

Therefore let me entreat you to take courage, to set about this Duty your
self, that you may not have Sins of others to answer for, as well as your own;
take up that brave Resolution of the Prophet Joshua; But as for me and my
House, we will Serve the Lord.

As you are a Master of a Family, you have a place of Trust committed to you by
God, who will certainly call you to an Account for it: For here you are
commanded by God to act the part of a King, a Father, a Priest, and a Judge,
over your little Commonwealth; the Fourth Commandment tells you, that every
Master of a Family must take care of his Sons and Daughters, his Man-servants
and Maidservants, and All within his Gates; not only to provide Food and
Raiment for them, but to take care of their Souls, which is the better part:
And here you are to act for God, you have the Charge from Him, not only of
Bodies, but of Souls; therefore let not the Dignity of your place make you
forget your Duty; for God will certainly call you and me to an Account, for
what Good we have done in our Generations, and how far we have sought his
Glory; and although I have only insisted upon your going to Prayers with your
Family, yet that is not all you are to do, only I am in hopes if you would
perform that, you could not easily neglect the other Duties; such as Reading
the Word of God, Singing of Psalms, Catechizing, and Instructing your Children
and Servants in True Christian Virtues, and showing them their Duty to God and
Man; to see if they thrive in Grace, or make Conscience of their Duty to God as
well as to your Self: For I fear we shall have but little assurance of our own
Salvation, except we endeavor the Reformation of our whole House, so far as
lies in our power: The mark of Abraham's Goodness was, That he would command
his Children and his Household after him: And David in the 101st Psalm, declares
his Resolution to this Duty: And Good Men in all Ages have carefully performed
it; and the Primitive Christians were very strict in it. And can we think to go
to Heaven a nearer way, when our Savior has commanded all Men to perform it?
The Scripture condemns all those that neglect it; for if we be ashamed to own
Christ in our Families, and deny the Worship and Service that is due to Him
here, He will deny us before his Father, and all his Saints and Angels, at the
last Day; and then, How sad will our Condition be!

But I hope, Dear Brother, I may take it for granted, that you will neglect it
no longer: For consider how great satisfaction it will be to you when you come
to Die, that you have laid up a good Foundation for the time to come, a
Treasure that no Devil can rob you of; a good Conscience then that you have
discharged your Duty, will go further than Purses of Gold. O the Pleasure of
looking back upon a well-spent Life in God's Service, and Reforming our
Families to the best of our Powers! Methinks I see how charming it makes Death,
and how it does support us in our Sickness; arms us to bear the Pangs of Death
through the Merits of Christ, and makes us die with Joy, with Hope, with
Comfort and Salvation. Therefore let me entreat you once more, to take up that
brave Resolution of the Prophet* Joshua, But as for me and my House, we will
Serve the Lord.

And, in the last place, let me advise you, in the words of St. James, chap. 5.
v. 13. Is any among you Afflicted? let him Pray. Is any Merry? let him sing
Psalms. And avoid all vicious and profane Songs, which corrupt the Mind;
Singing nothing but Psalms, Hymns, and Divine Songs, which will raise the Mind
to a Heavenly Frame; a Duty so practiced by the Christians of old, that St.
Hierom relates of the Place where he Lived, That you could not go into the
Field, but you might hear the Ploughman at his Hallalujahs, the Mower at his
Hymns, and the Vine-Dresser Singing David' s Psalms: So careful were they to
follow the Apostle's Advice in Ephesians. 5. 19. (with which I shall conclude)
Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing and
making Melody in your Hearts to the Lord.

And, That you may be Steadfast, Vnmovable, always abounding in the Works of the
LORD,

Is the Hearty Prayer of Your Loving Brother, S. W.

THE RULES AND ORDERS OF A SOCIETY.
I. THat the sole Design of this Society being to promote real Holiness of
Heart and Life, it is absolutely necessary, That no Person should be admitted
into this Society as a Member, but such as are well known to some of the
Society, as to their Lives and Conversations, and that they are of the Church
of England, as now Established, and that they are frequent Communicants of the
Lord's Supper, and such as do endeavor to make themselves Wise unto Salvation.

II. Every Member shall meet (if he can conveniently) about Six of the Clock at
the Place of Meeting, one Night in every Week, in order to encourage each other
in Practical Holiness.

III. That at these Meetings no Person shall discourse of State Affairs, nor in
the way of Trade, nor any hot Controversial points in Religion or Government;
but that the whole drift of our Discourse be to glorify God, and edify one
another in Love.

IV. There shall be Two Stewards chosen, by the majority of Voices, once every
Year, or oftener, who shall receive all Weekly Contributions, and other
Charities which shall come to the Disposal of this Society: And that on the Day
of their going out they shall give an Account of their Receivings and
Disbursements, and pay in the Overplus to their Successors; and no Money shall
be paid by them to any Charitable Uses, or others, but what shall be first
approved and agreed upon by the Society at a Meeting. And each Member shall
give at their Entrance, and a Register shall be kept of Receipts and
Distributions.

V. Every Member of this Society shall pay a Week toward the Charge of our
Meeting, in Chamber-Rent, Candles, etc. and for Charitable Uses, if there be
any Overplus; and Spiritual Charity is the rather to be recommended.

VI. If any Person of this Society shall fall into any scandalous Sin, that the
Society having well informed themselves thereof, shall exclude him from any
further Assembling with them till he shall give public Testimony of his
Repentance.

VII. At Whitsontide or Christmas there stall be a small Love-Feast, by the
Consent of the whole, or major-part of the Society, with few Varieties, and at
an easy Charge, to be defrayed by every Members contributing proportionably.

VIII. That if the major-part thinks proper, the Minister of the Parish for the
time being shall be President of this Society.

IX. At their Meeting they shall observe this Method: As Soon as some of the
Members are come, if the Stewards, or either of them be there, he shall take
the Holy Bible, and after saying the Prayer for the second Sunday in Advent,
shall read a Chapter; after which, any one that thinks fit may discourse
thereon, either by Explaining, for the Edification of others; or by asking
Questions, for his own Information; or discoursing of any other Spiritual
matter; all things being done decently and in order: After which he shall sing
a Psalm, and then one of the Stewards, or any other at their request, shall
begin Prayers, beginning with the Confession, the Lord's-Prayer, with the
Collects that follow it, and a Thanksgiving after Prayers, and so conclude with
a Psalm, and a Collect; and then the Stewards, or one of them, shall call over
the Names, and receive the Contributions; and about 8 of the Clock, all the
Business being dispatched, one of the Stewards shall read over these Practical
Rules, and the whole at least Four times every Year.

Practical RULES to be observed by every. Member, and read at every Meeting,
after Prayers, when the Names are called over.
1. EVery Member of this Society shall heartily endeavor, through God's Grace,
strictly to observe the Lord's Day, to sanctify it, and not to neglect, if in
Health, the Public Ordinances of the Church, and not to walk in Public Walks
or Places, where much People go, though he be in good Company, to avoid the
giving of Scandal to good Christians, and encouraging the Wicked in their Ways.

2. To receive the Sacrament of the Lord's- Supper frequently, and to attend
the public Service and Worship of Almighty God on Weekdays, as often as
Convenience will permit.

3. To watch strictly, that by no means any Action of our Lives, nor yet any of
our Words, may bring any Scandal on the Holy Religion we profess, being Just in
all our Dealings. And each Member shall encourage, in their respective Families
and Stations, all manner of Religious Family Duties.

4. That every one endeavor to keep his Soul in an habitual Frame of Prayer,
by setting the Lord always before his Face, and by making Spiritual Reflections
upon every Occurrence of Providence.

5. That we do not wound our Conscience by a servile Compliance in wicked
Company; but rather to reprove them, bearing Testimony to the Gospel of Christ
as far as Conscience and Prudence do then permit us to do; and yet to shun all
manner of Affectation and Moroseness, and be of a civil and obliging Deportment
to all Men.

6. To avoid all wicked Company when we have not a lawful Call; and to abstain
altogether from Play Houses and Gaming-Houses, and from Alehouses or Taverns,
except when doing of Business does require, and to arm our selves diligently
against Excess upon any such Occasions.

7. To discountenance, as much as may be, any Discourse being divulged, whereby
any Prejudice may arise to any Member of this, or any other Society, or any
other Person whatsoever. And to take special Care to avoid entering at any time
into any manner of Disputes, whether about Religion or Government, or other
Matters, as being that which does insensibly betray to Passion.

8. To pray for the Society in our private Prayers, that God would preserve
them, especially from Hypocrisy and Spiritual Pride, which is the Worm at the
Root that will blast all; and that we be helpful one to another.

9. To exercise Mortification and Selfdenial; and to keep a Monthly Fast, if
Convenience will admit, or Necessity require; at least to abstain from some
Meals sometimes, which will much conduce to bring the Body into Subjection to
the Soul.

10. That we endeavor that all our Discourse may be for the use of Edifying,
and to minister Grace unto the Hearers, we will diligently apply our selves to
the Reading the Holy Scriptures, and particularly such parts as are most fitted
to our Capacities and Information; such as, amongst many others, is St. Matthew
5, 6, 7. Romans 12. Ephesians 5, 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.

11. That every one think it his indispensible Duty to take care of one
another Soul, and not to suffer Sin to lie upon our Brother; and therefore if
any Member, by long absenting himself from the Meeting, without known cause,
does give just Occasion to suspect him of too much indifference, that then no
Person shall think himself excused from the Obligation of striving to reclaim
him, unless there be some fit Person or Persons, pitched upon by the Society,
to go and do that Charitable Office, if there may be hope of his Recovery.

12. That we often consider (with an awful Dread of God's Wrath) the sad height
to which the Sins of many are advanced in this our Nation, and the bleeding
Divisions thereof in Church and State, and that every Member be ready to do
what upon consulting with each other shall be thought advisable toward the
Punishment of public Profaneness, according as the good Laws of our Land
require to be put in Execution, and in pursuant of the King's Order and
Proclamation.

13. To beware of rashly-Judging or Censuring others who do not so much
frequent Holy Duties as our selves; or upon any other account to express due
Christian Charity to those of good Conversation, tho^ they dissent from us. And
to examine our selves every Night, that our Repentance may be sincere, always
evidenced by good Works.

14. If any Member of the Society be Sick, we do not forget to visit him, and
others, where we see it may be convenient, that we may comfort each other in
this to a better Life.

15. Lastly, That the Major-part of this Society may make what Alteration they
shall think Necessary in these RULES; which done, they shall oblige each Member
of this Society to performance, subscribing his Name hereunto, thereby to
declare his Approbation of, and his Resolution and Endeavor to live up to them.

Shorter Practical RULES to be read at every Meeting when there is not time for
the longer; and fit for every Member to get by heart.
I. THat God's Glory be the end of all our Actions, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

II. That we Worship Him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4. 24.

III. That we love God above all things, and our Neighbors as our selves, Mark
12. 30, 31.

IV. That we endeavor to make the Word of God the Rule of all our Actions,
Psalm. 191. 9. 105. John 5. 39. Romans 15. 4.

V. That we keep the Lord's Day Holy, Exodus 20. 8. Isa. 58. 13.

VI. That we stir up and exercise the Grace God has given us, in going on from
Virtue to Virtue, 2 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12.

VII. That we Pray Frequently, Fervent, Holy, and Persevering, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
Luke 18.

VIII. To be Just in all our Dealings, Matt. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31.

IX. To receive the Holy Sacrament frequently, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Luke 22. 19.

X. To have Poverty of Spirit, Meekness, and Humility, Matt. 5. 3, 5. Luke 14.
10.

XI. To watch against Censuring our Neighbors, Col. 3. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 5.

XII. To use our selves to holy Thoughts in all Places, Ephesians. 2. 5. Jer. 23. 23,
24. Heb. 4. 13. Psalm. 139. 23.

XIII. To examine our selves every Night, Psalm. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

XIV. To be helpful one to another, Cor. 12. 27.

XV. To Pray one for another, Jam. 5. 15, 16.

XVI. To exercise Tenderness and Compassion to all Men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.

XVII. To shun all Occasions of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 9.

XVIII. To subdue the Body by Fasting, Matt. 6. 16. Luke 2. 32 Act. 13. 2, 3.

XIX. To make holy Reflections on our selves when we read the Bible, or hear
the Word of God, James 1. 22, 23, 24.

XX. To endeavor to give no Scandal to the Holy Religion we profess, Mat. 18.
7. 1 Cor. 10. 32.

XXI. To avoid uncomely Jestings, and foolish Talking, Ephesians. 5. 4, 25. Col. 4. 5.

XXII. To Judge none that do not so much frequent Holy Duties as our selves,
Matt. 7. 1. Romans 14. 13.

XXIII. Lastly, That we all endeavor to encourage pious Discourse, and
constant Meetings in our Societies, as well as enlarge it with suitable
Members, Mal. 3. 16, 17. Col. 6. 9. Heb. 10. 25. James 5. 20.

A Friendly Discourse concerning Profane Cursing and Swearing. Wherein is
showed the Heinousness of those Sins, and the Necessity of private Persons
giving Information to the Magistrates. Price Stitched, Two Pence. Sold at the
same Place.


