Dr. FREEMAN's SERMON BEFORE THE HOUSE of COMMONS.

November 5. 1690.

Jovis 6. Die November. 1690.
ORdered, That the Thanks of this House be given to Dr. Freeman, for the Sermon
he Preached yesterday before this House at St. Margarets Westminster: And that
he be desired to Print the same. And that Sir William Leveson Gower do acquaint
him therewith.

PAUL JODRELL. Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET'S
Westminster, On Wednesday the Fifth of November, 1690.

BEING THE Anniversary Thanksgiving for the Happy Deliverance of King JAMES the
First, and the Three Estates of the Realm, from the GUNPOWDER-TREASON; And also
for the Happy Arrival of His present MAJESTY on this Day, for the Deliverance
of our Church and Nation from Popery and Arbitrary Power.

By S A. FREEMAN, D. D. Rector of St. Paul's Covent Garden, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XC.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, NOVEMBER. 5. 1690.
PSALM LXXXIX. 21, 22. I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I
anointed him.

My hand shall hold him fast, and my arm shall strengthen him.


THE Words contain in them God's gracious Promise to King David, of his special
and more than ordinary Presence with, and Protection of him in the
Administration of the Government he had called him to; And certainly, never had
any person greater experience of it than David, both before and after his
coming to the Crown: Witness, his Deliverance from the Paws of the Lion and the
Bear, from the mighty Force of the uncircumcised Philistine, from the
Persecutions of Saul, from the Rebellion of Absalom, from the secret
Conspiracies of Domestic Foes, and the open Invasions of Foreign Enemies.
Sometimes, indeed, it pleases God, for the Punishment of a wicked People* to
suffer a Righteous and a Religious Prince, to fall by the hands of Violence, as
was the Case of the good King Josiah: yet this is but rarely so; for the most
part such Princes may promise themselves Safety and Success from the Providence
of God; that God's hand will hold them fast, and his arm strengthem them; that
the Enemy shall not be able to do them violence, nor the Son of Wickedness hurt
them; that God will smite down their Foes before their face, and plague them
that hate them.

Three things are here to be considered.

I. The Person to whom the Promise is made, King David. II. The Promise it
self; viz. God's special Presence with him, and Protection of him. My hand
shall hold him fast, and mine arm shall strengthen him. III. What are the
proper Uses and Application of this Doctrine.
I. The first thing to be considered, is, The Person to whom the Promise is
made, King David, whom the Text considers under a twofold Character:

As a Religious King, David my servant; And,

As a Rightful King, With my holy oil have Ianointed him.

1. As a Religious King, David my servant; Saul by his Disobedience had showed
himself unworthy of the Government, and God's Favor; 1 Samuel 15. 23.
He rejected the word of the Lord, says the Text, and thereupon God rejected
him from being King, and resolved to translate the Crown to another Family: And
amongst all the Tribes and Families in Israel, he pitched upon David the Son of
Jesse, as the most fit, and best qualified Person for it: I have found David my
servant; concerning whom God gave this Testimony, That he was a man after his
own heart, and that he had done that which was Right in his eyes* A Good King
is one; who is no less the Image of the Love and Goodness, than of the Power
and Majesty of God; who no less represents the Affection and Tenderness of our
Heavenly Father, than the Authority of the Universal Monarch; whose Care it is,
That Religion flourishes, and the True Worship of God be established; That
Justice be impartially administered; That Vice be subdued, and Virtue
encouraged; That the One be shamed by his Example, and punished by his Laws;
And that the Other Reigns and Triumphs under the Influence of both: One, who
invades no Man's Property; 1 Samuel 12 3.
Whose Ox or Ass have I taken? Whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? So
Samuel, when Supreme Magistrate of Israel, justified his Integrity: Who uses
not his Power to ruin his People, to undermine the True Religion, or to
enslave their Persons; but to defend Both, and to preserve them in their Rights
and Liberties: Who is truly Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country; having
no distinct Interest from his People's, and making Their Welfare His highest
Glory.

2. As a Rightful King; With my holy oil have I anointed him. No Man can call
in question David's Title to the Crown, unless he will dispute God's Right to
dispose of Crowns as he pleases; for David was immediately Chosen by God, and
Anointed by his Prophet. But this was peculiar to the Kings of Israel and
Judah; no other Princes can produce such a Patent for their Crowns.

That which comes the nearest, is, When God by a signal and wonderful
Providence, for some Great and Noble Ends, to Save a Nation, or to Defend his
Truth, or to abate the Pride and Insults of His and His Churches Enemies, pulls
down Kings, and sets up Kings. But this is no certain way of arguing; Success
does not always give a Title where it gives a Crown.

The ordinary Means of conveying a Right to Govern, are, Either Conquest in a
just Cause, The Election of the People, or Hereditary Succession: Ours is owned
to be an Hereditary Crown, viz. Always descending to the next Heir, unless it
so happen, that he be naturally or morally incapable, and that the Public Good
and Safety will be evidently endangered in his hands. Here it leaps over, not
out of the Royal Line, but to the next, against whom there is no such
Objection. The great End of Government is the Public Good and Safety; This for
the most part is bound up in the Laws and Constitutions of the Community; and
as all the Powers and Prerogatives invested by Law in the Prince, or Head of
this Polity, are the better to enable him to execute those Laws, and maintain
the Common Safety; so all the Oaths that are taken to him by the Subjects, are
also in Subordination, and Subserviency to the Common Safety, to which they
were antecedently obliged, and he as well Vid. Tract of the Unreasonableness of
the New Separation.
as they sworn to preserve. And therefore the Lords and Commons of England, as
is evident all along in the Course of our History, have always looked upon that
Prince, who went about by an Arbitrary Power, in Contradiction to their Laws
and Rights, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, to Enslave and Oppress them, as one
that had laid down the English Kingship or Monarchy; and have made no Scruple
on such a just Occasion, to withdraw their Allegiance from him, and to place
another of the same Royal Line on the Throne of Majesty. So, that would Men lay
aside their Prejudices and their Passions, their Piques and Revenges, their
Peevish and Awkward, their Selfish and Narrow Spirits, they would soon
perceive, that the Preservation of our Laws and Religion, wherein consists the
Public Good of this Realm, (nay, which yet adds to it, the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion and Interest all the World over* whereon the Glory of God,
and the Salvation of Men's Souls do so much depend) have in a manner forced the
Royal Diadem where it is: And this Consideration alone (had it not been
seconded with a just Cause, and a prevailing Power in a Sovereign Prince) seems
to me, to give an Undoubted Title.

II. Here Is the Promise it self.

In the following Verses, from the 25th to the 30th, God promises David greatly
to enlarge his Empire, to exalt him to the highest pitch of Human Power and
Glory; to continue the Crown for ever in his Family, from which it should never
be taken, as it had been from Readiness: But these may be thought peculiar to
David, who was a Type of Christ as well as King of Israel; especially the last,
which did not receive its full accomplishment, but in the Kingdom of the
Messiah, who was to come of the Race, and is said to sit on the Throne of David.

What he promises him in the Text, is, His powerful Presence with him, to
protect him in all Dangers, to direct and assist him in all his just
Undertakings; to strengthen him against all the Enemies, both Domestic and
Foreign, of his Crown and Kingdom; and this every Righteous and Religious
Prince may ordinarily take Confidence in, and apply to themselves. And that,

1. As they are God's Representatives and Vicegerents in the World. They are
called Gods; and St. Paul styles the Supreme Magistrate, The Minister of God;
Because we are not capable of an immediate Converse with Heaven, therefore does
God govern us by Men like our selves, and so puts part of his Power into their
Hands; for as Prophets receive of the Spirit, so do Kings of the Power of God.
Now, those who are employed by God to act for, and under him in the World, have
reason to expect proportionable Assistance and Protection from him.

2. As they are entrusted by God with the Management of Public Affairs, and so
the welfare of the whole Community depending in a great measure upon their
prudent Conduct and Safety. We have ten parts in the King, said the Ten Tribes;
Thou art worth Ten thousand of us. And again, Thou shall not any more go out to
Battle with us, lest thou quench the Light of Israel, said the Israelites to
King David. What the Sun is to the World, that is a Wise and Gracious Prince to
a Nation, its Happiness, and its Glory. Now, we may be sure, that that
Providence, which, as the Scripture tells us, extends its Care over the least
and most despicable things, over the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts of the
Field, will much more concern it self for things of a more worthy Nature, for
Men, for Communities of Men, for Princes, the Life and Soul of Communities. God
is more concerned in Many, than in single Persons; and since a Kingdom is the
general Concernment of a King, a King must be the special Concernment of God.
Kings by the Ancients were called (...), Men kept by God, Hag. 2. 23.
He hides them under the Shadow of his Wings, he keeps them as the Apple of his
Eye. He sets them as a Signet on his right hand. God has this as his peculiar
Title, Psalm. 144. 10.
The God that gives Salvation unto Kings.

3. That I may put many things together and hasten: Good Kings may expect God's
special Presence with them.

In regard of the difficulty of their Office and Duty, being often times to
deliberate about the Fate of Kingdoms, to judge in Matters of a dubious and
intricate Nature, and to engage in Enterprises of the greatest Hazard.

In regard of the many Temptations, the Height of their Place and Power
subjects them unto; The uncontrollableness of their Power, the abundance of
their Wealth, the multitude of their Cares and Business, the Crowds of
Sycophants and Flatterers that always follow the Courts of Princes, are very
dangerous Snares to their Virtue; The Devil knows how much it would be for the
advantage of his Kingdom in the World, to have the Governors of it on his side,
that they cannot sin alone, but they must be followed by Troops, and therefore
he is always watching occasions, and craving permission from God to seduce and
pervert them.

In regard of the many Dangers they are exposed to; Princes have not only many
Potent Enemies from abroad, but for the most part many envious ill-willers and
discontented Malcontents at home, that are always beating how to supplant or
overthrow them.

In regard, lastly, of some momentous and important Work and Business a Prince
may be called to by God; Be it, for example, to put a stop to the spreading of
Idolatry, or to give a check to the merciless Rage of Tyrants and Persecutors;
This is the Cause of God, and he must be wanting to himself, should he be
wanting to those whom he has raised up for the defense of it.

The Worthies of the Old Testament, Moses and Joshuah, and Gideon, and Barak,
and Jeptha, and David, and many others, were bright examples of this; with whom
God was peculiarly present, and sometimes after a miraculous manner. The Author
to the Hebrews tells us what Heroical Achievements they performed by faith in
God.

I must not stay to lead you far back in other History, yet I cannot forbear
mentioning the many wonderful Deliverances and Successes wherewith it pleased
God to crown the Great Constantine, and our own Renowned and never to be
forgotten Queen Elizabeth, whom God raised up, the one, for the Deliverance of
his Church Universal from Heathen Rage; the other, for the Deliverance of this
Church from Popish Fury: But I must pass over these and innumerable others,
that I may come to them which I am concerned particularly to remember.

What an admirable Providence was it, that discovered the Gunpowder Treason,
the black Conspiracy of this Day, by the Lines of a dead Letter sent to the
Lord Monteagle! What could it be but a Beam from Heaven that darted into the
King's Mind a meaning quite contrary to the natural sense of the Words and all
Grammatical construction! The expression was, The Danger is past as soon as you
have burnt the Letter, which King James interpreted, as quickly, making it
signify, the suddenness and quickness of the Blow intended.

And no less visible was the Sword of the Lord, than the Sword of Gideon, in
our late happy Happy and Glorious Revolution; when we consider with what an
invincible Spirit of Wisdom and Courage His Majesty undertook the Cause of our
Country; what general Desires and Inclinations were on the sudden kindled in
Men's Hearts toward Him, their Laws, and their Religion; What a burning Zeal
and Vigor, what an universal Harmony of Affections, what a perfect agreement
of Councils and Endeavors inflamed the Breasts of all Men; What a strange
Folly and Infatuation blinded the Counsels of our Enemies; What guilty Fears
and Cowardice seized their Spirits; How all was brought about by a dry Victory,
without the expense of the Blood either of our Friends or Enemies; We must
conclude, That God was with him of a truth, and that it was he that made it to
prosper.

III. It remains now only, that we consider what are the proper Uses and
Application of this Doctrine. I shall name at present but these four. And,

1. What a sincere regard and esteem ought we to have for those, for whom God
is pleased to have so great and particular a concern? The Scripture is very
strict in injoyning Honor and Reverence to them, we are commanded to fear the
King, to obey him, to pay tribute to him; all just and legal Power and
Authority is not to be resisted; this is the Ordinance of God: and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Wise and gracious Princes are so
great Blessings to their Kingdoms, that in the Heathen World their Subjects not
only paid them the highest Honors during their lives, but worshipped them too
after their deaths. They could not imagine, that those who either by the
invention of useful Arts, or the institution of an excellent Government, or by
many noble Exploits and Deliverances had in a high degree obliged their
Countries, died like other Men, they reckoned they became Divine, and were
translated among the Gods, and so changed their Allegiance into Adoration. I
mention this not for imitation, but as an infinite shame and reproach to too
many Christians, who cannot find in their Hearts to make any other returns to
their Princes for the innumerable Benefits and mighty Deliverances, they at the
peril of their Lives and Blood have purchased for them, than Curses and
opprobrious Language, than meditating Ruin and Destruction against them. What
can we desire more, that is not by the blessing of God upon their Undertaking
restored and confirmed to us? Our Laws have recovered their just Vigor and
Authority, our Rights and Properties are secured, our Holy Religion safe, our
Lives, and our Souls too, if we are not wanting to our selves, out of danger.
We feel indeed at present some Burdens and Taxes, but are they any other than
what are absolutely necessary for our preservation, voluntarily imposed upon us
by our Representatives in Parliament, And what are tolerable and easy when
compared with the Slavery and Oppression we are freed from, and the far greater
Miseries we had just reason to fear were coming upon us? We have nothing to
complain of, unless it be that the Government is too mild and merciful to them
who so little deserve it. Certainly they who so murmur and repine under this
Golden Scepter, consider not what it would be to feel the Iron Rod of French
Cruelty and Popish Revenge.

2. God's special Presence with and Protection of good Kings, shows how vain
and foolish a thing it is, as well as sinful, to conspire against them. Never
was there yet a Government or Governor that could give Content and
Satisfaction to all its Subjects; so long as there are Devils in Hell that
delight in the Miseries and Confusions of Men, and so long as there is Pride,
and Ambition, and Malice, and Revenge, and Covetousness lodged in the Breasts
of Men, must Princes expect to meet with those who envying their Power and
Greatness, will be always contriving how to snatch it from them, or make them
uneasy under it; some there are that affect a Change for Change sake, and
therefore desire to be rid of their present Masters, only that they might have
new ones: Others are for troubling the Waters, hoping thereby for an
opportunity to heal their lame Fortunes in them; Others are against the
Government, because the Government is against them; It Is an Enemy to some Men's
Debaucheries, and they had as live part with their Lives as their Vices and
their Pleasures; Its an Enemy to some Men's Profits and Honors, they have lost
something they had, or they want something they cannot get, they have no share
in the Administration, no Place of Trust, no Post of Advantage in it, and some
Men can be true to nothing but their own Interests, and because a Government
does not serve their turn, they are for another that will; Its an Enemy to that
which some Men call their Religion, I mean their Superstitious and Idolatrous
way of Worship, and that State must not think to stand long, if the Devil and
the Jesuit can help it, that does not fall down to their Dagon: But in vain are
all the Attempts of Malice and Treason against those, who are compassed about
with God's Favor as with a Shield. Good Princes are the peculiar Charge and
Favorites of God; He in an especial manner interests himself in their Safety;
and unless their Enemies are of God's Privy Couucil, and can know beforehand
that he will suffer it, they can no more be secure of Success in their
Conspiracies, than they can be of being too hard for the Almighty. Give me
leave therefore in this case to apply the beginning of the 2 d Psalm, that was
literally spoken of David, as well as figuratively of Christ; Why do the
Papists rage, and the disaffected People imagine a vain thing? He that sits in
Heaven shall laugh them to scorn; the Lord shall have them in Derision; yet
have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion.

3. God's special Presence with and Protection of good Kings, calls upon us to
pray for the continuance of it to those whom in his good Providence he has set
over us; the Mercies God promises, he expects should be fetched down by Prayer.
Now Kings being the main Instruments of Providence, whereby God conveyeth his
Favors and dispenses his Justice to a People, as we cannot expect to be happy
and prosperous, but by their means; so we cannot expect that they should be a
means of it, unless by fervent and devout Prayer, we engage the continual
powerful Presence of God with them: Not to invoke the Blessing of God upon
Governors, is to disown God's Government of the World whose Ministers they
are: And how can that People expect to be blessed by God, who disown his
Government? There are none but must be sensible how much the welfare of this
Kingdom is bound up in the Preservation of this Government. In all likelihood
our Religion, our Laws, and our Liberties will stand and fall with our Princes;
we are therefore highly obliged, if not for theirs, for our own Sakes, to lift
up our Hearts and our Voices to Heaven for them. I hope we have not yet forgot
the Day of our Distress, what passionate Prayers we then sent up to Heaven to
take pity on us: And God was pleased to hear the Prayers of his People, He
raised us up a Deliverer, and has thereby encouraged us still to pray,
Strengthen, O Lord, that which thou have wrought for us: Clothe all his Enemies
with Shame, but upon himself let his Crown flourish.

4. God's special Presence with and Protection of righteous and religious
Princes, calls upon us to bless God for the two great Deliverances of this Day.
An eminent Jesuit, Campian by name, long since declared in Print, that Camp.
Epist. 10. ad Conc. Reg. Angl. p. 22.
their Society had made a Holy League and solemn Oath, that as long as there
were any of them alive, they would destroy heretical Princes by all means
possible; and as for the English Nation they would procure and for ever pursue
its Ruin, and the utter Destruction of its Religion. And to do them right,
hitherto they have made good their Oath; how unwearied and restless have their
Malice and Rage been against us?

The Royal Family of the Stuarts, to begin Sir Edw. Cook's Speech at Gar. Trial.
no higher, are indebted to them for many signal Kindnesses: What strong
Endeavors were made to keep King James the First from the Crown? Garnet a
Jesuit brought two Breves from Pope Clement the 8 th to exclude him, commanding
all Catholics, both Clergy and Laity, not to suffer him, or any other that was
not a Catholic, to succeed to the Crown. Parsons another Jesuit, under the
Name of Doleman, wrote against his Title, and set up another, that of the
Infanta of Spain against his; after a most rude and insolent manner, blackning
his Name, and loading his Actions with the most spiteful Calumnies; But when
after all their Attempts, they could not hinder him from coming in, they
resolved by dreadful blow of Gunpowder to rid themselves at once both of him,
and his whole Family: A Villainy so black and odious, that the Papists
themselves are ashamed to own it, and would fain have it pass for a
State-trick, and a Plot of an Eminent Minister at that time against them: But
this was an invention of their own, not thought of till long afterward, not in
the least mentioned nor pleaded by any of the Conspirators in their defense.
Pr^fat. mon. p. 146. Hist. Gunpowder Tr. p. 232. Delr. disquis. mag. l. 6. c.
11. Pr^fat. mon. p. 8, 9.
But, on the contrary, 'twas confessed by the Traitors themselves, justified by
some of them, owned by Sir Everard Digby's Letters now made public, taken care
of beforehand not to be discovered in Confessions, The Success of it prayed
for under the name of a great Design in hand, for the good of the Catholic
Cause, The disappointment of it sorely lamented; but in all Probability, had it
succeeded, would have been welcomed at Rome with as public Festivals and
Triumphs, as the great Thuanus, an Historian of their own, informs us, the
Parisian-Massacre was, wherein 30000 Protestants were slain in one Night. But
blessed be God who has hitherto defeated the malicious Purposes of the
inveterate Enemies of our Church and Nation, that brought to light that Work of
Hell and Darkness, and has preserved us in the Enjoyment of the Benefits of
that great Deliverance to this Day.

In the Reign of King Charles the First, they carried on the same Design; They
began with a Plot to murder the Archbishop, and to take away the King's Life,
happily discovered by means of Andreas ab Habernfield. What salvage and
inhumane Cruelties they committed in Ireland, I tremble to mention, wherein a
100000 Protestants were barbarously murdered in See Dr. Pet. du Moulin. Vind.
of Prot. Relig. chapter 2. p. 58. and his Reply to a Person of Honor, p. 4, 5.
cold Blood: What hand they had in kindling and carrying on that cruel and
unnatural War, and in the execrable murder of that incomparable Prince, how at
their Consults they voted 'twas for the Interest of Holy Church, and how active
and instrumental they were to promote the Councils that did it, has been
offered to be proved against them.

In King Charles the Second's time; Into what innumerable Sects and Factions
did they break us; what fiery Strifes, what implacable Animosities, (which, God
help us, are burning to this very day) did they blow up amongst them? How
dexterously did they manage the contending Parties, encouraging now one and then
the other, till they had almost beat out one another Brains? And then at last
by plotting to take away the Life of that Prince, (who was now thought, it
seems, to stand in their way) and to give a Toleration to the Popish Party, how
advantagiously did they prepare the way for a total Extirpation, as they called
it, of the Northern Heresy, which they doubted not to effect under the Reign of
a more resolute Prince, that should more heartily and vigorously espouse their
Cause? And you all know how near they were to the accomplishing of it.

Good God! What a black and melancholy Prospect of things was then before us?
What a horrible Storm hung over our Heads, threatening Ruin to every thing that
was dear to us, and to entail Slavery, Ignorance and monstrous Errors, even
Transubstantiation it self, upon our Posterity? How were we daily threatened
with an Army of Foreigners, and those the most infamous for Blood and Cruelty,
and some of them actually brought in upon us.

But blessed be God who has put an end to our Miseries, and almost to our very
Fears; who put it into the Heart of the King to come in to our Succor, and who
made even the Winds and the Waves propitious to him and his glorious Enterprise.

Blessed be God who has preserved him hitherto, to settle and establish us in
that Salvation, which under God he has wrought for us; who suffered not the
fatal Bullet that came so near him, to do him Mischief; nor the Swords of his
Enemies that thirsted for his Blood, to touch him; who preserved him safe in
the Crowds of his Enemies, and in the midst of innumerable Dangers, and after a
signal and glorious Victory, landed him safe again on our joyful Shore.

Blessed be God who has given him the Hearts of his Parliament, and the
Affections of his People.

Blessed be God for his Heroic Spirit of Wisdom and Magnanimity, for his
merciful Disposition, for the Justice and Equity of his Government, for his
sincere Love to the Church, for his unshaken Constancy to the Protestant
Religion and Interest, and for his Fatherly Care and Tenderness over all his
Subjects.

May his Life be long, and his Reign prosperous; and may the English Nation,
under his Auspicious Conduct and Victorious Banners, become a Terror to its
Adversaries, Deliverance to the Oppressed, and as heretofore, so for ever, the
Bulwark of the Protestant Religion.

To the only wise God our Savior, be all Praise and Glory, both now, and for
evermore. Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at Northampton, August the 26 th, 1690.
Before the Right Honorable Sir Henry Pollexfen, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. By Sa. Freeman, D. D. Rector of St. Paul's Covent Garden, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, at Whitehall, on the 19 th Day of
October, 1690, being the Day of Thanksgiving, for his Majesty's Preservation
and Success in Ireland. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum.

Both Sold by Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.


