A Friendly Debate Upon the next ELECTIONS OF PARLIAMENT And the Settlement of
Liberty of Conscience, In a Dialogue between a City and Country ELECTOR.
With Allowance.
Coun. WELL Friend, you have promised great and wonderful Things, if you are
but able to perform them. And since you are so set agog upon such ^ Settlement
of Religious Liberty, and there is like to (...) such bandying for Parliament
Men to go through ^ith the Work, that our Penal Laws and Test and all like the
old Walls of Troy, to let in the Grecian Horse) must be pulled down to make
room for it; What ^i^t you if you begin with the Penal Laws? and ^^nce they
carry the more venerable Antiquity of the two, ^^ant your first Battery, and
try your first Artillery against those elder Fortifications of our Church.


Cit. With all my Heart. And as I remember, ^our tenderness for their
Preservation proceeded, (...) you declared, from the Necessity and Validity of
^^ch Laws for the Defense of our Church, and (...) Danger threatened Her from
their Repeal; together with your Justification of the Equity of ^^^ose Laws,
from the Wisdom and Zeal of our (...) Pious Reformers that founded them, and
the continued Industry of all our latter Lawmakers in so religioussy and
constantly maintaining of ^^em.


Coun. Yes, much to that Tenure were the Positions I ^id down.


Cit. To begin therefore, and answer first to ^^ur Dangers, etc. Let us enquire
what our ^^urch has lost by Liberty of Conscience hitherto, ^nath that means
make some reasonable Examinati^^ to her future Danger, by a true View and
Survey (...) present.

The King you see has already granted all Men their Liberty of Conscience, by
virtue of which Liberty they have the freedom of Preaching, Pray^ng, etc.
without any let or molestation whatever. And y'will allow that a Universal
Toleration, by Act of Parliament, can open their Meeting House Doors no wider
then an Universal Indulgence has already done.


Coun. You are t'th right for that. For the passage, I confess, is as free
where the Gates are set open, as where they are thrown off the Hinges, and so an
Indulged Liberty, or a Magna Charta one is much alike for that. But pray what
would you infer from thence?


Cit. Only to ask you, what visible loss has the Church of England sustained by
this Religious Liberty. I suppose when you go to Church your self, you are not
so wholly taken up with your Devotion, but you can now and then spare half a
Minute to look about you, and see what Company you have there: And pray do you
find any apparent Diminution or Lessening of your Auditory since this
Indulgence.


Coun. Why truly now you put me to it, I think very little; But, cry you mercy,
upon recollection, I have lately mist some few of our Congregation,
particularly no less then three or four Eminent Parishioners, sometimes
Dissenters, that during the late Execution of our Penal Laws, to my special
observation came to Church, and are since fallen off again. By the same token
they used to peep in just once a Mouth and no more, (but better once then
never) and mark you me, they nickt it so prettily, that they made their entry
just after the exit of the Common Prayer, or if by chance they came within
three or four closing Lines of it, 'twas as much as ever I saw 'em strain to.
And truly when those wholesome good Laws were put in Execution, we might have
brought a great many more of our Dissenting Parishioners to Church too, but
that the remiss Justice of Peace of our Precinct was a little too tender
hearted.


Cit. Then I warrant, the rest of your Dissenting Parishioners were of the
poorer sort, and your Justice at Peace did did not think them worth the
Prosecution.


Coun. Upon my Word you hit him to a Hair. Truly that worthy Gentleman (His
only fault, he was too good Natured for the Authority he bore) was observed
never to Prosecute any of our Dissenters, but the topping Men amongst them, the
Richest and Fattest of them: However he did not make Cobweb Law-work on it, to
his praise be it spoken, though he suffered the Weak to slip through, I assure
you he noosed the Granddees to some purpose, so sued them, and fined them, and
danced them from pillar to post, etc. And truly to show you what Blessings of
God attended him for this Zeal and Pains taking in the Churches Cause, i^ ^a^
remarkable, that in our late two or three Years Reign of our Penal Laws, he
thrived better and grew richer then in twenty Years together before he had his
Commission.


Cit. A Justice of Peace Thrive and grow Rich with three Years Penal Laws! Why
Friend, that high Harvest Time well managed was enough to have made them all
Aldermen. I warrant you this Justice of yours recoverd swinging and thumping
Fines upon Fines from them, as you talked before, for these obstinate Noncons I
doubt not would endure hard squeezing before they would Buckle.


Coun. Fines! Ay, and well they escaped so. He might have indicted them upon the
35th of Elizabeth, and then nothing but Abjuration and Banishment would have
served their turns. But merciful good Man, he contented himself with only
pouring out the milder Vials of our softest Penal Wrath, in the punishment of
their Pockets and Estates, by Confiscations, Sequestrations, etc.


Cit. Now pray be so kind as to satisfy one Curiosity of mine.


Coan. What Is that?


Cit. How many of these Fines, Confiscations, Sequestrations, etc. you speak
of, did this merciful good Justice of Peace return into the Exchequer?


Coun. Humh! The Exchequer!


Cit. I Friend, prithee don't shrug at it, but for once be candid, and answer
this Point; say, how many of them did he return into the Exchequer?


Coun. Truly if I must out with it, I am afraid but few or none, that is, if
the present outcrys of the vexatious Dissenters be true, as I hope they are
not, for alas there is little credit to be given to so litigious and clamorous a
Generation. However poor Man he is prudently and timely retired, to be out of
the malicious noise of them. And what if after all, he was a little slow or
tardy as they call it, now and then in some of those Chequer Returns, I hope it
was no such impardonable Crime to make spoil of the Egyptians; besides His then
Gracious Majesty, Heavens Peace be with Him, did not so much want it perhaps as
He, and several of those honest Gentlemen in his Post might do. And if they did
not foresee or fore think of an after Reckoning, and possibly might be tempted
on a present occasion to make bold in that case? probably too, like Judas
Thirty Pence, they might not think it worth the Royal Treasury, and therefore
might lay it out in a Potters Field, or a Daughters Portion, or so. Alas, what
then! Envy it self cannot say, but He and indeed all the rest of those worthy
Gentlemen under the same Dilemma, if they did sink a little, as they call it,
into a by Pocket of their own, I am sure they deserved it all: To be at the
daily charge of Scouts and Pickerouns their Informers, and to spend so much in
March Beer and other good fortifying Liquors, besides so much good Breath in
Halloo's to hearten on the cold-scented Constables to hunt down the
Conventicles. And do you think after all, that such hard Laborers in our
Church Vinyard deserved nothing? Did they not toil and thresh in the cause to
recover those Fines, etc.? And have we not an express Command, that we shall
not muzle the Ox that treads out the Corn.


Cit. Prithee for shame, no more of this Banter! was the high and mighty Zeal
of our late Church Champions, our Indefatigable Magistrates, in executing the
Penal Laws, no more then a Religious Money Trap? Was the upholding our Church
by punishing Dissenters, intended, as we are made believe, for the Propagating
of Apostolic Truth, and Conversion of Souls, and the intended Service of God;
no more at the Bottom then a false cover for the robbing of Caesar? But to
leave those private (I might say general) faults lying at the doors of the
Guilty, and come to the merit of our Penal Laws; what operation have these
Penal Laws made, (these Laws that the Declaration so wisely observes, never
answered the Ends they were designed for) any more then to drive a few
Dissemblers, into our Church; a handful of Dissenters, that possibly in
tenderness to their Wives and Children, and not prepared for a voyage to
Carolina or Pensylvania, strained Conscience to temporise with Necessity; and
so only peept into Church, as you observed, once a Month to save their Bacon.
And do all the great and wonderful Penal Feats and Atcheivements terminate only
in making a few Hypocrites, instead of Converts.


Coun. Why truly now you talk of Hypocrites, I think indeed but few of our
compulsion'd Conformists came to Church heartily.


Cit. Did they not so? I need not then recount the loud and woeful Anathemas
pronounced against Hypocrites, and much louder undoubtedly must the
Establishers and Executors of such Laws deserve, that compel, wrack and torture
Men out of their true Zeal and Piety, into such false and pernicious
Hypocrifie. And consequently how little of Christianity can dwell under the
Roof of such rotten Fabrics: And after all if mere Policy and Reputation of a
Church, were the only argument for her conduct in that point; how much more to
Her credit is it to have her Congregations composed of all her own true and
zealous professors; then to cram in such a mungril sort of Proselites, to
disgrace the Flock they herd with; and what a Derogation to the very glory of
God must it be, where the Unanimity of Prayers and Praises, and an intended
Harmony of Hearts in so sacred a Work as that of Devotion, is so manifestly
Disjoynted and Dissordered by such a Babel Confusion of Worshipers; and
therefore with what more honorable and fairer face (under the Dispensation of
Indulgence) does our Ecclesiastical Constitution appear, where our Temples and
Altars are not reproacht ^or profaned I might say, by so scandalous a mixture
of Communicants.


Coun. Indeed Friend, I do acknowledge that the Executing of the Penal Laws
have rarely produced any greater effects then those you mention, as having
truly (more's the pity) wrought but very few real Conversions, (for these
stif-neckt Dissenters are an incorrgible sort of obstinates) but however, is an
honest good Law to be condemned, for no other Defect then want of Power to
restrain Offenders; you may as well at that rate arraign the ten Commandments,
nay the very Gospel it self; for all the Irreligion and Atheism of the Age.


Cit. Nay Friend, stop a little there; the Defect of these Penal Laws, lies not
only in their want of Power to restrain Offenders, as you call them; for that
part of their Defect arraigns only the Policy of those that made them, and is
the least part of their fault; but their greatest and most capital Defect is,
that the very Tenure and subject matter of those Laws is altogether inexcusable.


Coun. You will do well to make out all that Charge against them.


Cit. Alas, the every days Arguments on this subject, are so public and so
common --


Coun. That I warrant, you are unwilling to be at the trouble of repeating
them, because perhaps some of them have been said before, and are not all your
own; prithee let not that break squares between us, no matter whose or where
they come; I shall be glad to hear Reason though as old as Adam, and Truth, (if
a Man could meet with it) which they say is not ashamed to walk naked, has
Charms, that not like other Beauties, are less agreeable or inviting, because
public and common.


Cit. Then take that naked Truth, and own the Charms you give her; first by
what just Authority can the Church of England establish Laws to punish Dissent
in Religion and Nonconformity of Worship! He that punishes, ought to be assured
of a Wrong done, or an Evil committed by the Transgressor, or else both the Law
condemning and the punishment inflicted are unjust. But the Worship of God
according to the best Light of a Christian Conscience, (and that is all the
Crime the Dissenter is punished for) is so far from Evil, that it is the highest
duty of Christianity. And can that Law be justified by the standard of the
Evangelical profession, that so notoriously restrains Men from so indispensable
a Duty.


Coun. Alas, you mistake your self, these Laws do not restrain Men from that
Worship of God, but rather compel'em to it: Are not all the Doctrines of the
Church of England founded on holy Writ, and extracted from that sacred fountain
of Truth, the Gospel. And has: not the wisdom and care of our great Reformers
weeded and purged the profession of Christianity both in Doctrine and Worship,
as now believed and practiced in the Church of England, from all Inno^^^^^^ and
Errors whatever crept into it. And if God be the God of Order, where is Order
and Unity think you, to be established; if not in the Church of God; and if that
Order be so to be established there, as undoubtedly it is, shall we on the
contrary open a Gate by Liberty of Conscience, to let in all the dissorder and
confusion, that such Libertines and Enthusiasts can bring amongst us. And is it
so great a fault in our Penal Laws, or the Maternal care of a Church sometimes
in life the Rod to (...) an Obstinate and Disobedient Son.


Cit. Truly Friend in this wide Answer of yours, you have not directly replied
to my Assertion: However, as you have here mustered the very sum total of all
our Church has to urge in vindication of her Penal Laws; the Discussion
therefore of these her weightiest pretended ponderous Arguments, and the
Cutting this seeming knotty Gordian, will be no little Step toward adjusting
our Debate, and setting us to Rights.

In order to which, First I believe not only the Doctrins of the Church of
England, but the points in Controversy between her and her Dissenters, (for
theirs most of them and our Doctrines are the same) are founded on holy Writ,
and extracted from those sacred Fountains of Truth, as you say. But pray have
not several of the Dissenters the very same Basis; the Scriptures too even for
those Tenants and points in differance between us.


Coun. How now! I hope you are not for making the Scripture play the Satyr in
the Fable, blow hot and cold both with one Breath; can the Scripture reconcile
Contradictions? can Truth play the Janus? And can opposite points of Faith or
Divine Rites of Worship be both at once supported by the sacred Oracles of the
Gospel.


Cit. I dare not tell you that they can, but this I dare tell you, as there is
but one God and one Gospel, so there are those Great and Fundamental Truths,
delivered in that Gospel so plain and Evident, that he that believes and
practices accordingly, and to the height of his Ability, lives up to the
precepts and commands contained in, and derived from those Fundamental Truths,
cannot err in the path to Salvation. But on the other side as there are several
lesser points contained also in, or deduced from that sacred Volume of the
revealed Mysteries, that from Generation to Generation have admitted of
Dispute, and which (without setting up an Infallible Judge) neither have been,
are, or will be adjusted to the end of the World: And consequently, the
numerous Christian Dissenters, in those forementioned points of difference
between us, neither are, or will be reconciled as long as the Sun and Moon
endure; how unreasonable therefore is the Institution of Penal Laws, to punish
no other Transgression then this Impossible Reconciliation. And to bring it
more home to the Church of England, a Church that utterly disowns any such
Infallible Judge, confessing her own and all other Fallibility: Her punishment
of Dissenters carries the most notorious face of Injustice, that all her.
Eloquence can never answer, nor Sophistry it self can palliate: For what
assurance, as Fallible, can she have, but that the Dissenters in those points
in Difference, may be in the Right and her self in the Wrong; and therefore
with what forehead dares she pretend, (in so tender a concern, as no less then
the Liberties, Estates and Lives of her Dissenting Brethren struck at by our
Penal Laws) to punish Dissent as Erroneous, when possibly the error may be on
the punishing and not on the offending side.


Coun. Truly I should be a Dissenter my self should I dare contradict so
established an Opinion of our Church as ^^^ability. And therefore I must
acknowledge we ^pan^ no ^^^ther assurance of the Right on our side, in the
aforesaid controverted Points, then founding our Truth (in that matter) in
contradiction to their Mistake, only upon our Internal Evidence testifying for
i^, A^l^ght o^ Judgment of Conscience, that after a serious, ^^at^^re and
deliberate Examination, and from our own Int^^petation of the Spiritual
Records, decides in our own Favor, and gives Reason and Strength to our own
Arguments and Opinions.


Cit. This very acknowledgement has undone you; for the Dissenter himself has
that very Light and Judgment of Conscience, that in contradiction to all your
Reasons, decides for his own. And if no stronger a Light can erect Penal Laws,
supposing our Church Government in the Dissenters Hands, he has the same parity
of Justice to turn all our own Penal Weapons, or others as sharp, against the
very Breast of the now Church of England.


Coun. Troth, Friend, to give you your due, I think there is a little small
matter of Sense, some little smattering of Reason in this Argument of yours,
that, hang me, if at present I am provided with a Reply.


Cit. No matter, hear the end of it, and lay your own and your helping
Neighbors Heads together to answer it. He that is an Enemy to this Charter of
Religious Liberty, and that defends our Penal Laws in matter of Religion and
restraint of Conscience, or endeavors the choice of those Representatives in
Parliament, that shall uphold them, justifies the Deaths of every Protestant
that dyed by the Laws of Queen Mary, and all the Erection of Stakes and
Inquisition Houses; and ought not in Justice to complain, were it possible that
Popery should ever be so reestablished again in England (as that indeed it
never can be) --


Coun. Never! Are you sure on it?


Cit. Yes never! But of that in its proper place. As I said before, grant the
supposition of the same reestablishment of Popery, He ought not to complain or
murmur were the old Smithfeild Fires rekindled, and himself one of ahe Number
that Blazed in their Flames.


Coun. Heyday, Here Is a bold Lanch indeed. But I hope you are not serious, for
if you are, you will have tough work to vouch what you say.


Cit. Not so tough as you fancy: For to state the Balance between them. Our
Church in Power and Dominion, upon the presumption of being the True, Ancient
and Apostolic Church, and her self only in the right, sets up Gibbets to
punish her Erroneous Recusants, and establishes Jayls, Consiseations,
Sequestrations, Abjurations, Banishments and Halters here again too, to punish
her erroneous Non-conformists. And pray did not the Church of Rome in Power and
Dominion set up Fire and Faggot to punish her erroneous Recusants too, under the
same presumption of being the true ancient Aposto^ick Church, her self only in
the right, and her Heretics in the wrong. (I might have said greater
Presumption, for her supposed Infalibility gives her a confidence of that right
and wrong which our tenderer Modesty only allows us Hopes of) And consequently
by the same Equity of Condemnation we tacitly avow her Hereteci Comburendi to
be as honest and upright a Law (when in force) as 27th or 38th of Elizabeth.


Coun. But hold a little, my nimble Friend, I hope there is some little
difference between the Church of Rome and the Church of England.


Cit. I undoubtedly a great one.


Coun. And therefore I hope the Laws and Penalties to support our Innocent
Primitive Faith and Purity; as severe as you are pleased to represent them, and
the Laws to support such an Erroneous, Superstitious, Idolatrous Religion as
that of Rome bear some little Disproportion,


Cit. Disproportion! none at all: for grant all this outery of Error
Superstition, etc. against the Romish Religion, true: she has as authentic a
justification of her Penal Laws, as we can have of ours: We are indeed to
consider that the Scripture is that Ark or Cabinet, in which Gods Divine Truths
are Reposited, but with all so Reposited, that the Key of Knowledge that opens
to them, does not unlock to all Men a like. It Is not the absolute and perfect
Knowledge (for such Perfection is not given us) of Good and Evil, and Truth and
Falsehood in every entire Part and Particle: But only the Presumptive Knowledge
of them that sets up Churches and Laws to support them; and therefore the
Romish Church with an Equal or (rather) more strong Belief of her Divine
unerring Truth and uprightness, has as sufficient and authorative warrant for
her penal Inflictions in matter of Conscience, as we can have for ours. And
indeed power in the Saddle, in any Church whatever; whether Christian, Jewish,
Mohammedan, or Heathen it self, upon the granted supposition of a human Right of
Dominion over Conscience, with the same (tho not so well gounded) a presumtion
of Right on their side, has the same plea for all the Barbarities that
Persecution or Cruelty has, can, or shall commit. And therefore (as I said
before) he that upholds any such penal Power of Restraint of the worship of
God, and avows the government of Conscience, any other then the pecular
Province of the Almighty, and wholly without the Jurisdiction of Man, opens a
boundless and insatiate Torrent to all the licentiousness of Tyranny, that mad
Zeal, or Spiritual Pride under the Color of a Law (for that they could not
want) can set a floating. And these very Records, our Penal Statutes so uphold
deprive us of all Right of Appeal even to God himself, against the Injustice or
Oppression of any Ecclesiastical Restraint of, or Persecution for Conscience,
that any other Church whatever in power over us does or can exercise upon us.
For what have we then more done to us then we our selves will to have done to
others.

And more particularly to the Dissenters part, if they either infatuated or
scarcrow'd out of their Reason, shall neglect the embracing of His Majesty's
gracious Offer, and elect any Members of Parliament that they shall know are
not inclining to this Religious Liberty, they justify not only the Fines,
Imprisonments, Sequestrations, etc. that the Members of their own Communion
have from Time to Time, so violently Suffered from our Penal Laws; but also the
Deaths and Blood also of so many Thousands (for no less then Thousands are
their number) of their Brethren that have dyed in Jayle under the Restraint of
those Penal Laws. And consequently they must either confess themselves not in
the Truth, in exercising that Religious Worship for which they so Suffered, or
else that whole Congregations of Christians, may and ought justly by Law to be
deprived of Freedoms, Goods, Chattels, Estates, etc. and to Rot, Starve and
Perish in Jayls, with Truth on their side; and that so Suffering for Truth, is
Justice and Equity.


Coun. Why truly City Friend these Reasons carry an indifferent fair Face with
them.


Cit. Indifferent only?


Coun. Then suppose for once I granted your Point thus far. I have so many more
Rubs and Blocks in your way still, that you will sind no easy matter to get over.


Cit. Let us adjourn then this Evening, and come as fresh to morrow Morning
with 'em as you can.



