The Full and True RELATION Of a Dreadful Storm or Tempest Accompanied with
Thunders, Lightnings, and Hailstones, some of them being above Two pounds in
weight: As likewise a terrible Earthquake, continuing for above half an hour,
giving three furious onsets, the which happened on the 16th of August 1680, in
the City of Millain, and the Villages adjacent; so that in the space of Three
hours and a half, it quite demolished Twenty stately Houses, and ruined about
one hundred and fifty more, and greatly Endamaged Two Churches, by blowing off
their Steeples, and unleading them.

As likewise An Account of Barns and Reeks fired by Lightning, Trees blown up
by the Roots, and Villages adjacent destroyed; with about Sixty persons killed,
and a Hundred wounded, besides a number of Cattle that perished: the like not
having been known to happen: The Damages sustained upon view of several worthy
persons, being granted to be One Million and a half.

With several other Remarkable Accidenrs (strange and dreadful) as they were
faithfully transmitted by a person of worth, who was upon view of the sad
accident, and gave his report as to the losses sustained.

WHen angry Heaven designs to punish man for Disobedience, and to make him know
he is but dust, sundry means are used; and wise Omnipotence fore-warns before
he strikes, or gives his vengeance reins to overwhelm with ruin irrevocable
the Sons of Men: for sure it is, Divine Justice is always tempered with Mercy,
and many times some fall, to give the rest an opportunity for to repent, and so
avoid the danger imminent, which otherwise would fall heavy on their heads: And
truly through all Ages it has been observed, that the Almighty has been loath
to destroy the work that his right hand has formed; for as the holy Psalmist
does declare, that loud Thunder is his voice among the waters, so may it be
understood, that Tempests and Earthquakes are his warning-pieces, and as
Heralds, gives us notice of wrath designed to fall; of which more dreadful has
not happened, than what I shall here relate, which happened in the City of
Millain, and the Villages adjacent, on the 16th of August, 1680, the
Circumstances of which are as follows.

About Noon an unusual paleness over-cast the Sun, and all the Clouds seemed of
a white Amber-colour, their motions being many times contrary to the Winds,
that about Three of the clock in the Afternoon began to blow strong from the
North-West, when on a sudden, it Thundered, and darted Lightning so swift, as
made the Heavens seem all on fire, whilst a gathering blackness made it seem as
night, that people could not discern each other, so as to be known the space of
six yards; which put all to a great amazement, and caused them to imagine that
Doomsday was at hand: but long their wonder had not lasted, ere from the
breaking Clouds a storm of Hail descended, the stones of which were of such
Magnitude, as has not been seen in any Age, many of them weighing two pounds or
more; which surprising many in the fields, and other places shelterless, killed
them in a moment, whilst in vain they strove to fly, and Cattle without number
perished; all the Fruit Trees and others were broken in pieces for the space of
forty miles, as if they had been battered with Cannon-Bullets, or the Branches
torn with violent hands: nor fared the City and Villages much better, for in
many places the Spires were beaten off Church-steeples, the Leads broken
through, and all the Ornaments therein quite spoiled; whilst the Houses went to
wrack, scarce either Tiles or Slates being left upon them, but loosened or
broke off by the furious Storm, they were by the violence of the winds carried
like Leaves in the Air, far distant from their proper places; stacks of
Chimneys likewise being blown down, whose fall demolished several stately
Buildings; so that the wretched people in amazement knew not where to fly for
safety, but as they strove to avoid one danger, fell soul of another as great
if not greater than the former; for leaving their ruined Houses, in the open
streets the Hail was worse, and the Storm raged more, accompanied with hot
flashes of Lightning, and volleys of Thunder, so prodigious loud as was never
heard before; so that multitudes being struck down, lay sprawling and crying
for help in vain; each one preferring his safety before that of his friends.

Whilst this was doing, several Barns and Reeks of Corn and Hay near adjoining
to the City, took fire, supposed to be done by Lightning, whose Flames,
notwithstanding all the Rain and Hail, burnt fierce, and being carried with the
wind, whole sheets of that devouring Element were hurled in the Air, not
without greatly endangering the Churches and Buildings on that side the City.

The Storm and great Confusion having continued for the space of three hours,
Rending and Tearing what ever opposed it, immediately an unusual Portent more
dangerous, began to assault the tottering Ruins: for whether caused by the
violence of the Tempest, or Whirlwinds enclosed in Natures Caverns, is not
certain; but certain it is, the Earth began to Tremble more and more, till at
last it fell into so terrible a shaking fit, as made the Buildings skip like
Rams, and the People stagger as if drunk, that nothing but Confusions and
Amazements were spread among them, whilst the Crying Children followed their
woeful Parents, for to shelter them from Heavens wrath, which the angry Skies
sent down. The Earthquake gave Three several onsets, which each time increased
so, that the last seemed to have unhinged all Nature, and to have overturned
her deep Foundations, the like never having been in any of these parts before.
It continued for half an hour or somewhat more, doing infinite damage to those
Buildings the Storm had loosened; so that above Twenty fell flat to the ground,
and about one hundred and fifty spoiled and ruined, that they must be quite
plucked down; besides a number, almost numberless, that received less damage,
though very considerable.

The two Churches on the West Side, have almost all the Lead blown off them,
and their Steeples half way blown down: Nor are the Villages less ruined,
though they lie much lower, and are in several places sheltred with small
rising Hills, and high-grown Trees; but Trees availed them not, for they, as
well as Barns, Hay-reeks, Corn-reeks, and Houses, were torn up by the Roots,
some of them being tossed up in the Air, and made the sport of winds. After the
continuance of almost four hours, on a sudden all was whist and still; which
put some into a great admiration, which might have been spared, had they
considered what the Holy Scriptures says, That both Winds and Waves, and all
Created things obey, and at the voice of God desist to rage.

The next morning being very fair, several went to view the Ruins, and take a
particular account of the Damages done, as well in the City as other Villages;
which they found to be very great, and that the loss and spoil of Hay, Corn,
and Cattle only, amounted to half a Million; and the Damages the Churches,
Houses, Outhouses, and Barns had sustained at the lowest value, about one
Million more. It is said there was about Sixty persons killed, and about a
hundred wounded, with the fall of Hail, Tiles, Stones, and Timber. Several
persons of great Quality have come to be Spectators of our devastations, and
with admiration bless themselves, to see how many goodly Structures are
demolished and defaced; and all conclude never to have beheld the like; so that
it was thought fit by all our Magistrates, that a public Fast should be
Solemnized here at all the Churches, thereby to appease the wrath of Heaven,
and entreat him with supplications to turn away his conceived displeasure;
which was accordingly performed on the 18th of the instant beforementioned,
with great Observance and Solemnity.

LONDON: Printed for T. Davies. 1680.


