A Full and True RELATION OF THE Remarkable Fight BETWIXT Capt. HAMILTON and
Capt. BROWN, Commanders of the Two Scotch FRIGATES, AND Three French Men of WAR,
That brought over the IRISH Men to Join Dundee in the Western Sea, as it was
delivered to some of the Privy Counselors in Scotland, by those that were Eye
Witnesses during the whole Action. LICENSED Aug. 2. 1689. J. Fraser.
IN regard that the Bravery and Gallantness of the last Actions of Captain
Hamilton and Captain Brown's Lives are so Remarkable, and not frequently
paralelled, I think it not amiss to give you a particular and distinct Account
of them, as it was delivered to some Members of the Privy Council here, by one
of the Lieutenants of those Frigates that had the good Fortune to come off after
he had been taken Prisoner, and by other persons now in Town, who were present,
and Witnesses of what past, which was thus. On Wednesday the 10th. of July,
Captain Hamilton Commanding the Pelican carrying 18 Guns and 120 Men, and
Captain Brown in the Jennet Frigate carrying 12 Guns and 80 Men, as they were
Cruising between the Mull of Kintire in Scotland and Carrichsergus Lough in
Ireland, happened to discover at Sea to the Southward three Sail of Ships, to
whom they immediately plied up, and when they came within such a distance as to
be able to discern them; they observed them to look like English built Ships,
carrying the English Flag and Colors, which led them into the mistake of
believing them to be English and Friends: This obliged them to make up close to
them to Salute them; but they did not sooner perceive their Error, than they
found it impossible to Retreat; they being three French Men of War, having on
Aboard a Battalion of 400 Men of Colonel Porsils Regiment of Foot, that was
going to join Dundee; the biggest of them carrying 36 Guns, the Second 30, and
the third 24 Guns: And so to Action they fell immediately, and fought it with
all the Gallantry and Resolution imaginable with their Guns above an hour; the
two lesser Frigates fell to Captain Brown's share to engage with, and when his
Main Mast was shot down, they came and lay aboard him, in which Action his
Right Arm was shot off with a Canon Bullet, yet notwithstanding he maintained
the Fight Resolutely, and continued giving directions and Orders to his Men,
until he received seven Musket Bullets in his Body, the last of which killed
him dead, one Cambell his Lieutenant maintained the Fight with the same
Gallantry, until being over power'd by the Enemies men, who after great
slaughters coming on board found the Lieutenant lying on the Deck, Shot
throught the right Thigh, the right Shoulder, and left Arm, having only 14 Men
alive, whereof 8 were wounded and disabled. Captain Brown's Ship being thus
taken, these two Frigates Join the great one, and all three fall on Captain
Hamilton, who made his part good against the French Man alone, and when his
Ship had been much battered and torn, the two biggest Ships came and
endeavored to board him; and with them he fought a considerable time, his Ship
being better provided for a close Fight then Captain Brown's was, he had the
misfortune to be thrice boarded by the Enemy, and the Courage to clear his Deck
as often of them. At last his Forecastle and Steerage being torn open by the
violence and frequency of the Enemies Shot, and the hand grenades doing much
mischief to his Men, the Enemy boarded him the fourth time in great Numbers, so
that looking upon himself and his Ship for lost, as his last affort, gave
orders to his Gunner to go down to the hold and blow up the Ship; and he no
sooner gave the word of Command for Executing what he had purposed to do, but a
Cannon Bullet at random Shot from the third Ship, came and dispatched him, and
hindered his last orders from being obeyed. And so his Ship fell into the
Enemies hands, and of the 120 Men he had on board, only 30 Men were found
alive, whereof the greatest part were wounded and much disabled. In this Action
there were killed of our People, the two Captains, one hundred and fifty Six
Men; and of the Enemies one French Captain, two Lieutenants, two hundred and
Eighteen Men, and many wounded.

This Account we have from some that were taken and now have made their Escape,
and from those that have been aboard the French Ship since the Action, as also
from some of those Irish that were taken prisoners since that time, all their
Relations agreeing as above is mentioned.

LONDON, Printed for Rich, Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.


