(...) And Learned SERMON Preached in LONDON; By a most Worthy and Faithful
Minister of Christ. For the great Support and Comfort of the People of God in
Evil Times. Most Learnedly opened, and pressed from PSALM. 97. 11. Light is sown
for the Righteous.

And farther shows, That if there be either Justice in Heaven, or Fire in Hell,
Persecutors shall never go unpunished.



Printed in the Year, 1670.

A SERMON Preached One Fast Day, LONDON. In the Year, One thousand six hundred
and Seventy.
Psalm 97. v. 11. Light is sown for the Righteous.


THis Psalm is very consolotary, full of comfort for the Church of God: It is
written in an Elegant and Majestic style. The Psalm begins thus; The Lord
Reigns let the Earth rejoice. God has a Superintendency over all humane
affairs, he does what he will: It is God that sits Lord paramount, he has a
Negative Voice in the Counsel of men, The Lord Reigns, therefore, let the Earth
rejoice: Clouds and darkness are round about him: Righteousness and Judgments
are the habitation of his Throne. s if the Psalmist had said, The Providence
of the great God, they are very dark and mysterious, we cannot see what he is
doing, Clouds and Darkness are round about him; but his ways though they are
dark, they are always holy and wife, they are always Righteous, Righteousness
and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne. And so I proceed unto the words
I have read, having given this short preface, Light is sown for the Righteous.
Let things go how they will, let Providence be never so dark and bloody, here
is the Saint comfort: God reigns, and he will have a care of his People, and
will comfort them in the most dismal times; Light is sown for the Righteous;
which Tex is like Isreal's Pillar of Fire in the Wilderness which did give them
light. It is like the Mariners lanthorn, which gives light in a dark night:
whether it be a dark night now, I leave it to you to judge: Here is the
Mariners Lanthorn to give light to you in a dark night. Light is sown for the
Righteous. Light, it is here a Metaphor, that is put here for comfort, because
Light, when it breaks out it gives abundance of comfort and chearing to the
Spirit, as in Scripture Darkness is put for afflictions, Joel 2. 2. A Day of
Darkness and Gloominess; that is, a day of afflictions; why so, Light is put
for comfort and for joy: Ester 8. 16. The Jews, they had light, and gladness
and joy; so that here see by light in the Text, is meant comfort. Comfort is
sown for the Righteous; it is sown, you know that sowing prepares the earth for
harvest. Light is sown: that is, joy, and peace, and comfort: it is preparing;
the seed is in the ground: Light is sown, and who is this seed of comfort sown
for? why in these words, sor the Righteous; the wicked, they have nothing to do
with comfort. Those that do sow in sin, shall be sure to reap in sorrow. Job 4.
8. Even as I have seen those that plough iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the
same. Oh, they will have a sad harvest at last! but says the Text, Light is
sown for the Righteous, for the Godly, for those in whose Spirit there is no
guile. By righteous, I understand such that are really holy upright Christians:
God esteems them righteous, who have Christ's merits imputed to them, and
Christ's Spirit imparted to them: the Righteous in the Text, they are such as
are upright, sincerely holy, so it is in the next words, Light is sown for the
Righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Those are upright ones in
whose Spirit there is no guile.

In this Text then there are two things observable. First, Here is something
employed, Light is sown; it implies this, that the comforts of Gods people may
be for a time, like the seed hid under ground; that is employed clearly.

Secondly, Here is something expressed, Light is sown: There is this expression,
though the comforts of Gods people are for a time hid, yet a seed of comfort
still remains, Light is sown for them. I shall begin with the first of these;
that which is employed in the Text: That the comforts of Gods people are often
times hid, as the seed under ground. They have not that visible appearance of
their comforts; sometimes they are hid, as the seed under ground. Now this I
shall clear to you in a double sense.

First, Their outward comforts may be hid.

Secondly, Their Soul comforts, they may be hid for a time, as seed under
ground: under the clodds.

First, The Saints outward comforts may be hid under sickness, their liberty
may be hid under restraint, their names maybe hid under reproach; thus their
outward comforts may be hid.

Secondly, The spiritual comforts of the Godly, they may be hid for a time, as
the seed under the clodds: the Lord may conceal the evidence of his love; the
Lord though he has the heart of a Father, may have the look of an Enemy, Job
6. 4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof arinks up my
spirit: he speaks there of dissertion; the Arrows of the Almighty are within
me. God has wounded me. It eludes to the Persians, who in their War, did dip
the point of their Arrows in Poison, to make them wound more mortally. So says
Job, The Lord has shot his poysonsome Arrows, and has wounded me with it, the
arrow of dissertion: thus you see the spiritual comforts of the Saints, they
may be sometimes hid from them.

But why does the Lord do thus? truly no wonder that the spiritual comforts of
believers may be hid, as the seed under ground. No, comfort and they may be in
dissertion; for,

First, The Saints comforts are no better than Christ's comforts were; but
Christ's comforts were hid for a time, when he was in dissertion, and cried out,
My God, my God; he was without comfort; and shall we wonder if God eclipse our
comfort, and we walk in the dark? did not Christ do so? our comforts are no
better than Christ's comforts were.

Secondly, The Saints comforts are no better than their graces are, but the
graces of the Saints may sometimes be hid, why then may not their comforts?
their graces we see are often hid under much corruption, as Gold is hid under
dross; their faith is hid under much unbelief; their humility is hid under much
pride; their love to Christ is hid under much love of the world: How did David
here suffer an eclipse? why now the Saints comforts are no better than their
graces are; if their graces be hid, why may not their comforts be hid too?

Thirdly, The Saints Crown that is hid, their comforts are no better than their
Crown is; but their Crown is hid, why may not their Comforts. A Crown is laid
up; hid out of sight, 2 Timothy 4. 8. A Crown laid up for me: a Believers Crown,
it is hid from the eyes of the world: the world sees the Saints sufferings, but
does not see their crown: and the Saints Crown is hid from their own eyes too
for a while, 1 Job. 3. 2. It does not yet appear what we shall be, our
happiness that we hope for, it is hid out of sight: why, if our crown be hid,
why may not our comforts be hid? they are not better than our crown is? But you
will say unto me, but why does the Lord thus hide the comforts of his people?
does he intend to bury them? I answer, no: the Lord is all this while carrying
on a desigh of mercy and love to the Saints. Pray observe.

1 st. God has a design in hiding their temporal comforts from them, and
withdrawing them.

Secondly, God has a design in the hiding the Saints spiritual comforts, and
withdrawing them.

1. The Lord has a design in hideing the temporal comforts of his people; God
does it for this great end, that he may lessen and unglew their hearts from the
world. We ost let the world have too great a share in our love. It is a very
hard thing to enjoy any temporal mercy, and not make an Idol of it; and
therefore the Lord in wisdom and love, hides and withdraws those comforts of
the world from us. As, suppose that a husband were beyond the Sea, and he
should send his Wife a Jewel, and she should be so taken with the Jewel, as
quite to forget her husband: was it not time for him to send home for the Jewel
again, that she might love him more: So it is here: the Lord inricheth you with
temporal mercies, health, and estate, sends you these Jewels; you are apt to
fall in love with these Jewels, and forget God that sent them. It is time for
God to call home for those Jewels, that he might have more of your love.

Secondly, God has a design in hideing, and withdrawing the spiritual comforts
of his People; their spiritual comforts, as,

First, Perhaps God sees that they cannot bear comfort: comfort is not for all,
it is like strong Waters that break the Glass: Joys are strong things, all
cannot bear it, no more than a weak eye can bear the Sun. When Peter was upon
the Mount of Transfiguration, the glory of Heaven began a little to shine in
his eyes, he was transported, and said, he knew not what those sugared joys of
Heaven were: they are so sweet and ravishing, that some have tasted of them and
have died, they have not been able to bear them; therefore God hides and
withdraws them: all cannot bear comfort.

Secondly, God may hide those spiritual comforts from Believers, for a time,
that they may value them the more when they have them. Oh, brethren! Did we
come by our comforts easily, as Water at the strst pumping, we should begin to
disesteem, and vilify our comforts; that is our nature. Though Manna was
Angels food, when it grew common, it was slighted, it was dis-esteemed: What
is this Manna, and who is this Moses? they began to slight the Manna. When
Pearls grew common at Rome, they slighted them, and wore them upon their shoes;
so would we do with our spiritual comforts: therefore God, to inhaunce, and
raise the price of our spiritual comforts; he does for a time suspend them;
hides them, as the seed under ground.

Thirdly, God may hide the spiritual comforts of his Children, for trial; he
will try their ingenuity, he will see what metal they are made of, whether they
will serve him for himself, and not for comfort only. It is a harlots love, to
love the Husbands money and tokens more than his person. Such as serve God
only for Comforts, they serve God more for his gifts than for himself. We do
dislike such as will do nothing for us without a Fee; God likes not those
Christians, who will serve him only when he fees, and bribes them with Comfort.

Fourthly, God hides his peoples spiritual comfort, that he may quicken the
exercise of their Grace. Many times Grace is strong, when Comforts are weak;
Grace is at full-tide, when Comforts are but at a low ebb, Jonah 2. 4. I said I
was cast out of thy sight. There he had no comfort. Yet will I look again to
thy holy Temple. There was a strong Faith. Faith and Love, like two stars,
shine brightest in the darkest night. In the night of dissertion, we are taken
with Comfort, but God is more taken with the acting of our Grace. The truth of
it is, when God sometimes gives his people spiritual comfort, why then they are
apt to be more remiss in their walking, and they are not so quick and lively in
duty as they were; just like Musicians, as soon as you throw them down money out
of the window, they will leave off playing, you will hear no more Music. The
Lord withholds comforts from his people sometimes, because he loves to hear
the music of their Graces.

Fifthly, God hides the Spiritual comfort of the Saints for a time, that they
may be more humble: there is nothing the Saints are more apt to be proud of,
than spiritual comforts, and enlargement; because they look upon those things
as most excellent, and therefore their hearts are apt to be lifted up. Now when
God takes away those comforts, and hides them, their hearts begin to be more
humble. St. Paul's, danger was, in being lifted up; when he had so many Visions
and Revelations. Therefore he had a Thorn in his flesh to humble him. It was an
humbling Thorn. 2 Cor. 10. 12. Lest that I should be exalted above measure,
thou have given me a Thorn in the Elesh. When Christians have much joy in their
Spirits, they need a thorn in the flesh, to humble them. It is a very hard
thing, to be high in joy, and to be low in humility. Oh, what corruption is
there in man's heart? God cannot humble a Soul but it grows dejected; and God
cannot comfort him, but he is ready to grow proud: and therefore he is forced
sometimes, to withdraw spiritual comforts, and hide them, as seed under ground.
God had rather you should want comfort, than that you should be proud with your
comforts.

Sixthly, The Lord sometimes hides the spiritual comforts of his people, and
they walk in the dark, and see no light, that they may long the more to be in
Heaven: then their comforts shall be in perfection, and shall never cease; then
the Saints they shall be upon the Mount of Vision, seeing Gods glory ever, and
shall never complain more. My beloved has with drawn himself. In Heaven, they
shall have nothing but comfort then, because they have nothing but grace. The
Saints they shall be for ever sunning themselves in the light of Gods
countenance. Oh, blessed time! Believers, they shall never have an angry word
from God more; they shall never see a frown in his face more: the Sun-light of
Gods favor will be without clouds, and will never set; and therefore God lets
our comforts be hid, as seed under ground; that we may long for a Springtime
of glory; when the flowers of spiritual Joy shall be fully ripe, and blown, we
shall have comsort, and nothing but comfort. There shall be no more weeping
then in Heaven, there shall be joy in Hell. Now to make some Application of
this.

Use 1. Then, if we see not Spiritual joy rising suddenly in our hearts, let us
not wonder; you see God has a design of love and mercy to his People, who
hides Spiritual comforts! If God pleased, he could presently let out the
Sun-light of his face; he could presently give us joy; but he sees it better
sometimes to be without it, than have it: the Sun dulls the fuel, and puts it
out. The Sunshine of comfort, makes the fervor of grace abate. Note
therefore, God hides the spiritual comforts of his Saints, like seed under
ground: He is all this while carrying on a design of mercy, and love to them.
To come to the next: this thing is employed in the Text: Comfort may be hid as
seed, as seed under clodds.

Secondly, I come to that which is expressed here in the Text: Though the
comforts of Believers are for a time hid out of sight, as seed under ground:
why, yet still a seed of comfort remains for the godly: that is expressed in
the Text. Light, that is, Comfort is sown for the righteous; though comfort is
hid for a time, yet there is a seed of comfort still remaining for all the
righteous: this is, methinks, like a breast of consolation: do but lay your
faith to this breast, and you may suck out comfort. This is the observation.

The Doctrine is this;

That in the midst of all trials and discomforts of the godly, still there is a
seed of comfort left for them, Light is sown for the Righteous. Psalm. 18. 28.
For thou wilt light my Candle: as if David had said, though at present all my
comforts they seem to be blown out: why, yet the Lord will light my Candle:
Light is sown for the Righteous. Why, now you will say, Why will the Lord, in
great trials of his people, preserve a seed of comfort for them: Light is sown
for them. I answer, God does it for this end, that he may sweeten Religion to
them: if nothing were to be seen but sorrow and trouble; nothing but the dark
side of the cloud, and there were no intervals, it would imbitter Religion: It
would cast a prejudice upon the ways of God; and therefore the Lord, that he
may show you the beauty and pleasantness in Religion, he does chequer his work,
and preserve some seeds of comfort in the worst of times: this sweetens
Religion, Light is sown for the Righteous. Now, to illustrate this proposition,
to clear it to you, in case the Lord does preserve alive seeds of comfort for
his people.

First, In their outward comfort.

Secondly, In their spiritual agony and dissertion, God preserves a seed of
comfort for his people.

1. In their outward trouble, in persecutions, in sufferings: why, now God
preserves seeds of comfort; there are two seeds of comfort sown for the
righteous, in time of Persecution.

1. The Promises are seeds of comfort in Persecutions. There is no promise made
to prosperity, but abundance of promises made to persecution, and these
promises are seeds of comfort sown for the Righteous. I will only instance in
these four promises.

First, God has promised, that he will moderate the sury of his Enemies; he
will, in the day of the Rough wind, stay the East wind: God will blunt the edge
of their Razor, when their Spirits are sharpened against the Righteous: God
will blunt the edge, he will moderate the stroke. Psalm. 76. 10. The remainder
of wrath thou shall restrain. That promise is a seed of Comfort.

Secondly, The Lord has promised, that he will sanctify our Afflictions, and
Persecutions to us, they shall do us good. Jer. 24. 5. They shall be carried
captive, but it is for their good, to make them holy, brightning their graces,
fitting them for glory: fiery trials make good Christians.

Thirdly, Promise in Persecution is this, that God will proportion his strength
to our trials: and this promise is a seed of comfort. Psalm. 7. 39. He is their
strength in the time of trouble: either God will lighten our burdens, or will
strengthen our faith.

Fourthly, Another promise is this, in Persecution, that God will in his time
open the door of deliverance for his People: when the Rod of the Persecutor
has done its work, when it has humbled, and purified the Saints, God he can
soon throw away the Rod. 1 Cor. 10. 13. He will with the temptation, make a way
to escape. Never was Goldsmiths more curious to observe when the Gold is
thorough-refined, to take it out of the furnace, than God is to watch the first
season, when his People are fit for deliverance, then he will take his gold out
of the furnace. Why, these promises are great seeds of comfort in an hour of
Persecution.

Secondly, As the promises are seeds of comforts, so Persecution it self does
carry in it seeds of comfort for the godly, these two ways. Persecution it
self has seeds of comfort in it, two ways.

First, Persecution ripens the sin of the Enemy, and as their sin does ripen,
so the godlys deliverance does hasten.

Secondly, Persecutions have seeds of comfort in them: as they are a means to
distill comfort into the Soul: The Saints have joy out of sorrow, as Sampson had
honey out of the Lion. John 16. 20. You shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy: by the very Persecution, God will let in more joy
into the Soul: your sorrow, says Christ, shall be turned into joy: here is
water turned into wine. The Soul has never so much of God, as in an hour of
affliction: this made Paul to glory in tribulations, and as a Bird, to sing in
Winter. 2 Cor. 7. 4. Thus, you see, the Saints very persecutions do carry in
them seeds of comfort for them. Light is sown for the Righteous.

Secondly, The inward Agony of the Soul, and dissertion: still God preserves a
seed of comfort in the Soul: Light is sown for the Righteous. When God hides
his face from his people, looks like an enemy, draws a curtain between him and
his people; why, yet all this while, in this agony, there is some seed of
comfort left in the Soul. But you will say, what seeds are here? These two.

1. This is a seed of comfort in dissertion, that God is still a God in
Covenant, there is a seed of comfort. Though the Lord may forsake us in regard
of Vision, he will never forsake us in regard of Union. The Covenant relation,
the Marriage relation still holds, that is a seed of comfort. A Husband, he may
be gone a long Voyage, he may be a thousand Leagues off from his Wife; Oh, but
still the Marriage relation holds between them; God may be gone, dissert the
Soul, but still the Marriage knot is bound, God is a God in Covenant. Isa. 55.
53. I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Beloved, Gods truth is the richest Jewel of his Crown, and he has laid
this Jewel to pawn, in the Covenant; he has promised, he has sworn it, he
will be our God eternally. Though it is true, we forseit the mercy of the
Covenant, yet God will not break the truth of the Covenant. Psalm. 89. 28. My
Covenant shall stand fast. The earth does not always stand fast, that is
shaken and removed, as in some Earthquakes: Oh, but faith God, My Covenant
shall stand fast. Mat. 2. 16. The God of Israel faith, that he hates putting
away. God that would not have other men put away their Wives, do you think he
will divorce his own Spouse? the Lord hates putting away. Here is seeds of
comfort in dissertion.

Secondly, In dissertion, in a Spiritual Agony: why, now grace is a seed of
comfort, the tree may be without blossom, and without fruit, but still it is
alive, there is sap in the root of the tree; there may be vital sap, and grace
in the heart, though fruit of joy and assurance be not seen.

But a disserted soul will ask me this question, when grace appears now in an
hour of dissertion, to be a seed of Joy, and a seed of comfort? I answer.

First, The Soul mourns for Gods absence, that shows grace. It is a sign love
is in thy heart, else thou would not Mourn for Gods absence. When the Sun is
gone, the dew falls; when God withdraws from the Soul, why then the dew of
tears that drops from the eye, ( David felt this mourning, lamenting Gods
absence) that is a sign of grace in the heart.

Secondly, When the Lord has left thee in dissertion, a Christian has quite
loft his taste to all worldly comforts, like one in a Fever, every thing tastes
bitter, he takes content in nothing, so long as he cannot enjoy God. As Job
speaks, I may elude to it, I went mourning without the Sun: so a poor disserted
Christian, I go mourning up and down without the Sun; God gives me some
Starlight, some worldly comfort: what is all this? still in a night of
dissertion. I went mourning without the Sun, I cannot see Christ's face, the Son
of Righteousness does not sbine. Is not this a seed of grace? the Soul has
lost its taste to all worldly comfort; he cannot taste the sweetness in
Friends, and estate, as he could do. 2 Samuel 14. 32. Says Absolon, Let me see
the Kings face. Oh, nothing will satisfy a poor disserted Soul, but to see the
King of Heavens face, to see Gods smiling countenance: why, this shows, that
the Soul is deeply in love with God, and ready to faint away for him; this
grace is a seed of comfort, in an hour of dissertion; thus you see light is
sown for the Righteous. Both outward troubles, persecutions, inward agonies,
dissertions; thus you see, light is sown for the Righteous: seeds of comfort is
still left in that Soul. Let me now come to make some Application; and the Lord
give a blessing to it. Three several inferences I shall draw from this Doctrine.

1. See then from hence, my Brethren, the super-abundant goodness of the Lord
to his people, in the midst of all their sorrow and sufferings; still he
preserves a seed of comfort for them: light is sown for the Righteous. God does
chequer his work with troubles; he does intermix comfort like a Limner, who
mingles bright colors with dark shadows; I may elude to that Scripture, Zac.
14. 7. I do but elude to it. It shall not be day nor night. Neither day, nor
night; the people of God, they have some afflictions, so that it is not day,
yet they have some seed of comfort in their Souls, so that it is not night:
light is sown for them. The condition of believers in this world is never so
bad, but they may spy mercy in it, they may see some light, they may behold a
Rainbow in the black cloud. Psalm. 148. 7. Though I walk in the borders of
trouble, thou will revive me. Joseph was in prison, there, he was in
affliction, but the Lord was with Joseph, there was a seed of comfort. Paul had
a thorn in the flesh, there was his trouble, but God said to him, My grace
shall be sufficient for thee; there was a seed of comfort. In the Ark, there
was laid up the Rod, and Manna together; truly in this life, Gods people, Gods
suffering people, with the Rod, taste some Manna. Oh, the goodness of God, that
never brings his people so low, but still reserves seeds of comfort for them,
that they may not murm ure, but rather praise him in their worst condition;
that is the first inference.

Secondly, If it be Gods work, and his great design, to sow seeds of comforts
for the Righteous; than what will we think of those, who are sowing seeds of
sorrow for the Righeous? Surely these act directly against God, there is a woe
belongs to them, that make the heart of the Righteous sad, whom God will not
have made sad. Ezekiel. 13. 22. God is sowing light for his people, and these men
are laying snares for them: God is powering in Wine and Oil into his peoples
wounds, and they power in Vinegar: these act directly contrary to God, who
still would preserve seeds of comfort for the Saints. We read in Scripture of
Gods Bottle, and of his Bag; of Gods Bottle, Psalm. 56. 8. and of his Bag, Job
14. 17. The Lord will put the tears of his Saints in his bottle, and he will
seal up the sins of the wicked in his bag: such as afflict the righteous, they
strike at Christ through his Members sides: let them take heed, God is making
his Bow and Arrows ready to shoot. Psalm. 7. 13. The Lord ordains his Arrows
against the Persecutors. Never did any persecutor thrive on that trade, but
were broken at last. Domanter, and others ran mad and poisoned themseves. If
there be either Justice in Heaven, or Fire in Hell, Persecutors shall never go
unpunished. That is the second.

Thirdly, See here the difference between the wicked and the godly. Oh, here is
a great difference, the godly in all their sorrows have seeds of comfort sown
for them. The wicked in all their comfort have seeds of sorrow sown for them:
What are those seeds of forrow, that are sown for the wicked? they are the
threatenings of God. Here be seeds of sorrow, so long as the wicked and those
seeds will come up, Psalm. 68. 21. God shall wound the head of his enemies, and
the hairy scalp of such an one that goes on in trespasses. Why, this
threatening is a seed of sorrow, sown for the wicked. Oh, it is a dreadful thing
to be in the number of the wicked; to be of the Devils black-guard: the sinner
he lives every day in fear of arresting; there remains for him, says the
Apoftle, a fearful looking for a Judgment, and fiery indignation, Heb. 10. 27.
A wicked man, when he dies, he drops into the grave, and into Hell both at
once. God is brewing for the finner a deadly cup; Oh, it will make him heart
sick. Psalm. 57. 8. In the hand of the Lord, there is a cup, the wine is red, it
is full of mixture; the dregs there of, the wicked of the earth shall drink
them out: this Wine is the wrath of God. It is burnt wine, and this cup of wine
is full of mixture: what is that mixture in the cup? the worm of Conscience,
and the fire of Hell, here is a mixed cup, and the wicked shall be ever
drinking of it: yea, the very dregs: God will never say to the damned in hell,
Let this cup pass away from you: Methinks this might damp a sinners mirth:
there are seeds of sorrows. All the threatenings of God sown for the wicked. It
was sad news the Devil brought to Saul, oh, it must needs be bad news, where
the Devil is the messenger. I Sam. 28. 19. Says the Devil to Saul, Tomorrow
thou shall be with me. There are some sinners in England, that shall be with
the Devil before to morrow. Here is a cooling Card for wicked men. There is
seeds of sorrow, threatenings of God sown for the wicked; they will spring up in
time.

Fourthly, If there be seeds of light and comfort sown for the Righteous; then
when a child of God does not see the flower of comfort, let him rejoice in the
seed of grace; when he does not see the flower of comfort, yet let him rejoice
in the seed of grace; this seed will bring comfort in time.

Now a child of God will make this objection. Alas! I could take comfort, if I
culd find the seed of grace in my Soul: but I have such a deal of corruption,
that I fear, there are no seeds of grace left now. To this I answer. There may
be seeds of corruption in the heart, where there are seeds of grace. The change
that grace makes in the Soul, is a real change, but it is not perfect: Does not
Paul complain of a body of death, Romans 7. 23. He who has most faith, had need
pray, Lord, help my unbelief. Alas, our grace in this life, will be mixed with
coruption: our wheat is mingled with chaff: our stars with clouds. The best
Saint alive, is like Jacob, who, though he prevailed with God, yet he went
haulting away: what pride was there in Christ's own Disciples, when they were
striving which of them could be greatest. Luke 22. 24. Christians look not for
perfection here; God sees it is good that sin should be left in us a while, to
keep our Souls humble. Gravel and dung may help to ballast the ship, that it
overturns not. Oh! this dung of sin ballasteth a Soul, keeps it very low and
humble: Say not therefore, thou have no seed of grace, because thou have seed
of corruption. Let me ask thee this question; Do not thou mourn for thy sin?
Is not a proud, and a dead heart thy burden? Are not thy eyes a spiritual
Limbick, dropping holy tears for sin? and do not thou prize Christ? could
not thou be willing to part with all, for the Pearl of price? and do not thou
maintain a combat with thy corruption? why, that is a sign there is life of
grace, else no combat. Dead men do not fight: Grace is seen as well in
resisting sin, as in overcoming it. Why then, Christian, thou have the seed of
grace in thy Soul, be thankful for this grace, though thou have not the seed
flower of joy flourishing in thee. Why, look upon the Husbandman; when the
Husbandman has sown the seed in the Field, he takes comfort in that seed sown,
he knows there will be a crop e're long: So, Christian, if thou find these
seeds of grace sown in thy heart, take comfort, there will be a Crop of joy ere
long in thy Soul. That is the fourth inference.

5 th. Inference. If light and comfort be sown for the Righteous; why then here
is comfort this day for the Church of God in England; the seed is in the
ground, and deliverance in Gods due season, shall spring up to the Church.
Light is sown; what if I should say, Light is sown for England: I would revive
your spirits in time of sadness and drooping. Let our faith get above our fear.
Mica 7. 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: though I sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me. It is the voice of the Church, Light is sown for
the peaple of God, and the Church of God. I consess, things here amongst us, as
they have a sad aspect at this day, I would be sensible of our condition. If we
are not sensible of Gods hand, we cannot be humble under it. I would be
sensible, gray hairs are here and there; sad symptoms of Gods displeasure are
upon us: our sins grow higher, our trading grows lower; our divisions grow
wider, and therefore our seats grow stronger. Oh! how many Judgments of God
has England felt of late years, for its sins; and yet. we go on, as it were,
in despite of Heaven: We do at this day hang out a flag of Defiance against
the God of Heaven: and may we not yet fear, some other Judgments may yet ensue.
Poor England, it is like the Ship in the Gospel, almost covered with waves.
England lies a bleeding, with the wounds that her sins has given her; God
grant it be not a sickness unto death: yet, I say, in this day of Mourning, I
would not have you mourn, as they without hope. These things may humble us, and
set our eyes abroach with tears: yet mourn not, as them without hope. I would
come as the Dove, with an Olive leaf of peace in my mouth, to you this day. My
Text tells you, Light is sown for the Righteous. There is a little light, God
knows, it is but very little light, we can scarce see it at the Keyhole; but
there is some Light sown for the Righteous. There is three seeds of comfort,
for this poor, dying, self-destroying Nation.

First, God has a people in this Land that fears him, and are very dear to
him: that is one seed of comfort; they are to him, as the apple of his eye;
they are the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23. As they are called, they are Gods
Jewels, and all the rest of the world are but Lumber. God has a people dear to
him in England. The Lord would have spared Sodom, if there had been but ten
Righteous Persons in it: it is to be hoped, there are many tens in England.
Were the godly removed, as it is the desire of some, to give them their pass to
be gone; why, God would soon make quick work with the Nation: he would soon
break up house in England. Were it not for the Elect, he would soon sink Ship
and State, but for some of the Elect Jewels in the Ship: but for their sakes,
the Lord may reprieve the Nation, and may adjourn its Funerals a while longer.

Secondly, Another seed of Comfort for the Land, is this, The mercies of God in
Christ; that is a seed of comfort. The mercy of God in Christ. What cannot
mercy do for a poor Nation? Mercy can throw forth a plank to us, when we are
drowning. The Sun is not so full of light, as God is full of love. Mercy, it is
that which pleases God. Mica 7. 18. Mercy pleases thee. Why may we not hope
that the Lord will do that which is so pleasing to him, that, which is his
recreation, to show mercy. Malice pleases the Wicked, but Mercy pleases God.
Justice is called, Gods strange work, Isa. 28. 21. A strange work. As if the
Lord were not used to it. We shall observe in the Scripture, when the Lord is
going to shave off the pride of a people; he is said to hire the very Razor.
Isa. 7. 20. As if he had none of his own, he was fain to hire one. When God
executes justice upon a people, he is said to come forth from his place to
punish. Isa. 26. 21. The Be does naturally give honey; it stings only when it
is provoked. God does naturally show mercy: Mercy, my brethren, it is Gods
darling attribute, that he delights most of all to magnify. Why, methinks this
is a seed of comfort for England. Why may not mercy give the casting voice, to
save this Nation? Isa. 63. 9. In his love, and in his pity he redeemed them. In
his love and pity. Mercy does more overflow in God, than sin can in us, or we
could never be pardoned.

Oh, but you will say, we are not a people that are fit for mercy: what should
we do with mercy, that have so abused, and so provoked it? why, to this, I say,
mercy has healing in its wings. It can as well give a Nation repentance, as
deliverance. It can as well prepare us for mercy, as bestow mercy. Mercy has
healing in its wings: why, that is a seed of comfort.

The third seed of comfort for the Land is this, That Spirit of Prayer, that is
yet kept up among Gods people: Prayer ushers in deliverance. It is the Midwife
that helps to deliver the Church, when she is in pangs. Joel 2. 32. whosoever
shill call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. The sparkling walls, were
their spear walls: and the Bulwark of a Land is Prayer: Prayer it is a seed
that is sown in the ears of God. Nay, in the heart of God. Prayer commands God.
Isa. 45. 11. Concerning the work of my hands command ye me. That is, by Prayer.
Jacob's Prayer held God, it held him fast. Genesis 32. 26. I will not let thee go,
except thou bless me. I but pray observe observe, Moses Prayer seems to have
more force and power in it, than Jacobs Prayer had, Exodus 32. 10. Says God to
Moses, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them. And Moses sought
the Lord, and the Lord repented of the evil. Pray observe, Jacobs Prayer
prevailed with God, when God had a mind to show mercy: But Moses Prayer
prevailed with God, when God was angry; so that, to speak with reverence,
whether God be angry, or whether God be pleased; Prayer, why that prevails with
him: this is a seed of comfort for this poor Nation. There are many, that every
day besiege Heaven with Prayer; sends up whole volleys of sighs and groans to
Heaven. Psalm. 106. 23. Therefore he said, he would destroy them. Had not Moses,
his servant, stood in the breach, to turn away his wrath from them. Prayer has
influence upon the Almighty. Prayer finds God free, but leaves him bound:
especially Christ praying our prayers over again; and sprinkling them with his
blood, makes them go up, as sweet incense to Heaven: so that these are seeds of
comforts for this poor dying Nation. Light is sown for England.

Bat here I must insert a caution: and I beseech you to observe. Though there
be some light sown for them, yet take this caution; Expect an hour of darkness.
It is usually dark before morning. Things are like to be worse with us, before
they are better: you know, the seed dies in the ground, before it springs up.
Things seem to be in a dying condition; the seed is dying in the ground: e're
light comes, expect some darkness.

It is Gods usual method, he ushers in deliverance, by great afflictions: he
prepares for deliverance by afflictions: he brings his people into the
Wilderness, and then he speaks comfortably unto them, Hos. 2. 14. Shall I give
you some Scripture instances? There will be some darkness before light do
spring up: some Scripture instances to clear it up. God gave David a promise of
a Kingdom; David shall wear the Crown; I, but before that, David must fly for
his life, he must be hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains: and afterward,
then he shall wear his Crown. Abraham, he had the promise of a numerous
Progeny, as the Stars of Heaven, but before that, his Wives womb must be
barren. Moses, he was to work deliverance for Israel, he was to be their
temporal Savior; before his hand wrought any Miracles, his hand must be
Leprous. Christ he was to come into the World; there was the great Light of the
World: I, but before that Light came, it was an hour of darkness to the Church
of God. Isa. 9. 2. Those that dwell in the shadow of death, to them has the
Light shined. Before Gospel-deliverance, you must expect some sore pangs, and
the reason of it is this; here is the reason; Because God has a great deal of
work yet to do; there is much rubbish to be removed, before Gods spiritual
Temple will be built; sins must be brought lower; Superstition must be purged
away; the Devil must be cast out and will not this think you, cause great
commotion in the Church? and Convulsion fits, before light springs up:
Therefore, look for an hour of darkness.

But you will say to me, if it be so, then what shall we do in this hour of
darkness? how shall we behave our selves, till this Light does spring up to the
Church? Let us do these three or four things, when it is an hour of darkness.

1. Let us get into our Chambers, there our great work it lies, between God and
our own souls: go into your Chambers: Isa. 26. 20. Come, my people, enter thou
into thy Chamber, hide thy self. What Chamber, you will say, must we go into?

First, Let us go into the Chamber of our own hearts, by meditation, and by
Self-examination. Let us see how the case stands between God and our own Souls:
let us prove our selves, whether we are in the Faith: let us be clearing our
evidences every day: let us bring our graces to the touchstone: let us never
leave, till we have found out, we have a Covenantinterest with God. When things
are dark without, it is good that all should be clear within: that is one
Chamber: we should go to our own hearts.

Secondly, Let us go into the Chamber of Divine promises, and, as it were, lock
up our selves with God in these Chambers. Oh, the sweet promises that we should
now go unto, and fly unto as a refuge; God has promised, He will never leave
us, nor forsake us. If you do not leave God, he will not leave you. God has
promised, He will be our Sun and our shield, Psalm. 84. 11. In troublesome times
he will be our shield, to defend us: he will be our Sun, to enlighten us, and
comfort us. Let us hide ourselves, by Faith, in these Chambers: by the
Promises. That is the first work.

If an hour of Darkness be, go unto your Chambers.

Thirdly, Having done this, Let us commit our selves to God, and trust our
selves upon his Providence Psalm 45. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord. Commit
thy way to the Lord. In the Hebrew it is, Root thy way upon the Lord.
Christians, let us not be too sollicitous about issues and events of things:
cast your burden upon the Lord. So far as care is a duty, take it upon your
selves: but so far as care is a burden, cast it upon God.

Again, having done this, got into our Chambers, and rooted our ways upon the
Lord; trusting the issues of things with him: why then, in this hour of
darkness, oh, wait with patience, till Light springs up to the Church; that is
the great work, that now God calls to his people for: wait with patience, do
not murmur, but wait: do not wait through unbelief; do not fret through
impatience, but wait till Light springs up. It shall spring up in Gods due
season: All the enemies of the Church shall not hinder Light springing up.

Deliverance is coming, when Gods time is come. We read, that when Christ was
to rise out of the Grave; though there were a stone upon the door of the
Sepulcher, the Angel rolled away that stone, and Christ did arise gloriously.
This seems, methinks, to be the time of the Churches Burial, and there seems to
be a stone rolling over the Grave: but when the time of her Resurrection is
come, God himself will roll away the stone from the Sepulcher. Cant. 2. 8. It
is spoken of Christ, Behold, he comes leaping upon the Mountains, skipping upon
the Hills. My brethren, either Jesus Christ will remove the Mountains, or he
will come leaping over them: he will deliver his people; and till then, let us
wait. And that we may get into a waiting posture, consider these two or three
things, and so I have done.

First, Our betters have waited; the Patriarchs of old, they waited, till mercy
and light did spring up. Why, you know Moses he waited, and Abraham, he waited,
and Jacob, he waited, Genesis 49. 18. Says Jacob, I have waited for thy
Salvation, O Lord. The people of Israel, they waited four hundred years for
deliverance: and if they waited four hundred years, cannot we wait a few hours?

Secondly, Wait till Light springs up for the Church: consider, we have a full
God to wait upon: a Beggar is content to wait at a rich man's door, there is
something still coming.

God has treasures of mercy lying by: he has more blessings to give, than
one; we have a full God to wait upon, and shall not we wait? he Lord is not a
sealed sountain, but he is a flowing fountain.

Thirdly, The mercies we are in expectation of, they are worthy waiting for;
the mercies we have prayed for, and are in expectation of, they are worthy
waiting for, to see the golden Fleet of Prayer coming home, with rich return;
is not that worth waiting for?

To see; the Lilly and the Rose united; I mean, Truth and Peace. To see
wickedness discountenanced, and all its forces disbanded. To see the beauty of
Holiness shining in our Crystal. To see Jesus Christ riding in Triumph in the
Chariots of his Gospel Administration. To see Righteousuess exalted, and, like
the Wings of a Dove, covered with Silver.

Fourthly, Wait till Light springs up to the Church; consider this, the
glorious Promises that are made to waiters, Isa. 30. 18. Blessed are all they
that wait for him (A waiting condition is a blessed condition.) Isa. 49. 23.
They shall not be ashamed that wait for him. We account a man's Bond a very good
Security: Those promises they are Gods bonds, and they have a double Seal set
to them; the oath of God, and the blood of God: therefore let us wait
patiently; let us wait cheerfully, till Light does spring up, and flourish unto
a Harvest Deliverance.

FINIS.

