A Full and Particular Account OF THE Seizing and Imprisonment OF THE Duke of
Tyrconnel, And other Great Officers, BY THE Express Command of the French King.
To which is added, An Account of the Inhmmane Barbarities, lately committed by
the French: on the Protestants, in Plundering the Husbands, and Ravishing their
Wives and Children, in the West of Ireland.
Printed, According to Order.

1690.
SIR,
I Hope my Letter I sent you on Wednesday, last (wherein I gave you the
Particulars of the brave Action of Colonel Woosely, in taking the strong
Castle of Bellingargy) came safe to your Hands; since which, we have the
following Account from Bellfast.

Five Persons making, lately, a dangerous, and almost miraculous escape, to the
North, who gives the following Relation of Affairs, in Dublin, that Colonel
Darington (who commanded the Royal Regiment there; and was Commander in chief,
in the Castle, and City of Dublin, under the late King James) being
dissatisfied with his being removed from that Post, to make room for the
French, (by Concurrence and Approbation of Tyrconnel, and other Irish Grandees
of King James's Council,) presented a Petition to the King in Council,
setforth* That he knew his Innocence and Loyalty, could not justly be
blemished, or suspected, by any; notwithstanding which, he had reason to
suspect, he was misrepresented to his Majesty and Council, in that he was
removed from his Post, etc. and therefore, prayed his Innocence and Loyalty
might be freed from those Imputations, and be restored to his Post: But if it
should appear he was guilty of any Crime, he was Free not only to lose his
Command, but his Life. Upon the reading of which, King James was mightily
offended; and immediately committed him clo^^ P^^soner to the Castle, And
Tyrconnel taking his part, by strenously arguing the Case with King JAMES, put
him into so great a passion, that extorted this Expression from him: And will
you turn Rebel also, and dispute my Commands? and then gave Order for his
immediate Commitment also.

They add, That the French are very insolent and rude to the Protestants,
especially to the Women-kind; toward whom, they act their Parts like Death,
sparing none; for neither young Women, nor old, dare walk the Streets, or scare
peep out of doors for them: And being on free Quarter, they devour all the poor
Protestants have left. Alderman Jervice had Thirty quartered on him,
notwithstanding the French Ambassador, when he romoved from his House to Sir
John Davis's, took all the Alderman's Goods from him.

They add also, That King JAMES having seized all the Corn, and brought it into
Granaries of his own: Paid some in Brass Money, and others he has given Tickets
to be paid, as fast as the Brass Money can be made: And for all the Corn, he
gives but a small rate; and now he sells it out, to the Owners thereof, at
treble the price, and will not take Brass Money, but be paid in Silver, or
Gold; so that they who cannot get Silver, or Gold, to buy Bread, must be
starved; though he pays nothing but Brass Money amongst them. By this means,
King JAMES will get all the Silver and Gold that is left, in his Quarters; for
he forces the Irish, as well as the English, to buy at this rate, designing to
lay up, what he gets this way, in bank in France, to keep him when he is
deserted of all: For it is generally thought his oppression and tyranny, will,
in a little time, make the Irish (though formerly his Dear Joys, and Guardian
Angels) weary of him; and the French King, when he can be no farther
serviceable to him, will cast him by like an old Almanac.

They add likewise, That the Irish have deserted the Towns of Ardee Dundalk,
and Carlingford, on which, his Grace the Duke of Schonberg has ordered a
Regiment of Horse, and a Party of Dragoons, to take possession of Ardee, with
other Forces to Dundalk; and has ordered several Vessels with Provision and
Ammunition to go by Sea to Dundalk.

Now the Castle of Bellingargy is taken, there is but one Pass more in those
parts, which is that of Fina, which is a strong Pass, still possessed by the
Irish; which being once reduced, will open a clear way into the Province of
Connaught, which will be quickly overrun, there being but few Places of any
strength in that Province. The taking of Fina, I hope, will be the Subject of
my next to you, who am,

SIR, Yours, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Irish Hudibras: Or, The Fingallian Prince.Taken from the Sixth Book of
Virgil's Aeneid^. Adapted to the present Affairs in Ireland.

London: Printed for R. Hayhurst, in Little Britain. 1690.


