From aboard the Van-herring.
A LETTER FROM LEGORN, December. 1. 1679.
SIR,
YOU will receive herewith an incredible and unparalled Relation, which for
the strangeness of it may seem rather a Romance then a Reality. So it is, that
sundry of our Saylors have Capitulated with the Algerines, and conspired
together to kill the Captain, to betray the Ship, to make prize of the goods,
and Slaves of our Persons. This cursed contrivance is wonderfully brought to
light by two or three of their own Crew, who (touched with remorse for so
Hellish an Enterprise) have made an ingenuous confession of the whole Intrigue.
When it was first suggested and revealed to some of our Principal Commanders,
they took little notice of it. Whether it was from their incredulity, or
because they themselves were in the Confederacy, I cannot determine. At length
an honest Boatswaine, being made privy to it, he took the Confession and the
Examination of the first Discoverer, and carried it to the Captain and Council
of Officers, who seemed to be startled at it, but made no great haste to
enquire into it. This officiousness of the Boatswaine procured him the
implacable hatred of the Conspirators; and some of them cunningly trepan'd him
(one night) into one of their Cabbins, where they first strangled him, and then
privately threw him overboard. Next day being missed, great enquiry was made
after him, and after a while his dead Corpse was found floating on the Sea. Some
very confidently affirmed, that in discontent he had drowned himself; but anon
his dead Body being more narrowly viewed, it evidently appeared that he had
been strangled; which made all conclude that he was Murdered by these
Conspirators, either to strike terror into others, or to satisfy their own
revenge. This wicked Act had a good effect; his death quickened and alarmed
the Captain, the Commanders, and the generality of the Ships-Company. And now
the Council is called together; the Discoverer of the formentioned Treachery is
more fully Examined. He unravels the whole Mystery, and relates how there were
on board the Ship a great many Mahometans, and mungrel Christians, who held
correspondence with the chief of Algier: and that their design was to bertay
the Ship, to slay or enslave all those that made opposition; and because they
apprehended the Captain was not for their turn, to take him out of the way.
Further, that the Algerines had promised them their assistance, to furnish them
with men, ammunition and provision; as also to make their Lieutenant, Captain,
who was a Mohammedan, and true to their interest. He also accused five great
Rogues amongst us, for having a hand in this Conspiracy, and who were to be
Principal Officers in the Ship upon this Alteration. Several other persons he
named as active managers of this Devilish Design, and told the very times when,
and the places where they had their Consults, for the carrying of it on, and
that he himself had been engaged and employed therein. Hereupon the Captain and
Council seize the five persons before mentioned, and several others, and secure
them in the Hold.

By this time two or three more of the Conspirators began to relent; one of
them confessed the Murder of the Boatswaine, and that he had a hand in it. This
mightily confirmed the evidence of the first Discoverer, and convinced all
disinterested persons of the reality of the Treachery. Whereupon the
Discoverers (as there was reason) being pardoned, some few of those who were
most active and forward in the Plot, and that had a hand in the Boatswains
death, upon a full and fair hearing, were condemned and sentenced to death, and
accordingly were hanged at the Main-yard. Only one of the Criminals (who had
undertaken, as was clearly proved in the judgment of many unbiassed persons who
were present at the Trial, to Poison the Captain) a Chyrurgions Mate, chanced
to be quitted; who made haste (which was his wisest course) to get a Shore, and
was never heard of since.

The discharge of this little Doctor greatly astonished the Ships-Company, and
no less animated the Conspirators. They presently give out, that there was no
such Treacherous design in hand; that it was only a false and malicious forgery
of two or three persons whom they loaded sufficiently with Calumnies. And one
thing contributed greatly to their confidence; the Council, whilst they were
very warm in searching into this Plot, and bringing the Offenders to condign
punishment, and had declared the Lieutenant by his being a Mohammedan, had given
life to it; I say, whilst they were thus busied, they were broken up by the
Captain upon some difference arising between them. And though to quiet the
Saylors he has summoned them twice or thrice since, yet when the time comes,
he either will not let them sit, or dismisses them when they are just entered into
their debates; suspecting that some of his Council may have some private design
of their own.

This proceeding of the Captains, fills the Council and the whole Ships-Company
too, with strange fears and jealousies, they know not what to think or say; but
whatsoever the simple sort mutter, the wiser do conclude the Captain is Real
and Cordial in his prosecution of the Conspirators, because he has always
professed himself to be a Christian, and the Conspirators have attempted to
take away his Life; as also knowing that he will not be found out of his own
Interest, for he can never expect a better Command in the Ship than he now
has; and if they should continue him so, it must be with the Imparing of his
Honor, and Curtailing of his power. And though he will not suffer the Council to
sit and Act, yet he himself is active for the preventing of this Plot. He has
posted many Orders upon the Mainmast, that all Mahometans shall leave the
Ship. And though none of them stir, yet the reason is this, they have great
Abettors, as the Lieutenant, the Captains Lady, etc. Besides they have a
dispensation from the Mufti: and are allowed to conceal their Religion; yea in
order to the saving of themselves, and carrying on of their design, to take any
Tests or Oaths that are imposed upon them.

Yet not withstanding (which is to me a Mystery) the Conspirators are much
emboldened. The other day they had the Confidence to treat with some of the
Discoverers to let fall their prosecution, to make a Recantation, and promised
them great rewards for their so doing. And to invalidate the evidence of the
first Discoverer, they raised several Scandals upon him; Yea they had suborned
a Moor that waited upon him to swear that he would have buggered him in his
Cabin. Nay, they had the face to invent and feign a new Plot; which was, that
the honest Saylors were about to make head against the Captain, and to run away
with the Ship to the Commonwealth of Venice. The Lieutenant sent one to the
Captain with an Information about this Sham plot; which was at first believed,
but it was so simply managed, that every Tarpaulin could see through it.
Whereupon he that was mainly employed in the carrying of it on, did ingenuously
acknowledge, that he had abused the honest Saylors, imposed upon the credulous
Captain, and that he was set a work by some of the Principal Conspirators.

In this distressed posture we abide, and see no hope of deliverance. A day or
two a-go, some Merchants who have a considerable adventure board the Ship,
addressed themselves to the Captain, and prayed (in most humble manner) that he
would consider of the present danger they were in, and suffer the Council to
sit, to find out a way (if it were possible) to prevent their utter Ruin. He
bad them meddle with what belonged to them, they should let him alone to govern
the Ship; who was as sollicitous about her safety as the best of them all.

The Saylors also were about a Petition to the same purpose, which coming to
the Captain ear, he expressed his dislike of it, which very much saddens the
hearts of the Saylors.

I remember how they received the Captain when he came first aboard; they tossed
up their Caps, and cried, God bless the Captain, we will live and dye with him,
one and all; one and all, etc. And still they have that respect for him, that
they vow if he be taken away by any undue means, they will revenge his death
upon all the Mahometans aboard the Ship. And indeed there is no great fear of
them: for they are but few in comparison. The great fear is that the Algerines,
the next fair wind, will fall upon us in our Harbor; and to speak the truth,
we are but ill provided to defend our selves. But yet the Ship is as stout a
Ship as any Sails the Seas, and we are very well manned. And the Seamen are
full both of Rage and Courage; So that if ever they attack us, they may
possibly find hot work of it, and come short home.

FINIS.

