A Full and True RELATION OF THE DEATH OF K. JAMES. Who Departed this Life, the
27th. of March.
AS there is nothing so prevalent in the World, as Popular Mistakes, and
Mis-reports; and the Generality of Mankind are but too apt, especially in
matters of the greatest Moment, and relating to the greatest Men, to be imposed
upon; whilst the Truth of things done, if either Foreign or Remote, is always
liable to gross Misrepresentation; and Errors and Abuses in matters of most
Importance; either by misinformation or uncertainty, are daily industriously
handed about, and also as fondly believed and swallowed; there being nothing
possibly so much controverted, or variously delivered, as the Actions, the
Movements, and the Conducts, and all other Particulars (whether in their Lives
or Deaths) as those of Kings and Princes. For the Rectifying therefore of
Faults of that kind, we think fit to Publish to the World, the full and true
Relation of the Death of K. James, as we have received it from unquestioned and
undeniable Intelligence and Authority.

The particular Engagement and Alliance of King James with the French King,
being to the Wise and Judicious no matter of Novelty; we shall be short
therefore in that part of our Discourse; reciting no more than what necessarily
Introduces to the Narration of King James his Death. After the French
Provisions of Shipping and Men, for King James his Designs; and the great Hopes
of Assistance, that had been given him by the French King: to deal truly with
the Monsieur, he began to falter in his Promises, and (notwithstanding their
Intimate Correspondence, etc.) with very slow advances in the Affairs, he made
many demurrs and delays; occasioned however (as we may justly impute it) not
altogether from his want of good Will to King James's Cause, but rather from
the Embarrasment and Encumbrance of his own Affairs at home, that indeed took
up his whole care and Study. King James, to his no small disquiet and sorrow,
waited only the French King's leisure; whilst the Equipment of his Shipping (as
he plainly discovered) required more Speed, than the French King's faint and
sickly Promises could expedite; insomuch, that truly, Dalliances and
Complements at last, were all his Performance.

The poor King, sensibly afflicted with his many Troubles, Disappointments,
etc. and the perplexity of his affairs; and finding too late, that his unhappy
Alliances had only tended to his own Prejudice and Defeat, he began to
entertain a very deep and radicated Melancholy. But, alas! poor Prince, he did
not Live to see how all His Forces, Alds, Expectations, and truly his whole
Measures dwindled to nothing. And the result of all is, that though he were a
Wise Prince, yet Blessings did neither attend his Councils nor Actions: So that
it is not Humane Wisdom but Divine Direction, that orders and disposes all to a
good End.

In short, this aforesaid Melancholy and Afflictions, all pressing too heavy
upon him, a Load too weighty for his Great Spirit to bear, his Greifs,
Disquiets, and the Rest of his Resentments no doubt not alittle contributing to
His End, he fell Sick of an Ague, which afterward turned into a Feavour which
was too Violent for him. During his Indisposition and Sickness he was attended
by those Persons of Quality and Gentlemen about him, who still adhered to him;
but nothing so exemplar and singular as His Darling the Duke of B -- ks
Assiduity, and Tenderness toward him. As the King had always treated that
particular Favourit, with all the Endearments of a Gracious King, a Kind Friend
and a tender Father; so there wanted not on His part, (how, Cordially we cannot
say) all the Carresses, Application and Attendance as from a Creature, a
Confident, and a Couneellor, due to the Obligations received from a King. etc.

The Kings Distemper increasing, and His visible Dissolution drawing nigh, he
called for his Son, who rising out of his Bed something before day, and
presenting himself before him the King raised himself up as if He meant to
speak to him; it is thought to leave some peculiar Commission and charge with
him: but His Spirits were so Faint, and Nature so Weak, and exhausted in him,
that he had not the strength to Express himself, but immediately sinking down
in his Bed, he dyed in his Arms, being Early in the Morning, the Twenty seventh
of March.

Is there not a Time and Period, prefixed to Earthly Things, and the all
Dispensing Power, does either Infatuate or Establish Councils. The King that
was very much Impatient in His Health, was very Patient in His Sickness and
Death; His Death being an Object of Universal Pity. But much more regretted of
all Persons, more nearly Related to Him, and Embarqed with Him.

London Printed for Rob. Hayhurst. 1689.

Licensed APRIL the 2d, 1689. And Entered According to Order.


