A FULL AND TRUE RELATION OF AN English Vessel, Newly taken by a Company of
French Pirates:

Who, after they had cruelly Robbed her of all her Goods, killed part of her
Men:

But being afterward taken by the English, their Ships were ordered to be sent
Prisoners to Wapping Dock, and their Captains to be confined to the
Marshalsees; there at next Sessions to be tried for their Lives.

With Allowance.

London, Printed for W. Harris, next door to the Turn-Stile in the Postern.

A full and true Account of an English Vessel, which was lately robbed by
French Pirates.
SO prone are the generality of Mankind to Impieties, that rather than not
commit them, they will do it on an Element which seems as unnatural as
incommodious for them to effect their horrid Villainies upon. Who would imagine
that men who live in those fleeting Houses, called Ships, who are daily subject
to be destroyed by every blast or Hurricane, and every minute ride within three
Inches of their liquid Grave, should extract from the fear of mortality so much
leisure as serves them for the plotting their wicked Designs? Who would conceit
they could have while to think on any thing but mortality? and since they lie
liable to so many Accidents, which they have no security from, but that they
may even the very next minute tumble them into Eternity? I say upon these
Considerations who can imagine they should ponder any thing but their latter
Ends? or ought contemplate, but their everlasting Happiness or Misery in the
World to come? and yet we hear there are every day as many Outrages committed
at Sea as Land: Pirates on the Ocean, like Pick-pockets near the Gallows,
forfeit their lives even in the sight of death; when every Rock with its craggy
Brow seems to scold them into Piety, and every Storm with majestic Eloquence
to drive them into the security of an honest life.

Nor are we in Reason to blame that Monarchy or Government, to which these
excursive Sea-Robbers owe their Nativities, and consequently ought to do their
obedience and subjection, any more than we would sensure a wholesome Law or
Constitution, because some incorrigible Malefactors will forfeit their lives in
breaking it. Though Maritine Laws are in all Nations very severe, yet the main
Ocean affords so large a Scene, that it is impossible for any Magistrate,
though never so inspective or circumspect, to behold every Action that is done
thereon. There is no Kingdom so virtuous but there are some vicious in it, nor
no Constitutions so firm, as to constrain every one to Obedience; wherefore
since we see by daily Experience, That there is no Nation free from Malefactors
at Land, we may reasonably imagine, none are clear from Pirates at Sea; the
nice distinction betwixt a Pyrate and Thief, being so little, that we may not
altogether improperly term the first a Sea-Thief, and the latter a Land-Pyrate,
especially since the Laws of Nations run as strict against the one as the other.

It being therefore granted, that every Country is incident too much to abound
with these Caterpillars, I hope I shall be thought free from all Reflections,
when I have related a Passage which lately happened. In the Chanel betwixt
Callis and Dover, where a small Pink of ours then riding, ken'd at a distance a
Sail which made swiftly up toward her, which caused our Seamen to make all
the Sail they could before her, hoping to gain some Port, or meet with some
Assistance before they could be overtaken: But these hopes were altogether
fruitless, for the Pyrate which pursued them was so swift of sail, that in five
or six Leagues she overtook them; and after she had thrown off her Chain, and
locked them fast together, presently boarded our little Pink, who though not
manned for such an Assault made some Resistance; in which Contest her Surgeon
was slain by an accidental blow from one of the contrary Party, whom the
English perceived by this time to be Frenchmen, by whom being overpowered with
number, they were forced to see their Ship robbed without any hopes of redress.

After these cruel Pirates had carried off all they thought valuable out of
this little Pinck they left her to the merciless Ocean; but she making all the
sail she could toward the Downs, made her Complaint to Sir John Holms,
Admiral, who was riding there at that time; and he according to the usual
Civility which he daily dispences to all his injured Countrymen; ordered
forthwith the Castle Frigot and the Soldody, to go a cruising for the aforesaid
French Pirates; and not only so, but hearing that there were others abroad,
which used the same cruel, illegal, and wicked employment, gave the Commanders
of those Ships Orders to bring in not only any that were to be suspected for
Pirates, but any Privateer belonging to the French. Whereupon it was their
fortune to light upon two little French Vessels, which they suspected to be
concerned in the aforesaid Pyracy, or robbing the English Pinck: One of these
which was the lesser of them had about 50 men in her; and the other about
seventy or eighty.

Both these Vessels were after some small Resistance taken by the English, and
having no good Commissions to show for their sailing, were on suspicion of
being Pirates brought to the Downs before the Right Honorable Sir John Holms,
who upon mature Examination, thought fit to send up both their Vessels into the
River, where they now lie over against Wapping Stairs; and after he had heard
the Captains of both Ships what they could say in their own defense, thought
fit likewise to order them to be sent to the Marshalsees, there to have their
Trials according to Law in those Cases: Which the Reader, I suppose, may hear
at the Sessions held there about five weeks hence, as I remember beginning the
Twelfth day of August next.

Any one who will take so much pains as to go as far as the Marshalsees in
Southwark may see these two Captains, being both very brisk men to look on, and
the one of them very gallant; but, if I were capable of guessing a Man's mind by
his Countenance, I should be persuaded they are somewhat discontented, whether
by reason of their Confinement, or Guilt, I am not able to resolve.

I suppose it is in the hubbubs of War, as at the lamentable exigent of a great
Fire, where many Rascally Fellows, who have no Habitations of their own to
gratify the Ravenous Appetite of those devouring Flames, forget all Humanity,
and under pretense of helping their distressed Brethren, by carrying away and
securing to themselves their Neighbors Goods, become a greater Judgment, than
those Flames they would be thought to oppose.

How easy is it for a base spirited Seaman, to be guilty of resembling such
Knavery? who having either by direct, or indirect means, made himself Master of
a convenient Vessel, calls to his Assistance a Company of Vagabonds, Men of
desperate resolutions and fortunes like himself, and with these under pretenses
of opposing his Countries Enemies, falls promiscuously either upon them or her
Friends, not spairing upon occasion the Merchantmen of his own Nation, if he
light on them in a place convenient to secure their Cargo to his own secular
use. Thus are the Leagues and Contracts of Princes often in danger to be
unrivited, by a company of impious wretches, whose Souls are as narrow as their
Fortunes, and their Births if it were possible more abject than either.

FINIS.

