A Full and Perfect ACCOUNT of the Particulars of the Terrible and Bloody Fight
which the Christian Army have obtained over the whole Turkish Forces near the
Bridge of Esseck.
With a particular of what Plunder they have Seized and Taken.
Written from a Person of Quallity who was present in the whole Action.
August the 30th. 1687.
LEtters yesterday Afternoon (by three Flanders Mails) of the 21st. instant
from Vienna bring us the Joyful increase, and Particulars of the Entire and
Accomplished Victory the Christian Army have obtained over the Turks, near
Darda the, 12th. Courant, for which Glorious Atchievment, their Imperial
Majesty's attended by all the Nobility of that Court, paid their Devotions in
the Cathedral of St. Stephen, where Te Deum was Sung (with a Royal Salvo) of a
Triple Discharge of all the Canon upon the Ramparts, continued by Vollies of
Muskets, Resounding with Ringing of Bells, Bonefires, and Acclamations of the
People; the same being brought the Emperor from the Duke of Lorain, by General
Count Taaffe, since the dispatch of Prince Eugine of Savoy.

The better to conserve the Method of acquiring this mighty Action, it is
necessary at first to know the Inducement that obliged the Grand Vizier to quit
his Impregnable Retrenchment, and give Battle to the Christians; on the 27th.
the Grand Vizier passed the Drove with his Army, and Fortified his Camp near
Darda, with two Modern Retrenchments in the Front, strengthened with Pallisados,
having Esseck and the Drove in his Rear, the Danube and the Morass on his
right, with a Wood and a Morass on his left; which being viewed by the
Generals, 'twas judged Impossible without hazarding the Ruin of the whole
Army, to attaque and force his Camp; therefore 'twas resolved by some
Stratagams of War, to draw the Grand Vizier from those secured Retrenchments,
so Marched and Counter-march'd the Army in diverse Figures, one Detatchment of
them making show as if they would repass the Danube at Mohaez, and go into high
Hungary, whilst another made a feigned movement, of Marching toward Sygeth and
Sycloss, not without being able suddenly to reunite their Main Body, which the
Turks perceiving, looked upon it at first, as really it was intended, to decoy
him out of his Post; and thereupon would scarce permit the Ravaging Tartars to
pick up some of our Forrigers, till believing they might be retreating in
earnest, made some Detatchments to observe the Countenance of our Army, and
sometimes Skirmished with our advanced Guards, gave us the Alarm; and having
taken 200. of our Men, returned to the Camp (flushed with this advantage) the
Turks began to show themselves in different Parties; our Generals contrived new
Methods, Marching their Armies in several Fronts further afield, as well to be
distant from a Wood, which incommoded our Foragers, as to give the Grand Vizier
a larger space of Ground with desire to follow us; But this March was yet in
vain, yet notwithstanding, the same day we perceived a considerable Body of
Turkish Cavalry in our Rear; But so soon as we faced about, and began to
Skirmish with them, they made a hasty Retreat: The Duke of Lorain, by this
time, judging that he should not be able to cause him to give Battle in open
Field, took a resolution to March for Sycloss and Five-Churches, and withdraw
those Garrisons, Demolishing the Fortifications, which otherwise might have
fallen into the Enemies possession, began to move toward them on the 10th. and
with easy Marches, continued the 11th. sending Baron De Orlick to precede the
Vant-Guard with 4 or 500 Horse; In this March, a great Body of Turkish Spahies
did what they could to interrupt our motion, showing themselves sometimes on
the Wing, then on the Flanks; We entered upon Dispute with them, but they
Retired with recipitation: On the Twelfth, the Grand Vizier thinking the
CHRISTIANS were making the best of their way from him, would not loose the
opportunity, but detached some of his best Troops, to give us a Diversion; and
about two in the Afternoon 10000 Turkish Cavalry, and half the number of
Janissaries came right upon our Left Wing, Commanded by the Elector of Bavaria
and Prince Lewis of Baden, preceded by some German Curiasiers, who vigorously
sustained the Turkish Charge, but retired into their first Line: on a sudden
The Janissaries were Posted on an Eminence, with some Fieldpieces, and made
continual Firing with small Shot, whilst 10000 of their Horse endeavored to
put us in Disorder, which obliged the Elector of Bavaria to extend his Front
to be in proportion with that of the Enemy, the Regiments of Savoy and Comercy
sustained this first Charge, which was very fierce and obstinate; the
Christians continuing firm with great Resolution and Courage, notwithstanding
they were Attaqu'd in Front and Flank, the Elector came in Person to their
Assistance, and found the Dispute so warm, that he received a Shot in his Hand,
Prince Comercy a Wound in the Breast with an Arrow, which yet did not hinder
his continuing in the Action, to give what necessary Orders were required.

The Duke of Lorain to get ground, causes at the same time, the Right Wing to
March cross, and stretch toward the Flank of the Enemies, who Attacked on the
Left, and the Left went to meet another Body of Horse and Foot which Marched to
Charge them, and now the Fight began to be bloody on both sides, the Victory
hanging in suspense for two or three hours; but by the coming in of a fresh
Detachment on the Christians side, the Turks began to lose ground, afterward
to mend their pace; and in the end, to take a perfect Flight. One Body of their
Cavalry relying upon their Foot, put the whole in disorder; a great Slaughter
being made, and we pursued the Enemy with so much Rigor and Heat, that we
entered Pell Mell into their Camp; and made our selves with little resistance,
Masters of both the Entrenchments, and pursued the Enemy as long as the day
would permit. This Victory is so great, as not to have any parallel for some
Ages: We drove many into the Morass and Drove, where they perished; the Bridge
over the River, through the weight of People thronging to get over, broke down;
some say the Grand Vizier caused the same to be done, leaving a multitude on
this side the Drove, who are retired to the Woods, Marshes, and Isles, where
they are shut up: and must Surrender upon discretion, for want of Food: And
some Persons report that there is no less than 25 or 30000 Men thus dispersed.
And of 15000 old Janisaries, scarce 50 are saved; and they reckon above 20000
are Killed and Drowned. They have Seized a mighty Rich Booty, the Grand
Vizier's Tent, which is fell to the Lot of the Elector of Bavaria, is so Rich
in Gold, Pearl, Precious Stones, etc. as is inestimable. 116 Cannon, and
Mortars taken, 6000 Head of Cattle, 1500 Camels, an hundred Buffulors seized
2000 Wagons with Provision and Ammunition, are fell into our Hands, a number
of Tents, Standards, and Horses Tails, and there is scarce a Soldier but
abounds in Gold and Silver. The Prisoners also Report, that the Grand Vizier
had not been induced to come out of his Retrenchments, but by the Persuasion of
some Christians in his Army, who Flattered him with assurance of Success; and
that they should certainly take Prisoners the Dukes of Lorain and Bavaria; and
thereby oblige the Emperor to make Peace with the Grand Seigneur, and restore
all the places in Hungary he has Conquered during the War: But Providence has
disposed otherwise, and it is not to be doubted, but that this Glorious Victory
will have a quite contrary Effect.

LONDON, Printed by N. T. 1687.


