A Full and True ACCOUNT Of Two Famous and Signal VICTORIES Obtained by Their
Majesty's Forces OVER THE IRISH REBELS. The First over General Sarsfield, near
the Shannon, Raising the Siege of Bir, taking all their Cannon, and Killing an
Hundred and Sixty on the Spot, driving them over the Shannon. The Second over
Four Thousand Raparees; the Killing Five Hundred of them, and taking all their
Arms.

Also the Arrival of Sir Clovesly Shovel with Their Majesty's Fleet. With many
other Material Occurrences.
In a Letter from Dublin.
SIR,
SINCE my last, of the Action of Major General Scravemore and Tetau, and that
of Levison's Dragoons, we have received the fol^owing Accounts from our Forces:
That ^ome Scouts of M. General Scravemore, ^ad Two days ago brought to him Two
Raparee Prisoners they had taken, who were sound to be Officers among them, and
very Intelligent Persons, upon their Examination they could not ^e brought to
Confess any thing about their Associates, or where the chief Rende^vous of any
Numbers of them were, upon which one of them were immediately Executed, and
Orders were given for the Execution of the other, upon which he consessed where
a great Body of them were: The General immediately ordered a strong Detachment
to be sent with the Guide, who marched secretly by covered ways, till they came
near to a Mountainous place, between which, in a great Vale, were got together
between Three and Four Thousand of them, with a great quantity of Cattle, that
they had gotten from the Counties adjacent (they were Carousing themselves,
some taking of Snees, others Smoking and Drinking;) upon the approach of our
Forces, the Raparee Rebels gave a great Shout or Cry, like that of the Turks,
seeming to come on with a great deal of Resolution; but on our Forces first
Fire they immediately Fled, leaving their Prey of Cattle, and most of their
Arms, among which were Fifty Silver Hilted Swords, supposed to belong to their
Chief Officers: Our Forces pursued them with a great Slaughter, killing between
Five and Six Hundred of them, and taking many Prisoners.

We likewise have an Account from Connaught-side, That the Body of the Irish,
consisting of between Five and Six Thousand, that have been moving for some
time, about the Shannon, Commanded by Sarsfield and others, having crossed the
Shannon and come on this side, they Marched with Five Cannon to a strong Town
and Castle called Bir, which belonged to one Sir Lawrence Parsons, it is
Situated within Two Miles of the Shannon, Fifty Two from Dublin, and as many
from Cork, and being come within Two Hundred Yards of the Place, they sent a
Summons to the Governor to Surrender, who had in it a Garrison of about Eighty
Soldiers, besides Townsmen in Arms; the Governor sent back a Resolute Answer,
That he knew no King but King William, for whom he kept the Castle, and to whom
he hoped to be able to give a good Account of his Trust, by a Resolute Defense;
on which the Enemy raised a Battery with their Cannon, from whence they Played
pretty briskly on the Place; the Garrison at the same time (and while the
Battery was raising) Played as briskly from the Castle on the Enemy, and killed
a great many of their Men; while this was doing, Lieutenant General Douglas;
and Sir John Lanier, who were going in Pursuit of Sarsfield and his Parties,
hearing the Guns Play too^ the Alarm, and by their Scouts or Advanced Parties,
had Advice brough^ them, that the Enemy had laid Siege to Bir, on which they
immediately Marched thither with their whole Force, upon whose Approach the
Enemy raised the Siege, and retired over the Shannon again, leaving their
Cannon and Baggage and about 160 of their Company Dea^ on the Place, which had
been Killed b^ the Cannon from the Garrison.

We have an Account from all hands That the Irish are fallen under miserabl^
Necessities, and what is more to ou^ Comfort, things are like to grow much
worse with the Rog^^s. The Trained Bands or Militia of ^he several Counties,
Cities, and Towns in Their Majesty's Possession, are Raising, and man^ Raised
and Armed to be in a posture (...) assist in Defending the Country People this
Winter from the Insolences and Vi^lanies of the Raparees. Trade begins t^
Flourish, and fall into its old Channe^^ again: And the Effects at the Custom^
House advances very much. The greatest Want we fear this Winter is Coal for
Firing.

Sir Clovesly Shovel, with his whol^ Fleet, came into the Bay of Waterfor^ Two
Days since, and we hear he is Sailing again toward the Coast of Galway in
search of some French that we hea^ is Crusing there-abouts; but we hea^ not one
Word of the Grand Fleet.

London, Printed for T. Cooper. 1690.


