THE FUGITIVE STATESMAN, IN REQUITAL FOR THE Perplexed Prince.

LONDON, Printed by A. Grover, 1683.

TO THE READER.
THE Faction, amongst the many Instances they have so frequently given of their
Spleen and Hatned to the Government, hardly ever showed their Malice more in
any one particular, than in the Business of the Black Box, which furnished a
Pretext to a Libel, called The Perplexed Prince; which, though but poorly writ,
yet the malignity of the Design being to poison Peoples Minds with an Opinion
of some Probability and Truth in that Matter. It was thought fit in Return, to
show the World one of their Principal Heroes, in his true Colors. How well
soever his Picture may have been drawn by others, yet some Features, Lines
perhaps may have escaped their Pencills, which are coucht here in the Landscape
of that Arch Ttaytor's Life. A Mirror of him cannot be too often looked into;
that one may avoid falling into the Snare of those wicked, wretched Partisans
he has left behind him, who never cease undermining the Foundations of the
Government; and are perpetually brewing Sedition, with the highest Ingratitude,
after all the Indulgence and repeated Pardons of their Gracious Prince and
Sovereign: Though they can have now no Hopes, no Prospect of ever bringing about
their tug'd for Anarchy; yet we still daily see fresh Instances of their
restless Endeavors to that End, so that one would think they do not yet despair
of effecting their Purposes, notwithstanding they have lost their Patron. But
it is to be hoped their good Intentions will be Crowned with the same Fate with
that of the wicked Achitophel; and that they now too will be thinking of
setting their Houses in Order. It Is high time; for they are now become so much
the Detestation of all Mankind, that they can expect but little Comfort in this
World; and I am afraid, unless they give other Testimonies than they have yet
done of their good Nature and Repentance, they are not to expect much Happiness
and Felicity in that to come. How pernicious soever they have proved both to
Church and State, they would be glad to see they had a due Sense of their
former practices; and could they be but prevailed with to ask Forgiveness, they
would undoubtedly obtain their Pardon: But it is so much their Nature, and they
seem so obstinately bent upon doing Mischief, that there is no probability of
their ever being persuaded to forsake their evil ways. And since no Counsels do
avail for the reducing them to their duty: nor to court them from destruction,
we must even abandon them to their Fate, which undoubtedly at length will do
them Justice, and reward them according to their Merits.

THE Fugitive Statesman.
THE Land of Judah had never attained to that refinedness in Gallantry, as
under the Reign of David; that Prince having overcome all his Enemies both
Foreign and Domestic, and established himself by his just and gentle
Government, as well in the Hearts of his People, as upon the Throne of Israel,
gave up those hours which are so necessary for Refreshment to amorous Designs,
and was herein so universally imitated by all his Subjects, that there was none
of what Age and Condition soever but had some Intrigue; insomuch that by this
general Practice, there was no manner of Artifice, Contrivance, or Stratagem
for the well managing an Amor, but what was brought to the highest Perfection,
during the time of his swaying the Scepter.

During the Wars that were between David and Ishboshe^h for the Crown of
Israel, Abner finding not only the Justice of David's Cause, but that it would
be likewise impossible for the Hsurper's Son, to withstand the Power and good
Fortune of the King of Judah; did privily underhand make Offers of Submission
unto his Rightful Prince, with the Forces under his Command which David
accepted of, upon Condition of bringing him again Michal his Wife, whom Saul
he^ Father had given to Phalti: Thi^ Treaty was managed by Achitophel, and that
with so much Art and Cunning as procured all manner of Success to David, and
proved finally destructive to his Enemies.

Jezabel, Michal's youngest Sister having staid with her during the late
Troubles, was now willing to accompany her to Court; and in the several
Conversations that Achitophel had with Jezabel upon that Occasion, he was so
captivated with the Wit and Beauty of that Princess, as made him think the
highest Felicity consisted in the possession of a Heart adorned with so many
Charms; and as her Excellencies inspired him with Amorous Thoughts, so they
inflamed him with the Ambition to attempt the insinuating himself into her
Favor and Affections.

This he did not despair of effecting, he knew his own Talents, he knew none
more fit than himself for close Designs and crooked Counsels; he was a Man
sagacious and bold, had not only all the Arts of a Minister of State, but was
as dexterous in the well managing an Amorous Intrigue; he knew that Jezabel was
Ambitious, and had had formerly some Kindness for David, which was now turned
into a violent Resentment, upon his having preferred Bathsheba before her. All
these Circumstances concurring to the flattering his Hopes, he resolved to
embark in this Design, notwithstanding he had not all the Advantages of Body as
concur to the making a complete and an agreeable Gallant.

He was not long without finding an Occasion to make known to her his Passion,
which he declared in such Terms as were most capable of Persuasion, and fittest
for Insinuation: But notwithstanding the Figure he made in the State, and the
considerable Interest he had both in Court and elsewhere, he met with more
Severity than he expected, and was treated with some sort of Scorn and Disdain,
she having that Opinion of her Charms, as to think all Homages unworthy of her
Allowance, that were not made by Crowned Heads.

Nevertheless Achitophel's Flames were too raging to be stifled by this
Resistance, and as it was one branch of his Character to undertake difficult
Attempts, and to persevere until he had brought to pass his Designs, this
Opposition did but the more whet his Desires, and make him set the greater
Value upon the Object he adored. Thus he resolved never to desist until he had
accomplished his Aim, and for that purpose he besieged her with continual
Assiduities, informed her constantly of all the Occurrences in the Cabinet
Councils at Court, and secret Cabals in the City, and by these means soothing
her intrigueing and asspiring Temper, and so by degrees insinuating himself
into her Breast, he became in a short time a very extraordinary Favorite.

He had now changed his Conduct in the management of this Intrigue, He forbore
speaking to her of Love, expressing no Passion but for her Service, and her
interest, telling her that no Princess upon the Earth, would so well become a
Throne as she, that undoubtedly Providence would one day do her and it self the
Justice, as to give her the Crown of all Asia. And when that any great
Sovereign's Bed was vacant, he seemed grieved that their Religion would not
allow of a Match, that so he might have shown his Zeal for her Advancement, in
using his Interest for the bringing it to pass. By such like Discourses as
these, did he win upon her haughty Humor, and became to that degree her Bosom
Friend, that imagining she could not expect ever to find a Person so proper as
Achitophel to make her Confident, nor one more capable of putting in Execution
her fatal Designs, she resolved to ease her Heart of those tormenting Thoughts,
which she there kept pent up, by making Achitophel's Breast the Repository of
them. Thus one day after having acquainted her with the Passages at Court, and
entertained her for a long while with the Zeal he had for her Service: My Lord,
said she, to Achitophel, I am sensible of your good Intentions, and am glad to
find your Love changed into a Passion for my Interests, and to show you how far
you have won upon me, by the repeated Instances of your good Will and Favor, I
am willing to unbosom to you my most secret Thoughts, and let you know what
reason I have to be a Malecontent. You may remember, continued she, how that
upon my Sister Michal's Marriage to David, I fell ill of a Fever, and I must
own, though not without a Blush, that his good Mien, his Wit, in short, all
those advantages he had received both from Art and Nature, had made some
Impression upon my Heart, and if I was not flattered I might have expected to
have made the like in his; but notwithstanding all my endearing Carriage, I
found him insensible to all my Favors, nothing but Michal could he adore. She
was the Object of all his Praises, and I of his Scorn and Neglect.
Nevertheless, I patiently bore with this Preference, since it was supported and
confirmed by the Will of Saul, and since he was wholly ignorant of the
Sentiments I entertained, tho I had made all the Advances possible to hint to
him how favorably his Vows would be heard if paid to me, and told him all such
endearing things, as were consistent with the Glory of a Princess of my Rank:
But David was so blinded with his Passion for Michal, that he had no Eyes for
other Charms. However in a short time you know the Change at Court, David was
drove from thence. I know it Madam, interrupted Achitophel, for I am sure, I
was the chief occasion of his Exile and Sufferings, but pardon the
Interruption, Madam, you shall hear more of that hereafter. You know David was
banished the Court, renewed she, you know Michal his Wife was given by Saul to
Phal^i, the Son of Laish, and now my Love made me entertain fresh Hopes, I
fancied David would never condescend to a Reconciliation with a Person, who had
yielded to give her self to another, I had reason to expect David would
certainly one day mount the Throne being so universally rooted in the
Affections of the People, and I had the Vanity to believe that all the twelve
Tribes could not furnish a Person fitter to share with him in his Glories than
my self. And when accordingly he returned, and you were sent to bring Michal
back, my hopes revived more strong than ever; for though I might have
apprehended he might have had some inclination still left for her, yet knowing
how much she had lost of her former Charms since their last Interview I did not
despair of undermining her, and succeeding in her place. This made me the more
eager to accompany her to Jerusalem, where I was crew by disappointed of all my
Expectations. Michal it is true has not that share in David's Assiduities she
formerly possessed, it is Bathsheba now that is the Mistress of his Affections,
she reigns sovereignly in his Breast, I and my Family are daily more neglected
and depressed, and all for a Person much beneath my Rank, and, may be, Merits.
Here she paused; and the wily Achitophel, reassuming the Discourse, told her
that he had been long sensible of the Indignities she suffered, and as long
desirous of procuring the means of doing her Justice, and of furnishing her
with Occasions to show her Resentment. It is not only the Outrages, persued he,
that are done to all those Charms you posses in so sovereign a Degree, and the
Passion I have in all that concerns you, that prompts me to Revenge, I have
some Reasons of my own, that might pretend to spur me to it, if yours, Madam,
alone were not sufficient to put me upon the Wing. I am neglected too at Court,
Hushai's Conusels are preferred before mine, and I am not thought worthy of
having that share in the present management of Affairs, that perhaps I am
capable of. I am suspected of being still inclined to the Family and Practices
of your Father Saul; and they have not yet forgotten the part I had in the
several dismal Revolutions. And I must indeed confess, I was never over-well
affected to Kingly Government; in Commonwealths, the bravest and wisest have
commonly their share: But in a Monarchy all goes generally by Favor and
Affection, and a Man cannot be thought a good Subject without being a Slave,
and that Servility is in my Mind inconsistent with a generous Temper. Thus my
natural Disposition led me to promote and foment the late Troubles, and I found
David then, though so young, yet so extraordinarily gifted, that I foresaw he
would have but little need of the Ministry of others, and I dispaired of ever
having any thing to do in the administration of the Government, unless his
Exclusion was obtained. This set me to work, and I found more ease than I
expected in my undertaking; People were easily decoyed with Alarums of Invasion
of their Properties, and Suppression of their Liberties; we scattered Rumors
abroad of the extraordinary Influence the Jebusites had at Court, and of the
likelihood there was of their introducing their Religion, if not suddenly
prevented and vigorously opposed. These Bates not only took with the silly
People but with the whole Sanhedrim, they entered into Covenants, and by United
Forces, they at length found the means to deprive the King both of his Crown
and Life, and expel the Heir the Kingdom. Yet all we who had first projected
this Revolution, were frustrated in our Hopes, for the Army we made use of
usurped the Power we had promised our selves, but then it was too late, we were
constrained to submit to the Arbitrary Temper of the Sword, and so brought upon
the People what they had so much dreaded, and what many thousands of them had
endeavored to prevent to the loss of their Fortunes, and their Lives, and thus
did we occasion all the Calamities that a whole Nation in Combustion can
suffer, without any Benefit to our selves, but we were forced to dissemble, and
content our selves to stand as Ciphers to the Usurper. But he being dead, and
silly Ishbosheth upon the Throne, we fell again to contriving how to out him
thence, and to place our selves in his stead. By these means our Party being
divided, the People too generally affected to their promised Prince David, and
one of our Chief Leaders upon our Backs with an Army, with which he favored
the Kings Return: All these things, I say, concurring to make me despair of my
own Advancement, and to see His Restitution unavoidable, I thought it was best
to shift for my self betimes, and therefore seemed as Zealous for His Recovery
of the Crown, as any of his truest and antientest Friends; this made some way
for the bringing me into Favor, I was crowned with new Honors for my Merits
in that great Revolution, had a considerable share in the management of public
Affairs, had conferred upon me Offices of Trust, such as were both beneficial
and honorable too in the Minds of the Vulgar, but yet I was not satisfied, I
could not but still think it servile and slavish to truckle under an other, and
did not yet despair of one day attaining to be the Head of all the Tribes of
Israel, knowing the Nature of the Jews to be such, as that they showed their
Humor more than their Humor more than their Loyalty in calling back David and
setting him on the Throne. I knew a Commonwealth was their Golden Calf, and I
must confess, I did not expect they would have obeyed so long. I used all the
Arts imaginable to raise Jealousies between the Prince and his People; I
promoted their giving of Moneys, and the raising of Taxes, and then scattered
Rumors abroad of the ill management and squandring away the Revenues; finding
this to take my Hopes revived, I proceeded on to the giving the Prince such
Counsels, as I knew must of necessity lessen him in his Peoples Affections:
That is, I advised the King to join with Pharaoh, against Tire, I advised the
breaking of the Triple Bond, on which the safety of all Asia did depend, I
advised the shutting up the Treasury, by which thousands came to suffer want, I
advised a Toleration of all Religions, which underhand, I gave out was designed
by the Court, to make way for the Religion of the Jebusites, so hated by the
generality of the Nation. By these and other Counsels as Destructive, I found I
had pretty well furthered my Design: Now, none like me could have effected all
these things. I had first supplanted the Just, the Wise and Learned Abethdin,
and then David having trusted me with the Principal management of Affairs, I
effected all these things, rather by surprise than by the King's Allowance and
Consent. But now Prudent David began to suspect my Designs, and having found my
Counsels and Measures destructive to the Government, and the Nations Interests,
he discarded me the Court, and sent me among my Friends in the City: There I
fomented the Flames I had already kindled, I gave out that Solomon the next
Heir was a Jebusite, that the Influence he had over the King might be fatal to
the Religion of the Jews, and that if he had not already perverted the King, it
was to be feared he would in time, or at least, he would not fail when he came
to the Crown himself to introduce the Idolatry of the Jebusites, to the downfall
of the true Church, and to the destruction of the Peoples Liberties and
Properties; the pampered Jews always inclined to rebel found this Cry too
suitable to their Natures not to go along with it, they fell a murmuring,
bawling out against Arbitrary Counsels, and a Change of Religion, and the
Sanhedrim it self was at length so infected, by the Care I had taken, that such
Members should be elected as were inclinable to Sedition, and Abhorrers of
Monarchy: The Sanhedrim, I say, it self, grew at length so infected, as to deny
the King the necessary Aids for the supporting the Government, and defend his
Subjects, and his Allies, against the growing and formidable Power of Pharaoh,
for I had poisoned them with an Opinion, that what they should give, how
necessary soever, would be employed to their Oppression, and not in their
Defense, against the Enemies of the Kingdom. Thus, whenever Armies were raised
by their Consent for the common Safety, I spread abroad Rumors that the Court
intended to make use of them, for the putting in Execution Arbitrary Designs;
Thus were they still cashiered before the Business was effected for which they
were raised. This both redoubled the Peoples Umbrage, and increased their
Murmurs against the management at the Helm, being persuaded the Government had
decoyed them into the raising of Forces to cut their own Throats. But
notwithstanding all the Poison I had scattered, David had still that Influence
over the Hearts of his People, that nothing could fasten the least Suspicion
upon him. Solomon his Heir indeed received several Outrages in many Encounters.
We had worked the Mobile up to a Belief, that he was a Favourer of Arbitrary
Designs, that he went full of the Revenge for David's and his Suffering which
he would not fail of cruelly executing, whenever he had an opportunity for so
doing, and that he was laboring to restore the Jebusites and their Faction,
and out those who were both numerous and considerable, who were in Possession
of their Estates. These were terrible Alarums, they knew that this Prince had
to Perfection, Wisdom, and Valor, they knew he never undertook any thing
without effecting it; so as that they could not think themselves too cautious
in securing themselves against all Events. Thus did the whole Land ring with
great Complaints of this great and Generous Prince. And pray you, Madam,
observe here the blindness of the People, and for how little a while the
greatest Virtues are in their esteem; this glorious Prince, had in a thousand
Occasions, hazarded his Life, and all in their Defense, against their Enemies,
and had got such Victories as will make him admired by all Ages. But his
Virtues in Peace, were no less admirable than his Qualifications in War. He was
renowned for his Sincerity and Justice; his Gratitude was so great that he was
never at rest until he had tenfold rewarded the Service that had been done him.
These are only Patterns of his unbounded Merits; yet the silly Multitude were
easily wheedled in to a belief that this Prince was a Promoter of their ruin:
though he had so often and so prodigally ventured his Blood and all in their
Defense. Yet you see, Madam, how easily they were exasperated against a Person
they owed so much to, and how a few Arts and incredible Rumors wrought them up
to a Ferment, and the highest pitch of Ingratitude. But what those Arts were,
Madam, I must take another occasion to acquaint you, having at present to meet
Absalom, and some others at a Rendezvous upon Matters of great Moment, which
you shall not fail of knowing as soon as ever things are brought to any
Ripeness, and I believe that you will not fail too of owning that never any
Zeal and Passion could parallel that which I have for your Concerns. Thereupon
taking his leave he went to the Rendezvous, where he found Absalom, Zimri,
Nadab, Shimei, Corah, Ishban, Belial, Rabsheka, Judas, Phaleg, Ben-Jochanan,
Balack, Og and Doeg, with many others of all sorts and Conditions. Some of
these were to head, countenance and give renown to the Party, others were to
sow and scatter Sedition: Each had a peculiar Talent for the Province that was
allotted him, Absalom was a Prince endued with all the Qualities proper to win
the Hearts of the People, he was beautiful above all the Men of his Time, had
by early Conquests in the Wars of Israel's Neighbors gained mighty Renown and
Glory, was David's Son, which was sufficient to entitle him to be the Darling
of all the Tribes: Thus the Gracefulness of his Mien, the Benignity of his
Temper, the Comeliness of his Person, and the Vastness of his Performances,
being Charms capable of insinuating themselves into the Affections of Persons
of all Conditions: None so generally adored, none so universally celebrated as
was Absalom. By this Prince it was that Achitophel thought most fit to lure and
decoy to his Party, if not the generality of all the Tribes, at least, the
dissenting Sects of the Jews: Not that this wily Politician designed or
intended his Greatness, but for that he knew that having no just Title to the
Crown, he must always necessarily depend upon him and his Faction, until that
having thus divided and destroyed the Royal Family, by its Domestical
Divisions, he might by that means reduce the Monarchy into a Commonwealth, or
Democracy. Thus he had been long besieging him with all the Arts of a crafty
Statesman, had flattered him with the Dominion he had over the Peoples
Affections, but then represented unto him how highly derogating it was to his
Honor, for him to spend his days in Idleness and Ease, after he had begun so
glorious a Career, that all his Laurels would tarnish and ^ade away, unless
cultivated by new Efforts and Undertakings, that his Father David was now in
the Declension of his Age, and now lessened too in the Minds of the People, as
being suspected of having favored the late Plot of the Jebusites, Solomon,
though a Prince endued with all the Virtues worthy of, and fit to illustrate a
Throne, yet being thought a Jebusite, the People did but the more abhor him for
his good Qualifications, and thought that they only tended to the rendering him
the more capable of introducing that change, which they fancied he designed,
and consequently their own Oppression: That he had found the way to estrange
People's Hearts from David, and that the general Cry was for Religion,
Commonwealth and Liberty, with several other Arguments; as that being set up by
the People, they would be the more fond of him as a Creature of their own
making, and though his Command were limited, yet in case of ill Success upon
any occasion, he might impute it to that Limitation, and to the shortness of
his Commission, and then ended his Harangue with new Eulogies upon his former
Conduct and Actions.

Thus Absolom's generous Temper being soothed by Praise and Flattery, and
blinded by Ambition, the only Vice of great Souls, was almost ready to yield to
the Artifices of this Fox, when for a while the Royal Blood struggling still in
him, he replied, that he had no pretext to take up Arms for the public
Liberty, that his Father governed with unquestioned right, that he was the
delight of Mankind, and the Faith's Defender, that he was acknowledged by all
to be Good, Gracious and Just, was never known to have usurped upon the Laws,
that his compassionate Nature had induced him to pardon Millions of his Foes,
that he distributed Justice impartially to all his Subjects; that he was mild,
easy, humble, studious of the public good of his People, that the mildness of
his Reign did not suit with the stubborn Nature of the Jews, yet that therefore
he was not to turn Rebel, and by encouraging the Wicked, run popularly
distracted: That in case he were a Tyrant, oppressed the Peoples Privileges,
changed their Religion, and brought in the Jebusite; yet his part was no more
than to mourn and lament, and look upon him as a Scourge from Heaven for their
Sins, but that Nature, as well as a Subjects Religious Duty to a Sovereign,
would curb and hinder him from entertaining any ill Design against his King and
Father. Besides, continued he, what have his Favor and Indulgence left me more
to desire? he has always prevented and forestalled my very Wishes; The Crown,
then pawsing, he persued, though not without a Sigh, you know justly belongs to
a more deserving Person, whom you know is born in the Right Line, whom you know
stands possessed of all the Royal Virtues that can endear a Sovereign to the Eyes
and Hearts of all Mankind, especially to the brave and good; the Enemies of our
Country know his Courage, the King his Loyalty, and the World his Fame, the
offending Crowd his Mercy, and his Friends extol and proclaim his Truth. Thus,
continued he, I have no reason to complain that Heaven gave me no pretense to a
Throne, since what people could be more blessed in such a Prince as David, and
such a Successor as Solomon? yet I could have wished (said he again with a
sigh) that Fate had either raised my Birth higher, or debased my mind lower,
that I had been born in a legal way, and that I had got the start of Solomon in
the World, for I find my temper too aspiring for the Circumstances of my Birth
and Station; I find in me David's Blood too strong and prevailing to be allayed
by that of my Mother. In short, I find my Soul perpetually whispering in me,
that desire of Greatness in a Godlike Sin.

When Hell's Minister saw him thus staggering, he plied him with fresh Attacks,
and accosted him in this manner. Do you think the all-wise and all-bountiful
God has imparted all those Prodigious Gifts to you in vain? No undoubtedly,
they were destined for a Throne, they were destined to fill the World with
Wonders of your Reign, and every action of your Life, and every Argument you
have used do confute your Words, second my Wishes, and prove my Asserction. Not
that David's Gentle Temper is to be despised, but it is a greater Virtue in a
private Person, or an Ecclesiastic than a Sovereign, and a Masculine Soul is
certainly fitter for a Throne. Has not his easy Nature induced him to make such
lavish Grants to his never satisfied Subjects, that now nothing will content
them but the Throne it self? Let the Kingdom be now in never so much Peril from
the formidable and encroaching Power of Pharaoh, let Israel's Allies be never
so much oppressed and ruined for want of assistance from David, yet the
Insatiate Sanhedrim will contribute nothing to the public relief without
David's lopping off and bestowing on them a limb of his Prerogative. Thus I Will
take care by plying him with new Plots or plunging him into some expensive War,
to bring him into such necessity as that he shall be forced to sell and give us
his best and truest Friends, whom I have already so ordered the business as to
look upon as Jebusites and Pharoah's Pensioners. And when we have stripped him of
those, our next work shall be to purchase the Successor, whom my contrivances
have stigmatized and rendered obnoxious to the State, and have turned all his
Virtues like a Battery to his own ruin. Thus we will in time bring David to
that extremity, that he shall for want of Moneys be forced to agree to the
exclusion of Solomon, and pass your Title into Law: Wherefore your business now
will be to urge your Filial Right, the Public Good, a Prevention of Change of
Religious Worship, an hinderance to the Usurpation and Oppression of Liberties
and Properties; never be bigoted and seduced by a Natural Love, hearken to the
Universal Call, the eyes of all Mankind are upon you, and by this course you
not only study the People's Happiness and fulfill their Wishes, but you likewise
secure your self from ruin; for do you imagine that so severe, so wise, so
penetrating a Prince as the next Heir is, does not see through all your
Artifices, does not mark the Progress you make in People's Hearts? undoubtedly
he does, and takes notice of the least step you take, and will upon occasion
resent it, with a Vengeance, which self-defence will prompt him to; for he can
never think himself safe and secure, when he is in possession of the Throne, as
long as you possess the hearts of the People; wherefore the same self-defence
the prime Law of Nature, obliges you to enter into such measures, as may secure
your own and your friends Lives, and prevent the dreadful Consequences of a
Jebusites Swaying the Scepter. Wherefore put in practice all the Arts that are
necessary for the keeping people up to the ferment they are in, let no occasion
slip for the promoting a Rebellion, try your Title while your Father is still
living, and give out, that you take up Arms only in the King's Defense; and
thus having secured his Person, doubt not of success, for thereby you secure
your Cause.

This Advice was most pleasing to Absalom's mild Disposi^ion; and Ambition had
that Ascendant over him, that he could no longer resist the Allurements of a
Throne, nor hold from joining with Achitophel in his wicked Designs and
Councils. This hellish Minister acquainted him with the Character and Part each
Instrument had in the Prosecution of their Conspiracy: Told him, that as he
knew Zimri was one of the greatest Wits of the Age; so being a Man discontented
with the Court, for that one of his own Creatures, when he was Principal
Minister, was now preferred before him, and invested with all those Honors and
Offices of Trust, that he thought himself secure in the Enjoyment of. Zimri,
continued he, with his Wit and Drolling, now is capable of jesting some People
into an ill Opinion of our Antagonists, and wheedling others into favorable
Sentiments of us and our Cause. And then for Nadab, said he, never could there
have been found a fitter man for our Ends: He is ambitious, high Spirited,
restless, and in Want; well versed in our Laws, has an indifferent good Pen,
and has a peculiar Gift of Canting, which you know takes much with the meaner
sort of Jews; so that this Man will do us great Service, both in preaching up,
and writing People into Sedition; thus by supplying his Wants, and flattering
his Ambition with considerable Preferments, he will prove a Drudge to the
Cause, and a great Promoter of our Interests. Jonas famed through the whole
Land for his understanding the Statutes, being distasted with the Court, for
that he is not advanced to such Places of Trust which he fancies his Merit
allows him to lay claim to; will be very serviceable to us in our Undertakings,
for that he has a particular Talent of wresting the Statutes to mean Rebellion,
and of making Treason just and consistent with the Laws of the Land. But a main
Engine for the carring on our Plot, will be Shimei: A man, though not prodigal of
his Money, yet of his Gall and Curses against Monarchy and Kings; and who will
be as lavish of his Time and Pains, to undermine the Government, as he is
niggardly and sparing of his Pelf to relieve the Poor, succor the Needy, or
help the Orphan and Widow. This Man, I Will take care shall be chosen a
Magistrate of Jerusalem; and he will be sure, in case any of opur Friends should
fall within the Clutches of the Law, to pack such a Jury of Dissenting Jews, as
shall make no Conscience of violating their Oaths, to free our Partisans from
the Punishments that are inflicted on Criminals of State. But our Masterpiece
is Korah, who though a Weaver's Son, yet I doubt not but that his performances in
this Business, will make his name live to all Ages. He has been long preparing
for the part he is to act. I once made him pretend himself a Jebusite, that so
getting Acquaintance with those of that Sect, he might be the more able to
varnish with probabilityu the Matters he is to attest. This. Fellow's
Livelihood must depend on his Evidence; and he shall not only swear, that the
Queen and the next Heir are in the Plot against the King; but that David
himself does conspire with them, and the Jebusites against himself: How
improbable soever this may seem to thinking persons, yet the Jews are of a
temper so greedily to swallow all that provokes and tends to the raising
Sedition and Tumult. The next he represented to the ambitious youth, was
Ishban, whose trade had long been to cheat the People; but now undertakes to
reform the State. This man was rivall'd in his Wickedness by Belial, who though
he had been several times pardoned by his Prince, yet during the time of his
Government of Jerusalem, he was perpetually brewing Treason and Rebellion
against his Sovereign and the State. Rabsheka too made a considerable figure in
the Roll, outwardly a Saint affecting to haunt the Conventicles, but privately
the Stews and Bawdy-houses. A Man given to all manner of Debauchery, which he
inherited as well as his Seditious Principles from his Father, and to promote a
Change he cared not if he squandered away the maintenance of the Orphans, and
the Treasure of the City, whereof he was the Keeper, and so he could but
contribute to the pulling down Monarchy, he was Death to the Cries of
Distressed Widows, and to the Lamentations of Wives and Children, whose
Husbands and Fathers groaned under a heavy Captivity amongst the Barbarians,
and for whose Redemption the public had trusted him with Moneys, which he
lavished away contrary to the design of the Charitable Donours, for the
carrying on the Cause. Many more there were of the same Kidney and Malignity of
Temper that were Managers and Promoters of this grand Design, whose Names and
Characters it is too tedious to rehearse, and this taste of the aforementioned,
is sufficient to give a guessat the Nature and Dispositions of the whole Crew.
But now it is time that I afford the Reader a sight of Absalom and Achitophel
at one of their Cabals, and give him a prospect of their Consults and Debates.

The place of their Rendezvous, was commonly in some public house in the City
of Jerusalem, for this Reason, that the flocking thither of several great Men
of their Party, might give Renown to the Cause, and especially so contrived by
Achitophel, that Absalom might be publicly seen, for that his Looks, Words,
and Behavior, carried with them that Charm, as insensibly to insinuate
themselves into the Hearts of the People, who no sooner saw him than they were
inspired with affection and wonder. The Company being now met, Achitophel
finding Abjalom still wavering, making a Conscience of taking up Arms against
his King and Sovereign, fearing too it might be the Destruction of the whole
Realm, and the Death of the King himself, and moreover jealous, lest the
pretense of public good,* which they made use of, should be practiced against
himself, and with more reason too, since he had no lawful Title; to which that
Wily Minister replied, with a kind of scornful Air; that he thought he had
removed and destroyed all those vain bogglings of Conscience, and jealousies of
Consequences; that he was already advanced too far to retreat now with safery,
that what would be his security if he persued his Career, would be his downfall
if he made a Retreat, which was his Popularity and the Ascendant he had over
the Peoples Affections. That interest ought to be his only Idol, that if he did
not consult his own safety, he ought at least to consider how many friends
there present, and others that were absent had already engaged themselves so
far, that they exposed their Fortunes, their Relations, their Lives, their All
for his advancement; and should he now abandon them and give himself and them
up a Sacrifice to the resentment and revenge of an highly injured enemy, would
not only be madness to himself, but ingratitude to his generous Partisans. This
reflection of his Friends sufferings and ruin in case he desisted, joining with
his ambition and the love of Glory, which he fancied shined no where so bright
as on a Throne, determined him to comply with their Instances and
Importunities, and made him resolve vigorously to prosecute the measure they
had taken. Whereupon they began to concert matters for the well managing and
prosecuting their Design. It was resolved in that Meeting, that Absalom should
take a Progress through the Land, well knowing that the Charms and Popularity
of that Prince would invite many to their Party, be a means of sounding peoples
Affections, and of distinguishing their Friends from their Enemies. Whereupon
Absalom set forth with all the Splendour and Magnificence imaginable, was
saluted in all places with the Shouts and Acclamations of the People; what by
his winning Personage and Carriage, what by the specious Pretexts of Love and
Duty to his Sovereign, and due regard to Religion; and redress of Grievances,
with his many Glorious performances in the Wars abroad, the whole Land rung
with his Praises, and the people thought they could never sufficiently admire
and extol a Prince adorned with so many perfections. In all places where he
past, the Jews flockt in great Numbers to him, expressing the Joy and
Satisfaction they took in the sight of such a Prince; and he in return, cajoled
them with all the foftest Words that Tongue can utter, telling them, that he
had been a banished man for their dear sakes; that his endeavors to prevent
their Oppression by Arbitrary Government, had been the Occasion of his having
been cut off from the Succession to the Crown, and had made him incur his
Father's Displeasure and Resentment; that now all their Liberties were to be
trodden under Foot by a Despotick Power; that their Trade was intercepted and
invaded by the Egyptians and Syrians, and the Jebusites were bringing in their
Idolatry and Abominations. That for his part, he did not in the least regret
his Loss, how considerable soever it was, since his Sufferings only proceeded
from his having stood up in their Defense and Behalf: But that he could not but
mourn the sad condition they were in, since his Father, continued he, with a
Sigh, being now in the Declension of his Age, and doting on the Charms of an
Egyptian Princess, was grown careless of his Glory, suffered all his Councils
to be influenced by his Successor, who exalted David's Enemies, and disoouraged
and outed all his Friends. These are Grievances, prusued he, of such a Nature
as cannot be too much lamented, and as he feared, were countenanced and
supported by Bribes and Sums of Foreign Coin: That he had hazarded his All, and
had already lost his Offices and Favor for their Redress: But that he did not
repine at David's having given his Right away; but that he could not without
Tears reflect at his having squandered away theirs and his own, to the
Dishonor of the Jewish Name, to his own Downfall, and their Slavery.

Such were his usual Words and Caresses to the People, who were thus wheedled
into a belief, that they could not afford him too much of their pity and
compassion. These Blandishments prepared the way for Achitophel to work what he
had been long contriving. This cunning indefatigable Minister was not idle at
Jerusalem during these Occurrences in the Country. As he had allarum'd and
filled the whole Land with Terror and Consternation, by having suborned Corah
to swear the Queen and Solomon into the Plot with the Jebusites in Conjunction
with the Egyptians, were said to have upon the Government; so now finding by
the Pulse of the Nation which way they were inclined, he contrived, set on
foot, and promoted an Association, being the same thing under an other Name, as
the Covenant, which had formerly been made use of for the excluding and keeping
David out. Then he fell to stir up the People to Petition for a Meeting of the
Sanhedrim, and yet underhand took care that such Members should be generally
chosen as were Dissenters from the Established Religion of the Jews and
Dissaffected to the Government. These he knew would never give David the
Supplys necessary for the Support and Defense of the State, but would embroil
matters so, as would render the unhinging of the Government an undertaking the
more easy to effect. Besides, he had other Prospects in setting on foot the
Association and these Petitions, how directly contrary soever they were to Law.
For by these means he numbered and listed his Party, and moreover, made them
seem more strong and numerous to the World than they really were. And having
thus engaged the Malcontents and Dissenters in a Conspiracy, he knew they
could not go back, but must vigorously push it on, unless they had a mind to
fall under the severe Penalties and Inflictions of the Law. He likewise gave
out that there was a certain Instrument preserved in a Black Box, being the
Contract of Marriage between David and Absolom's Mother, and a settlement of
the Crown upon the Issue he might have by that Lady. Notwithstanding the
improbability of this Rumor, and David's protesting publicly the
groundlessness and falseness of it, yet it was very serviceable to Achitophel's
Designs, since the people believing what they ardently wished for, would by no
means be persuaded of the contrary, and this seconding their former Measures
and Paces, they thought now all their irregular proceedings supported and
countenanced by Law. Now they began to redouble their Clamors for the convening
of the Sanhedrim, who were no sooner met than they fell to voting that all
those who were Loyal and Zealous for the support of David and the Crown, were
Traitors and Enemies to the King and Kingdom, that all those who contributed to
the relief of the necessities of the State, were the same. In short, all
things, Actions, and Persons, that stood up in and tended to the maintenance
and preservation of the Monarchy, were thus tumultuously voted and declared
Illegal, Treasonable, and Arbitrary. Thus were all the King's Faithful
Ministers to be banished from His Person, His Successor was voted a Jebusite,
yet without any proof made of his being so, or without any desire of his
declaring himself upon that point; but they did not stop there, they drew up a
Bill of Exclusion of the next Heir from the Crown, which they importuned the
King to sign and pass; declaring it the only means of securing the State. But
meeting with a just opposition in this so horribly unjust request, they
declared, notwithstanding the King offered to comply with any other Expedient,
they again declared, I say, that there was no other way to prevent any change
of the Established Religion, the Subversion of their Liberties and Properties,
and an Inundation of Arbitrary Government and Tyranny. The King in the mean
while repeated again and again his Instances for the bringing to trial such of
the Lords as were accused to have a hand in the Jebusites Plot, but all to no
purpose, the Sanhedrim was Death to wholesome Counsels, and rusht on upon
matters out of their Province. The Wise and Prudent David foreseeing the
mischievous Consequences and confusion these Excesses and Irregularities of
that great Body must necessarily be attended with, thought fitting for
prevention of those Calamities and sad Revolutions which in all probability
would follow in case they were suffered to go on at that rate, to dissolve
them, and issue out Orders for the choosing a new Sanhedrim. But all to no
purpose, he found in them the same heats and ferments, so as that they now
seemed to be become resolute, tumultuary, Debauchees; thus was he constrained
again to send them home, and order a new Election, convening them to meet at
Baharim, in hopes that the change of air might have some effect upon their
temper, and that being no longer pampered and poisoned by the seditious rout of
Jerusalem, their Debates and Resolves might proceed with more deliberation and
tend more to the public good. But still he found himself disappointed in his
Expectations and pious intentions. He found true, what their Speaker declared
at the opening of the Assembly, that they were not given to change, which is to
be meant of their Seditious Practices and Principles. Nay, they came thither so
attended, each Member with such a Guard as surpassed the King's own, and burst
into such rash and destructive Resolves, that David having intimation too
underhand of a Conspiracy to seize upon his Person, and that many of the
Members came thither so numerously and so strongly attended for that purpose,
he was again forced for his own and the Kingdom's security to Dissolve the
Sanhedrim, and return in all have to Jerusalem, by which means the
Seditionaries were frustrated in their Designs upon His Person. But
nevertheless, this did not make them discontinue their treasonable Practices,
and they scattered abroad Clamours more than ever, somenting Jealousies amongst
the Subjects, declaiming against the King's Governments, as if the next Heir
and the Jebusites had the whole Ascendant over his Counsels, they had their
Incendiaries in all parts of the Kingdom, both for the Preaching up Sedition
and scattering about Libels for to alienate the hearts of the King's Subjects,
and to bring all into Anarchy and Confusion. Some of these Instruments were
caught and hanged up for their pains, which was the least they deserved, having
Libels found about them of so horrible a nature, as was capable of poisoning
and infecting the soundest part of the People.

Hereupon David thought it fitting and seasonable for the preventing the Malice
of his Enemies from producing it is effect to issue out a Gracious Declaration,
wherein he condescended to give his Subjects an account of his Conduct, and the
Reasons he had to Dissolve the late Sanhedrims, justly checking them therein
for their Irregular Proceedings, and assuring his Subjects of his constant
Resolution to maintain the Established Religion, the Government as settled by
Law, and that the Law should be the constant Rule he would govern by. This
produced the good effect he designed; the People remembered the Calamities they
groaned under in the time of the late Troubles and Usurpation, they easily
perceived the same humors were fomenting and nourishing the same Designs, they
saw the same Methods and Measures taken and persued, and several of the truly
Loyal Jews had newly had a taste by the exorbitant Resolves of the Sanhedrim,
what a bitter Entertainment they were to expect, in case they were allowed to
pursue blindly their Career, to their own and the Nations Ruin and
Destruction. These Considerations (I say) made the Truly Loyal Israelites bless
God for having bestowed upon them so Wise and Prudent a Sovereign, and who was
so watchful for their good and happiness here, and their future felicity, by
taking care no Innovation should be made in the Divine Worship, nor no
Usurpation upon their Properties and Estates.

Thus the Loyal flock from all parts of Israel with Praise and Thanks to the
King for his Indefatigable Labor and Vigilance for their safety and Repose;
declaring, that notwithstanding all the Noise, and Clamours, and endeavors of
the Enemies of the Public Peace, they would continue Loyal to him to the last
Gasp, and Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes in defense of his Person and
Dignity, and the Succession in the Right Line,

Notwithstanding that the Loyalists by these means showed themselves to be much
stronger and far more numerous and considerable for Estates, and the Figure
they made in the Nation, than the Malcontents and Seditionaries, yet these
last did not desist from their Devilish Practices.

In the mean while Achitophel what by his incensing Speeches in the Sanhednim,
what by his other Contrivances for the working the People up to a Tumult, as by
burning the Golden Calf, and the like, having laid his Designs but too open to
the eyes of all Mankind, and being likewise accused of Treason, he was taken
into Custody, and committed to close Imprisonment. Amongst other things, a
Daughter of the Association was found amongst his Papers, which though a matter
of High Treason, and that several points of the like nature were attested and
sworn against him by several Credible Witnesses, yet the Dissenting Jews having
then in their power the impanelling of Juries, they packt up such a number, as
whose Consciences would suffer 'em to see their Sovereign's Life, and the whole
frame of the Government in danger of being destroyed, rather than put their
Seducer Achitophel to the hazard of being brought to a fair Trial, shown in his
own Colors, and so rewarded according to his Deserts. But are they to blame
for this? Were not they themselves as well engaged as he in the Conspiracy? And
no Law obliges a Man to accuse himself, they knew their own Preservation
consisted in his Acquitment, and it was unreasonable to expect they should pass
Sentence upon themselves, which they fancyed they should have done, had they
allowed of the Justice of his Impeachment. And people of their Mould and
Principles always make Conscience, give way, and submit to Self-Prefervation
and Interest. And besides, they thought perhaps, no Man more capable of putting
his House in order than himself. Thus was the Arch-Traytor again set at
Liberty, and Canting Nadab too notwithstanding all the Proofs that were brought
against them. Several other Dissenters too were released, maugre the
notoriousness of their Crimes, upon a Law the Seditionaries had taken care to
have passed some time before the breaking out of the Plot, by this Law in case
of Bail offered, no Man could be detained in Prison, and the Faction would
never suffer their Partisans to want that upon any Occasion. Thus Law and
Justice were perverted in these wicked Men's hands, the Cause was their Golden
Calf, and they thought it no Crime to Sacrifice their Consciences, their
Repute, nay, the Honor of the Nation (since it bred almost a Detestation of
the Jews in Foreigners, in that it was capable of Producing and Breeding such
a pack of Monsters; so that they could but compass their Ends, and bring about
their long desired and tugged for Revolution. They still had in mind the
sweetness they had tasted in the Sequestration of the Loyal Jews Estates, they
longed to be again at pillaging and plundering, and they cared not what
Desolations soever they might bring upon the Realm, so they but attained their
Insatiate Lust of Power and Arbitrary Executions, this was the scope of all
their Wishes, this they drove at in all their Consults and Cabals, and this
they had effected, had not the Prudent and Most Vigilant Prince that ever God
placed at any Helm by an unparalelled Conduct disappointed their Execrable
Designs.

These Proceedings still more alarumn'd and awakened the Truly Loyal Jews, and
they unanimously found no means so conducing to the safety of their Prince,
their Religion, and their Country, then to enter into an Anti-Association
against the Mutineers and Seditionaries. All the Towns, all the Provinces of
the Land of Judah and Israel rung with Acclamations of David's Prudent Conduct,
offered up their Praises to God for bestowing on them so good, and so Gracious
a Prince, and poured forth their Thanks and Acknowledgments to him, for his
Pious and Indefatigable Care and Vigilance for their Safety and Preservation
here from all Usurpations of their Fellow Subjects, and for their Eternal
Happiness hereafter, by hindering their being perverted and seduced by any
Innovations in their Religious Rights aad Worship. Thus David began again to
recover and establish himself in the Affections of his Subjects, all that
Malignity wherewith the Faction had endeavored to poison People's Minds, began
to purge away of it is self, their Eyes began to open and see clear, and they
perceived the Bait, the Lure that was laid to draw them into the same snares,
the same Desolation they had formerly so miserably suffered by the same means.
Then they began to be ashamed of, and detest the Torrent which they had so
blindly gone along with before, and their Breasts were not sufficient to
contain the Abhorrence they had of these Traiterous Courses, but they expressed
it to one another, they humbly declared it to their Prince, offering their
Fortunes and Lives a Sacrifice for his safety upon all ocafion to put a stop to
the restless endeavors of the Faction to destroy the Peace and Tranquillity of
the Nation, and to involve it in Anarchy and Confusion. These Offerings were
received by David with his accustomed goodness; and now seeing the sound part
and generality of the Nation undeceived of the injurious Surmises they had
entertained, he thought it now seasonable to recall back the Suffering Heir from
Hebron, where his Conduct had been such as to quell and destroy that Spirit of
Sedition and Discord so natural to that People, and found the means to bring
plenty into the Land and reduce it to a greater Calm and Tranquillity than it
had for many Ages enjoyed. But the Hebronites were not they who alone enjoyed
the good Effects of his prudent management of Affairs in that Country, the
Jews themselves were by it secured from a Torrent and Inundation of Misery and
Confusion: That upon all Tempestuous Junctures, used to break in from Hebron,
upon the Land of Judah.

These fresh and repeated Instances of Solomon's wise and zealous Application
for the Good and Welfare of the Jews, made them thirst again for a Sight of the
Heir of the Crown: Whereupon they renewed their humble Acknowledgment to David,
upon his Resolution of calling him back from Hebron, and grew jealous, and
envied the Hebronites the Happiness of having enjoyed his Presence, and the
benign Influence of his Wisdom for so long a time.

Then began the Conscious Faction to fall into Despair: They perceived all
their Wiles, all their Artifices for the working up People to a Civil War,
proved abortive, through David's wise Government, and Solomon's prudent
Councils. They found the Friends of David to be so many, so great, and so
illustrious, that all their Arts and Contrivances, could not in the least
balance, or come in comparison with their Zeal and Virtues. Barcellai had long
flourished in the Roll of Fame for his constant Loyalty to the Crown, had once
sacrificed his vast Fortune and his Ease in its Defense; and was no less
celebrated for his Virtues and his Learning, than for his Performances in War,
and his Conquests over David's Enemies. Glorious too he was in a Son, who had
filled the World with wonder at his Conduct and Valor in Naval Combats, and
by Land had put a Stop to Pharoah's dreadful Power, and impetuous Progresses
lower Israel's Confederates. Zadock the High Priest, had been constantly
watchful since his promotion to that high Office, to preferve the Ark from
Schisms and Innovations. David knowing his Zeal and Worth, had advanced him to
that high Dignity, notwithstanding he had carefully shunned all Power and
Grandeur. The Zogan too of Jerusalem, who descended of a noble Race, did as
nobly assert the Rights of the Church and State against all Factious and
turbulent Invaders; and the Prophets Sons being led on by such Examples, were
bred up in Loyalty, Learning, Religion and Virtue. Hushai a constant Friend of
David in all Storms and Tempests of State: his Native Excellencies were
polished in his very Youth, by Foreign Treaties and Negotiations; and David
found by his Management of those Matters he then entrusted him withal, his
great Capacity for the performing and officiating those high Offices he
bestowed upon him at home. Neither was he deceived in his Expectations: For his
frugal Care supplied the Necessities of the State, when the Treasury was at the
lowest Ebb. Jotham, a Man of vast Copiousness, and penetration of Wit, gifted
beyond Comparison by Nature, and formed by Arts and Learnings, to persuade and
prevail over the Hearts and Affections of Assemblies. Bezaliel, whose Command
was over the Kenites Rocky Province: Him Nature had so abundantly stocked with
all Advantages in its Disposal, that Education and Learning found him complete
and in no need of their Conjunction to render him perfect. He had all the
Virtues, without any of the Vanities which usually attend them, and had the
Happiness too to see all his Glories copied in his Son. Abdael adorned with all
his Father's perfections, who had restored David to the Crown without so much
as the loss of one sole Israelite. Abdael the Head and Governor over the
Prophets School, pursued his Father's Footsteps, and by his undauntted
perseverance in his Fidelity to his Prince, made the Faction conscious how
impossible it was to bring about their Ends as long as the Crown was
surrounded, and supported by Friends of such a temper. Eliab, who had long
wandered and partak'd with his Royal Master in all his Sufferings abroad, and
had been firm to him in all those sad and doleful Persecutions of Fortune: For
which, and several other Services he was rewarded with the Charge of the Royal
Household, and had his only Heiress decked with all the Pride and Beauties of
Nature, united to young Othriel, David's Son, and the Illustrions restorer of
his Father's youth, and likewise was celebrated by the Principal among Foreign
Authors for one of the greatest Ministers of his Age. Helon, tho tempted by
Pharaoh, with all Glories, Allurements and Grandeur of his Court; and tho an
Egyptian too by Birth, yet he abandoned his Country, refused the tempting
Offers of Pharaoh, and slighted his Idols to give himself to David, bringing
with him such a Virtue, that neither Profit or Example could seduce or betray.
Sheva, than whom none was more Loyal and watchful to defend the Prerogatives of
the Crown, to render Sedition and Turbulency odious and in their true Colors,
to undeceive the People of those Shams and Frauds that were palm'd upon them by
the Factious Scribes, and to purge away those venomous and seditious Humors and
Distempers which the Faction were always infecting the Tribes with. Asaph, who
in Charming Numbers sung the People into Loyalty; and by as keen Satyrs made
those who obstinately persevere in their Evil Practices, ashamed of their
Doings, and exposed them to the and Detestation of others, These were the
principal of those who stood in the Breach, and dared the Fury of the
Seditionaries, when their hopes of Success were at the highest, and they
thought themselves in a fair way to bring about their mischievous and wicked
Contrivances. The Faction was sensible how difficult a Task it would be to make
way to the Crown through so brave a Band: And therefore to remove this Guard,
they voted many of them in the Sanhedrim Enemies to the King and Kingdom, and
addressed to David to have them discarded from their Attendance upon his
Person, and banished from their places in his Council; but David was too well
acquainted with their Worth and their Zeal, for his and their Countries Welfare
and Service, to give them up a Sacrifice to the insatiate Rage of a mutinous
and rebellious Multitude. He knew that as long as his Throne stood upon such a
Foundation as their Loyalty and Affections, the Enemies not only to Monarchy,
but to all Government and Order, would never, notwithstanding all their Malice,
be able to undermine it.

Nevertheless, the Seditious maugre the little Prospect they had of Success,
left not off intriguing and caballing against the State, trying by all possible
Means to embroil Affairs, seduce Peoples Affections, and raise in them a
Jealousy and Umbrage of the Government. For that purpose Ben-Jochanan the
Levite was set to work. This Man being of mean Birth, and brought into Want by
a Marriage, or a Wife out of the Dregs of the people, tho indeed suitable to
his own Extraction, turned Renegado, and became a violent Incendiary and
Promoter of Sedition. The Faction taking hold of his Want, and the Sordidness
of his Temper, picked him out for an Instrument; and his Business was to frame a
parallel between the Illustrious Heir, and that Grand Apostate, who first
seduced the people to fall down and worship the Golden Calf. This piece having
been long and painfully worked up by him, did, before it was sent abroad, pass
the Test and Scrutiny of the principal Hands of the Faction. His main Scope and
Design was to breed a Jealousy in the people of the Governments being inclined
to favor a Change of Religious Rites and Worship, and to bring in the Ancient
Superstitions and Idolatries of the Jebusites: And then it proceeded to assert,
that in case of such a Change and Innovation, it was lawful for the people to
oppose and divert by main Force of Arms, all Paces and Efforts that tended
thereunto; and if by any Circumstances it could be surmized, that the
Government persevered in such a Design or Resolution, that then it was lawful
for the People to depose and kill such a Prince, and alter the Government be it
what it will.

This piece nicking the Juncture, was mightily cried up by the Party, though
all Men of Sense and Reason, detested it is Doctrine and Abhorred the Parallel
and Draught. Besides, the thing it self was but shallow and no Bugbear, and not
over fit for the purpose they designed it, notwithstanding all the care that
had been taken to make it a Prodigy of a Book. For it was rather a Panegyric
upon the Apostate, and a defense of Apostasy, then a Satyr against those who
abandon the true Religion. But perhaps this is the only instance that the
Author or the Faction ever gave of Modesty. And indeed, with what face could
they declaim against Apostasy, when they themselves were guilty of it in the
highest Degree, for they were not only Apostles to their Sovereign, to their
Nation and their Government, but also to their Religion and their God. And
therefore it is no wonder if they endeavored to maintain and scatter abroad
such detestable and abominable Tenets as were not only destructive to Monarchy,
but to all Government and order in the World. But Peoples Eyes being too well
opened and their Affections to the Government too strong, to be ensnared by
such course Stratagems and such thin nets, they haunted about for new
Contrivances, endeavoring by all the means imaginable to get such Magistrates
chosen in all great Towns and especially in Jerusalem, as were affected to
their Party, and hinking by that course to fetter up the Course of Justice, and
thereby to prevent a just revenge upon all their Crimes. But the Loyal Jews
were now grown so sensible of the Destructive Machinations of the Faction, and
so fearful and apprehensive of falling again into the same Ruin and
Calamities, they had but so lately groaned under, by the same Men, who made use
of the same Pretenses and the same Colors to decoy them into Misery and
Destruction. I say, being warned by their past Sufferings and Desolations, they
vigorously stood up in defense of the Government, insomuch, That
notwithstanding all the Hellish cunning and Contrivances of their Cabals,
notwithstanding, all the Zeal and Spirit of the Party, who were reduced to that
Extremity, as to be in danger of being brought to condign punishments, in case
they failed of having such Officers and Magistrates elected as were of their
own Leaven, yet they were disappointed of their hopes and Expectations, the
Loyal Jews found out and exposed their Forgeries and Illegal Proceedings,
rendered them odious to the sound part of the Nation, and procured such Officers
to be chosen, as were zealous for the True Religion as then Established,
Asserters of Monarchy and the Government, Impartial Lovers of Justice, and
wholly devoted to the good and interest of their Country. This heightened the
Factions Despair, they were now at a terrible plunge, and knew not well what
Course to take, but the rancour they had sowed had taken such deep root, that a
great part of the Mobile of Jerusalem had still so much of the Infection left
in them, that they were ready upon all occasions to fall upon such Officers of
Justice, who came to put the Laws in Execution upon such Criminals as were of
their Party, and had incurred Penalties by their Mis-behaviour and their
Transgressions. By these means several were rescued from Justice, and the Laws
hindered from being put in Execution. But though they foresaw that this could
not long secure them, they still continued to use all manner of means to
endeavor to alienate the Peoples Hearts and Affections from the King and his
Heirs. There had formerly appeared in the World a Book, Entitled, The Growth
of the Superstitions of the Jebusites, Written by an Ingenious though a
disaffected Jew. This same piece had met with a favorable Reception amongst
the Jewish Malcontents, and a Continuation of it was at this time thought
proper to revive the Umbrages of the People; amongst other things it
endeavored to persuade, that there had long been a Secret League and Treaty
between Pharaoh and the Monarch of Jerusalem, whereby David was obliged amongst
other Articles to introduce the Worship of the Jebusites, and that for that
purpose Pharaoh should assist him with Men and Money, and likewise, to make
himself absolute over the Lives and Estates of his Subjects. A mad, ridiculous
sham and invention. For it was a thing impossible ever to bring in and
establish the Jebusites without wholly destroying the Jews, and certainly never
any Prince out of an Affection to some few particular Men, and a Sect
destructive to Monarchy, and Dependant on a Foreign Head would destroy the
main Body of the Nation, and leave himself without Subjects and Support. And as
for the Jebusites being brought in by the Consent of the Jews, is a thing never
to be supposed, since their very Habitations were the Ancient Possessions of
the Jebusites, and the Jews would certainly never allow of their Return, whom
they had deprived of their Inheritance, well knowing they would never be
content until they were reinstated in them again, and that Baal not only
claimed their Conscience, but their Lands too. And as for Pharoah's
contributing his aid and succor to the King of Judah, for the resetling them
and Tyranny, it is well known he has always been too great a Slave to his
Interests and Grandeur to commit such a Solecism in Politics, as to put Arms
into such a hand as of all Asia, was alone capable of putting a stop to his
Prodigious and dreadful Carreer. He knew the temper of the Jewish People, the
Constitution of their Government, with the Infatuation the Sanhedrim lay under,
to be such that they would give no Supplys to the Crown, though in the greatest
Exigencys and necessitys of State, out of a frantic and groundless fear, that
they might be employed to their own Oppression. He knew too that the settled
Revenues on the Crown were too short and inconsiderable to suffice either
supporting the Crown it self, upon occasion, or defending and relieving the
Allies and Confederates of Israel, against the spreading and overflowing Arms
of Egypt; though his Wealth and Revenues were vast, he employed them such ways
as more contributed to his Grandeur and the Enlargement of his Empire. He
bribed and made Pensioners of a vast number of Jews, who pretending Zeal and
Friendship to the State and Government, yet at the same time maliciously
insinuated into the People, that there were Designs on foot at Court to Usurp
their Sacred Rites and Properties, that the Royal Family were inclinable to
Baal's Superstitions and Idolatry, that with it Tyranny and Arbitrary Power was
to be introduced. By such like Wiles and Artifices as these were the Chosen
People seduced to entertain an ill Opinion of their Governors and upright
Patriots, and to cry up, and extol those Traitors to their Country, who by
such Courses created those Divisions amongst the Hebrews as weakened them and
rendered them incapable of opposing the Growth of Egypt's King. They were the
Persons who endeavored to sell and bring upon their Country Slavery, and
Idolatry, notwithstanding their exclaiming against the Government, as usurping
upon their Privileges and Charters. They were the occasion of Israel's
Confederates being oppressed and overrun. They by brooding such Jealousies and
Divisions, laid open the only door that could let in the Jebusite. All the
Gracious Declarations of David, all his Assurances to maintain their
Privileges and defend their Religion by Law Established, were not satisfactory
to this Insatiate Party, for that Religion and Privilege were only the
Ingredients they made use of, to work the People into a Ferment, and then by a
continual Application of Fears and Jealousies, to scrue 'em up into a Rage and
Fury, the Consequences whereof they knew would be Confusion and Anarchy: This
they looked upon as the readiest way to build their Fortunes, which if they
could attain to, they cared not though it were upon their Father's Ruin and
Destruction. They longed to be Lording and Domineering again over their Fellow
Subjects: They had not forgotten the Sweets they enjoyed in the Sequestrations
of the Loyalists Estates, and such as remained faithful to David in his late
Troubles. This was sport they itch'd to be at again; and therefore all Persons
and things that opposed their destructive Designs, and tended to the
preservation and safety of the People and Government, these Traitors traduced
as Enemies to the Kingdom, and exclaimed against them as Arbitrary Tools. Yet
these very People were the only Persons who aimed and exercised Arbitrary Power.

In the several late Sessions of the Sanhedrim, the Seditionaries having got by
Surprise and Illegal Elections several of their Faction to be chosen Members,
all their Resolves savoured of and tended to Tyranny, they sent for up into
Custody from all the parts of the Land of Judah, such Persons as upon occasion
testified their Zeal for the Crown, imprisoned them without any Cause given:
And then they voted, That the next Heir being a Jebufite, and the hopes of his
coming such to the Crown, has given the greatest Countenance and Encouragement
to the present Designs and Conspiracies against the King and Protestant
Religion. Thus they voted the next Heir a Jebusite, which was more than any Man
living could tell but himself; but in case he were, the Wisemen of the Jews,
were of Opinion, that the most Prudent and most Pious course, would have been
to have employed all imaginable Care and Art for the reducing him to the True
Church, whereas this way of proceeding of theirs could but the more enrage and
irritate him against the Professors and Doctrine of the True Religion. Besides
that Branch of the Vote that affirms, That the next Heirs being a Jebusite was
what gave the greatest Countenance to those Designs that were then on foot
against the King, the Government, and the Jewish Religion, was contrary to what
Corah had laid down in his Depositions, who said, that the Jebusites had
declared their Apprehensions, that he would not allow of their Designs, and
therefore after the Blow was given, they must have been forced to have
constrained him to give his consent to the Assassination of the King his
Father, Massacre of his true Jewish Subjects, firing of his Towns, etc. by
pardoning of the Assassins, Murderers and Incendiaries, that then he also be
poisoned and destroyed, after they for some time had abused his Name and Title
to strengthen in their Plot. All which and several other Passages in Corah's
and other of the Evidences Narratives of the Plots, do show they had no
Reliance on the next Heir; but that on the contrary, his Affection and
Tenderness toward the King, would render all their Designs abortive.

Yet upon groundless Surmises they proceeded to bring in a Bill of Exclusion,
notwithstanding that they well knew, that the Crown of Judah was an Hereditary
Kingdom or Monarchy, which devolved upon the next Heirs of the Blood Royal,
without any Election, or Consent of the People, otherwise than by acknowledging
their Lawful Right, derived from God, by their Blood to them; and as
undoubtedly their Hereditary Monarchy was set up at first, so it was afterward
upheld and maintained by the Providence of God; from which we cannot but infer
this Conclusion, That whoever shall attempt to alter such a right of Succession
without a manifest Revelation, is a notorious Usurper upon the Right of the
Person who is to succeed, be the pretense for it what it will; and a Rebel
against that Providence which gave him that Right. Nor could the former
Rebellious Ufurpations and Disorders be Presidents to justify those who should
begin them again: So that no Humane Power can bar and prevent the next Heir his
Succession; but by encroaching upon his Right, and by rebelling against the
Divine Providence that gave it him. So that be the Inconveniences that shall
follow upon such a Succession what they will or can be, the Jews were obliged
to submit to them upon pain of Rebellion, both against God and his anointed.
And then let any Man be Judge, if it be not better to fall into the Hands of a
Jebusitish Prince, than into the Hands of an angry God, who is a consuming
Fire; and who is not bound by any Act of a Sanhedrim from afflicting a sinful
and rebellious People.

Not but that the Loyal Jews, and even those that were stigmatized with the
Name of Jebusites, did acknowledge that it would be a great Affliction for them
to fall into the Hands of a Jebusitish Prince; because of the great and
implacable Malice which the Jebusites, their whole Sect and Tribe have ever
born to the Jews and their Religion, which was more easily defended against
them than any other Religion whatsoever, as being founded upon greater
Antiquity, derived immediately from God himself, and more conformable to the
Doctrines of the Prophes. Wherefore Baal and the Jebusites had left no Stone
unturned to re-establish in Jerusalem, their Suerstitions, and root out the
Jews and the true Religion; and sticking neither at Perjury, Treason, nor any
other Villainy that they thought might conduce to that end. And when God by his
Gracious Providence had defeated all their damnable Projects, they transformed
themselves into the Shapes of the Dissenting Jews; and so promoted a Rebellion,
which ended in the seeming Ruin of the Religion and Government, to their
mighty Content and Satisfaction: But tho David at his Return, re-settled the
Church, yet they did not give over; but by a Toleration, by spreading Pamphlets
and Libels, written in the Style of the Dissenting Jews, and so very acceptable
to them, by discouraging all that opposed the intestine Divisions; and a
Multitude of such other Frauds, they did in twenty Years time so shake the
Foundations of the Jewish Church again, that David with all his Prudence and
Piety could hardly preserve and uphold her against the Jebusitish Party on the
one hand, and the Dissenters on the other.

So that if this poor persecuted Church, should have fallen into the hands of a
Prince of their Communion, she was to have expected whatever the most enraged
Malice, armed with his Authority could inflict upon her; and she had all the
reason in the World to expect the Dissenters would join with them to afflict
and ruin her. Not out of any Kindness to Baalism; but out of an implacable
hatred they both have conceived against her: So that the Ark had all the reason
in the World to dread that day that should put her into such Hands.

But still with this Limitation, notwithstanding that by avoiding one Mischief,
she should not plunge her self into a greater; that is, by flying Persecution
from Men, to fall into a Rebellion against her God, by whose Providence Kings
and Princes, of what Religion soever they be, rule; and by whom they have in
all Ages been so ordered, disposed and governed, as he in his Divine and Holy
Wisdom saw most expedient for the Prosperity or Chastisement of his Church, to
the greater Increase of her Glory, and her Happiness in the World to come.

So that the Sanhedrim could not have proceeded on to the disinheriting the
next Heir, by passing a Bill of Exclusion upon him, without doing an Act
contrary to natural Justice, by running headlong to Condemnation before
Conviction: Besides, it was before they had heard the Party, or examined any
Witness about him, at least none in his Defense. And all this without any Law
or President, is without doubt very severe. Moreover the Kings of Judah had
their Right from God alone, and no Power upon Earth could deprive them of it.
So that the Proceedings of the Sanehedrim in this matter, were precisely
contrary, not only to the Law of God, but the Law of the Land too: For if this
Bill had passed, it would have changed the very Essence of the Monarchy, and
have made the Crown elective: For so the same reason that the Sanhedrim might
have disinherited that Prince upon mere Surmises of his difference from them in
Religion, other Sanhedrims might have disinherited another, upon some other
Pretense which they might suggest; and so consequently by such Exclusions elect
whom they please. Besides, this Bill of Exclusion was contrary to those Oaths
which all such Jews as were in Office, and made any Figure in the State, were
bound to take, and had taken, to be faithful and Loyal to their Kings and
Successors. Neither was this the right Course to prevent those Calamities they
so much dreaded; on the contrary, it was the ready way to ascertain them at
David's Death with the Addition of a Civil War; and in all likelihood bring it
upon them before that time too: For so soon as ever the Bill should have past,
the next Heir would have had a Right to have made War upon the Land of Judah,
even in David's Life time; and what the Event of that would have been, God only
knows. However, to have prevented a Surprise, there must have been a Standing
Army, or an Association kept up so long as the next Heir lived; and what the
Consequences of them might have been was no difficult matter to foresee; the
first ruining the Liberties of the People, and the second endangering the
Prerogatives of the Crown: And both of them in the divided Condition Judah was
then in, in point of Religion, tending to raise such Fears and Jealousies, as
would have been almost as uneasy and unsafe as a Jebusitish Successor; and all
this brought upon them immediately by their rash and inconsiderate Doings:
Whereas the other was only future and contingent: So that Doeg in his Infamous
Libel, called The Character of a Jebusitish Successor, has drawn up the Case
after a false and impious manner; but what could otherwise be expected from
such a Fellow as would sell his God for a Meals Meat; and who was only the
Arch-Traytor Achitophel's Copist in the Business? But allow the Case to be so
as it is stated in that Libel, it would not have justified the excluding such a
Successor as he has described by Force and Arms, against his Right, and their
Oaths to the contrary, though they were never so certain to succeed in the
Attempt; but then that wicked Man has most falsely represented things to the
World; and so as it is impossible they should ever have proved in the Event, if
the Jews did not give occasion for it, by an improsperous Rebellion.

For first it was agreed on by all the World, that there were ten Jews for one
Jebusite, through all the Dominions of the Land of Judah and Israel: so that if
such a Successor should attempt to extirpate them, the bare refusing to aid
and assist him in such an Enterprise would render it impossible.

Secondly, All their Laws were in Favor of that Religion which was
established, and which could never be repealed but by the Sanhedrim; and it is
morally impossible to have a Sanhedrim, the Major part of which Will not be of
the true Jewish Religion, as established, who will never consent to ruin
themselves.

Thirdly, The Revenue of such a Prince could not bear the Charge of so great an
Army, as would have been necessary to have reduced the People to a Religion so
generally hated and detested as that was.

To all which indeed the Faction made Answer, That he might have had Foreign
Aids; and Secondly, that he would have had the means to have allured, deterred,
and perverted many from the Jewish Religion to his own.

As to Foreign Assistances, no Prince will dare to have so many as shall
totally overpower his own People, because then they will be able to ruin him;
and he may be sure they will do it, self-Interest being the Idol of all the
World; so that this was a ridiculous Supposition in a Prince of their own
Nation, who had no other Dominions but those.

As to any Number of People he might have been able to have brought over to his
own Religion, they would have been very inconsiderable in Proportion to those
who would not have been brought over, though the Number were supposed to have
been greater than was likely to be: For that some Men have got a Way of
reproaching all they hate, with the Name of Jebusites, because there was none
more hated than that; yet even for that Case the Number must have been too
small, being very unwilling to List themselves in a hated Party, except they
might have had great Advantages by it; which are not to be afforded to many (in
proportion to the rest) in one King's Reign, in so small a Kingdom as that of
Judah.

Thirdly, the very Attempting of this with force and violence, would have
driven so many People out of the Nation; as would have destroyed both the
Princes Revenue and Security, which according to all Appearances of Reason, no
Man would have done for his own sake.

To this might be added, that it was three to one whether ever the Jews should
have had such a Prince: For who but God could tell whether Solomon should have
survived David? But if he did, whether his Interest, the Grace of God, and
Man's Humane Inconstancy, would not have worked upon him to return to that
Religion he was first principled in, and for which, David and the whole Royal
Family had so gloriously suffered.

And after all this, supposing he should have succeeded and have been zealous
for his Religion, and suppose that to be Baalism; there was no necessity that
he must have acted all the worst Principles of Baalism to the utmost Degree. It
is certain it is not usual so to do, though the difficulty be not so great as
here it would have been.

And after all, Does not the Providence of God govern the Jebusitish as well as
the Jewish Princes? Is the Arm of the All-mighty shortened, that he can neither
deliver nor support his Ark? Or had he forsaken her in her Old Age, who
preserved her with so much Care and Power in her Infancy under Heathen Princes?
Do we believe the Prophets? Do we believe the Jewish Religion is acceptable to
him? Are the far greatest part of them that profess it, sincere or false in
their pretenses? If all this be answered one way, they have something more to
rely upon, than the Faith and Religion of Princes? If in the other, it would
have been but folly to pretend to secure by humane Arts, that which God was
resolved to destroy.

But then should we grant that the hopes of the next Heir's coming a Jebusite
to the Crown, had really given the greatest encouragement to the Jebusites
Plot, would the Dis-inheriting him have defeated those hopes? No, But it would
rather have whetted them on to do their utmost to Murder the King, to prevent
or revenge that injury to the next Heir and their longed for Successor.

So that if any Man would but in cold blood consider on all the Proceedings of
the Sanhedrim; he must necessarily conclude, That if ever Faction, Anger, and
Ill-Designs were entertained by so great a Body of Men as the major part of
that Assembly was, it is apparent they were here. Of which it will not be
unseasonable to instance, but in some few Particulars.

Could ever any Man produce either Precedent or Law to justify the Imprisonment
of those Generous and Loyal Jews, who publicly declared their Abhorrence of
the Irregular, Tumultuous and Traiterous Proceedings of the Faction? Had the
meanest sort of people of all the twelve Tribes a Right to Petition the King
against his Express Command, in a thing of which he was the sole Judge by all
the Laws of the Land? and might not such as represented the King's Person, or
otherwise officiated in the Government, oppose them, or which is less, disown
those Irregular Proceedings? But suppose they did more than they ought in this
their Opposition, was it fit to Imprison them before they were allowed to
defend themselves, and urge what they had to plead in their Justification? But
being it served those Gentlemen's turn at that time, they made use of it,
without considering, that it might one day be turned against them themselves,
and then how severe a Task it would be to brook it. The Towns and Corporations
of the Land of Judah did send generally the principal of their Tribes and
Hundreds, but if this Precedent had once been allowed of, and established, they
might have laid them by when they pleased; and have sent Mechanics, Tradesmen,
Shopkeepers, and how would their high Spirits have brook'd to have been sent
for into Custody, and made to kneel, without being suffered to speak, and only
for doing their Duties to such Men, and to be sent home again? Certainly none
of the Heads of the Tribes could have brook'd such Indignities, but with such
inward Resentments as befit the generosity and temper of that Nation, or
otherwise they must be thought to have been prepared for Slavery: And all that
manly Courage that had made those People renowned in all Countries in the
World, was degenerated into the most shameful effeminacy and Cowardice. Only in
this case Religion and Loyalty made them yield, even to Injustice and
Oppression. As long as God-like David thought fit to suffer it, they submitted,
but with such Thoughts as would have taught the Faction more Justice and
Moderation, if this had not been in the Case.

Besides, their styling all those Generous Jews who were brought into the
Commissions of the Peace, in the room of some others displaced, Men of
Arbitrary Principles, and Countenancers of Jebusites and Baalism; and if the
Faction could have invented more odious Names and Words than these, they might
with as much truth and ingenuity have bestowed them upon them. Was it a
Privilege of the Sanhedrim to vote a Man a Philistine or an Egyptian, or that
those who they thought fit were the Men, who occasioned the Breach before David
and his Sanhedrim, and consequently the occasion of all his former Troubles? If
it were so, there was no more to be said, but only to beg their pardon, and to
kneel down at the Bar of the Sanhedrim with the same submission as if one had
believed the Speaker Infallible, and every Member an Angel. But if their Votes
were bound to be not only consonant to Law, but agreeable to the truth of
things, then that Passage was hastily and passionately written, and not well
considered; and will be an admonishment to them that they take such care for
the future as to write more cautiously, and speak and vote like men, that had a
little respect to their Places.

Was ever any thing so extravagant as their Vote concerning David's Revenues
and his borrowing of Money upon them? Might not a Loyal Jew have lent the King
a Talent or two without their leave, and not incur the danger of being reputed
an Enemy to the meeting and sitting of Sanhedrims? Suppose the Egyptians or the
Philistines should have made an Invasion into the Land of Israel or Judah, or
the Jebusites, or Dissenting Jews have risen, and David have wanted Money to
have suppressed the One, or have driven out the Other, must the Loyal Jews have
hazarded His or their own Ruin, rather than supply him by a Loan in the
Intervalls of the Sanhedrim, had not they a Property in what was their own, and
might not they use it as they saw Cause, without breach of Privilege of
Sanhedrims?

They Voted too, That the Prosecution of the Dissenting Jews upon the Penal
Laws, Was at that time grievous to the Subject, a weakening of the Jewish
Interest, an Encouragement to Baalism, and dangerous to the Peace of the
Kingdom: And this Vote is as incomprehensible as any of the rest. Why was it
made? To what Subject is it grievous? To the Dissenters? why then let them
leave their Dissenting to the Ark and all will be well. What Jewish Interest
does it weaken? Does it weaken the Jewish Interest that is settled by Law? Then
why did they not say so? But how it encouraged Baalism, or endangered the Peace
of the Nation, was yet harder to be understood? But suppose it did; What then?
They might repeal the Bills they had on Foot, that would have repealed them, if
they might but have passed; but they were to be Adjourned, and had not time to
finish them: And did they think to have laid them asleep by their single Vote,
without the Consent of the Elders, or of the King? They should have done well
then to have told the Nation that they had the Legislative Power in their own
hands, and that it was contrary to Law for any Man to act against a Vote of the
Sanhedrim, though in obedience to the Laws of the Land.

Now if they had carried these few points in this Session.

First, Not only to deny the King any Supply, but to make it Criminal for any
Man to lend him Money upon his Revenues, they might then in another Session
have gone further, and have made it punishable for any Man to have paid him his
just, settled, legal Dues; and that would have made them able to have forced the
King or his Successors to whatever they had pleased.

Secondly, They might have proceeded to imprison David's Subjects in an illegal
and Arbitrary way, for Matters that had no Relation to Privileges of
Sanhedrim, they might afterward have extended this to as many persons and
things as they had pleased; and so no man would have dared to have stood by
David against a Sanhedrim, though they had attempted to depose him. Nor would
David in a short time have been able to have protected his Subjects against any
Injury that they, or any of them had been pleased to have done them; which
would infallibly have subverted the Monarchy, and have introduced a
Commonwealth.

Thirdly, If they had got that great Branch of the Legislative Power into their
Hands, of suspending the Execution of Laws by their Votes, they might have
driven it as far as they pleased, and so have outed the King and the Elders as
a former Sanhedrim did by the same means.

These and a thousand other Circumstances concurring to make all unbiassed and
understanding People suspect, nay, believe, that there was a Plot of the
Dissenting Jews upon the Government and Religion, as by Law established: the
Loyallists began to rowze up, and by their vigorous Zeal and Vigilance to
support the Throne and State, defeated the Designs of the Faction, whose
Weakness and Emptiness they exposed, and made appear their own Strength and
Numbers, to exceed beyond all Comparison those of the Seditionaries, who now
having lost all Hopes of retrieving their Cause, began to shift for themselves,
lest a longer Stay might have exposed them to the just Fury and Resentment of
the Law.

Amongst all those Sculkers and Fugitives, none had more reason to look out be
time for a safe Retreat from a just revenge than the wicked Achitophel: He had
been the hellish Contriver of all those Devilish Machinations against the
Peace, Welfare, and Tranquillity of the State: But how heinous soever the Sins
of the People were, Heaven out of its abundant goodness, thought not fit to
punish them so severely, and to suffer them to be the second time plunged into
the dreadful Calamities of a Civil War, as they had like to have been by that
Impostor of a Patriot.

Thus all Prospect of Success, in his Designs being vanished, the People
irritated and enraged against him for the Desolations they had like to have
fallen under by his means, and justice gaping after Revenge for so many direful
Effects of his Diabolical Contrivances, he resolved for Tire, where several of
his Tools were gone before out of the same Motive of Self-Security, and to
prepare for his Reception.

Yet first he was to take his Leave of haughty Jezabel. Being come to her for
that purpose, he let her know, both by his Looks and Words the Torment and
Anguish he lay under, for having been so disappointed in his Designs and
Endeavors to pull down Monarchy, and set up his and her Creatures in its Stead.
He told her, he had risqued not only Life, Body and Soul for that purpose; but
that he had moreover inveigled his Friends into the same Perils and Dangers,
and had hazarded the utter ruin of the Jewish Nation for her Interests. She
let him know how sensible she was of his good intention, that she was well
acquainted that he had used all the tricks and Stratagems of Policy, for the
promoting her end, and that since he had done all that lay in the Power and Art
of Man, they had only to complain of their Destiny for the disappointment, and
that he should find in her all the acknowledgment his good endeavors deserved.
That she approved of his design of taking Refuge at Tire, where she knew he
would be most welcome to a little Sister she had there, who had been always his
Darling, and she always mindful of his good Offices for her Promotion. That
Tire was the only place of safe retreat for him, since her other Sister at
Hebron was become an Apostate to their Cause and Blood, being by the Charms of
David's Reign deluded into a fondness and good Opinion of Kingly Government.
And as for her other little Sisters they were not in a Capacity to shelter him
from the just resentment of an incensed Prince, that she her self would only
stay till she had settled her Affairs, and then would follow him to his
Sanctuary, where he should receive from her such returns as corresponded more
with his Endeavors, than the Issue of his Designs. Thus after many other such
like kind and tender Expressions and Assurances, he took his leave and departed
for Tire.

But at his Arrival there, he found himself again disappointed in his
Expectations, for the little Sister instead of receiving him with those
Caresses and Blandishments, she usually welcomed People with of his Temper and
Kidney, gave him but a cold and poor entertainment. She still remembered the
Persecutions and Calamities she had suffered by the means of his Counsels, she
still remembered his Speech in the Sanhedrim, pressing her ruin, and which
indeed brought her to the Brink of Destruction, so that it was unreasonable to
expect she could look favorably upon a Man whom she had so many Reasons to
hate and detest, and who was so far from any true affection to any one, or any
Society soever, that he has always proved the very best of humane kind, only
for the carrying on his own designs and Interests. Thus she made him sensible
that she still bore him a grudge, which went so to his heart, with the
displeasure to find all his Devilish Wiles and Practices displayed and exposed
to the eyes of all People, to find he was become the abomination of all the
sound and honest part of mankind, Achitophel laying all these things to heart,
I say, put an end to his loathed Life in such wise as the World well knows.

FINIS.

