From our Women's Meeting held at York, the 15, and 16th. days of the Fourth
Month, 1692.
To every particular Woman's Monthly Meeting within this County.
DEAR Friends, and tender Sisters? We dearly Salute you in the Love of God, and
his precious truth, wherein he has loved us, and united us unto himself, and
one unto another. And has concerned us, according to our measure for his
honor, and the prosperity of his truth, in and amongst us, liveing praises to
him for ever. We being met together in his fear to wait upon him for Wisdom
and Counsel to order us, in all our undertakeings, relating to Church
affairs: Truth's comely order; and the righteous Government thereof, such has
been the aboundings of the love of God amongst us, through the operation of his
blessed spirit, that a double obligation is laid upon us to love him, and to
serve and obey him while we have a day, and a time, on this side the grave.

And many heavenly testimonys has been born amongst us for our encouragment in
the demonstration of the Lords power so that we are well satisfied, that God
almighty accepts our service and delights in the care, and exercise, wherein we
have been concerned: And diver^ comfortable testimonys, has been brought in
writing (and read amongst us) from several of our Women Monthly Meetings of
the care and concern of Friends, for truths honor and the prosperity thereof
amongst them; And we find it our duty to encourage you, our dear Sisters in
every of your respective places and we servently desire your persevering in
your diligence and care in keeping your Monthly Meetings in the love and power
of the Lord, waiting upon him, for counsel and wisdom to be enabled by him, in
all your undertakeings to act for his glory, having nothing in in your eye but
his honor and the prosperity of the truth, and the preservation of his people
therein: And let none who have put their hands to the plow, look back nor who
have bowed their necks to the yoke of Christ and their shoulders to the burden,
wax weary. And though you meet with diverse exercises, yet be not discouraged.
but be careful, to discharge your duty to god, and clear your consciences one
unto another in the love of God, and in the spirit of meekness, and in due time
you will reap your reward. And therefore be fervent and zealous for the truth,
for there is as great need now as ever: For although the Lord has given us a
day of liberty and ease, as to the outward, yet we have and unwearyed enemy,
and cuning adversary to Sions prosperity which envyeth our hapyness and is not
willing to miss any oppertunity, but uses all his endeavors inwardly to
captivate the soul and to hinder the groath and dominion of that precious life,
that has right to rule: and this he attempts to do, by drawing out the minds
of such as (in this day of liberty) are not Watchful in the light of the Lord,
into vain customs and the foolish fashions of the world, too much intermixting
with the spirit of it, foolishly to be led away into the defiments thereof. And
has prevailed upon others, to be makers breaches, and sowers o^ strife and
discord, and to become accusers of the brethren, and at length to be led away
into a separation from friends, and the unity of truth once by them received,
and beseived in. The Lord Rebuke that spirit is our earnest desire, and if it
be his will opon the eye of the minds of such, that they may see the effects
of their doings. How the truth by them is reproached, the hearts of the
faithful sadned: And God almighty keep us, near unto himself, and one unto
another, greatly valueing, those great mercys and privileges we have afforded
us, in the peaceable Enjoying our meetings in the worship and service of our
God, according to the manifestation of his blessed spirit in us: And that we
labor to make a right use, of every of these opportunitys, put into our hands,
Not knowing how soon we may meet with exercises again, nor after what manner
they may come, yea, a Winnowing Season, a day that shall burn as an Oven,
Wherein the proud and those that work wickedness will be as Stuble. But the
wheat will the Lord gather into his garner, when the Chafe shall be burnt with
unquenchable fire. And therefore Dear Friends every where be warned, to keep
low in your Minds For woe will be to the Crown of pride; Which often goes
before destruction and an haughty spirit before a fall. And Dear Friends you
whom the Lord has gathered out of Babilons, Confusion and has preserved from
partakeing with her, of her vain delights and pleasures, and therefore not to
partake of her plagues: keep to your ancient Rock and strong tower, to which
the Righteous in all ages Fled and were safe: For there is refuge and sure
hideing place, in all storms and tempests, And feel that arm and power that
gathered you to God in the beginning, that thereby you may be kept little and
low before him, of humble minds, of broken hearts and contrite spirits,
trembling at the word of the Lord. And be as watches on Syon walls that when
the danger does approach you may escape and Give warning to those that are
wandered and led astray, by the wills of the enemy from the fase habitation, and
that as the Lord may direct and lay it on you, you may advise, with
exbortation, and reproof, to hasten with speed to the inward Court and not to
be found in the outward where the Gentiles sees must tread: And if the
rebellious slight your Counsel and hate your advice, If such be taken away in
their Iniquity you will be clear, and the Lord will be clear, and their blood
will be upon their own heads. And you who are mothers of Children, and in duty
to God, bound to order your famliyes aright as become the truth, in the place
God alimghty has set you: See that in your words and actions and in your
apparel, and all others things under your concern, you be good examples to
your Children and Servants, and Do not Indulge or Connive at any thing in them
that may offend the Lord or grei^e his good spirit, Do not allow or suffer them
to wear any thing, that may render them justly deserving those Calamitys, which
in Judgment from God, may justly fall upon this generation of evil doors, for
the pride and haughteness of the people thereof, use your endeavors, to hinder
their Imitating the proud fantastical fashions of this world, as high dressed
heads with Ruffles and double Gause, and all other* things in attire that is
superfluous, or any way dishonorable to truth as Stripped Gounes, of diverse
Colors wrapped into a narrow Compass hanging behind them: All which we Judge to
be, unbecomeing truth, Nor suitable to our holy profession nor the plainness of
the Truth we have received and believed in. For truth is lowly and plain, and
made those a plain people in the beginning who were subject to it, and is not
changeable in it self, Nor admites of any Change in us, And therefore we can do
no less, but advise you to the plainness of it, Considering the good effects it
has wrought in, and through those who are guided by it: Oh what true fear,
what holy zeal, what plain dealing and great care was there in that day, to
keep truth clear, on every hand, amongst all who loved it, their Apparel
plain, their Countinances solid, and grave, their words weighty few and savory,
such as Ministered grace to the hearers: And there is a word further, in our
hearts to you young Women, keep in the line of life, and Language of truth,
saying one unto another, Arise Virgins Daughters of Sion and shake your selves
from the dust of the earth and put on beautyfull Garments, even the Robes of
Righteousness the Saints Clothing, and humble your selves to the Cross of
Christ, you who have decked your selves above the simplicity thereof and let
that Crucif^e you, to the World, and the world to you daily: and be you willing
to walk in that narrow path of self denial; the narrow way that lead, to life,
and the Lord will adorn you with a meek, and a quiet spirit, which is with him
of great price, and will inwardly make you beautyfull, as the Kings Daughters;
for it is the very labor and travel of our souls that Sion may become the
Beauty of all nations, and the praise of the whole earth. And that the
wanderes, and the scattered a broad through the letting in of a careless and
forgetful mind of the mercys of the Lord unto them, in the day of his first
love: may be again gathered unto him and into the footsteps of the flocks of
his Companions, to enter in at the right door into the fould of rest and
safety, and into the perfect peace which God gives and none can take away. And
that you who loves the truth, and are springing up as plants therein, may
gradualy grow from strength to strength and from one degree of grace unto
another, until you become as Nurssing Mothers in Israel, in your day and age
and (as Deborah) concerned in your measure, of life, and the station God
almighty has placed you, under the Government of Gods power and subservant
thereunto to Rule for him, to the praise of him who loved and accounted us
worthy.

And that (as Dorcas) you may consider the poor and make provision for the
Widows and fatherless, and as other faithful women in generations gone, which
might be mentioned, and many more of this generation removed from us out of the
body, worthy to be remembered of us, and the Memorial of them lives upon our
spirits to our refreshment in the Lord, and to the praise of his worthy name
over all: Much might be said, but we Recommend you, with our own souls to the
word of truth in every of our own bosoms, which leads into all truth, and if
diligently harkened unto will perfectly teach and direct us all in the way of
righteousness. Wherein we shall be well pleasing to God, and his delight will
be to do us good daily: renewing his mercys unto us as the morning, in the
continuance of his ancient love, in the fresh sense whereof we are concerned
both young and old according to our measures to be true and faithful in the
work (through Gods help) whereunto we are called, as Co-workers and
fellow laborers in the service of truth, meet helps one unto another in the
Lord, and through his power whereunto shall be the praise, as worthy for ever:
And let it be remembered by us all: that the woe was, and is to those that does
the Work of the Lord negligently, Therefore dear Friends, set us be careful in
our age and day, according to the dispensation of the grace of God committed to
us, to serve the Lord in faithfullness with one consent, secking his honor
alone unto whom it does belong, from henceforth and for ever.

And it is desired that this our Testimony, and advice with other Testimonys
given forth by us heretofore after once peruseing and reading over, may not be
cast by, and lost, but that one of every sort of our papers may be kept in
every particular meeting in the County, and as Occasion and oppertunity may
require they may be read and the advice and Counsel therein contained, may be
observed and followed that our Labor and Travel in the truth may be answered,
and that Friends in general may reap the benefit thereof: And that our next
yearly Meeting, may be attended: with some faithful Women from each monthly
Meeting to bring in their Testimonys, concerning their care of the good and
comely. Order of truth that we may be comforted together, as at this time we
have been by the aboundings of the love of God unto us, worthy to be honored
by us, the days we have to live, unto whom honor does belong now, and for
evermore.

Subscribed in the Name and on behalf of the Meeting. Judith Boulbie. Katheren
Winn. Elizabeth Beckwith. Margaret Bracking. Sarah English. Jsabell Morris.
Elizabeth Moore. Frances Tailor, Mary White. Katherin Ratlife. Dorathy Wells.
Anne Allison. Debora Winn. Grace Hemsley.



