A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions of Oyer and
Terminer, Holden for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and Jail-delivery
of Newgate; WHICH BEGAN AT THE Sessions House IN THE Old-Bayly, On Wednesday,
April 26. and Ended on Friday, April 28, 1682. Where were many Remarkable
Proceedings, but more especially the TRIAL of James Boucher, and Walter Archer,
For Killing the Bailiff at Westminster. As Also, In Relation to the Person
Accused for Getting his Daughter With Child: TOGETHER, With the Names of those
that received Sentence of Death, the Number of those Burned in the Hand,
Transported, and VVhip'd, AT the Sessions which began at the Sessions House its
the Old-Bayly, on the 26th of April, and was there continued till the 28th of
the same Instant: the Proceedings were as follows.

Edward Odery was Indicted and Tried, for that he on the 27 th of December
last, Robbed the House of Ambrose Saunders, and took thence wearing Apparel,
Sheets, Pewter, Brass, and other things, to a great value; upon the Trial,
although he pleaded Not Guilty, yet the Witnesses Swore that several of the
Goods were found in the Prisoners House, and that he employed a Woman to sell
the same; whereupon the Jury (after receiving their charge) brought him in
Guilty.

John Belther, William Best, and one Butler, were Indicted for picking the
Pocket of Margaret King, on the 27 th of February, of Nine Pounds, Fifteen
Shillings; the Two former, upon their being Apprehended, confessing the same,
although one of them was not judged to be above 10 Years old, but there being
no Evidence against the Third, only the confession of the accessaries, he was
acquitted.

Richard Osborn was Indicted for Stealing a Tankard from one Griffith Jones in
Soaper-Lane, but he not being able to charge him any otherwise than that he
came and offered to help him to it again for a sum of Money he was acquitted.

Mary Sharp and Mary Motley were Indicted and Tried for a Burglary and Felony,
in breaking the House of one Mr. Sadler, on St. Thomas's Eve last, and taking
thence Two Farrendine Gowns, Six Silk Petticoats, several Shifts, Table-Cloath,
Napkins, a Hundred Yards of Ribbonds, and other things, to the value of Fifty
Pounds, most of which they Pawned at one Smiths a Broker; but their Plea was
their Husbands stole them, and compelled them to sell 'um; the Husband of the
latter having been Executed last Surrey-Assizes, upon which the Jury so far
commiserated them as not to find them Guilty.

William Griffith and William Hall were Indicted for stealing a Hundred and
Four Gold Rings from Mr. William Chapman Goldsmith in Barkin-Parish, on the 5
th of February, the manner thus; A Person coming into the Shop to buy a Ring,
whilst the Apprentice opened the Shutter, the Box was drawn out by reaching
over out of the Street, and the former of the Prisoners some time after going
to sell one of the Rings, was apprehended, warning being given as is usual upon
the like occasion, and upon further search, another Ring was found about him,
he having put it into his Knife-sheath, but he alleged he found them, till
coming before Sir William Turner, he confessed they were given him, and
declared several of his Accomplices; but there being no other Evidence than his
against Hall, he was acquitted, but Griffith found Guilty of the Felony.

Mary Jones and Margaeret Shuter, having an Indictment preferred against them
for Stealing a piece of Crape from one Mr. Smith, a Coat-seller in Great St.
Bartholomews, under pretense of buying several Yards; but being pursued, the
former was taken with it about her, but the latter at that time made her
escape, but was soon after taken; upon their Trial, they pleaded Not Guilty,
alleging they found it, and that they were never in the Shop; but the proof
being plain that it was taken upon them, they were found Guilty of the Felony.

Mary Harris was Indicted for Stealing Two Silver Tankards, valued at Twelve
Pounds, on the 13 th of this Instant, from John Southey in Thames Street, but
there being no positive proof that she had them, the Jury would not find her
Guilty upon Circumstantial Evidence.

Elizabeth Cooper being Arraigned upon an Indictment for stealing Ribbonds and
Silks, she confessed the Felony.

Uriah Helder had an Indictment preferred against him by one Mr. Benson of St.
Dunstans-in-the-East, for Stealing about Fifty Pounds worth of Brass-Wyre, the
Evidence proving the sale of some parcels of Wyre by the Prisoner, but not
being able to swear it was any part of that which was lost, he was acquitted.

Joseph Rudwell took his Trial upon an Indictment for stealing about Five
Hundred weight of Lead and Iron, the which he sold to a Broker-Woman near
Holbourn-Bridge, and she disposing of them to Stilliard-makers, they were
owned; to his Indictment, he pleaded Not Guilty, and endeavored to deny that
he ever had or sold any such Weights, but that being plainly proved, he laid
it upon a Porter, that, as he said, brought them thither, but the Porter not
being to be found, he was found Guilty.

George Pain a Pot-stealer was Tried for stealing near a Hundred of all sorts,
viz. Pewter-Pots, but for want of the Brokers Evidence that had purchased his
stolen Ware, he was acquitted.

James Smithe was Indicted for a Felony committed in St. Martins in the
Fields, taking about Three pounds worth of Silks and Stuffs, but there not
being sufficient Evidence against him, he was acquitted.

Two Women for Stealing Tape, Lace and Stuffs, were Indicted, and several of
the said Goods being found about one of them, she impeached the other, but
there being no proof against her otherwise, she was acquitted, and she on whom
the Goods were taken, found Guilty.

George Wallis was Indicted for Robbing his Lodging, on the 28 th of March, and
conveying thence Sheets, Blankets, Shifts, Pillow-beers, and other things, to a
considerable value; which he disposed of to several Brokers in Long-Lane, and
other places, which being there found, and he upon the same Apprehended, he
pleaded he borrowed them, but that Shift availed him not, for the Jury brought
him in Guilty.

A Fellow that was Chamberlain to an Inn in St. Giles's in the Fields, entering
a Gentleman's Lodging on the 13 th of March, took thence a suit of Clothes, a
Sword, and other Riding Furniture, and conveyed them to a Carriers, directing
them to be sent after him to Worcester; but upon search for the Goods, they
were seized in the Inn before they were packed up to be sent to him, so that by
that means having notice where he was, the owner sent and had him Apprehended;
who being committed to Prison, and an Indictment preferred against him, he
confessed the taking of them, but alleged that he only designed to ride a
Journey with them, and so to restore them; but the excuse being looked upon as
frivilous, he was found Guilty.

Edward VVillmore was indicted for the Murderer of Christopher Todd, the
manner, as it appearing upon Evidence, thus; the deceased drinking in the
Celler under the Exchange in the Strand, on the 17 th of December. last, the
Prisoner came in, whereupon a quarrel happened about drinking, which in the end
caused a scuffle, so that the deceased falling, his left Thigh being infirm by
reason of the perishing and splintering the Bone for many Years before, it
either broke, or the splinters of the Bones cut the Arteries so, that by reason
of the great effusion of Blood, he dyed within 7 Weeks afterward, but no
former malice being proved, and it being plain that the deceased gave the first
abuse, the Prisoner was acquitted.

Hester Bird was Indicted for Robbing Alderman Sturt of a Gold-watch,
Silver-Lace, and several parcels of Money, which she did by the convenience of
a false Key, he being a Lodger in her House; but she pleaded he gave her what
she had, and made many slight pretenses that he offered to force her, etc. but
the Evidence being played against her, she was found Guilty.

Walter Archer, James Boucher, and Elizabeth Fitz-Patrick were Indicted for
the Murder of William Jones a Bailiffs follower, the manner thus; several
Officers having Arrested the Mother of Walter Archer, carried her to an
adjacent House in Westminster, where under pretense of sending for Bail, two
persons came up, and after them Four more with drawn Swords, and forcing into
the Room, run the deceased through, and afterward stabbed him in several
places, so that within half an hour after he dyed, the rest of the Bailiffs
hardly escaping; the Prisoners pleaded they were not the parties that killed
him; but the proof being plain, as likewise against Elizabeth Fitz-Patrick,
that she was aiding and assisting, they were all three found Guilty of wilful
Murder.

John Dicher, Ann Dicher, and Elizabeth Stocker, were Indicted for Robbing a
House at Deptford, and bringing the Goods into Middlesex; as likewise another
Indictment for Robbing the House of Captain Fosby; of which Fellonies the
former was found Guilty, but the latter was acquitted.

John Bant, a Frenchman, and late Cook to His Grace the Duke of Buckingham,
was Indicted for the Murder of Philip Gilbert, Cook to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Feversham, the circumstances as they appeared upon Evidence, being
these, The Prisoner going to a Tavern at Charing Cross, and sending a Porter
for the deceased, in the name of Two French Gentlemen, but he no sooner came,
but they sell to quarrel, and the Prisoner drawing upon the deceased, they
fought, where after a pass or two, the prisoner swearing he should kill him,
was as good as his Word, for running him into the body, he instantly dyed; the
prisoner pretended the deceased owed him money, and that was the occasion of
the quarrel, but not being able to prove it, he was found guilty of wilful
murder.

Gilbert Stock-dale, the person who was imprisoned for getting his Daughter
Vrsula Stockdale, a Girl about 12 Years of Age, with-child, was called to the
Bar, where he appeared to be 70 Years of age, and there being no Indictment
preferred against him, he was enlarged.

At this Remarkable Sessions, Eight Persons received Sentence of Death, 5 Men
and 3 Women, Viz. John Bants, James Boucher, Walter Archer, and Elizabeth
Fitz-Patrick, for Murder, John Belcher, William West, Ann Stubbs alias
Ditcher, and Ann Stacy, for Felony and Robbery.

Hester Bird, and Jane Freeman, were reprieved before judgment, and ordered to
be Transported. William Griffith, John Dicher, John Smith, Joseph Rudwell,
Katherine Smith, Elizabeth Cooper, Mary Shorter, Mary Jones, Ione Hull, were
burnt in the Hand; 3 ordered to be Whipped, and so ended this remarkable Sessions.

Printed for T. Benskin, 1682.


