A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Trial, Conviction, and Condemnation OF THE
SCOTCH REBELS, OFFICERS in the L. Dunbarton's Regiment; At Bury St. Edmunds in
SVFFOLK, (On Wednesday, July 31st, 1689.) For High Treason. Licensed, according
to Order, 1689.
THERE having been in March last, a Notorious Defection amongst the Scotch
Regiment, commanded by the Lord Dumbarton, at Ipswich in the County of Suffolk;
whence, in a Hostile and Rebellious Manner, they marched from place to place,
until at Spalding in Lincolnshire, his Majesty's Forces encompassing them, they
threw down their Arms, and submitted to Mercy; were made Prisoners of War, and
afterward brought up to London, where about Forty of the most notorious
Criminals were committed to Newgate and the Gatehouse.

For Trial of whom, the Judges at their last Assizes at Bury St. Edmonds in
Suffolk, made an Ajournment, since which, Orders being given for Trial of Eight
of them at Bury the Thirtieth of July.

Viz.
Captain -- Sutherland, Cp. John Auchmonty, Cp. Wiliiam Deanes, Cp. John
Levingston, Alexander Gawne, Adj. Patrick Cunningham, James Inuas, and Robert
Johnson.
But it being proved that Captain Sutherland was so indisposed as that he could
not be removed without Hazard of his Life, the other Seven only were sent down
under a Guard and secured in Bury Goal.

And Indicted before Sr. William Dolbin, an^ Mr. Baron Turton,

For High Treason, in Rebelling and Levying War against their Majesty's, their
Crow and Dignity, etc.

Which being found by the Grand Jury against all of them, they were Arraigned,
the first Four in one Indictment, and the Three latter in another; to which
they severall^ pleaded not Guilty; and prayed a Copy o(...) the Jury returned,
and Council, as to matter of Law; both which was granted.

Next Day, viz. July the Thirty first, the Court being sat, and a mighty
Confluence^ People from all parts of the Country came (...) to hear the Trial,
the Jury were called ove^ being 168 Persons, of diverse Ranks and Qualities, but
not one who had less than For(...) Pounds a Year in Land.

The King's Solicitor excepted against To(...) and no more; but the Prisoners
against many.

^n fine, the Jury being agreed on and (...)orn, the Trial was adjourned to the
next day, August 1 st.

And then Capt. John Auchmonty was brought ^on his Trial. The King's Witnesses
were (...). Rob^^t Irvin Agent to the said Regiment, Lieutenant Patric Br^kley,
and Lieutenant To(...)t Bruce, and Sixteen of the Country, (...)m Ipswich,
from Stow-Market, Turnham, (...)ilden-Hall, etc. Who gave a mighty full
(...)idence; against the Three first, as to the Rebellion and Levying of War at
Ipswitch, and proceedings to Spalding, which the Country also proved from place
to place, and their Carriage and Actions, their Pressing their Men, Horses,
Carts, etc.

The Captain alleged the Soldiers mutinied, and made him and other Officers
Prisoners, and what he did was a force upon (...)m, and many other
Insignificant Excuses, that their Majesty's were not Crowned, to which it was
Answered they were King and (...)even by Act of Parliament, and that Levying War
against them, was Rebellion, HighTreason, etc.

The Concerting the Rebellion, and the continued and repeated Acts of Rebellion
and (...)ving War being fully proved, the Jury found him Guilty of High Treason.

Upon which the other Three, viz. Captain Deanes, Captain Levingston, and
Adju(...) Gawne, Petitioned the Court, That they might be permitted to
withdraw their Plea, they would plead Guilty, and throw themselves at their
Majesty's Mercy, which the Court Granted.

Which also did Cunningham, Inuas, and Johnson, who were in the other
Indictment, and the Court also Granted it.

Then being Called to know what they had to say, Why Judgment of Death should
not pass upon them to Die according to the Law, said, They all threw themselves
at their Majesty's Royal Feet for Mercy, and humbly besought the Judges to
Intercede with their Majesty's for them, and that they would spend the
Remainder of their Lives in his Majesty's faithful Service, wherever he should
please to Command them. That it was great Mortification to them to be so
unfortunate as to fall under these Crimes, and the disfavour of the King, whom
some of them had long served in Holland, etc.

Mr. Gawne (being a Romanist) said, He would serve his Majesty wherever he
should Command him, and as far in any thing as he was Capable, and wherein he
could not do as others, to assure his Fidelity, would give Security.

They indeed did all of them behave themselves with great Modesty and Prudence
as Gentlemen and Soldiers, and seemed really inclined to give all
Demonstrations that Men could of their future Intentions of Loyalty, etc.

In Conclusion, Sentence of Death was passed on them all as in Cases of
High Treason.

LONDON, Printed for J. Pardo in St. James 's-street, 1689.


