A full and true ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH OF George Lord Jeffries, LATE Lord
High-Chancellor of England, Who Dyed in the Tower of London, April 18, 1689.
LICENSED

April 18. James Fraser.



MAny and great have been the Expectations of the People about the Event of the
Commitment of the late Lord Chancellor to the Tower, and their Wishes have
been as various, as they have been affected to him: Many (who had entertained a
just Indignation against him for his late ill Conduct of Affairs) longed for
his being brought to his Trial, that he might receive that Justice that his
Irregularities that he was committed for were thought to have deserved. But
Divine Providence has disappointed them herein, by calling him to a higher Bar,
where he must give a just Account of all his Actions, and receive that just
Reward that is due to him for the same, unless he has prevented it by his
Repentance, and God's Infinite Mercy. As to the Manner of his Death, it was as
follows:

He has been very much tormented with his old Distemper, the Stone and
Rheumatism, almost ever since he has been in the Tower; and there has not been
any help wanting, that Skill or Art could invent, for the continuation of his
Life; but it has been all as ineffectual and vain, as the Supplications of the
Distressed were sometimes to him, in the time of his Power: For about this
Month last past he has been in a very languishing condition, still wasting away
more and more, in which time he has hardly been in a capacity to take any thing
to sustain Nature, unless a little Sack to revive it when it has been almost
spent; about three Weeks since, he had a mind to a bit of Salmon, which he had,
but could not digest it, nor scarce any thing else, unless a poach'd Egg: So he
continued decaying till the Eighteenth of this Instant April 1689, when about
half an hour after Three a Clock in the Morning he dyed, in the forty first
Year of his Age; after having lived to see many ambitious Designs disappointed,
and their Most Gracious Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MART Seated on the
Throne. Whom God long preserve.

LONDON: Printed for R. Gifford. 1689.


