A Full and True NARRATIVE OF ONE Elizabeth Middleton. A Roman Catholic,
Living in Gardeners-Lane, Westminster.

Who Endeavoring to Turn the Late Hellish- PLOT on the Non-Conformists;
thereby to Vindicate her own Sect, the Papists: Was before several Witnesses
heard Impudently to Wish, That she might never see the Light: and that some
Remarkable Judgment might light on her, if there were any such thing as a PLOT
designed, or carried on by the Roman Catholics, tending to the Destruction of
the KING, or the Subversion of our Religion or Government.

Which miserable Imprecation, by (...) Hand of Providence, fell on her within
Two Days afterward, she being not only according to her own Wish, totally
Deprived of her Sight, but Visited also with a dangerous Fit of Sickness. In
which sad Condition she yet remains to the terror of all-equivocating Papists,
who dare be to impious as to make Imprecation contrary to their Knowledge and
Conscience.

Printed for F. T. in the Year, 1679.

A Full and True Narrative of one Elizabeth Middleton, a Roman-Catholique, etc.
THe Invincible Impudence of the Roman Catholics, is not a little remarkable,
in that they still continue to endeavor to possess us, that there is no such
thing as a Popish Plot; no, not although there is hardly any of our senses but
have informed us on the contrary; for, alas! have we not seen our Famous City
flaming about our Ears? have we not felt their perfidious Swords plunged in our
Protestant- Bosoms? have we not heard them fairly Tried, and found Guilty of
the same Fact? have not our Forefathers tasted of, and we been threatened with
their Poisonous Cups? and had not the Nostrils of the whole Land like to have
been choked with the fatal stench of their Powder Plot? But if after all this
we will not credit our senses, to what (...) were they given us:? what
assurance have we that we Eat, Drink, Walk, or Sleep? or who shall be able to
make Affidavit that he lives? for certainly there cannot be a firmer
demonstration of any of these, Than that the Roman Catholics are our
inveterate enemies, and would cordially rejoice at our designed Ruin. Which
that we may undoubtedly believe, and stand o^ our honest Guard, Indulgent
Heaven has been very industrious in affording us frequent evidences of their
hate and Treachery, the unparalled Murder of Sir Ed. B. Godfrey, had been of
it self sufficient to depaint their Guilt: But as if Providence had
condescended to take a particular cognizance of our foolhardy incredulity:
since then there has scarcely ever a Day passed over our heads which has not
given us farther assurances of there Hellish Designs. And that we may be left
without all hopes of excuse, the Almighty has been pleased farther to Evidence
their perfidiousness, and our danger, by a Miracle wrought on one of their
Religion, which for its Truth and Rarity, ought never to be forgotten, but to
be preserved and hoarded up like the Egyptian-Manna, as a Relick fit to be
delivered to Posterity, that our Successors, as well as our selves, may see the
Justice, as well as the Power of him that did it.

THe Person on whom it was effected, was a Woman well stricken in years, and
one who had imbibed so many of the Popish-Principles, that she was become a
most Stickling Zealot in the Romish-Religion, and so passionate that she could
not with any patience endure to hear any thing, either against it, or the
professors of it, without running unto many extravagant expressions against
those who opposed her; and this her infirmity was much more visible, because
she happened to inhabit in a Lane where many Papists did likewise dwell, whose
frequent Converse might in all probability increase her eagerness, and raise
her Spirit in the defense of those Principles, into which (though she were
subtly seduced) she so dearly loved. The name of the place of her abode, is
called Gardeners-Lane, near Westminster; the Houses whereof are of an ancient
low sort of timber-Building, and consequently the more dangerous if any Fire
should either by design or accident happen therein. This it seems the Papists
were very well acquainted withal, who according to the information of the
Inhabitants thereabouts, had some time since condemned it to their merciless
flames, and had so far proceeded to execution, that one of their
Firehousing-Agents had got into a great Bake-House at the upper end of it, with
intention by setting the Bavens on fire, to consume the whole Lane, but by Gods
mercy he was strangely prevented, by falling (in the dark) against a
Glass-window, and the Panes bursting out on the other side, alarmed a
Maidservant of the house, who taking him only for a Theif, endeavored to
apprehend him, by crying out, Stop Theif. But though at that time he escaped,
he has since by the confession of another whom he had employed about a like
concern, been apprehended, and has been so ingenious as to confess the Fact.

This narrow deliverance could not but possess the ^autious Inhabitants to be
more careful for the time to come; and in order thereunto, to extirpate, o^
Root out (as possible they may) as many of the aforesaid Papists as they could:
at which this Woman Elizabeth Middleton, seemed more then ordinarily concerned,
nor would be persuaded to desert the City, though his Majesty's Royal
Proclaimation had been exhibited to that purpose. But she obstinate in her own
ways, seemed to take no Notice thereof; but stayed at her usual habitation,
openly proclaiming her opinion, and boldly commending those Principles, and
vindicating the practicers thereof, insomuch that she was at length taken
notice of by Authority, which according to the usual method followed in those
cases, proceeded to render her a Papist Convict, in order to the farther
Execution of the Law, long since provided for such Recusants.

But nothing could stop the fierce current of this Woman's incorrigableness; she
continued as Malepert and bold as ever: and once about a fortnight since, it
was her fortune to go into a Neighbors Victualling. House, known by the Sign
of the Sun and Phoenix, in the same Lane, and not above four Doors off her own
home: there she fell afresh to the aspersing of Non-conformists, and the
aserting the Loyalty and Innocence of those of the Romish Religion. It could
not be immagined but at such a juncture as this is, she should meet with some
that opposed her, whom she patiently resisting, was by the Nervous strength of
their reason, brought to the contrary of what she said, screwed up to such an
excess of extravagent passion, that at last in a very concerned posture, she
openly wished, That she might never see the Light, and that some Remarkable
Judgment might fall on her (for an Example) if there were any such thing as a
Plot Designed, or carried on by the Roman Catholics, tending to the
Destruction of the King, or the Subversion of our Religion or Government. There
is no question but when she spoke this hidious Imprecation, she imagined she
might digest it with as much ease, and less harm, then others of her persuasion
swallow Oaths, Tests and Sacraments, in attestation of their Loyalty, when they
intend nothing but Bloodshed and Sedition; But God will not always be Mocked,
and though his Vengeance comes but seldom, yet it comes sure, and he will be
Glorified either in afflicting us and making us thereby immediate and open
Examples of his displeasure: or else in preserving us and rendering us the
happy Subjects of his care and Providence. This truth is Remarkable by those
dispensations which the Almighty thought in his infinite wisdom, fit to lay on
this rash woman, who must necessarily know that either her asseverations were
not true, and so it was but just that her own Imprecations should fall on her,
or else that she was ignorant in the thing she so confidently affirmed, and so
ought not to have challenged God at so high a rate, to inflict his Judgments
upon her if it were not true.

Had she but thought of this, she might in all humane probability have escaped
those dreadful judgments which seiz^d her but Two days afterward, for then
according to her wish, she was stricken stark Blind, insomuch that when many of
her neighbors went to visit her, she knew them by their Voices, but could not
in the least distinguish who they were by her eyes or sight, being by her own
acknowledgment stark blind; and being told of her rashness in making the
aforesaid asseveration, she was heard to answer to no other purpose than this;
Viz. That God was a just God, and would not be mocked. But Heaven thought not
Blindness alone a sufficient penalty for so great an Impiety, and therefore
added to it a dangerous fit of Sickness, with both of which, she remains
miserably afflicted to this day.

And now behold honest Reader, the sad effects of Popish presumption, and the
miserable condition of Popish Proselytes, who if they can by any clandestine or
daring Impiety, out-brave Mankind, think that God takes no notice of them; but
let such take warning by this unhappy Example, and knew that if for such Sins
they escape here, yet he will certainly light on them, and punish them
hereafter.

FINIS.
POSCRIPT.
If any one questions the Truth of this Narrative, let them Repair to the
Prementioned Sign of the Sun and Phoenix in Gardeners-Lane, near Westminster,
and the Man of the House who is a sufficiant Honest sober Protestant, will give
them Satisfaction.

FINIS.

