A RELATION OF A VOYAGE Made in the Years 1695, 1696, 1697. on the Coasts of
Africa, Streights of Magellan, Brasil, Cayenna, and the Antilles, by a Squadron
of French Men of War, under the Command of M. de Gennes.

By the Sieur Froger, Voluntier-Engineer on board the English Falcon.

Illustrated with diverse strange Figures, drawn to the Life.

LONDON, Printed for M. Gillyflower in Westminster Hall; W. Freeman, M. Wotton
in Fleet Street; J. Walthoe in the Temple; and R. Parker in Cornhill. School.

A IOURNAL of a late Voyage of Mr. de Gennes To the Straits of MAGELLAN By le
Sr. Froger


TO THE Right Honorable THE Lord Phelippeaux, Count of Maurepas, Secretary of
State, Superintendant-General of Maritime Affairs, etc.
My Lord,
THE glorious Post You are in possession of, and whereunto the judicious Choice
of the Greatest and Wisest of Kings, as well as a most ripened Capacity, has
advanced* You to, does so naturally appropriate this Relation unto Your Self,
that I could not forbear, how shapeless soever the same may be, to present it
to Your Honor: I had no other Design in the first Undertaking, than to compile
it for my own particular Instruction: But the Silence of all those who made the
Voyage with me, constrained me to expose it to public View. Your Lordship can
find nothing here, which the Extent of Your Knowledge has not already
anticipated; for what can such a Minister be ignorant of, who for the
Revolution of so many Years, and in such hazardous Times, has sustained the
Weight of Public Affairs in the most potent Monarchy of the World, and whose
Extraction is from a Family wherein Science and Illustrious Qualities are as
Hereditary as Nobleness of Birth, and Integrity of Life? Wherefore, My Lord, I
have been so far from thinking to offer any thing New to Your Honor upon this
Occasion, that I have had no no other Intention, than barely to make known the
ardent Desire I have to be in a Condition to merit Your Protection by a
continual Application of my self to my Duty, and an Inviolable Adherence to
Your Lordship's Will, who am with profoundest Respect,

My Lord, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, T. Froger.

THE PREFACE.
AS I have always had a passionate Desire to see Foreign Countries, I was no
sooner Master of my own Inclinations, but I made it my Business, in the
prosecution of my Design, to attain to whatever might contribute to the
Employment of an honest Man, and to distinguish my self from those Travelers,
who run over the World for the sole delight they have of seeing different
Objects, without ever putting themselves in a Condition to be useful to their
Country: Wherefore being thus inclined, and assisted by the Advice of my
Friends, I took to the Study of the Mathematics, and at length, by reading the
Relations of others, made my self familiarly acquainted with the History of the
different Nations of the World.

The Noise which Monsieur de Gennes his Expedition made in 1695, determined my
Resolutions of taking that Opportunity to go abroad, as believing I could not
do better than to lay hold of the Convenience of so brave a Voyage; and
therefore without any more ado, I abandoned the little Experience that an Age
of Nineteen Years could supply me with, to the Course of my Fortune, came
quickly to make use of the Lessons I had learnt (as well as the chief Officers
of the Mariners) under one of the greatest Masters of the Age; and began now to
come to the practick Part of what I knew before but in the Theory. The general
Idea I had formed with my self of the Voyage, and the frequent Conversations I
had with our Pilots, gave me the Advantage of taking notice of all the
Circumstances I thought necessary to Sailing; And I am not to omit, that the
long abode I have made in diverse Parts, giving me a real Taste of the Pleasure
there is in seeing Foreign Countries; I have with all imaginable Exactness
inquired into the Commerce of the Place, the particular Interests of each
Colony, the Strength, Situation, and Advantages of the Ports; the Manners,
Customs, and Religion of the People; and lastly, the Nature of those Fruits,
Plants, Birds, Fishes, and the Animals that seemed to have any thing
extraordinary in or peculiar to them, and these I have set out in the best
manner I could, by a great many Copper-Cuts, all of them respectively fixed in
their proper Places.

But I have more particularly applied my self to make Charts of the Entrances
of Harbors and Rivers, either of my self, as I have had Leisure for it, as may
be seen in those I have given of Gambia, Rio-Janeiro, and All-Saints-Bay, as by
reforming the Charts or Memoirs that have been taken of the Straight of
Magellan, of the disemboguings of the Isles of Antilles, and of the Government
of Cayenne, that has not yet appeared in the World, under the Name of
Aequinoctial France, in that Extent, and with those Limits I have set it forth
by.

I hope this Relation will meet with so much the more favorable Reception,
seeing I have retrencht it of those tedious Particulars wherewith others of
this kind are usually stuffed, and have made use of all the Exactness and
Simplicity that a Work requires that has no other than Truth for its End, and
wherein the Reader will have the pleasure either of seeing new Descriptions, or
his Judgment regulated in respect of those he has already seen elsewhere; and
lastly, an orderly View given of all the unfortunate Disappointments of so
noble an Undertaking, that had been made, during the War we were engaged in,
and of which you have the Subject at large in p. 80, 85, etc. and so onwards.

A RELATION OF A VOYAGE Made in the Years 1695, 1696, 1697. to the Coasts of
Africa, the Streights of Magellan, Brasil, Cayana, and the Antilles or Caribby
Islands.
WE set out from Rochel on the 3d. June 3. 1695.
of June, A. D. 1695. to navigate the Southern Sea, with six Vessels, viz. The
English Falcon, furnished with 46 Pieces of Cannon, and 260 Men, under the
command of Monsieur de Gennes Captain: The Sun of Africa, carrying 32 Pieces,
and 220 Men, comcommanded by M. du Pare, Captain of the Light Frigate: The
Seditious, a light Frigate of 26 Guns, and 140 Men, M. de la Roque Commander:
The Corvette-Felicity of 8 Pieces of Ordnance, and 40 Men: The Glutton-Pink of
10 Guns, and 40 Men: And the Fruitful-Pink, of 4 Guns, and 20 Men: These two
Pinks carried two Mortars and 600 Bombs, with all sorts of Provisions and
Ammunition necessary for a long Voyage.

We set sail about three a-clock in the Morning, with a fair North-East Wind,
passed the Pertuis or Straight of Antioch, and before Noon, entirely lost the
sight of Land.

On the 7th. Instant at Eleven of the Clock, we discovered at the distance of
three or four Leagues under the Wind, two Vessels, which the Felicity went to
view: They came from St. Domingo, and were steering their Course for Rochel.

On the 9th. we had sight of another Vessel, which the Seditious and the
Felicity gave chase to, during four Hours: The latter, which came very near
her, informed us, that she seemed to be a Sally-Man, and might carry about 30
Pieces of Cannon.

On the 10th. at Noon, we made 15 Leagues across Cape Finisterre.

On the 11th. at Break of day, we were separated from the Seditious, and the
Fruitful, as also from another Vessel, which followed us from Rochel.

On the 15th. at four a-Clock in the Afternoon, we espied a very large Ship,
which came up to view us within three Cannon-shot, and afterward tacked about
again; whereupon we gave her Chase, till the darkness of the Night caused us to
lose the sight of her.

On the 21th. at Sunrising, we discovered the Island of Madera, from whence we
judged our selves to be distant about 20 Leagues.

On the 22th. The Island of Madera.
at 11 a-clock at Night, we lost the Shallop with Decks, which M. de Gennes had
caused to be built, on purpose to throw out the Bombs: For as she was tacking
about, whilst the Sea ran very high, her Cable broke, and she was driven out of
her Course.

On the 26th. at three a-clock in the Morning, we passed the Tropic of Cancer;
at Break of day, we discovered the Land of Praya; and in the Afternoon
performed the Ceremonies of the Tropical Baptism or Ducking, which are commonly
used by the Mariners in those Places.

On the 1st. day of July, July 1. 1695.
at three a-clock in the Morning, the Corvette let off a Gun, to give us notice
that she was near Land; whereupon we sailed beyond that Vessel without
discerning her, by reason that she was very low built, and the Night was dark.

On the 3d. we discovered Cape Verd, Cape Verd.
or Green Head, and cast Anchor at 11 a-clock at Night, within two Leagues of
the Island of Gorea: The next Day we likewise rode at Anchor within a
Cannon-shot of the Place.

The Governor of that Island immediately sent to compliment M. de Gennes, The
Island of Gorea.
with a Present of an Ox, and two Dozen of Pullets. The Person who brought this
Present told us, That the Vessels of the East India Company passed by a little
while ago, and that an English Deserter had informed them, That almost the
whole Garrison of Gambia was fallen sick, and wanted Provisions; which piece of
News was so well confirmed to M. de Gennes, even by the Relation of the
Governor himself; that if the Seditious and the Fruitful had come up with us,
we should have set sail the very next day, in order to besiege the Fort, before
the English could have had any notice of our Arrival.

In the mean while, waiting till those Ships appeared, we diverted our selves,
some in Hunting, and others in Fishing; nay we met with sufficient variety of
Divertisements, not very expensive, without leaving the Villages. The Negroes
came continually on board with their Pirogues.
Vessels full of Fish, which they gave us in exchange for Knives, Sheets of
Paper, little pieces of Iron, and other Toys of the like nature: We also
pierced some Barrels of Wine, and setting aside the Heat of the Weather, which
was excessive, the Sports and Pastimes abated a great deal of the Impatience
that we had to go to Gambia.

On the fifth Instant, M. de Gennes, M. du Parc, and the Governor of Gorea,
went to give a Visit to the Alcaty or Governor of a Village called The Gap,
situate on the Seashore, near a small Marsh, being the only place where fresh
Water can be taken in; upon which account the Alcaty suffers none to do it,
till an Agreement be made beforehand, to give him a Bottle of Brandy for every
Shallop. He received these Gentlemen very courteously, and granted their
Requests upon good Terms.

The next Day M. de Gennes invited to Dinner the Governor of Gorea, the
aforesaid Alcaty of Gap, and another Alcaty of a neighboring Village, who was
the Brother of a Favorite of the King of Houmel, and otherwise in great esteem
for his Magnanimity, and for being one of the most robust and well-set Men of
the Country. The Alcaty of Rufisca was also present, by chance, with a Negro
Lady, the Widow of a certain Portuguese, who had one of the chief Places in the
Kingdom: This Lady had excellent Features, was endowed with a generous
Disposition, and of a very obliging Deportment; being of a middle-siz'd
Stature, and clothed after the Portuguese Fashion. M. du Gennes treated them
all magnificently, and made them some small Presents: He was also desirous to
divert them with a Volly of Cannon and Musket Shot: But Dinner was scarce
ended, when they earnestly importuned to be dismissed. The cause of their
sudden Departure being unknown to us, we were not a little surpised, in regard
that they had no reason to be tired with the Company; till the Governor of
Gorea told us, Superstition of the Negro's.
That apparently they had occasion to ease themselves, and that a Superstitious
Custom prevailed among 'em, never to do it at Sea.

On the 9th. Instant, our Shallop being fitted out to take in fresh Water, a
Storm of Wind arose, which threw her on the Coast: She suffered little Damage,
by reason that the Shock happened on the Sand: Nevertheless this Accident was
like to have occasioned a great Contest with the Negroes, who gave it out, That
one Moiety of the Vessels that run a-ground on their Coasts, ought to be
appropriated to their Use: And even the Governor of Gorea himself
acknowledged, that they had a Right to such a Claim: But forasmuch as this Law
was made only in reference to Merchant-Ships, we speedily set some of our Men
on Shore, to stand upon their Guard; and for farther Security, retained seven
or eight Negroes, who were come on board to trade with Fish: In the mean while,
our Carpenters wrought during the whole Night; and the next Day in the
Afternoon our Shallop returned laden with Water, and as sound as before.

On the 13th. at two a-clock, two Vessels appeared, whilst our Corvette was
sailing to the Village of Rusisca; whereupon we discharged a Cannon to cause
her to return, and to recall all the Mariners on board: We likewise made Signals
to the other Ships, which were answered by them. They were the Seditious and
the Fruitful Pinks, which came to join with us again, after having waited for
our Arrival eleven Days at Madera: They cast Anchor at two a-clock, and the
next Day our Corvette set out a second time for Rufisca, to get some
Provisions, that were necessary for our departure in good earnest.

Before we leave Gorea, The Description of the Island of Gorea.
it may not be improper to give some account, how the French settled in that
Island, and to relate what I have seen and heard concerning the Nature of the
Coast, and the Traffic and Manners of the Inhabitants.

The Island of Gorea is distant only one League from the Continent, four from
Cape Verd, and may be about half a League in Compass. The Hollanders first
fixed a Colony therein, and built the Forts of St. Francis and St. Michael,
which are still to be seen: Afterward the Count d' Etrees made himself Master
of the Place A. D. 1678: The English took it from the French in 1692. and
demolished the Forts which were erected by the Hollanders: At last the Senegal
Company, having re-taken it in 1693, rebuilt St. Michael's Fort: And there are
at present in this Island about 100 Frenchmen, with some Families of Lapto's or
free Negro's, who are hired by the Company to trade from one Coast to another.

The Seacoast is flat, sandy, and in many places very barren: The Soil brings
forth Millet, Rice, Tobacco, and some Fruits, which are all generally very
insipid: The Country is every where beset with a sort of wild Apple or
Crab-Trees, that grow as thick as Broom in a Heath or Warren: There are also
certain small Shrubs, which are very common; their Fruit, called Mandanaza by
the Negro's, being no bigger than a small Nut, exactly resembles an Apricock in
Shape and Color: It is of a very grateful Taste, but very unwholsom: Its Leaf
is like that of Ivy, but of a somewhat lighter Green. I have seen there a sort
of Trees not unlike our Plum-Trees, the Fruit of which has the Color, Bigness,
and almost Taste of our Cherries; It Is called Cahouar; and I have caused the
Figure of it to be drawn, because it appeared to me to be very remarkable. The
Negro's made a Present to us, as a choice Banquet, of certain large Fruits that
resemble small Gourds, but under the Skin, is only a kind of Substance like
dressed Flax: They cause them to be roasted under Embers, and afterward chew
them to suck out the Juice, which is as yellow as Saffron: This Fruit has a
Stone as large as an Egg, and as hard as Iron. In the Country there is a great
number of Palm Trees, out of which the Negro's extract a sort of white Liquor,
that we call Palm-Wine, and which is thus prepared: They make an Incision in
the Trunk, and apply to it a Gourd-Bottle, into which the Liquor runs by the
means of a Pipe: It Is very pleasant to drink when one is hot; but at the end of
two or three Days, it is spoiled, and easily inebriates.

The Island affords great variety of Game: Turtle-Doves, Pintades, Pigeons and
Partridges as big as Pullets, and of an exquisite Taste, are very numerous;
besides diverse sorts of large Fowl, which are unknown in Europe. Unknown Birds.
There are also Goats, Stags, Buffles, Apes, Civet-Cats, P: 10.

An unknown Bird killed on ye Coaste of Africa.

A Storke of ye Coaste of Africa.

M. Vander Gucht Scul:

Tigers, Elephants, Lions, flying Serpents, and many other Animals. Among
others we met with two very care Birds, viz. one as big as a Turkey, with black
Feathers, its Legs being thick and short, and its Head of an extraordinary
Figure, which will be better explained by the annexed Draught of it, than by a
large Description. The other Bird is somewhat less, having white Feathers over
the whole Body, the Bill long and yellow, the Tail and the tip of the Wings of
a very lively Fire-Colour, and the Legs small and very long.

The People of these Coasts from the River Senegal, The People.
are entirely black, robust, and well-set. They all go stark naked, both Men
and Women, except their Privy Parts, that are covered with a sort of
Cotton-Stuff, which they call Pagnes: They are very slothful, and always hold a
Pipe in their Mouth: They feed upon nothing but Millet and Fish, and very
seldom eat any Flesh: They were surpised to see us eat Herbs, and said that we
were like Horses in that particular. Their Trade consists in Slaves, Gold,
Morphil or Ivory, and Wax; which Commodities they usually exchange for Iron,
Hatchets, Fusees, Coral, Glasses, Knives, Paper, red Stuffs, and more
especially Brandy; in which they take so great delight, that the Son, when it is
in his power, often sells his Father to procure it.

Every Province has its particular Governor, who gathers the Tributes due to
the King, and takes care to call an Assembly of the Negroes when they are
enjoined to go on Warfare. Their ordinary Arms are the Hanger, Their Arms
the Sagay, which is a very light Half-Pike, and the Bow, which nevertheless
they do not use very dexterously; some of them are also furnished with
Firearms. Their principal aim is to take a great number of Prisoners, who are
never exchanged, but are either distributed for the Service of the Officers, or
sold for the Sovereign's Advantage. The King resides at the distance of thirty
Leagues from the Seacoast in a Town called Cayor, where he has a Palace, and
Appartments for his Wives, always entertaining some Foreigners in his Court,
and more especially those of the Portuguese Nation: His Dominions are extended
very far in the Country, and lie along the Coasts from Rufisca, which is four
Leagues distant from Gorea to the Southern side map of the River of Gambia Page
15.

A CHART of the River of Gambia with the Coasts adjacent
A Scale of 2 Leagues

of the Senegal: The Northern is inhabited by certain Moors, who arrive there
in Caravans from the Deserts of Zaara, and whose whole Trade consists in the
Gums, with which they load their Camels: They likewise bring Barbary Horses,
with which the Negroes afterward traffic even to the Confines of Guinee. The
King of Houmel keeps four or five hundred for his Guard; and when he has a mind
to make War, he can raise 6000, all the People being obliged to march, except
the Marabous, who are their Priests, and who stay at home with their Wives, to
make Prayers for the good Success of the King's Arms. These Marabous are very
numerous, and every one of them has diverse Wives: They pray to God five times a
Day, more especially at Midnight, and at the Rising and Setting of the Sun; but
before they say their Prayers, they usually wash their whole Body several
Times: Lastly, they write and speak the Arabic Tongue, as we do the Latin.

The most part of the Negroes are destitute of Religion, Their Religion.
and live in the Woods, of the Booty that they get from Travelers. Those who
have any kind of Belief, follow the Mohammedan Sect, very much corrupted: They
wear about their Neck, Arms, and Legs, and even bind about their Horses, little
Leathern Bags, which they call Grisgris, in which are enclosed certain Passages
of the Alcoran, which were given by the Marabous, to secure them from venomous
Beasts, and from all sorts of Wounds; an abominable Superstition, which they
equally observe in reference to their managed War-Horses. They circumcise their
Children, but not till they have attained to the Age of Twelve or Thirteen
Years. Their Sabbath is kept on Monday, during which they forbear working, and
make but one Meal. They have no considerable Festival but that of Tabaske,
which happens in the Month of June; and for the celebration of which, they
prepare themselves a Month before, by continual Fasting and abstaining from
correspondence with their Wives: Then they meet together in a large Plain, to
say their Prayers, and to be reconciled with their Enemies, every one bringing
a Goat, a Calf, or some other Animal of the like nature, which the Marabous,
clothed with a kind of Surplice made of white Pagnes, or Cotton-Stuff,
sacrifice to Mahomet. After ^he celebration of the Festival, which continues
till Evening, every one carries away his Victim to make a solemn Banquet of it,
with his Family; which Custom seems to have much relation to the Jewish
Passover.

When one of the principal Elders dies, Their Burials.
the Marabous embalm his Body, and expose it to public View in a Hut, where
the Women of the Neighborhood are assembled to lament his Death during several
Days. At last when these Lamentations, which continue more or less, according
to the Quality of the deceased Person, are ended, the Marabous wrap up the
Corpse in a Pagnes or Cotton-Shrowd, and bury it; whilst his intimate Friends
take a pride in stabbing themselves, to show the sincerity of their Affection;
which barbarous Custom they blindly observe, even contrary to the Prohibitions
of their own Religion and Laws. This is all that I have seen, or could get
Information of, concerning those Coasts, with any manner of probability.

On the 19th. we set sail for the River of Gambia, having for our Guides two
Negroes, and the English Deserter, of whom we have already made mention. We
sailed along the Coasts four or five Leagues in length, and twenty the next
day. At 6 a-clock in the Evening we cast Anchor within three Leagues and a half
of the Mouth of the River, and immediately sent out our Shallops to sound the
depth of it, but they met with a great deal of foul Weather during the whole
Night, and were not able to return till the next Day at Noon.

On the 22d. Instant, at eight a-clock in the Morning, we all entered the
River, with English Colors, and at Eleven we saluted with three Cannon-shot, a
thick and very high Tree, which serves instead of a Pavilion to the King of
Bar, and which the English are likewise wont to salute, as often as they come
into, or go out of the River. At Noon we ran a-ground before the Isle of Dogs,
on a Shelf of Mud, where we stuck above two Hours, and could not get off
without some difficulty. At last at Five a-clock in the Evening, we cast Anchor
within a small League of the Fort, which we immediately invested, with the
Corvette and the Shallops, to hinder the Importation of Provisions, or of any
manner of Succors. We also began to unmast the Fruitful Pink, to turn it into
a Bomb-Galley.

The same Evening M. de Gennes sent our two Negro Agents to a Village called
Gilofriee, situated on the Riverside, to carry a Letter to a certain ancient
Portuguese, named Don Cardos, whom the Governor of Gorea had assured us to be
well-affected to the French. And indeed, this Portuguese having received the
Letter, came to salute M. de Gennes, to whom he afterward gave an exact
Account of the Condition of the Fort, and insinuated at the same time, that
forasmuch as the English were not well beloved by the King of Bar, it would be
no difficult matter, by the means of some Present, to bring him over to their
Party. The Chevalier de Fontenay, our second Captain, went at two a-clock in
the Morning, to compliment Don Cardos, and to entreat him to permit us to land
a Body of Men; to hinder the English from taking in fresh Water and Provisions:
But the King had told him that he would not be concerned in our Quarrels, lest
if we could not take the Fort, it might give an occasion of Hatred to the
English, who might afterward resent the Affront; and that therefore he would
not suffer any one to land, but that he would readily supply us with all Things
that were in his Power.

On the 23d. St. James's Fort summoned.
Instant M. de la Roque went to summon the Fort to surrender, and upon his
Approach, a Canoo appeared to enquire of him what were his Demands: He
answered, That he was desirous to speak with the Governor: Whereupon he was
conducted blindfold to the Governor's House, and was received in his Absence
by the King's Lieutenant, whom he made acquainted with the occasion of our
Arrival, and that he was come to summon the Place before we proceeded to any
Acts of Hostility. M. de la Roque was nobly treated, and the Healths of the
Kings of England and France were drank several times, with Volleys of
Cannon-shot. After the Collation, M. de la Roque returned on board, with three
English Officers, whom M. de Gennes entertained with the like Magnificence.
They desired some Days of Truce to consult about the Affair, but no longer time
was granted to make their positive Answer, than till six a-clock the next
Morning; so that they were reconducted to their Fort very much dissatisfied
with these Proceedings, and wrote the following Letter to M. de Gennes.

A Letter written by the English Officers to M. de Gennes.
From St. James's Fort, July 23. 1695. SIR,
YOU have allowed us so little time to consider about your Summons, made (as
you say) by the Order of the French King, that we are resolved to wait for your
Attacks, and to defend our selves to the last Extremity, rather than to
Surrender; not doubting but to meet with a generous Enemy. We are,

Sir, etc.

The next Night 23 or 24 of our Shallops took a Brigantine and several Canoos,
laden with Provisions for the Fort; whilst the Sun of Africa gave Chase to
another Canoo, in which the Governor was passing over thither, who perceiving
their close Pursuit, threw himself into the Sea, and made his Escape to the
Woods, from whence he found means to retire the same Night, without being
discovered.

At break of Day, we set out two of our Shallops, and sailed three Leagues up a
small River, which takes its Name from the Village of Block, where a certain
Prince resides, who assumes the Title of Emperor, The King of Block styled
Emperor.
and who is almost continually engaged in War against the King of Bar. We burnt
two small Vessels, which the English were refitting there, and laded our
Shallops with two Pieces of Cannon, and diverse cast Paterero's that were taken
out of them. In passing down the River, we landed at the Village of Barifet,
The King of Barifet Tributary.
where a Petty King keeps his Court, who is tributary to the other of Block.
This Prince sent us word, That it was customary for Strangers to make him some
Present, and that he desired us to furnish him with a Scarlet-Cloak: We
contented him with some Bottles of Brandy, which were more acceptable to him
than the finest Cloak in the World.

On the 24th. The Bombarding of the Fort.
Instant, at Eight a-clock in the Morning, the Fruitful Pink discharged two
Bombs, which did not come near the Fort; therefore M. de Gennes forbad the
letting off any more, and determined to wait for the Tide of Flood, in order to
level the Shot within reach of the Place. In the mean while, the Governor
having sent a Canoo with a White Flag, to desire to Capitulate, two Officers
were detained as Hostages, and M. de la Roque and the Chevalier de Fontenay
were sent to the Fort, to draw up the Articles, which were signed the same Day,
by all the English Officers, and the next Day, by all the Captains of the
Squadron.

Articles of Capitulation granted to the Officers of the Garrison of St.
James's Fort in the River of Gambia on the Coasts of Africa.
I.
THat the Salaries due to them from the Company shall be paid.

II.
That every Man shall be permitted to carry along with him his Arms, Baggage,
Chests, Attire, Ammunition and Money, with Drums beating, and Match lighted;
and that every Officer shall be attended with a young Negro.

III.
That every married Man, or Inhabitant of the Country, shall have liberty to
continue therein.

IV.
That the Commissioners for Trade shall enjoy the same Privilege, in repairing
thither, and making the French a Return of what they have traded for.

V.
That the Sieur Charles Daval, a French Man settled in England for the Space of
16 Years, shall enjoy the same Privilege as the Governor himself.

VI.
That two Days shall be allowed them, to make up their Accounts; that is to
say, that the Fort shall be delivered up on Tuesday Morning at Six of the Clock.

VII.
That Twelve free Negroes who are employed in the Company's Service, shall be
permitted to go wheresoever they shall think fit.

VIII.
That a Vessel with three Masts shall be given them, with Artillery,
Ammunition, and Provisions to return to England, without detaining any thing
whatever; and that their Departure shall be within thirty Days at the farthest.

IX.
That they shall have a good Passport to go in safety; and that the English
Governor shall in like manner grant an effectual Passport to the French
Captain, who is to be their Convoy back again, that his Cargo may not be
impaired.

X.
The abovementioned Articles being granted, it was declared, That these Goods
belonged to the Royal Company of England, viz. 500 Quintals of Morphil, 300
Quintals of Wax, 130 Male Negroes, 40 Female in the Island, 50 at Gilofriee,
and above 80000 Crowns of Merchandises at the usual Rates of the Country, as
also 72 large Cannons mounted, 30 dismounted, and a considerable Quantity of
Warlike Ammunition; and that they should have a Truce till the Commander in
Chief returned an Answer.

Signed JOHN HAMBURY. DE LA ROQUE. The Chevalier DE FONTENAY.


On the 27th. The Fort surrendered
at break of Day, M. de la Perriere, Major of the Squadron* gave notice to the
Governor to prepare for his Departure, the Term which was granted him being
expired: At Six a-clock the Shallops and Canoos ready fitted up, attended on
the Commander, and then cast Anchor in a Line, within Pistol-shot of the Fort.
M. de Fontenay, who was chosen for Governor, first came on Shore, where the
English Governor gave him the Keys, and embarked the same time to go on board
the Felicity. Afterward all the Forces landed; Sentinels were set in all the
necessary Posts; the French Standard was set up; Te Deum was sung by the
Almoners of the Squadron, and 37 Cannons were discharged.

This Fort was square, The Description of the Fort.
with four Bastions, lined with good Brick-Work, having in the Outworks three
pieces of Fortification called Horse-Shooes, and several Batteries along the
Pallisado's: It was furnished with a prodigious quantity Arms, and the
Magazines of Powder were well stored; insomuch that it is certain that if the
Governor, being a young Man, (who was more intent upon his Pleasures than on
the putting of his Fort in a good Condition) had taken care to keep therein a
sufficient quantity of Provisions and of fresh Water, it might have held out
for a long time. The Situation of this Fort was very advantageous, and there
wanted only a Magazine of Powder, and a Cistern Bomb-proof, to render it
impregnable.

On the 28th. Instant M. de la Roque went to desire the King of Bar to give us
leave to take possession of the Slaves and Oxen, which the English had in his
Dominions: Whereupon the King replied, That the Fort being surrendered, every
thing that was left on the Land* of very good right belonged to him: M. de la
Roque told him, that we would not be so satisfied, and that if he refused to
grant our Demands willingly, we would certainly do our selves Justice by force
of Arms. And indeed a Council was held about that Answer; and forasmuch as it
was well known, that in the beginning of the War, he had seized on Merchandises
to the value of above 40000 Crowns, belonging to the French who traded on that
River; it was determined to make a Descent upon the Country, to take the King
Prisoner, and as many Negroes as could be catched; and to burn all their Hutts.
This Decree was ready to be put in execution, when an Alcaty came to pass a
Compliment upon M. de Gennes, and to assure him, that the King was unwilling to
engage in a War against him; on the contrary, that he was very desirous to keep
an amicable Correspondence with him; and that he might freely take whatever he
should think fit.

The next Day, M. de Gennes went to give a Visit to the King; the principal
Officers walked before him to his Canoo, and conducted him to the Place where
the Interview was to be made. The King appeared a little while after, without
any regular Train, in the midst of a great number of Negroes, and attended with
some Drummers: He was of a very advantageous Stature, and was clothed with a
red Doublet beset with the Tails of Wild Beasts, and little Bells. He had on
his Head an Osier-Cap, adorned with diverse Rows of Coral, and two Ox-Horns.
Here we may observe by the way, that Circumcised Persons in those Parts, have
the liberty to wear such a Cap, during eight Days immediately after their
Circumcision, by virtue of which, they are authorized to commit all manner of
Crimes imaginable, with impunity, and none durst complain of their outrageous
Villainies. The King in this pompous Equipage, holding a Pipe in his Mouth,
walked with a Majestic Gate under a stately Tree, where he usually gives
Audience to the Ambassadors of the neighboring Princes. M. de Gennes went
thither to salute him, and made him a Present of 20 Bars of Iron, a Barrel of
Brandy, a Pair of Pistols, and a Burning-Glass, with the Effects of which he
was extremely surpised. The Interpreter being a Frenchman who dwelt on the
River above ten Years, spoke the Language of the Country very fluently; by
which means their Conversation was continued for a considerable time; and among
other things, this poor King often inquired whether he was much talked of in
France? After a great deal of Discourse of the like nature, they parted; but
the King caused M. de Gennes to be reconducted by forty Men of his own Guards,
and several Drummers, and presented him with some of the finest Oxen that could
be found in the Village.

On the 30th. Instant, a Council was held to determine, whether the Fort should
be kept or slighted: The latter Advice was followed for diverse Reasons, and
therefore we drew near, to take all the Merchandises that were to be exported
in our Vessels: They consisted in several Pieces of Ordnance, a great quantity
of Arms, Morphil, Wax, Vessels of Tin and Copper, etc. Woollen and Linen-Cloth,
printed Calico's, Coral, Glasses, and other Commodities, in which a great Trade
is carried on in that Country.

On the 5th. Day of August A. D. 1695. August, 1695.
the Sun of Africa passed down the River, to transport certain Merchandises and
Ammunition to Gorea; but that Voyage was undertaken to no purpose, because the
Governor would not furnish himself with them, without the Consent of the
Company.

On the 14th. Instant, The meeting of a Free-booter.
a Free-booter of St. Domingo, which parted from thence a Year ago, came to
cast Anchor before us, and having saluted us with three Cannon-shot, we
answered her with one. This Vessel met with the Sun of Africa at Gorea, by whom
she was informed of the taking of St. James's Fort; and that since it was
determined to demolish it, some Advantage might be got by diverse Provisions
that were left, as being of no use to us. The same Day, we suffered a
considerable Loss upon this Occasion: Forasmuch as the Fruitful Pink was
appointed to convey the English Officers into France, and was obliged to pass
by Cayenna to leave some of our Negroes there; 150 of them were shut up in the
Hold, lest they should attempt to make their Escape: But these miserable
Wretches, scarce having room to breathe in, threw themselves one upon another,
as it were in despair, so that 34 of them were found stifled.

On the 16th. the Fruitful Pink being ready to sail for Cayenna, saluted us
with her whole Artillery, and we answered her with a Cannon-shot.

The 17th, 18th, 19th. and 20th. Days of this Month were spent in breaking the
Cannons at St. John's Fort, and undermining the Walls, from whence we removed
on the 21st. to avoid the ill Accidents that might happen upon the blowing up
of the Place: The Fort is blown up.
On the 22d. the Mines sprang, and took very good effect; except two, which
miscarried, and were sprung the same Evening. The King of Bar immediately sent
to search among the Ruins for such things as might turn to his Advantage; and
the Portuguese, who had several Colonies on the River, told us, that they durst
not go thither till after that the King and his Officers had caused every thing
to be carried away, which might be serviceable to them. The English spent
several Years in building this Fort, which was situated in the middle of a fine
River, where the Traffic is very considerable; and the Revenues which they
received from thence are computed to amount to a Million; so that the Loss of
the Place cannot be easily repaired.

This River is navigable even so as to bear large Barks, The Description of the
River.
200 Leagues up the Country, where it is joined with that of Senegal, in that
place where the Niger forms its famous Arms: Its Sides are flat, and cut with
many Channels, to which the Sea runs up; and the Soil along its Banks is fertile
in Millet, Rice, Tobacco, and diverse sorts of Fruits; affording also good
Pasture for the feeding of numerous Herds of Oxen. The principal Fruits that we
observed in those Parts, are the Banana, the Tabakomba, and the Plougue.

The Banana is a long Fruit covered with a yellow and tender Skin; the Pulp of
it being soft like Cotton, and of a very good taste: It grows on a tender
Stalk, about two or three Fathoms high; its Leaves are a Fathom long, and of a
proportionate breadth. This Stalk bears only one single Bunch or Cluster, round
which there may be forty or fifty Banana's; and when the Bunch is gathered, the
Stalk is to be cut, by reason that otherwise it could not bring forth any more
Fruit.

The Tabakomba is almost of the same Shape as a Bon-Chretien Pear; its Peel or
Rind is like that of a Pomegranate, and opens when the Fruit is ripe: It
contains five or six small Fruits of a Rose-Colour, the Pulp of which is
insipid, and the Stone very large.

The Plougues or Medicinal-Nuts contain three small Kernels, that are called
Indian Pineapple Kernels, and which are used by the Apothecaries in the
composition of their Medicines.

There is at least as great Plenty of Wild Beasts, and as much variety of Game
in those Parts, as on the Coasts of Gorea. We saw there certain rare Birds,
which might well deserve a Place in the famous Aviary of Versailes, by reason
of the admirable Beauty of their Feathers, or upon account of their
extraordinary Shape; particularly, the Pelican, which the Inhabitants of the
Country call Wide-Throat; and the Guinee Peacock. The Pelican resembles a Goose
in its Size and Color, having on the lower part of its Bill, which is very
long, P: 32.

Ptougues or Indian Pine. apple kernels

Cahouar

Taba Komba

M. Vander Gucht Scul.

P: 33.

How Monkeys carry Infants up Trees

The Habit of the Circumcised*

A Negro playing on ye Balafo

a Bag, capable of holding almost two Quarts of Water. This Bird commonly
pearches upon foam Tree, near the Banks of a River, waiting till the Fish swim
even with the Surface of the Water, to fall upon them, and even swallow some
that are a Foot long. The Guinee Peacock, The Guinee Peacock.
which others call the Imperial, or the Lady, is black, and almost of the
bigness of a Turkey: It walks stately, its Neck and Legs being long, having
Feathers of a Violet-Colour on the Tail, and two Tufts on the Head, which
render it magnificent: That on the forepart of the Head is of a black, and
very fine Feather; and the other behind is of a long thick Hair, of a yellowish
Color.

The Apes are larger and more mischievous than in any part of Africa; The
Negroes dread them, and cannot travel alone in the Country without running the
hazard of being attacked by these Animals, who often present them with a Stick,
and force them to fight. I have heard the Portugueses say, that they have often
seen them hoist up young Girls about seven or eight Years old, into Trees, and
that they could not be wrested from them without a great deal of difficulty.
The most part of the Negroes imagine them to be a Foreign Nation come to
inhabit their Country, and that they do not speak for fear of being compelled
to work.

The Air about this River is very unwholsom, by reason of the Rains that
continually fall during six Months in the Year; that is to say, from June till
November; insomuch that Strangers can scarce avoid its malign Influence; for
this Air causes lingering Fevers, by which Men are extremely wasted before they
die. We experimentally felt these direful Effects, departing from thence with
about 250 sick Persons, of whom above two third parts died a little while
after. These Rains sometimes come with terrible Blasts of Wind; which are so
much the more formidable, in regard that a Vessel may be suddenly surpised and
over-set with them.

The Portugueses have many Habitations in different Places, and more especially
in the Village of Gilofriee, where they have a small sorry Church. Those
Persons who are desirous to settle in the Country, of whatever Nation they be,
usually pay a yearly Tribute to the King, P: 35.

The Balafo an Instrument of the Negroes.

The Sticks

A Brasil Cherry

to the value of 50 Crowns, besides the Presents which they are in a manner
obliged to make him, on certain Festivals, and when he enters their Hutts;
where he always finds something that may serve for his use, and which these
poor People dare not deny him.

The great Trade which is managed in that River, has rendered the People much
more polite and civilized than those of Gorea: They are better Mahometans, and
have a greater Veneration for their Commanders, whom they never accost, but
with one Knee on the Ground, and throwing Sand over their Heads, as a mark of
their Submission. Their Hutts Hutts.
are neat, and well built, being made of a fat binding Earth, which soon
hardens: They are covered with Palm Tree Leaves, so well fitted, that they
cannot be penetrated either by the Rain, or the Heat of the Sun. They are of a
round Figure, and cannot be better compared than to our Ice-Houses. The most
part of the Negroes divert themselves therein, with discoursing about the
Alcoran, or with playing on a certain Musical Instrument, which they call
Balafo, Balafo, a Musical Instrument.
whilst their Wives are employed in tilling the Ground. The Balafo is nothing
else but several Pipes of very hard Wood set in order, which diminish by little
and little in length, and are tied together with Thongs of very thin Leather.
These Thongs are twisted about small round Wands, which are put between every
one of those Pipes, to leave a small Space: This Instrument very much resembles
one of ours in that particular; but that of the Negroes is composed of many
more parts, in regard that they fasten underneath ten or twelve Gourds, the
different Sizes of which perform the same effect as our Organ-Pipes: They
usually play upon it with Sticks, the Ends of which are covered with Leather,
to render the Sound less harsh.

The Portugueses told us, that the Negroes who live further up the Country,
with whom they have but small Dealings, are altogether Savage; boast of being
great Sorcerers, and have little Religion: That when a King, or one of the
principal Commanders, dies, they lay them in a new Hut, kill his best beloved
Wife, with a certain number of Slaves to serve him in the other World; and
lastly, having said particular Prayers, and put Provisions and Tobacco
sufficient to last a long time into the Hutt, they cover it with Earth.

On the 24th. Instant at Noon Their Departure from the Coast of Brasil.
we passed down the River, and the next Day about 8 a-clock in the Morning, we
prepared to set sail. The Free-booter passing by us, saluted us with five Guns,
and we answered her with one. We were stearing our Course for Brasil, and that
Pickeroon for the Red Sea. We gave the Ship's Crew two Pieces of Ordnance, with
Powder, Ball, and some Oxen, on condition that in the Passage they should set
the Negro Prince of Assiny ashore in his own Territories. M. de Gennes had the
charge of him, but could not perform it, without interrupting the Voyage he had
undertaken.

On the 26th. and 27th. we had a great Calm, and on the 28th. a Barrel of
Brandy took Fire in the Hold, but it was soon put out, by the care that was
taken in applying a great quantity of wet Clothes. The Number of our sick Men
increasing every Day, and the most part of them dying for want of necessary
Refreshment, a Council was held on the 30th. to know whether it were most
expedient to continue our Course to Brasil, or to stand in for some Port: The
latter Advice was followed, and it was determined that we should go in quest of
the Islands of Cape Verd, where the Air is much more healthful than on the
Coast of Guinee.

On the 3d. Day of September, September. 1695.
we had boisterous Winds, which being contrary would have driven us off from
the Islands, and perhaps would have hindered us from making them: Wherefore we
steered our Course for Gorea, to take in fresh Provisions, waiting for a more
favorable Wind to return to the Island of Cape Verd.

On the 5th. at break of Day, They stand in for Gorea.
we discovered Land, and at six a-clock in the Evening we cast Anchor before
Gorea, where we took in 15 Oxen, and loaded some of our Shallops with Water:
Then we set sail again on the 9th. Instant, with a favorable Gale of Wind.

On the 12th. 13th. and 14th. we had a great Calm; and on the 15th. at 8
a-clock in the Morning we discovered the Island of May, from whence we steered
our Course for that of St. Vincent.

On the 17th. we came within sight of an Island, the Coasts of which appeared
to be very high and foggy. And indeed, by its height we judged it to be that of
St. Nicholas.

On the 18th. and 19th. the Winds were contrary; but on the 19th. and 20th. at
Night they favored us; and at two a-clock in the Morning we discovered Land by
the Light of the Moon: We continued the rest of the Night about the Cape; and
at break of Day we perceived it to be the Island of St. Lucia. At two a-clock
in the Afternoon we entered the Channel, which separates the Island of St.
Vincent from that of St. Antony; and when we were arrived within Musket Shot of
a great Rock which lay in form of a Sugar Loaf in the middle of that Channel,
at the Entrance of St. Vincent's Bay, where our Ship was to cast Anchor; we
were becalmed, and obliged to tow it up with our Shallops against the Current
that carried us above the Place. We spent the Night in a perpetual Hurry; for
the Wind continued so little in the same Point, and veer'd so often, that we
durst not fall into the Bay till break of Day.

On the 22d. Their Arrival at the Island of Cape Verd.
we set up Tents on the Land, for our sick Mariners, who were very numerous;
for many of them were seized with the Scurvy, besides the Fevers of Gambia;
and of 260 Men belonging to our Ship's Crew, we had only 80 left who were in a
Condition to Work.

The Island of St. Vincent is inhabited, A Description of St. Vincent's Island.
but it is barren, and beset with very high Mountains: It affords little fresh
Water; Wood is also scarce there, and it is customary to cast Anchor before it,
only by reason of the Safety of its Harbor. We met with 20 Portugueses of St.
Nicholas's Island, who were employed there during two Years, in dressing
Goat Skins, with which this Island abounds: These Animals were taken with Dogs
so well inured to the Game, that each of them was wont to bring twelve or
fifteen every Night. There is also abundance of Tortoises in that Island, of
which there are different kinds, and some that weigh three or four hundred
Pounds. These Animals make to Land to lay their Eggs, hide them in the Sand,
and return without sitting on them: They are not hatched till the end of 17
Days, and continue during nine of them without being able to pass to the bottom
of the Water, insomuch that three quarters of them are usually destroyed by the
Birds.

On the 23d. Instant, Great Plenty in St. Antony's Island.
we Manned out our Boat for St. Antony's Island, to trade for some Provisions;
and our Mariners, conducted by two Portugueses of St. Vincent, went to certain
Cottages, where they were kindly entertained by the Inhabitants, who gave us
some Pullets, and a great quantity of the Fruits of the Country, viz. Figs,
Raisins, Banana's, Oranges, Lemmons, and Water-Melons; telling them at the same
time, that if we sent Word thither in three Days, they would give notice to the
Village, where we might be supplied with Oxen, Hoggs, Pullets, Ducks, Fruit,
and every thing we could desire. This Village is situated in the middle of many
high Mountains, which render its Access difficult: There are above 500
Inhabitants capable of bearing Arms, and a great number of Negro-Slaves. The
Fathers Cordeliers have a Church there. The Portugueses of this Island, as all
the other of the Islands of Cape Verd, are of a swarthy Complexion, but they
are ingenious People, and very sociable: They feed on a kind of Bread made of
Millet and Banana's. They have numerous Herds of Oxen, Asses, Goats, and Hogs,
with variety of Fowl; Their Wine is also good, and their Fruits excellent;
insomuch that this Island, where the Air is healthful, and always temperate,
may well pass for a very delightful Place.

On the 26th. at two a-clock in the Morning, a Merchant-Man of Nantes, that
came to salt Tortoises for Martinica, cast Anchor by us. If their Ship's Crew
had known that they should have met with so good Company, they would not have
entered so boldly; but they were not aware of us till it was too late to
retreat; and if they had proved Englishmen, they might have paid dear enough
for their Curiosity. These Men informed us of the loss of Namur, and told us,
that they passed by the Island of St. Nicolas, where the Inhabitants engaged
them to bring back their Countrymen, of whom they had heard no News since they
went to St. Vincent. They kept their Word; so that the Portugueses conveyed the
Vessel under the Wind into a Creek, where there is greater abundance of
Tortoises than in any other place: They often assisted 'em in Fishing, and were
afterward carried back to St. Nicolas.

On the 27th. Instant, the Pink went to St. Antony's Island, to fetch the
Provisions that the Portugueses had promised us, and which we could not obtain
till the first Day of October, October. 1. 1695.
by reason of Bourse asort of Fish taken in ye Road of ye Island of S.t Vincent
at Cape Verd

P: 43.

M Vander Gucht Sculp:

the difficulty of conveying 'em to the Seashore. Thus we had 1200 Pullets,
100 Hogs, above 25 Oxen, and a great quantity of Fruits; the whole Cargo in
exchange for Linen-Cloth, Beads, Looking-Glasses, Ribbons, Knives, and some
other small Wares of the like Nature, which contented them much better than all
the Money we could have given 'em; more especially in regard that they have not
any Harbors in their Island, so that Vessels very seldom arrive there; and the
King of Portugal, who receives large Revenues from thence, sometimes forbears
sending any thither during the term of three Years. All these Provisions, with
a vast quantity of good Fish that we took in this Bay, served in some measure
to recruit our Fleet.

Amongst the Fish that were caught by us, we met with one of an extraordinary
beauty in respect of the Rays about the Eyes, a great number of Spots and
Hexagonal Marks of a very lively blue Color: This Fish is commonly called a
Bourse. Bourse.


On the 4th. Day, They steered their Course again to Brasil.
at Eight of the Clock, we set sail with a North-East Wind, steering our Course
again to Rio-Janeiro, or the River of January on the Coasts of Brasil.

On the 5th. at Night, we passed between the Islands of St. Jago and Fuogo. The
former is the first of all the Islands of Cape Verd, and the Sea of a Bishop:
The other is only a large Mountain, that continually burns, where we saw Fire
on the top of it during the whole Night; and in the Day it only appeared to be
Smoke. The Portugueses have often endeavored to fix settled Habitations
therein, but could never accomplish their Design, as being perhaps too much
disturbed by the Cinders, Sulphurous Matter, and even Stones that are thrown
out of this burning Mountain.

On the 6th. and 7th. we had strong blasts of Wind, with Thunder and Rain; and
on the 10th. we saw two Blowers, Blowers and Porpoises.
being a sort of small Whales, which spout up Water very high, and with a great
Noise. We likewise discovered vast Shoales of Porpoises, that followed us above
two Hours: They are of the size of a Hogg, swim in Rank and File as it were so
many Companies of Infantry, and sometimes reach above two Miles in length.

On the 11th. 12th. 13th. and 14th. the Rains were continual, and the Winds
very unconstant, so that our Pilots were very much surpised; for in drawing
near the Coasts of Africa, they expected to meet with the Trade-Winds, which
are very common in those Parts that lie between the Tropicks. In the mean
while, our Water diminished, half of our Men were fallen sick, and our Negroes
perished daily.

On the 30th. at Night we passed the Equinoctial-Line within a Degree, They
passed the Line.
or thereabouts, of the first Meridian; and the same Night we observed a Comet,
which continued till the 19th. of November. Indeed we were not sensible of the
excessive Heats, and tedious Calms, with which all the Relations of Voyages
threaten those who cross the Torrid Zone; for we always had some fresh Gales of
Wind, and the Nights were very cool.

On the 4th. Day of November, November. 1695. Flying Fish.
we saw abundance of flying Fish, and Fregats. These flying Fish are almost as
big as a Herring, but their Head is more square; and their Wings are nothing
else, but two very long Fins, that support them above the Water as long as they
retain never so little Moisture. The Gold-Fish and the Bonite continually make
War with them in the Water, and the Birds assault them in the Air.

The Frigate is a large Bird, The Frigate.
of a Gray Color, having short Legs, Feet like a Goose, a forked Tail, and the
Wings sometimes seven or eight Foot in compass: These Birds fly with a great
deal of swiftness, and are to be seen for 300 Leagues.

On the 13th. we gave Orders to the Felicity to spread her Sails, because she
stood in need of being careen'd; and at the same time, to search for
Storehouses, where at our Arrival we might unlade our Gambia Merchandises.

On the 17th. we saw a great Flock of Birds; and on the next Day we discovered
the Island of the Ascension, The Island of the Ascension.
which is distant above 150 Leagues from the Coasts of Brasil; it is of a small
compass, and very steep.

On the 22d. A Sow that brought forth a Monster.
a very remarkable thing happened in reference to a Sow with young that we took
at St. Antony's Island. This Sow pigg'd, and the first of her young was a
Monster, which had the Body of a Pig, the Ears and Snout of an Elephant; and
above that Snout which was in the middle of the Forehead, an Eye with two
Apples. This Monster might have been kept for a Rarity if it had lived; but the
Sea killed it immediately after it was brought forth.

On the 24th. at four a-clock in the Afternoon, we discovered Land; but the
Winds and Currents being contrary to us, we were not able to cast Anchor till
the 26th. Instant, which we then did before the Island of St. Ann, The Isle of
St. Ann.
on the side of the Continent, from which they are distant two small Leagues:
They formerly served as a place of Retreat for the Hollanders, when they
attempted the Conquest of Brasil. They are three in number, and the greatest of
them lies in the middle, being about a League and half in compass, and having a
convenient sandy Creek, where good fresh Water may be taken in. There are also
some wild Fruits, as Purslain and small channell'd Cherries, which are almost
of the same Taste as ours.

In the Woods, Channell'd Cherries.
with which these Islands are beset, one may hear a melodious Harmony, made by
a great number of small Birds, with fine Feathers: Among others, there are
Perroquets, Cardinals, and Colibries. The Cardinal is a kind of small Sparrow,
the Wings and Tail of which are black, and the rest of the Body of a very
lively Scarlet.

The Colibrie is a small Bird no bigger than a May-Bugg, with green Feathers:
It has a Bill somewhat long, and feeds on the Juice of Flowers like our Bees:
Its Nest is as large as an Egg, and is so much the more curious, in regard that
it is made of fine Cotton, and hung up with very small Threads. On the
Seacoasts there are Dotterils in so great abundance, that our Mariners
sometimes killed five or six of them with a Stick at one blow. These Birds are
as big as Ducks, and commonly fly about the Islands and the Rocks that are not
extended far in the Sea. The two other Islands are much less, and form with the
greater, to the North and South, certain Channels, which one may pass through,
as occasion serves. The Northern on the side of the Continent, has a Creek very
convenient for the careening of Vessels; but the Southern is only a huge round
Rock.

Over Against the Coast stands a small Village, inhabited by the Portugueses,
where we sent our Shallop to get some Provisions for the sick Mariners: Our Men
found the Inhabitants under Arms, map of the mouth of the River Ianeiro Page: 49

The Mouth of the River Ianeiro on the Coast of Brasil.
A Scale of one League

and ready to hinder our landing upon the least suspicion. These People were
pillaged some Years ago by Rovers, and ever since stand upon their Guard as
soon as they discover the approach of any Vessel. However we found means to
purchase a couple of Oxen, a dried Fish, several Cheeses, and Pulse, with some
Fruits, at a dear rate.

On the 27th. we took in fresh Water, and the next Day set sail for the River
of Janeiro.

On the 29th. we doubled Cape Fry, Cape Fry.
and on the 30th. at eight a-clock in the Morning, supposing that we had almost
made the River, The River Jeneiro.
we let off a Gun, to give notice that we stood in need of a Pilot; but having
tacked about on all sides till three a-clock in the Afternoon, without hearing
any News, and without being able to discover the Mouth; We cast Anchor within
three Leagues of the Land, and sent our Boat along the Coast, to search it out.
The Portugueses of St. Ann had told us, that there was at the Entrance, a huge
Rock in form of a Sugar Loaf; but instead of one, we discerned two, at a great
distance one from another; so that we were much perplexed, not knowing how to
steer our Course.

Our Boat lay at Anchor during the Night, at the Mouth of the River, under the
Cannon of the Forts, which caused it to be stopped. At break of Day the Officer,
who was in the Boat, went to meet the Governor of the Place, and returned at
six a-clock in the Evenning, to inform us that the Inhabitants scrupled to
permit us to enter, by reason (as they gave it out) of the great number of our
Sick Men: But it is more probable, A Scruple made to permit them to enter the
River.
that not being accustomed to see any other Ships than those of their own
Nation, and fearing lest we might be engaged in a War against them, they were
so extremely terrified at our Arrival, that as soon as our Corvette (which
entered eight Days before us) appeared, all the Women retired to the Country,
with the best Effects of the Town.

At six a-clock in the Morning, we prepared to draw near, and at nine an
Officer came, who caused us to cast Anchor within half a Cannon-shot of the
Forts, which are built on both sides of that River. Afterward he went to make
a Report to the Governor, and promised us that he would use his utmost
Endeavors to get an Order for the sending of a Pilot.

In the mean while, there arose a strong Blast of Wind, which obliged us to
hoist up Sail, by reason that our Ship got loose from Anchor, and ran upon a
Shelf of Rocks which is in the middle of the River: But the Commanders of the
Forts, who had Orders to stop our Course, and who, without having any regard to
the apparent Danger we were in of perishing at that instant, imagined that we
designed to enter without their leave, discharged twelve or fifteen
Cannon-Balls across our Masts, to oblige us to cast Anchor: Thus they made a
Bravado, insulting over us, because they knew that we stood in need of their
Assistance, and durst not resent their Affronts. Therefore we made haste to
cast Anchor; and about a quarter of an Hour after, an Officer came on board,
who left us a Pilot, and a Physician to visit our sick Men: He told us that we
might weigh Anchor, and that he was going to the Fort to know the Governor's
Pleasure: But as we were under sail, before he arrived there, we received ten
Cannon-shot more, which shattered our Flag, dismounted one of the Port-Holes in
the Gunner's Room, and passed between the Shrouds, without hurting any one of
our Crew. Then we went to cast Anchor with the Seditious Pink, within a small
League of the Town; neither would the Governor suffer the Sun of Africa, nor
the Glutton Frigate, to enter, by reason that he had Orders (as he pretended)
from the King of Portugal, not to admit above three Foreign Men of War into the
Harbor.

The next Night, at two or three a-clock, the Sun of Africa, which continued
still at the Mouth of the River, got loose from Anchor; and forasmuch as the
Current drove her on the abovementioned Shelf of Rocks, so that she could not
be stayed by any of the Anchors, she discharged several Cannon-shot, and made
Fires upon all the Masts, as a Signal to get Succor: Whereupon we sent our
Shallop, which got her off from that place, where she would have been
inevitably lost without their Assistance. This Ship set sail the same Day for
La Isla Grande, which is twenty Leagues distant from thence; and the Pink cast
Anchor in a small Bay at the Mouth of the River, where she waited till the
Corvette came up to enter. M. de Gennes made a Complaint to the Governor, of
the Insult that was offered us at our Entrance, and that the King's Ships were
basely left in danger: He excused himself upon account that the People were
ready to make an Insurrection; that it was none of his Fault that we did not
enter at first; and that for the future he would serve us as far as it lay in
his power.

On the 4th. Instant, The sick Men set on Shore.
we set our sick Men ashore in a small Village that fronts the Town on the
other side the River.

On the 5th. The Governor sent us a Pilot, who caused us to cast Anchor within
a quarter of a League of the Town; They do not salute the Town.
which we did not salute, because they refused to return us an equal number of
Shot.

On the 15th. a Vessel entered which came from the Bay of All Saints.

On the 17th. and 18th. two other Vessels arrived that came from the Coast of
Angola, laden with Negroes.

On the 20th. we paid our Ship.

On the 22d. the Felicity set out for La Isla Grande, and the Glutton Pink
entered in its place, to take in some Quintals of Biscuit, made of Meal that we
brought out of Europe. She likewise took in some Salt-meats, Meal of Manioc or
Yuca, with Cassave, Rice, Mayz, Guildive, and other Provisions, which we
purchased with Gambia Merchandises, upon which we lost a great deal in the
exchange, The Governor's unfair Dealing.
by reason that the Governor having prohibited the Inhabitants to trade with
us, and taking upon him to be the sole Seller and Buyer, we were obliged to
afford our Commodities at a cheaper rate than they bear in Europe; which
sufficiently shows the sinister Practices of that Nation, of whom three
quarters are originally Jews. We likewise sold our Negroes, but retained the
most robust of them, to recruit part of our Fleet, which the Sickness of Gambia
had much impaired; our single Ship having already lost above 50 Men.

We continued till the 27th. Instant in this River, which may without doubt
pass for one of the safest and most convenient in America. Before it falls into
the Sea, it forms a large Bay, where Vessels ride as it were in a private Port.
The bottom of it is firm, and the Winds are broken by the means of the high
Lands, with which it is encompassed: The Shelf of Rocks that lies at its Mouth,
and by which one cannot pass without coming within half a Cannon-shot of the
Forts that command it, contributes much to the security of the Harbor.

At the distance of two Leagues from the Mouth of the River, stands the City of
St. Sebastian, St. Sebastian.
which is an Episcopal See, the usual Place of Residence of the Governor of
the Province. It Is situated on the Western side of the River, and in a fine
Plain, surrounded with high Mountains: It Is large and well built, and the
Streets are Straight, so that the magnificent Structures of the Jesuits and
Benedictins that terminate them on both sides, each on a small Ascent, render
the Prospect very delightful: It has no Fortification on that side toward the
Country; and it is defended only by a small Fort on the Seashore below the
Jesuite's College.

The Inhabitants are polite, The Manners of the Inhabitants of St. Sebastian.
and endowed with a Gravity customary to their Nation: They are Rich, take much
delight in Trading, and keep a great number of Negro-Slaves, besides diverse
entire Families of Indians, whom they maintain in their Sugar-Plantations, and
whose Liberty they are not willing to retrench, as being the Natives of the
Country. Their Slaves for the most part manage all their Houshold-Affairs,
which renders them so dissolute and esfeminate, that they will not vouchsafe to
stoop to take up a Pin themselves, for which they have occasion. Luxury is so
predominant among them, that not only the Burghers, but even the Monks may have
to do with common Harlots, without fearing the Censures or Reproaches of the
People, who have a very great Respect for them. Uncleanness is not the only
Vice peculiar to these lewd Monks: They live in gross Ignorance, so that very
few of them understand the Latin Tongue; and it is to be feared, that as they
strive even to outvie the Sodomites in their Debaucheries, they may one Day
partake of the like Punishment. There are vast Multitudes of Cordeliers,
Carmelites, and Benedictin Monks every where in the Territories of Brasil; but
they take little Care of the Conversion of an infinite number of poor Indians,
who stand in need of being instructed in the Mysteries of the Gospel; and there
are only eight or ten Reverend Capuchin Fathers of the French Nation, and some
Jesuits, throughout that vast Continent, who take Pains in performing the
Functions of their Mission with an extraordinary Zeal.

I cannot forbear relating a small Adventure which happened to a young Man of
our Squadron, A notable Adventure.
who fell out with one of the Inhabitants, and was obliged to draw his Sword in
his own Defense; but perceiving himself alone, and pressed with a great number
of Portugueses, he thought fit to retire, and seeing the Door of the
Carmelite's Monastery opened, he made bold to enter, not doubting but to meet
with a sure Sanctuary in that Place; but he soon found the contrary, for one of
these charitable Monks immediately struck him on the Head with a Hanger, the
Marks of which Wound will always appear during his whole Lifetime: Then many
others rushed in, and beat him with Cudgels, and at last put him again into the
Hands of the Inhabitants, who had Compassion on him, and detested the barbarous
Proceedings of the Monks. The Reflections I have made on these counterfeit
Monks, ought not to give Offense to those who make a Conscience of discharging
their Duty; since the Invectives made against such Libertines* serve only to
augment the Respect that ought to be had for those who seek for an occasion to
show the effects of a true Zeal, and use all possible means for the propagating
the Christian Religion, even to the apparent hazard of their Lives.

The Country lying about this River affords good Pasture, Sugar Canes.
bringing forth abundance of Tobacco and Canes, of which the finest Sugar is
made; and also a kind of very strong Brandy, which we call Guildive. The latter
comes of Slips, are full of Knots, that put forth Leaves like those of Reeds,
and grow on Ridges as Corn: These Canes when gathered, are carried to the Mill
to be ground, and the Juice that they yield runs through several Pipes into the
Cauldrons, where the Sugar is made and refined, almost after the same manner as
Saltpeter. The Soil is likewise very fruitful in Rice, Mayz, and Manioc,
Manioc.
which are Roots that put forth a small Shrub four or five Foot high, and are
propagated of Slips: The Fields in which they are planted, and where they are
left standing two or three Years, are like those of our Hemp-Closes: These
Roots, which serve instead of Bread in a great part of America; are as thick
and long as Carrots: They are usually grated with Rasps made for that purpose,
and Meal is made of 'em after having squeezed out all their Juice, which is the
rankest Poison in the World, and which they take care to drain off into Places
underground, lest the Cattle should drink it. The most part of the Portugueses
feed on this Meal, such as it is; and others make of it a kind of small Cakes,
which they bake on Iron-Plates appropriated to that use. There is abundance of
Fruit and Pulse in those parts: Cabbiges, Onions, Lettuces, Purcelain, Melons,
Water-Melons, Goads, Grapes, and many other Fruits that we have in Europe,
thrive there, and come to perfection: But the peculiar Fruits of the Country
are Oranges, Banana's, Ananas's, Potato's, Ighname's, Coco's, Goyaves, and many
others, of which they make very good Confections.

The Ananas grows like an Artichoak, and resembles a large Pineapple: Its
Leaves are long, thick, and armed with small Prickles. It bears a Crown of the
same Leaves, and may be esteemed as the best Fruit in the whole Continent of
America.

The Potato and Ighname, are Roots very like the Toupinambous; The former is of
the taste of a Chestnut, and is usually eaten broiled or roasted in Embers. The
Ighname is somewhat insipid, but much more wholesome and larger than the Potato,
but both these sorts of Roots are of singular use to make very savory Pottage.

The Coco grows upon a Tree which is much like a Palm Tree: This Fruit is very
large, and has nothing but what may be applied to some Use: It is covered with
a kind of Tow, which may serve to caulk Vessels, better than Hemp: This Tow
being taken off, we meet with a large hard Nut, of an Oval Figure; of which
Cups and other Toys of the like nature are usually made, that bear the Name of
Coco's. This Nut contains a white Kernel, of the Taste of a Hazel Nut, lying
round about of the thickness of one's Finger: Lastly, the Middle is filled with
a cool Liquor resembling thin Milk, about the Quantity of a large Glass-full;
insomuch that this Fruit alone may serve for a Man's Sustenance: And indeed the
most part of the Indians do not trouble themselves about providing any
Victuals, when they know that they shall meet with Coco-Trees in the places
through which they are to pass.

The Goyave is somewhat bigger than a Nut: Its Pulp is red, very stony, and of
the Taste of a Peach. The Tree that bears this Fruit resembles our Plum-Trees.

There are also numerous Herds of Oxen, Hogs, and Sheep, with variety of Game,
and several sorts of Fowl, but every thing is sold ^t an excessive dear Rate.
The Fleet that arrives there every Year from Portugal, brings Wine, Meal, Oil,
Cheese; Linen and Woollen Cloth, and all other necessary Merchandises; and
returns laden with Sugar, Leather, and Train-Oil; from whence arises a
considerable Revenue to the King of Portugal. Formerly they had great
Quantities of Tobacco, but at present the Sale of it is forbidden, as one of
the greatest Obstacles to the Trade of the Bay of All Saints: It Is also
prohibited to deal in Corn and Wine, to prevent the interrupting of the
European Commerce, of which the Inhabitants may make considerable Advantage, as
well as those of St. Paul, in the Territories of St. Vincent, whose Political
Government is so Remarkable, that it may not be amiss to give some Account of
it by the way.

This Town, The Town of S. Paul tributary, but not subject to the King of
Portugal.
which is situated Ten Leagues up the Country, derives its Original from an
Association of Robbers of all Nations, who by little and little, formed a great
Town, and a kind of Commonwealth, where they made a Law, not to admit a
Governor. They are surrounded with high Mountains; so that one cannot enter,
or go out, but through a Defile or narrow Passage, where they keep a strong
Guard, for fear of being surpised by the Indians, with whom they almost
continually make War, and lest their Slaves should find Means to escape. These
Paulists usually march 40 or 50 in a Body, armed with Bows and Arrows, which
they use more dexterously than any Nation in the World: They traverse the whole
Continent of Brasil, passing as far as the River of Plata, or to that of the
Amazons, and return at the End of four or five Months, sometimes with above 300
Slaves, whom they drive as Herds of Oxen; and having tamed a little, they
dispose of them in the Country to till the Ground, or employ them in fishing
for Gold, which they find in so great quantity, that the King of Portugal, to
whom they carefully send a fifth Part, receives every Year above 8 or 900
Marks: They pay him this Tribute not out of a motive of Fear, for they are more
potent than he, but to follow the Custom of their Ancestors, who not being at
first well settled in their Retreat, endeavored to withdraw themselves from
Subjection to their Governors, under pretense of managing the King's Affairs,
to whom they own themselves at present, to be Tributaries, but not Subjects,
that they may shake off the Yoke on the first Opportunity.

On the 25th. instant, The Generosity of a Portuguese.
we set our sick Men on board again, who, except five or six, were very hearty.
The Commander of the Place where they lodged, was a generous old Gentleman, of
great Integrity, and was not at all tainted with the sordid Principles of his
Countrymen; For he entertained our sick Mariners with a Paternal Charity,
supplying them with Eggs, Confits, Wine, and generally with every thing that
was necessary for them, at his own proper Costs and Charges; nay he offered to
retain the weakest of them in his own House till our Return.

On the 27th. we set sail, and passed between the Forts, with our Cannons
mounted, and Matches lighted, being all ready to answer them if they should
attempt to disturb us about the Salute at parting, or should make us wait for
the Governor's Orders. We no longer stood in need of them, of which they were
also very sensible: They all appeared in Ranks on their Parapets, and seemed to
be overjoyed at our departure, by reason that they were tired with the
continual Guards that they kept during the time of our Abode among them. The
Governor thought himself so little secure, that he summoned all the
Inhabitants within four Leagues round about. We were no sooner gone, but he
caused a Fort, furnished with some Pieces of Ordnance, to be built below the
Town on a small Island, which commands the Road, and where the French settled
when this River was first discovered.

On the 29th. after a great Calm, we cast Anchor at seven a-clock in the
Evening in the Channel of La Isla Grande; and on the 30th. the Heat was so
excessive, that we were ready to burn even in the Water. In the Afternoon a
gentle An unknown fruit found in ye Great Island at Brasil,

p: 65

A Mapou Pear Found in ye great Island at Brasil,

Breeze came off from the Main, which moderated the Heat of the Sun; whereupon
we set sail, and having made three Leagues, cas^ Anchor by the Sun of Africa,
within a Musket Shot of the Land, and in a sandy and very convenient Creek,
where Vessels may be sheltered from all manner of Winds, and where one may take
in the best fresh Water.

La Isla Grande or the Great Island, La Isla Grande.
being about 18 Leagues in compass, lies high, and is beset with Woods of a
prodigious thickness, insomuch that one cannot walk in them 100 Paces together:
But there are entire Plains of Orange Trees and Lemmon-Trees, with much variety
of wild Fruits; and among others the Pear of Mapou, which bears a sort of Red
Cotton, and of which Quilts are made, that are so extremely durable, that they
can scarce be worn out; for by exposing them to the Sun from time to time, the
Cotton swells again of it self, and the Quilt becomes as it were new. We met
with another sort of Fruit, which is as big as a small Nut, and seems to have
the crowned Head of a Clove. There are also many of those Animals that we call
Tatous, and the Scales of which serve to adorn Apothecaries Shops: Their Flesh
is firm, and has the taste of fresh Pork.

On the Coast over-again^^ this Creek, stands a large Town belonging to the
Portugueses, where there are about four or five hundred Inhabitants, and two
Convents, viz. one of Carmelites, and the other of the Cordeliers. We there
bought some Provisions, viz. Oxen, Fowl, dried Fish, and four Pyrogues, What
Pyrogues are,
which cost us from forty to eighty Crowns: These are large Canoos, very long,
and made of one single Tree hollowed: They are light, fit for Descents, and
capable of holding 60 Men. The Governor of Rio-Janeiro sent on purpose to
forbid the Inhabitants to sell us any sorts of Commodities whatever; but they
had not much regard to his Prohibition, for they furnished us with every thing
we desired. They have all Habitations in the Mountains, and affect to be as
free as the Paulists.

On the 5th. Day of January A. D. 1696. Jan. 96.
after having taken in fresh Water and Wood, we set sail for the Streights of
Magellan.

On the 6th. 7th. 8th. and 9th. we had a great Calm; and on the 10th. map of
the strait of Magellan Page 66.

THE STRAIGHT OF MAGELLAN
A Scale of Leagues

being come within forty Leagues of the Land, we began to stand off from the
Coast at that distance, to avoid the Shelves of Sand that lie at the Mouth of
the River of Plata, and which run very far into the Main.

On the 21st. and 22d. at Night, as we were sailing across Cape St. Antony, we
lost sight of the Felicity, although the Moon shone bright, the Sea was calm, and
the Wind moderate; neither could the Fault be attributed to any thing, but the
Negligence of those Mariners who were then upon the Watch, and who relying too
much on the calmness of the Weather, fell asleep. We discharged diverse
Cannon-shot, and all steered different Courses, in quest of that Ship, but it
was to no purpose.

On the 23d. we saw a great many Sea-Wolves lying asleep on their Backs, upon
the Surface of the Water.

On the 26th. and 27th. we had a dreadful Storm of Thunder, and much Rain.

On the 29th. we saw some Whales, Sea-Pies, and prodigious Flocks of other
Birds, that followed us as it were so many Ducks.

On the 30th. we saw abundance of Sea-Weeds, which made us conjecture we were
near Land; but having sounded, it appeared that we were still distant from it
above forty Leagues.

On the 31st. the Sea was all over covered with small Cray-Fish, insomuch that
it might well be called the Red Sea; We took up above 10000 of them in Baskets.

On the 1st. and 2d. of February, February 1696.
the Winds were boisterous, and the Sea ran high.

On the 4th. at Noon, we discovered the Cape of St. Ynes de las-Bareras: The
Lands thereabouts are low, and as far as we could discern, very barren: We
discerned a very thick Smoke, which induced us to believe that there were some
Inhabitants. The most part of Navigators who have sailed on those Coasts, and
who have published Relations of their Voyages, affirm, that when the Savages
discover the Arrival of any Vessels, they usually make great Fires, and offer
Sacrifices to the Devil, to conjure him to raise Storms to destroy them.

On the 5th. and 6th. the Winds were very variable, and the Weather hazy.

On the 7th. at three a-clock in the Morning, the Pink let off a Gun, to give
us notice that she descried Land, whereupon we cast Anchor, because it was very
requisite for us to discover it; and at break of Day we discerned a Cape, which
our Pilot, and two of our Officers, who had before passed the Streights of
Magellan, assured us to be that of The Virgins. The Winds veer'd, and became
contrary, so that we were not able to cast Anchor, to make any Discovery.

On the 8th. the Winds still continued contrary to us; and at two a-clock in
the Afternoon blew with so great impetuosity, that our Cable broke; neither
could we hoise up our Sails, which were taken in, to give less Advantage to the
Wind; forasmuch as there was no probability of being able to carry any Sail, we
suffered our selves to lie by, at the mercy of the Waves, till the next Day at
four a-clock in the Morning, when the Fury of the Wind being somewhat abated,
we drew near the Land, and at Noon cast Anchor at the Mouth of the River of
Sancta Cruz, The River of Sancta Cruz.
there to wait for a favorable Gale, to rejoyn our Vessels. We scarce let fall
Anchor, but the Storm was appeased, the Sea became calm, and we made as much
Sail as we could that Day.

We doubled the Cape at Night, and at break of Day came up with our Fleet, and
steered our Course to the abovementioned Promontory, Cape 24. taken for that of
the Virgins.
which we supposed to be that of the Virgins; choosing rather to follow the
Directions of the Navigators who had already cruis'd about those Coasts, than
that of the Sea-Charts, which are often mistaken in places that are so little
frequented: However we insensibly drove upon a Shelf, from whence it would have
been very difficult to get off, if we had not timely discovered our Error by
sounding: Therefore we immediately changed our Course, and lengthened the
Coast, bearing but little Sail.

On the 11th. Instant, we discovered another Cape, very like the former, and
although we had scarce reason to doubt it to be that of the Virgins, yet we could
not be well satisfied till we found it by experience. We tacked about for some
time, till the Foggs were dispersed, and at Noon we entered the Straight, where
we cast Anchor at four a-clock in the Afternoon, at the Entrance of the Bay of
Possession, with a favorable Wind and Current.

On the 12th. at break of Day, we prepared to set sail, but there was so little
Wind, that we were not able to make three Leagues during the whole Day.

On the 13th. at break of Day, we set out again, and made as much sail as the
Tides would permit us. At four a-clock in the Afternoon we doubled the Cape
Entrana, Cape Entrana. Boucaut. Bay.
and cast Anchor at the Entrance of the Bay of Boucaut. We there saw several
Whales, and a great number of Porpoises all over white except their Head and
Tail.

On the 14th. we weighed Anchor, and tacked about till Noon, when the Tide
being contrary to us, we were obliged to cast Anchor within two Leagues of the
Land, in the middle of Boucaut Bay. The Coast is flat, barren, and destitute
both of fresh Water and Wood. We there met with Snipes, and many Flocks of
Sea-Pies; and some of our Mariners told us, that a League up the Land, they had
seen Buffles and Goats. There is also (as everywhere throughout the Streights)
a prodigious quantity of Cockles and Muscles, which are not at all inferior to
those of Charonne. We found some, the Shells of which were of an admirable
Beauty, and weighed half a pound.

On the 16th. Cape Gregory. S. George' s Island.
we weathered Cape Gregory, and at Noon cast Anchor within a small League of
St. George's Island, to which we could not come nearer, by reason that we were
becalmed, and the Tides began to run contrary. This Island being about a League
in Compass, is high and barren, yet we found there some Mushrooms, many
Sea-Pies, and several Hutts of Savages abandoned. We also took some Penguins,
Penguins.
from which the Island derives its Name, which was imposed by the English, by
reason of a great quantity of this sort of Birds which they found therein: They
are somewhat larger than Geese, have short Legs, with Gray and very thick
Feathers; Their Wings are bare without any Feathers, and serve only instead of
Finns: They live for the most part in the Water, retire to Land to sleep, and
make Holes in the Ground like Foxes. The most part of our Company spent the
Night there, to have the pleasure of viewing the Sea-Wolves: Sea Wolves.
These Animals climb up steep Rocks, sit on their Tails like Monkeys, and make
a dreadful noise to call their Mates: When they bring forth Young, they carry
them into the Woods, supply them with Fish, and tend them as carefully as an
indulgent Mother does her Children.

On the 18th. a blustering Wind arose, which obliged us to stand in again for
Boucaut-Bay, where we cast Anchor in the Evening, under shelter of Cape
Gregory: The Pink followed us, and the other Vessels were not long in coming up.

On the 19th, and 20th. it was excessive cold, and the Winds grew more
boisterous. We saw great Fires on the Island of Fuogo, and the Savages seemed
to be desirous to converse with us, but the Sea ran so high, th^^ we could not
come near them.

On the 21th. we set sail again, doubled Cape Gregory, and having crossed St.
George's Island, along which we coasted with Plummet in hand, we suddenly found
our selves fallen upon the Point of a Shelf: We cast Anchor to sound, and
continued our Course again an hour after. At 5 a-Clock in the Evening, we cast
Anchor within six Leagues of St. George's Island, in a Creek, where the Coast
arises delightfully, and begins to be beset with Woods: There are diverse small
Rivers, where very good Water may be taken in, and on the Banks of which we met
with Salery, Gooseberries, Foxes, Bustards, Thrushes, Ducks, and Cormorants,
and abundance of other Sea-Fowl.

On the 22th, and 23th. the Winds were contrary.

On the 24th. we set sail, and at Noon came up again with our Vessels, which we
left at St. George's Island, and which had cast Anchor within two Leagues of
Famine Bay: We took in there very good fresh Water, but not without some
difficulty, by reason that the Coast was full of Rocks. In that place we had
the first sight of the Savages, Savages of the Streights of Magellan.
of whom about Eight or Ten on the Seashore were making certain Bark-Canoos,
which they did not abandon, but entreated us by Signs not to meddle with them.
Among these Savages was a robust old Woman, who appeared to be Aged about 80
Years, and who seemed in a manner to Command 'em. They were armed with Slings,
Bows and Arrows, and were attended with 5 or 6 little Dogs, which apparently
served 'em for Hunting: Their Arrows were pointed P. 74

Mountains Coverd with Snow dureing ye whole year.

the Hutts of ye Savages

Peng^^^^s

M. Vander Gucht Scul:

with a sharp Flint-Stone very artificially cut, in form of a Serpent's Tongue:
They also made fit large pieces of Flint to cut Wood, not having the use or
knowledge of Iron.

These Savages are robust, and of a tall Stature, their Complexion being of an
Olive-Colour: Their Hair is black, long, and cut above their Head in form of a
Crown. They usually paint their Faces, Arms, and several other parts of their
Body, with a white Tincture. Notwithstanding the excessive Cold, they always go
naked; except that their Shoulders are covered with the Skins of Sea-Dogs and
Sea-Wolves. They are destitute of Religion, and free from all manner of Care.
They have no settled Habitation, but rove up and down, sometimes in one place,
sometimes in another. Their Hutts are made only of a Semicircle of Branches,
which they set up, and let one into another, to shelter themselves from the
Wind. These are the famous Patagons whom some Authors avouch to be eight or ten
Foot high, and of whom they tell so many strange Tales, even making them
swallow whole Pails full of Wine: However they appeared to us to be very sober;
and the tallest among them was not above six Foot high.

On the 25th. Cape Froward.
we prepared to set Sail, but had scarce passed Cape Froward, when we found the
Winds variable and contrary; insomuch that not being able to cast Anchor, we
were obliged to pass the Cape in the Night.

On the 26th. at break of Day, the Fury of the Winds being somewhat allayed, we
set Sail again. At two a-clock in the Afternoon we doubled Cape Froward and
Cape Holland at ten at Night, Cape Holland.
but with terrible Blasts of Wind that came from between two Mountains, and for
the most part surpised us in the midst of a great Calm. At Midnight there
arose a high Wind, which obliged us to stand in for some Port; and the first
Anchorage that we could meet with, was two Leagues above Cape Froward, in a
spacious and very convenient Bay, where we continued till the 3d. of the next
Month, to take in Wood and fresh Water, in a River which there falls into the
Sea, and where the Shallops ride at flowing Water. In a little Island situated
in the middle of this River, we met with a dead Body half rotten, and covered
with about a Foot map The French Bay with the Mouth of the River Gennes in the
Straight of Magellan
Page 77

of Earth, but we could not distinguish whether it were the Corpse of an
European or of a Savage, only the Skins of Sea-Wolves, which we found hard by,
induced us to believe that he was a Native of the Country. This Bay is not
marked in the Charts; therefore we called it the French Bay, and imposed on the
River the Name of Monsieur de Gennes. The French Bay, and River de Gennes.


On the 3d. of March March 3. 1696.
we put out to Sea, with a favorable Gale; but we had scarce doubled Cape
Froward, when the Winds veer'd after their usual manner, with Blasts that came
by Fits, and fell foul on our Vessel when we were least aware of it. We passed
the Cape in the Night, the Winds blew f^^h, and we were obliged to stand in two
Leagues above the French Bay, which we were not able to make.

On the 5th. we discovered Famine-Bay, Famine- Bay.
so called, because the Inhabitants of a new Colony of Spaniards were there
miserably starved to death, which Colony was settled by Philip II. King of
Spain, who endeavored by that means to hinder the Passage of Foreigners to the
Southern Sea. This Bay is large, having a firm bottom, so that 40 Ships may
conveniently ride at Anchor therein. There are spacious Plains round about,
which may be sown with diverse sorts of Grains. There is also great plenty of
Game; and it is probable that the Spaniards might find more in those Parts, if
it were not destroyed by the Savages.

On the 6th. we weighed Anchor, and doubled the Capes Froward and Holland,
where we felt, as at other times, very furious Blasts of Wind; but the next Day
at Noon, we cast Anchor two Leagues below Port Gallant.

On the 8th. a high Wind arose, which drove the Sun of Africa from her Anchor,
and forced her to stand in for the French Bay^

On the 9th. at Noon, the Winds were as favorable as could be wished for; yet
we could not take the Advantage, by reason that we were obliged to wait for the
Sun of Africa, which did not appear till the next Morning at break of Day: Then
we prepared to set Sail, but the Winds immediately veer'd, and became contrary,
with a great deal of Hail and Rains so that we were obliged to cast Anchor a
League below Port Gallant.

The Winds continued contrary to us, till the 20th. Instant, being very sharp,
and there fell abundance of Rain, Hail, and Snow, with which the Mountains are
covered during the whole Year. We took in fresh Water and Wood, and saw a great
number of Whales.

On the 20th. The Rode of Port Gallant.
we set sail with a favorable Wind, but it soon returned to its wonted Career,
and we could only make the Road of Port Galant, where we continued fifteen Days
longer, with cold Winds, a great deal of Rain and Snow. This Road is large, and
sheltered from the Eastern Winds. The Situation of the Harbor is pleasant and
very commodious, two small Rivers falling into it. There are also to be seen
the finest Shells in the World, with variety of Fowl, viz. Larks, Thrushes,
Ducks, and abundance of Sea-Pies. We often heard the Cries of the Savages in
the Mountains, but could not see them.

Forasmuch as our Provisions began to fail, the Season being already very far
advanced, and there was no longer any hopes to meet with favorable Winds to
convey us into the Southern Sea; we held a Council on the 3d. Day of April,
April 1696.
and it was determined that if the Wind did not change within the space of two
Days, we should return to La Isla Grande, to take in Provisions, in order to
seek our Fortunes elsewhere. It may be easily imagined in so lamentable a
Conjuncture, how great a Mortification this Disappointment was to Persons, who
hoped to make their Fortune by so noble an Enterprise. There was not one
Mariner of the whole Squadron who did not choose rather to perish with hunger,
than to be diverted from the right Course; And indeed they were already
accustomed to eat Rats, and paid fifteen Pence a-piece for them. Although we were
not so happy as to see those fortunate Coasts of Peru, from whence we are
supplied with what is generally esteemed, most precious; nevertheless I am apt
to believe, that a particular Account of the Occasion of our Undertaking this
Voyage, may not be altogether unacceptable to the Reader.

In the Year 1686. The Occasion of our Voyage.
certain Free-booters of St. Domingo, who are well known to be Enemies to
Peace, after having for many Years infested the Coast of Carack, New-Spain, and
Cuba, without being able to get any considerable Prize, took a Resolution to
pass to those of the Southern-Sea, which they know to be much more Rich, and
less fortified. There were two Passages which lay open into those Parts, viz.
one along the Coast, and the other by the Straight of Magellan: The former, as
the shortest, was taken by some other Rovers; but there were two great
Difficulties, one of being attacked by the Indians during their Course, who
have sometimes War and sometimes Peace with the Spaniards: And the other
Difficulty is to find in that Sea, Vessels convenient for the performing of
such a Voyage. The Passage through the Straight of Magellan appearing to these
Free-booters to be the safest, The Free-booters enter the Southern Sea through
the Straight
they set Sail, being 80 Men in number, for the Southern-Sea, where they soon
became formidable by the frequent Descents they made in several Places, and by
the great number of Ships richly laden, which they took: However,
notwithstanding these Prizes, they made but little Booty, as well by reason of
the irregular Conduct of their ill-disciplin'd Company, as in regard that the
Merchandises were too combersome to be managed by Persons who had no settled
place of Retreat: Therefore they contented themselves only with putting them to
Ransom; and when they could take a sufficient quantity of Provisions for five
or six Months, they retired to some Island, where they spent their time in
Hunting and Fishing; and after having consumed their whole Stock, they returned
to the Coast.

Thus our Free-booters lived wretchedly for the space of seven Years, They
continued there seven Years
till some of them, moved with a Desire to return to their Native Country, took
a Resolution to sail back to the Northern Sea, and to that purpose met together
in the Island Fernand, where they divided their Booty, and every one of them
had the Sum of eight or nine thousand Livres for his Share. However twenty
three of them having lost by Gaming what they were so long in getting,
continued on that Island with a A sort of Vessel.
Pirogue, in which they crossed over to Peru, resolving either to perish, or at
least to repair their Losses. Some time after, they took five rich Ships, among
which they chose that which they judged to be most convenient for the making an
end of their Voyage: They loaded it with cast Metal, diverse Indian Merchandises
and Provisions, and at last would have returned with a much richer Cargo than
the others, if they had not had the ill Fortune to lose their Ship in the
Straight of Magellan, where they spent ten whole Months in building a Bark, as
well as they could, and with all the Application requisite in so great an
Exigence: They laded their Bark with what they could save out of the Wreck of
their Ship, and passed Cayenna.

All the Free-Booters being come back to the Northern Sea, They return to the
Northern Sea.
thought fit to retire with their small Cargo; so that some of them settled at
Brasil, and others went to Cayenna, St. Domingo, and the other Islands of
America; but there were about four or five, who being unwilling any longer to
undergo the Hardships of so mean a Condition, took a Resolution to make a
Second Voyage, and to that purpose, they passed over into France, with good
Memoires concerning their Adventures. One of them named Macerty, made
Application to Mousieur de Gennes, whom he knew to be a Man very fit for the
Management of great Undertakings, insomuch that the latter approved his Design,
and went to Paris, to represent to the Court the Advantages that might arise
from such a Voyage, proffering his Service to carry on so noble an Enterprise.

The Proposals made by M. de Gennes were received with all the approbation,
that could be wished for; the King supplied him with Ships at his own choice,
and the Project was so well approved of, upon account of its Novelty, that
diverse Persons of the highest Quality readily contributed to the equipping of
our Fleet. A great number of Young Men, who were equally excited by Curiosity
to see such fine Countries; and by the hopes of getting an opportunity to make
their Fortune, earnestly desired to be admitted into the Company: However it
seems, we did not go on successfully in all Points, since our Design at last
proved abortive: But it is to be hoped, that the Court will not discourage an
Undertaking of so great Importance, which failed only by reason of the small
Experience we then had of the Season of the Winds. It Is well known, that the
Spaniards are not in a Condition to make War with us; that by the means of the
vast Treasures which they gather daily out of New-Spain and Peru, they have
actually made themselves Masters of those Countries, by spilling the Blood of a
vast multitude of poor Indians, who only sought for an amicable Correspondence
with those haughty Invaders, who to strike a greater Terror into their Minds,
gave it out, that they were descended of the Gods. Besides all the Tortures
which they could devise for the destroying of those miserable Wretches, they
carried on their Cruelty so far, as to assassinate and sell them for the
Slaughter, for the Maintenance of their Attendants. And indeed, there are many
Frenchmen who can testify, that the Coasts of Peru are still covered with the
Skeletons of those unfortunate Victims, whose Blood cries to Heaven for
Vengeance, and for the Liberty of their native Country; insomuch that nothing
can prevent the Destruction of those Enemies of God and Nature, who under the
Name of Christians, revive Idolatry, and live in the midst of their Treasure,
in a Luxury that even surpasses that of brute Beasts. I might enlarge on this
Subject, but that it is more expedient to resume our former Discourse, and to
give a farther Account of our Misfortunes.

On the 5th. Instant, the Winds being still contrary, we prepared to return to
the Northern Sea, as it was determined two Days before. But we were scarce
under sail, when the Winds changed as it were on purpose to deceive us, and
induced us to make another Attempt, which was not only fruitless, but would
have certainly proved our Ruin, if we had not been apparently protected by
Divine Providence in a very extraordinary manner. We had not made a League,
when these favorable Winds terminated in a great Calm, and the Tides (the
Course of which we could not discern from Cape Froward) drove us on the Coasts,
insomuch that four Shallops were not able to get us clear of the Shore. We let
fall a large Anchor, which very much abated the force of the Current, but could
not hinder us from running a-float, by reason that the bottom not being firm,
could not hold it. We might have leapt off from the Poop ashore, and judged the
Danger to be unavoidable, Apparent Danger.
when a gentle Breeze happily blew fresh from the North, and set us at Liberty;
whereas if any other Wind had arose, we had certainly perished. In the mean
while, the Sun of Africa and the Glutton Frigate were very near running the
same Hazard.

We lay before the Cape during the whole Night, and at break of Day, we set
sail again, but the Winds being contrary, we were forced to spend the next
Night in the like manner, before Cape Froward.

On the 7th. They stand in for the Northern Sea.
at break of Day, the Winds blowing fresh again from the North-East, we made
our last Effort, and doubled Cape Froward, but to no purpose. However we did
not forbear to put out to Sea, and on the 11th. at six a-clock in the Evening,
having passed between Terra de Fuogo and the Shelves that lie at the Mouth of
the Straight, we re-enter'd the Northern Sea, and steered our Course directly
for La Isla Grande.

On the 16th. at break of Day, we were separated from the Sun of Africa and the
Seditious Frigate, by the means of a great Fog, which hindered 'em from hearing
the Signals that we gave to tack about.

On the 17th. and 18th. we had foul Weather, and the Sea ran very high.

On the 26th. the Weather was very foggy, and the Winds were so boisterous,
that we were obliged to take down the Mizzen-Mast: The Waves swelled extremely,
and we were beset on all sides as it were with Mountains of foaming Billows;
insomuch that in the Evening we lost one of our Mariners, who fell into the
Sea, as he was coming down from the Topmast.

On the 27th. our Pilots sailed across the River de la Plata, at the distance
of 60 Leagues from the Land, and on the 29th. we had a great deal of foul
Weather.

The Winds were very favorable to us, May 1696
till the 9th. of the next Month; but we did not take a provident Care to sail
along the Coasts, which we could not discover till within 20 Leagues to the
North of the Islands of St. Ann.

On the 12th. we cast Anchor in a Road very full of Fish, where we took a great
quantity of fine ones, and among others, diverse Sea-Porcupines, Sea-Porcupines.
so called, because they are actually armed with sharp-pointed Bristles, as the
Porcupine or Hedg-hog, which they prick up when pursued by other Fishes.

On the 13th. at nine a-clock in the Evening, we made ready to set Sail; but on
the 14th. and 15th. the Winds were very variable.

P. 88

A Sea Porcupine taken on the Coast of Brasil*


On the 16th. we discovered Cape Fry, but were not able to double it, because
there was very little Wind stirring. About eight a-clock in the Evening, the
Sky being very serene, we discerned the Moon to be in an Eclipse, that
continued almost for the space of two Hours, and which indeed was not foreseen
by us, in regard that we did not meet with any Almanacks in the Straight of
Magellan, where the Inhabitants, although great Star-gazers, do not reap the
Fruits of their Observations. About two a-clock in the Morning, we descried a
Vessel under the Wind, and some gave it out that there were two: Whereupon we
prepared our Batteries, and kept the Weather-gage during the whole Night. At
break of Day, we perceived it to be a Portuguese Bark, which a Storm had driven
from the Mouth of the River Janeiro: The Mariners belonging to this. Vessel
informed us, that the Fleet was arrived, and that the Governor was changed, but
that he heard no News of our Ships. We freely bestowed on them two Barrels of
Water, of which they were destitute two Days, and were not able to make Land,
to take in any.

On the 19th. we doubled Cape Fry, and on the 20th. we cast Anchor within
seven Leagues of Rio-Janeiro; but we had not so much as one blast of Wind, and
the Currents were contrary. There we saw Two of those Pillars of Water that
arise out of the Sea, and which are commonly called Spouts: When they draw
near, it is customary to discharge several Cannon-shot, to disperse them, and by
that means the danger is often escaped.

On the 21st. we put out to Sea, and the next Day we cast Anchor, within two
Leagues of the Coast, before the Mouth of the River, but we determined not to
enter it, by reason that our Place of Meeting was appointed to be at La Isla
Grande.

On the 24th. we prepared to set Sail again, when the Rocks cut our Cable, and
saved us the trouble of weighing Anchor; and so little Wind was stirring in the
Night, that at break of Day we found our selves driven by the Currents under
Cape Fry, which made us take a Resolution to stand in for the Islands of St.
Ann, to wait for a fair Wind, as also to take in fresh Water and Provisions, of
which we had a very short Allowance. Thus we cast Anchor on the 26th. Instant
at Noon, and found the Island as full of Fowl as at our first Arrival.

On the 27th. we sent our Boat ashore to take in Provisions, and to get
Information about our Vessels: We purchased six Oxen, two Hoggs, and some
Pullets, but not without a great deal of Difficulty, by reason that all the
Provisions were transported to Rio Janeiro, for the use of the Fleet: We were
also informed, that our Ships had entered that River twenty Days ago.

On the 29th. at five a-clock in the Evening, we set Sail with a favorable
Wind, and ordered the Pink to carry the Lanthorn: We followed her for some
time, but forasmuch as she sailed too near the Coast, and the Night was dark,
we left her to continue her Course, and stood somewhat farther out to Sea.

On the 30th. at break of Day, we weathered Cape Fry, and found the Winds and
Currents contrary as before. At the same time, we discerned the Pink four large
Leagues to the Windward of us; nevertheless (as we were afterward informed)
she continued at Sea eight Days longer, before she could find means to enter
the River.

The rest of that Day, and the next, we had but little Wind, and that too was
contrary; insomuch that after diverse fruitless Attempts, Monsieur de Gennes
judged, that for the future we ought not to be obstinately resolved to pursue
our intended Course, lest we should be reduced to the greatest Extremity; but
that 'twas more expedient to stand in for the Bay of All Saints; since by
sailing thither, we should get so far onward in our Way, and we should
certainly meet with plenty of Provisions in that Place.

Therefore we cast Anchor June the first, June 1696
at Four a-clock in the Evening, before the Islands of St. Ann, to get some
Recruits, having on board Victuals sufficient only to serve for eight Days at
most; and forasmuch as it was requisite to give notice to our Vessels of the
Course that we had determined to steer, we sent an Officer ashore to desire a
Passport of the Commander of the Town, to go to Rio-Janeiro by Land, to
acquaint them with our Design: the Officer who had received Orders to return
the same Evening, not appearing by next Day Noon; Monsieur de Gennes believing
some Misfortune had befallen him, sent out a Shallop armed with two small Guns,
to get Intelligence, which returned to us again about Five in the Evening: And
the Men reported, That they had seen the Canoe in the River, where there were
Dwelling-places; and that the Officer who appeared on Shore, came up to the
point of Land there, in Order to give them Notice to return, because it was
shallow Water, and that he had passed over a Ridge of Rocks where the Surge of
the Sea was very frightful; and that this was the Reason, together with his
tarrying for three Beefs they were in quest of for us, that detained our Canoe
from returning to us.

The Shallop went back next Day, about ten of the Clock, and as she was ready
to enter in, the Officer who had sent her back the Day before, gave them a
Signal to come to an Anchor, and to wait till the Tide came in. They continued
in that Posture till two a Clock in the Afternoon; when the Officer that
commanded, grown quite weary with staying, made use both of his Sails and Oars,
and put forwards; and that in spite of the Advice of the Master, and of all
the Signals that could be made from the Shore to the contrary: But he was no
sooner incommoded with the terrible Rocks aforementioned, than that he began to
repent (though it was now too late) of his Rashness. After they had bore diverse
rude Attacks of the Sea, a Wave brought all their Oars on one side, and this
Wave was followed by another, that opened the Shallop in the very middle, and
drowned the Commander, The Shallop lost.
with seven Seamen more; but the Master, together with the Gunner and seven
other Mariners, saved themselves, and remained on Shore to seek out their
Comrades Bodies.

That same Evening our Canoe came to inform us of this sorrowful News; and
withal, that it was impossible for us to pass over the Territories of the
Portuguese to go to Rio-Janeiro, because the Governor had given Orders at Cape
de Fry, to suffer no Stranger to pass that way. She brought us three Beefs,
some Poultry, a Tyger-Cat, and another very strange Animal, whom the Portuguese
p. 99

A CAPIVARD or Water Hog at the foot of a Bananier.
call by the Name of Capivard: The Capivard.
he has a Body like a Hog, his Head is of the shape of an Hares, and his Hair
thick and ash-colored; he has no Tail at all, but sits upon his Breech as an
Ape does; his Abode is mostly in the Water, and goes not ashore but in the
Nightime, when he ravages all the Gardens round about, and roots up Trees
that he may come at the Fruit of them.

On the 4th we sung Mass for the dead, and discharged three Pieces of Cannon
for the Officer that had been drowned, whose Name was Salior, born at Paris,
and a young Gentleman whose Loss deserved to be regretted. This being over, the
Canoe was sent to shore again, to bring back those Seamen that had the Luck to
escape drowning; she returned the same Day, and brought along with her two
Beefs more: The Bodies of our drowned Friends could not be found, and the
Portuguese informing us that the Place where they were lost were full of
Requins, it is not to be doubted but they were devoured by them.

Next Day, which was the sixth, about three in the Morning, we made ready to
sail for the Bay of All Saints, without giving Information of the same to the
other Vessels we had with us; but seeing Monsieur de Gennes had spoken of it
before at la Gloutonne, we had some sort of reason to hope that they would
rejoin us, at least at Cayenne.

On the 7th and 8th we steered a wide Course, that we might put by the
Abralhes, which are certain Islands and heaps of Rocks that run out five and
forty Leagues into the Sea, and on which diverse Ships have perished. The
Portuguese, who are well acquainted with them, make no great Difficulty of
sailing through the midst of them; and so save a large Compass that others are
obliged to make, to avoid them. We saw a great Whale the Day following, that
went round our Ship several times, and twice under it.

We were on the 10th, 11th, and 12th. troubled with excessive Heats, and had
but very little Wind; at what time we caught a great Number of Requins, which
was a considerable help to lengthen out our Provisions: But though this Fish
appears to be firm Flesh enough, yet it is so insipid that several of our Men
were injured with the eating of it. It Is thick, and five or six Foot long, a
great Lover of Man's Flesh, has a large Mouth, and therein five rows of very
sharp Teeth: He turns himself upon his back to catch his Prey, and has two or
three small Fishes near him that are his Pilots, and never forsake him, but
serve to secure him from being surprised by the Whale.

There is a sort of Fish which they call Sucet, that is commonly fastened to
the Requin, and this has given many Men occasion to believe that he is his
Pilot; but herein they are mistaken, for this small Fish never closes with the
other, but when he finds himself pursued; and then taking half a turn round, he
strikes the Requin over the Head, and fixes himself so fast to the other, that
it is impossible for him to make him let go his hold; insomuch, that this little
Fish makes himself to be convoyed with this pretty sort of Guard whithersoever
he pleases: On the three following Days, viz. the 13th, 14th, and 15th, we were
incommoded with contrary Winds; but on the 17th we kept about fifteen Leagues
off of the Abralhes and sailed on, and next Day passed over the Shallows of St.
Antony.

We made Land the Nineteenth, The Currents follow the Course of the Sun on the
Coast of Brasil.
which our Pilots computed at above thirty Leagues distance; and this made us
judge, That the Sea Currents moved to the North, as the Portuguese had assured
us, who take it for a Maxim, that the Currents on the Coast of Brasil follow
the Course of the Sun; that when the same is in the Northern Hemisphere, they
run to the Northward, but when in the Southern, to the Southward. On the
Nineteenth at Night, having got within six Leagues of Cape St. Antony, we
brought to, and by break of Day, we saw about two Leagues to the Windward of
us, a Ship that steered the same Course as we did; whereupon we slackned our
sail to let her come up, and believing it might have been one of our own Fleet,
we gave her a Signal whereby to know us, but she returned us no Answer, and
proved to be a Portuguese Ship, that was making the best of her way for the Bay
of All Saints as well as we: About Noon we made the Cape of St. Antony, Cape
St. Antony.
and saw all along the Coast a great Number of Barks, and the Negro's Piperies,
as they are called, being no other than three or four pieces of Wood made fast
together, whereon two Men go out a fishing to the extent of two Leagues: Some
of them we boarded, but we could never bring them to conduct us to the Road,
they alleging, they were forbid to do it; but I believe it was because they
would not leave their fishing.

But it fortunately happened, that we descried two sorts of small Tartanes,
that were for making the best of their way into the Bay as well as we; them we
waited for, and required them to grant us a Pilot for our Money; upon which,
one of the Masters of these Tartanes, offered himself to conduct us to the
Place where we were to Anchor, and this he performed with all imaginable
Civility: We drew up in Order, within Cannon Shot of Cape St. Antony, and about
five in the Evening cast Anchor within a small League of the Town, that we
might not embarrass our selves with the Portuguese Fleet we found there,
consisting of between forty and fifty Sail, all laden and ready every minute to
sail away.

As soon as we were come to an Anchor, there came a Lieutenant from the
Admiral, to require us to salute him; but Monsieur de Gennes made him answer,
the King had given him Orders not to salute any, without they received Gun for
Gun; and that he would send his next Captain, to settle that Affair with the
Governor: The Lieutenant hereupon, sent to see for his Shallop, in order to
assist us; and after a thousand tenders of his Service to us, he accompanied
the Chevalier de Fontenay to wait upon the Governor, with whom he had no long
Dispute, for they quickly agreed not to salute one another at all, which made
most of the Portuguese to murmur, and concernedly to say, That it was not to be
endured, that a Frenchman should pass under their Forts without saluting them,
and yet not be called to an Account for it: But it is well known, they are no
otherwise brave than upon their own Dunghills; and that they had rather, upon
Occasion, have Recourse to their Beads than to their Courage.

The Morrow being The Feast of God, Monsieur de Gennes, accompanied with
several other Officers, went to wait upon the Governor and the Intendant, who
showed him abundance of Civilities: The Governor's Name was Don John de
Lancastre, one of the Principal Men of the Kingdom, and Viceroy of Brasil:
Then they went to see the Procession of the Holy Sacrament, The Procession of
the Holy Sacrament.
which is as remarkable in that Town, for the vast Number of Crosses, Shrines,
rich Ornaments, armed Troops, Companies, Fraternities, and Religious Orders; as
it is ridiculous for the Masquerades, Musical Instruments, and Dancers that
attend thereat, and who by their wanton Postures, invert the end of this Holy
Ceremony. The Procession was no sooner over, but our Gentlemen went to hear
Mass, to the Convent of the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits; where they were
received by some Fathers of the French Nation very kindly, who confirmed unto
them the Loss of Namur, and the Hopes there were of a Peace with Savoy; from
them they went to dine with the French Consul, and heard a great deal more News
there also.

We were also informed by a Friar newly come from Goa, News from Goa.
that before he had left that Port, he had seen a French Ship that put in
there, after having fought three Arabian Vessels, by whom she had been very
rudely handled. When these mischievous Pirates board any Ship, they do, in
order to blind their Enemies, make use of a sort of wrought Lime, which being
squashed down upon the Bridge they use upon that Occasion, has a most terrible
Effect.

Here we came to know also of the Loss of the Famous Montauban, Montauban
Shipwrecked.
of whom the Free-booters made so much Noise at Bourdeaux. He met with a large
English Ship on the Coast of Guinea, whom he boarded, and took her by main
Force; but the English Commander being enraged that he should be taken by a
Free-booter, he set the Powder on fire, and blew up his own Ship and that of
Montauban's; who with a dozen or fifteen of his own Men, threw himself into the
Sea, where they floated upon Masts for five Days and five Nights, and at last
got a-shoar half dead in the King of the Negro's Country, where they were
kindly received, upon the account of an old Portuguese that Traded upon that
Coast, and who took Compassion on those miserable Wretches: When they had been
there about five or six Months, a Dutch Ship bound for Jamaica passed by that
way, which took Montauban and seven or eight of his Followers, who promised to
pay for their Passage, on board him; while the other six, who could not find
the same Favor at the Dutch-man's hands, got a Passage in a Portuguese Flute,
that carried Negro's to All Saints Bay, from whence we gave them free
Transportation to Martenico.

On the 4th of July, July, 1696
the Admiral with diverse Merchant Ships, anchored in the Road; and on the 8th,
the whole Fleet made ready to sail away for Lisbon, consisting in all of 45
Ships, laden with Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Fish, Oil and Skins; they were almost
all of them mounted from twelve to thirty six pieces of Cannon, but the Admiral
and Vice Admiral that were Men of War, and out upon the King's Account, carried
one of them sixty Guns, and the other no less than seventy two.

We drew nearer to the City on the 9th, having hitherto taken in no Provisions;
for the Portuguese Fleet had made it excessive dear, but now we bought some
European Meal, Magniot, and Rice; and the Intendant was so civil, as to let us
have the Use of the King's Magazine, to provide Salt to season our Provision
with: And that we might not be wanting in any thing to our selves that was
necessary; we began also to build us a Shallop instead of that which we had
lost at St. Anne's.

All Saints may be reckoned for one of the largest, A Description of All Saints
Bay.
finest, and most convenient Bay of any other in the World, being capable of
containing no less than two thousand Ships; of a very good Depth, and no Winds
to be feared there. They take a great Number of Whales therein, build very fine
Ships, and they had one then upon the Stocks that would carry sixty pieces of
Cannon.

As for the City of St. Salvador, that is seated upon this Bay, it is large,
well built, and very populous; but the Situation of it is not so advantageous,
as could be wished. It Is high and low, and scarce one straight Street therein;
it is the Capital City of Brasil, an Archiepiscopal See, and the Residence of
the Viceroy: This place is honored with a Sovereign Council, and the
Privilege to coin Money; where, in order to quicken Trade, they make such sort
of Pieces as are current nowhere else, but in Brasil: They have on the one
side the Arms of Portugal, and a Cross charged with a Spear on the other, with
this Inscription, SVBQ. SIGN. STABO.

This City, to the Seaward, is defended with some Forts, and several Batteries
mounted with Cannon, and to the Landward, with earthen Bastions ill made. We
saw them lay the Foundation of a Fortress, the Governor had ordered to be
erected about half a Cannon shot without the Town: The Dutch attempted diverse
times to make themselves Masters of this Place, but without Success, though they
have taken away two and twenty Ships from thence at one clap.

The Inhabitants, to say nothing of the common People, who are insolent to the
highest Degree, are neat, civil, and honest, and withal rich, being lovers of
Trade, and for the most part are of a Jewish Extract; and this is the Reason,
that when any one of the Inhabitants is about to make one of his Sons a Divine,
he is obliged to prove his Ancestors were Christians, as the Knights of Malta
are under an Obligation of making out their Gentility, before they enter into
the Order. They love Women extremely, and spare no Charges for the setting out
of their Wives, who in respect to all other things, have Cause enough to
complain; for they are never allowed to see any Body, and go not out of doors
at any other time but on Sunday early in the Morning, to go to Church: They are
a very jealous People, and it is a kind of a point of Honor for a Man to stab
his Wife, when he can convict her of being unfaithful to his Bed; though for all
that, this cannot hinder many of them from finding out a way to impart some of
their Favors to us Frenchmen, whose winning and free Conversation they are
mightily in love with.

As the Town is nothing throughout but up's and downs, and that consequently
Carriages are very impracticable there; their Slaves are forced to perform what
Horses should otherwise do, and carry the heaviest sort of Goods from one place
unto another: And it is also for the same Reason, that a thing they call a
Palanquin is much in use there; it is nothing else but a kind of a Sedan,
covered over with a little embroidered Canopy, and carried by two Negro's by
the help of a long Pole, whereunto it is fastened at both ends: Persons of
Quality are carried therein to Church, to make their Visits, and also into the
Fields. The Houses are high-built, and most of them of Freestone and Brick;
their Churches are very sumptuous, being finely gilt, full of Silver-plate,
Sculptures, and a vast Number of the best Ornaments that are to be met with:
And as for the Cathedral-Church there, dedicated to the Cross, the Lamps and
Candlesticks are so high, and massy withal, that two Men can scarce carry them.

They have several sorts of Religious Orders amongst them; as Franciscans,
Carmelites, Benedictines, Jesuits, and diverse others, and all of them, except a
little Convent of French and Italian Capuchins, are very rich; and more
particularly, the Jesuits are very potent there, they being no less than 190 in
Number, their House of a vast Extent, and their Church large and well
beautified: Their Vestry is one of the most Magnificent that ever was seen,
it is about an hundred and fifty Foot long, and of proportionable Breadth: They
have three Altars in it, two whereof are placed at the two ends, and the third
in the midst of that part that joins to the Church; and upon which may be seen,
every Morning, above twenty Calices, all of them made of Gold, Vermillion, and
Silver; on each side of this last Altar stand two great Tables, that are of
that length, that there is room only left for two doors to open, by which they
enter into the Church. These two Tables are made of very fine Wood, the whole
Surface of them being adorned with Ivory, a sort of Network, and a great many
fine Water-colour Paintings, that are brought thither from Rome. The fourth
side of this Vestry, that stands to the Seaward, is pierced with diverse large
Crosses from top to bottom, and the Ceiling very curiously painted.

The Soil here is flat or level, watered with fine Rivers, on which the
Portuguese inhabit for above fifty Leagues into the Country, whose Dominion the
Indians shun, and for that end retire into the Woods; but they steal their
Cattle continually, and eat them themselves when they can catch them: Our
Capuchins, who (as we have already observed) have a Convent in this City, have
traveled four or five Years among these poor People, and exposed themselves
with an Apostolical Zeal, to all sorts of Fatigues, in order to reduce them
from their Blindness and Ignorance.

The Earth produces Sugarcanes, Tobacco, Cotton, Magniot-Roots, Rice, Maes,
and such good Pasturage, that they breed so great a Number of Cattle, that Meat
is sold there under a Penny a Pound; but the Country is so pestered with Ants,
that they are constrained, for the preserving of their Fields of Maes and
Magniot, to carry them to feed upon the Roads: And those who are curious in
Gardening, must, by the help of several small Channels, form an Island of every
Bed, to drown the Ants in their Passage over. They have Pulse and Fruits there
in abundance, such as they call the Banane, Ananas, Patatoes, Ighname, Cocoe,
and Goyave, of which we have given a Description already.

Here they have also Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger, the Oil of Capahu, Balsom, and
several sorts of Roots that have a wonderful Effect; and amongst the rest,
those called Para-ayra-braba, and Hypopecovana. The Cinnamon-tree is about the
Height of a small Cherry-tree, bearing long Leaves, and pointed at the end, of
a bright green Color; the Jesuits were the first that brought them thither out
of Ceylan, of which they took great Care: But in some Years they grew very
common, because that the Birds who eat the Fruit thereof, sow the Seed up and
down everywhere, being not able to digest it. The Plant which bears the
Pepper, clings round about to other Trees like Ivy, has pretty large Leaves,
pointed at the ends, and of a deep green; and the Fruit it produces are small
Grapes, like those growing on the wild Vine.

The Capahu-Oyle and the Balsom, come from the Jurisdiction of Spiritu Sancto;
those they draw from certain Trees, where the wild Beasts by rubing against
their Bark, cure themselves of their Wounds; for let them take off never so
little of them, these Liquors will gush out, and have so much the more
admirable Effect, in that they are not adulterated, as those we have in Europe
are. The Para-ayra-braba, is a thick hard Root, which is made use of as an
infallible Remedy against all sorts of Poisons: And as for the Hypopecovana
it is a small Root, that in our Armies has sufficiently discovered the Virtues
of it against the Bloody Flux, being valued at ten Pistoles a Pound; but now
it is cheaper, as being more common.

Among those that are curious, you shall find very large Oranges, that
originally were brought from the Mogul Country; according to which they have
their Names, and some whereof are eight Inches Diameter. They have a sort of
Roses growing amongst them, whose Leaves are very like unto those of Guimauva,
and the Fruit whereof is very singular, being white from Midnight till Noon,
and from Noon to Midnight again of a red Color.

They have abundance of wild Fowl in that Country, and a great Number of
extraordinary Birds, and more especially the finest Parrots in the World; to
which may be added Tigers, Deer, wild Boars, and several other Animals that are
unknown to us in Europe: Monsieur de Gennes was presented with a very large
Tortoise, that lived without eating and drinking the rest of the Summer, under
one of the Carriages of our Cannon; and these are a sort of Animals that will
never die till all their Fat is entirely consumed.

We observed two sorts of Monkeys there, which they distinguished by the Names
of Sagovins and Macaques; the former are about the Bigness of a Squirrel, some
of them being of a greyish Color, but others have a fine Coat, and of a Golden
Hue; they are always very merry and lightsome, but so tender that the least
Cold kills them: The Macaques are larger, and of a brown Color, weep
continually, and are no otherwise diverting, but that they will imitate every
thing they see you do; and we had one of them that would make some of our
Ship-tackle as well as the Seamen themselves.

The Portuguese have already found some Silver Mines there, and lately
Amethists also; they have Brass enough from the Coast of Angola, from the
Traffic they drive there, upon the account of the Negro's. But to return, on
the 17th of July came in a Portuguese Ship, belonging to the Guinea-Company,
lately erected amongst them, which carried a white Flag with a Sinople or green
Cross in it, and next Day our three Ships, which we did not expect to see till
we came to Cayenne, joined us; the Sun of Africa gave us seven Guns, and we
returned her as many; the Seditious had lost her Fore-round-top, and by them we
were informed that a Fleet of eighteen Sail were put out of Rio-Janeiro; that
the Felicity had gone thither, that fifteen Men had deserted them, and that
Monsieur de la Roque had two of his Men killed and an Officer wounded, in a
Descent they had made against the Portuguese, who detained five or six of our
Officers in Prison, upon account of a Quarrel that happened, wherein two of the
Inhabitants were left dead upon the spot.

On the 22d we heard the good Capuchin Father Francis preach; this Man had
spent five and twenty Years in preaching to the Indians, and told Monsieur de
Gennes, That he had several times asked Leave of the General of his Order, to
return for some time into Europe, but that he had desired him to continue where
he was, and not to forsake that Work he had so happily entered upon; And that
so taking the Desires of his Superior, as a Command from him, he said he was
ready to re-enter upon his Mission, and had no farther Thoughts of his Native
Country.

Having, by the sixth of August, Aug. 1696
taken in our Stores of Water and Wood, and laid in Provision for six Months,
we prepared for our Departure, and found the Governor very civil, who made a
Present to all the Captains of some Amethists, and of all sorts of
Refreshments; and the seventh Day being come, we sailed away, and having
doubled the Cape of St. Antony, we kept our Course out at Sea for some Days,
that we might shun the Coast, which, by reason of the Banks of Rocks, as well
as the Storms that are frequent there, is very dangerous.

On the 8 th we descried two Barks, that made all the sail they could to come
up with us, and we staid for them, as believing they were about to bring us
some News, because there was a Ship put in there the Day before. But they
proved to be Negro's, who came to desire us to take them away with us, or else
they would commit themselves to the mercy of the Waves, sooner than they would
return again under the Tyranny of their Masters; but we sent them back, that we
might not give the Portuguese Occasion to complain of us, that we had taken
away their Slaves: The miserable Condition of the Negro Slaves.
And in truth, these sort of Wretches are in a very miserable State; they are
born Slaves, and they are scarce able to lift up their hands to their heads,
but they make them work at tilling the Ground as Oxen do: Besides they are
ill-fed, and bastinado'd for the least Fault: They behold their Children sold
before their Faces, and sometimes their Wives: And this does affect the
greatest part of those who have been bred up in the Christian Religion, to that
Degree, that they run away from their Masters, and choose rather to go and die
in the Woods among the Indians, where they meet with greater Humanity than with
the other: But this they must execute with the greatest Precaution, for if
their Masters once catch them, they give them no Quarter; for they hang a great
Iron Collar about their Necks on each side whereof there are Hooks, whereunto
is fastened a Stake or Branch of a Tree, with which they thrash them at
Pleasure; and this they repeat so often, that they put them almost out of
Condition to follow their Work: But if it so happen, that after this sort of
Chastisement they relapse again into the same Fault, they without any more ado,
cut off one of their Legs, nay, and sometimes hang them for an Example of
Terror unto others; and though all this is bad enough, yet the Spaniards and the
English treat them still in a more cruel manner.

I knew one living in Martinico, who being of a compassionate Nature, could not
find in his heart to cut off his Slave's Leg, who had run away four or five
times, but to the end he might not again run the risque of losing him
altogether, he bethought himself of fastening a Chain to his Neck, which
trailing down backwards, catches up his Leg behind, as may be seen by the Cut:
And this, in the space of two or three Years, does so contract the Nerves, that
it will be impossible for this Slave to make use of his Leg. And thus, without
running the Hazard of this unhappy Wretch's Death, and without doing him any
Mischief, he thereby deprived him of the means to make his Escape.

On the 17th about seven in the Morning, we had a sight of Cape St. Augustine,
which we made at above thirty Leagues distance, which gave us Occasion to
believe that there were great Currents that way, that run toward the Coast: On
the 22d about six in the P 120

How ye Portuguese Whip their Slaves when they run away

A Slave that has his leg cut off for running away

An invention of a French Man in Marlinico

Evening we past the Line, They pass the Line.
with a fresh Gale of Wind, that was very necessary to dispel those excessive
Heats that are usually to be met with there, and here we found great Currents
bearing to the Westward; we kept still out at Sea, that we might come to the
height of Cape Orange, and every Morning we sent out the Sun of Africa and the
Seditious upon the Scout, by reason of the Information we had received from a
Portuguese Ship, lately come from the Coast of Guinea, That two Dutch Ships
were to sail away from thence in July, for Barbicha and Surinam, laden with
Golddust, and seven or eight hundred Negro's. They are obliged, after they have
past the Line, to make the Cape of Orange, and to follow the Coast with the
Current, and if they would have passed that way, we should have infallibly met
with them.

On the 27th by break of Day, as our Pilots allowed us to be yet above sixty
Leagues from the Shore, we observed the Water to be of a yellowish Color, and
muddy; and those of the Company, who were so curious as to taste them, told us,
they did not want much of being sweet; and this made us believe that we were
come to the Mouth of the famous River of the Amazons, The River of the Amazons.
that is so rapid as to preserve the Sweetness of its Waters for near twenty
Leagues within the Sea; we ran upon the Coast till three in the Afternoon, when
we discovered a flat, even, and woody Coast, where we anchored about six in the
Evening; and on the 28th and 29th, we followed the said Coast, at three or four
Leagues distance from the Shore, and never found above five or six Fathom Water.

On the 30th, Cape of Orange.
about seven in the Morning, we descried the Cape of Orange, where we began to
see the Foot of the Mountains: About three in the Afternoon, we doubled a great
Rock called the Constable, three Leagues out in the Sea, and five from Cayenne;
we drew up, at about half a Cannon shot's distance, and about six in the
Evening came to an Anchor, three Leagues to the North of Cayenne before five
little Islands lying near to that place. When next Day was come, Monsieur de
Gennes sent an Officer to complement the Governor, and to desire him to send
us a Pilot to conduct us to a sase Anchorage; but our Arrival had already
alarmed the whole Island, and they fired off their Cannon all Night long, to
give the Inhabitants Notice to come together; and they would not trust to our
Colors, because the Dutch in their Passage to Surinam and Barbicha, have often
cast Anchor within a League of the Town, under white Colors; and as they had
not been used to see four French Ships at one time, they were apprehensive of
some Design upon them.

Our Shallop could not return before next Day, Sep. 1696.
which happened to be the first of September, the same being obliged to take a
Course round the Island, for avoiding the Currents, which are very violent on
that Coast; but she brought a Pilot along, though the Sea was so shallow that we
were forced to tarry where we were till the Day following: And then on the
second and third, we made as much use of the Tide as possibly we could, in
order to get in, because there was so very little Water, and that we could not
make ready before it had half flowed: But about four in the Evening, we cast
Anchor under the Cannon of the Town, within Pistol-shot of Land; there were two
Merchants Ships already in Cayenne, that had waited seven or eight Months for
their Cargo, besides another Vessel that came in the Day before us, laden with
Wine and Brandy. As our Men had, just about this time, received a Month's Pay,
and that it was now a long time since they had met with so good an Opportunity,
they not only drank up the Ship's whole Cargo in eight Days time, but also all
the Wine they had in the Island.

Cayenne is a French Island, The Description of Cayenne.
situated on the Coast of Guiana, four Degrees and forty five Minutes North
Latitude, and 332 Longitude; it is formed by the two Arms of a River, and may be
reckoned to be about eighteen Leagues in Circumference; it stands high, upon
the Brink of the Sea, and is so marshy in the middle, that you cannot travel by
Land, from one end to the other; the Fens of it are covered with a sort of
large Trees called Mangles, The Mangle.
which above all other, have the peculiar Quality of growing in Seawater;
these Trees are so thick, and their Roots for the most part springing out of
the Earth, rise up, and are so well interlaced one with another, that in some
places a Man may walk upon them above fifteen or twenty Leagues together,
without setting his Foot upon the Ground; amongst them also diverse Indians
retire with their Canoes, and there they make their Carbets.

The Town stands on the West-part of the Island, and is very advantageously
situated, Nature and Art having both equally contributed to the fortifying of
it: It Is of an irregular Hexagone-Figure, has near sixty pieces of Cannon
planted upon Batteries, for the Security of it; and on the Seaside, upon an
Eminence, there is a Fort built that commands every way: The Garrison of the
place consists of two Hundred Regular Troops, but there are above four Hundred
Inhabitants living either upon, or round about the Island, that upon the least
Alarm are obliged to stand to their Arms. Monsieur de Feroles, the Governor,
is a Person that has great Insight into the Affairs of a Colony; the Power of
distributing Justice is vested in him, and he is much beloved by the
Inhabitants: The Jesuits have a Church in the Town, and a Chapel at the other
end of the Island, for the Convenience of those that live remote.

This Island was formerly very unhealthy, as well for the continual Rains that
fell there, for nine Months in the Year, as because the Ground was covered with
Wood, and withal very marshy; Diseases were very rife amongst them, and Infants
usually died almost as soon as they were born; but since the Island has been
grubbed up, they have begun to grow more healthy, the Women have good
Lyings-in, and their Children are lusty.

The chief Commodity of the Country, Traffic.
is Sugar and Rocou, but they make no great Quantity, because the Inhabitants
want Slaves to work for them, and that is the Reason that Ships wait sometimes
for near a Year's time for their lading: Those Negro's which we had sent
thither by the Ship called the Fertile, were almost all dead before they got to
the Place; for being taken with a Calm, they wanted both Water and Victuals:
But we having still about forty on board, we sold them for five hundred Livres
a Man. The Commodities they have from France, are Wine, Brandy, Meal, and
powdered Meats; for Beefs are very rare to be found there, besides they are not
allowed to kill any of them without Leave, as being desirous to let them
multiply.

They carry Iron Tools, and small Wares also thither, for to traffic with the
Indians: Four or five Years since, Money was very scarce amongst them; but the
Free-booters who returned from the Southern-Seas, and the meanest of which had
at least two or three thousand Crowns for his Share, bought them Habitations
here, increased the Colony, and thereby made Money current amongst them. They
drive a considerable Trade in Slaves, dried Fish, and Amacks, with the Indians
living upon the River of the Amazons, and by this Commerce the Colony is very
much enriched; but the Portuguese, who for some Years past have a mind to
settle there, have massacred in a most cruel manner those Persons who before
went thither unmolested, and in all manner of Security. Monsieur de Feroles
has begun a Road which is to go by Land to this River, A Road from Cayenne to
the River of Amazons.
and pretends he will drive the Portuguese from thence. The same belongs to
France, and it is our Interest to preserve it, not only upon the account of our
Traffic, but also because there are Silver Mines there.

The Earth, besides Sugar and Rocou; produces Cotton and Indigo, and is withal
very fertile in Maes and Magniot; besides those Fruits we have seen in Brasil,
we find growing here, Fruits.
the Cassia, Papaye, Acajou-Apples, the Vanilla, Peet, and several others. As
for the Papaye, it is a thick Fruit, and tastes somewhat like a Cucumber; it
grows round the stem of a tall but tender Tree that has large Leaves, and cleft
as your Vine Leaves are; the Tree it self is hollow, and grows above fifteen
Foot in one Year's time.

The Acajou-Apple is thick, long, and of a yellow-red; has a sharp Taste, and
is usually eaten baked. At the end of this Apple you have a little green Nut,
that tastes like a Filbert, and in form resembles a Sheeps-kidney: This Fruit
grows upon a tall and round sort of a Tree, like unto a Chesnut-tree, whose
Leaves are of the same Form and Color, as those of the Laurel: The Wood of it
is very fine, and proper to make Household Furniture of, and Pirogues of forty
and fifty Foot long; if a Line, or such a thing, be once spotted with the Juice
of this Acajou-Apple, it is impossible to take away the Stain, till the Season
of the Fruit be entirely gone.

The Vanilla is a Plant that creeps up along other Trees, in the same manner as
Ivy does; its Leaves being of a bright green Color, thick, long, strait, and
pointed at the ends. About seven Years after it is planted, it begins to hear a
sort of Husks that are full of an oily Matter, and Seed that is smaller than
that of Poppy, which they make use of in that Country, to give a good Scent to
Tobacco, and Liquors they have amongst them.

The Peet is an Herb that can be peeled in the same manner, as Hemp with us,
and whose threads are stronger and finer than Silk, the Use whereof it would
have long since put out of doors, if so be it would have been allowed to be
transported to France. Ebony, of a different sort, Letter-wood (as they call
it) and that of Violet, with several others, are very common in that Country.
To say nothing of the Fish and Fowl that we find there in great abundance, as
we do also Tigers, Deer, Pigs, little Porcupines, Camelions, those Beasts they
call Agontills and Sapaions, and diverse sorts of Animals more.

As for the Agontill, it is a Creature of the same Bigness with an Hare, of a
reddish Color like unto a Deer, sharp Muzzle, small Ears, and short as well as
very small Legs; but the Sapaion is a kind of a little Monkey, of a yellowish
Color, having large Eyes, a white Face and black Chin: It Is of a low Stature,
but of a lively and caressing Nature.

The Camelion does somewhat resemble those small Lizards that creep up our
Walls, whose Color cannot be agreed on, because they receive it from every
thing they touch: They have here also very large Serpents, but not very
venomous, and some of them have been observed to have swallowed a whole Deer at
a time.

As for Birds, Birds.
they have very curious Parrots in that Country, that will quickly learn to
speak; from which the Indians pluck Feathers of diverse Colors, by the help of
the Blood of certain creeping Animals, with which they rub them. They have also
other Birds, called Flamands, Ocos, Toucans, and many sorts besides. The first
whereof, viz. the Flamands are Sea-birds, about the Bigness of an Hen, which
fly in Bands as Ducks, or rather Cranes do; and whose Feathers being of a
scarlet Color, the Indians make unto themselves Crowns of them: The Ocos are
as big as the Indian Poultry, black on the Back, but white breasted, with a
short yellow Bill, a fierce Gate, and have small frizled Feathers standing up
like a Cop upon their Heads. And for the Toucan, that is a Bird that has both
black, red, and yellow Feathers, being very near as big as a Pidgeon, whose
Bill is almost as thick as his Body, and of a very singular make, as being all
over nothing but black and white welts or streaks, like Ebony and Ivory
interlaid; neither is his Tongue less admirable, being naught but a plain
Feather, and that very straight.

We shall say nothing of several Birds, who have nothing remarkable in them
besides their Feathers; and therefore, we shall now proceed to a short
Description of the Government of Cayenne, which some, by reason of the Bigness
of it, and its Situation under the Equator, have called Equinoxial France.

The Government of Cayenne contains about an hundred Leagues in length, The
Government of Cayenne.
upon the Ocean, wherewith it is bounded both on the East and North; as it has
to the West the River Marony, which separates the same from Surinam, now in the
hands of the States of Holland; and to the South, the Northern Boundary of the
Amazons, where the Portuguese have already built three Forts upon the Rivers of
Paron and Macaba: One may see by the Map made of this Government (which I have
taken Care to correct, according to the Memoirs of Monsieur de Feroles, for to
send it to Court) the Road that has been made, in order to drive them from
thence: This Road begins at the River of Peira, which falls into that of Paron,
and by which they can afterward go down in Canoes: Here also Observations may
be made of the different Nations of the Indians that dwell in those Parts, and
who all of them, though intermixed one with another, speak different Languages,
and are almost always engaged in War, which is not usually put an end to, until
they make forty or fifty of their Enemies Prisoners. We were informed by the
Jesuits, That several of these Nations were once entered into a League against
one another; and that they were about a Year's Space in making grand
Preparation for War, which after all ended one Night, in their surprising two
or three Carbets, where they might burn perhaps about an hundred Persons, Men,
Women and Children, and so returned home as fierce and vaunting, as if they had
made a Conquest of the whole Country.

These Indians are red, The Indians of Cayenne.
of short Stature, having black, long, and lank Hair; they go all naked, unless
it be their Privy-parts, which they cover with a little Cotton-welt, that hangs
down by their Legs: But for the Women, they use a piece of Cloth half a Foot
square, which they call Camisa, and which is usually woven after a striped
manner, of diverse Colors, and especially white, which they prefer above any
other; but some of them there are, who only hang a Carrot-leaf at their Girdle:
The Men cut off their Beards, dye their Faces with Rocou, and cover their Arms
and Faces with several folds of the forementioned sort of Cloth; they
generally, by way of Ornament, wear Crowns made of Feathers of various Colors,
and bore a hole between their Nostrils, where they hang a little piece of
Money, or a large knob of green Crystal that is brought from the River of
Amazons, and which they mightily value: But there is particularly one whole
Nation of these Indians, that make a large hole in the nether Lip, through
which they put a piece of Wood, whereunto they fasten this Crystal: And as
these are thus singular, all the other Nations have particular marks of
Distinction also.

These People are very skilful in Bows and Arrows, which they make use of as
well in fishing as fowling: They work their Amacks very curiously, and make
very pretty Pots and Baskets, which they call Pagara, and are wrought in such a
manner, that they go one into another, and cannot be penetrated by Water: They
also make use of their Couis or Calabasses, about which they turn their
Ornaments, and varnish them with diverse Colors, so as that the Waters shall
not injure them; but for all this Skill of theirs, they are very lazy, and
continually lain down, taking no Care for the Morrow, no, not for their
necessary Subsistence: And there is nothing but Famine that can draw them out
of their Amacks. When they are in the Country, or waging War, and chance to
hear that the Wife lies in, they return with all speed, bind up their Heads,
and, as if themselves were in labor, they lie in their Beds, where their
Neighbors come to comfort them under their imaginary Illness: There are
several of them live together in one or more large Cottages, which they call
Carbets, over each of which there is a Captain constituted. As for their Diet,
they feed upon that which they call Cassave, Maes, Fish and Fruits; the Men
they live by fishing, and it is the Women that till the Ground: They earry but a
small matter of Victuals along with them, when they go to War; for they feast
upon the fattest part of their Prisoners Flesh, and for the rest they sell them
to the French.

They have diverse sorts of Feasts amongst them, unto which one Carbet invites
another; and there they appear with Crowns on their Heads, and Feather-girdles,
and spend the Day in dancing round, and in feasting, where they make themselves
drunk with a strong sort of Liquor, which they call Ovicon, made of Cassave and
Fruit, boiled together.

These poor People live in miserable Ignorance, for they worship the Stars, and
are very much afraid of the Devil, which they call Piaye, and who (as they say)
comes to Beat and Torment them: Every one of them has his Wife, which they
cannot forsake, 'tho they find them Tardy: Old Men they highly venerate, and
when any of them die, they bury them in their Carbets, without any other
Ceremony than to make themselves soundly drunk: But as soon as they think the
Corpse is almost rotten, they dig up the bones, and burning the same to ashes,
they put it into their Ovicon, and this they esteem excellent cheer; the
Jesuits take a deal of Pains in Instructing these poor People, who with much
Docility give ear to the Mysteries of the Christian Faith.

On the 16th a Fire broke out in the House of one of the Officers, which was a
great loss not only to the Owners, but also to several of the Inhabitants round
the Town, who had their Movables there. All these Houses are built of Wood,
and thatched over, which is the reason that Fire takes them so fast that
nothing can be saved.

On the 25th we made ready for a cruise upon the Coast of Barbados, which
Island is under the Dominion of the English, who send thither above six hundred
Ships every Year: It Is well Peopled, and they reckon no less than six thousand
Negro-Slaves to be in it, so that without Contradiction it may be esteemed the
most Powerful Colony of all the American Islands.

Monsieur de Gennes had some thoughts of going to attack Surinam, and for
furthering of his design, Monsieur de Feroles made him an offer to go thither
in Person with part of his Garrison; but certain Indians who do nothing else
but go backwards and forwards to give an Account of what is done both on the
one and the other side, informed us there were two large Dutch Ships there
carrying 70 Pieces of Cannon, that were ready to put out forthwith, and that so
we should have to deal with the Fort and these two Ships at a time; which made
us alter our resolution, and to continue Cruising.

On the 14th of October, October, 1696.
believing our selves to be in the height of Barbados, we sent the Glutton to
Martinico, with Orders to lade her self with Sugar, and so to sail away for
France: And there we Cruised to the 16th, fifty, forty, and thirty Leagues
distance from the Shore, without seeing any thing, and therefore we thought it
advisable to draw near to the Island.

The 17th the Weather was very Hazy till five in the Afternoon, when clearing
up all of a sudden, we discovered Barbados, from which we might be about five
Leagues distance: About an Hour after we descryed a Ship; But as we found she
was near the Shore, and that it was now Night, we thought it more Convenient to
bear off than to come up with her.

On the 18th the Wind being very slack, we found our selves still to be at the
same distance from Shore, but about Noon we gave chase under English Colors to
a Carvet that came to discover what we were, but upon her putting up French
Colors, and giving us a Gun as a Signal that she was really such, we hung out
ours also, and gave her the same assurance. This was a small Vessel from
Martinico called the Malovin, carrying four Guns, and was manned with five and
forty Buccaneers, whose Captain came on board us, and gave us an Account of the
Death of Monsieur de Blenac, General of the American Islands, adding farther
that he had met with our Fleet, and that there were six and twenty Sail of
Ships got into Barbados about six Weeks before.

About five in the Evening we discovered three Ships near the Shore, which the
Malovin told us was a Man of War for a Guard-ship, that carried four and fifty
Guns, and two small Frigates of fourteen Guns each, and that they were come out
to hinder her to take a Merchant Ship, that she had chased to the very mouth of
the Port.

On the 19th by Break of Day we discovered the said Guard-ship followed by a
Skiff about two Leagues off of us: But as there was but very little Wind
stirring, and that she had a great mind to know what we were, she made use of
her Oars to get out, and about three in the Afternoon sent her Shallop to see
what the Seditious was, which was not above two Cannon-shot off, but about five
she recalled her, and an Hour after she sailed off and made a show of getting
to the Shore and recovering land: But we did not think fit to pursue her,
because we were apprehensive she might return, and had a design to surprise us:
But in short we saw her again at ten at Night within Cannon-shot of us, and she
followed us all that Night long almost within Musket Shot, and from time to
time fired Rockets as a Signal for the Shallop to come up, that had not yet
rejoyned her. At break of Day we came up to her with a good Wind under French
Colors, and all our sails loose, but as she had no other design than to see
what we were, and not to fight, she gave us no Occasion to desire her to return
to Port, which she did very safely, as did also the Skiff and her Shallop,
which we discharged some shot at.

On the 20th and 21th we bore off to Sea, and next Day about Noon discovered a
Ship, about three Leagues to the Windward of us, with which we came very near
up, when the Night approached and prevented our taking of her.

On the 24th we took a small Fly-boat of forty Tunn, The taking of an English
Fly-boat.
coming from Virginia, laden with Tobacco, Bacon, and Meal for Barbados, and
was valued at 10000 Livres; and the Seditious the very same Day gave chase to
another small Ship, that made her escape by the favor of the Night.

The 25th and 26th we had a great deal of bad Weather, on the last of which,
about three in the Afternoon we saw a large Ship two Leagues to the Windward of
us, toward which we bare, and all that Night kept a different Course that we
might not lose her, but all in vain.

On the 28th we found our selves in sight of Barbados, from which we computed
our selves to be five and twenty Leagues distance; we were surprised with our
mistake, and could attribute the cause of it to nothing but the Currents; but
we took this opportunity to send our Fly-boat to Martinico, toward which she
made good sail by the help of the Night, and a favorable Wind.

We spent the rest of our time to the fourth of November, Novem. 1696.
to get thirty or forty Leagues out to Sea, because the Winds are always
contrary, and that no way can be made but upon a tack; and on the sixth,
seventh, and eighth we had very bad weather, and next Day we were ready to sail
back, when we discovered a Ship two Leagues off to the See-ward, The taking of
another Vessel.
which as well as we, was at the Cape, to stay for the weather to prove better;
hereupon we made all the sail we could, and in two Hours time came within
Cannon-shot of her; she put out English Colors, which we Answered with ours,
and at the same time gave her some chase Guns; she kept Fighting, Retreating,
and wounded three of the Sun of Africa's Men, which was ready to give her a
whole Broadside and to send her to the Deep, when, to prevent it, she presently
struck.

She was a tight Ship, carrying two and twenty Guns, belonged to New England,
and this was her first Voyage: Her lading consisted chiefly in Materials for
Shipping, and some Cod; we put twenty Men on board her, and steered for
Martinico, but that Night it blew very hard, and we were separated from the
Seditious in the storm; and on the 11th we had sight of Barbados, which we
left to the North of us.

Next Day early in the Morning, we found our selves at two Leagues distance
from St. Lucia, which we had a desire to leave behind us, but the Wind took us
short: This Island is high of Situation, covered all over with Wood, and very
remarkable for two Peaks in it like a Sugar Loaf, that may be seen at twenty
Leagues distance in clear Weather: We Coasted it all Day, and on the 13th early
in the Morning, we found we were three Leagues from the Diamond-Point of
Martinico; we plied till Evening for to get into the mouth of Sack-Royal, (as
they call it) where we Anchored at five, within half a League of the Fort,
which we saluted with seven Pieces of Cannon, and were answered with as many
from thence.

Next Day the Captain of the Fort entered us for Careening; we found four or
five Ships there from Rochel and Bourdeaux, and two Danes hired by French
Merchants for the Voyage, one of which saluted us with five Guns, which we
answered with three: We Anchored about two Spears length from the Mead, where
we took out our first Tier, Provision, and Utensils, in order to cleanse our
Ship.

We understood on the 16th, that the Seditious was come to Fort St. Peter, and
that the Glutton, laden with Sugar, was sailed away for France, the same Day we
were entered for Careening.

The English failed not to send a Packet-boat to fetch away their Prisoners,
with a design to discover what state we were in, and the French Prisoners she
brought over, told us that the Guard-ship, that had given us Chase, when she
understood what we were, not thinking her self safe in that Port, had sailed
away for Antegoe to join another Ship of sixty Guns that cruised about that
Island: The Packet-boat went from Port Royal to Fort St. Peter, where all the
English Prisoners that were in the Island, were delivered up to her, and some
of whom the very same Night, they were to sail for Barbados, took away a small
Privateer that was ready to put to Sea, and had but one Man to look after her;
whereupon the English Officers were presently seized, and the Packet-boat sent
back to demand Satisfaction for this Seizure, which was contrary to the Law of
War.

On the first of December, December 1696.
though we had not fully embarked all our things that we had to put a Shore, we
left the Careening place, to the end we might put an stop to the desertion of
our Men, of whom we had already lost no less than thirty, all of them brave
young Fellows, who sought for nothing more than an opportunity to fight for the
honor of their Country, in order to make their Fortune, or lose their Lives,
and who were enraged at their sufferings now for two Years together without any
hopes of attaining their Ends: And what is still more lamentable, there were
three or four of them found starved to Death on the Mountains about fifteen
Days after.

From the third at Night to the fourth we set Sail for St. Peter's Fort, where
we anchored at five in the Evening, within Pistol-shot of Land, and continued
there to the thirteenth to take in Water.

But seeing it is now a long time since we have had any account of the Islands
of America; and that the face of things there is much altered since fifteen or
twenty Years, I thought it would not be impertinent to make a short Description
of the same, whereon depends all the rest that are in our possession.

Martinico was at first Inhabited by some French and English, A Description of
Martinico.
who took this, as was done by all the other Islands, as a place of refuge, and
each of them upon different accounts: They lived there a long time at Peace
with the Indians, who gave them a share of the Cassave and Fruits that they
Cultivated; but after the descent Monsieur d' Enambuc made on St. Christopher,
in the Year 1625, those Indians being put in the head by their Wizards, that
these new Guests came with an Intention to destroy them, and to take away their
Country, they resolved to Massacre them; but the French discovering the design,
took all the Caution imaginable to prevent it.

In 1626 there was a Company erected for the American Islands, and then they
began to be Peopled, and Ships frequently sailed thither, to Trade for Sugar,
for which they paid ready Money; but after diverse petty Wars, there was a
general Peace made with the Indians in 1660, and they had St. Vincent and
Domingo assigned them to retire to. They continue there to this Day, and come
constantly to Trade with our Frenchmen, between whom and them there is so
great an unity, that when they catch the English, whom they know to be our
Enemies, they Murder and Eat them, and the French themselves have no power to
bring them to give them Quarter: The Jesuits, and other Orders settled in these
Parts, do from time to time make small Voyages into their Islands, to Instruct
them in the Principles of Religion; which they hear with a great deal of Joy,
but reap little Benefit thereby, as being still very tenacious of their old
Superstition.

The American Islands Company were of no longer Duration than the Year 1651,
when they sold them to the Knights of Malta, and several particular Persons;
but now the King is Master of them; where he has erected Forts, and keeps good
Garrisons. Martinico is the residence of the General, and Sovereign Courts of
Judicature; whereon depends St. Domingo, Guadalupa, Granada, Mary-Galanda, the
Saints, St. Cross, St. Lucia, and Tabago; of which they have abandoned the last
three. This Island is situated in 14 degrees North Latitude; and 315, 25
minutes Longitude, stands high, and is fifty five or sixty Leagues in
Circumference. It has the convenience of three Ports, where you may lade above
an hundred Ships every Year; and their Names are the Cul-de-sac Royal, the
Bourg of St. Peter, and the Cul-de-sac de la Trinity.

Cul-de-sac Royal is a large Bay to the South of the Island, Cul-de-sac Royal.
and at the bottom whereof stands a pretty Town, containing near three hundred
Inhabitants, where the General resides, and the Courts of Justice are kept: The
Streets of it are straight, the Houses regular, and mostly built of Wood; and
here the Capuchins have a very fine Convent. The Fort which is very
advantageously situated, is built upon a large and long Point of land that
runs out into the Sea, and makes the best Careening place in all the Islands:
The Fort is no other way accessible to the Sea-ward, but by Lays or Banks of
Rocks which do encompass it; and the Town cannot be otherwise approached to,
than by a small but very narrow Clascis, that is flanked with an half Moon, and
two Bastions, lined with good Stonework; and defended with a Ditch full of
Water; they have eighteen and four and twenty Pounders mounted every way upon
it, and six Marine Companies in Garrison. Monsieur de Blenac before his death
erected a Magazine of Powder there, and a Cistern Bombproof, so that the Fort
is now in a Condition to withstand a whole Army.

The Town of St. Peter is pretty large, The Town of St. Peter.
and better peopled than that of Fort Royal; but to speak the truth of it, it is
no more than one Street, a good quarter of a League in length, full of ascents
and descents, and in several Places interrupted with diverse curious Rows of
Orange Trees; to say nothing of a River that runs cross the middle thereof,
that has excellent Water; this River comes down from a great Valley, that
stands behind the Town, and where may be seen a great many Sugar Plantations,
that are very agreeable to the Eye: At one end of the Town stands the Jesuits
House, which is curiously Built; and at the other the Jacobins Church; where
also there is a small Convent of Vrsulines in the middle, besides an Hospital,
over which the Brethren of Charity (as they are called) have the
super-intendency: Most of the Houses there are built of Wood, but very well,
and the Inhabitants are very Civil and Affable. France may be known there by
the neatness of the People, and Martinico can boast that her Females are as
handsome as the Women of Europe: There had been a Fort at the mouth of the
River, which the Hurricans entirely ruined and levelled to the Ground; they
have no more now there, than two Companies of Foot, and two Batteries at both
ends of the Town, consisting of eight or ten Pieces of Cannon each; but they
are continually at Work there to raise new Fortifications.

The English came thither in 1693, with sixty Sail of Ships, and made a descent
above the Town toward the Preacher's Point, from whence they were vigorously
repulsed by the Inhabitants, who killed about fifteen Hundred of them upon the
spot, with the disadvantage of no more than twenty Killed and Wounded on their
own side; and Monsieur de Blenac signalized himself very much upon this
Occasion: He Marched in one Night from Fort Royal with two hundred Men thither,
and so encouraged the Inhabitants, that it may be said, it was almost to him
alone that the Success of this Expedition was owing.

Cul-de sac de la Trinity, that stands on the other side of the Island, is much
smaller, and less frequented than the other Ports; besides which, there are
diverse small Places on the Seaside, where Barks and Canoes take in their
Lading; so that since the taking of St. Christopher's, whose Inhabitants
withdrew into other Islands, they reckon Martinico to have three thousand Men
bearing Arms, and above fifteen thousand Negro-Slaves.

This Island, as has been already noted, is very high and so full of Mountains,
that the middle part thereof cannot be inhabited; but it is very fruitful in
Sugars, where they are now refined, in Cotton, Rocou, Cinnamon, Cocoe, of which
they make Chocolate, in Magniot, and the Fruits of the Country, which I have
described already. They have very fine sort of Wood there, especially that
which they call the Gayac, of which they make Pullies, and such like things,
for the King's Men of War.

These, and several other Fruits, which are transported thence into France grow
in this Country mighty well; and Sheep, Oxen, and Horses, multiply amongst them
apace; and the Ships that sail thither, whether singly, or in company, to lade
Sugar, carry with them Wines, Corn, Salt-meats, and all sorts of Merchandises
they may have occasion for; so that a Man of an Estate can live there, as well
as in France: But yet the high Situation of the Country makes the Air
unwholesome, and there are but a few Ships that go thither, whose Crew does not
feel the Effects of it; and we our selves, lost about a dozen or fifteen Men,
who died as it were from one Day to another, without any Symptom of being sick.
The Inhabitants, besides the Inconveniency of a bad Air, are much incommoded
with Ants, Mousticks, and a kind of an Handworm, which they call Chiques, and
which fix themselves in the soles of the Feet, and are so much the more
troublesome and insupportable, in that they cannot be rooted out from thence,
if they have once time given them to lay their Eggs there: Serpents are also
very common in this Island, and creep into the very Houses, of which there are
se^eral sorts, whose stinging is very dangerous; but the Negro's find Simples
there that cure them presently.

We made ready on the 13th to go and take in Wood at St. Lucia, Their Departure
from Martinico.
and from thence to return to cruise on the Coast of Barbados; but the
Seditious had been ordered away for a Convoy to a Merchant-Ship, bound for
Guadalupa, where she received Monsieur de Gennes his Commands, to make the best
of her way for France.

On the 14th, The Isle of St. Lucia,
about Nine in the Morning, we anchored in a great Bank of Sand at St. Lucia,
where a very good Port may be made, and convenient Habitations fixed. St. Lucia
is of a high Situation, covered with Wood, and rendered almost uninhabitable,
by a vast Number of Serpents that are to be found there; but for all that,
there are two or three Indian Carbets, or Villages, upon the place, and some
Frenchmen, who fetch Tortoises from thence for Martinico: You will find upon
the Sea-shoar, a great many Macheveliers, which is a Tree that does not grow
very tall, whose Wood is very fine, and its Leaves like unto those of a
Pear Tree; it bears small Apples, that are of such a Smell and Color, as do
invite People to eat of them; but it is very dangerous to comply with the
Temptation; for there is no Antidote that can secure a Man from a speedy Death,
that has once tasted of them: The very Leaf of it makes an Ulcer upon the
place it touches, the Dew that falls from them takes away the Skin, and the
very Shadow of this Tree makes a Man swell to that degree, that it will
infallibly kill him without speedy help.

On the 15th, in the Afternoon, we weighed Anchor, and kept pretty near the
Shore, that we might be able to get to the Coast of St. Vincent, within two
Leagues of which we found our selves next Morning by break of Day: But it was
three in the Afternoon before we could draw near, though we had a small Gale that
was favorable enough; and this made us suppose that the Currents were against
us; but it blowing at length, at three of the Clock, a fresh Gale, we made a
little more sail, and coasted within half a League of the Island, where we saw
a very fine Country, and seemingly well cultivated: The same is inhabited, on
the Coast by which we passed, with twelve or fifteen hundred Negro's, that fled
thither from the Neighboring Islands, and especially from Barbados, from
whence they made their Escapes, with a favorable Wind, in their Masters
Canoes: But the other side is Peopled with two or three thousand Indians, who
have a great Trade with those that dwell upon the River Orenoquo that is on the
Continent, whither they pass in their Pirogues, as they do to all the Islands
situate in the Gulf of Mexico; and that which is very wonderful, is, That
they are never overtaken with bad Weather, but that on the contrary, they are
always aware of the Day wherein an Hurricane happens, a long time before the
same does come to pass.

St. Vincent is also high of Situation, abounding in Fruits, Fowl, in Goats
and Hogs. There is a very fine Port there to Lee-ward, which the English some
Years since, would have made themselves Masters of; but the Indians prevented
their making a Descent, with Showers of poisoned Arrows, and the Assistance of
the Negro's, who took Vengeance on them for all the ill Usage they had met with
at the hands of that Nation.

On the 17th we doubled that Place they call the Pomgranates, and next Day saw
the Island of Tabago, which the Marshall d' Estre took from the Dutch in 1678.
after two of the sharpest Engagements that have been heard of; but this Island
is now desolate, and serves only for a place of Retreat to Birds. About Noon we
steered toward Barbados, which we discovered on the one and twentieth; and
having a fair Wind on the 25th and 26th, we made much of our way toward
Barbados.

On the 31th we discovered, by break of Day, An English Prize.
a small Vessel to Leeward, and made all the Sail we could to come up with her;
and as she saw we were got near her, and that it was to no purpose to flee, she
came to, and staid for us: She was a Vessel of forty Tuns, that had been three
Months sailing from Bristol for the Barbados, and was laden with Beer, Syder,
Herrings, Cheese, Butter, Hats, and several sorts of other Goods, being valued
at 20000 Livres. We put eight Men on board her, and sent her away for Martinico.

Next Day, which was the first of January, 1697. January, 1697.
we discovered also another Vessel, four Leagues to Windward of us, and we bore
up toward her till three in the Afternoon, but could not come up with her,
which made us give over the Chase.

On the 6th we had a sight of Barbados. As Monsieur de Gennes, who had been
sick for fifteen Days, found himself now sicker than ordinary, he thought fit
to return to Martinico. They return to Martinico.
We left the Sun of Africa behind us, to cruise, which she did for five or six
Days, without purchase; and we making all the Sail we could, next Day about
four in the Evening discovered the Coast of St. Lucia, which we left to Leeward
of us; and on the 8th, about ten in the Morning, entered the Port they call
Cul-de-Sac Royal: We were come very near the Fort, and ready to cast Anchor,
when we met with a great Rock, that took out three of our Ship's outer Planks,
without doing us any further Damage; we quickly brought her back, and anchored
a good Cannonshot from the Shore; and indeed it is dangerous to get nearer, and
we had good luck to come off so well.

We discharged our Prizes, and sold the Goods very well, because the
Inhabitants, who were in daily Expectation of the Arrival of Monsieur d'
Amblimont's Fleet, wanted Provisions; and it is certain they had not twenty
Barrels of Meal left in the whole Island. The Free-booters had contributed very
much to subsist them for the first Years of the War, by the many Prizes they
had taken on the Coast of Barbados, St. Christopher, and the other Islands
belonging to the English, but now their Merchant-ships sailed together in
Fleets; and there are also some of them, who to avoid the Privateers, go to the
Coast of Tabago and la Trinity, and come back again to recover Barbados.

On the 24th we made ready to sail for the Fort of St. Peter, where we anchored
on the 25th, and continued in that place till the fourth of the next Month, to
take in Sugar, Cassia, and Cocoe, with which Martinico almost supplies all
France: The Cassia grows in Husks about half a Foot long, upon a Tree much like
unto our Walnut-tree.

The Cocoe grows no where but in moist Places, Cocoe.
and such as are but little exposed to the Sun; the Tree that produces it is
but small, the Fruit is long and uneven, like a Cucumber; when it is ripe they
gather it, and leave it for a time to dry in the Sun; it is properly nothing
else but a rind, like that of the Pomgranate, that contains about five and
twenty, or thirty Beans, of which thy make Chocolate.

On the 31st. we fitted out a Brigantine, to sail to Barbados, to exchange the
Prisoners they had made of the Crew of a small Free-booter, that had been taken
in sight of Guadalupa.

I have a mind, before we go from hence, to relate the Adventure of our Poor
Mango, who gave us continually some diversion or other; this was an old Monkey
we had, belonging once to the Governor of Gambie; who was so prodigiously
strong, that he broke his Chain at least once in eight Hours; and as soon as he
got loose, he failed not to make a Ravage: His main Care was to get him a
Dinner, and when he had fooled any poor Seaman out of his Mess, it was very
pleasant to see him get up to the top of the Masts, and to jump from one Sail
unto another with a dish of Rice, or a great Piece of Bacon in his Paws. If any
one was so bold as to go about to take away his prey, he threw a Cannon-ball at
his Head, or what ever else came in his way; all which was nothing in
comparison of the Wounds of his Teeth, which made such an Impression, that the
Marks of them some times remained for the space of two Months and upwards. At
last he took upon him to throw into the Sea the Wheels of an Ivory-Clock which
Monsieur de Gennes had ordered to be made, and took up two Years time in the
doing: But this was no sooner known, than that the poor Devil was condemned to
have his head chopped off, and therefore he was carried a Shore to have the
Sentence Executed upon him; but he managed his part so well, that after two or
three Pistols shot at him, he broke his Cord and took to his feet; and all that
Day we saw the poor Animal, as wounded as he was, run up and down along the
Shore, to seek out an opportunity to return on Board; and if he was much
concerned for losing of us, we were no less to find our selves deprived of his
dear Company.

From the fourth at Night to the fifth of February, February, 1697.
we made ready to sail for Guadalupa. As for our Great Prize which remained at
Fort Royal, to dispose of her Wood, and relade with Sugar, we left twenty Men
on board of her; but for the other two Prizes, we sold them, though to no great
advantage, because they were but small, and the Lading inconsiderable.

At the Preacher's Point we met an English Prize, taken by the Merchant-ship,
that entered at the same time with us into Cayenne, near St. Christophers; then
we Coasted St. Domingo, and on the sixth anchored very near the Shore before
Guadalupa, even in the midst of the Town, to the South-west of the Island, at
the bottom of a very high Sulphurous Cavity, that casts out smoke continually,
and oftentimes fire. We got our full Cargoe in less than two Days, and the
Inhabitants came to entreat us with great earnestness to take off their Goods,
so that we could have laden fifteen Ships in fifteen Days time.

This Island is very large, and healthier than Martinico, being divided into
two parts by an Arm of the Sea, called the Salt-River, by which Barks may pass
up when the Tide is in; the Land is high, but fruitful in Sugar, Indico, and
Cotton: Here also they have Rocou, Cassia, Cocoe, and very good Comfits. Fruits
and Fowl are very common there; and they have a sort of Birds about the
forementioned sulphurous Cavity, which they call Diabolins, which are very
large, and as good as Pullets; they live upon nothing else but Fish, which they
vomit up to feed their Young withal, and the Inhabitants send out their Negro's
to take them; but whether it be that they are not used to it, or that the Cold,
or the Air of the said sulphurous Cavity seizes upon them, they are taken with
such a languishment upon it, that they cannot surmount without much Difficulty;
they also find several boiling Fountains in this Island.

That part of the Island which stands to the Northward, because of its being
larger than the other, is called The Great Land, and has been inhabited a long
time, but at present has not above an hundred Inhabitants. The other, which is
known by the Name of Guadalupa, has two Companies of Foot in it, about a
thousand Inhabitants fit to bear Arms, and a great Number of Negro-Slaves: The
Jesuits, Jacobins, Capuchins and Carmelites, have their Parishes there in
distinct Places, as well as in Mary-Galand, and the Island called Saints.

The Town where we cast Anchor, is the most considerable and almost the only
one of the Island, being divided into two parts by a small River, which runs
from behind the sulphurous Cavity we have already mentioned; it is large enough,
and the greatest part of the Houses in it are built of Stone: There is a
Battery of eight pieces of Cannon erected in the middle, and the same commands
all the Road; and at the end thereof, upon the Bank of a swift Torrent, stands
a little Fort defended by eight pieces of Cannon, and lined with good
Stone-Work.

The English made a Descent upon this Place in 1691, burnt the Town, took away
the Battery that stood in the middle of it; and there was none but this Fort
made good by the Inhabitants, till Monsieur d' Vragny, then General of the
Islands, came with three or four Men of War, and some Merchant Ships, fitted up
in haste to raise the Siege; when the English re-imbarked with Precipitation;
and left above two hundred Men in the Woods, to the Mercy of the French.

Between the tenth at Night, and the eleventh, we weighed Anchor, and at break
of Day saw a Brigantine, that bore up toward us, when we on our part did the
same in respect to her; upon which about Noon we fired three Pieces of Cannon,
which made her presently alter her Course; it is likely she might be some small
English Privateer, that looked after some Prey on these Coasts.

On the 12th and 13th we were very much becalmed, St. Cross.
and on the 15th we discovered the Island of St. Cross, which many of our Crew
were confident, to be the Islands called the Virgins; for indeed at a distance
it appeared to be no other than a Number of little Islands separated from one
another: Here they have Sugar, Cotton, and Indico, great plenty of Fowl and
Swine. And Cows and Horses would have multiplied here apace: But as they were
from Day to Day apprehensive of the loss of this Island, they caused the
Inhabitants to withdraw to St. Domingo, with all their Effects, and entirely to
abandon the Place.

On the 16th by break of Day we discovered St. Thomas, St. Thomas.
that is to Leeward of all the Isles of the Virgins: It Is very remarkable for
many Banks, and white Towers that do surround the Port of it: Upon our approach
we discovered the Town, and a great Fortress of Stone-work that defends the
Entrance of it, without which rode three large Ships. This Island belonged to
the Danes; the Hamburghers have an Agent there, and the Product of the Place is
Sugar and Indico, but no very great Quantity of either; and they would not
think it worth their while to mind it, but that this does facilitate the Trade
they drive in Negro's with the Spaniards of Portorico, that is about fifteen
Leagues off.

About Noon we doubled the Island of St. Thomas, and left a great white Rock on
the left, that looked at a distance, like a Hoy under-sail: This Euripus, as I
may call it, is very commodious for the Merchant-ships that stand in fear of
the Corsairs, which they cannot many times escape, when they sail by St.
Christophers, Saba, and others of the Enemies Islands.

On the seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth, we had a great deal
of Rain and but little Wind; and on the one and twentieth, we past the Tropic
of Cancer. From the twenty third to the twenty eighth we had variable Winds,
and very rainy Weather.

The second and third of March we had great Winds, March, 1697.
Rains, and foggy Weather, and the following Days we were becalmed: We found
our selves parallel to the Bermudoes, but an hundred and fifty Leagues distance
from it, as being a Place which all the Ships that come from the Islands, take
care to shun, seeing they have found by constant Experience, they must meet
with bad Weather there; for the contrary Winds either forces them to draw near
it, or to pass to Lee-ward of it.

On the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th, we had a fair Wind and moderate Weather but
from the time of our leaving St. Thomas, till we came parallel with the Azores,
we saw Herbs every Day floating upon the Sea, which those who had sailed upon
the Coasts of New Spain, told us came from the Channel of Bahama, from whence
they were carried into the main Ocean by the rapidity of the Currents, and then
dispersed over all this Sea, by the Westerly Winds that continually blow upon
the Coasts of Virginia and New England.

On the 10th we had both Winds and Rain, and the Weather was very cold; we came
parallel to the Azores, and kept at an hundred and fifty Leagues distance from
the Isle of Corva.

On the 11th we had very great Winds, but they blowing of us onward in our way,
we were easily brought to acquiesce with them.

Very early on the 12th in the Morning, the Winds blew very hard, the Heavens
were all over-cast, and the Sea grew very boisterous and terrible, and it was
with very great Difficulty that we could carry low Sails: We had a Foot of
Water in the Hole, but we could not use our Pumps; the Waves were as high as
our Masts, and came in upon us on all sides: And in this dangerous pickle we
continued all the Day: But about ten at Night the Winds began to allay, and on
the thirteenth we rejoned the Sun of Africa, which the bad Weather had
separated from us the Day before, and whose Gallery had been swept away by a
great Wave.

On the sixteenth, being come parallel to Cape Finister, we made all the Sail
we could to get a sight of it; and next Day, at five in the Evening, we saw a
small Vessel two Leagues to Windward of us, and which we believed was bound for
the Bank of New Foundland: But on this, and the two succeeding Days, we had
Hail, Rain, and very cold Winds.

On the nineteenth we discovered a pretty large Ship three Leagues to Leeward,
whom we chased for four Hours, but could not come up with her.

And on the twentieth, by break of Day, we found another within two Cannon-shot
of us, which made us put out all our Sails, and give her chase, which continued
for seven hours: But as we had but little Wind, we could not come up with her,
and so we resumed our Course again.

From the two and twentieth to the 27th, the Weather was very hazy; and for six
Days together, we saw neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars, and had but very little
Wind.

On the 17th we saw three Ships to Windward of us, which we did not think
convenient to look after, seeing our Provision was now almost spent, and that
it was our Interest to improve our time well; and this same Night, we beheld a
Rainbow cross the Heavens, which, without receiving any Reflection from the
Stars, that were very much over-cast, had a very lively red Color.

The 28th, 29th, and 30th, we had favorable Winds, and fine moderate Weather.

But now the first Day of the Month of April being come, April, 1697.
the Wind chopp'd about all of a sudden, and came contrary; at what time we
accounted our selves not above fifty Leagues from Cape Finister: Next Day the
Winds bare hard upon us, and disabled us to make the Cape.

But on the fourth and fifth they began to allay, and proved fair enough; and
next Day, at seven in the Morning, we discovered about a League from us to
Leeward, a pretty large Ship, which we chased all Night long, gained much upon
her, and had it not been for a Fog that fell for two Hours, by favor of which
she sailed away, she had certainly given us either Bullets or Bread, which last
we now most wanted, all our Provisions being spent, and the Winds still
contrary.

On the eighth we saw Pewets, and other Sea-birds, who are never seen very far
from the Shore; next Day being the ninth, we met with a sort of little
Sparrows, who passed over our Sail-yards without resting themselves; and this
was an infallible sign unto us, that we were not far from Land.

On the 12th at break of Day, we descried two Ships at a League's distance from
us, but we could not come up with them, our Ships being too foul, too full of
Herbs and Shellwork, to think of gaining upon Vessels newly careened, as we
apprehended these to be.

On the 13th we saw several Birds that waited as well as we, for a favorable
Wind to put them a-shoar; next Day the Wind was boisterous, and we had much
Rain, Hail and melting Snow: And we lost Company with the Sun of Africa in a
Fog, who not observing the Signal, sailed away, while we were setting our
Round-tops, that were displaced, in order again.

On the 15th the Wind being somewhat allayed, and the Weather clearing up,
about break of Day we saw five Ships, three to the Star-board, and two to the
Lar-board; but we were not in a Condition to go and look after any them.

By the sixteenth our Provision was all spent, The Men brought to live upon
Chocolate.
and we necessitated to use the Sugar and Cocoe of the Merchants, to make
Chocolate for the Ships Crew; which is a Liquor that is of a very nourishing
nature, and might serve instead of Victuals; but our Seamen, who were not
accustomed to it, did not like it at all, and said it made their heads giddy.

On the 17th at Sun rising, we thought we had the sight of the Tower of
Cordovan, but our joy was short-lived, and this Tower was all of a sudden
Transformed into a Ship.

At last on the 18th, after a traverse of sixty seven Days, we sounded and
found a Bottom, and were come parallel to Pertuis de Maumusson, about twenty
Leagues distance from the Shore: On the ninteenth we had but a small Wind.

But on the 20th we discovered Rochebonne, which is fifteen Leagues wide of
Pertuis d' Antioch; the Sea, though very even, proved now to be broken and
violent: About Noon we saw four Ships, and they Steered the same Course with
us. Soon after we discovered the Steeple of God's- Island, about five in the
the Evening, the Whale-Tower in the Isle of Rhee, and at Night we came to an
Anchor, to wait for the Tide.

On the 21st we weighed, and by break of Day we found our selves within two
Cannon-shot of four Ships, which we had seen the Day before, which made us put
out French Colors: They did the like, and we sent our Canoe on board them, to
know what news from France: They happened to be a Bark of the Isle of Oleron,
and three St. Malo Men, half men of War, and half Merchants, who were going to
take in Salt in the Isle of Rhee, and from thence to fish on the bank of
New Foundland: They gave us six Baskets of Bread, one Barrel of Bacon, and
some Beer, which a little refreshed our men. The St. Malo men passed by Pertuis
Breton, and we by that of Antioch, and so on till about Midnight, we cast
Anchor before Rochelle, where we found the Sun of Africa, who was got into that
Port two Days before us.

FINIS.
An EXTRACT of the French King's Grant, for the Printing of this Book.
BY the King's Grant, made at Paris the 15th of October, 1697. and signed Midy;
the Sieur de Fer, Geographer to the Dauphin, is allowed to Print, Sell, and
Dispose of, by the Hands of what Printer or Bookseller he pleases, a Book
Entitled, A Relation of a Voyage made on the Coasts of Africa, Brasil, the
Streights of Magellan, and Islands of America, for the space of eight Years:
And all Persons, of what Quality or Condition soever they be, are forbidden to
Print the said Book, without the Consent of the said Sieur de Fer, upon Pain of
such Penalty, Confiscation of the Copies, etc. as are held forth in the said
Grant.

Entered in the Hall-Book of the Company of Stationers and Printers of Paris,
the 12th of October, 1697. Signed P. Aubouyn, Syndic.
Begun to be Printed the first time, January the 9th, School.
THE END.
BOOKS Printed for M. Gillyflower, W. Freeman, M. Wotton, J. Walthoe, and R.
Parker.
OF Wisdom, Three Books. Written Originally in French by the Sieur de Charron,
with an Account of the Author; made English; with some necessary
Advertisements. By George Stanhope, D. D. late Fellow of Kings-College in
Cambridge, from the best Edition. Corrected and Enlarged by the Author, a
little before his Death.

The Roman History, from the Building of the City to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar, containing the Space of 727 Years; Designed as
well for the Understanding of the Roman Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By
Lawrence Echard, A. M. of Christ's- College in Cambridge.

Now in the Press.
The Roman History, the Second Part. By Lawrence Echard, A. M.

A Complete Body of Chirurgical Operations; Containing their Definitions and
Causes, from the Structures of the several Parts: The Signs of the Diseases for
which the Operations are made: The Preparations for, and the Manual Performance
of each: The manner of Cure after every particular Operation: Together with
Remarks of the most skilful Practitioners upon each Case; as also Instructions
for Sea-Surgeons, and all concerned in Midwifery.

The whole Illustrated-with Copper Plates, explaining the several Bandages and
Instruments. By Monsieur de la Vauguion, M. D. and Intendant o^ the Royal
Hospitals about Paris.


