From our Women's Yearly Meeting held at York the 19th. and 20th. days of the
Fourth mo^nth. 1700.
WE being Met together to wait upon the Lord, to feel his Heavenly Power to
enable us to perform our Christian duties we owe unto the Lord, and one unto
another: for he has been pleased to regard the low estates of his Handmaids,
and in his wonted kindness has accompanied our meeting with his Heavenly
presence, and visited our Souls with his unchangeable Love to the gladding of
our hearts to-gether. And here has been several Testimonies born amongst us
to our great comfort and Confirmation. And we have received Testimonies in
writing from the most of our monthly meetings, of the care and Concern of
friends. And Some have given a-good account of the prosperity, and Increase of
Truth, and Condescension of friends to a Reformation in several things that
are wanting, and we hope in future time will be amended.

And now friends, we could well do no less, then give in this short account of
the Concerns of this our Solemn Assembly, desiring your due Care in the wisdom
of God to manage the Affairs of Truth in every monthly meeting. For we being
under a weighty Concern of the great Love of God in Seperating of us, from the
worlds vain Customs, foolish Fashions, and traditions: And by his power making
a Remnant willing to lose the favor of Relations, and acquaintance for denying
customary Feastings, at marriages, births and burialls, at feast times,
mas-times, fast days, and all other vain Sportings, and pastimes: And some
for testifying against them have been deep Sufferers. Therefore we desire
Friends care in every particular Meeting, that none professing the same Truth,
may practice those things which others suffered for denying: And that the
Ancients keep to their plainness, and the Simplicity of the Truth which is
unchangeable in itself; and admits not of any change in us, neither does it
suffer our children, or servants to mix with the world in any of these things.

And we desire our queries from our last Quarterly Meeting may be put in
practice, which is needful, not only so, but where any thing is wanting, that
may be as weighty: For we desire in all things, we may do to others, as we
would they should do to us, and give no accasion to Jew nor Gentile; but keep a
Conscience void of offense both toward God and Man; and as much as in us lies,
live peaceably with all, and do good unto all, especially unto the househould
of faith: For surely, friends, a blameless life, and righteous conversation
reaches the witness in others, and stops the mouths of Gainsayers.

And where any go into any thing of disorder, which causees the way of Truth to
be evil spoken of, as in the days of old: Such may be dealt with, according
to order now established. Many admonitions such have had from this place: much
we could write, but we would be short.

For there are more Meetings now erected, and Friends have the opportunity of
inquiring one of another, the oftener, and hearing one from another, how the
affairs of Truth are carried on in every monthly Meeeing, which we hope may be
of good service; as Friends are freely given up in the wisdom of God to attend
these Meetings, and in his counsel to manage Truths Concerns.

And we also desire, there may be no backwardness in Friends in helping in this
service, for if woe was pronounced against those that wrought the Lords work
carelessly, or with negligent minds, what will it be for those that will not
work it at all, nor lend a hand to help it on. Jael was commended for putting
her hand to the work, and her right hand to the work-Mans hammer: Deborah,
Dorcas, and Lidia with many others, who were Co-workers, and Fellow laborers,
whose Testimonies are lest upon Record, that have been a Comfort and
Encouragement to us. And truly Friends, great Encouragement we have had from
the Lord, and cause to Encourage one another, as living members of one body,
which cannot say to each other we have no need of thee; For there is need of
all, and service for all, in building the walls of Jerusalem, repairing her
wastes, and making up the breaches in Sion.

And take heed of letting in hard thoughts, one against another and be not too
hard one upon another about things serviceable, which gives no occasion, but be
careful to preserve unity. But things needless, and Superfluous, that give
occasion, those testify against: And do not reflect one upon another, saying
the work has been long in hand, and little done, There is a great deal to do
yet, And truly Friends, we believe, there will be woke for the People of the
Lord in all Ages: We could be glad, if through our travel, future Ages might
have more ease.

And now young Women, who feel a Concern upon you for the Honor of the Lord in
your day: We desire your faithfullness, and your help, and care for good Order,
and Church discipline: For you are very near, and dear to us, and we are
comforted in you, and encouraged, that when we shall be dissovled, and gone to
our rest; Our Heavenly Father (whose tender care has been over us to this very
day living praises to him for ever) we believe will enable you to carry on his
work, to his Honor, your Souls Comfort, and his Peoples good.

Now Friends, we know we have hinted at these things in our former Testimonies
from this place, so that we have no new thing to write, yet we hope we may be
born in stirring up the pure mind one in another, and putting one another in
rememberance of performing these things.

And we desire this Testimony may be accepted, and received in the same love in
which it is given forth: And we also desire, that our former Testimonies given
from this place may not be lost, but be gathered up in every monthly Meeting,
and kept in some particular hand, if happily there may be service for them in
future time.

Also we desire, that care be taken that some weighty Friends of every monthly
Meeting do attend the next Quarterly Meeting.

Signed on the behalf of the Meeting by us Elizabeth Tailor. Katharine Win.
Mary Wh^te. Deborah Win. Alice Ellis. Elizabeth Yeall. Rachel Linskill.
Margaret Smith. Mary Burgess. Elizabeth Broadhead. Mary Oddy.



