A FULL and TRUE ACCOUNT Of the DISCOVERY of the Late Treasonable Plot
SCOTLAND, As also of the Original Bond of Association, that several disaffected
Persons have entered into, and Signed, against the Government; and of the
Seizing of several Persons in the House, of the Lord Olyphant, where the said
Association was found.
LICENS^D.

March y. 1690.
I Doubt not but you may, have heard several Reports about an Association, that
several of the Highland Clans, and other disaffected Persons were entering into
against the Government, and to support the declining Interest of King James in
this Kingdom. But till of late I have not been able to give you any certain
Account of what I was doing, and contriving amongst those Persons, the
Discovery whereof happened in the following manner. It was discoursed of in the
North, especially in the Shire of Bamf, That a certain number of Men were going
up and down to several Gentlemen's Houses, whom they believed well inclined to
contribute their Endeavors to keep up the Rebellion and to assist Coll.
Cannon, who Commands amongst the Highlanders, and to get them to set their
Hands to a Bond of Association, which was prepared for that purpose, name To
stand by King James with their Lives and Fortunes, and promise never to lay
down their Arms, until they had settled him again in Scotland. There was private
Intimation of such an Association, and a meeting of some 10 or 12 of the Party,
to be held at the Lord Olyphant's House in Bamf It concer^^ Matters about the
signing of the Bond, given to Sir Thomas Levingston, who Commands a Regiment of
Dragoons at Inverness, who immediately dispatched 100 of his Men, under the
Command of Capt. Hay, and another Captain, with Instructions to them, to March
with what Diligence they could to the said Lord Olyphant's House, and when they
came there, to see, and search if there were any Strangers in the House, and in
case there were any considerable number of them, to secure them; but in case
there were none but those of the Family in the House, not to make any further
enquiry, or to disturb them.

This Party marched with that Diligence and Secrecy, that they came and
surrounded the Lord Olyphant's House before he had any Suspicion or Notice of
their marching that way; they found 10 or 12 Gentlemen, Strangers in the House,
besides those of the Family, whom they presently secured; then they searched
into a Closet, to see what Papers they could find, and amongst other things,
they had the good Fortune to light upon the Original Bond of Association, with
the Hands of about 400 Persons to it; some whereof were Heads of Clans, and
other Heritors; many were such as were of desperate Fortunes, ruined in their
Credit and Domestic Affairs, whom no Law could reach, and such like
Circumstances. This Paper was immediately sent to the Privy Council, and from
thence transmitted to His Majesty. The Privy Council upon so important a
Discovery, has ordered Parties to go out and apprehend as many as they can of
those Persons, who have Signed the said Assocition; whereof I hope to be able
to give you some good Account by the next: Amongst other Matters, which I am
told are contained in the Association, besides the general Expression, of
standing with their Lives and Fortunes by King James, and to endeavor the
Settling of him on the Throne of Scotland; they engage and oblige themselves in
particular, To appear with all the Men they can raise, and Interest they have
in their respective Places of Abode, in June next, and join Coll. Cannon, and
the rest of the Rebels now in Lochaber, and to furnish them with Victuals and
necessary Provisions. The said Lord Olyphant, and all the Conspirators that
were found at his House, are sent Prisoners under a strong Guard to Aberdeen.
Besides the said Original Association, there were found other Treasonable
Papers, which will not a little contribute toward the Discovery of the secret,
as well as public Enemies of the present Government.

LONDON: Printed for Rich. Baldwin. 1690.


