A full and true RELATION OF a most Barbarous and Dreadful MURDER; Committed on
the Body of Mrs. Kirk, wife of Edmund Kirk Drawer at the Rose-Tavern in
PYE-CORNER, On Sunday May the 25th. 1684.
Whose Body was found in a Pit near Tyburn, supposed to be Murdered by her
aforesaid Husband.
EDmund Kirk was a Drawer at the Rose-Tavern at Pye-Corner, where he had lived
with the Master of the House about a Fortnight or three Weeks at most; Friday
the 23 d. of this Instant, being the day of the Execution of John Gower who
Mutthered his Wife, and Francis Robinson, who were then Executed at Tyburn; he
asked his Masters leave that he might go and see them suffer, and at his
return, brought back the Speeches and Confessions of them, which he
particularly related to the Family. Much about the time he came to his
aforesaid Master, he was Married to a Woman who was Servant in a Lawyers house
in Dove Court on Fish-street Hill, and on Sunday in the Afternoon went to see
his said Wife, and invited her to walk into the Fields, as appears by the other
Servants: they took their walk toward Paddington, and about seven a Clock at
Night Edmund Kirk returned to his Masters House, where he was observed to be in
a great heat, but not any ways Melancholy, or Indisposed in his Temper.

On Tuesday Morning, about ten of the Clock the Body of a Woman Murdered, was
found in a Pit within two Fields of Tyburn, her Arms and other parts of her
Body were black and blew, and her Throat c^t from one Ear to another. The
Constable of Paddington acquainted with it, came to view the Body, and
searching the Pockets of this poor murdered Wretch, found a Letter which she
designed to send to some Friends in the Country, and was writ by her Masters
Clark, with Directions in it how to send to her. By the Directions of the
Letter, he acquainted her Master, that the Body of a woman was found Murdered
at such a place, and such a Letter in her Pocket. The Gentleman having mist his
Servant from Sunday, and knovving that her Husband lived with a Vintner at the
Rose-Tavern at Pye-Corner, went this Morning, being the 28th of May, to his
Masters House, where examining him about his Wife, he seemed in a strange
horror and confusion of Spirit, upon which he was carried before Sr. William
Turner, who Committed him to Nengate. He did own before Sr. William, that he
went out with her toward Paddington, and vvithall said he brought her back
again; but the Circumstances appearing very plain against him, he confessed he
vvalked with her from her Masters House toward Paddington, and at three of
the Clock in the Afternoon, he went from his Masters House to his Wife, and
without his Masters Knowledge took his Cane from behind the door, and at his
return at seven a Clock, brought it back with him and set it in the same
place. When the Body was found, there was also found a Brass Ferule of a
Cane, of which notice being given to Sr. Wm. Turner, the Cane was produced,
which was bloody a foot from the end of it, and the Ferule off; which said
Ferule by the Description the Constable of Paddington has given of it, does
certainly belong to the said Cane. Edmund Kirk, does acknowledge that he took
the said Cane out with him but will not plainly and positively confess the
Murder, tho by all Circumstances, he does appear to be the cruel and barbarous
Author of it. He continued at his Masters house at Pye-Corner from the time of
the commtting of this Murder, and did not in his carriage and behavior appear
to his Master or Fellow Servants under any trouble or disquiet of mind, till
this very morning, when he was apprehended; and then was under a strange
surprise and consternation, and trembled like an Aspin-Leafe. The poor Woman
who was thus inhumanely Butchered, was judged by those who knew her before
this fatal mischief, and by others who have seen the body since, to have been
with Child, which probably she was before Marriage: and some little Items
have been taken notice of in his former Expressions, as if his marriage had
been rather upon force, to prevent a greater shame than in the choice of his
Affections; what was the true cause, does not yet plainly appear, but he was
observed to discourse unvvillingly of her and was always displeased with any
expressions which related to her.

Thus by this lamentable instance may we see the strange power the Devil has
over the mind and affections of some men, who as this person, tho he had seen
John Gower Executed on the Friday before for murdering his Wife, yet could take
no warning from his sad example, but on Sunday following (a day which more
particularly ought to have deterred him from so Bloody a murder) commits the
same crime himself, by which he may expect the same miserable and shameful
death.

London Printed by Elizabeth Mallet in Black-Horse Alley near Fleet-Bridge,
1684.


