Some Particular MOTIVES OF THE CONVERSION OF PETER FROTTE, HERETOFORE
CANON-REGULAR of the Royal Abbey of St. Genevieve at Paris.

PRIOR of the Priory and Parish of Souilly in the Diocese of Meaux.

In a Letter directed to Mr. James Benign Bossuet, Bishop of Meaux; formerly
Tutor of Monseigneur Le Dauphin.

Englished by the Author.

And Dedicated to the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Stamp, Lord Mayor of the
City of London. And the Honorable Court of Aldermen.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arr Inn, Warwick Lane. M
DC XCI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir THOMAS STAMP, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
And the HONORABLE COURT of ALDERMEN.
MY LORD,
NO body, I hope, will accuse me of temerity, if I take the boldness to
Dedicate to Your Lordship this Discourse; though hereby I have the unhappiness,
to interrupt with this little Address of mine, Your more important Affairs. For
no wonder if a stranger comes to implore, nay to importune Protection; even his
very condition gives him title to it; since every Stranger in a Foreign Country
may be looked upon as an Orphan, without particular Kindred, Friend, or
Acquaintance, it may be allowed him to have Recourse to the First Magistrate of
the City wherein he lives, as to a Public Patron, Friend, and Father. As for
my part; My Lord, it is true, I am not so abandoned a Stranger, but that I have
found some Friendship and Charity, not only among my Contrymen, who are here
mere Strangers as my self, but also among the Englishmen. Nevertheless were I
not in need of any Protection or Favor, I should be glad of an occasion to
give my self the honor of approaching to Your Lordship, to manifest in
describing the Hypocritical and Cruel character of an Enemy of Your Religion
and Liberty, That I desire heartily the happiness of this magnificent City, of
Your Lordship, and of Your Honorable Brethren, who so happily steer it at this
time, to its present measure of Peace and Order; to congratulate it for its
Loyalty and Love to so Good, so Generous, and so Illustrious a King; to Rejoice
and Bless you for Your great Care and Unwearied pains, in Rooting out the
Seminaries of Sedition, in supressing Irreligion and Profaneness, and doing
what lies in men, for the keeping of the Unity and Concord; in which worthy
deeds that you may ever proceed, and be succeeded, by the Blessing and
Concourse of Divine Providence, is, and shall be the daily Prayer of Your

(RIGHT HONORABLE) Most Humble and Obedient Servant, PETER FROTTE.

Some Particular Motives of the CONVERSION OF PETER FROTTE, etc.
In a Letter directed to Mr. James Benign Bossuet, Bishop of Meaux; formerly
Tutor of Monseigneur Le Dauphin.

Monsieur,

I Remained too long in your Church; I have been too long a Witness of her
Violences and Cruelties against those whom she injustly calls Heretics, not to
understand into what degree of Fury she would have run against me, had I been
so unhappy, after my renouncing her Communion, as to fall again into her power.
It Is, Sir, what obliged me to abandon all what I possessed in France, That I
might come into these Countries, where Conscience being free, I could give
glory to God, and worship Him according to the rules of the Holy Gospel: I am
not ignorant also, what calumnies this same Church of yours is wont to put upon
those that separate themselves from her, and especially when they are of my
Character: I know she forgets nothing that may cry them down, and blemish their
Reputation. This reason engaged me also to make public the true motives of my
Conversion, to direct them to you, and to write you this Letter; that all
people might know what your simple Priests and Monks are capable of, when they
see a great Prelate, who honored me so long with his esteem and protection,
become on a sudden one of my greatest Enemies, and run into Invectives with an
Anger unbecoming his Character, as soon as he apprehended I designed to forsake
his Church.

I do not deny, Sir, and I am obliged to acknowledge, you gave me a thousand
marks of your Bounty: This to your Recommendation I owe, that I was very
welcome at Monsieur Le Pelletier, Comptroler of the King's Exchequer; and that
Monsieur de Menars, Intendant of Paris, favored me with his particular
Protection. Moreover, though my kindred might have the Honor to be known, and
a little considered by Monsieur the Chancellor; your Favor and Authority was
not needless to me in reducing to Reason the Inhabitants of Souilly; which I
had not prosecuted in Law, but in Obedience to your Order.

You caused me to Preach in your Cathedral Church, and in your Presence, on the
most Solemn day of the Year; and my Sermon was not only approved, but also
applauded by you. I was welcome not only in your House, but also at your Table
and in your Coach: All things were pleasant to me at your Court, and your
kindness toward me caused great Jealousy of me in many other good People.

It Is most certain your favor and affection was so great to me, that you would
never believe what several People told you of me, viz. That I neglected the
Celebrating of Mass; That I Preached no more; That I was always in the Company
of the Protestants; That I compelled them not to obey to your will; That I
stayed for nothing but the Prince of Orange's coming into France to Reform my
Church; And that at last I overthrew by my behavior in this Country, all that
your Zeal Endeavored to Establish.

My Kindred, which feared for many Reasons I would abandon your Church,
informed you of all they knew about that business: My Brother De Lignieres,
Colonel, who was long since in your Town with his Regiment, spoke to you of
nothing else; if by Divine Providence you had not been prejudiced against all
these reports, which yet were really grounded, as you may see now, this
unnatural Brother, who hates me only because I reproached him with his
Licentious sort of Life, would have sent to me many of his Soldiers to take me
up, and would not have spared me more than he did the poor Reformed of
Daulphine, when he went thither to Preach so efficaciously, by an extraordinary
Mission in Quality of Captain of Dragoons.

I must, Sir, Adore here God's Providence, who kept me in midst of these
Dangers; who not giving me yet all the necessary light, nor resolution enough
to break with you, gave me yet the confidence to remain among so many Enemies,
who were long since angry with me: For many years ago, my Kindred, and Canons
Regular of Saint Genevieve, being informed from all hands of the liberty I took
to speak in particular Conversations, nay, to Preach also publicly against the
abuses of the Ecclesiastical power; of the Superstious Worship; of the
Pharisaical Hypocrisy of the Monks, and the Priests; of the dangerous Policy of
the whole Clergy; designed often to declare me fool, and to treat me
accordingly. How great Happiness, Sir, to be believed fool by the Worldly
People, since this folly (as Saint Paul calls it) is the true Wisdom in the
sight of God!

This Intention (I say) so much worthy of your Religion, was not unknown to me;
for many threatened me, and others warned me of this danger.

Notwithstanding this, as I was not convinced of all the truth I looked for,
and was yet entangled in some Errors, I continued as one asleep, in midst of
those who contrived my Ruin, and upon the brink of a Precipice: But I was also
under the Protection of God, who alone knew the day and the hour which he
appointed for my Salvation; he shut your Eyes, and stopped up your Ears for my
good; Insomuch, that all the discourses and reports of my Kinsmen, of our
Canons of St. Genevive, and of my Parishioners, by which they intended to Ruin
me, hindered not you a Fortnight before my escape, to give a very good
Testimony of my Manners and Behavior, before the most Illustrious Persons; I
mean, that the 15th. of July last, you told in the Presence of Monsieur Le
Duke, the Montausier, of Madame, the Duchess of Uzess his Daughter, and of
many other Persons of the first quality, That I was a very Honest man, and my
Life and Conversation was very good. This Master Sanlecque, Prior of Garnay, a
very Honest man, who was present at this Meeting, related to me. Pray, Sir, be
not Angry with him for that, for I never made him partaker of my design: You
have said the same to Monsieur de Menars, Intendant of Paris; he himself did me
the favor to tell it me, and advised me not to go out of your Diocese, because
you were well affectionated to me. I thank you, Sir, that knowing me (as you
did) you did me Justice by your Testimonies, and that you added often many
Praises, which I was not worthy of.

Nevertheless, I must confess, your favors were very dangerous to me: This
good will toward me, of a Person of so great merit, deceived me, and imposed
upon my mind; and I do not know well whether the fear of showing my self
Ungrateful, has not lessened the difficulties I had about your Religion, and
whether it has not caused me to defer for a while the rendering of my Duty to
God.

But whilst you defended me without, against men, God attacked me happily
within, and broke, by the strength of his Grace, all the impediments which I
had set against my own Salvation.

He inspired me efficaciously to abandon a Church in which my heart was never
contented, in which my Conscience was always grieved, sometimes upon one point
of Faith, sometimes upon another, and sometimes upon all controverted Articles.

But at last this lucky moment happened, in which God gave me light and
resolution enough to accomplish the design I had long since, to renounce a
Religion which appeared to me to have many things borrowed from the Jews and
Heathens. I caused my goods to be transported into Paris, there to be sold.
This removal of my goods was observed by many People, and no body questioned
more my design: You your self being convinced of it, endeavored to ruin the
good opinion you had given of me by public Testimonies.

Remember, Monsieur, the indignation you had conceived against me in that time,
and your extraordinary change, which obliges me also to change, and to give an
answer to your Malice and Fury, as it deserves. How comes it to pass, Monsieur,
That the 15th. of July you said wonderful things in my praises, and before
irreproachable and illustrious Witnesses; and the First day of the following
Month, you caused to be reported in my Parish, at Claye, at Lagny, at Meaux,
That I took pleasure in nothing but riding on Horseback; That I was fitter for
a Camp than for the Church; That I was a shame to my Kindred; and that of a
long time I had not said Mass but carelessly; That I am a Profane, and an
Heretic, a Rogue, and a Banditto.

What strange Palinody! Am I then Metomorphized in a Fortnight? No Monsieur, I
am no other man; and except the changing of a corrupted Religion into another
holy one, I am always the same; I can prove to you, that you need not recant
what you have often said in my Praise. For you well know I could have sold my
Living at a good rate, especially it being in the good state wherein you were
pleased to put it. Many People offered me a great deal of Money for it, but I
would not sell the Ministry; the proof of it shall be evident, for he to whom
you procured my Living, shall not be disturbed in his Possession.

I was willing, Sir, to give you at my departure, this last proof of my good
Conscience, and of my Honesty: I do not repent; yet have I acted perhaps too
scrupulously; for at least should not I be excusable at my going out of Egypt,
to take something of spoil from God's Enemies and cruel Persecutors of his
Israel? Especially considering they robbed me of all my goods, and often made
an unworthy traffic of my Patrimony, of my Liberty, and of my Soul.

But if I am always the same in point of Honor, how much are you changed on
the same point? from your being Sweet, Gentle, and Affable, you on a sudden
became Sour, Angry, not to say Furious; for you are not Contented to declare
War against me, by many injuries and wrongs, but also you came to handy-blows;
you drive out of my House my Vicar, whom you your self had approved; you cause
my House to be broken open, and plundered all the rest of my goods which I had
not yet removed; you endeavored not only to bereave me of my Reputation and my
Goods, but also of my Liberty and my Life. You permit Monsieur de Bellou my
Brother in Law, to attack me, first by a Troop of Sergeants, and afterward by
a Provost Armed with your Episcopal Charity, and with your Apostolic Zeal.

But at last, since God has been pleased to deliver me out of your hands, and
to guide me into those Countries your Violence cannot reach, never hope to have
me in the clutches of your Tyranny again. Nevertheless, I desire to acknowledge
your Supreme Power once more in my Life; and to the end I may render to you my
last homage, I resolved to acquaint you with the reasons of the change God has
been pleased to work in me; you shall see many motives of it in another It Is
not Englished.
Discourse directed to you, after I have pronounced it publicly; but I
reserved some other to tell you them here privately.

You helped me very much, Sir, to my Conversion, with your demeanor: I cannot
dissemble it, you (if I may so say) edified me by your Scandals. Your
Exposition of Catholic Faith, so famous in all the world, made me think you do
not believe what you Teach, and you retain the truth in Injustice: This Book a
great while ago imprinted in me a bad, but a true opinion of your Doctrine. I
could not be a witness of the fits of your Anger against the Reformed of your
Diocese, without pitying them, and conceiving some Indignation against you. I
could not compare the fashion of your Missions with your Pastoral Letter, Dated
on 24th. of March 1686 without being persuaded (as many others have been) you
had no sincerity; for you boast in this Letter, That none of your new
Catholics have ever undergone any Violence, either in Person or in
Goods,......and that they came again to you quietly, and voluntarily; you
appeal to their own testimony for it. You know it very well (say you.)

O Monsieur! How dare you say so? Did I not see with my own Eyes the extreme
violence you exercised in Person against all this People, for (except a certain
branded Woman of the Lizys Town) whom for Charities sake I omit to name, and
whom you called your Conquest, and carried as triumphantly in your own Coach,
to draw others with her as with a Bait; except (I say) this notoriously branded
Woman, who perhaps abjured willingly her Religion; all the rest were
constrained to do it by the Soldiers whom you caused to pass and repass through
your Diocese in the time of your Missions, and by continual Threatenings made to
them, even in the Sermons you have pronounced at Claye before Monsieur
L'Intendant, whom from the Pulpit you called your Second in this Expedition.
Was I not a Witness of the power and efficacy of your Preaching, of your Art
and Industry in honoring the Ministry, when they carried violently into your
Episcopal Palace all the Protestants of the Villages of Nanteuil, Quincy,
Conde, etc.? For it is true, in less than two Hours, you persuaded them of all
your Mysteries; but all this quick success came of their being without any
Minister to defend them in this Controversy, from this great Episcopal Luster,
and Splendour which attended you, and dazzled their Eyes; But more especially
from the fierce presence of some Officers of War, whom you never wanted, and
who always helped you very much in your design, by sprinkling upon all your
Discourses, a great deal of energy and strength, which took them all up in a
moment, and constrained them to embrace your Opinions. You presently gave them
your Blessing, with a full power of Communicating, after the Roman fashion;
thus you bewitched them; but your Charm continued but a little while. For every
body knows, That in going out of your Palace, all your converted People
abhorred your Violence; we heard them publicly Recant, what you constrained
them to Sign in your Chamber: They, methinks, showed enough their Repentance;
for a few Days after they met together near Nanteuil, to Pray to God, and to
beg his Pardon, for the scandal they gave one to another, in surrendering
themselves to your Violence. But this occasion manifested also, you are not in
the right to boast of your great Sweetness and Kindness (as you do:) since you
were transported with so violent Wrath, that you caused many of them to be
Condemned to Death. It Is true, that calling your self an Imitator of St.
Austin, who was used to take the Criminals out of the hands of the Judges, or
caused their Punishment to be diminished; you procured to change the Sentence
of Death, into that of the Galleys; but you came short of the Charity of this
Holy man; For he was not contented to ask the Magistrates for a simple
moderation of Punishing in behalf of the Criminals, when he could obtain for
them a free and full deliverance from it. You on the contrary, who over-ru'ld
the Sentence (Monsieur L'Intendant, having an order to follow what you should
think fit) instead of causing those Innocents to be wholly delivered from the
inflicted Pains, you changed their Punishment into a more insupportable one,
the Condemnation to the Galleys being worse than death it self.

If this be your kindness, how must we call what you did at Claye? When in
obedience to your order Benjamin Good Chyrurgion, was commanded to exercise his
profession no more; when according to your Commands, the Widow called Testar,
had her Eldest Son taken from her; and in like manner was the woman called
Boisseleau taken up for no other reason, but because she was very well versed
in her Catechism, and highly encouraged her companions, not to comply with your
bad Exhortations: When having caused the Cuirassiers, Commanded by Monsieur de
la Chaise, the Nephew of Father de la Chaise, to come to Claye, you got
together all the Protestants in the Monsieur D'Herouville his House, and told
them, Unless they would Abjure their Religion, and become Catholics, you would
bring into their Houses these Soldiers, who would overturn their brains, Make,
Sir, make if you can, these actions to agree with what you boast of, viz. That
none of the Protestants of your Diocese, have ever undergone any Violence,
either in Person, or in Goods, and that they all came again to you quietly.

Again, can this be accounted a great Moderation in you, to have procured, That
a Physician of the la Ferte sous-Jouaire, called Monceau, Eighty Nine Years
old, should be thrust into a Monastery, with some circumstances full of
Barbarity? That Eight or Ten Dragoons should be sent to a Wood-sellar, called
Laviron, of the same Town; That Thirty of them should be Quartered upon
Monsieur de la Sermoise, Gentleman of Brie; That his Wife and his Daughter
should be taken from him, and put into a Monastery, and thereby notwithstanding
Christ's Command, put asunder what God has joined with the fastest bonds; Call
(I say) those actions as you please: But as to what you did at the same Claye,
whereof I am witness, in order to pervert Isaac Cochart, sick to Death, Pray
Sir, pardon me, and do not accuse me of Passion, if I call it Fury.

This (I must confess) made too deep an impression in my Imagination, and too
sensibly wounded my heart, not to be forced to reproach you with it in this
place.

This Faithful Christian, seeing the Churches desolation, and the falling down
of his Brethren, feared nothing so much as to si^k with them. He encouraged
himself night and day, with God's Word, to Fight the good Fight: He looked upon
approaching Death, as upon a sure Haven against your Persecution. He was
contented to depart this Life, provided he could carry away his undefiled Faith
committed to him, and bring it before the Tribunal of his own Judge.

You opposed, Sir, his pious design in a strange manner; we saw you come to
this Patient, accompanied with Monsieur L'Intendant, with Monsieur le
Lieutenant General of Meaux, bearing in his hand a Letter Signed by the King;
the Provost of the Marechaux being present, with a band of his Archers; a Cart
was ready at the door for carrying away the Patient, that is, to Kill him.

O what Apostleship! Is this the equipage of an Evangelical Preacher?

You made to him a long Controversy, full of Injuries; and seeing him constant
in his Faith, cried you not out, all transported with Anger, As soon as he
shall be dead, let his Body be drawn to an Allay*stall like a dead Dog?

You came again to him, you solicited him with Promises and Threatenings; you
told him you were ready to take from him his dear and only Son, that is, like
an Industrious Tempter, you tried him in the most sensible part, and tore his
Entrals.

Where is then, again Sir, the great kindness and sweetness you boast of? this
Cruel Spectacle indeed converted me by little and little.

What (said I to my self), is it possible that a Bishop, only to continue in
the favor of the Court, should attempt upon the Consciences, which immediately
and absolutely depend of God alone? What Apostle, What Churches Father, What
lawful Council, ever taught, to stablish the Faith in the Heart with violence?
The primitive Church used a great deal of Circumspection, before the
administering of the Sacrament to those that were suspected of heresy or wicked
life. She tried them a long time, that so one might have a moral assurance of
their Faith and Holiness; she admitted them not so much as to her meeting; so
far was she from inviting them to the holy Table: Whereas our armed Bishop,
Monsieur de Meaux, constrains those whom he ought to believe, according to his
principles, to be Heretics, Schismatics, and profane Persons, not only to
come into his Church, but also to eat what he teaches to be the real Body and
Blood of Christ; according to his Doctrine, he gives to the Dogs, what is the
most Holy Thing upon the Earth and in Heaven: As Pilate delivered Jesus Christ
to the Jews for fear of Caesar; in like manner, Monsieur de Meaux delivers Jesus
Christ to his Enemies by an unworthy compliance to his Prince. When these
Heretics (said I) have in their profane Mouths the Savior of the World, they
shall insult and mock him, boasting as Pilate in the Gospel, that they have
power over him, and that his own Nation and his Prelates, gave them this power,
by delivering him to them.

O how much more (added I) are the Heretics Respectful for the Holy Signs of
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, than Monsieur de Meaux and the other like
him, for what they affirm to be Jesus Christ himself!

This indeed your behavior, approved almost of all Bishops, your Brethren,
ought to terminate all our dispute about Religion; it is a compendium of
Controversy easy to be understood of all men of any sense.

I treat you, methinks, indulgently, when I say you do not judge your Eucharist
so great a Treasure, as you preach it to be; and that you do not believe Jesus
Christ's presence so really in the Sacrament as you declare; for you would not
cause the holy Body and Blood of your Savior, (I dread to speak it, and even
to think on it) to be eaten of the Dogs. These, indeed, violent Conversions,
which are accompanied with forced Communions, are to me an invincible
Demonstration of what you think upon the point of the Sacrament. Is it not
better, Sir, for your Reputation, that I prove you in this Writing, you are an
Hypocrite, than to convince you to be a notorious Prophaner of your most Sacred
Mysteries?

Therefore admire not, if from henceforth I do believe on that point, nothing
else than your self; but it shall be with this great difference, that I will
profess freely all the rest of my Life, the Religion which you keep secret in
your Heart; wherein Fear, and Hope, World, and Flesh, detains it in Slavery. I
am in the right, Sir, to judge of your Faith, by your Actions; Saint James
teaches me, that Faith is manifested so. Jesus Christ himself lets us
understand, that we are to distinguish the true Prophets from the false ones,
by their Fruits.

Pray, Sir, do not accuse me to have made a rash judgment of your Actions; for
though it may be solidly grounded on what I said before, I may yet confirm it
with what I my self observed in your fine Summer House at Germigny. I saw you,
Sir, there present at the Celebration of Mass, in a very uncomely Habit, and in
a Posture unworthy of the Faith you profess; for though you were in perfect
Health, and ready for your Dinner; you were nevertheless at the Mass bare
breasted, and in a posture fitter to assist at the rubbing of your Horses
heels, than at the Sacrifice you say is so dreadful, That the Angels themselves
tremble at it.

Are you then, because of your Episcopal Character, more familiar with Jesus
Christ than the Angels? Have you received of him the Title of Favorite, which
gives you such Privilege and Liberty?

You treated, indeed, your God in a most familiar manner; you lay all along
upon a soft Pillow; you had sometimes in your hand, and sometimes upon your
head a Ridiculous Cap; you were clad with a loose Nightgown, all ungirt like
Horace his Distinctus Nepos; and so you took the fresh air whilst a little
Priest hired of you to say Service, made you at least a memorial of your
Savior's bloody Passion: You had not (to be sure) in this posture the
countenance of a Christian ready to dye for the defense of the
Transubstantiation which you would persuade others by fire and sword to
believe; But to say truth, as soon as you saw me in your Chapel, where you
thought there were but your own Domestics, and most familiar Friends, you were
so ashamed to appear before me in such a neglected and unbecoming posture
(which you yet judged to be worthy of the real Presence of the Lord) that you
ran quickly into your Closet to dress your self; and then it was I perceived
the tenderness of your Conscience, by the fear you showed to have given me a
Scandal.

But fear no more, Sir; I have already told you, your Scandals were useful to
me, and I received enough of them, to be Converted by the Grace of God.

I gained something also by the confusion wherein I saw you, at one of the
Conferences held from time to time all Summer long, in the Chapel of your
Bishopric: There some body made you a strong objection, about some
controverted matter, in which you were followed close; to which you gave so
poor and so weak an Answer, that you your self being not contented with it, and
sensible of its extreme weakness, you endeavored to strengthen it by some
injuries against the Reformed Ministers, whom you called before all the
Company, Miscrable fellows, and Rogues. Those defamations were the strongest
part of your solution; and what surprised many People the more, was, that the
day before, you rebuked a Priest, for having called a Country man Rogue, and
told him wisely, that no Priest ought to have such words in his Mouth.

You give, Sir, excellent precepts indeed, but your power and greatness exalts
you above them; the Princes of the Church, like you, ought doubtless to have
another different Morality from the common People: And it would be a wonderful
thing to see a Bishop of the Roman Church, as Modest as a Simple Priest.

Whilst I am making you my Confession, I shall tell you some other things that
contributed also not a little to my Conversion; It appears, all your Zeal for
the Roman Religion, is nothing but policy, and an extraordinary ambition to
please the Court, wherein your interests and your hopes are great. For my part,
when I consider the demeanor of the French Bishops, as also other
Ecclesiastical Superiors; I cannot but look upon you all as upon Stage Players;
and upon your Religion, but as upon a mere Comedy. When the Court commanded you
to maintain the Popes Infallibility, you scrupled not to Anathematize all those
who opposed this imaginary Privilege: When the same Court ordered you to
dispossess him, you soon deprived him of it; and doubtless you are all ready to
restore it him at the first Order you shall receive.

But this is no more than what is common to you, Sir, with all other Bishops in
France. I had rather to speak of that which is particular, and proper to you
alone. Before the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, Monsieur de Meaux, was not
so vigorous a Preacher against the Reformed; but since the Court declared, That
it would suffer no Religion in France but the Roman; and since the Persecution
against the Protestants is come to be in Fashion, Monsieur de Meaux appears at
the head of the extraordinary Preachers, and most Cruel Persecutors. Whereas
indeed by your Function you are obliged equally at all times to promote the
Edification of the People of your Diocese; but you leave this care to your
Vicars, when God alone imposes it upon you; and you work only in person, when
you have the occasion fit to get the favor of an Earthly King, by obedience to
his Order, be it never so unjust. It Is then you think your Honor is chiefly
engaged; for what would the Court say, if Monsieur de Meaux, who has such
excellent parts to persuade, do not promote the Conversion of the Heretics? If
you do not make good progress in it, you are ashamed, you become angry, as if
you would oblige the Almighty, the only Master of the Heart, to let be
instilled therein the poison which you pour with so much subtilty and Charm
into the Ears.

'Twas doubtless to blot out the shame in which your bad success involues you,
That in the Convocation of the Protestants that you called at Claye, in the
time of your Missions, and in the presence of Monsieur L'Intendant, you told
all the Assembly in the midst of your Discourse, Not they alone were obstinate
in their Religion, but that they were in this, like all the other Protestants
of France; all the People who were present took notice of these words, and made
use of them to their own purpose: A Person of Quality held me by the Arm, and
whispered me in the ear, Was there ever a greater extravagancy? Could he have
invented an argument less fit to persuade this People? but (added he) Monsieur
de Meaux is ashamed of having so slenderly promoted the Jesuits, and the Courts
design, and with this Discourse he endeavors to justify himself before
Monsieur L'Intendant, to the end that his report and testimony, may keep him in
the Court from any Reproach.

Seriously, Sir, all this your behavior sometimes politickly Gentle, sometimes
passionately Violent, scarce ever Sincere, and never Christian, shook strongly
my Conscience. But (I confess to you) (I served not my self soon enough of your
Missions and Sermons; I ought not, since I knew you, to have remained so much
as one moment with you under the pretense of any slight difficulties which
still possessed me: and the truth is, I put my self in danger of losing the
grace of my Conversion, when I delayed so long to accept it.

It was perhaps God's will it should be so, in order both to mine, and your
Conversion. By God's Grace I led you the way in the Race, be not ashamed to
follow me.

O how abundantly, would your Conversion make amends for your Scandals! As for
me, I am not so considerable in the World, that my Conversion should produce
any great effect therein. Its chief, and perhaps its only fruit shall be for
me. I was brought up unfortunately in darkness, in the company of Lazy persons;
whose society and ill manners kept me unknown. As I consumed unfruitfully the
best days of my Life, the rest of them will be perhaps profitable to none. But
you, Sir, who appear almost above all with the Splendour of your Dignity, and
acuteness of your Wit; with your Learning, and so many other very rare gifts of
Nature and Fortune; you may set forth in our days wonderful things in sight of
all the World, if you please to employ for the Truth, all that Wit you have
hitherto made use of to fight against it. Your Conversion would be Famous, by
the enlarging of our Savior's Kingdom; and perhaps by the sudden decay of the
Empire of the Antichrist: I may assure you, That as your dangerous Books hold
open the door of the Pit, to many Thousand Souls, whom you keep from their
Conversion: Your changing of Doctrine and Religion, opening the Eyes of abused
Christians, would introduce them to Salvation.

Consider what power God has trusted you with; Are you not afraid lest he
require of you a severe account of it at the dreadful Day; wherein being
exposed to the very Truth and Justice, you will not find at the feet of his
Tribunal any such Cowards, and Interessed Flatterers, as will render you
praises, for the Poison your Books have presented them?

I would not be obliged to tax you of being not Sincere; I fear lest this very
Reproach should increase in you this bad point of Honor, which makes so many
people to perish: But for God's sake look with pity upon your own Soul, and do
not Sacrifice it to humane and worldly respects; Time is short, Death is not
far off, Judgment approaches, Eternity is at hand; if these dreadful things
ought to make an impression upon the minds of the youngest; what effect ought
they not to produce in the Soul of a Prelate above seventy Years old? Cast away
then this dangerous point of Honor, it is a Serpent which you feed in your
Bosom for your own ruin; shall this wicked Honor, this dangerous Reputation
that you got in a bad Party, be always dearer to you than Interest of the
Truth, than the Salvation of your Soul, than Gods glory?

Nay, to be sure, in renouncing this worldly Honor, you would find it again,
and more abundantly in your Conversion; for those that you abused with your
Writings, coming to change in your Company, and by your example, would give you
more solid and more true praises, than those which you have hitherto received.
The moment of your Conversion would be more glorious to you, even before men,
than this long space of your Life which is already past; this precious moment
would sanctify and crown all your excellent qualities: I pray God to inspire
you with this good design, and give you not only to Will, but also to fulfill
it. I am

SIR, Your Most Humble and most Obedient Servant, PETER FROTTE.

Certificates of the Manners, Doctrine and Conversation, of the Converted
Author.
The first from HOLLAND.
SOme Months ago, Mr. Frotte, heretofore Canon Regular, and possessed of a
Living in France, of one of the best Families in Paris, came to live amongst
us, and gave proof he had abjured Popery in Switzerland, from whence he also
brought an excellent Testimony, and made good here, abundantly all the praises
given him in those Countries; having showed, as well by his Writings, as by his
Conversation, very much of Wit, Learning, and Sincerity for the motives of his
Conversion. We desired to make him stay in this Country; but he finding not
how to subsist here honorably, resolved to go into England; and we have given
him this present Testimony, that he may he known for a Person of no vulgar
Merit.

Dated at Roterdam the 14th. of March 1690. Jurieu, Minister, and Professor in
Divinity. Le Gendre, Minister. Phinees Pielat, Minister. Basnage, Minister.


Another Certificate from London.
THE Acquaintance we have had for these fourteen Months with Mr. Frotte, has
given us a perfect Knowledge of him. We were very glad to experience in him the
Character under which the precedent Attestation represents him. He gave us some
Proofs of his Dexterity in expounding of the Holy Scripture, and of his
Knowledge in Divinity. The Gifts of Preaching he received of God, is not
ordinary; it would have been a loss, if he had employed it in the Defense of
errors and Idolatry. We were edifi'd also by his Modesty, and good
Conversation; and we hope all those that shall know him, will be affected
toward him in the same manner.

Dated at London the First Day of May 1691. J. Graverol, Minister.
I approve this precedent Certificate, which might be made more advantageous
without offending the Truth. De Galinieres Pese, Minister.
I approve this Attestation abovementioned. Brocas of the Hondes plens,
Minister.

Another Certificate from Ispwich in Suffolk.
WE willingly give this Testimony to Mr. Frotte, That during the space of four
Months, in which he resided in this Town, we have never found in him any other
Sentiments but what are conformable to the pure Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and to the present Government of this Nation; and that as to his
Conduct and Behavior, it has always appeared most Worthy of his Profession,
his Piety and Charity having edified us upon all occasions. We beseech God to
continue to him always his Consolations, and the strength of his Holy Spirit in
all Trials, through which Providence shall be pleased to make him to pass.

Dated at Ipswich the 20th of September, 1691. Fontanier, Minister. De
Marraquier, Gentleman.


FINIS.
A^e Sold by James Langford, Tailor, in Flower-deluce-Court in Blackfriars.
1691.

BOOKS Printed for Richard Baldwin.
TRuth brought to light by Time; or the most remarkable Transactions of the
first fourteen Years of King James's Reign. The second Edition, with Additions.

A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar: whereby the
Learned may attain in few Months to Speak and Write French Correctly, as they
do now in the Court of France. And wherein all that is Dark, Superfluous, and
deficient in other Grammers, is Plain, Short and Methodically Supplied. Also
very useful to strangers, that are desirons to learn the English Tongue: For
whose sake is addded a Short, but very Exact English Grammar. The Second
Edition. By Peter Berault.

The Devout Christian's Preparation for holy Dying. Consisting of Ejaculations,
Prayers, Meditations and Hymns, adopted to the several States and Conditions of
this Life. And on the four last things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell.

Victoriae Anglicanae; being an Historical Collection of all the Memorable and
Stupendous Victories obtained by the English against the French, both by Sea
and Land, since the Norman Conquest. viz. The Battle, 1. Between. K. Henry II.
and Robert of Normandy. 2. At Morleis 3. At the Rescue of Calice. 4. At
Poicters. 5. At Cressey. 6. At Agincourt. 7. At the mouth of the River Seine.
8. At Vernoil. 9. At Cravant. 10. At the Relief of Orleance, with the great
Actions of the Lord Salisbury and Talbot. 11. Of Spurrs. Dedicated to all the
Commissioned Officers of the Maritime and Land Forces. Price stitcht 6 d.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Deagant: Containing the most Secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added, a particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. faithfully translated
out of the French Original.

A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French, upon the
English Prisoners of War; being a Journal of their Travels from Dinant in
Britany, to Thoalon in Provence, and back again. With a Description of the
Situation and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their
Distance, etc. Faithfully and impartially Performed by Richard Strutton, being
an Eyewitness, and a Fellow-Sufferer.

The State of Savoy: In which a full and distinct Account is given of the
Persecution of the Protestants in the Valleys of Piedmont, by means of the
French Councils: As also of the Unreasonable Conditions and Demands that the
French King would have put on the Duke of Savoy: And of the just Causes and
Motives that induced that Duke to break off from the French Interest, and join
with the Confederates: Together with the most memorable Occurrences that have
since happened there: As also the true Copies of all the Letters and Dispatches
that have passed between them.


