The full and True RELATION OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE ASSIZES Holden at
MAIDSTONE, FOR THE County of Kent.
Which began on Tuesday the 23d of this instant March, and ended on Friday the
26th of the same. With an exact Account of the most remarkable Trials of
several notorious Offenders, both for Murders and Robberies.

And more especially of one James Wattle for murdering his Apprentice, and one
Bridges for hanging a Child up in a Sack and smothering it to death in a
Chimney, and several other considerable Trials* With the number of those
Condemned to dye, burned in the hand and to be whipped. Printed.2. April. 1680.

JUstice in its Annual progress seldom misses to revenge Affronts imposed upon
its integrity, and loudmouth d crimes still hurry a deserved punishment on such
offending Miscreants as dare by vile offenses to transgress the best of Laws,
as may in the sequel of this dread result be showen.

The first that was called to the Bar was James Wattle, of the Town of
Maidstone Grocer, who was Arraigned and tried, for Murdering his Apprentice, a
Youth of about eighteen years of Age: the manner thus. The deceased being his
Cosen, or some near akin to him, was by his indulgent Parents committed to his
Care and tuition, not doubting such barbarous usuage as followed from a Friend,
and by reason of their distant living, could no^ ^asily be informed, but as it
is commonly seen, a stranger is more kind than a perfidious friend, so in this;
for the youth had (...) lived long with him, before he began to use him at a
gross R^te, that made him complain he was weary of his Life, and all the
neighbors took no little notice of the same; but as to tho Mu^ther for which
the Prisoner was tried, be coming home late, the 6th of February last, knocked
at the Door, but the Youth as it is supposed being drowsy by reason of his
tedious watching, did not quickly hear to let him in, the which so enraged his
fury that no sooner was he admitted, but with his unlawful Cudgel, he having
shut the door fell upon him so unmercifully, that he cried out murder and
begged of him for Heavens sake to forbear, but this not at all apeased his
violence, but continued beating of him till he was tired out of breath, giving
him so many mortal blows as cannot well be numbered, and so left him weltring
in his Gore, who was afterward by some kind hand conveyed to Bed; but in some
few days after died, complaining of his Masters cruelty. After his death the
aforesaid Wattle was apprehended, and bound to answer at this Assizes, where he
pleaded that it was not in the least his design to murder him, but to correct
him for his negligence, and that he was sorry for those unfortunate blows that
had brought the youth to his end, yet upon all circumstances, the Jury brought
it in Manslaughter and he was burned in the hand.

Richard Field had two Indictments brought against him, for stealing a Horse
and a Mare, out of a Farmers grounds near M^^^stone* he being taken on the back
of one of them, his plea was that he bought them, but could not produce the man
be named that sold them, not bring any proof that he had bought the same and
having been formerly a man of ill repute, and one that had sold many horses to
several in that place, but could give no account how he came by them, the
witness against him being plain and positive, the Jury brought him in Guilty,
and he according to Law, received Sentance of Death.

George Barker and William Beston were indicted the former for stealing of
Sheep, the latter for stealing pewter and Linen to a considerable vallue, all
which being proved against them, they were brought in Guilty, and were both
burned in the hand.

The next was one Bridges who was tried (...) Mu^thering (after an inhum^ne
manner, seldom heard of) a little Girl about three years old, the
circumstances as follows. This murder was committed about eighteen years
since, yet to see how Divine Vengeance finds those out that dye their cruel
hands in Blood of innocents, the Girl aforesaid being as we are credibly
informed his Brothers Daughter, was by her Parents deceasing left with a
considerable Competency of Moneys, if not lands or houses, left and bequeathed
to him, with all the endarments of her departing Friends to be brought up by
him the which he most willingly undertook but had not long e're the Devil, that
grand promoter of all dire Designs, prompted him on to make her away, and get
the possession of what she had to his own proper interest his hellish
suggestion prevailed so far with him that he thought sit to put it in practice,
and so cunning in contriving, as the better to evade if a discovery should be
made of Violence done to the Child, that might appear upon search, he tied her
up in a thin Sack and hanging it up in the Chimney made a fire with wet straw
and other combustible matter, which made a noisome smoke and so smothered her
not at all regarding the distressed infants crying and entreating her to take
her down till she were dead, and finding none observed it but those that
himself thought sit to make privy to, it viz. one Dux a servant Maid, he caused
to be buried, and gave out that he had sent the Child to London to be educated
there, and so stopped the mouths of those that were inquisitive in that
particular but about eighteen years being expired, his Maid fell sick and
thinking death was near at hand, her Guilty Conscience started up this most
inhumane and barbarous Crime, so that it long lying heavy on her she at last
divulged it in its horrid circumstances as before recited, but recovering of
that sickness, her Master was apprehended upon those words, she had confessed,
and being committed, received now his Trial, his plea was that she was
lightheaded when she spoke those words, but he not being able to make out what
became of the Child, and there being no other Witness but her Confession, the
least the Jury could make of this barbarous Act was Manslaughter.

Robert Morgan was Indicted for Felony and Burglary for breaking open the
house of one Mr. Wincomb a Victualer, and taking away diverse Pots, and Flagons,
two Pewter Basins, and several parcels of Linen, with 20 s. in money, all
which amounted to 8 or 9 pounds but being taken with the Goods, he was
Committed, yet they could not prove the door to de broake open, so that only
the Felony was materially proved, for which he was convicted and burnt in the
hand.

Mary Willis and Thomas Ward, for stealing several pieces of Linen from off
the Hedges near Maidstone, were found Guilty to the vallue of ten pence, and
ordered to be scurged for remembrance.

There were in all five burned in the hand, one condemned to dye, and two to be
whipped.

FINIS.

