From our Half Years Meeting in Dublin, the 9th 10th and 11th Days of the 9th
Month 1691.
To all Friends in this Nation of Ireland, or elsewhere.
Dear Friends,
WE being met together from several parts of the Nation according to our usual
manner, and the Lords blessed Power and Presence with us to our great comfort
and confirmation in our Duty and Services to him.

We have had an acount of Friends from several parts of the Nation, and cannot
be unmindful of the Providential hand of God that has so Wonderfully preserved
us in these times of great Cruelty and Calamity, and has given us our Lives
for a prey: and opened a way for us to come together and enjoy one another
company, and the Lord in the midst of us according to his Gracious Promise to
our mutual comfort and great satisfaction.

We have all cause in due Reverence, Diligence and Faithfulness, to serve the
Lord with our lives whilst we have them, to the utmost of our abilities.

We have account that Friends, which were drove from their Places by the
general Calamities, many of them are returning again to live in the Country:
And Friends of Leinster Province have taken care to supply the Necessities of
poor Friends there; it is the desire of this Meeting, that Friends in all other
Parts of the Nation do take the like care to supply the wants of the poor now
in their Settlement.

We have also an account that Friends in most places do continue their Labor
and Care for one another good, and that their Service and Labor of love is
acceptable.

And they are satisfied and comforted in it; and that things are indifferent
well concerning superflueties in Apparel, Household-stuff, Trading, and things
relating to Gospel Order, according to our tender advice given formerly in
several Epistles from our Half years Meeting for the good of all.

And we desire that your Care and Labor with all diligence may continue, that
all who profess the Holy Truth; their lives in all things may answer their Holy
Profession.

And dear Friends, We being in a weighty Sense, and Concern for the Lords Name,
Truth, and Testimony, do desire that all Friends who Profess our unspoted
Religion, may keep clear of the spots of the World in all their Commerce,
Dealing and Concern: And that all Friends be circumspect to keep their Word and
Promises; and perform them punctually at the time appointed, that their Yea any
Nay may not be violated, but may stand Firm as at first, when the Lord called
us to be a People; and let their words be few and savory, and not take liberty
to multiply unsavory Talk in their Concerns on any account, but know a Bridle,
and their words seasoned with Grace, and keep to the plain Language, and train
up their Chidren therein: And shun and avoid unnecessary Company, least any
thereby be drawn into Temptations; and take heed of being overcome with Strong
Drink or Tobacco, which many by custom are brought into Bondage to the
Creature; and the Mind craves it, and is brought under the Power of it, that
should be after the Lord, and should use all his good Creatures to his Glory in
their places, uses and services for which they were created for Man's good, and
Man to have Dominion over them and subdue them; and not them to have dominion
over Man's Mind or Body, but Sanctify the Lord in your Minds, Bodies and
Spirits, which are his.

And let your moderation appear to all Men in plainness in your Dresses and
Apparel, Men and Women both young and old, and not in costly Attire, foolish
Dresses, and new Fashions ruffling Periwiggs* needless Buttons, wide Skirts,
and long flap sleeved Coats, which appears to answer the Fashion rather then
Service.

And that Friends keep up their former Testimony against Stripped and Flowered
Stuffs, in Making, Selling or Wearing.

And that Friends refrain from Decking, or adorning their Rooms with needless
things, and their Kitchens with flourishing needless Pewter and Brass, which
the mind that goes from God into the world desires and gets, and is never
settled nor satisfied.

And that all Friends be careful that they involve not themselves in the things
of the world, which may prove as Tares, Briars and Thorns to entangle them and
corrupt their minds, that they cannot serve the Lord in their Day as they ought
to do, but consider we brought nothing into the World, and we are sure to take
nothing out, and having Food and Raiment be content.

And that all Friends be careful and diligent to keep up their week Days
Meetings for the Worship and Service of God: And that all Heads of Families be
examples and furtherers of their Children and Servants in that Religious Duty:
And keep your Hour appointed for Meeting, which is both Orderly, Commendable
and Profitable: And if any be backward or negligent, let them be Admonished.

And that all Friends may depart from Meetings in the Sense of the Lords
goodness, and Meditate therein; And not immediately after a Godly Meeting fall
into discourse of Worldly things, which is too frequent, and seems to be the
work of the Enemy that Picks out the good Seed that was sowed in the Meeting.

And in all your Men and Women's Meetings, be Sollid and Grave; refrain all
needless discourse, neither speak above one at a time; for if otherwise, it is
neither edifying, nor answers the service of the Concerns before you.

And all young Men and others in Riding to, or going from Meetings, or other
occasions, refrain Galloping and Riding after an aerie flurting manner, but let
your moderation and gravity appear in all things as lights in the World.

And Friends are desired not to Travel upon first Days about their worldly
occasions, whereby they are hindered from coming to Meetings to worship God;
which is unprofitable to themselves and offensive to others.

And that all Friends keep to their ancient Godly order relating to Marriages,
and take heed that Earthly ends prevail not to break it, but let the Lord and
his Truth be minded and Preferred above all: Yet where Occasion appears let
Parents on both sides know the mind of each other about Portions, to prevent
difference or Misunderstanding, before their Children make any progress in that
case of Marriage. And that all Children first acquaint their Parents, and have
their Consent and Advice before they make their minds known one to the other.

And We tenderly Advise all Friends, according to our former Testimony, that
they take not Lease, or meddle in that kind with Gleab Lands, or Bishops Lands,
appertaining to their Function, some having been hurt thereby,

And that all Friends that goes to settle on Farms in the Country, endeavor as
much as in them lies, to settle as near together as they can; for the ease and
benefit of Meetings, and Educating their Children in the way of Truth, for by
living and remote from Friends, many have suffered loss, and found great
Inconveniency thereby.

And that Friends of every Monthly Meeting have Books of Records, and keep a
true Record of Births, Marriages, Burials, Wills, and Inventories and give
account of them all to the next Half years Meeting.

And we desire that Friends of every Province Meeting according to the first
Institution of our National Meeting, do appoint Six Friends of each Province,
such qualified Men as can Answer the Service of the Meeting, and can give a
Full and True Account of the State of Things in that Province, relating to
Truth and Friends.

These things in particular We Recommend to your Godly Care, with whatsoever
else you may see appear against the Truth, and to the hurt of Friends: Also all
other Things that we have formerly Recommended to you in our Epistles may be
performed to the Honor of God, and Good of all Friends.

And that such Faithful Friends take the Concern upon them, as may go in the
Lords Wisdom, and Authority of his Truth, which may answer Gods Witness in all
Concerned, and the Work they have in hand. And, That every Meeting give an
Account to the next Half-Years-Meeting of their Proceedings herein.

Signed in behalf and by Order of the Meeting, by

William Edmondson. Abraham Fuller. Amos Strettell.



