A Full and True ACCOUNT Of all the Proceedings in IRELAND, Since His Majesty's
first Embarking for that Kingdom, to His present March to Besiege Limerick.
Being a particular Relation of all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, and Towns
Surrendered; likewise the Number of Men Killed and Wounded on both sides; and
also King James's last Speech to the Lord Mayor of Dublin when he departed
thence.
JUly 17. 1690. News was brought to Dublin of King William's Landing about
Friday the 13th. of June. Before this King James had ordered his Army to
rendezvo^z near Atherdee, from several parts of the Kingdom. On Monday the
16th. King James marched out of Dublin to join them with about 6000 French
Foot, most old Soldiers, excellently well Armd and Clad; one Regiment of these
being Dutch Protestants, and were observed carefully for fear of Deserting. The
whole Irish Army encamped, made about 36000, besides 15000 more which remained
in Garrisons. The same day King James left this Town, there marched in 6000 of
the Country Militia, and Colonels Luttrel and Mac Gillicuddy were left Governors

The Irish were assured either that the French Fleet would cut off King William
from England, or that an Insurrection would be made there; for we were told
that 100000 Men were ready to rise, under the notion of Declaring for a
Commonwealth: The Protestants here being in great Consternation, and knew not
what to think of these things; for they were kept as Prisoners of War, and
suffered to know no more, nor enjoy any more than what the other pleased.

On Thursday the 19th. after King James was gone to encamp, the Governor ordered
all Persons walking the Streets without Swords or Bayonets, which was the Badge
of Protestants, to be taken up and secured in several Parades. He picked out
whom he thought fit, and sent them to several Prisons.

After this followed a Proclamation, That not above Five Protestants should
meet in any place above the Family, on pain of Death. The Church Men, who
remained with us, though they had lost all their Subsistence by the Irish
Parliament, except what People voluntarily contributed, acquitted themselves
with a great deal of Zeal and Diligence, being particularly in^^uenced by the
Bishop of Mead and Dr. King, Dean of St. Patricks, who have been the Bulwark
of the Protestants in these sad times.

Dr. King was clapped up in the Castle, and many other of the principal
Protestants in the College (which was now a Garrison) and other public Places.

On Saturday the 21st. We heard the Irish Army retreated, and the English were
come toward Droghedah; we knew King James's design was to avoid a Battle as
much as he could, and to have walked the English Army along the Boine River,
and so cross the Country to Limrick; but this day we were told from the Camp,
That the Enemy seemed to press toward Dublin, and King James was resolved to
defend it, and that therefore they thought he could not be able to keep off a
Battle above Ten days.

On Sunday the Irish came on this side the Boine; and King James, as it should
seem, distrusting the issue, Sir Pat. Trant, First Commissioner of the Revenue,
and another Gentleman, were ordered to go from hence on Monday Morning to
Waterford to prepare Ships.

On Monday the last of June, The English Army having had very little Rest or
Victuals, drew to the Boine; Lieutenant General Dowglas's Horse were ordered to
post themselves at a Ford near Droghedah, upon a rising Ground, over against a
Battery of the Irish of 6 Guns, guarded by a Party of their Horse. Here the
English stood the shot of the Enemy, every Man on foot by his Horse several
Hours, while there passed 200 Shot, the King in the mean time having rid
between them and the Ford, where he received his Hurt on his Shoulder by a
Canon Shot, which disabled him the next day from holding his Sword. At last,
when the King had said, Now I see my Men will stand, some Guns were sent to
them, upon the first Discharge of which among the Irish Horse, they retarded
from their Battery, and stood farther off. The next day General Douglas was
sent with 12000 Foot 5000 Horse to a Ford further up the River by Slane, where
had been a Battery of the Irish, but that they were drawn off, and only 800
Dragoons guarded the Ford. The English were to go down a steep Hill to the
Ford, and uneven way, yet the Irish Dragoons o^^^ once fired and retreated to
the Body of their Army, which lay toward Duleek; mean time the King, with the
rest of the English Army came to the Ford where D^wglas was posted the day
before, near Dr^ghedah (which at this time had a Garrison of 800 Irish.) Duke
Schomberg h^^ded the Dutch Foot Guards, and the Eniskillen Horse, the KING
said, should be his Guards that day. Some of the Irish Horse opposed the Dutch
Foot, who sought up to the middle in Water, and were almost born down, before
some Horse (which they long called for) could come up to their relief: In
passing this Ford Mr. Walker of Derry was killed. Being past this Ford, t^^y
m^^ still a vigorous Opposition; and and here Duke Schomberg advancing too far
among the thickest of the Enemy was killed, and now lies in St. Patrick's
Church, in order to be carried to Westminster. The King with the Horse (himself
engaging in the thickest) met the like Opposition. The Danish Horse once gave
way, but the King went himself, and brought them up again. Of the Irish, King
James's Horse and Foot Guards principally maintained the Opposition, and
suffered much; King James himself not engaging, but standing on a rising
Ground. At last Douglas received Orders to engage them at a place where he
could come in only with his Horse, which alone put the whole Irish Army to
flight, so that before the King's Line could get up to 'em, they had little to
do but pursue.

At 10 at Night K. James came to Dublin with about 200 Horse all in Disorder,
an Hour or two after the whole Body of the Irish came in in very good Order.

At 5 this Morning, being Wednesday the 2d. of July, King James having sent for
the Irish Lord Mayor, and some Principal persons to the Castle; told them, That
he found all things against him; that in England he had an Army which would
have Fought, but they proved false and deserted him; that here he had an Army
which was Loyal enough, but would not stand by him: He was now necessitated to
provide for his safety, and that they should make the best terms for themselves
that they could. He told his menial Servants, that he should have now no
further occasion to keep such a Court as he had done, and that therefore they
were at liberty to dispose of themselves, and so with 2 or 3 in Company, he
went to Bray, and along to the Sea to Waterford; having appointed his Carriages
to meet him another way. We hear he did not sleep till he got on Ship board;
and having been once driven in again, is since clear gone off.

About 4 in the Afternoon, we perceived the Irish Horse, which were drawn out
in the Morning, and which we hoped had been quite gone, entering into Town,
followed by the French and Irish Foot in a full Body; and marched through the
Town, without doing any injury, and were drawn up by Lord Tyrconnel on the
other side of it, in order to March further; the Militia followed them; only
the Governor remained: At last he resolved to March also, and to drive 2 or
300 of the Principal Prisoners before him; but while they were preparing for
this, a false Alarm was spread, that a party of English being Landed at the
Harbor, and were just at the Towns end; it was too dusky to disprove this by
view, and they had not leisure to send a Messenger, but in have shifted for
themselves.

By 6 in the Morning the Bishop of Mead, Dr. King, and other Principal
Protestants formed a Committee, in the Castle, and sent away an Express to the
King, of this Towns being at Liberty. This Express found him Marching up to
Dublin in two Lines, expecting to meet the Irish; and at the same time the News
came of the Surrender of Drogheda, which he had left a Party to Besiege, and in
which they had pinnion'd all the Protestants and Prisoners, and placed them
under that part of the Wall which was to be battered; but this was not known
till after the Surrender.

At 8 at Night one Troop of Dragoons came as a Guard to an Officer, that came
to take charge of the Stores. It was impossible, the King himself coming after
this, could be welcomed with equal joy as this one Troop; the Protestants hung
about the Horses, and were ready to pull the Men off them, as they marched up
to the Castle.

I am told by one that viewed the Dead, that there was not above 1000 killed on
both Sides, though perhaps you may hear of greater Numbers.

Upon the Approach of General Douglas to Athlone, the Irish burnt the Town,
broke down the Bridge, and retired into the Castle, and it is thought twill not
be long before he is Master of it.

The Enemy are got together about Limerick, but Count de Lausun will not suffer
the Irish Troops to come into the Town.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for H. Jones, near Charing Cross.


