A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Barbarous Rebellion AND Rising of the Lord
Dunbarton's Regiment at Ipswich in Suffolk. With their Pretenses of Declaring
for the late King James.
THE Lord Dunbartons, sometime called Douglas's Regiment consists of Six and
Twenty Companies, and by their continual Exercise and Service at Tangier,
Holland, and other places abroad, they have been so improved in Military
Discipline, that they are looked upon as one of the Largest and Ablest
Regiments in the Kings Dominions; but as they have Courage, so they always and
in all Quarters they have come to, have been known for the most Rapacious
Villinous Fellows in the whole Army, leaving in all places marks of their
Barbarity and Roguery, so that in England especially, they have been looked
upon by all People as the common Nuisance and Grievance of the Kingdom; and by
their Pillaging Outrages, Robberies, and Murders, they are uttterly Detested
and Abominated by all that have had the Misfortune to know them.

About two years ago they raised a Disturbance even the City of London, near
their Quarters at White Chapel, a while after at Ipswich in Suffolk, upon no
reasonable pretense but their own Ravenous and Tumultuous Humors, they were
after the present Kings coming to Town sent to Ipswich again to Quarter, and
were designed by his Majesty, and the Honorable Parliament for the Service of
our great Friends the States, but they being for sometime used to a Luxurious
Idle Life in London, did not only seem to decline that Service but any other,
under pretense of not having their Arrears paid them, whereupon his most
Gracious Majesty forthwith Orders their full Arrears and Pay, (but like true
Villains) they now finding that Excuse baulked, were resolved to raise another,
and no sooner had they received their Pay, but they immediately Seize their own
Officers binding and securing them, and drawing out they pretend to Declare for
the late Abdicated King James, and offer great Violences to several of their
Officers and others who endeavored to persuade them quietly to lay down, and
be quiet; and fearing they should be too weak to stand the Force of the
Country, they endeavor to force some Ships to Transport them to Scotland, to
raze and foment Divisions in that Kingdonm, but Notice being sent to the
Commanders of some of his Majesty's Ships in the Port, Eight men of War
presently drew out to attend their Motion, and the News being brought Yesterday
to King and Parliament, Five Regiments were Ordered forthwith to March to
reduce them, viz. The Lord Devonshires, two of Dutch Dragoons, and two others,
and to Day it was moved in Parliament that they might forthwith be declared
Rebels and exposed to the will of the Country, who no doubt will be glad of so
good an Opportunity of Punishing such Rebellious Miscreants, and making them
Examples to the other base Corrupted part of the late Kings Army, who by a long
Discontinuance from Martial Discipline are so dissolved in Luxury and
Debauchery, that they may more justly be called a Nest of Vagabonds and
Cowards, than an Army of Valiant and truly honest Edglish-men.

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing. 1689.


