A full and perfect ACCOUNT Of the Seizing Seven of K: James's Officers. VIZ.
Captain Vaughan, -- Frogmorton, -- Whinnell, -- Burges, Sidmore, Brooks, and
Yearburrough.
Who were Bound for France, with Treasonable Letters.
And now are in Custody in Bell-Savage-Yard by Ludgate: Till Their Examination.
Licensed, J. Fraiser, and Entered According to Order. 1690.

THE Seven abovementioned Gentlemen, ^^^^ing with a Master of an English
Vessel, about Terms for carrying them to France; and after some time they
agreed with ^im for the Sum of Forty Pounds sterling; Ten ^f which said Sum was
paid him on their going ^n Shipboard, and the other Thirty Pounds ^as to be
paid him on their Arrival on the Coast ^f France. The Vessel being under Sail,
pur^^ing her intended Voyage, on the Coast of ^aldon in Essex, the Master
espied aloft an Eng^^^h Man of War making toward them: Upon which, he
immediately went off of the Deck into ^^e Cabin, and informed the Gentlemen
that ^^ere was an English Man of War steering their ^^urse directly toward
them; and that he be^^^ved they would come aboard, and examine ^^d search the
Ship. Upon which Words, the ^^ster perceived the Gentlemen to be in a (...)
great Consternation, and horrid Confu^^^n, and taking a bundle of Letters,
wrapped up (...) Handerchief with Lead at the bottom, threw ^^^^to the Sea: On
which the Master (as it is ^ht, to save his own (...), ^i^ely considering there
was no way to escape the Man of ^^r) immediately gave private Orders at the ^,
to have the Ship steered into Maldon, ^^^ch was accordingly done, and the
Gentlemen seixed and secured: And, notwithstanding, ^^^^g searched, there were
(as is said) found ^^^ately about them, several Commissions, etc. And
yesterday, being the First instant, about Seven in the Evening they were
brought from Rumford, being the Road from Maldon, to London, by a Party of
Dutch Horse. They Inn at the Bell-Savage near Ludgate, where they remain under
their Guard, till they are carried before the Privy Council, which will not sit
'till Sunday in the Afternoon.

The Accidents of the 'fore-going Discovery, and the lately unwelcome News of
the Death of the most Valiant, and almost universally-lamented Duke of LORRAIN,
puts me in mind of honest John Partridges Astrological Observations, on the
past Month of April: For though I am no great Friend to Prophecy, or the
Science of Astrology, yet I think this worthy of remark, viz.

That in this Month some Great and Eminent Man will die: That in this Month a
Plot will be detected, and some Men of considerable Note concerned therein.

The good Providence of God has wrought a mighty Work, in delivering this
Church and People from the Rage of their Enemies, the rapacious Papists, whose
Designs was Murder; and those that escaped that, must have been absolute Slaves
to the arbitrary Power of France and Rome; for they were fallen into their
hands, but God sent them a speedy Deliverance.

^


