A Full and True ACCOUNT OF HIS Grace Duke Schomberg's Marching Toward DUBLIN,
AND Of the Preparations the late King James is making to oppose him: With other
Affairs relating to Ireland: In a Letter from Chester, Sept. 2.
Licensed,

Sept. 4th. 1689. J. F.

Chester, Sept. 2d. 1689. SIR,
SInce my last we have this farther Account of Carrick-Fergus, That before the
Surrender of the place, Duke Schomberg having advanced his Trenches, and
several Breaches being made by the Cannon from the Frigates to the Sea-wards,
and the Bombs having done considerable damage by Land, upon the Town, the
Enemies Hearts begun to fail, and beat a Parley; upon which some of the English
Army peaceably advancing to capitulate, the treacherous Irish fired upon them,
and killed near Sixty of our Men; upon which Duke Schomberg declared, He would
give none of them Quarter; but being informed some hundreds of Protestants were
there in durance, and having compassion for them, gave them the Terms mentioned
in my last, and conveyed them Three Miles from the Town, which was as far as he
was obliged; but they had not marched above Three Miles further, when the
Scotch of the Country, even the Women, fell upon them, the former disarming
them, the latter recovered what they had plundered them of before, and so let
them go toward Charlemont; which place his Grace Duke Schomberg intends to
take in, being upon his March toward Dublin, having only the Newry-Pass, and
Drogheda to take; the Irish daily imploring his Protection as he marches. The
Enniskilling Party have overrun all Connaught, except Athloan and Gallaway,
which is indeed a strong place.

By a Vessel arrived at Liverpool, on Saturday last, who left Dublin the Week
before, being a Ship of Mr. Thomas Bell's, an eminent Merchant in Dublin, and a
good Protestant, wherein was his Wife, and some other Passengers, who bring
this Account, That before they came away, that several Mutinies had happened,
and of their being a mortal Feud between the French and Irish, in which Eleven
French were killed upon the place. The fine Wood at Santrey, and at Clantarfe
are all cut down, and the Ways pallisadoed between Swords and Dublin; and that
K. James threatens to fight the English Army between Drogheda and Dundalk, and
intends to march his Army thither, having fortified the Town of Drogheda with
all the care and diligence they are capable of; which truly is not much, for a
safe Retreat in case the Army should be beaten, thinking that may endure a
Winter-Siege, and then they may be Relieved by the French at Spring; the Irish
bragging. That they have left the North for the English to make themselves
Graves, and to prevent all Surprise, and make sure of themselves. King James,
and some of the Irish Nobility by his Example, have ordered all their best
Movables, together with Ammunition and Artillery, to the strong Garrison of
Athloam, it being near the Center of the Kingdom, where they have laid up a
Magazine, and made one Coll. Grace, an old Irish Colonel in the last
Rebellion, Governor; who has already sufficiently plundered the parts
adjacont: This place the late King believes to be best for an Escape to
Gallaway, and so ship off for France; but just before we came away, we heard it
reported Gallaway had declared for K. William: So that he has vested Tyrconnel
again with the Government; and it is said they are to act separately with
distinct Armies; and by his Intercession have enlarged all the Protestants,
except Four, and those who have heretofore behaved themselves with the greatest
Insolence toward them, do now caress them after an extraordinary manner,
beginning to Goshop it after the Irish way, Dear Joy: I am sure I did you no
wrong; I was always your Friend, and spoke for you well everywhere. But God
grant that upon their deserting of Dublin they do not burn it; and indeed there
is a great deal of Irish Interest in the Houses of that City, which we hope may
be a means to preserve it. There was one Mr. Swine Governor of Carrick-Fergus,
when taken, and not Mark Talbot, Tyrconnel's Bastard-Son, as was reported.

Coll. Villiers's Regiment of Horse is gone to High-Lake to be shipped off; and
my Lord Hewit's Regiment of Horse likewise comes into Chester this day, in
order to follow; there being all the Care imaginable taken to hasten them.
Farewell till farther -- I forgot to tell you, that the Protestants British,
Repair into Ireland in great Numbers, with all alacrity and cheerfulness.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
REasons why the Parliament of Scotland cannot comply with the Late King
James's Proclamation, sent lately to that Kingdom, and Prosecuted by the Late
Viscount Dundee.Containing an Answer to every Paragraph of the said
Proclamation; and vindicating the said Parliament their present Proceedings
against him. Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry.

LONDON: Printed for J. Green near Temple-Barr, 1689.


