A VISITATION By way of DECLARATION UNTO The Manifestation of the spirit in you
Rulers and Heads of these Nations, both Parliament, Officers, and Soldiers,
that are in Arms and Authority to do Service for the Commonwealth outwardly.

Amongst whom I formerly have had my Conversation about thirteen or fourteen
years, and with many of them I have often engaged against the Enemies of the
Peace and Liberties of the honest people of these Nations, and that some of the
old Officers and Soldiers may very well remember.

What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou sleddest? thou lordan, that thou wast
driven back? ye Mountains, that ye shipped like Rams? and ye little hills like
Lambs?

Psalm. 114. 5, 6. Was it not because of the dreadful presence of the Almighty,
who has said of old unto his people, I will restorethy Judges as at the first,
and thy Counselors as at the beginning; afterward thou shall be called the
City of Righteousness, the faithful City,

Isa. 1. 26. From a true Lover of your souls, that loves to do Justice, and all
that join with them, known unto the children of men by this Name,

Joseph Fuce. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1659.

A Visitation by way of Declaration unto the manifestation of the Spirit in you
Rulers and Heads of these Natitions, etc.
OH ye wise ones of the earth! (that are in Authority to sit in Parliament)
lend your ears, and hear in this the day of your visitation, Luke 19. 44. and
be not lifted up in pride of heart, and bitterness of spirit against the Lords
Heritage, which the proud, and lofty Rulers, and envious Magistrates has
oppressed grievously, as you your selves may very well know, and consider what
has been their pretense, and what has been their reward in the end: Have they
not been overturned, broken, and scattered as the chafe before the wind? And
had this happened a great while ago, in another Age, or a far off in Foreign
Countries, then had there been more necessity for me to have spoken more larger
of what has been acted by them, and what has happened unto them; but you that
are not wilful and blind, have your own selves both seen and heard of their
most unjust and unreasonable cruelty which they have acted, especially upon
those despised People which live godly in Christ Jesus, although others (that
are not according to their minds) has not altogether escaped their wicked
Decrees: Therefore in the pure fear of the Lord I exhort you that are more
tenderhearted, and do feelingly know what they have done, that you take heed
that none creep in among you to corrupt you, but consider truly and honestly,
so as to let those things which has been done by them, and that which came
upon them, before examples unto you, 1 Cor. 10. 6. so that you may by no means
be persuaded to do as they have done, neither to suffer that to stand which the
Papist of old, and the oppressors of late has set up, which is contrary to the
will of God, and the public good of the Commonwealth; for because of these,
and such things, the Lords hand was against them, to cut off some of the chief
of them, and to give the other up to be scattered as the small dust of the
earth before the wind; therefore you that are in their places, listen a
little, and incline your ears to hear the voice of the just, and your hearts to
understand, ye Heads of these Nations, for unto you I write in obedience to the
spirit, and in love to your souls, you are all to be turned in unto the
manifestation of the spirit which is given to every man to profit withal, 1
Cor. 12. 7. and so all to learn of it how to perform and bring to pass the good
works which many has promised to do, but has not performed them, because they
took counsel, and not of the Lord, Isa. 30. and went out from the manifestation
of the spirit in them, which is light, and despised it is reproof, and so hated
the instruction of the just within, and took counsel together, with the chief
priests, (as the pharisees did) without, in darkness, and the priests being of
so many opinions, and in so much confusion and opposition one against another,
but all in darkness: And the people that know no other Preacher but the
Priests, they are all like the priests, for the priests have taught them so to
be, for so the leaders of the people has caused them to err, Ier. 23. And the
people (by the instructions of the priests) has made choice of men of several
opinions unfit to sit in Parliament, yet such have for a time sat as members
in Parliament, and others that has meant well, that are not taught by the
priests, they have made choice of such as would have done that which the Lord
requires, which is, to undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free:
Isa. 58. 6. So some were for taking off oppression, and others for laying it
on, and when these came together, there were divisions among themselves, some
for that which was right, and others for that which was wrong, and the priests
party (made up with many Lawyers) being the greater in number, as you your
selves very well know, that they that would have done good, knew not how to
perform it because of evildoers which did oppose them; and if there be such
among you, they will hinder you if they be not rem^ved in time; And therefore I
warn you who are in Authority, that you may not take counsel of the many
priests, to be deceived by them, if they should do as they have done, that is,
to come bowing and crouching with flattering titles, from their lying lips, and
deceitful hearts, and with their seigned Petitions, which they call Humble: And
this has been their manner of creeping (unawares) into the hearts and
affections of Parliament Men, and others, to draw their minds from the pure
principle of God in them, which should have taught them to have been of one
mind, and so to have proceeded, to the glory of God, and for the public good
of the Nation, according to the will of God; and this are ye witnesses of:
Therefore all you that are of such a noble mind, to do justice, and to love
mercy, and walk humbly with God, Mich. 6. 8. [Mark] you must all take counsel
together of the Lord, and so come to be all taught by one Teacher within you
all, that so you may come all to stand together in the Counsel of the Lord, who
has given the manifestation of the Spirit to every one of you to profit
withal, and all that profit with the manifestation of the spirit (which is
light) they must own that to be their Teacher, to teach them how to cast off
every weight and burden, and the ^in that does so easily beset them, that so
the seed in every particular may go free. Now you must of necessity be turned
unto the light of Christ in you, before you can see or know what does oppress,
and what is oppressed in every particular; and I say unto you as Paul said unto
the Romans, That which may be known of God, is manifested in you; Rom 1. 19.
and therefore you are to come unto a teacher within you, which would teach
every one how ^o cast off the works of darkness, and to put on the Armor of
light, Romans 13. 12. Mark, Pride is a work of darkness, love of the honor and
glory of the world, covetousness, and self-private ends, are works of darkness,
and the ground from whence such things does arise, does oppress the seed, and
is cursed wheresoever it is standing, and the beam is to be cast out of your
own eye first, before you can see clearly how to pull the mote out of your
brethrens eyes; and do not seek honor one of another unto your selves, for that
was a work which proud Hammon did, Esth. 2. And Hammons proud, envious nature
has much appeared in these our days, unto the grievous oppressing of the
Lords people; but such oppressors the Lord has, and will bring into contempt,
and so di^honor them; but such as truly fear the Lord, and are for the exalting
of his truth in themselves, and in others, such the Lord will honor, for they
shall sit together with Christ at his right hand, where is joy and pleasures
forever-more: And such as are Heirs of this great and everlasting Honor, they
have no need of the lesser Honor, which will vanish away in a moment, when
everlasting reproach and contempt comes upon them: And if you receive him whom
God has sent to be a Leader and Teacher unto his people, for to lead and teach
you how to walk and act according to the Law of God, which is light, then you
will not need the counsel of the blind leaders, the Hireling-priests; for ye
your selves know the counsel of the priests has led the people into so much
confusion and division, that they could not stand, and so those words of Christ
are fulfilled, which says, A house divided against it self, that house cannot
stand, Mark 3. 25. And so of a truth, if you should take counsel of the many
priests to be divided, you must not think to stand: Therefore in obedience unto
the everlasting truth, and in love unto your souls do I write unto you, that
you may be all warned in time, to own the only true teacher within you, which
is Christ the light, and believe in him for strength and salvation, so may you
come to be all of one heart, and of one soul, as the multitude were, and are,
that did, and do believe in the light, and so may you be made both able and
willing to proceed and go on together, doing that which is good, and undoing
that which is evil, fearing the Lord, and hating covetousness; and fear not
men, but fear the Lord, and look unto him for salvation, and wait upon him to
have your strength renewed, for his Arm is stretched forth, and revealed to
uphold those that walk in his light, to his own praise and glory, who is God
over all blessed for ever.

To all the valiant Officers and Soldiers, small and great, amongst whom I was
for many years, a private soldier, Corporal, and Sergeant, in the time of the
late wars, and now in the bowels of love, and in obedience unto the spirit do I
write unto you, that the noble principle o^ witness of God in you may be the
more stirred up, and you the more brought down unto it, that with the light
(which is the noble principle you may see how tender and low in heart some of
you were in the time of the wars, when you did fear the Lord, and met togethor,
and were in distress as to the outward, then did the Lord cause his blessings
to fall upon many of the Army, as the dew upon the tender grass, whereby they
were refreshed and strengthened in heart with boldness to go on against their
enemies without, which the Lord gave into your hands because of their
abominations; and not only so, but some of you did separate your selves from
the priests and their Churches, the Papists old Mass-Houses, and from pleasures
and sporting your selves, and from riotting in the daytime of your
afflictions, and did humble your selves, and keep many days of Humiliation,
then was there a pure principle of God stirring amongst you, moving your hearts
to pity the oppressed, and to visit the most honest people that were grieved
and afflicted in the Countries where you came, because of the abominable
Idolatry which was set up in the Nations, and many of the honest people did
much affect you, and did assist you with such things as they had for your
service, and then was there good intentions and desires stirred up in many, and
great and fair promises were made what should be done if the Lord would but
give you the victory over your enemies which were in arms against you; and
Engagements were propounded and taken, and many did often seek the Lord (as
they called it) by praying and promising unto God what they would be, and what
they would do, if he would but stretch forth a finger of his mighty hand, or
but make known a little of his great and unexpressible power, whereby their
enemies might be overturned; and many such like expressions were used,
sometimes with tears vows were made unto the Lord, insomuch that the Lord did
hear and answer, (for his own seed's sake, which groaned earnestly in many of
you to be delivered) and when you were very low in strength and number as to
outward appearance, and your enemies great and many: [mark] even then am^ngst
you did the Lord arise, and make known himself to be a mighty God of War, Exodus
15. 3. and by his dreadful power overturned and scattered your Enemies, and not
only so, but also kept many of you safe; and at the last after the fall of
many thousands, some on the one side, and some on the other, even then did the
Lord bring you again forth of the battles by the strength of his own Arm, by
which he preserved you when many were cut off, and destroyed; and when he the
Lord of Hosts had appeared so wonderfully for us, against our Enemies, that
their great numbers were cut off and scattered, and fled into other Islands,
Castles, and Holes, and then they thought no placc strong enough for them,
their hearts were so dismayed: And when the Lord had done this Work which was
so great and wonderful, then the well* affected people looked for something to
be done, but very little or nothing was effected; but then there might have
been excuses made, because of corrupt members in the Army, and an House of
Lords to hinder both Army and Parliament, and they rose up against the Army;
but you may very well remember how the Officers of the Army joined and
condescended to the private soldiers, and to men of low degree, to join
together; and Agitators were chosen, as well of private Soldiers, as Officers;
and then there was a great cry against oppression, and engaging one another
against a King or House of Lords, and at randezvouz's there were great outcryes
for Justice, with a great shouting, saying one and all, Justice, Justice; but
when the House of Lords were dissolved, and the King beheaded, and all opposers
of the work which you promised to do) were subdued to outward appearance: now
take notice what hindered the Parliament and Army then, that they could not do
the work which they had vowed, promised, and engaged (both unto God, and the
well-affected people in these Nations) for to do? I shall make mention of some
of the chief particulars: Some of the chief Officers of the Army they loved to
be honored by men, others they coveted to be rich, and others they went into
pleasures, as Hunting, Bowling, and sporting themselves in the day time, when
they should have paid their vows unto the Lord, by fulfilling their promises;
and others into carelessness and ease in the fleshly mind, others into
oppression, talking of reformation, and seeking, as the pharisees did, to have
the praise of men: And others were turned unto a measure of the true light in
their consciences, and bore a testimony for the Lord against evil doings; and
most of us came out, and were turned out from amongst you for the truth's sake,
when we had finished, and were finishing our testimony: And so you may see your
foes were them of your own hearts at the last; and in that time the Parliament
lent their ears unto the priests that sought their gain from their quarter,
that came flattering with their Petitions for Augmentations, because they are
greedy, and never have enough, Isa. 56 11. And the Parliament were so deceived
by their good words and fair speeches, that they went from their work, which
was to do justice in taking off oppression, and in their dark minds set
themselves to grope after Religion, thinking to settle that without man, which
the Lord by his power alone setleth in the hearts of his people; but there
about the Parliament sat a long time dreaming, until Oliver Cromwell turned
them out of the House: And thus they were deceived by the subtilty of the
Serpent, which hearkened unto the priests. And after there was another
Parliament which did begin as if they would have done something for the
Commonwealth; for they began to consider the great oppression of tithes which
the Popes power caused to be taken from the people unjustly, to uphold their
unrighteous Worship. But you may remember very well how the priests did flock
together, and ride, and run, and so bestirred themselves with their flattering
titles, and their deceit unto the Rulers, fearing greatly they should loose the
inheritance which the Pope their Father in the time of popery, most unjustly
took from the people, and gave unto the Jesuits, and so tithes came unto these
priests that are of the Popes stock: But those children of the Romish Whore
(the false Church) did so prevail with the Rulers, that they got that
Parliament suddenly turned forth, and then there were inventions to strengthen
the old papists Laws by which the Lords people has been grievously oppressed;
for some of the priests has taken near ten times as much as is their due
according to the Popes allowance at the first; yet the priests were not
satisfied, but still thirsted after blood. And lastly, there was a Parliament
to be chosen, and then the priests stirred again exceedingly, crying, when men
were mentioned to sit in Parliament, Are they for tithes? So that if the honest
people had made mention of moderate men, they could not choose such in many
places, because the multitude that follow the priests were the most in number,
and so chused the greater part of the Members which some thought they would
have satisfied the priests thirst with blood, and they proceed not only to
oppress the Lords people called Quakers, but they sought to oppress all others
that differed from them, both Army, and all well-affected people thereunto
belonging, and then in due time were they discovered unto you that did return
the eyes of your minds in a little unto that noble principle which did once
stir you up against persecution for conscience sake, and that did manifest unto
you your unfaithfulness in not performing what you had promised to do, and some
of you did make a pretty honest confession, although others might oppose you in
that thing, as they have done in other things that were honest: But consider,
had you done before what you have begun, and now pretend to do, then could not
you and many others have seen, not scarce have believed that the priests and
their chief followers had been such cruel oppressing tyrants, and blood-thirsty
ones, as they have manifested themselves to be, that now you may say when any
ple^deth for them, By their fruits we know them, whatever any say of them. And
again take notice, Would many have believed that God would have manifested his
power so wonderfully in these days to uphold his little stock so patiently and
willingly to follow his Son in suffering such grievous things as has been laid
upon them to try them for Christ's Name sake, who is the Captain of our
salvation and therefore do we follow him in the regeneration, who is the true
light that lights every man that comes into the world; and with the light of
Christ in your consciences, you may all see I have not spoken very much of
those things which has happened since our engaging at the first against
tyrants and oppressors of the godliest people in those days, for
consciencesake; but although I have but hinted or spoken of some of the diverse
appearances of that old persecuting spirit which has of late appeared under so
many fair pretenses of Religion and Reformation, yet I hope you will find it to
be enough to answer the witness in you, which will show you the truth of this
short Declaration and Exhortation in love to your souls, so that when you are
tempted to do as they have done, you may not be ignorant of the evil, and what
will follow unto you as well as unto them, if you do as they have done; and be
you assured, the tempter will come unto you more subtly then ever, to tempt
you; but the light in the conscience is sufficient for to discover and make
manifest all temptations both without and within you, as your minds are kept
unto the true light, and exercised by it, for that does lead into lowlines^ of
mind, and into love and tenderheartedness, and so you may come to profit with
the manifestation of the spirit, which is given unto you for that end, 1 Cor.
12. 7. and dwell in the Love which God has shed abroad in your hearts, for he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, who is the habitation of Justice, Ier.
50. 7. And now my Friends, both Parliament and Officers of the Army, in whose
hearts it is to do Justice, love Mercy, and to walk humbly with your God, the
day of of your trial once more is come, and an opportunity is put into your
hands to ^ry you once more whether you will endeavor to please God, or man,
and whether you will act according to the will of God, or men: And thus the
Lord is trying of you whether you will fulfill the Promises. Vows and Covenants
which you made formerly unto him when you were low and in distress, and this
the Lord is doing before he utterly cuts you off from the land of the living,
and cast you out into outer darkness, and seal you down into the pit with the
wicked for ever. Therefore be all awakened, and come all unto the light in you,
or else ye cannot be of one mind; for he has said, Without me ye can do
nothing, John 15. 5. But all that owns him to be their Leader, they come to
walk in the counsel of the Lord, and to stand in the way of his judgments,
which are just and true, and righteous altogether. And so the Lord direct you
by the manifestation of his spirit, to do that which is well-pleasing unto him,
that the soul, which is immortal, may find rest at the last, for evermore. From
a lover of true Judgment and Mercy,

Joseph Fuce.

THE END.

