A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions of Oyer and
Terminer, Holden for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and Jail-delivery
of Newgate; WHICH BEGAN AT THE Sessions House IN THE Old-Bayly, On Thursday,
June 1st. and Ended on Friday, June 2d. 1682. Wherein is Con^ain^d the Trial of
many Notorious Malefactors, for Murders, Fellonies, Burglary, and other
Misdemeanors, but more especially the TRIAL of JANE KENT for Witchcraft.
TOGETHER, With the Names of those that received Sentence of Death, the Number
of those Burned in the Hand, Transported, and VVhip'd. As likewise some
Proceedings in Relation to the Persons that Violently took the Lady out of the
Coach on Hounslow-Heath.
LONDON, June 1st. 1682.
THis Day the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, began at the Sessions House in Old
Bailey, holden there for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and
Jail-delivery of Newgate, until the 2 d. of the aforesaid Instant, where the
Proceedings were as follows.

Elizabeth Hunt was Indicted for picking the Pocket of Mary Rome, of 25
shillings; the manner (as it appeared to be upon Evidence) was thus: The
Prosecutor going through a narrow Lane in Cheapside, to avoid being hurt by a
Coach that was coming stood up in a door way, whereupon the Prisoner and two
more, supposed to be of her Gang, Shouldered her up, and in the mean while the
Prisoner picked her Pocket, delivering the Money to the Comrades, who went off
with it; but the Prosecutor immediately perceiving that she was robbed,
apprehended the Prisoner, who desired her to make no noise and she would give
her satisfaction, and thereupon pulled out a considerable parcel of Money, but
upon her Trial she denied it, but the proofs being plain, not only by another
Witness, but also by her former Confession, she was found Guilty.

Katherine Cook was Indicted for Stealing seven Silver Spoons from Sir Robert
Jason, in the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West; She at that time living with
him in the nature of a Servant, which appeared upon Evidence thus: The Spoons
which were judged to the value of 3 pounds, being used at Dinner, they were
delivered to her to make clean, when as she carried them into the Pantry, from
whence she alleged, they were conveyed by a Woman that came in to ask whether
such a person did not live there, naming a strange name; but the Witness Swore,
that upon her Masters charging her with the Felony, she offered to pay one
half of the value; but she producing several Witnesses to testify her Honesty
and good Behavior in her former Services, and there being no positive proof
that she stole them, she was acquitted.

Lydia Littleworth was Tried for Robbing William Theed her Master, in the
Parish of St. Michaels in the Querry, on the 5th. of May last, and taking from
him four broad pieces of Gold, four Guinnies, three and twenty Shillings in
Silver, four Gold Rings, and some other things, the which she delivered to a
Woman to keep for her, and upon inquiry absolutely denied the Fact; but the
Woman suspecting she had stole the Gold, made inquiry, so that the Evidence
being plain against her, she in Court confessed that she took the Money,
expressing a great deal of sorrow for her Wickedness, and upon the Jury's
return of their Verdict, she was found Guilty.

Ann Bland had an Indictment preferred against her, for taking three Shillings
privily from the person of Elizabeth Bennet, a Butchers Wife, on the 20 th. of
May last, the Circumstances, as they appeared upon Oath, being these: The
Prisoner coming to her Stall in Honey-Lane-Market, under pretense of buying a
Neck of Veal, began to question the Sweetness of it, desiring the Prosecutor to
smell, the which whilst she was doing, the Prisoner watching her opportunity,
put her hand into her Apron-pocket, and taking her Money departed; but within a
few hours, she was taken doing such another Exploit; to this she pleaded
Innocence, but it plainly appearing she was an old Offender, and the Prosecutor
Swearing positively that she was the Woman that Robbed her, the Jury found her
Guilty.

John Cotton of the Parish of St. Mary Matpellier, otherwise White-Chappel, was
Indicted for Stealing a Hood and Scarf from Judith Wheeler; whereupon (having
well learnt his Lesson in Newgate) he pleaded Guilty to that and all other
Indictments within the benefit of the Clergy.

Abraham Kent was Tried for Stealing Iron Bolts for Ships and other things,
from James Yeames of Wapping, on the 13 th. of April last; one of them upon
Evidence, appearing to be found in his Breeches, yet he denied that he ever
Stole any, but that coming through the Yard, he gathered up some Chips, amongst
which was the Bolt; then being demanded why he concealed it in his Breeches, he
alleged that his Breeches being Ragged, it droped into them contrary to his
knowledge; but these silly excuses excused him not, for it appearing that he
was a Notorious Pilferer, the Jury brought him in Guilty.

Thomas Hermitage was Indicted for Robbing the Lady Williamses house on the 10
th. of April, and taking thence two Feather-Beds, a pair of Grates, Coverleds,
Carpets, and Linen, to a considerable value, which upon search, were found at
a Broakers, where he had disposed of them, whereupon he pleaded Guilty to the
Indictment.

Robert Suitor, late Servant to the Earl of Arglass, deceased, was Indicted for
Robbing William Crelling his Lords Gentleman, by breaking open a door, and
taking thence a Pormantle, in which was a Gold Pendilum Watch, valued at 14
pounds, a Gold Locket and Gold Buttons, 28 pieces of broad Gold, 21 Guinnies,
25 Shillings in Silver, a Siver-Hilted Sword, and other things of value, taking
them from the aforesaid Earls House in Druery-Lane, on the the 7 th. past, for
which, upon his being Apprehended, he confessed that he was privy to the
Robbery, but that it was not he that committed it, but an Irish Man whom he
named, alleging that he Renched the door with a Fork, and then taking the
Pormantle, persuaded him to go with him, which he consented to, and that for
his share he gave him the Watch and 20 Guinnies, which Watch was taken about
him, but with the Money he had bought a Horse, but upon his Trial he at first
denied what he had said; but finding the Evidence to be strong against him, he
again confessed the Fact, and thereupon was found Guilty.

A Woman was Tried for Stealing several pieces of Silk out of a Shop in
Paternoster Row, on the 20 th. of May last, which being taken about her e're
she could dispose of it, notwithstanding she pleaded that they were given her
by a strange Woman; that Excuse prevailed not, for she was found Guilty.

William Stafford a Life-Guard-Man, was Indicted for Killng Mr. Roundwaite,
another of the Guards, on the 16 th. of May last, which upon Evidence, appeared
as follows: The Prisoner and the Deceased came into a Field near
Knightsbridge, where they equally drew, and made several Passes at each other,
and often pausing, fought again, which they continued till the deceased
received seven Wounds, one of which was under the left Pap, 7 Inches, insomuch
that he fell to the ground; whereupon the Prisoner walked off, but being
pursued, was taken, the Prisoner pleaded that he came to take a friendly walk
with the deceased, and that being in the Fields, the deceased drew upon him,
and that what he did was in the defense of his life; and indeed, there being no
kind of former Malice between them proved in Court, the Prisoner was found
Guilty of Mans-slaughter only.

Jane Kent, a Woman of about 60 years of Age, was Indicted for Witchcraft, and
using several Diabolick Arts, whereby she compassed the death of one Elizabeth
Chamblet, a Girl about 5 years of Age; the Father of the deceased gave
Evidence, that she first Bewitched his Swine, by reason she having bargained
with him for two Pigs, which he refused to deliver her without Money; and that
a while after his Daughter fell into a most piteous Condition, Swelling all
over her Body, which was discolored after a strange rate: He farther deposed,
that she also Bewitched his Wife, and that after the death of his Daughter, he
went to one Dr. Ha^^ks in Spittle-Fields, who advised him to take a quart of
his Wives water, the pairing of her Nails, some of her Hair, and such like, and
boil them, which he did, in a Pipkin, at which time he Swore he heard the
Prisoners voice at his door, and that she Screimed out as if she were Murdered,
and that the next day she appeared to be much swelled and bloated: A Woman that
searched her likewise Swore, that she had a Teat on her back, and unusual Holes
behind her ears: A Coachman likewise Swore, that upon his refusing to carry
her and her Goods, his Coach overthrew; but she producing Evidence that she had
lived honestly, and was a great pains-taker, and that she went to Church, with
many other Circumstances, the Jury found her not Guilty.

Captain Pursell who was lately Committed to Newgate, upon the account of
violently forcing Mrs. Selleger out of her Coach, upon Hounslow-Heath,
petitioned the Court that he might be admitted of Bail; but the Court replied,
There was an Indictment intended against him for Felony; upon which, the
Gentleman that brought the Petition, desired that he might be Tried, whereupon
the Court replied, If the Evidence for the King were ready he might.

Ann Hi^ was Indicted for Robbing the house of Jane Kinthorne, in the Parish of
St. Gilis's in the Fields, about two years since, but it appearing that the
Prisoner had taken them into her Custody, by order of the Prosecutor, to secure
them from being taken by the Landlord for Rent, the Jury acquitted the
Prisoner, and the Prosecutor received a (...).

John Welling, a Youth about 12 years of age, was In^icted for picking a
Gentlewomans Pocket in Honey-Lane, of 9 Shillings, which appearing plain, he
was found Guilty.

John Johnson was Indicted for breaking open the Chamber of Chistopher Turner,
a Gentleman of the Temple, on the 28 th. of May last, and for Assaulting a
Laundress that was then in the Chamber where it was, proved that he broke open
the Chamber door with an Iron, after he had attempted to pick the Lock, and
found it Bolted; then entering and finding the Laundress there, he swore an Oath
that he was betrayed, yet pulled out a Pistol, he set it to her breast, and bid
her kneel, and swear she would not discover him, which at present she promised,
but afterward shutting her self into a Study, and cried out, so that he being
pursued was taken with much difficulty, and now being found Guilty, was Fined
20 pounds.

Henry Arnold was Tried for picking the Pocket of one Vox, of a Watch, and
Silver Tobacco-Box, but for want of Evidence, the Jury acquitted him.

John Lush was likewise Indicted for breaking open the Chamber of Squire Hoyle,
in the Temple, and stealing Silk Curtains and other things, to the worth of
above 20 l. for which he was found Guilty.

At this most Remarkable Session Elizabeth Hunt, Lydia Littleworth, Ann Bland,
and John Welling received Sentence of Death. Thomas Michael, John Cotton,
Thomas Hermitage, Edward Stafford, Robert Suitor, and Thomas Lush, were Burnt in
the Hand John Spittle ordered for Transportation, John Austin and Abraham Kent
to be Whip'^ and John Johnson Fined ^0 pounds.

Printed for ^. (...). 1682.


