A full and true Relation of a horrid and detestable Conspiracy against the
Lives, Estates and Reputations of Three Worthy Members of this present
Parliament, which God long preserve.
SUch is the restless and implacable Malice of a Fanacical Antimonarchiaecal
party, consisting of the late Villainous Ministry and their Underspurleathers,
and that it is hard for persons of Great Estates and Qualifications, who have
been eminently Zealous for King William, and have Sacrificed all for rescuing
their Country from Popery and Slavery, to escape their cursed Machinations.
This will not only appear as clear as the Sun, by the Black Design, which is
the Subject of our present Narative, but thereby also those Wretches close
Correspondence with the French King and his Emissaries, will be proved more
manifestly than by their contriving and soliciting the Partition-Treaty, although
that was more than enough for the Satisfaction of all well disposed Loyalists.

Know therefore, Gentle Reader, that upon Tuesday the Twenty Third Day of this
Instant September, between the Hours of Four and Five in the Afternoon, as that
renowned Author Charles Davenant Dr. of Lows, was in his retirment in certain
Chambers in Greys Inn, Meditating for something to Write in the House of
Aust^ia's Quarrel, a Letter was delivered to him by a Porter quite out of
Breath, which desired his presence immediately, at the House of one Mr. Paulet
in the Hay-market, commonly known by the Name of the Blew Posts, to meet some
of his Brethren of the secret Committee, about Affairs of Importance. The
Doctor after some consideration with himself, likeing the Place, and approving
the Company, readily quitted his writing Dress, and got into a Coach, promising
the Fellow Sixpence extraordinary for expedition. During his short passage his
Thoughts were employed about the Good of his Country, reckoning upon the
Downfall of half a score Modern Whigs at the least, as the necessary Result of
such a Consultation. As soon as he was alighted a Footman in mourning, who
waited at the bottom of the Steps, received him, and without speaking a word,
conducted him to a door, which upon giving three knocks, was opened. The Doctor
entering was surpised at first to see only two Gentlemen, till turning to his
right hand he espied a worthy Member, Anthony Hammond, Esquire. That eminent
Patriot was but just entered the room before the Doctor, having been sent for
by a like note, and in obedience to a Summons of such Authority having left
unfinished a very useful speech he was preparing to show, that notwithstanding,
the unhappy Clause in the Succession Bill, certain Persons might vote
themselves capable of Offices and Pensions. Before the first Complements were
over, John Tredenham, Esp. was introduced with the same Ceremony, and according
to his wonted Civility made an Apology for coming so late, as being detained by
business of public concern, the Collection of some Guineas from Friends by way
of Subscription for printing Sr. Joseph's Speeches, with an Appendix of his own
Poems.

Every one of these worthy Members supposed the Strangers to be well known to
the other two, and by that unhappy Mistake, without the least distrust, they
all sat down together. One of the Strangers lead them on in this Error, by
showing he was well acquainted with their several Characters. He first
entertained Mr. Tredenham, with the great performances of his Uncle. That none
of the Heroes of Antipuity cut down Giants with half the ease he destroyed
Chancellors. How swiftly Clarendon fled before him as soon as he thought him
unfit for measures he was then engaged in, which Clifford and Arlington could
better carry on. And how easily Summers sunk under him when time was come for
carrying on again the like measures; and that despicable Creature durst sawcily
appear to obstruct them. From that subject he changed his discourse to the
praises of Mr. Hammons Grandfather, exhorting him to have ever before his Eyes
the Immortal Glory he had gained by his active Zeal for restoring an injured
banished Prince, as the noblest Subject for his Emulation

He then Applied himself to the Doctor, extolling his indefatigable Industry in
writing so many Volums on Subjects of which he was thought wholly Ignorant,
till the World by seeing the Books was convinced of the contrary. He ascribed
to those Works of his the confounding of the late Hellish Ministry, those
Robbers of the Public, those Harpies and Bloodsuckers, those Friends of War,
and Disturbers of the Peace of Christendom. He said he was studying the English
Language to read his Works in the Original, and assured the Company that to his
knowledge the French Academy had orders from the greatest King in the Universe,
for translating them into that Language, that all his Subjects might be
apprized of the Merits of the Author. He went on to tell the Doctor he knew
Tuesday was one of his writing days, and that on those days he fasted till
Sunset, in order to the keeping his head clear, for which reason he had
prepared a good Supper that was just ready to be put on the Table. As this was
no inconsiderable Complement to the Doctor, so it put the whole Company into
good humor, and they all eat and drunk heartily without any kind of suspicion
in the world.

After Supper was over, and the Doors Bolted again, every body seeming inclined
to be more open-hearted, they taulk^d freely upon all Subjects, and none more
honestly than the Stranger, tho it is true he always spoke French. He railed at
the Partition Treaty, no Man better. He commended the French Kings great
Moderation in acceping the Spanish Monarchy. He praised the Wisdom of those who
were for early owning the Duke of Anjou. He demonstrated that those that were
for putting the Preservation of the Peace of Europe into a Vote, could mean
nothing but War and Desolation. And he very ingeneously offered that none but
an inveterate Splenetick Whig could be so absurd to maintain that the calling a
young Gentleman by his Fathers name was contrary to the sense and meaning of
the Treaty of Ryswick. In short his Subjects were so well chosen, and so
prittily handled, that the Evening passed pleasantly, and they thought they
were at the Fountain or the Vine.

At last this Stranger, with a serious air, told the Company of the
apprehension the French Court was under upon certain Intelligence that the
Doctor, (forgetting all former Engagments) was treating with the House of
Austria, and that this had given France more disturbance than any News which
came from Italy. He went on to take the Emperor's Manifesto to pieces, in order
to show the Doctor how bold an attempt it was to engage on so weak a side in
such a quarrel, and invited him to enter presently into the Argument. The
Doctor looking surly on the sudden, and dashed the Discourse by saying his
Talent was writing and not speaking. But that he had minded what the Gentleman
said, and before the next Session of Parliament, the World should see five
hundred pages in answer to it.

The Stranger cunningly asked Pardon if he had gone too far, but continued for
some time with great insinuation to endeavor to divert the Doctor from his
intention likely to prove so fatal to France, by Arguments of Gratitude and
past Obligations, but finding him true to his Character (for it is known in
Print that the Doctor is neither to be Frighted nor Allured) he begged of him,
if he was finally determined to publish so large a Volumn, against the House of
Bourbon, he would at least bestow a Qualifying Postcript in favor of so great
a Family, praying the Doctor not to take the proposel ill, because this would
not be the first time he had compassionately vouchsafe to let his Book and
Postcript be of two sides. The Doctor unwilling to engage hastily for a
Postcript of that consequence, before Company especialy, without some more
signifiant application, in some heat told him, his Discourse was improper, and
that Postscripts were not so cheap. The other Stranger who had been silent for
the most part (and as you may understand. Gentle Reader, proved afterward to
be the Spainish Agent, tho then utterly unknown) not understanding the Doctors
true meaning, and fearing what had been said was taken as a Reflection, called
out very hastily Mounsieur Poussin, chang the discourse.

At the name of Poussin the three worthy Membeer, started, and looking first
wistly on one another, at the same instant demanded of the Stranger who was? He
plainly told them his Name was Poussin, that he was the most Christians
Majesty's Agents, and had that day received Orders from the Lords Justices for
quitting the Kingdom forthwith, but that he durst not see his Masters Face
unless he had first paid his respects to Persons of their great Consideration
in the Kingdom. Those Words were no sooner uttered bur the Doctor cried out in
English, Oh Hammond we are undone, some Cursed Whigs of the new Stamp have
drawn us into this Snare. As he spoke, he fled to the Door, and rushing out ran
down stairs, and the utmost preicpitation threw himself into the first Coach he
saw, which unhappily was plying with some Masks in expectation of Sir Wi.
Culpepper, and god knows how he would have disengaged his Person if the Spanish
Agent had not followed him, and with much ado got him home, tho in very ill
Circumstances; Mr Hammond in all the confusion imaginable had the same hasty
Aim at a Chair, and got into it upon the easier Terms of only breaking both his
Sh^^s against one of the Polls. Mr. Tredenham being the only man remaining,
Poussin laid hands upon him, and told him plainly he would not leave him in
this disorder, but resolved to see him safe at his Lodging, since they both
lodged in the same house: And bid him not be discomforted, for they should find
there half a dozen of their friends who waited for their coming. This
Confounded him absolutely, and Poussin taking him by the Arm lead him down
Stairs, and carried him to the White Posts in Duke street St. James's, into Mr.
Poussins own Room, which was the very next Chamber to Mr. Tredenhams. The poor
Gentleman though he came into a House where he had long Lodged, did not know
where he was, (such was the amazement he was in) and for Two Hours together did
not know any of the Persons he found there, tho his particular friends and
daily Companions. And he does Solemnly protest, and believes, no one will doubt
of his Veracity, that tho Poussin had lodged in the same House with him for
above Six Months, he never changed word with him, or saw his face till they met
at the Blew Posts.

Having thus Gentle Reader given thee a faithful Relation of this matter, as it
is drawn up in form of an Affidvit, Subscribed by Three worthy Members, ready
to be sworn before Sir James of the Peak's Partner, and which will be Published
in the Doctors next Book, together with many material Circumstances; I must now
desire thee to go along with me in making the following Remerques: Is It to
Observe the plain and Notorious Innocence of these unbiassed Patriots. 2ly, to
consider the Horrible Malice of the Hellish Conspirators who drew them into
this Snare: And Thirdly, to Conclude who the Persons must be who could be
guilty of such a wicked design.

As for the first, the Innocence of the three worthy Persons appears beyond all
dispute, by the Surprise and Consternation they were in, as soon as they
understood who their dangerous Companions were. Thou have hard of it in part
already, but it is most certain, Mr. Hammond kept his Bed upon it two days. The
Doctor was three whole days before he could be assured whether it was a Dream
or not, during which time the Young Gentleman declared himself under Command to
fight any one who durst affirm a certain Person had been in Poussin Company.
But at the End of that time, the Doctor being Convinced, ordered Harry to live
in Peace. Their Innocence does also appear in the Second place, from the
absurdity of imagining that Men of their Wisdom would in a public House meet
with such a dangerous Person as Mounsieur Poussin, after he was forbid the
Kingdom, and so give the Enemies to the Public an Advantage against them.

In the next place, Reader, observe the Malice of this Contrivance, it was not
to Trapan them into some slight ridiculous mistake, but into a Crime of the
highest Nature. Had any other Prince Commanded his Ambassador to retire from
the French Court without taking leave, and thereupon Monsieur Poussins Master
had ordered that Princes Minister to be gone out of his Dominions in 24. Hours,
whoever had ventured to have a private Conversation with him after, had been
broke on the Wheel. Whoever had done the like in Venice, had been tied in a
Sack and thrown into the Adriatic, and Death at least had been the Punishment
in any other Country. It is to be hoped the Law in England is not severe, but
who can tell if that Wicked Party who were for making Laws ex post facto
against poor Sir J. Fenwick, and Honest Sir Charles Duncomb, may not be nibling
at a like thing again.

This leads us, Gentle Reader, to the 3d Consideration, who the Authors of this
Malicious Contrivance must be? In order to this, you must consider that these
unbyassed Patriots were all Members of the Commitee of Impeachments, and
Eminently Active in that service of the Nation, and that two of them (as a
Reward for that great Merit, were named Commissioners to serve their Country
for nothing in the Bill of Accounts, which unhappily miscarried, and in that
Bill some or one at least of the Impeached Lords was concerned. From hence it
must be undeniable concluded, that the Impeached Lords must be guilty of this
Diabolical Project, it may well be so called, for surely Persons of so great
Sagacity and Integrity, unless under some Enchantment, could never have been so
grossly tr^pa^^'d. It must be by downright Witchraft, and those Lords have long
lain under Suspicion of being engaged in that black Art. If there was no
Witchcraft in the Case, it must be by some damnable Confederacy between these
Lords (for they must be in it) and Mr. Pousin, in order to Cover their own
close Correspondency with France, by making an appearance at this Critical time
of great Friendship and Intimacy between these true Patriots and that Dangeros
French Popish Minister, and thereby to have it believed that the French King
was a Friend to those prosecutions, and perhaps that the Persons who were to
serve their Country gratis in the Bill of Accounts, were to be paid for their
pains in that matter by another hand. Add to this, the probability of making a
Breach between the Emperor and the Doctor by this Artifice, and then there can
be no doubt but this detestable Machination must be carried on by the late
Ministry and their Underspurleathers.

In the mean time good Reader, thou can not but be highly pleased to see the
innocence and integrity of these Friends to their Country and Enemies to
France, thus clearly proved: And for thy further Satisfaction, all the said 3
Persons do declare, that during the whole five Hours Conversation, there was
not the least word spoken of what was to be done the next Sessions, not any
thing said against War, or in praise of Peace. No taulk of the most likely
means for keeping up Animosities, or of the most plausible ways for delaying
Supplies Not a word said of the great Pity due to King James the Second, or the
Great hopes due to King James the Third, nor one Jest made on the Bill of
Succession.

FINIS.

