A full and true ACCOUNT Of a Notorious and Bold ROBBERY, COMMITTED On
Hounslow-Heath on Friday last, 1700. By Jonathan Lan, and Guy Cook, Two
Highway-Men.
Particularly, How they Robbed Simon Hartcourt, of the Middle Temple Esquire of 35
Guines, Ten Lewe's-d'ors, a Silver Watch, and several things of great value, as
also how they were taken after a strange manner, and Committed to Newgate, by
the Lord Chief Justice Holt, on Saturday last.

ON Friday Last, Simon Harcourt Esquire: having (as I am informed) been at a
Country House of his beyond Hownslow, and coming over the Heath in his Coach
toward the Evening in order for London, his Coach was stopped about the middle
of the Heath by Jonathan Lan, and Guy Cook Two bold Fellows well mounted, who
drawing their Pistols, one pulled the Coach Man off his Box while the other was
boldly demanding the 'Squire 's Money, who seeing his Pistols Cocked, and
finding them both of Violent Resolutions, delivered them 35 Guineas with a
considerable quantity of Silver, and a Watch and making a further search, after
having bound the 'Squire's Man, they sound 10 Lewe's-D'ors and other things of
great vallue in the Coach; which they carred off, and Rode directly toward
London leaving the Esquire and his Man bound Hand and Foot, who were presently
relieved by some Persons who came over the Heath.

Notwithstanding the Highway Men's seeming escape and safety, they were both
Discovered and Taken after a strange and unusual manner, viz. a Country Farmer
on Horse Back, during their Robbing the Esquire stood undiscerned ^t s^^^ distance,
and seeing what they had done, followed (...) which they taking notice of, they
Rode up to him, and with cocked Pistolls threatened him with Death, if he did
not disist following them: But the Country Man being a subtle Blade,
Counterfeited himself Drunk, and Acted his Part so natural, by making strange
Faces, Antic Gestures, etc. that they really believe'd him to be no less than
what he pretended, and thereupon calling him Drunken Sot, they left him and
went forward, but he still followed them, and with a Drunken kind of a Tone
seemed to press them to Drink a Pot or Two with him, but thinking he had been
realy Drunk, they told him he had got a Pot too much already, and thereupon
took no further notice of him.

However he continued his Drunken Fancy, and followed them till they came to
Cue-Ferry, where they took Water, but no sooner were they in the Ferry Boat,
but the Country Man put off his Barneby 's ^isguise, and caused them to be
Seized on the other Side, whereupon they were conveyed to London under a strong
Guard that Evening, and the next Morning Carried before the Right Honorable
Lord Chief Justice Holt, who Examined them concerning the aforesaid Robbery, at
which time 'Squire Harcourt, and his Man made Oath against them, as did also
the comical Country Man, so that having little to say in their own Defense,
his Lordship Committed them both to Newgate, for the said Robbery on Saturday
last being the 1 st of June 1700, since which they are Charged with another
Robbery, that they Committed on Bagshot Heath, the same Day they Robbed 'Squire
Harcourt: For Robbing two Grasiers, from whom, (it is said) they took a
considerable quantity of Gold and Silver.

LONDON, Printed by J. W. near Fleet Street, 1700.


