A full and True ACCOUNT Of a Strange APPARITION, THAT ^wo Months last past
has frequently Appeared and Haunted the House of Mr. S -- ge in
^HERREY-TREE-ALLEY, NEAR ^hill-Fields, by the Artillery-wall, in the County of
Middlesex.
^T is very frequent amongst the Multitude to disbelieve those things of which
their own Eyes were never Witnesses: upon which Ac^^^nt any thing that is Novel
seems so far from ^^uth, that scarce one in a Thousand will give ^^edit
thereunto, and more especially in that (...) Apparitions; of which the
following Ac^^unt is so Notorious, that it is enough to con^^uce Infidelity it
self. And that no Person ^^atsoever (even in this Incredulous Age) may ^^^ke
Scurple to believe the same, he need only give himself the trouble to repair to
the place in the Title directed, and he shall have sufficient Satisfaction to
clear all his Doubts touching the same; the true Relation whereof follows.

The House now in the Possession of Mr. S -- ge, in the place aforesaid, was in
the late dreadful Sickness in London, commonly made use of as a Pesthouse, for
the more Gentile sort of Persons, who would not expose themselves to the
general House made use of for that purpose: And as most People conclude, the
Persons that then kept the same, did not so fairly use such as were their
Patients; insomuch, as it is credibly reported that after the Death of a
Gentleman of a good Quality, who there departed this Life, the House was
usually Haunted, and the Persons who then lived therein were so much Affrighted
with the usual Appearance of a certain Apparition, that they were forced to get
Ministers and others who undertook to Lay and quiet the same for some time,
which being since expired, for about two or three Months last past the same
has again Appeared, and so Affrighted the Master and the rest of his Family,
that the same is now become public, and grown so familiar with all the House,
that they see it with much less Astonishment then when it ^^^st Appeared; and
what quiets them the more (...) that no Person of the Family has recieved the
^^ast Detriment thereby, and tho sometimes it ^ay Appear in several shapes, as
that of a Man (...) Dog, yet as it is Harmless, they now scarce ^^ar it; the
Report of which has encouraged ^^veral Persons to Attempt the Lodging in the
^^d House, and particularly one who pretend^d to be a Cunning-Man, who with two
or three ^ore undertook to come one Night and ^^atch the same Appearance: in
order where^^to having laid in some Bottles of Wine and (...) good Fire made,
they sat up: but being told (...) some Persons that for their further security
(...) was the best way to lay two Swords a cross at (...) entrance of the Door,
and that then tho (...) Apparition might appear, it would not enter (...) Room;
and so accordingly the same fell (...), for that about twelve or one of the
Clock (...) could see the same pass by and look into (...) Room where they
were, yet did it not ^^esume to enter thereinto, whereby they had ^^e
satisfaction of proving the Truth of what ^^ey came to see: without the further
fear or ^^arer approach of the Apparition then the pas^^ge before the Door, in
their view as aforesaid: yet did not the same so patiently deal with tho^^ who
were the Servants of the House, and (...) above Stairs, for that being
disappointed belo^ it went up Stairs into the Garret, where the Servants lay
and pulled the Cloths from their Bed^* whereby it put them to so great an
Astonishme^^ that they never were before so Affrighted therewith, which being
told amongst some of the Neighbors they were very inquisitive of the Truth of
the story, and one that was a Maid Servant in the House next adjoining
thereunto, being in her self persuaded that there was no Truth in the Relation,
did so far prevail wit^ Mr. S -- ge, that the next Night she was admitted to
Lodge in the House, and being very Confident, went to Bed all alone; yet havin^
from the former Relation some sort of Apprehension, she kept her Candle alight
and shut h^^ Door fast to her: Yet notwithstanding all the Confidence and
Presumption, about the usu^^ time of the Appearance the same entered into the
Room, and coming near to the Bed-si^^ Habited like a Country Gentlman, he dre^
the Curtains and laid his Hands on the Bedcloth^ and by degrees pulled off
first the upper Rugg and then the Blankets, which she percieveingshe pulled the
same to her again and contended for ^he Mastery till at last the Ghost became
so Of^^^^ed in the Contest that he insensibly pinched (...) bruised her, that
the next Morning when (...) came to report the Truth of what she had (...) and
felt the same appeared as well in her ^^nishment and Bruises, which made her
Black (...) Blue from the Elbows to the Shoulders, as ^^at she reported and
complained of. And (...) this may not appear strange, I would not (...)e any
Person censure the same till he be fur^ satisfied therein: Nor would I be so
Pre^^^ptuous to put the same upon the World, and ^^^reby to cheat them with a
Falsity, had I not ^^^^icient Satisfaction thereof, and that from the
^^^abitants themselves, who have often seen the (...): Nor is the place where
the scene of this ^^ir is laid so far off, but that any Person in (...) Hours
time may satisfy himself of the Truth ^^^^eof: In which Relation I am come so
far ^^t of the particulars that no Person upon in^^ry but will meet with the
Relation far more ^^ply than here set down, and more particular^^ is reported
by the Master of the House, that (...) Apparition aforesaid very often comes
into (...) Chamber and took his Cloths off the Bed, ^^gs his Money and other
things about the ^^re, but tho this has often times happened, yet he never lost
any thing, nor was his Wa^ damaged in the least, and upon the sight ^^^^^of,
tho he calls out, yet will not the same depar^ but if his Wife chances to see
it and Shreiks (...) presently Disappears and rambles into the Garret, where
the Servants are sure to be Trouble^ and Affrighted therewith: And moreover
(...) has been credibly said, that in the Yard ther^ has been sometimes seen,
and often heard (...) Coach to drive about the Yard, insomuch tha^ a great
Mastif which was kept for the Secu^^ty thereof, has continually How led every
Nigh^ to the disturbance of all the Neighborhood* and is since almost pined
away: and the nex^ Neighbor in the House adjoining has been several times
waked by the noise of Groans and Howlings, and has risen from his Bed, to loo^
out of the Window, where he has upon the Ridge of the House perceived to his
Aston^^^ment the shape of a great Dog, and notwithstanding all the calling and
noise he could make, the same would not stir from the said Place^ Let not
therefore the World be still Incredulous of Reports of this Nature, and think
themselves Cheated in this till they have some proof to the contrary, this
being not the first Accoun^ of Apparitions of this kind, but many other^ have
been made Evident from the Learned ^ed Pen of Mr. Glanvile; many of which I
(...) herein ennumerate would the narrowness ^^is Sheet contain the same: In
which for (...) Readers better satisfaction I would refer him (...) that
Ingenuous Author before mentioned, (...) has not only given instances of the
like ^^^^ritions in several remarkable Stories and ^^^ations of the same, but
has also proved the ^^^h thereof against the Infidelity of all Deni^
whatsoever. And it is further intended by (...) Master of the House that he
will obtain the ^ur of some Divines to set up and speak to (...) Apparition,
whereby the same may be qui^ in that it is very Troublesome to the ^^ole Family:
and the Person who now lives (...) the said House has laid out for the co^cy
of his Trade several hundred Pounds ^^^^eupon.

FINIS.
LONDON, ^^^^ted by G. C. for J. Cox, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle. 1685.


