A Full Account of the TRIAL OF GODFREY CROSS FOR High Treason,
In adhering to the King and Queen's Enemies, by giving Intelligence to the
French Fleet; as also in endeavoring to Depose them of their Royal Crown and
Dignity, by raising Rebellion and Discord amongst their Majesty's Liege
Subjects, etc. At the King's Bench Bar at Westminster, on Friday the 21st Day
of November, annoque Dom. 1690.
THe Court being set, about ten a Clock the Marshal of the King's Bench Prison
was commanded to bring his Prisoner to the Bar; which was done: And the
Prisoner being commanded to hold up his Hand, the Jurors were called over; out
of which number were sworn these Gentlemen whose Names are underwritten, viz.

Esquires,
John Buggins Francis Farnabey Edward King John Culpepper James Petley Bonnam
Hays Thomas Jeffery Edmund Daventport John Kennard William Selby Edward Manley,
Gent.
William Dry,
After which an Indictment of High Treason was read against him: Which set
forth, That be being a Person of very Evil Fame, did Traitorously, Falsely,
Maliciously and Devilishly Adhere to, Aid, Abet, and Comfort the King and
Queens Enemies that now is: And did (of his Malice, before thought) endeavor
our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen to final Death and Destruction
to bring, and to raise War and Rebellion among the Subjects of our Sovereign
Lord and Lady the King and Queen that now is, within this Kingdom of England
and elsewhere, etc.

And to Accomplish and Bring those his Treasonable, False, Malicious and
Devilish Practices and Purposes to pass, did, on the 6th Day of July, in the
second Year of their Majesty's Reign, in the County of Kent, convey himself on
Board of several Ships belonging to the French Fleet, which were then riding
not far off from the Town of Lidd in Kent: And there had held Correspondence
with them, particularly with Sir William Jennings, then Commander in Chief of
the French Admiral; from whom he brought Letters of Invitation to some Persons
here in England, To come on Board him: And carried Intelligence to them of the
state of Affairs here, against the Duty of his Allegiance, and against the Form
of the Statute in that Case made and provided, etc. To all which Charge he had
before pleaded Not Guilty.

Then the King's Council proceeded to open the Matter of Fact, and the horrid
Nature of it, to the Gentlemen of the Jury; giving them to understand, That he
was Indicted for a Crime of a very high nature, (First) For adhering to the
French King, who was an open and professed Enemy to this Nation; which did find
him to be guilty of a manifest Intention to destroy it, and to bring the King
and his Subjects under the Power and Dominion of the French King:
Notwithstanding the great Charges and Trouble the present King of England has
been at to reduce it, and to detect all their Villainies, in that Vigorous and
Unwearied Attempt that he is still making against the Common Enemy. And that
the French did not altogether trust to their own Power and Strength, but they
expected Correspondent Helps from the King's Enemies; Amongst which perfideous
sort of Men this Prisoner at the Bar appeared.

And furthermore the Prisoner at the Bar, on the 6th of July last, at the Town
of Lidd aforesaid, about seven a Clock in the Morning, did appear on Horseback,
near the Water side, within View of the French Fleet; and a Sloop coming near
the Shore, he waved his Hat as a Token or Sign to them to come nearer; then
they sent out their Longboat, he riding his Mare up to the Belly in Water to
the Boat-side, and went into the Boat, quiting his Mare, etc. at which the
Prisoner seemed to laugh: But the King's Council told him, That it was no
laughing Matter, or to that effect. The Council further declared the
Aggravation of his Crime; How that he being one of the King's Natural and True
born Subjects of this Kingdom, instead of taking up Arms for the King and
Queen, as by the Duty of his Allegiance he ought to have done, he goes on Board
the French Fleet and carries Intelligence to them of the state of Affairs here
in England; and brings back Letters and Notes of Invitations and Intelligence
to others, to join with him in his Traitorous, Devilish Designs, and Wicked
Encompassings and Imaginations; which did particularly tend to the Deposing of
the King and Queen; and that the People of England should be no longer a
People. So that surely the thing it self, viz. His going on Board the French
Fleet, was Evidence enough, beyond all Papers, or any thing else that could be
brought against him; but to clear all Doubts, there were several Good Evidence
produced to prove the Matter of Fact more fully upon him, the first of which
was one Stephen Stacy, who declared upon Oath.

That he saw him ride into the Water up to the Mare's Belly, and go into the
Boat, to some French Men, who were coming toward the Shore, having before
waved his Hat, and halloed toward them; and that he turned his Mare loose and
a Greyhound that followed him; which were afterward found upon the Shore.
This Witness swore positively that he saw him do all this, and that he was the
same Man that went into the Boat; and that it made up to the nearest Ship.

There was a second Evidence called, who declared, after being sworn, That he
was upon the Watch, on the 6th of July last, over against the Body of the
French Fleet, where they saw a small Man of War put out a Longboat, making
toward the Shore; whilst they were gone to give Intelligence of it, the Boat
had taken in the Prisoner, and his Greyhound lay upon the Sea Shore, and the
Mare was loose, which he and three more Men took up and carried to Lidd: And
that he knew the Mare to be Cross's Mare, and the Dog to be his also: And that
the Mare had lately been in the Water, for that she was wet; and was ready
bridled and sadled: And when they came to Cross's House, he was not at home,
his Servant telling them, That his Master rode out upon the Mare that Morning,
etc.

Another Witness, being sworn, deposed to the same effect, confirming the Truth
of what the former had declared, as to the Boat coming ashore, and the Mare and
Dog being found loose, after the Prisoner was gone on Board the French Ships:
And that he saw the Boat come exactly from the Fleet: As also that the Mare and
Dog were Cross's own Goods: And that he rid out upon the Mare that Morning: And
that the Boat came within a Musket Shot of the Shore, and went directly to the
French Fleet.

There were others that swore to the same effect as the former, so shall give
no further account of them, but proceed to another, which indeed was one of the
most material to bring the Matter home upon the Prisoner: Who being sworn for
the King, deposed,

That he was informed by some who were on the Top of the Steeple, That they saw
the Boat coming from the Fleet ashore, and a Man landed about twelve a Clock at
Noon, on the said 6th of July; and afterward arming himself, he raised the
Town, and coming to the Seaside he found it to be Godfry Cross, the Prisoner
at the Bar; whom he toook at some Rods Distance from the Shore, and said to
him; Neighbor Cross is not this a shameful thing of you, to go a Board of an
Enemy? Did you go to give Intellence how our Town stood effected? Or did you go
to carry Letters? Upon which the Prisoner gave him very abusive Language, and
said, You one eyed Dog, what have you to do? etc. After which he was seized and
and carried to Lidd, and examined by the Bailiff, not denying the Matter
charged against him: Nor that he had not been on Board the Fleet; but
complained that he had lost his Mare. Which was confirmed also by another
Witness, that helped to apprehend him; and that he had given a Crown to the
Boatmen that set him (...) Shore; and that he had been a Board three or four
Vessels of the French Fleet.

There were two other Evidence, who gave account of his Examination, and that
he did own to have been on Board the French Fleet: And that he had brought two
Letters from on Board the French Admiral, written by Sir William Jennings,
which were found about him: The first was directed to one Mr. Bryant Bowls of
Deal, the other to one Mr. Thomas Tedman a^ Dover; dated on Board the French
Admiral, and signed by Sir William Jennings: The Contents of them were both to
the same purport, viz. To invite any of their Majesty's Subjects to come on
Board the Fleet; and if they did, they should have liberty to go back, for they
came not to hurt any Person, but to protect all Loyal Subjects, and to punish
Rebellious ones: For that the Fleet was as much the King of England 's as ever
it was the French King's, etc.

The Prisoner being asked, What he had to say in his Defense against so home a
Charge, answered, That he had but little to say; but that he had always been a
true Protestant, and a Church of England-Man, (as he himself termed it) and
never did nor intended any harm to any one: And that he had done no damage, so
was willing to submit to the Judgment of the Court. Although when he was
apprehended he pretended that he rode into the Water to look after some Boards
that were floating there; and the Men in the Boat asked him to drink a Dram,
which he did: And after two of the Men forced him off his Horse into the Boat;
but was looked upon as a feigned Excuse.

But in the Conclusion a further Proof was brought against him, which was
omitted through Inadvertency, viz. That when he was on Board the French
Admiral, Sir William Jennings asked him, In what Posture the Nation was? to
which he, the Prisoner replied, That for the Town, they had affrighted most of
the People out of it; and the rest were making provision for themselves: Or
Words to the like effect, etc.

The King's Council, after this, made several Reflection upon the hainousness
of the Crime, and that his going on Board to the King's Enemies Fleet, and
giving them Intelligence, was a manifest Token of his adhering to them, so
consequently must be found High Treason, although the Court seemed to be of the
contrary Opinion at the first, and that it was but a Misdemeanour: But after
the Council had pleaded it further, the Lord Chief Justice summed up the
Evidence, in a particular and distinct Manner, to the Gentlemen of the Jury,
telling them, That if they did believe that he went voluntarily on Board, and
did bring those Letters from Sir William Jennings; and that they were to
persuade Men to forsake their Allegiance; and to endeavor to restore the late
King; and to assist all those that were for the Late King: Then they must find
him Guilty. But if he did this ignorantly, and not to seduce the King's
Subjects from their Allegiance, then they must find him Not Guilty. etc.

After which the Jury withdrew for the space of about a quarter of an Hour, and
returning they brought him Guilty of High Treason.

Licensed, November 22 d 1690.
LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss near Fleet-bridge. 1690.


