From a Person of Quality in SCOTLAND; TO A Person of Honor in LONDON:
Concerning His ROYAL Highness, JAMES, Duke of York.
SIR,
THE acquaintance that I contracted with you when I was last in England with
Duke H. and the several Discourses, that with so much freedom we had together,
concerning the state of affairs then in agitation, makes me thus familiarly
renew that friendship which grew then between us, whereby you will see, how
much I am altered from my self since that time: You cannot have forgot I am
sure, in what opposition I then stood against the D. of Y. succeeding to the
Crown, and then so firm, that all you could say, though backed with strong
arguments and reasons, could not any ways shake me, and therefore you may now
justly wonder how it should come about, that I should now write to you in his
behalf: I intended this Letter at the beginning of the Parliament at Oxford,
and thought it might arrive to you time enough before they might meddle with
the Bill of Seclusion, if they should endeavor it at all, knowing the Aversion
of his Majesty from putting by his Brother from his Hereditary right, and though
to our wonder, the Parliament was Dissolved, before we could think it was well
begun, and before I could Write what I intended, yet since the Duke has many
Enemies in England, I have, in letting you see my thoughts as to his right of
Succession, showed you that his virtues have begotten here, even in this Cold
and bigoted Country, some Friends.

But before I enter upon my Reasons that any man who shall endeavor to put by
the D. of Y. from his Hereditary right, violates the Laws of the Land,
scandalizes his Religion, and does Unjustice to his Prince, I shall acquaint
you how I came to be thus Interessed for the Duke, who was so much once against
him. And first I declare to you, lest you should suspect that it might be the
change of my Religion that should have made this change in my Politic opinion,
that I am still, and ever shall be, of the same Religion I was born and bred
in; that is, a Protestant; and that I have as much aversion for the Religion of
the Duke, as I have a love and affection for his person. But the greatest
motive that begot in me a Veneration for the Duke, and so Consequently for his
just Interest, is the personal knowledgde of his very many Excellencies and
virtues which has raised in me, not only an ordinary Esteem, but has made me
justly think him to be in himself no ordinary man, but one worthy of the
greatest Crown in Europe. Before I knew him but at a distance, and though I had
often seen him and been in his presence, yet I had received his Characters at
second hand, and found him sometimes represented one thing, sometims another,
according to the several opinions and Interests of persons, so as my knowledge
of this great man, was very much disguised, and in the dark, till his residing
here among us, gave me and many others, a clear prospect both of his Persons
Actions, and Virtues. I shall not go about to Characterize him to you, who so
well know him, and who so often from those many shining and excellent Virtues
in him, has raised up Arguments to bring me from the opinion I had entertained
against him. But you see that he himself, by his Actions and Convers, in a
little time, has been able to do more then all the words and Arguments in the
world could do.

Having thus showed you upon what account I am become the Dukes friend, you
cannot now think it strange, that as an Effect of that Reverence and esteem, I
have received from so worthy a person, I should write to you in his behalf. And
though the Parliament be Dissolved, and that we fear not from thence, the
prejudice many did expect, yet I shall tell you in few words, my mind; that I
think it both unreasonable and Unjust, for any Subject of England to attempt
his Seclusion from the Crown. And I must here further protest unto you, that
although I had never so great esteem for the D. yet were it not just, Lawful,
or Right for him to succeed in the Throne of England, I should never open my
mouth, nor use any Arguments in his behalf, but the Right, Justice, and Equity,
that I believe him to have on his side, makes me trouble you with these: And I
must also beg your pardon, that I presume to tell you my opinion, and to lay
down my weak Reasons for the Justice of the Dukes cause, since I know you are
already furnished with such, that may in Law and Equity, be a sufficient
Bulwork to defend his right against all the opposition can be made from
Rational and men, therefore honored Sir, I shall be obliged to use the less
Arguments to you upon that Subject, nor will the scantling of a Letter give
leave for long Harangues, or for Oratorious pleadings of the Case.

In the first place, I suppose there are none, even among his violent opposers,
that any ways question the D. right of Succession, so that his indubitable
right to succeed his Brother (whom God long preserve) if he has no Legitimate
children, of England, that he should succeed, because a Roman Catholic is the
thing stood upon: We shall not here at all question the right and power that
the King and his Parliament may have to dispose of the Succession, and to cut
off the D. from all hopes of succeding to the Crown, we will grant it, that it
is in their power so to do, but all that I have to urge to you, is, That in so
doing, they would be very unjust, or at least give very hard measure to the
Duke, only because he has changed his Religion, and by which means, they have
entertained an Opinion, that he will bring in Popery, and alter the Religion of
England: But I think it is a Maxim in the Christian Religion, that we ought not
to commit an evil, that good might come thereon; and therefore, if putting the
D. by his just and indubitable Right, be a committing an evil against Justice,
Law, and Right, it ought not to be done in any expectancy of all the good that
shall follow thereupon; And how they can salve such an Act, which is decryed by
all Princes, and by many wise and great persons, from injustice and wrong, I
cannot tell. The jealousies and fears of the people, ought not to stir up those
in Authority to do injustly: and it is feared likewise, that the bringing in of
Popery, as a consequence of his succeeding to the Crown, is buz'd about into
the peoples cars, and thereby increasing their fears and Jealousies, by some
persons, who may perhaps have other designs in their heads, not only of
breaking the Legal-line of Succession, but that also of all Kingly Successors:
So that, whilst by this means, the people seek to maintain their Religion, they
will be forced to loose their Government, and be reduced again to the many
Arbitrary-headed Monster, whose paws will be far more heavy than the Royal
Scepter in the Hand of the D. and this I doubt will be all that will be got by
Secluding the D. This one thing is enough to make the King fearful of yielding
to such an Act, and to cause him by all means to endeavor, the securing to his
people, the Ancient Government of the Kingdom, as well as Religion and
Property, since there are also fears and jealousies on the one hand, as well as
the other.

I see my Letter grows long, and therefore beg your excuse, that I huddle up
what more I have to say, which might be enlarged upon.

I say further, That the Great and Heroic Love, as well as just and pious,
that His Majesty has for his Brother, should be some Argument to his people,
not to urge things so violently against the Duke, and so opposite to the
Affection of His Majesty, he having Declared, That there is nothing that a
Parliament can demand, to secure them in their Religion, and to quiet their
Fears and Jealousies, he will not willingly grant them, excepting this one
thing, of utterly secluding his Brother from his Right, which is against his
Conscience. I say, that methinks in this matter, the People should be as tender
of the Conscience of their King, as he is of the Desires of his People; and
that a medium may be found out, that may satisfy both (...) the Root of the
Tree: And to add to the Weight in the Dukes Scale, and to oppose those who
would have him to be the Cause of the Troubles of the Nation, (though nothing yet
has been plainly proved, that his Enemies can lay to his Charge) I say the
people ought not to forget the many Heroic and Valiant actions he has done for
his Country, how boldly and willingly he has ventured his Blood and Life, in
the Dutch Wars, exposing himself to all manner of Dangers, for the sake of his
Country, for which, like the Noble Themistocles, he is in Danger of running the
same fate, of being Banished by those people, to whom he had brought the Crown
of Victory: But however, justly the Athenians thought they might do it, his
Banishment to this day, stands as a Brand of their Ingratitude and ill Nature,
in the Records of History; as no doubt, will this Seclusion of the Duke, after
his Valiant Actions, be recorded to the Dishonor and ingratitude of your
Nation.

We should now examine, how far the Religion of the Prince, is consisting with
the Essence of Government, and whether there be that danger to the Protestant
Religion, from a Popish Successor, as his Adversaries pretend; and many
Arguments might hence arise, which might give an Esclarisment to the matter in
question, but I doubt I have Trespassed already too long upon your patience,
and therefore shall not trouble you farther at this time concerning them,
believing you sufficiently furnished of your self, with a true speculative
knowledge of those Cases, and that you are able there-hence to raise many
Arguments, in so just a cause. But before I bid you farewell, I most also take
notice, that in pressing the King to perform an Act of Violence to himself,
they mightily distrust Providence, for after all, the Duke being so little
under the age of the King, he may first dye, and by that most natural way
secure them from their many fears and Jealousies of dangers, that may accrue to
them by his Succession, if Providence thinks good; but if not, and that he
should survive, I question whether an Act of Parliament would be able to keep
him from endeavoring to obtain his Right: It is therefore the best way to wait
a while, and to submit to Providence, who knows best how to dispose of all
things, and not to be too anxious and fearful of things, as may never come to
pass, and not to run into unjust Actions, in order to prevent them. Pardon me,
I beseech you, the trouble I have given you, since I was urged to it by the
Affection I have to a person, that I believe most in the World are mistaken in,
because Ignorant of his Worth, I am

SIR, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant.

Printed for Joseph Heath-coat, in the Year, 1681.


