SELECT SERMONS, Preached upon sundry occasions BY JOHN FROST, B. D. late
Fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge, and since Pastor of the Church at S.
Olaves-Hartstreet, London. Now newly published together with two Positions for
explication and confirmation of these Questions, 1. Tota Christi justitia
credentibus imputatur. 2. Fides justificat sub ratione instrumenti.

seal

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. Anno Dom. MDCLVII.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, at the urgent importunity of some both Pious and Judicious,
the relict of the Author, with the consent of his nearest Relations, has
presented these Theses and Sermons to public view (as is hoped) for thy good:
and would have thee advertised, that these only are all his labors as yet
extant, or published to the world, and therefore none else to be owned as his,
unless attested by the said Relations. If these few shall be found acceptable,
and beneficial to thee, it is probable that more hereafter will be made public
in the same volume: in the mean time it is heartily wished that these may be as
effectual to the Reader, as they were affectionately intended by the Speaker;
and it is hoped then God will have glory, and his people good by them, which is
the utmost aim of the publishing of them.

Farewell.
Errata.
Page 5. line 2. medium, read modum. l. 17. r. persolutlone. p. 10. l. 33. r.
vita. p. 17. l. 10. tum, r. e^^m. p. 23. l. a. r. Scripture-precept. p. 24. l.
10. r. (...). p. 26. l. 1. beard, r. bard. p. 36. l. 20. ways, r. wages, p.
64. l. 1. this, r. his. l. 34. not, r. no. p. 69. l. 26. intent, r. extent. p.
129. l. 30. r. (...) as. p. 131. l. 35. r. It is hard, that I say not
impossible. p. 148. l. 18. r. he was at his. p. 150. l. 35. means, r. meanness.
p. 155. l. 34. r. unsuccessfull. p. 189. l. 11. r. ense reci- p. 199. l. 36.
wont, r. will not. p. 207. l. 7. r. being by a. p. 2^1. l. 3. r. (...). p. 246.
l. 12. r. ^^^, and (...). p. 267. l. 31. 1. but principally and in
joynt-efficiency. p. 273. l. 39, 40. r. it cost nothing in reference tous,
though in reference to Christ's bloodshed it was purchased, Ephesians. 1. 7. p. 279.
l. 30. dele of. p. 280. l. 16. it, r. them. p. 283. l. 38. r. futurus. p. 311.
l. 11. of, r. to wrath. p. 317. l. 24. is, r. are. p. 333. l. 17. of, r. in. p.
341. l. 28. in, r. into. 347. l. 1. shall, r. should. p. 354. l. 3. make it, r.
make them.

THESIS DE TOTA CHRISTI JUSTITIA CREDENTIBUS IMPUTATA, Quam Sub praesidio
Reverendissimi Viri JOANNIS ARROWSMITH S. T. D.

Ac in eadem Professoris Regii, 8. Kal. Februar. 1654. in Scholis publicis
CANTABRIGIAE Tuebatur JOANNES FROST, Collegii D. Joannis ibidem Socius.

geometric pattern

CANTABRIGIAE: Ex Officina Joannis Field, Almae Academiae Typographi. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

ORNATISSIMO DOCTISSIMOQUE VIRO JOANNI ARROWSMITH, SS. Theologiae Doctori, and
Collegii SS. Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi Magistro.
A Micorum quorundam importunitas impetravit tandem, Vir amplissime, ut
Posthumum hoc in publicum darem; and cui potius quam dignitati tuae dedicarem,
cujus sub moderamine Author ipse haud ita pridem exercitium hoc Theologicum
habuit. Vivum laudasti, mortuum defend: Post tuum judicium formido nullum.
Compenset hanc tuam benevolentiam (...) Deus aeternante prosperitate. Et favere
porro ne desistas Authoris moestissimo Parenti,

Vestrae tamen reverentiae and amplitudinis observantissimo, JOANN. FROST.

ORATION ante initam disputationem.
Sum Deus, misericors in Christo Pater, Cui debetur unice, quod inter nuperas
Ecclesiae simul and Reipublicae ruinas nos, homunciones licet indignissimi,
superstites hodie sumus, quasi tot misericordiae tuae praecones and monumenta.
Gratias Tibi agimus, non quas debemus, sed quas possumus maximas, quod sub
alarm tuarum umbra ad hunc usque diem in mediis procellis Academias
protegisti; quod (oblatrante licet invidia and ignorantia) nobis etiamnum
indulges otium literarium, quo nominis tui and veritatis gloriae, nostrum
aliorumque saluti litare and invigilare possumus. Tu, Domine, inhabitas lucem
inaccessam, Tu lucis spiritualis fons unicus, and Pater luminum; natura fatemur
nos meras tenebras, alta ignorantiae nocte obvolutos, saxea circumgestamus
corda, Tui solius (omnipotens Deus) praerogativa est coecas mentes illuminare
and corda adamantina emollire: nos ad pedes tuos humillime provoluti oramus
supplices, ut illucescas mentibus nostris luce Tua, ut animis Spiritu tuo
afflatis, oculisque collyrio tuo inunctis, and mirabilia Legis and profunda
Evangelii indies scrutemur magis and intelligamus; atque ita potenter flecte
reluctantes animos, ut in obsequium Veritatis nos totos tradamus. Fac,
quaesumus, ut sordidis justitiae nostrae exuti pannis, and Christi justitiae
stola induti, coram Te compareamus singuli, necnon eam, de qua disputaturi
sumus, intus in cordibus nostris sentiamus discriminantem gratiam and fidem
salutarem. Ita denique conatus nostros inpraesentiarum, omniaque in posterum
secundes studia, ut cedant in nominis Tui gloriam, Ecclesiae emolumentum,
dilucidationem veritatis, fidei augmentum ac robur, in salutari Christi
cognitione profectum, aeternamque nostrum omnium salutem per Jesum Christum,
olim in terris, nunc a dextera Tua Salvatore^ nostrum atque Intercessorem, cui
inter orandu^ confidamus unicum, cui Tecum una cum Spiritu, Tri-uno Deo, sit
laus and honos nunc and in aeternum.

Thesis. Tota Christi justitia credentibus imputatur ad justificationem.
JUstificationis doctrinam solitus erat olim Lutherus Articulum stantis aut
cadentis Ecclesiae nominare: cujus dicti veritatem utinam Haereticorum,
quotquot per retroacta secula fuere, aut jam nunc sunt, omnium iniquiora
conamina plus satis non comprobassent; quibus, quo facilius Ecclesiam
Reformatam funditus evertant and Religionem nostram, altius radices agentem, ex
hominum animis radicitus evellant, in hanc justificationis arcem, quasi totius
fulcrum and propugnaculum, solenne semper fuit totam convertere argumentorum
molem and ingeniorum aciem, hanc praecipue imputationis justitiae Christi
Acropolin Sociniani, Remonstrantes, and Pontificii tota vi aggrediuntur, and,
quam argumentis and rationibus pessundare non possunt and labefactare,
calumniis onerant and dicteriis insectantur, quae singula si recenserem, and
patientiae vestrae lassitudinem, and piis auribus nauseam and taedium crearem.
Pontificii, ad unum pene omnes, hanc justitiam imputativam ut putativam and
imaginariam sugillant. Bellarminus ( tom. 4. c. 7. l. 2.) imputationis dogma ut
(...), quod nullum in Scripturis aut Patribus testimonium habeat, ut non
necessarium, ut absurdissimum, ut rectae rationi contrarium insectatur.
Ingeniosus iste nequam Castellio, in Tractatu de Justificatione, hanc
imputativam justitiam ut imaginariam, page 17. ut inane nomen justitiae, page
31. ut carni suavem calumniatur. Lessius, ejusdem farinae homuncio, in
consultatione de Relig. consideratione 3. inter alios nostrae Religionis
Articulos pietati (uti contendit) contrarios, hunc de justitia imputata
enumerat, quasi necesse esset ut omnem Dei timorem excutiant, dum docent (
ipsius sunt verba) per fidem peccata non imputari, quantumvis ea sunt multa vel
magna. Andradius eam vocat amentissimam insaniam, page 477. in defensione fidei
Tridentinae. Sanderus dicit hanc imputationem officere gloriae Dei and Christi.
Salmero rejicit ut superfluam, ut superbiae matrem, quia, inquit, ponit servos
Domini sui gloriam usurpare. Rainoldus eam vocat Mathematicum solifidivum
commentum, p. 324. contra Whitakerum nostrum. Quin insuper eos omnes
anathematis fulmine percutit conventus Tridentinus ( sess. 6. can. 10.) qui
dixerint homines per justitiam Christi formaliter esse justos. At in hanc
Christi justitiam paulo iniquiores extiterunt, jurati illi Christi hosts,
Sociniani. Socinus ipse part 4. c. 4. de Christo Servatore, commentum vocat
justitiae Christi nobis imputatae, quam nec Moses nec Paulus ne somniavit
quidem; cap. 1. ejusdem libri, Commentum, inquit, ut valde absurdum atque
impium, ita intolerabile; c. 8. Non ipsis solum sacris litteris, sed rationi
plane repugnat; and cap. 1. dicit nos huic opinioni adhaerere cum salutis
nostrae discrimine, adeo foeda atque execrabilis est, ut pestilentiorem errorem
post homines natos extitisse non credam. Smalcius, Magistrum secutus, hanc
doctrina^ vocat Satanae impostura^. Horum vestigia premunt Remonstrantes, unum
pro omnibus accipite Episcopium, qui, concione secunda, page 437. de causis
incredulitatis Judaeorum, tria enumerat doctrinae nostrae capita, viz.
Trinitatis, absolutae praedestinationis, and justificationis per justitiam
Christi, quae impedimento esse Judaeis and offendiculo ait, quo minus fidem
Christianam amplectantur, quasi per hanc justitiam imputativam actum esset de
legis obedientia and studio bonoru^ operum; and revera, inquit, ita se res
habet: and posset certe Apostolus and viro Arminiano and Judaeis satisfacere,
qui saepius de industria justificationis doctrinam ab hac criminatione liberat,
ad Romans 3. 31. Legem igitur inutilem reddimus per fidem? absit, imo legem
stabilimus; and cap. 8. 4. dicit Apostolus per Christi justitiam legem in nobis
compleri.

Audivistis, Academici, homines ad convitia ingeniosos satis, qui fortiter
calumniari didicerunt, ut tandem aliquid haereat. Aggredior quaestionem, uti
perscentiscitis, criminationibus vexatam, calumniis onustam and pene obrutam;
quae efficere potuissent, ut causae praevaricarer, nisi praeluxisset mihi
Scripturae lumen, quo, vel in thesi, vel inter disputandum, totam illam
calumniarum noctem, quam huic veritati offundunt hujus seculi tenebriones,
discutere nullus dubito. Quinetiam gratiam divinam and misericordiam, qua, cum
primaeva justitia excideramus, vicariam hanc Christi justitiam credentibus
nobis praeparavit, acceptat, ac in justitiam imputat, ex intimo cord non
possum non suscipere and amplecti: neque facile mihi persuaserim veritatem ex
eorum partibus stare, qui suae quasi diffisi causae mallent aeliorum opiniones
vellicare and contumeliis proscindere (quae Socinianorum in singulis Religionis
capitibus consuetudo est) quam suam argumentis evincere and statuminare. Assero
igitur (obtrectantibus licet Haereticis) totam Christi justitiam imputari
credentibus ad justificationem: Quam ut felicius veritatem explicem, proponam

1. Terminorum explicationem; 2. Quaestionis statum; 3. Conclusiones and
argumentorum momenta. Quae singula ea, quam rei majestas patitur, brevitate,
and, quam nostra tenuitas, perspicuitate absolvam. Quod ad terminos attinet:

Primo, per justitiam Christi intelligi velim non essentialem illam and
Osiandricam Christi, viz. qua Deus est, sed mediatoriam, qua (...) Mediator and
Sponsor noster extitit, quae saepius in Scriptura vocatur justitia Dei, ut Romans
1. 17. and 10. 3. viz. vel ratione gratuitae donationis, and acceptationis,
quippe quae sola in judicio Dei valet, vel perfectae adaequationis ad divinam
voluntatem, vel revelationis, quippe de qua acutissimi Philosophi ne somniarunt
unquam, vel originis, quippe a Christo praestita, qui and Deus and homo erat,
vocatur justitia Christi subjective, justitia fidei Phil. 3. 9.
instrumentaliter and objective, de quo fusius agemus postea.

Secundo, terminus iste tota non sumitur in quaestione extensive, and quoad
meriti and efficaciae latitudinem, ita enim unicuique credenti non imputatur,
sed limitate, ut pretium particulare, and quantum credentis postulat
necessitas. Unde obiter constabit quam inanis est ista Bellarmini calumnia, qua
hanc imputationem prosequitur, quasi nos nimirum Christo pares and ex aequo
justos esse exinde sequeretur, and vere nos dici posse Redemptores and
Mediatores: In promptu est responsio, viz. Justitiam Christi quam longissime
superare Adami, omniumque creaturarum justitiam, and ejus satisfactionem and
mortem esse universale omnibus credentibus redemptionis pretium, at fide recipi
solum, in quantum sufficit ad particularis hominis justificationem; perinde cum
Christo justos credentes dicimus, quoad veritatem, non quantitatem and
subjectum; deinde Mediator est nomen officii, cujus nos participes non sumus,
sed justitiae ex actibus mediatoriis resultantis. Per totam igitur justitiam
intelligimus tum activam, impletionem viz. legis a Christo praestitam, a cujus
exactissima obedientia ne tantillum per totam vitam deflexerit, tum passivam,
per quam intelligi velim non nudam corporis mortem, cui tamen in Scriptura
saepius justificatio nostra Synechdochice and (...) attribuitur, utpote
extremae obedientiae complemento, sine qua nihil nobis obedientia Christi
profuisset (utpote quam lex violata indispensabiliter vel a peccatore vel
sponsore postulabat) sed totam Christi humiliationem, ipsam formae humilis and
servi assumptionem, omnesque and corporis aerumnas animique dolores, quos a
primis incunabulis ad glorificationem usque pertulit, quos nostro loco ferebat,
ut per utramque justitiam tum mandatis tum minis legis omni ex part satisfiat.
Neque est quare habitualem seu originalem Christi justitiam, qua tota humanitas
Christi a prima conceptione perfusa erat, a justificatione nostra (quod
nonnulli faciunt Theologi) excludamus, cum haec nativae nostrae corruptioni,
uti activa peccatis actualibus, and passiva poenis, quas commerueramus and ex
rigore legis luere debuissemus, aptissime respondeat. Monendum hic est hanc
distinctionem esse modalem, seu eiusdem rei in diversas considerationes, quippe
and impletio legis and persolutio poenarum unicam de integro constituunt
justitiam qua justificamur, ad quam non valet ipsa Christi passio, nisi ut
voluntary suscepta and praestita, and in tantum activae nomen meretur, (...)
-- inquit Apostolus, Phil. 2. 8.

Tertio, Imputatur] Imputationis naturam apertissime explicat Davenantius; Res
imputantur ( inquit p. 372.) quando illaru^ intuitus and respectus valent nobis
ad aliquem effectum aeque ac si a nobis aut in nobis essent: ita ex intuitu
nostri peccati, quod Christo imputabatur, cum Christo Deus egit, licet
innocentissimo, ac si revera peccator fuisset: ita imputata nobis Christi
justitia, nobiscum agit Deus ac si justi essemus. Ex intuitu activae
obedientiae nos respicit, ac si propriis personis legem implevissemus; and ex
intuitu passivae, ac si poenas peccato debitas dedissemus. ideoque per
justitiam Christi imputatam nihil aliud intelligimus quam eam donatam nobis and
applicatam ad spiritualem aliquem effectum producendum; uti persolutio debiti a
sponsore sacta a creditore ita debitori imputatur, ut ejus respectu debitorem
manumittit, perinde ac si ipse solvisset debitum. Huic respondet verbum Graecum
(...), de quo, mirum quantas! Pontificii rixas movent: sed, modo rem tenemus,
absint (...), quibus vestra vetat patientia ne longius immorarer. Hinc obiter
constare potest, quam proterve and malitiose nobiscum agunt Pontificii, quasi
imaginariam solum poneremus justitiam, ut justificationis nostrae materiam
coram Deo; and imputationem, nudam solummodo existimationem, quod in nos urget
Bellarminus, qui semper opponit vere and imputative: and Castellio nostros
exagitat Theologos ut Christi modestia, vel opinione modestos nos esse, ut
Christi justitia justes; page 32. Absurdissimum viz. existimant, aliquem aliena
justitia justum fore. At merae hae nugae sunt, and deliria: non enim asserimus
nos justos justitia prorsus aliena, sed quae vere sit nostra, veritate
imputationis, licet non inhaesionis: and hanc imputationem esse existimationem,
cui veritas in re ipsa respondet; and hanc justitiam realiter fieri nostram; 1.
donatione; 2. promissione; 3. acceptatione Dei; 4. applicatione fidei, quae
realis est, non putativa: haec imputatio causam habet realem, Dei viz. foedus
and voluntatem; fundamentum reale, nimirum Christi perfectissimam obedientiam
nostro loco praestitam, and a nobis propter nostram cum Christo unionem
participatam; ob quam justi habemur coram Deo, non quidem inhaesive, sed per
habitudinem ad Christum, cujus justitia fit nostra ex part Dei per
imputationem, ex part nostra per fidem: ideo additur in quaestione

Quarto, Credentibus] Qui terminus quadruplicem habet emphasin and vim in
praesenti quaestione.

Primo, ut dicat instrumentum: non enim dicimus fidem justificare formaliter
cum Socinianis, neque dispositive solum cum Pontificiis; sed per medium
instrumenti, non quidem naturalis, sed ex divina ordinatione, qua ex summa
sapientia instituebat hoc justificationis medium, viz. fidem, quae passivam and
receptivam habet aptitudinem respectu objecti justificationis prae aliis
omnibus virtutibus.

Secundo, ut dicat actum fidei: non enim amplector Maccovii sententiam,
asserentis, fidem habitualem illud esse, quo justificamur, page 770. quia fides
non aliter justificat quam relative, and connotative ad objectum; aliter enim
suo merito, propriaque virtute justificaret, ast notum est, habitus nullum
dicere respectum ad objecta, nisi mediantibus actibus. Unde obiter etiam monere
possim, me nihil de infantum justificatione impraesentiarum determinaturum,
quippe quibus justificationis privilegium modo quodam latentiori communicatur.

Tertio, ut dicat momentum justificationis nostrae; viz. quamprimum in Christo
credimus: non enim iis assentior, qui justificationem ponunt fidei
antecedaneam, nimirum, vel ab aeterno, vel pretii per Christi mortem
persolutio, vel ab ipso tempore quo Christus promissus nobis est in Mediatorem,
Genesis 3. 15. quae Maccovii opinio est, qui fidem non aliter justificare
existimat, quam quoad sensum nostrum, quod nimirum fide cognoscimus, and
sentimus nos esse justos coram Deo, page 792. quippe Scriptura judicat omnes,
ut filios irae, antecedenter ad fidem, Ephesians. 2. 3. quid? quod opera, aliaeque
virtutes, ut justificationis (...), nos justos declarant coram Deo. Agnoscimus
virtualem justificationem, quoad praescientiam and voluntatem divinam ab
aeterno, meritoriam pretio persoluto, at actualem and formalem justificationem
antecedenter ad fidem non agnoscimus. Neque enim decretum justificationis est
ipsa justificatio, neque ad hanc sufficit pretii datio: quo modo nostram
Socinus deridiculo habet fidem, quasi fide diceremus nos credere dari, quod jam
a Christo datum est, (p. 4. c. 3.) cum tamen nos profitemur fide opus esse, non
ad solutionem sed ad applicationem: non est idem justitiam imputari, and
Christum pro nobis justum esse: quae duo tamen Socinus pessime confundit, qui
arguit a positione satisfactionis ad negationem imputationis, licet enim prius
per Christum parta est justitia, nobis tamen non cedit in justificationem,
priusquam fide applicamus. Res simili constabit: ut quis debtor absolvatur,
requiritur 1. ut sponsor persolvat debitum. 2. ut creditor in ea acquiescat. 3.
ut debtor eandem solutionem acceptet, and sibi propriam faciat: ita ut nos rei
peccatores absolvamur a reatu, and justificemur, non solum requiritur
persolutio debiti, a Christo facta, sed desideratur insuper acceptatio, and
imputatio Patris, and applicatio fidei: hinc est quod saepissime justificatio
fidei ascribitur, Romans 5. 1. and passim in Scripturis; and quousque increduli
manemus, ira Dei dicitur super nos manner, Joan. 3. 36.

Quarto, ut designet identitatem justificationis sub utroque Testamento, contra
Socinianum istud dogma, De fide in Deum sub Veteri, and in Christum sub Novo
Testamento: Cum tamen Apostolus ad Romans 4. cum ver. 3. dixisset, Abrahamum
credidisse, and imputatum esse ei ad justitiam: versibus 23, 24. addit,
Scriptum hoc esse propter nos, quibus futurum est, ut imputetur ea. Unde
luculenter consiat, eundem modum per eandem fidem utrobique factam peccatoris
justificationem, qui ultimus quaestionis terminus.

Quinto, Ad justificationem:] hoc est, ut ejus justitiae participes facti
credentes, and pro justis a Deo habeantur; and peccatorum remissionem
recipiant, ita ut huius intuitu, Deus eos and a peccatorum reatu absolvat, and
justos pronunciet: (haec enim justificationis vox includit, ut infra patebit).
Non dissimulandum est, ortas hac etiam de re inter nostros Theologos
controversias; dum alii remissionem peccatorum asserunt esse effectum
imputationis justitiae passivae, ut Piscator, and qui eum sequuntur: alii
utriusque justitiae effectum esse contendunt, ut Calvinus, and Chamierus, p.
193. de quibus infra erit opportuniter determinandi locus. Interea haec
sufficiant ad terminorum explicationem. Quaestionis statum iam aggredior.

Quatuor praecipuas and celebriores observavi de imputatione Doctoru^
Sententiae quatuor de Justificatione. Sentent. 1.
sententias. Prima est eorum, qui satisfactionis, and meriti Christi ultro
agnoscunt imputationem, non autem ut sit nostra coram Deo justitia. sed ut
valeat ad impetrandam justitiam inhaerentem, qua formaliter justificemur: haec
Bellarmini, and recepta est Pontificiorum sententia.

Secunda est eorum, qui omnem justitiae Christi imputationem de medio Sentent.
2.
tollunt: sed fidem volunt esse ipsam justitiam imputatam ( loco illo Apostoli
ad Romans 4. 4. (...) intellecto) quam ex divina acceptilatione perinde valere
aiunt cum justitia perfecta, and legi omnimode adaequata. Audite ipsum Socinum,
lib. 4. c. 4. de Servatore: ubi rationem exhibens quare fides dicitur imputari
Abrahamo: Quia, inquit, Deo visum est fidem nostram justitiae loco nobis
ducere: and cap. 8. Non aliam, inquit, praeterea imputationem in salute nostra
aeterna intervenire agnoscendum, quam pro justis haberi a Deo, quicunque ex
Christi praescripto, ipsi ex animo obedirent. Confundunt viz. Sociniani fidem
cum obedientia. Smalcius disp. 4. contra Fratzium, Licet, inquit, fides nostra
non mereatur vitam aeternam, tamen Deus ita in ea acquiescit, ac si vitam
aeternam mereatur. Cui sententiae affine est illud decantatum (...) credere
Arminianorum, hoc solum (quantum ego intelligo) cum discrimine: quod Arminiani
agnoscunt justitiam Christi ut causam meritoriam, quam Sociniani prorsus
repudiant. Ipsum, si placet, audite Arminium, Epist. ad Hypol. Dico, inquit,
fidem imputari propter Christum and justitiam ejus: In qua enuntiatione fides
est objectum imputationis, Christus vero, and obedientia ejus est causa
justificationis impetratoria, and meritoria, quia Christus cum obedientia sua
est objectum nostrae fidei, and non objectum justificationis, and imputationis
divinae, quasi Deus nobis Christi justitiam imputat ad justitiam, quod fieri
nequit. Haec Arminius.

Tertia est eorum, qui Christum satisfecisse, and mortem nostro loco subiisse
Sentent. 3.
existimant, ita ut haec loco justitiae nobis imputatur, cujus consequens
ponunt peccatorum remissionem, in qua sola statuunt justificationem nostram:
nostro autem loco Christum legem implevisse, vel ejus obedientiam activam
imputari ad justitiam prorsus negant. Haec Piscatoris, Forbesii, Wottoni,
Windelini, Hammondi, aliorumque opinio est. Hi scilicet, dum pro veritate
militant, insutilem justitiae Christi togam dilacerant, and dividunt; dum
Sociniani and Pontificii propriis superbiunt iustitiae pannis: ipsi Sociniani,
licet utriusque imputationem negant and rident, in activam tamen vehementius
invehuntur: multo magis quam poenarum persolutio detestanda est Christi
justitiae imputatio. Verba sunt Socini, cap. 4. lib. 4. de Servatore.

Quarta est eorum, qui utriusque justitiae imputationem propugnant, and
Sentent. 4
tuentur, and quod utraque sit nostrae justificationis materia coram Deo, and
eodem prorsus modo imputata credentibus, ideo, Deus ut respicit credentes in
Christo moriente, quasi ipsi dedissent poenas; ita in eodem Sponsore Christo,
legem adimplente, quasi ipsi perfect implevissent, and utraque simul ad
perfectam justificationem imputatur. Fatentur quotquot sunt Theologi activae
obedientiae necessitatem. Sociniani, ad exemplum. 2. Alii, ut sit conditio
requisita in persona Mediatoris and Sacerdotis. 3. Ut ob hanc sincera nostra
obedientia grata Deo sit, and accepta: ita Hammondus. 4. Ut sit nostra coram
Deo justitia a Deo donata loco nostro praestita, and fide apprehensa and
applicata: haec doctissimorum Theologorum men's est, and sententia; Chamieri,
Maccovii, Scarpii, Polani, Riveti, Gomari, Dounami, etc. et, unius instar
omnium, Davenantii. Quibus ego inpraesentiarum meum adjicio calculum, dum
assero, Totam Christi justitiam credentibus imputari ad justificationem. Haec
breviter et succincte de quaestionis statu: sequuntur quatuor conclusiones pari
brevitate discutiendae.

Prima Conclusio. Justitia nostra non valet ad justificationem coram Conclus. 1.
Deo. Cum autem ea duplex est, Habitualis, sive inhaerens; Actualis et
exercita: utramque excludimus ab aliqua causalitate, sive efficiente, sive
formali in nostra justificatione. In hac conclusione litem intendimus
Pontificiis, qui Concilium Tridentinum sequuti, justitiam inhaerentem et operum
statuunt justificationis nostrae causam coram Deo, dum nostram de imputatione
doctrinam vellicant; ac si omne^ prorsus justitiam inhaerentem, et studium
sanctitatis inane redderet, et frustraneum. Hoc jacto prius fundamento,
procedit tota Castellionis disputatio de justificatione, qui (quasi nos omnem
realem justitiam de medio tolleremus) dicit, page 13. Hoc ostendere Christi vel
infirmitatem, si non posset; vel malignitatem, si non vult nos inhaerenter and
vere justos efficere.

Eadem nostram onerat sententiam calumnia Socinus, lib. 4. cap. 4. de
Servatore: Ut salvi simus, inquit, non necesse est, ut a vitiis vere
abstineamus, sed ut abstinuisse censeamur. Ut utrique calumniae occurramus, has
brevissime propeno Theses et Theoremata.

Primo dicimus, Inseparabiliter conjunctam esse justitiam imputativam, Thesis 1.
et inhaerentem: et Christum simul factum esse credenti et justificationem et
sanctificationem, affirmante Apostolo, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Secundo dicimus, Frustra and temerarie sibi dejustitia Christi adblandiri,
These. 2.
qui sanctitati operam non dat, and studio bonorum operum: quippe fidem istam,
qua Christus apprehenditur, profitemur cum Apostolo esse operantem per
charitatem, Gal. 5. 6.

Tertio dicimus, Per utramque justitiam, inhaerentem viz. and imputatam These. 3.
nos vere justos denominari: hac relative and perfect, illa inchoate,
subjective, and imperfecte.

Quarto, Agnoscimus justitiae inhaerenti and actuali suam conferri mercedem,
These. 4.
non autem ex merito sed ex gratia.

Quinto, Fatemur hanc justitiam valere ad nostram justificationem These. 5.
coram hominibus, quippe quae fructus, and (...) est justificationis; licet non
coram Deo: quam distinctionem apertissime innuit Apostolus, Gal. 3. 11. (...):
operibus legis declarative justificari coram hominibus nuspiam negat Apostolus.

Sexto dicimus, Hanc justitiam Deo placere and gratam esse, non autem These. 6.
ex suo merito and dignitate, sed ut effectus Spiritus, and ex gratia Dei, ob
meritum, and justitiam Mediatoris.

Septimo, Agnoscimus justitiam operum esse ornamentum conversationis, These. 7.
necessaria antecedentia salutis, fructus fidei justificantis, cui tum ex
legis, and voluntatis divinae obligatione, tum ex debito gratitudinis studere
debemus. Interim,

Octavo, Negamus hanc justitiam esse formam nostrae justificationis, These. 8.
vel eam, ob quam Deus nos justos pronuntiat, and ad vitam aeternam acceptare
dignatur. Idque hoc duplici ducti argumento:

1. Haec sententia Pontificiorum repugnat and voci, and naturae
justificationis, quae passim in Scripturis designat forensem, and judicialem
absolutionem, and acceptationem, non infusionem inhaerentis justitiae: si enim
hoc prae se fert justificatio, opus Deo gratum proculdubio efficeret, quam quod
gratissimum, qui impium justificaret, qui tamen, Prove. 17. 15. dicitur esse
abominationi Jehovaeh. Pontificiis etiam repugnat vis vocis Graecae (...), quae
semper denotat sententiae pronuntiationem, non justitiae infusionem, utpote
quae in Scripturis opponitur (...), in judicium vocare, and condemnare; at quis
sanus affirmaret condemnationem esse injustitiae infusionem, and non potius
morti adjudicationem, cui cum ex diametro opponitur justificatio, necessario
designat non infusionem, sed absolutionem a reatu, and acceptationem ad vitam.

II. Non valet nostra justitia ad justificationem coram Deo, quia ^a omnia,
quae in ea justitia, qua possimus in conspectu Dei justificari, requiruntur, in
nostra quali quali justitia desiderantur. In ea enim, qua quis justificari
potest, justitia requiritur:

1. Omnimoda and absolutissima perfectio, quam postulat tum Dei sanctitas, tum
legis indispensabilis obligatio.

2. Adaequatio ad legem, and voluntatem divinam: eaque tum, 1. Extensiva, tum
ratione objecti, praeceptorum viz. and negativorum, quibus opponuntur
commissionis peccata; and affirmativorum, quibus repugnant omissiones;
Apostolus enim eum reum factum esse omnium pronuntiat, qui in uno impegerit,
Jacob. 2. 10. tum ratione temporis and durationis. Ei enimvero, qui semel a
legis norma aberraverit, ut per legem justificetur impossible prorsus est,
quippe qui, juxta legis rigorem and sententiam, morti et condemnationi
adjudicatur, Gal. 3. 10. neque potest nostra perfectissima justitia injuriam
divinae Majestati per minimam legis transgressionem illatam compensare. 2.
Intensiva, ratione subjecti, ut fiat toto cord, et tota anima, ut ne tantillum
a debita intensione deficiat: nullibi autem reperiri tam perfectam justitiam,
ut plenissime demonstremus, fidenter appellamus Scripturas, et sanctissimorum
hominum conscientias. Scripturae eum mendacem pronuntiant, qui se peccatum
habere non dixerit, 1 Joan. 1. 8. Supposito autem vel semel commisso peccato,
perfectissima nostra obedientia ejus reatum tollere non potest: quid? quod
justitia nostra inhaerens reliquiis peccati foedatur, et justitia operum
plurimis laborat infirmitatibus, (...), inquit Apostolus, Jac. 3. 2. Quod si
Sanctorum experientiam attestamur, Davidem videre est Dei severitate^ serio
deprecantem, Psalm. 143. 2. Ne congrediaris, inquit, in judicio cum servo tuo,
nam non esset justus coram te ullus vivens. Paulum habemus se confitentem
peccatorum maximum, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Imo se fatetur exinde non justificari, licet
nullius rei sibi conscius est, 1 Cor. 4. 4. Jobum, Danielem habemus in
Scripturis peccata sua confitentes: Paulum saepius justitiae suae renuntiantem,
Phil. 3. 8, 9. Imo totam Ecclesiam legimus, suam astimantem justitiam, ut
panniculum abjectissimum, Isa. 64. 6. Imo, ipsos testes advocamus adversarios,
qui non ausi sint in sua justitia coram tribunali Dei se sistere. Notum est
illud Bellarmini, Tutissimum est, etc. At multiplex habent adversarii refugium:
Pontificii dicunt, Scripturas a justificatione excludere solum opera legis
Caeremonialis, vel a natura praestitas. Cui opinioni repugnat quod Apostolus
opera credentis Abrahami a justificatione removet, ad Romans 4. 3. At Christi
merito debemus (inquiunt Pontificii) quod haec justitia valeat ad
justificationem; at hoc revera elevat meritum, and justitiam Christi, quasi ad
nostram redemptionem per se non sufficeret. Confugiunt denique ad
acceptilationem divinam, quasi propter Christi justitiam Deus nostram,
imperfectam licet justitiam, loco perfectae haberet; quae opinio necessario
ponit, vel legis, ex part saltem, abrogationem, quasi eam, quam prius,
justitiam non postularet; vel Deum insinuat fallibilis judicii, and falsae
existimationis, quippe qui imperfectam loco perfectae justitiae duceret, quod
parum abest a blasphemia, Romans 2 2.

Conclusio secunda. Justificatio peccatoris coram Deo fit per imputationem
Conclus. 2.
justitiae: cujus conclusionis veritas ex antedictis patet; quippe cum
inhaerens justitia impar sit ad hunc effectum producendum, opus erit justitia
aliena, and nobis imputata: tertium enim justificationis modum Adversariorum
acutissimi excogitare non potuerunt. Haec conclusio contra eos militat, qui
justificationis naturam in solitaria and nuda peccatorum remissione ponunt,
quae Piscatoris sententia est, and aliorum, quotquot sunt, omnium, qui activae
Christi obedientiae imputationem negant. Ultro fatemur, peccatorum remissionem
esse partem justificationis integrantem, and cum imputatione inseparabiliter
conjunctam, at solam remissionem ad nostram justificationem sufficere negamus;
tum quia Scripturae saepius loquuntur de remissione and imputatione, ut
distinctis per Christum impetratis, and collatis beneficiis: ut videre est ad
Romans 4. 7, 8. uti olim de Christo Daniel prophetavit: fore viz. ut expiet
iniquitatem, and adducat justitiam perpetuam, Dan. 9. 24. Neutra per se valet
ad nostram justificationem and salutem. Poenae, quam commeruimus, respondet
peccatorum remissio; culpae, quam contraximus, iustitiae imputatio: per
remissionem tollitur obligatio ad mortem; per imputationem communicatur
justitia ad vitam: remissio liberat a damnatione; imputatio justitiae dat jus
ad salutem: remissio efficit non injustos, imputatio vere justos, quod
indispensabiliter requiritur, ut vitam assequamur: remissio peccati reatum
tollit, non maculam; haec autem ut removeatur necessum est, priusquam possidere
possumus istud coeleste regnum, in quod non intrabit quidquam, quod inquinat,
Apoc. 21. 27. Ipsi Adamo vitam non debebatur, ex eo quod reatus expers fuit;
sed ex perfectae obedientiae, and perseverantis justitiae condition. Cujus in
Protoplasto defectum sequuta est, and in totam posteritatem derivata, and
obligatio ad omne genus mortem, omnisque justitiae privatio. Cui duplici malo
medetur peccatorum remissio, quae tollit obligationem ad mortem, and justitiae
imputatio, quae primaevae rectitudinis and perfectae obedientiae locum and vim
supplet. Supponamus hominem per non imputationem peccatorum restitui in
pristinum statum, quo culpa vacabat, and unde per peccatum exciderat, at in
isto statu desiderabatur insuper perfecta and illibata sanctimonia, and legis
impletio (quam etiamnum ad vitam aeternam postulant Dei sanctitas, legis
obligatio, coelestis haereditatis conditio, and qualitas) quam cum nos
praestare non possumus, opus erit alterius, Mediatoris viz. justitia imputata,
qua coram Deo justi habeamur, and ad vitam aeternam acceptemur; quod fit, non
solum adoptionis jure, and titulo; sed justificationis, quam ideo vocat
Apostolus (...), Romans 5. 18.

Conclusio tertia. Justificatio peccatoris fit per imputationem justitiae
Conclus. 3.
Christi: quam imputationem acriter impugnat Bellarminus, lib. 2. cap. 7. de
justificat. and quasi (...) dogma uno ore clamitant Pontificii, and Sociniani.
Paucis igitur videamus, quibus and Scripturae testimoniis, and rationum
momentis statuminari potest haec sententia. Passim depraedicat Scriptura illam
justitiam nostram, and nos in ea justos pronuntiat, quod aliter quam per
imputationem fieri (...) prorsus and impossible. Hinc Christus factus dicitur
credentibus (...), 1 Cor. 1. 30. non inhaerenter, vel effective solum, illud
enim in proximo termino exprimitur, cum Christus factus nobis dicitur (...)
sanctificatio: beatum eum depraedicat David, cui Deus justitiam imputat, uti ab
Apostolo citatur, Romans 4. 6. Non nostram intelligit Apostolus, quippe imputari
dicitur (...), absque operibus; and Deus justificare dicitur (...), v. 5. ergo
non ex propriae justitiae intuitu. Ita Romans 5. 18. dicimur justi constituti
(...), sive unius hominis, viz. Christi; vel unam justitiam, hoc est, perfectam
and consummatam intelligamus perinde est, quippe utroque modo Christi imputatam
justitiam designat: Ita 2 Cor. 5. 21. fieri dicimur (...), non inhaerenter in
nobis, sed in Christo imputative, hinc saepius repetita Prophetarum vaticinia
de Christo, justitia nostra, Jer. 33. 16. 23. 6. etc. Hinc etiam justificatio
per Christum semper opponitur operibus legis, and justitiae nostrae: quid? quod
ea, qua justificamur, justitia (...) saepius appellatur, non causative solum,
ita enim legis justitia, and inhaerens Dei est justitia, cui tamen e diametro
saepius opponitur, quod ad justificationem attinet, fidei, and Christi
justitia, ut apertissime constat ex Phil. 3. 9. and cum justitia Christi ea
sola sit, quae perfectae and justitiae divinae respondeat, and legi adaequatur,
and qua solum induti, fidenter possumus coram tribunali Dei comparere, ea
utique erit justificationis nostrae causa, quae tamen nostra fieri aliter non
potest, quam per imputationem: fusius explicat hoc Scripura duplici facta
comparatione, and analogia.

1. Ex comparatione primi and secundi Adami, quam apertissime insinuat
Apostolus, Romans 5. versib. 12, 18, 19. Sicut per unum hominem peccatum introiit
in mundum, and per peccatum mors: and sicut per unam offensam reatus venit in
omnes homines in condemnationem; ^ta per unius justitiam beneficium redundat in
omnes homines ad justificationem vitae. Sicut enim per contumaciam unius
hominis peccatores constituti sunt multi; ita per unius obedientiam justi
constituentur multi. Ad cujus commatis explicationem haec monenda sunt: 1o.
Apostolum instituere comparationem inter primum and secundum Adamum, ut duo
hominum capita, and personas publicas; hunc posterorum omnium, illum singulorum
credentium. 2o. inter modum communicationis Adami inobedientiae and Christi
justitiae. At Adami peccatum nostrum fit per propagationem respondet
Bellarminus: fatemur nativam corruptionem transire in nos per propagationem, at
reatum primi actus peccaminosi nobis imputari. Causalis enim propagatio peccati
non impedit imputationem, quatenus nos Deus respexit, ut in Adamo peccantes:
pari ratione utramque justitiam and inhaerentem, and imputatam habemus a
Christo; at hanc absolutionis and justificationis causam asserimus, non illam.
3o. Utrinque par ratio, and fundamentum communicationis: 1. Quod Adami peccatum
imputetur posteris provenit a nostra cum eo, ut defectionis capite, unione. 2.
Ob foedus cum Adamo, ejusque posteris initum. Ita fundamentum and ratio
imputationis justitiae Christi duplex est: 1. Unio nostra cum Christo per
fidem. 2. Foedus inter Patrem et Christum sancitum de opere redemptionis
peragendo, quo Christus se sistit ut sponsorem, et fide-jussorem nostrum; unde
fit, ut ejus justitia a Deo, ut nostra, et nostro loco praestita habeatur,
proindeque nobis imputetur.

2o. Ex analogia modi, quo Christus factus est peccatum pro nobis, et nos in eo
justitia. Hanc comparationem innuit Apostolus, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Fecit enim, ut qui
peccatum non novit, pro nobis peccatum esset, ut nos efficeremur justitia Dei
in eo. Qui Christum peccatorem factum esse inhaerenter asserit, blasphemus
erit, et satisfactionis meritum tollit: qui peccatum hoc in loco exponunt
victimam et sacrificium pro peccato, non multum ab Apostoli scopo aberrare
videntur. Interim affirmamus, ut fiat victima, necessum fore, ut nostra ei
imputarentur peccata (unde cum defectoribus Christum annumeratum fuisse
legimus, Isa. 53. 12.) prout omnia populi peccata hirco emissario imposita
fuisse constat, Levitic. 16. 21, 22. Ut summatim igitur hoc contrahamus
argumentum: Christus imputative pro nobis factus est peccatum; ergo nos in eo
imputative justi constituti sumus. Hanc conclusionem ponimus.

1o. Contra istud (...) credere Arminianorum, quorum vestigia (uti in aliis
Theologiae capitibus ita in hoc) premit Goodwinus in peculiari tractatu, quo
fidei imputationem in sensu proprio probare conatur; ac si instar legalis et
perfectae justitiae a Deo aestimaretur ipse credendi actus: dum locum istum ad
Roman. 4. 3. literaliter intelligunt; Credidit Abraham Deo, and imputatum est
ei ad justitiam. Quo in loco fidem materialiter intelligendum non esse, quasi
merito et dignitati fidei debebatur Abrahami justificatio: sed relative, quod
credenti justitia fuit gratis imputata, ideoque ver. 11. (...), hoc est fide
apprehensa, vocatur; vel organice, quod Abraham fide acceperit justitiam a Deo
gratis donatam: haec abunde satis evincunt, ut fides sit proprie nostra coram
Deo justitia.

1. Repugnant istae, quibus nostra laborat fides, imperfectiones.

2. Repugnat officio and naturae fidei, quae extrinsecam and alienam applicat
justitiam: hinc per fidem dicimur Christum recipere, Joan. 1. 12. eaque, qua
justificamur, justitia dicitur (...), Romans 3. 22. and (...), Romans 10. 6. Fides
igitur non est res imputata, sed instrumentum applicativum, and receptivum
istius justitiae, qua justificamur.

3. Justitia fidei universaliter opponitur justitiae operum. Ei, qui non
operatur, sed credit, imputatur fides in justitiam, Romans 4. 5. Ergo fides, qua
opus, non valet nec acceptatur ad justificationem. Imo Apostolus Paulus suae
nuntium mittit justitiae, ut fidei justitiam stabiliret, ad Philip. 3. 9. Ut
comperiar, inquit, non habens meam justitiam, sed eam quae ex fide: at vero
(...) credere est pars justitiae nostrae.

4. Quidni aliae virtutes and gratiae ad justitiam imputarentur aeque ac fides,
nisi ea relative and ut Christi receptiva consideratur? cum pariter gratuitae
repugnarent justificationi, Romans 11. 6.

5. Si fides, qua opus, justificaret, esset vel solitary, vel conjunctim cum
justitia Christi. Si prius dicatur, frustranea redditur justitia Christi: si
posterius, imperfecta. Fidem igitur ad justitiam imputari, intelligi debet,
metonymice, relative, concretive, seu connotative cum objecto, quod
apprehendit: Christum viz. and ejus justitiam, quae materia est nostrae
justificationis coram Deo.

Secundo, Contra istud Socinianorum dogma, quo statuunt Christi imitationem
esse nostrae justificationis causam; Ita Socinus, ( cap. 6. par. 4. de Christo
Servatore.) Justificamur, inquit, per imitationem Christi, qua nos, ita ut
Christus, Deo obedimus: and fidem ipsam definit esse imperfectam legis
observantiam. Ultro fatemur, Summam religionis esse imitari, quem colimus: at
interim hanc imitationem ab omni in justificatione nostra causalitate
removemus, (ornamentum agnoscimus conversationis, negamus esse instrumentum
justificationis, non enim per nostram obedientiam, sed (...), nos justificari
cum Apostolo profitemur, Romans 5. 19.) cum hoc de imitatione Christi, ut causa
justificationis nostrae, dogma and (...) est, and (...), quod aliter mirum
esset Apostolum tacito silentio praeteriisse, cum ex industria justificationis
doctrinam tractat. Smalcius ( in Praefat. Catechism. Racov.) hoc in Socinianae
religionis laudem jactitat, quod Ecclesiae suae maxim prae aliis reformatae
sunt a Papatu: quod non minus insulse, quam superbe dictum esse, eorum de
praeviis dispositionibus, de viribus liberi arbitrii, de perfectione hominis in
hac vita, de concupiscentia, and alia id genus dogmata, quibus cum Pontificiis
conspirant, abunde satis testantur. Sin minus, ex hac, quam prae manibus
habemus, doctrina Sociniana luculenter constat eos una cum Pontificiis
convenire in articulo justificationis. Quid enim aliud sonat Socinianorum
imitatio Christi, quam Pontificiorum justitia, quam venditant, inhaerens, and
operum? quam cum, in prima conclusione, satis eventilavimus, pergamus ad
quartam and ultimam conclusionem, quae haec est.

Conclusio quarta. Justificatio peccatoris coram Deo fit per imputationem
Conclus. 4.
totius justitiae Christi; vel, tota justitia Christi imputatur credentibus ad
justificationem. In quam conclusionem insurgunt e nostris etiam Theologis
nonnulli, qui satisfactionem, and mortem Christi imputationem ultro fatentur:
justitiam tamen activam, nostro loco praestitam, and in justitiam nobis
imputatem, ex professo negant. Nos parem utriusque rationem, and necessitatem,
tum Scripturae testimoniis, tum rationum momentis brevissime demonstrabimus.
Passivae obedientiae imputationem propugnant istae, quae Christum se pro nobis
(...) dedisse affirmant: activae imputationem, sive impletionem legis a Christo
factam credentibus imputari, hae luculenter satis testantur Scripturae; ad Romans
10. 4. ubi Christus dicitur (...), finis legis in justitiam omni credenti.
Finis legis est eos justificare, qui eam observant, quem finem quo minus
assequamur, impedit non legis qualitas, sed carnis nostrae vitiositas, cui malo
medetur Christi obedientia; per quam fide apprehensam hunc finem legis
consequimur, ut coram Deo justificaremur, ac si in propriis personis
perfectissime implevissemus. Apertissime explicat hunc locum Chrysostomus,
(...), inquit, (...): hoc est, Christi justitiam imputatam. ad Romans 8. 4.
dicitur (...): hoc est, jus legis in nobis compleri: non dioit (...) a nobis,
sed (...), in nobis: hoc est, ut Christo unitis, and ejus perfectam obedientiam
per fidem participantibus. (...) h^c designat totum lud, quod a nobis lex
potuit exigere, viz. tum poenae persolutionem, tum perfectam obedientiam, quam
and lex primario, and jure indispen* sabili postulat, quam itidem in Scriptura
(...) s^pissime designat: ut Luc. 1. 6. Erant ambo justi in conspectu^ Dei,
incedentes in omnibus (...). Ad Gal. 4. 4. Christus dicitur pro nobis (...),
factus sub lege: hoc est, tum poenas comminante, tum obedientiam strictam
postulante. Plenissime ad hanc rem facit illud Apostoli ad Romans 5. 18. (...),
per unius justitiam beneficium dicitur redundans in justificationem, quo in
loco obedientiam Christi designari constat: 1. ex oppositione ad Adami (...),
seu peccatum, quod proculdubio erat legis violatio. 2. Ex terminis
aequipollentibus, ver. 19. (...): quae voces justitiam activam and obedientiam
designant. Vnicum superaddam Scripturae locum, Matthew. 3. 15. ubi Christus
Joannem alloquitur, (...), decet nos implere omnem justitiam: qui locus
solidissime nostram firmabit sententiam, si Chrysostomo fides habenda est, qui
hisce verbis explicat Christi mentem; quasi videlicet dixisset; (...). Liceat
mihi frui patientia vestra and candore, dum argumentorum, quae hanc evincunt
veritatem, attingo capita. Obedientiam Christi passivam, seu satisfactionem
postulabat

1. Vindicatrix Dei justitia, cui vt satisfiat necessum fuit, prius* quam
peccator, salva Dei justitia and veritate, absolvi, and a commeritis poenis
liberari possit.

2. Impotentia nostra, qua satisfaciendo non eramus pro offensa infiniti
demeriti,

3. Ut valeat nobis ad justificationem, requiritur, ut quodammodo fiat nostra,
quod aliter, quam per imputationem fieri non possit: hanc autem solum ad plenam
nostram justificationem non sufficere, quin insuper desideretur imputatio
justitiae activae, haec evidentissime evincunt.

Primo, Sponsoris officium, quod Christum loco nostro subivisse testatur
Apostolus ad Hebr. 7. 22. In fide-jussore autem duo desiderantur, 1. ut totum
persolvat debitum, 2. ut persolvat loco debitoris, quem ob hanc solutionem, ac
si ipse dedisset, creditor absolvit, and dimittit: ita Christus vas and sponsor
pro nobis factus, totum, quo obarati, neque tamen solvendo eramus, persolvit
debitum, quod deplex erat, 1o. Obedientiae. 2o. Paenae: hoc ex indispensabilis
creationis lege, illud ex primo quod commisimus peccato; hoc legi, illud
justitiae divinae debebamus: utrumque igitur persolvit Christus, and perfectam
praestando obedientiam, and mortem, quam lex minabatur peccatoribus, subeundo:
utrumque loco nostro, ut per satisfactionem nos a maledictione, and damnatione
liberaret, quam lex minabatur, and per perfectam obedientiam jus nobis ad
salutem acquirat, quam Deus legem factoribus promisit. At Christi obedientiam
pro se debitam objiciunt Adversarii, proinde nobis ut imputetur impossible
est. Per hypostaticam unionem Christum solutum fuisse ab obligatione legis
existimant viri acutissimi Maccovius, and Perkinsius. Sed esto, debita licet
sit, potest esse meritoria and nobis cedere in justitiam: 1o. quia voluntary
suscepta sit humana natura, proindeque haec obedientia erat solum ex condition
and suppositione necessaria: 2o. ob personae dignitatem: 3o. ex pacto and
foedere cum Patre inito: 4o. ex gratiosa Patris acceptatione; uti Rex filio
infensus, placari potest meritis Filii, licet omnis ejus, ut subditi,
observantia sit Regi debita: neque tamen hinc tollitur nostra obedientia, ad
quam nihilominus tenemur, tum ex indispensabili legis obligatione, tum ut
debitum observatiae and gratitudinis.

Secundo, Justitia and sanctitas Dei: illa mortem, haec obedientiam perfectam
postulat; quarum primam cum far non potuimus sine aeterno salutis dispendio,
nec alteram praestare ob naturae vitium, and imbecillitatem, Deus credentes
respiciat oportet, ut in Christo utramque persolvente, vel in aeternum
desperent de justificatione and salute.

Tertio, Legis indispensabilitas et perpetua obligatio. Christus dicit se non
venisse ut legem solveret, Matthew. 5. 17. Imo Apostolus profitetur legem per
fidem stabiliri, Romans 3. 31. Lex obedientiam primario postulat, secundario and
per accidens poename ergo ex eo, quo Adversarii evincunt satisfactionis, and
mortis Christi necessitatem ob legis comminationem, ut nos a morte liberemer, a
colligimus necessitatem perfectae Christi obedientiae ob legis mandatum, ex
cujus imputatione ad vitam acceptamur. Lex and poenam, and obedientiam
peccatoris postulat; Hoc fac, and vives; and, In die, quo comederis, morieris.
Lex enim non patitur poenam, nec justitiam vicariam; hoc Evangelii gratiae
debemus, quod fide-jussoris Christi obedientia and satisfactio nebis imputatur
ad justificationem: si Christum spectamus ex vi, and rigore legis; si
nosmetipsos ex gratia, justificationem and salutem consequimur.

Quarto, Utriusque imputationem postulat salus nostra: passivae, ut expietur
peccatum jam commissum; activae, ut satisfiat legis mandato, and vitae conditio
impleatur: hujus, ut a morte liberemur; illius, ut vita and aeternitate
donemur: neque enim poena abstracte and solitary considerata valet ad vitae
meritum and impetrationem, quae non perpessioni poenarum, sed perfectae
obedientiae promittitur, Levit. 18. 5.

Quinto, Adversariorum sententia elevat honorem Christi, ejusque justitiae
minuit efficaciam. Si enim ut nobis praeberet obedientiae exemple (quem
secundarium obedientiae Christi usum agnoscimus) Socinum sequuti, Christum and
satisfecisse and implevisse legem asseramus; detrahamus and merito obedientiae,
and personae dignitati: quippe and viri pii, and Martyrs nobis obedientiae
tramitem ostendunt, and sanctitatis exemplum praebent: neque solum requiritur
ut praeparatio passivae, vel conditio personae Mediatoris, ut victima fiat pro
peccatis: ad hoc enim suffecisset originalis vel habitualis Christi justitia,
and frustraneum foret Christum vitam duxisse tam sanctam, tot undique miseriis
stipatam and intertectam. Quid? quod and Dei gratiam, and misericordiam,
Christi honorem, Christianorum consolationem quam maxim promovet haec de
justitiae activae Christi imputatione doctrina: quod fusius demonstrandum
foret, si temporis, vel patientiae vestrae dudum lassatae ratio pateretur. Si
qui adsunt, qui hac de re secus sentiunt, facile mihi persuaserim, ab iis me
veniam impetraturum, quam, Adversariorum iniquissimus, Socinus hujus sententiae
patronis olim indulsit (lib. 8. cap. 4. de Christo Servatore) cujus verba
coronidis loco apponam. Non multum refert, inqnit, sive Christi imputatione,
sive quacunque alia ratione fieri justificatio dicetur, dummodo vitae
sanctimonia salva sit: and cap. 1. Condonabit istam opinionem ( de imputatione
loquitur) proculdubio benignissimus Deus, utpote ab hominis malitia non
proficiscentem, si vitae sanctimonia, quam a nobis omnino requirit, incolumis
remaneat. At non est quare Haereticorum passimus formidet pietatis dispendium
ex imputationis doctrina: nisi eum obsurdescerent Haeretici, ad ravim usque
clamamus, inhaerentem justitiam inseparabiliter cum imputata conjunctam, and
studium bonorum operum fructum and effectum asserimus fidei, qua haec justitia
Christi applicatur: meritum bonorum operum repudiamus, usum and necessitatem
profitemur; excludimus ex actu justificationis, non ab homine justificato:
interim asserimus, Justitiam Christi solum valere, eamque totam desiderari ad
nostram justificationem, and concludimus,

Tota Christi justitia imputatur credentibus ad justificationem. FINIS.
The qualification of a Gospel-Minister: in a Sermon on,
ACTS 18. 24. And a certain Jew, named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent
man, mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus.
NOthing more conduces to the souls comfort, and establishment of any Church,
then the constant presence of a learned, and the pious example of a religious
pastor: as nothing betrays people sooner to ignorance, irreligion, and
apostacy, then a want or absence of a judicious and religious minister. Moses
cannot Exodus 32. 1.
stir from the Israelites to the mount, though upon necessary occasion of
converse with God, but presently they fall into Idolatry, worshipping the
calf: and it is no great wonder if wolves should make a prey of the flock, when
they have no shepherd. Let itinerarie non-residents think of this: S. Paul was
deeply sensible of it; and therefore the care of all churches being upon him,
which he mentions as an additionall trouble to all his other: when ever the 2
Cor. 11. 28
work of the Gospel called him from any church, he was careful to leave, or
send another to them, as Titus to Crete, and Timothy to Titus 1. 5. 1 These. 3.
2.
the Thessalonians, to establish and confirm them in the faith: and here, when
he was necessitated to leave Ephesus to go to Jerusalem at the Passover
(conceiving that the fittest opportunity to spread and propagate the Gospel
there, rather then any other time of the year) he is careful to substitute
Apollos, (in which Calvin piously Calvin. in locum.
admires the providence of God over his church, not to suffer it without a
settled minister) who might recompense the loss of Paul, and water that church
which he had there planted. Apollos I say, one fully furnished for the work of
the Gospel, and most fit for Ephesus (ministerial gifts then proving most
useful, when right placed; the want of which has rendered many great Paul's,
and men of eminent abilities unprofitable, useless, and unsuccessfull) famous
Cor. in locum
then for Orators, and Philosophers, Ut artem art eluderet, that as Julian the
Apostate cried out when convinced, and non-pluss'd by the reasons of the
Christians, (...), that Theodoret. lib. 3. cap. 8.
they were caught in their own net, and beaten at their own weapons; so
Apollos here might by his heavenly and ravishing eloquence, catch them in the
net of the Gospel, who so much boasted of their fleshly and carnal wisdom.

Two things are considerable in the words.

1. The person, Apollos: the same, if you believe Grotius, with In locum. Romans
16. 10.
that Apelles S. Paul salutes and commends.

2. The qualification: that is twofold,

1. (...), An eloquent man.

2. (...), Mighty in the scriptures.

1. The person, Apollos: of whom I intended to have spoken little, or nothing,
but that I observe the Church-Levellers of our time, who would remove the
ancient landmarks, pull up the hedges, and lay the ministerial office open,
and in common to all, whose confidence, covetousness, or ambition makes them
pretend to Gifts; or whom the less judicious multitude out of faction, or
separation, or envy to the settled ministry, or affectation of noveltie, or
weakness and rashness shall judge gifted, though not called or ordained: they
make this instance of Apollos, as one of their asylums to flee to, whom they
allege as a gifted brother, no ordained preacher. Give me leave therefore to
suggest briefly some few hints to you, which may lead us into a more full
discovery of the person, and may drive these pretenders from that refuge, which
they have betaken themselves to in this instance of Apollos.

1. It is probable that Apollos (being an Alexandrian) was educated in the
school of S. Mark, who first planted the Christian faith here, as Eusebius
shows; or, as others conjecture, among the H^st. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Essens, who had a famous school at Alexandria, and, if you believe Baronius,
were convert Jews turned Christians; which he thinks probable, both because
those historians which speak of the Jews, as Josephus, Strabo, and the rest,
are wholly silent concerning this sect; and chiefly because all the sects of
the Jews, as Pharisees, Sadduces; Herodians, the scripture speaks of as enemies
to Christ, but we read of no opposition Christ met with from the Essens, nor
does Christ ever charge or denounce woes against them, as against the rest:
though I know others impute this to the fewness of that sect in Jerusalem,
whilst our Savior lived, or else to the peaceable quietness, and calm of
their spirit, not being given to contradiction, (as the Sadduces and Pharisees
were, men of more hot and fiery spirits) it being part of their religion, as it
is of too many of our times, to suffer every man in his; certain it is and
confessed of all, that they were very diligent, and industrious in searching
the scriptures of the old Testament, especially the Prophets, and so might
learn much of Christ; and here, it is likely, Apollos might get his large
scripture-knowledge, which he so powerfully managed to the conviction of the
Jews concerning Christ; for verse 28. it is said, that He mightily convinced
the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the scriptures, that Jesus was Christ.

2. Observe the place, where Apollos preached; it was not a Christian
constituted Church, but a Jewish Synagogue, verse 26. He began to speak boldly
in the Synagogue. It was a general, though corrupt, custom amongst the Jews
to indulge liberty to learned men, though no priests, to teach in their
Synagogues; as the Scribes and the Lawyers, which the Gospel every where speaks
of: upon which custom it was that S. Paul, though of the tribe of Benjamin,
was so often permitted to preach in their Synagogues, as we read throughout this
book of the Acts: hence the teaching of the Scribes is opposed to that
authority wherewith Christ preached. Mat. 7. 29. it is said, Christ taught the
people as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, who had none: So we
find Apollos here preaching in the Synagogue, non ut habens autoritatem, sed
scientiam, says the learned Estius, as making use of, and taking in locum, and
Mat. 4. v. ult.
advantage of that indulgence of the Jews to preach and spread the doctrine of
Christ.

3. Observe the time when he preached; it was when God for the more speedy and
effectual propagating of the Gospel poured out plentifully of the
extraordinary Gifts of his Spirit, and it would be rashness in any one to
assert, that Apollos was not extraordinarily Gifted: and if so, this instance
will nothing at all advantage those pretenders who want ordinary Gifts.

4. Consider that this Apollos was one of John's disciples; ver. 25. it is said,
He knew only the baptism of John, that is to say, the doctrine of John
concerning Christ to come; and it may probably be thought the contrary cannot
be proved, that he was authorized and commissionated by John to preach the
Gospel.

5. Observe what this Apollos was afterward; an eminent, public, and
authorized preacher in the Church of Corinth; S. Paul's helper and successor 1
Cor. 3. 6. I have planted (says Paul) and Apollo watered, and therefore S.
Paul calls him his brother, 1 Cor. 16. 12. and he is, totidem verbis, in
express terms called, a minister, 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who is Paul? or who is Apollos?
but ministers by whom ye believed; and so famous he was, that he has the
churches approbation of his Gifts, verse 27. and when he came to Corinth, he
was so eminent, that he proved the head of a sect and faction (which is the
highest ambition of their pretenders) 1 Cor. 1. 12. One says I am of Paul, and
I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ; and though this was after his
preaching here at Ephesus, yet I (reading of no ordination he received
afterward) have good reason to believe that he was now ordained.

6. Negative testimonies from Scripture in things circumstantiall are but
illogicall, and inartificiall arguments. God indeed has in things fundamental
to faith and holiness made a plentiful provision in scripture, which is able
to make a man wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17.
and perfect to every goodwork. To assume any thing as a rule of life; or
foundation of faith, more then that the scripture affords, is to impose upon
our selves, and defame the scriptures; but silence of scripture in things
circumstantiall, especially in particular instances, is not rationally
argumentative. Argumentum ab autoritate negante, sed non ab autoritate
negative, valet in Theologicis, says a reverend man of our own: if scripture
had said plainly, that Apollos was not ordained, the instance had been of some
force, but to argue, he was not ordained becaused the scripture does not say,
totidem verbis, he was so, is to me a very irrational and unsatisfactory
argument. Nay, if we consider the peremptory strictness of scripture-commands,
none should take this office upon him, but he that is called as was Aaron, and
that was done by the outward appointment Heb. 5. 4.
of Moses; and withal considering the Apostles care to leave Titus to ordain
in every city, and his strict charge to Timothy, to lay hands suddenly on no
man, to wit, without examination of his 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Gifts and abilities, and all this to prevent disorderly, promiscuous, daring
intrusion into the ministerial office; considering withal the solemn
separating of Barnabas and Paul by prayer and laying Acts 13. 12.
on of hands, which calling and appointment S. Paul frequently asserts to
uphold his authority amongst them to whom he wrote, as to the Romans he tells
them he was (...), separated Romans 1. 1.
unto the Gospel of Christ; laying these things and many more which might be
alleged together, we, I think, finding Apollos here preaching (which may
equally satisfy other instances brought out of scripture,) have good ground to
believe he was ordained, though the scripture be silent in it, when it does not
assert the contrary.

7. If all this will not satisfy the objectors, let me add this last by way
of concession; let those, who lay this instance as a foundation for a Babel of
confusion in the church (for there can be no order in a rude and promiscuous
parity) I say, let those pretenders demonstrate themselves to be Apollo's, men
eloquent, and mighty in the scriptures, and for my part (though I think those
most fit to sit in Paul's chair, who have been educated, and instructed at the
feet of Gamaliel) I profess, I see no great reason, or evidence of scripture,
why they may not be admitted to the ministerial office. But when either out of
weakness they dare not, or out of pride and faction they will not submit
themselves to the judgment and appointment of those whom scripture, precept,
Apostolical practice, and uninterrupted custom of the church has empowered to
set apart and authorize men for this office, and so enter in at the right door;
but will audaciously climb up some other way (excuse the expression from
uncharitableness, it is our Saviors concerning the Pharisees, who were like
intruders in these days) they are but thieves and robbers, stealing away the
hearts and affection of the people, yea, and the maintenance too from the right
and duly-constituted ministry.

These considerations of the person I humbly and willingly submit to your
judgments, and shall come now to those qualifications, which were the intended
subject of my discourse, when I first laid out my thoughts upon these words.

First, (...), which may have a fourfold reference,

1. To his skill in History and Antiquity; thus Lorinus understands the word:
a fit qualification for an Apollos, a minister of the Gospel, to be versed
especially in Ecclesiastical and Churchhistory, where he may observe the
various, and several providence of God protecting his church, the original
and growth of errors, arguments for the truth, and acquaint himself with those
supports and comforts which Christians have had in suffering for it, all which
are very useful for an Apollos.

2. To his knowledge in scripture; as if herein his eloquence consisted, not in
a vain pomp, and proud ostentation of words, but in a powerful and quaint
discovery of that majesticall elegancie and heavenly eloquence which is in
scripture: no greater eloquence any where then in scripture; he that will (...)
(which is a Metaphor, you know, taken from diggers in mines) search and dive
into them, shall find rich and precious mines of eloquence, golden Allegories,
height of Metaphors, and all other tropes and figures of Rhetoric more fully
and elegantly exemplified, then in any the most eloquent poet, or exactest
orator; which the learned Glassius in his Philologia sacra has admirably
discovered.

True indeed, a cursorie and non-observant negligent reader cannot discover it;
as a man, who only looks upon, but never digges into a mine, will never find
the treasure. S. Austin confesses Lib. 3. Confess. cap. 5.
that, whiles he was a Manichee, he had low and mean thoughts of scripture,
visa est mihi indigna, quam Tullianae dignitati compararem, says he: he
thought it not comparable to Tullies eloquence; but when he searched farther
into them, then he discovered that elegancie, which became the majesty of
Scripture-mysteries, and men acted by the Spirit of God, as you may see at
large in that excellent piece of his De doctrina Lib. 4. c. 6.
Christiana.

3. To the freedom and fluencie of his language; by which with a pleasing
violence he captivated the ears and hearts of his auditors: this is a great
gift of God, and a very requisite qualification of an Apollos, the want of
which made Moses decline the office, O my Lord, says he, I am not eloquent, I
am slow of speech, and of a Exodus 4. 10.
slow tongue, and could not be satisfied till God gave him the promise of more
then ordinary assistance, v. 12. I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what
thou shall say. This is that (...), the opening of the door of utterance, which
S. Paul exhorts the Colossians to pray for to God for him. A free and full
Coloss. 4. 3.
ability of expressing the conceptions of the mind (according to the
capacity of the Auditors) is an excellent and desirable ministerial gift,
without which the greatest parts often prove unedifying and unprofitable.

4. To his exquisite skill in all arts and sciences; and this the Greek word
(...) signifies, as Camerarius notes, and this too is a requisite qualification
for an Apollos, a minister of the Gospel. This was the eminency of Moses, that
he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, that is to say, the
liberal arts and sciences, Acts 7. 22.
which Austin compares to the Egyptian spoils transferred to the use and
service of the Israelites. This was the commendation of Daniel, that he was
cunning in all knowledge and understanding, Dan. 1. 4.
and skillful in all wisdom and learning. S. Paul was born at Tarsus, the
Metropolis of Cilicia, more famous then Athens (if we credit Strabo) for the
study of Philosophy and the Greek tongue, and afterward instructed by
Gamaliel at Jerusalem; so Apollos here is (...). The greater wonder and pity
both, that such knowledge, which was the real honor of those, should now be
our discredit and reproach: we being fallen into those times of which
Espencaeus complained, when Graece nosse suspectum erat, Hebraice prope
Haereticum, or, if you will speak in the more uncharitable language of our
times, Antichristian; when it is the cry of too many, what Festus cried out
against Paul, that too much learning instead Acts 26. 24.
of qualifying, and enabling any to be Apollos, ministers of the Gospel, does
but make us mad: I wish the want of it did not make them more such. But I shall
not now undertake the vindication of learning, from those uncharitable
imputations, which has lately been done by an ingenuous man amongst our
selves; but shall enter upon the second qualification of Apollos, which I
chiefly intended, (...), mighty in the Scriptures: which I shall speak of;
First, Doctrinally, in two particulars,

1. I shall show the excellency of Scripture-knowledge in it self.

2. The usefulness of it as to Apollos, a Minister of the Gospel.

Secondly, Practically in a few words of Application.

First the excellency of Scripture-knowledge in it self appears in these
considerations,

1. The excellency of things revealed in scripture, so sublime and spiritual,
that the light of nature, and the highest improvement of reason, could never
have discovered without divine revelation, as the secrets of Gods electing
love, reconciliation by Christ, justification by faith, adoption, the covenant
of grace: those are secrets which the eye of reason could never pry into;
these were mysteries hidden from ages and generations, but now manifested by
the Gospel. To these add the glorious mystery of the blessed Trinity, which
is wholly indemonstrable by natural reason; indeed, first supposing
scripture-revelation, there may possibly be some resemblances of it found in
the creation, as the esse, posse, and operari of every creature, or those three
common notions of Belng, O neness, Truth, Goodness, and many more which the
schools insist on; and there may be some argument to evince my faith not to be
against reason (though I have the greatest reason in the world to believe it,
because God says it) as that God should infinitely communicate himself, or from
the perfection of the number three, and the great account the Heathens had of
it; which arguments Estius urges, who yet confesses this mystery, abstracted
from divine revelation, wholly indemonstrable by any light of reason: this
mystery scripture discovers, There are three, who bare record in heaven, the 1
John 5. 7.
Father, the Son, and the Spirit; and these three are one. To instance but in
one, which indeed is the sum and substance of all divine revelation, the
mystery of Christ, which is above the reach, and beyond the discerning of most
prying and improved reason: I easily believe the Heathens (the wisest of them
at least) might have some knowledge of the fall of man, from the rebellion of
passion against reason, from the strange proneness which they experienced to
vices, quae sine exemplo discuntur, says Seneca, not inclined to them Lib. 3.
quoest. cap. 30.
by any acquired habit, nor led by any bad examples, nay, even to those vices
which carry a contradiction in them to natural light; add to them the
difficulty of acquiring habits, and exercising the acts of virtue (which would
be easy if natural): these were evident signs and effects of some sin, which
prepossessed and inhabited our nature, to which purpose that of Austin is
excellent, continentia tam concupiscentiae testis est, quam hostis, Continence
is both the enemy, and evidence of concupiscence: for virtue could not be
heard, if it were not opposed by the strength of natural inclinations to sin.
These, I say, and many other sad effects of man's Apostacy, which might be
named, are evidences to reason, that man is not now as he came out of the hands
of God, but somewhat degenerate from his original rectitude; but Gods dealing
with man in a Covenant-way, and by his infinite wisdom ordering and disposing
man's fall and Apostacy, to the accomplishing so great a mystery as the
sending of Christ into the world, to restore and recover man into a state in
some respects better then that of innocence, is a depth natural reason could
never fathom. God inhabiting humane nature, the word made flesh, and so
undertaking for the recoverie of lost man, Christ in his threefold office, as
Prophet, Priest, and King, to dispel the darkness, expiate the guilt, and
conquer the rebellion of corrupted nature, healing by Christ's stripes, life by
his death, are paradoxes to reason.

Per mortem alterius stultum est sperare salutem.

The candle of the Lord, as the soul of man is called, may discover something
(though but darkly) of God, but Scripture only is the star to lead us unto
Christ. It was a just censure, which Augustine passes upon Tullies works, that
he could not find the name of Christ in them. The Scriptures are the
swadling-clothes in which Christ was wrapped. Our reason is of too low a
stature, and therefore as Zacheus did upon the Sycamore, we must climb the
tree of life, the Scripture, if we would get a sight of Jesus.

Natural reason may discover the back-parts of God in the creature, but if she
pretends or presumes to discover the Sun of righteousness, she betraies her
weakness and degeneracie; it is one end of Scripture-revelation, to supply the
shortness and defect of natural reason. Nay, the glorious Angels, the most
quick-sighted of the whole creation, could not have discovered these
Gospelmysteries, Which things, says the Apostle, the Angels desire to look
into: (...), to stoop, to peep, to pry into, as things veiled and hidden, 1
Pet. 1. 12.
alluding to the Cherubims, which were made with their eyes looking down
toward the mercie-seat; the word signifies a diligent, sollicitous, and
through search: Tanta Evangelii, and mysterii salutis majestas est atque
jucunditas, says Glassius, either ravished with the pleasantness, or
confounded and blinded with the Majesty of these mysteries. They desire to
pry into them, and so they might have done, and been never the wiser, had not
God revealed them by Scripture. What the Apostle speaks of that one mystery of
Ephesians. 3. 10.
incorporating Jew and Gentile into one body by Christ, we may say of these
Gospel-mysteries, that God revealed to the intent, that unto principalities,
and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom
of God; without which revelation, the Angels had been strangers to these
mysteries to this very day.

2. The excellency of the revelation it self, or manner of revealing them,
which appears upon a threefold account.

1. The fullness and sufficiency of it, both as to doctrine and practice, faith
and manners, both to make a man of God wise unto 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17.
salvation, and perfect to every good work.

1. Scripture contains a full revelation of all foundations of faith, or things
necessary to be believed to salvation, either expressly, or by convincing,
evident, and undeniable consequence, and needs not to be eeked out with
unwritten traditions, or pretended enthusiasmes and revelations. Tradition,
which brings down and conveys Scripture-truths through the successive ages of
the Church to us, we cannot without ingratitude but acknowledge as an eminent
instance, and testimony of Gods providence, and none of the least arguments
for the authority, and Divinity of Scripture; and in this sense the Church is
(...), as the pillar holds forth the Kings proclamation, but contributes no
authority to it. And in this sense too, S. Augustin's non credidissem
Scripturae nisi Ecclesiae autoritas commoveret, may go for good and current
Divinity: we could not have believed the Scripture, because we could not have
had it, if providence had not handed it to us by the Church. So revelation of
Scripture-mysteries by the Spirit of God we acknowledge as the accomplishment
of a great Gospel-promise of the Spirit leading us into all truth: which
therefore Joh. 16. 13.
the Apostle Paul prays for for the Ephesians, that God would give unto them
(...), the Spirit of revelation, the knowledge Ephesians. 1. 17.
of Christ: but traditions or revelations, as additionall or supplementall to
Scripture, we reject as detracting from the wisdom of God, and the perfection
of revealed truth. Non est scriptum, timeat Tertul. Revel. 22. 18
vae illud adjicientibus, to wit, that woe, if any: shall add unto these words,
God shall add unto him the plagues which are written in this book; and the
Apostle passes an Anathema upon whoever should (though an Angel from heaven)
preach any other Gospel then he had Gal. 1. 6.
preached. Notanter dicit praeter non contra; not only what is against, but
what is more then Scripture-revelation is to be rejected; there is enough
revealed to bring us unto salvation, and what would you have more? These things
are written, says S. John, that ye Joh. 20. 31.
might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have
life through his name; and Search the Scriptures, for in them ye Joh. 5. 39.
think to have eternal life: and our Savior does not blame them for thinking
so. And if Scripture be not sufficient, we may say as the disciples in another
case, ad quid perditio haec, to what purpose Matthew. 26. 8.
was it written? To the law and to the testimony, says Isaiah. Esaias. 8. 20.
When the rich glutton in hell desired one should be sent from the dead to his
brethren; Abraham sends them to Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; let
them but believe what is in Moses and Luke 16. 29.
the Prophets, and they need not fear coming into this place of torment.

2. Scripture is a full and perfect rule of holiness, able to make the man of
God thoroughly furnished to every good work. Therefore 2 Timothy 3. 17.
our Savior, when the Lawyer came and tempted him with that question, What
shall I do to inherit eternal life? bids him have Luke 10. 25, 26.
recourse to the Scriptures, What is written in the law? how read thou? This
is the only perfect, and unerring rule of true righteousness. Those three
words of the Apostle, (...), Titus 2. 11, 12.
speak the whole duty of a Christian in all his capacities, and relations to
God, himself, and his neighbor: and this the Gospel teaches and engages us
to do. So perfect a rule it is, that the most specious observances, the most
glorious performances, the most exact worship is no way acceptable unto God, if
not commanded in, and directed by the Word. They may have (...), they may have
a show of wisdom in Will Worship, Coloss. 2. 23.
to the pleasing of men, not to the honor of God. God gave Moses a pattern for
the making of the Tabernacle, and David for the Exodus 25. 9.
Temple, and all things were to be ordered and regulated according Heb. 8. 5.
to this pattern. God has set us a perfect rule of worship in his word, and no
service pleases him but what is according to this rule: as our Savior told
the woman of Samaria, concerning the Samaritan worship, at mount Garazim, and
Jewish worship at Jerusalem, that the Samaritanes worshipped they knew not
what, the Jews knew what they worshipped, for salvation was of the Jews; Why
so? because the Jews had Gods special direction, and appointment of Gods word
for their service, which the Samaritanes had not.

We acknowledge the Churches power to determine decent observances, and
constitutions for public order in the service of God. The Apostles (...) will
sufficiently warrant this. 1 Cor. 14. 40.
The Church is a cipher, stands for nothing, if it has not power here, and he,
who wilfully sleights these, will be found guilty of contempt and disorder:
but the imposition of traditional observances in so needless a number, as may
seem to reduce us under the Jewish yoke, which neither we nor our fathers were
able to bear; Acts 15. 10.
or as equally obligatorie to conscience as divine commands; or as the
immediate worship of God; or as duties essentially necessary in order to
salvation, we justly abhor as the Tyranny of Rome, as the infringement of
Christian liberty, as a violation and voiding the commandment of God, as our
Savior told the Pharisees, that they made the commandment of God of none
effect, that is, slighted and Mat. 15. 6.
disregarded by their traditions. All our holiness, all our worship must be
regulated by Gods will, not our own: Non ex arbitrio Deo serviendum, sed ex
imperio; not according to our own fancy, but Gods command and prescription. It
may seem somewhat a strange expression at first, Israel has forgotten his
maker, and builded Temples; Hosea 8. 14.
one would rather think this was a reverencing of God: this is the account of
it, God had appointed one Temple, and they multiply and build many, contrary
to Gods direction and institution. I say of all humane invented will worship of
God, as Tertullian of the Heathen-worship, Ex religione superstitio
compingitur, and eo irreligiosior quanto Ethnicus paratior. Men in this are no
better then laboriously superstitious, taking pains to be irreligious. And the
judicious Hooker determines, that in Gods service to do that which we are not,
is a greater fault, then not to do that which we are commanded. Amongst other
reasons he gives this to our purpose, in that we seem to charge the law of God
with hardness only; in that with foolishness and insufficiency; which God
gave us as a perfect rule of his worship and service. I shall conclude this
point with that of S. Paul, As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall
be Gal. 6. 16.
on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

2. The perspicuitie and plainness of this revelation.

It is the design and plot of Rome to fasten an imputation of obscurity upon
the written Word, that hereby she may with more plausible show exalt Peter's
pretended successor into the infallible chair, as an unerring interpreter, and
also discourage and dishearten the people from reading them. As the spies
reported the land of Canaan to be impregnable, and so disheartened the
Israelites. Hence the Papists cry out of Scripture, that it is unintelligible,
and obscure to vulgar and common capacities, and thus they defame, and raise a
false report of the written Word, and make the difficulty of it a pretense for
their neglect, and cloak for their ignorance.

The Scripture was made to be a Christians guide, and rule of life (as I said
before): a blind guide, a dark and obscure rule is a contradiction. Thy word
is a light to my feet, and a lanthorn to my Ps. 119. 105.
paths, says David; and the Apostle Peter bids us look to the Scripture, as a
light which shines in a dark place: the same Apostle 2 Pet. 1. 19.
indeed observed in S. Paul's Epistles (...), some things hard to 2 Pet. 3. 16.
be understood; this relates to the sublimitie and mysteriousness of things
revealed, not to the obscurity of the revelation.

There is a depth of mystery in Scripture, clothed with a plain and familiar
expression, Thy testimonies are wonderful, says David. There is the mystery
of Scripture yet follows, The entrance Psalm. 119. 129. Ibid. v. ^30.
of thy words gives light, it gives understanding to the simple. Here are
mysteries to exercise the acutest wits, depths for the profoundest judgments
to fathom, and yet so plain and obvious, that the meanest and plainest, using
the means, as prayer, diligent search, and the rest, may profit by. Here is
meat for strong and grown Christians, and here is milk for babes too. In a
word, God has so intermingled, and interwoven Scripture-Revelations with some
difficulties, some facilities; that plainness breeds not contempt, nor
difficulty neglect and disheartnings, that by the plainness of them he might
teach us knowledge, and by the difficulties learn us humility.

3. The certainty and infallibility of Scripture-Revelation, as being written
by the guidance and dictate of an infallible Spirit. All Scripture is given by
divine inspiration: no Scripture is (...), 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 20.
of private interpretation, so our translation, or (...), or (...), of any
private spirit, which reading I find pleases Beza best, as agreeing with what
is said in the next verse, that the penmen of Scripture were, (...). For the
prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke
Ibid. verse. 21.
as they were moved by the holy Ghost: and therefore Scripture is a certain and
infallible rule of faith and holiness.

This was one end of Scripture, That we might have an infallible rule of life,
and judge of saving truth; which, had it been brought unto us only by the acry
conveyance of Tradition, uncertain revelation, might soon have been either
forgotten, or corrupted. If we leave the Scripture once, we are left at
miserable uncertainties, and lie open to all deceits and delusions. If we rest
upon Enthusiasticall revelations, Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
light, and delude us: our faith and obedience will 2 Cor. 11. 13
be always at uncertainties. The revelations of those (who pretend to them) be
always various, sometimes contrary, and commonly pretended to, to serve new
interests and designs. The Spirit is every man's pretense, and therefore we must
have some way to examine, and judge of the truth or falseness and error of
every man's spirit: and this can be no other way, but by the infallible Canon of
the Scripture. We never find S. Paul alleging any of those (...),, those
revelations which he had when he was caught up into the third heaven, but he
has recourse to the Scripture for 2 Cor. 12. 4.
the vindication of the Doctrine he delivered; as you may see in his Apology
before Agrippa, I continue, says he, to this day saying Acts 26. 22.
no other things, then what Moses and the Prophets did say should come. And the
Apostle Peter speaking of the voice from heaven (though 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
that was a ture one, yet) adds, we have (...), a surer word of prophecy; (to
wit, the Scriptures, the same with (...), verse 20.) whereunto ye do well that
ye take heed. A voice from heaven may sooner deceive us, then the written Word
of God: if we rest upon Traditions; these are often erroneous (as Rome can
witness) at best fallible and uncertain.

A man can scarce ever know when he has believed and practiced rightly, or
enough: Traditions being variable, and often in diverse successions, one contrary
to another, in the guidances, and direction of our Pastors and Teachers. Nor
can we certainly, or safely resolve our belief into them, for we are bid to
try these Spirits, whether they be of God. They may either out of ignorance, 1
John 4. 1.
or malice mislead you: Scripture Canon is the only infallible guide, and God
may as soon deceive you, as Scripture can.

3. The excellent ends fruits of this revelation and the knowledge of it: that
is, not only for discourse (though I could heartily wish it were made more use
of this way): not only to exercise a subtle wit (though there be
Scripture-mysteries will do this too): not only to ripen a lascivient fancy;
which are the greatest ends of all other knowledge; but the ends of
Scriptureknowledge are more heavenly and spiritual. The Apostle has enumerated
them to our hands, it is profitable (...) for 2 Timothy 3. 16.
doctrine, if thou be ignorant; (...) for reproof, if thou be erring and
misled; (...) for correction, if thou be sinning; (...) for instruction in
righteousness, to lead the to, and direct thee in thy duty.

Consider the excellency of it in these respects above all other knowledge.

1. It is a confirming knowledge, the foundation and principle of constancy
and settledness in Religion. The chief cause of the light Scepticisme, and
wavering unsettledness of our times, is the want of a sound Scripture-knowledge
of the Truth, with which if men's spirits were well ballassed, they would not so
soon be tossed about and carried away with every wind of doctrine. The Apostle,
speaking of such, gives this account of it: that they were children Ephesians. 4.
14.
in understanding. Observe who they are the Apostle speaks of, who are led
captive by those seducers, who creep into houses: they are silly women. And
why they? the reason is given; because they verse 7.
are ever learning, and can never come to the knowledge of the truth. No man
can simply desire to be deceived. Error, as error, has no sutableness, or
adequation to man's understanding; but many are deluded by error under the
vizard of truth; Jacob was deceived with blear-eyed Leah instead of fair Rachel.

While men are in the dark, not enlightened by a clear Scriptureknowledge, they
often court error for truth. This never more easy then in these days; when
that, which will most secure us from Apostatizing from acknowledged and
received truth, is a sound Scripture-knowledge: which therefore the Apostle
prays God for the Colossians and others, that they might have the full
assurance Coloss. 2. 2.
of understanding to the acknowledgement of the mystery of Christ, and he
gives the reason, This speak I lest any man should beguile you with Verse 4.
e^tising words.

2. It is a comforting, supporting knowledge. So David found it, Psalm. 19. 8.
The statutes of the Lord are pure, rejoicing the heart; and verse 10, sweeter
they are then the honey, and the honeycomb. The Wiseman (and he spoke it
experimentally; as having more wisdom then all that were before him in
Jerusalem) found the upshot of all his knowledge to be nothing but vexation of
spirit, Eccles. 1. 16. passing this deliberate judgment and sentence upon it,
verse 18. that in much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow. But the comfort of Christians was one end of Scripture,
which was written, That we through patience, and comfort of the Scripture,
might have hope. Here an observant Romans 15. 4.
Reader may discover many glorious promises, which are rich treasures of
comfort, full breasts of consolation, from which the pious Christian may suck
much supporting and chearing sweetness. Here we may suck and be satisfied with
the breasts of consolation, as the Prophet expresses it, Isaiah 66. 11. The
promise is as full of comfort as a dugge is full of milk; as crying children
are quietted with the dugge, so perplexed consciences are quieted and eased by
the promises; this all other knowledge in the world cannot help you too. What
refuges has Seneca, the wisest of Stoics, found for doubting and troubled
minds? and yet all ended in mere disquietness. Not Athens must teach this
lesson, but Jerusalem; not Reason, but Revelation; not Nature, but Scripture. I
have read of a woman, who was much disquieted in conscience, even to despair,
and endeavoring to prove her own executioner, was comforted by that promise,
Isaiah 57. 15. Thus says the high and the lofty one which inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place: with him
also that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the hearts of the
contrite ones: and of another who being ready to die, Lord, says he, I
challenge thy promise, by which thou art engaged to give rest to those who are
weary, and heavy laden* and so was comforted.

3. It is a Transforming knowledge; which no other knowledge is. We read, Romans
1. 21. of the Heathen, who, when they knew God, glorified him not as God: and
the Psalmist, having spoken of the knowledge of God in his creatures, subjoyns
this as the perfection of the word of God, Psalm. 19. 7. that it converteth the
soul, The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. In a word, natural
knowledge is only sufficient to make men without excuse, but
Scripture-knowledge to make us wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15.


Secondly, The usefulness and necessity of it, as to an Apollos, is still in
Scripture justly accounted the cognizance, and commendation of of an able
Minister. It was Ezras commendation that he was a ready Scribe in the Law of
Moses: and Timothies, that 2 Timothy 3. 15.
from a child he had known the holy Scriptures, which Paul notes as the badge
of a good Minister: Thou (says he to Timothy) shall be a good Minister,
nourished up in the words of faith and of good 1 Timothy 4. 6.
doctrine.

This knowledge is necessary,

1. That he may truly and savingly make known, and discover Jesus Christ. This
is the great duty of Ministers, which was the end for which S. Paul desired
the door of utterance, Colos. 4. 3. (...), to speak the mystery of Christ: and
therefore he desired to know nothing, among the Corinthians, but Jesus Christ 1
Cor. 2. 2.
and him crucified. Christ, he is the sum of Law and Gospel; the substance,
and as it were Epitome of the written Word. Every thing in Scripture relates
some way or other to Christ: the Types shadowed him, the Prophets foretold him,
the Sacraments signify him and seal him. The Law is a Schoolmaster to lead us
unto Christ; Gal. 3. 24.
the Gospel offers him, and conveys him, our faith receives him, our love
embraces him, our hope expects him, our obedience imitates and honors him; the
promises are grounded upon him, by the Gospel-priviledges purchased by him.
Thus Christ is the Center, wherein all these lines of revealed truth meet, and
when a Minister has discovered Christ, he has done all; and this he cannot do
without the Scriptures, Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me, says
Christ, John 5. 3. We are Ambassadors for Christ; and 2 Cor. 5. 20.
the Scriptures are our Credential letters, which contain all the terms of
reconciliation and peace, upon which we must treat with rebellious sinners, and
act for the interest of our great Lord and Master.

2. That he may preach according to the analogy of faith: which is the
Apostles exhortation, Romans 12. 6. let him that prophesies prophecy according
to the analogy of faith: (...), according to the scope, consent, and harmony
of Scripture. Scripture is its own best interpreter: one Scripture gives light
to another: as it was an ordinance of old for the Priest in the Temple to light
one lamp by another; and the Jews were wont, when they read Moses, to read so
much of the Prophets, as was most answerable to that part of the Law. To
observe the consent of Scripture is an excellent means of understanding Christ.
The Apostles themselves, though acted by the same infallible Spirit, yet
always quote Scripture: not so much to confirm their doctrine, as to
demonstrate the harmony of revealed truth, and so to explain obscurer
Scripture by plainer; as S. Peter having alleged that place, Psalm. 16. Acts
2. from v. 25. to 32.
10. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, etc. which might seem obscure, he
presently adds other Scriptures to prove that this could not be understood of
David, but of Christ; as you may see Acts 2. verse 30.

A Timothy must have (...), a form of sound 2 Timothy 1. 13.
words; not only some loose scattered confused notions of Truth, but a
methodical orderly Systeme of Scripture-truth, that hereby discovering the
dependence of one upon another, he may the more fully understand all.

This notion of the Apostles (...), rightly to divide the word of ruth, to wit,
according to Scripture-analogie and consent, can^not 2 Timothy 2. 15.
be done without a laborious study, and perfect knowledge of the Scripture.

3. That he may convince gainsayers: which is a duty the Apostle requires of
every Minister, (...).

Two sorts of Gainsayers a Minister is to grapple with,

1. Gainsayers in Opinion.

2. Gainsayers in Practice.

By Scripture-knowledge he may be able to convince both these.

1. Gainsayers in Opinion, whose errors contradict the truth of Scripture. And
if ever it were necessary to be armed against such, most certainly in our
days; wherein it is the height of many men's ambition, and a great attainment
to be a Gainsayer to received and acknowledged truth. None so successful
conviction of such, as by Scripture-argument; if you allege and urge Reason,
some of our Gainsayers are incapable of it, and will cast it of as Carnal; if
Learning, too much (say they) makes you mad: but, as David said of 1 Samuel 21 9.
Goliah's sword, there is none like that, no sword fitter to fight with these
opposers then the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, none like this; with
this our Savior routed Satan, the Prince of darkness, the father and patron of
error, in three onsets; Scriptum Mat. 4. 7.
est, etc. as thus afterward our Savior dealt with Satan's accomplices and
abettors, as the Sadduces, who denied the resurrection. Have ye not read (he
confutes them from Exodus 3. 6.) I am the God Mat. 22. 3^, 32.
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the
dead but of the living. So the Pharisees error, concerning the lawfulness of
divorce, Christ confutes from Genes. 1. and 2. Have ye not read, that he which
made them at the beginning, made Mat. 19. 4. 5, 6.
them male and female, and they twain shall be one flesh? and so forth. The
Apostles afterward trod in their Masters steps, and wrote after his Copy.
Stephen confutes the Jews by epitomizing the history Acts 7.
of the Old Testament: S. Paul confutes the Idolatry of the Athenians, from
Psalm. 50. 8. Who gives us life, and breath, and all Acts 17. 25.
things, as you may see. And this was one effect of Apollos his accuratness in
the Scripture, that (...), he convinced the contradicting, Acts 18. 29.
and gainsaying Jews, that Jesus was Christ. So true is that of Tertullian,
that Heretics are lucifugae Scripturarum, they De resur. c^r*
hate the light of the Scriptures, lest their errors should be detected and
reproved. The Papists deny the people the use of Scripture upon this pretense,
lest it should breed errors: the truth is, lest it should discover, and
confute them. He that does truth, comes to the light, but error hates it. Thus
the Manichees error, of God being Psalm. 5. 4. Habak. 1. 13.
the cause of sin, flees the light of those Scriptures, Thou art not a God that
have pleasure in wickedness; and, A God of purer eyes then to behold sin; and
He that does sin is of his father the devil. So the Pelagian 1 John 3. 8.
error of Free Will, and the Power of corrupted nature, flees the light of
those Scriptures, Without me you can do nothing, says John 15. 5. Phil. 2. 13.
Christ; and, God works both to will and to do of his good pleasure. The
Antinomian doctrine cannot bear the light of those Scriptures, Mat. 5. 17. Romans
3. 31.
I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; and, Do we make void the Law
by faith? God forbid: nay, we stablish the Law. An induction of particulars
would be too tedious; but this in general, that opinion which the Scripture
confutes not, either is no error at all, or, be sure, of no dangerous
consequence in point of salvation.

2. Gainsayers in practice, who contradict the purity of the Gospel by holding
the truth in unrighteousness and turning Gospelgrace into wantoness; and these
are more frequent then the former. Many profess Gospel Truth, yet do not
embrace Gospel-holiness: these are to be convinced by Scripture, as our Savior
did Mat. 15. 7. Esaias 29. 13.
the Pharisees of hypocrisy from the Prophet Esaias, This people draws near
unto me with their mouth and their lip, but their heart is far from me. All
things, which are reproved, are made manifest by the Ephesians. 5. 13.
light; that is to say, by the light of the Scriptures. There is a searching
power in the word of God, which is quick, and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged sword, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart;
and if it be powerfully and wisely managed, Hebr. 4. 12.
how may a Moses make the heart of a Pharaoh sometimes ^elent? a Nathan make a
David weep? a Paul put a Felix into a (...) of trembling? and a Peter make the
Jews pricked at the heart? and a John Baptist convince a Herod of his unlawful
and wicked enjoyment of his beloved Herodias? How does the word of God often
drive men from those forts, and succors and delusions which they had framed to
deceive themselves, and encourage themselves in the ways of sin? as, others sin
as well as I: what says Scripture to this? Follow not a multitude to commit
iniquity; and, Though hand Exodus 23. 2. Prove. 11. 21.
join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished. I may defer my repentance
from youth to old age, says another: See what Scripture says to this,
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc. and, Eccles.' 12. 1.
Hebr. 3. 15. Romans 6. 23.
To day, if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. This is but a
peccadillo, says another: Scripture says, The ways of sin is death. Such
flatteries and deceits the deceitful heart of man is apt to gull it self with.
The power of the word is to such as the voice of God was to Adam, Where art
thou? and then he could lie hid no longer: it convinces and discovers them.
This is the effect of preaching the word, as the Apostie says, If all
prophecy, (to wit, of the nature of sin, Gods wrath against it, and the like,
as Pareus glosses) if there come in one that believes not, he is convinced of
all, he is judged of all, and the secrets of his heart are Mr. Dod.
made manifest. When a reverend Divine amongst our selves, had by a powerful
Sermon convinced a licentious wretch, who heard him, he fretting and very angry
(as wicked men commonly are at a convincing Minister) came to him and charged
him with preaching that Sermon against him out of malice and envy; he returned
him this answer, If this Sermon had been preached in the dark, when I could not
have seen my Auditors, this very word of God would have found thee out, and
convinced thee of thy sins. In a word, Rectum and verum est mensura sui and
obliqui: therefore Scripture containing all fundamental doctrines of faith, and
essential duties of holiness necessary to salvation, must consequently be
sufficient to confute, and reprove all contrary sin and error.

4. That he may instruct the people and inform them of their whole duty. Here
they must expect, and require their knowledge; for, The Mal. 2. 7.
Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and the people shall require it at his
mouth. Unless their doctrine distill as the dew, the field of the Lord, the
Church, must needs be barren in holiness and fruitless in knowledge. This is
the last use the Apostle says the Scripture is profitable for, (...): for
instruction in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3. 18.


True indeed (may the people say) it is fit and necessary, that Apollos's,
Ministers, should be mighty in the Scriptures: but, we hope, we may be excused
from searching the Scriptures, it is not our duty, we are to expect it from our
teachers.

Indeed this is Rome's language. If you were at Rome, you might sanctum
canibus, margaritas ante porcos projicere, (it is the expression of Hosius) to
cast pearls before swine or that which is holy to dogs: you are little
beholding to them for this. But, believe it, though Antichrist will exempt you
from reading the Scripture, Christ will not, who enjoynes it, as a duty upon
all to search the Joh. 5. 39.
Scriptures: and observe the argument he uses to enforce this duty; for in
them ye think to have eternal life. If then you expect any interest in that
happiness, you are concerned, and engaged in this duty of Scripture-search;
which is both commanded and commended in Scripture. Let the word of God dwell
in you richly in all wisdom, Coloss. 3. 16. Acts. 17. 11
says S. Paul: and it was the commendation of the Bereans, that they searched
the Scriptures daily, whether the things that Paul and Silas preached were true
or no.

The Church of Rome accuse, and charge this promiscuous searching of the
Scripture as the cause of Heresy, pride, and faction. I deny not, Scripture
misunderstood is sometimes abused to promote these ends: but this is not the
natural, and proper effect of reading the Scripture, the ignorance of which, if
we believe our Savior, is the cause of Heresy, and error. Ye err, says
Christ to Matt. 22. 29.
the Sadduces, not knowing the Scriptures: and indeed if we be robbed of the
Compass of Scripture, we must needs split upon the rock of error. In a word
then, it is the Tyranny of Rome to withhold it, and it will be your sin to
neglect it.

Application.

1. This condemns, and corrects that general neglect and undervaluing of
Scripture: which (now Atheism is justly feared to be growing upon us)
prevails in the world, men preferring every thing else before this. The Papist
exalts his unwritten Tradition above the written Word. Pari pietatis affectu
suscipimus and veneramur, may seem a modest determination of the Tridentine
convention, and much less then their practice speaks. The Enthusiast magnifies
his pretended revelation, and Scripture to him is but a dead letter, and the
searcher of it but literalis, and vocalis too. But let us return home, and see
whither we can plead not guilty: where are our Nepotians, who by diligent
perusal of the Scripture, make their souls Bibliothecam Christi, as Hierom
says of him? Where shall we find an Alphonsus, who is reported to have read
the Bible ten times over with a comment? or like that Transylvanian Prince,
whom Maccovius reports to have read the Bible over twenty seven times? Where
shall we find a David, who meditates in the Law of God day and night,
preferring it before the honey and the honey-combe, Psalm. 19. 10. Psalm. 119.
72. Job 23. 12.
before thoughts of gold and silver? or a Job, who esteems the words of Gods
mouth more then his necessary food? Nay, have we not many proud, cursed
Politians, who think it a disparagement to their parts and learning, to
condescend to the study of Scripture, and (as he said) think they never spend
their time worse then in reading it? Do not idle Romances, and lascivious
Poems, and the like, take up the most of our youth-studies? nay, amongst us who
look toward the Ministry, does not a nice and intricate School-man, an
uncertain Father, an antiquated Rabby, justle out the Scripture? I speak not
against those in their due order and measure; but I would not have Hagar drive
Sarah out of doors. I would not have the Handmaids courted, and the Mistress
neglected. If they be our (...), let Scripture be our (...). Preposterous
studying these, before we be well grounded and settled in Scripture-knowledge,
does often fill the soul with such notions, speculations, and prepossessions, as
we shall find it very hard afterward to vail and submit to the simplicity,
and truth of the Gospel. Nay, if the most pious, practical, devout writings of
men, (with which this age to the glory of it abounds) hinder our study of
Scripture, it is our sin and provocation, and a high disparagement of the word
of God. Nor indeed can we with the same confidence and security read them, as
being often mixed with error, interest, and inconsiderate zeal, and those other
imperfections, which the frailty of the best spirit betraies them to (as
waters though never so pure in the fountain, will relish of that mine they run
through): as we may promise our selves from these Oracles of God, penned by the
unerring dictates and guidance of the Spirit of God. It is well known what
worth Luther's works are of, yet he professes, Odi libros meos, and saepe opto
interire, quod metuo ne morentur lectores, and abducant a lectione ipsius
Scripturae, quae sola omnis sapientiae fons est. That he hated his own books,
and often wished them perished, lest they should be a means to withdraw men from
the study of the Scripture, which is the only fountain of true and saving
wisdom.

2. This should put every one of us upon the search and study of Scripture;
Which that we may do successfully,

1. Be much in prayer: that is the key to unlock these cabinets of precious
jewels. S. Augustine has two remarkable stories to this purpose; the one of
Antonius the Hermit, who was so (...), taught of God, that he could, though he
knew not one letter, fully understand, and by heart repeat the whole Scripture:
the other of a certain servant converted from Heathenisme to Christianity,
who, triduanis precibus obtinuit, and codicem oblatum stupentibus, qui aderant,
legendo percurreret, by three days continuing in prayer had such revelations,
that, to the admiration of the beholders, he could read the whole Bible. This
is the course the Wiseman directs to, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. If thou searchest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, etc. Then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. This S. James
exhorts to, James 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God. This David
practiced, Open my eyes (as he prays to God, Psalm. 119. 18.) that I may see
wondrous things out of thy Law. The Spirit is the best, nay only rerevealer,
and true interpreter of Scripture. What is said of the Jews, that when Moses is
read the vail is upon their heart, may be 2 Cor. 3. 15, 16. Rev. 3. 16.
said of every one, who is not enlightened by the Spirit of God, whose eyes are
not anointed with this eye salve, a vail of flesh, a vail of ignorance, a vail
of corruption is upon their hearts. To think to discover the things of the
Spirit, without the Spirit, is to dream of seeing without light: now prayer is
the way to come to the Spirit. How shall not your heavenly Father (says
Christ, Luke 11. 13.) give the holy Spirit to them that ask him.

2. Avoid a proud and prying curiosity: this darkens Scripture; when men are
not content to know what God would have revealed, but wrest out of the
Scriptures what was never intended in them. These are those (...), which S.
Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 3. 16. to whom he therefore says, the Scriptures are
dark and obscure: who play the Chemists with Scripture, and, as they endeavor
to do with natural bodies, extort that out of them, which God and nature never
put into them. How have the forced Allegories, obscure Cabbalas, impertinent
nice Criticismes obscured and darkened revealed truth? which I am so charitable
as to think rather Essays for exercising men's wits, then for interpreting and
clearing the Scripture.

I think it a good way to understand Scripture, never to leave the literal
sense, unless when it is inconsistent and repugnant to the analogy of faith,
then we must seek a figurative, else not; as when Matt. 5. 29, 30.
we are commanded to pluck out our right eye, and cut off our right hand, which
in the letter is repugnant to the command of not killing, this must be
interpreted figuratively of parting with our nearest and dearest corruptions,
which are as near and dear unto us as a right hand, or a right eye.

3. Resolve to practice what you read and understand in Scripture: this is the
reason men profit no more in the Scriptures, they hear out of fashion and
custom, they read out of curiosity, not conscience. It is grace in the heart,
and obedience in the life, which makes men fruitful in Scripture-knowledge:
upon which the Apostle Peter grounds his exhortation, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. to
add to our faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, etc. he
subjoyns the reason, v. 8, 9. If these things be in you and abound, they make
you that you shall not be barren and unfruitful in the work of the Lord Jesus
Christ; but he that lacks these things is blind. The Turk writes upon the
outside of his Alkoran, Let no man touch this book, but he that is pure; and
the Philosopher gives this reason, why a Arist. lib. 1. Ethic. cap. 3.
young man cannot be a profitable scholar in Morality (...), because guided by
lust and passion; and the Apostle gives the same reason, why some were ever
learning, and could never come to the knowledge of the truth, because they were
led away by diverse 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
lusts: on the contrary, nothing improves knowledge more then holiness, which
David gives as an account of his knowledge, Psalm. 119. 100. I understand more
then the Ancients, because I keep thy precepts.

4. Be diligent in reading the Scriptures, which was Paul's charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendance to reading; make it thy work and business. God is
not wanting to the diligent and constant searchers of Scripture. When the
Eunuch was reading the Prophet Esaias, God provides him an instructor; sends
Philip to Acts. 8. 9.
him to teach him.

I shall end all this with the exhortation of S. Paul, Coloss. 3. 16. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; and S. Peter's conclusion of
his Epistles (2 Pet. 3. 18.) shall be the Conclusion of my Sermon; Grow in
grace and in the Scripture-knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to
him be glory both now and for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.
THESIS DE FIDE JUSTIFICANTE SUB RATIONE INSTRUMENTI.

Quam SUB PRAESIDIO ANTONII TUCKNEY, S. T. D.

Ac in eadem Professoris Regii, Kalend. Julii, 1656. in die Comitiorum
CANTABRIGIAE Tuebatur JOANNES FROST, Collegii D. Joannis ibidem Socius, pro
gradu Baccalaureatus in Theologia.

geometric pattern

CANTABRIGIAE: Ex Officina Joannis Field, Almae Academiae Typographi. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

ORNATISSIMO DIGNISSIMOQUE VIRO, ANTONIO TUCKNEY, SS. Theologiae Doctori,
Collegii Divi Johannis PRAEFECTO, and in Academia Cantabrigiensi Professori
Regio.
NOn est instituti mei ( Reverende Professor) quorumcunque oblocutorum
exceptionibus, in quas praefatio haec incursura sit, obviam ire: mihi abunde
satisfactum erit, si ea, quae ad haec impulerunt, pietati Tuae breviter
exposuero. Inter alia, quae filius charissimus, and nunquam satis lugendus,
mecum nuncupatorie reliquit; hoc unicum praecipue in votis habuit, ut siquid
Theseos, vel Concionis hujus Typis mandaretur, sub Tui nominis Auspicio in
lucem prodiret. Huic fidei-commisso eo libentius morem gessi, quo singularem
erga Te observantiam testatam facerem, and aliquantulum pro eximia Tua in illum
benevolentia gratitudinis (...) exhiberem. Alio insuper jure Exercitationes hae
patrocinium Tuum ambiunt, utpote authoritate Tua, Tuoque consilio initae, and
peractae. Lege cautum est, Liberos Filii, licet emancipati, si decesserit, in
avi potestatem incidere. Hoc ipso nomine Authorem astrictum tenuisti: ne
graveris filii Tui Posthumum, patreque orbatum in legitimam tutelam accipere.
Dum ego luctu and maestitia pene obrutus effundam vota, ut Deus gratiae gratia
Te ditatum augeat provehatque, ut Ecclesiam, Collegium, and Cathedram ornare
pergas diutissime.

Reverentiae vestrae observantissimus, JOAN. FROST.

Thesis. Fides justificat sub ratione instrumenti.
FIdem justificare in praesenti quaestione supponimus, ut ab omnibus Theologis
ultro concessam veritatem: Neque de justificationis vocabulo litem movebimus,
quippe quod sensu forensi and judiciali, ex idiomate cum Ebraico, tum Graeco,
usitatissimo insuper Scripturae dicendi modo, accipi debere (exceptis
Pontiflciis) abunde satis inter nos and Adversarios convenit. Quid per Fidem
volumus luculenter constabit ex actu ejus formali; quem statuimus esse, non
nudum assensum cum Pontificiis, nec (...), seu de salute certiorationem ( ne
scrupulos and laqueos conscientiis infirmorum injiciamus): sed fiducialem
innitentiam, seu recumbentiam in Christum, quem in foedere Evangelico oblatum
statuimus esse objectum specificum fidei justificant is. Fidei quae justificat
objectum generale asserimus esse totum Dei verbum; speciale, Christum
Mediatorem; formale quod justificat, Christum ut Pontificem, Sacerdotem, ut
(...) and pretium redemptionis nostrae; non quod Christi officia in negotio
justification is disjungimus, sed distinguimus: quam distinctionem, quia ut
levidensem, and lusoriam sugillant Adversarii, pari instantia visum est
dilucidare. Ac si quit morbo laborans and in mortis confinio positus, virum
adiret curationem ab eo and salutem expectans, petens quem Theologum,
Juris-consultum, Medicum simul probe norit: ^i dubio procul innititur and
confidit, qua Medicus, non qua Theologus, aut Juris-consultus; etiamsi sit haec
omnia, and singulis horum pro re nata fungatur officiis. Suffragatur Scriptura,
capitis ad Romanos quinti versu nono; (...). Modus autem, quo Fides justificat,
impraesentiarum controvertitur; de quo quinque observavimus celebriorum
Theologorum opiniones.

Prima est eorum, qui existimant Fidem justificare declarative tantum, and
quoad sensum conscientiae internum. Haec Helena, haec Diana Antinomoru^; quibus
calculum adjecit acutissimus Maccovius, apud Page 79*
quem fide justificari nil aliud est, quam quod fide cognoscimus, and sentimus
nos esse justos coram Deo. Hujus sententiae Hyperaspistes in diversas eunt
sententias. Strenuus ille Gratiae divinae assertor, and Remonstrantium Malleus
(non sine aliquo honoris titulo nominandus) Twissius, ab aeterno factam
electorum omnium justificationem voluit. Nuper laudatus Maccovius ab eo tempore
quo Christus promissus est in Mediatorem, Geneseos capitis tertii versu
decimo-quinto. Crispus, Antinomorum Antesignanus and Coryphaeus, in morte
Crucis, cum poenas peccatis nostris debitas persolvit Christus, nos a reatu
solutos, and justificatos asserit. Alii justificationem fieri volunt, cum
Spiritus nos Christo unit; quam unionem fidei antecedaneam asserunt; qua
accedente dehinc oritur justificationis nostrae sensus.

Secunda est eorum, qui fidem volunt justificare dispositive and inchoative; in
quantum radix est ceterarum virtutum, and qualitativa praeparatio subjecti ad
justificationis privilegium. Cui porro adjungunt Bellarminus, and Concilium
Tridentinum, spem, timorem, dilectionem, poenitentiam, propositum suscipiendi
Sacramentum, and propositum novae vitae. Nudum assensum volunt esse
dispositionem; Fidem charitate formatam partem istius justitiae inhaerentis,
qua coram Deo justificam^r: hanc sententiam junctis suffragiis Pontificii
profitentur.

Tertia est eorum, qui volunt fidem justificare formaliter, in quantum actus
fidei est res imputata, and a Deo virtute secundi Foederis, per gratiosam
acceptilationem habita loco istius perfectae justitiae, quam primum Foedus
postulabat. Hanc amplectuntur Sociniani and Remonstrantes. Fides est objectum
imputationis, inquit Arminius, epistola ad Hippolytum. Deo visum est fidem
nostram justitiae loco nobis ducere; ita Socinus. Sed plenissime hanc explicant
sententiam Lib. 4. de Servatore, cap. 4. Page 291.
Remonstrantes Dordrechtani. Foedus illud novae gratiae, quod Deus Pater per
mortis Christi interventum cum hominibus pepegit, non in eo consistit, quod per
fidem, quatenus meritum Christi apprehendit, coram Deo justificemur; sed in
hoc, quod abrogata perfecta obedientiae legalis exactione, fidem ipsam and
fidei obedientiam imperfectam pro perfecta legis obedientia reputet, and vitae
aeternae premio gratiose dignam censeat.

Quarta est eorum, qui volunt fidem justificare conditionaliter, quatenus una
cum sincera obedientia est conditio novi Foederis, and causa sine qua non
justificationis. In hanc sententiam eunt Doctores Sociniani. Obedientia, quam
Christo praestamus, licet nec efficiens nec meritoria, tamen causa sine qua non
est justificationis coram Deo: Verba sunt Anonymi Scriptoris Sociniani. Fides
non est accurate loquendo, causa instrumentalis; sed sine qua non
justificationis nostrae: hinc enim dicitur nos fide justificari, inquit
Smalcius. Diligenter cavere debemus, ne vitae sanctitatem and innocentiam
causam Disput. 4. contr. Fratz.
justificationis nostrae vel efficientem, aut impulsivam esse affirmamus, sed
tantummodo causam, sine qua eam nobis non contingere decrevit Deus. Verba sunt
Socini in Synopsi justificationis. Non difficile esset plura id genus, e
Crellii, Volkelii, Socini scriptis proferre testimonia, ni vobis et taedio
esset et fastidio. Haec obiter notare visum est, ut sentiamus quam dolendum
sit, e nosiris etiam Theologis quosdam, eosque (quod dolendum magis adhuc) cum
eruditione, tum pietate insignes, sub infelici hoc Socinianorum vexillo
militare: utque intelligant juvenes se, dum in hanc opinionem vel coeca
temeritate, vel nimia virorum admiratione abrepti, praecipites se dent, Socini,
Haereticorum pessimi, premere vestigia.

Quinta et ultima est eorum, qui volunt fidem justificare instrumentaliter,
relative seu organice, in quantum respicit objectum justificans, Christum
nimirum, cujus respectu capacitatem habet admissivam et receptivam. Haec
receptissima est Theologorum celeberrimorum sententia, a qua mihi religio est
vel latum unguem discedere: utpote quae longissime abest ab Haereticorum
erroribus, omnem praeripit hominibus gloriandi ansam, operum elevat dignitatem,
totamque justificationis gloriam Deo et Christo in solidum tribuit. Non vos
latet (Viri, Patres, Fratresque) quam perplexa et nodosa sit haec
justificationis doctrina, quantae de causa formali, meritoria, and id genus
aliis in Scholis agitantur lites, quantoque cum sententiarum animorumque
divortio. Inter omnes autem super hoc fundamentali religionis nostrae articulo
controversias, haec, quam prae manibus habemus (si Chemnitio fides sit habenda)
non infimae notae est; cujus verba (ne videar hodie de lana caprina, aut rei
nullius momenti, litem movisse, utque, si quod sit in Auditorum mentibus,
amoliar praejudicium) lubet hic refer. Controversia ( inquit ille in loco de
justificatione) de causa instrumentali una est ex praecipuis, hanc enim
doctrinam Diabolus odiosius oppugnat; quia been norit causas efficientes sine
applicatione non prodesse nobis ad salutem, ideo spargit varias corruptelas,
applicationem fieri operibus, vel propriis, vel alienis, vel fide and operibus
simul. Et alibi omne suum artificium eo confert, ut organum applicationis vel
eripiat, vel labefactet, vel depravet: quod totis viribus conati sunt
Pontificii, Sociniani, utinam et non e nostris nonnulli.

Totam quam suscepimus provinciam ea, quam rei majestas patitur, et loci
vestrumque ratio posiulat, brevitate, quinque conclusionibus expediam.

Conclusio prima. Justificatio fidei non est declarativa quoad sensum, sed
constitutiva quoad statum. Cujus ratio in promptu est: quod sensus
justificationis oritur ex actu reflexo, ipsa justificatio ex actu directo fidei
in Christum recumbentis. Quin et justificari dicimur (...), coram Deo: Ergo non
terminative tantum in conscientia. Romans 3. 20.
Justificationis insuper sensum amitti posse, and a justificato abesse
experiuntur saepius and conqueruntur Sancti. Hinc illae Davidis lacrymae, hinc
frequentes Sanctorum planctus gemitusque. Imo diu saepius est priusquam Sancti
assurgere possunt ad sensum justificationis suae: qui postea per recidivationes
peccatorum labefactatur, imo obruitur. Sensus insuper favoris divini fructus
est, non essentia justificationis: (...), inquit Apostolus. Ceterae virtutes,
Romans 5. 1.
ut fructus Spiritus, and justificationis (...), nos justos declarant, nullibi
tamen iis justificationem adscribit Scriptura. Et ut haec veritas extra omnem
controversiae ponatur aleam, perpendite locum Apostoli (ad Romanos cap. 5.
verse. 19.) Sicut per inobedientiam unius illius hominis peccatores constituti
sunt multi, sic per obedientiam unius ( scilicet Christi a Deo imputatam, and
fide apprehensam) (...): ergo non solum declarative in conscientia. Ut autem
antedictis erroribus tempestive occurramus, dicimus

Primo, Justificationem ab aeterno factam non esse. Agnoscimus quid analogum
justificationi in decreto Dei; quod tamen, cum sit actio immanens, non est
productivum effectus ad extra; neque aliquam efficit realem mutationem in
subjecto: quae ubicunque fit, sive moraliter, sive Physice, necessario fit per
actionem transeuntem. Tritum est in Scholis, Praedestinationem nihil ponere in
Praedestinato. Justificationis insuper decretum supponit solum esse cognitum,
actualis justificatio personae postulat existentiam: enimvero ubi nullus realis
reatus, ibi absolutio actualis impossibilis est. Quod enim Maccovius cum
Antinomis objicit, res scilicet ab aeterno habere esse cognitum, nihili est,
quippe quod praecognitio divina, cum sit actus immanens, nil ponit in objecto.
Neque diffitemur justificationem habere esse cognitum in mente divina ab
aeterno, quae, cum per actionem transeuntem completur, fit mutatio in subjecto,
non in Deo; quia actiones transeuntes dant solum extrinsecas denominationes
Deo. Non dissimili modo, ac si Architectus secum hodie statueret cras domum
aedificare; exstructa domo, mutatio transit in objectum, manente Architecti
proposito. Et, ut quod res est dicam, vere portentosa est haec aeterna
justificatio. Elevat merita Christi, inania reddit omnia justificationis media,
non liceret (quod Sanctis semper in usu fuisse legimus) remissionem peccatorum,
sed remissionis sensum a Deo petere: hinc sequeretur perinde justos esse
electos antecedenter ad fidem ac post fidem; imo filios esse Dei quos Scriptura
pronuntiat filios irae. Ephesians. 1. 3.


Secundo, Neque quamprimum facta est promissio justificari dicimur, nisi
virtualiter: hoc est, impleta condition, quae fit per fidem. Certitudinem
futuritionis fundatam asserimus in promisso, quo fidelitate sua Deus se electis
obstringit, ob interventum satisfactionis Christi, and beneficium sub
condition, and ipsam conditionem ex gratuita misericordia confer.

Tertio, Neque in morte Christi justificari dicuntur electi. Justificationem
meritoriam in morte Christi agnoscimus, dicente Apostolo, Deus erat in Christo
mundum reconcilians sibi: hoc est, quoad pretii 2 Cor. 5. 19.
solutionem and dationem; cujus beneficium voluit in credentes solum redundare.
Per seipsum fecit purificationem peccatorum nostrorum, ad Hebraeos cap. 1. ver.
3. hoc est; quoad pretium, and sacrificii perfectionem. Fide opus esse
asserimus, non ad solutionem, sed ad applicationem. Partum est jus ad
justificationem morte Christi, actualiter fit fide. Ut debtor absolvatur,
requiritur non solum solutio debiti a creditore facta, sed desideratur insuper
acquiescentia creditoris in ista solutione, and acceptatio a part debitoris,
qua sibi propriam faciat. Facillime haec ad justificationem accommodantur, ad
qu^m requiritur, praeter acquiescentiam Patris in solutione pretii a sponsore
nostro facti, applicatio, and receptio fidei: Uti pharmacum, a peritissimo
licet Medico praeparatum, and morbo accommodatissimum, aegroto tamen non valet
ad salutem, nisi sumatur. Omnes promiscue sub condemnatione, and maledictione
legis, ira Dei, potestate mortis esse, antecedenter ad fidem pronunciat
Scriptura, non obstante Christi satisfactione in cruce facta. An Christus loco
electorum erat justificatus and absolutus (quam justificationem mysticam vocat
e nostris vir doctus) mihi, fateor, adhuc non constat, neque sum ausus, tacente
Scriptura, definire.

Quarto, Falsissimum, utpote cum (...) tum (...), commentum est, dari unionem
cum Christo antecedenter ad fidem, cum spiritus nos Christo unit ingenerando
fidem in cordibus nostris. Operantem Spiritum agnoscimus antecedenter ad fidem;
saltem ordine naturae; at inhabitantem, and nos Christo agglutinantem negamus.
Inhabitat Christus per fidem in cordibus vestris, inquit Apostolus ad Ephesios,
cap. 3. ver. 17. Et, Promissum Spiritum accipimus per fidem, ad Galatas, cap.
3. ver. 14.

Ex supradictis constabit justificationem fieri in tempore, and concomitanter
ad fidem, eodem temporis, licet diverso naturae, instanti; and fi^ri per
actionem transeuntem, cujus effectus est mutatio moralis, non quoad sensum
solum, sed quoad statum.

Conclusio secunda. Fides non justificat per modum dispositionis, Conclus. 2.
aut praeviae, and inhaerentis qualitatis. Hoc Pontificiorum commentum est,
quorum (...) hac in re esse videtur, quod justificationem fieri volunt per
motum Physicum, productivum justitiae inhaerentis per modum formae: ad cujus
introductionem Fidem ( hoc est, nudum assensum) timorem, spem, id genus alias
dispositiones, ut subjectum qualitative praeparantes, postulant; prout factum
cernimus in ordine ad productionem formarum Physicarum: cum nos asserimus in
justificatione fieri non Physicam and positivam, sed moralem and relativam
mutationem, uti infra before patebit. Sufficiat interim monere praeparatoriam
hanc fidei justificationem repugnare,

Primo, Scripturae.

Secundo, Rationi.

Tertio, Doctrinae Pontificiae.

Primo, Scripturae, quae nullibi dicit fidem disponere adjustificationem, sed
justificare seu recipere donum justitiae absque operibus. At Romans 5. 17.
quocunque nomine vocetur haec dispositio, sub operibus comprehenditur, ut
diserte loquitur Apostolus ad Romanos, cap. 9. ver. 30. Quid igitur dicimus?
Gentes, quae non sectabantur justitiam, justitiam apprehendisse; Ergo sine
operibus praeparatoriis. Impios insuper (videlicet antecedenter, licet non
reduplicative and consequenter tales) Deum justifi^^re asserit idem Paulus ad
Romanos, cap. 4. verse. 5. ideoque non per fidem, spem, timorem, id genus alias
dispositiones praeparatos.

Secundo, Rationi: quia hae dispositiones Hypocritis, imo daemonibus insunt,
qui credunt and contremiscunt. Pessime insuper sanctificationem Jac. 2. 19.
cum justificatione confundunt Pontificii, quae, cum non introducitur in
subjectum, sed per imputationem fit, non eget praeparatoriis dispositionibus.

Tertio, Doctrinae Pontificiae. Quomodo enim hoc de dispositionibus
praeparatoriis dogma cum opere operato Sacramentorum cohaeret (quod junctim
prositentur Pontificii) ipsi viderint, vos judicate. Concludimus cum Apostolo,
Hominem justificari fide, non solum ergo ad justificationem Romans 3. 28.
disponi.

Conclusio tertia. Fides non justificat formaliter, ita ut vel habitus vel
actus fidei a Deo nobis imputetur ad justitiam, virtute Novi Foederis. Tum quia
hoc modo considerata est pars inhaerentis justitiae, and propriae, quam tamen
Apostolus justitiae, qua justificamur, e diametro opponit, ad Philippenses,
cap. 3. verse. 9. Ut comperiar in Christo, (...). Actus fidei opus est, ideoque
fidei, in quantum justificat, contradicitur, ut liquet ex Apostolo, ad Romanos,
cap. 4. ver. 5. Ei qui non operatur, sed credit, etc. quae verba si de actu
fidei interpretemur sensus loci esset; Ei qui non operatur sed qui operatur
fides imputatur ad justitiam; ita versu sexto, David beatum declarat, cui Deus
imputat justitiam absque operibus; quod perinde esset juxta hanc opinionem, ac
si dixisset Apostolus, Cui Deus imputat opus sine operibus. Dogma profecto hoc
est periculosum adeo, ut totam evertit justificationis doctrinam, imputationem
justitiae Christi destruit, and inanem reddit; legem ex part saltem abrogat,
quippe cui fides, cum sit virtus particularis, non adaequate respondet; Deum
insimulat falsae aestimationis and judicii erronei, quippe qui imperfectum
instar perfecti duceret; justificationis intercisionem ponit, cessante
videlicet credendi actu. Quin and ipsa Fides ob multiplices, quibus laborat,
imperfectiones eget misericordia divina. Quod autem ad gratiosam
acceptilationem confugiant, oritur ex male intellecta secundi Foederis gratia,
quae in co non consistit, quod Deus minorem nunc quam olim postulat
obedientiam, siquidem lex creationis est indispensabilis; sed quod eam
obedientiam, quam nos praestando non eramus in Mediatoris persona gratiose
acceptat, ( cum lex personalem postulabat justitiam) and fide applicatam,
misericorditer, virtute secundi Foederis nobis imputat, ut materiam nostrae
justificationis. Quod attinet ad locu^ illum Apostoli, quem substernunt
Adversarii, ut errorishujus fundamentum, ad Romanos, cap. 4. ver. 3. Credidit
Abrahamus Deo, and imputatum est ei ad justitiam; interpretemur necessum est,
vel, de justitia facti non personae, sicut actus Phineae (Psalmo 106. ver. 31.)
dicitur reputari ei in justitiam; hoc est, probatus erat Deo actus: vel, si de
justitia personae, quo respicere videtur Apostolus, intelligimus fidem
metonymice, relative, concretive, seu connotative cum objecto quod apprehendit.
Cujus veritas liquet tum ex contextu, verse. 11. vocatur (...), and verse. 13.
(...): Tum ex paritate phraseos in Scriptura, Petrus Apostolus secundam scribit
Epistolam (...), iis qui aeque preciosam fidem cum ipsis Apostolis sortiti
sunt. Qui vero hoc fieri possit ut quilibet fidelium parem cum Apostolis fidem
habeat? non in habitu, qui fortior multo, nec respectu actus, qui vegetior
long erat in Apostolis quam in inferiori Christianorum plebe: ideoque
relinquitur ut sit respectu objecti, Christi nimirum, quem totum infimus
credentium amplectitur. (...) vocat Apostolus, non quod in omnibus sit
aequalis, sed quia eundem omnes Christum, ejusque justitiam fide possident,
inquit Calvinus.

Patet insuper ex analogia fidei, qua ubique in Scriptura praedicatur justitia
Christi, non solum ut causa meritoria, ( quod ipsi fatentur Pontificii) sed
materialis justificationis nostrae. Per obedientiam unius justi constituuntur
multi, ad Romanos, cap. 5. ver. 19. Christus a Deo nobis factus est justitia, 1 Corinthians. cap. 1. ver. 30. Nos efficimur justitia Christi in eo: 2 Corin. cap.
5. ver. 21.

Liquet etiam ex rei veritate; nisi enim fides consideretur objective, nemo
fidelium ad statum justificationis assurgeret, nisi qui gradum, and mensuram
fidei Abrahamiticae attigit.

A phrasi denique Pauli alienum est, illud imputari quod inhaeret. Paulus illud
imputari dicit, quod quis nec habet, nec fecit. Sic Deus peccata nostra
imp^tavit Christo, quae ipse non fecit: pariter, quam nos non fecimus, nobis
imputat justitiam Christi. Hanc comparationem instituit Apostolus (Epistolae ad
Corinthios, cap. 5. ver. 21.) Fe^it ut qui peccatum non novit, pro nobis
peccatum esset, ut nos efficeremur justitia Dei in eo.

Conclusio quarta. Fides non justificat, ut conditio sine qua non Conclus. 4
Foederis una cum operibus, and nova obedientia: vel ut concausa and sine qua
non justificationis. Fidem esse conditionem Foederis and causam sine qua non
justificationis lubenter agnoscimus, at sub ea ratione justificare fidenter
negamus. Hoc enim concesso facultates animae, intellectus, and voluntas,
perinde dici possunt causae justificationis, utpote sine quibus nemo
justificatur. Fides ut conditio est in nobis, ea autem, qua justificamur,
justitia est extra nos, quam inhaerenti opponit Apostolus, ad Philippenses,
cap. 3. ver. 9. Obedientiam agnoscimus esse indispensabile medium salutis,
negamus esse causam vel conditionem satisfactionis. Quam distinctionem, quia
sugillant Adversarii, ex Scriptura liceat illustrare. Spe salvi sumus, inquit
Apostolus ad Romanos, cap. 8. ver. 24. Nullibi dictum legimus, Spe justificati
sumus. Conjunguntur fides and opera quoad existentiam, non quoad causalitatem.
Opera removemus non a fide, sed a justificatione. Operum necessitatem
profitemur, ne pietatis studio post habito peccatis laxentur fraena; negamus
operum causalitatem, ne gratiae divinae fiat praejudicium: Si enim ex operibus,
tum non ex gratia, affirmante Apostolo. Quod enim objiciunt Adversarii,
Apostolum vim justificandi Romans 11. 6.
praeripere operibus ex natura factis, and fidem antecedentibus, non iis quae
fidei fructus sunt, and a gratia promanant, tam falsum est, quam quod
falsissimum; quippe quod Apostolus excludit opera indefinite, and sine aliquo
additamento, etiam pii, and credentis Abrahami; ad Romanos, cap. 4. ver. 6.
Beatus cui Deus imputat justitiam sine operibus, non addit legis, sed
indefinite quaelibet opera excludit. Et versu 5. Ei qui non operatur, sed
credit in eum, qui justificat impium, imputatur fides ad justitiam: quo in
commate omnis operans opponitur credenti; ergo omnia, qualiacunque sint, opera
opponuntur fidei. Neque Apostolus in tota hac disputatione, in qua ex professo
de justificatione agit, opera operibus opponit, sed opera ubique and fidem,
quantum ad justificationem, inter se committit. Neque agebatur tunc temporis
controversia, an haec vel illa opera; sed an fides vel opera justificarent.
Quam litem appositissime dirimit Apostolus, ad Romanos, cap. 3. verse. 28.
(...). Quo additamento saepius utitur Apostolus, non ut differentiam operum
insinuaret (opera enim, quae ex gratia fiunt, ad legis normam exiguntur): sed
quia omnia a Deo in lege praecipiuntur. Imo saepius in Scriptura Apostolus
renatorum opera a justificatione removet. Ad Galatas, cap. 2. verse. 16.
Scientes non justificari hominem ex operibus legis, sed per fidem Jesu Christi,
etiam nos in Jesum Christum credidimus, ut justificaremur ex fide Christi: de
se and Galatis loquitur jam renatis: aliquot enim jam annis ante Galatae fuere
conversi, quam Paulus illam scripsit epistolam. Quidni dicam materiam gloriandi
subministrare vel opera renatorum, si per ea justificarentur? Non ex operibus,
inquit Apostolus, ne quis gloriaretur: de operibus autem ex fide and gratia
ortis Ephesians. 2. 9.
loqui Apostolum patet ex proximo commate, Ipsius opus sumus creati in Christo
Jesu ad opera bona. Sua etiam posi conversionem (de praesenti enim loquitur ad
Philippenses, cap. 3. verse. 8. (...)) opera detrimenta pronuntiat, and
stercora. Cum autem Jacobus dicit hominem justificari operibus, non fide
tantum, quod Abrahami and Rahab probat exemplis, cap. 2. quod unicum erroris
sui Adversarii ponunt fundamentum, and causae praesidium; non abs re erit
Apostolos paucis conciliare. Quod facili fiet negotio, si Paulum de fide viva,
and per opera efficaci, de justificatione coram Deo, and de iis qui opera
jactabant, and propria justitia intumuerunt; Jacobum autem de fide mortua
operibus destituta, de justificatione coram hominibus, and de solifidianis, qui
posthabito pietatis studio fidei larvam venditabant, interpretemur. Quae
singula ex ipso patent contextu. Fidem, quam intelligit Jacobus, daemonibus
tribuit versu 19. and (...) vocat proxime insequente. Ostende mihi fidem tuam,
versu 11. ergo de declarativa loquitur justificatione. Quae utilitas, fratres,
si quis dicat se fidem habere; ergo eos alloquitur, qui inane jactabant fidei
nomen, operibus vacuum, and a virtutis studio alienum. Ut quod res est dicam,
Opera renatorum cum fide conjungere in negotio justificationis, est saepius
coctam Pontificiorum Cramben recoquere: qui distinctionem hanc operum, ante and
post fidem centies nostris objecere, quo justificationis doctrinam per solam
fidem labefactarent: quae olim prora puppisque causae nostrae habita est, and
primo jugulum petiit, and in prima reformatione lethale incussit vulnus, and
caput imminuebat causae Pontificiae. Fundamentum hoc Religionis nostrae,
articulus stantis est and cadentis Ecclesiae, ut olim Lutherus. Galatas, ut a
gratia and Evangelio apostatas increpat Paulus eo, quod opera cum fide
miscebant in negotio justificationis, cap. 1. verse. 6. Pessime certe de
Religione nostra merentur, qui Pontificium hoc, imo purum putum Socinianum,
dogma diu ab Ecclesiis nostris exauctoratum populo demum propinant. Opera quae
ex fide oriuntur, and sunt fructus Spiritus Sancti, adeo ad justificationem
necessaria sunt, ut sine illis fides apprehendens Christum justificare nullo
modo possit: verba sunt Andradii. In iis locis, ubi Apostolus fidem operibus
opponit, de operibus ejusmodi agit, quae and perfectam, and perpetuam
obedientiam continent, qualem sub lege Deus ab hominibus requirebat; verum non
de ^s operibus, quae obedientiam, quam Deus a nobis qui in Christum credimus
requirit, comprehendunt: verba legimus capite nono Catecheseos Racoviensis.
Quae eo transcripsi consilio, ut intelligamus ex eorum lacunis, quorum vel
nomen detestatur quilibet qui Christianus revera vult audire, fluxisse putidam
hanc de concausalitate operum in justificatione doctrinam.

Conclusio quinta and ultima. Fides justificat sub ratione instrumenti;
Conclus. 5.
cujus veritas per inductionem ex antedictis satis patet. Si enim nec
dispositive nec formaliter, nec conditionaliter, justificat; relinquitur ut
rationem instrumenti subeat in negotio justificationis. Cujus loco Sociniani
Christum; Bellarminus humanitatem Christi; Lib. de justificat. c. 2.
Concilium Tridentinum vel re, vel voto, susceptum Sacramentum; alii Foedus
novum substituunt ut justificationis instrumentum. Nos brevitati litamus;
sufficiat igitur in explicanda and confirmanda hac Thesi rerum capita delibare.
Quod ut felicius fiat, haec pauca praemittenda duximus.

Primo, per [fidem] intelligimus habitum fidei, quatenus se exerit per actum,
and respicit objectum, Christum videlicet and ejus justitiam; quo respectu
dicimus eam esse animae instrumentum.

Secundo, [justificare] Sumitur vel active, pro actu Dei judiciali; vel passive
and terminative, prout in credentem terminatur. Fidem esse instrumentum
asserimus, non respectu prioris, cujus causam in solo Dei favore and gratia
quaerimus, nobis quod nostrum non erat velut nostrum imputantis; sed
posterioris: Ideoque ex instrumentalitate fidei male colligitur ab Adversariis,
hominem se justificare. Deus active justificat credentem, homo non se
justificat, sed credit ad sui justificationem ( ad Romanos, cap. 10. ver. 10.
Cord creditur ad justitiam) dum fide recipit Christum ejusque justitiam.
Ideoque cum dicimus fidem justificare, passive intelligi debet; and idem sonat
ac fide justificamur, phrasi nimirum metaleptica, qua effectus causae
principalis tribuitur instrumentali; ut aratrum dicitur ditare agricolam:
instantia est Augustini.

Tertio, duplex est instrumentum justificationis. Externum unum, videlicet
Evangelium, quo offertur justificatio sub conditionibus Foederis. Remote
Ministri Ecclesiae dici possunt instrumenta justificationis: unde ligare,
solvere, peccata remittere dicuntur in Scriptura, videlicet declarative,
applicando remissionem poenitentibus and credentibus. Internum alterum, objecti
justificantis applicativum, and tale instrumentum asserimus esse fidem: quae
est quasi manus animae applicantis, ut Evangelium est manus Dei offerentis
justificationem.

Quarto, Instrumentum est vel Physicum, and Natural; quod Physice operatur ad
effectum principalis agentis, and quo posito ex naturali necessitate effectus
sequitur: vel morale, and ex institutione, per quod volumus omne medium a causa
principali assumptum in ordine ad effectum, ad quod per se innatam non habet
vim, and (...). Hinc Scholastici definiunt, Creaturam posse assumi a Deo ut
instrumentum morale, licet non elevari, ut sit instrumentum Physicum
creationis. Fidem in justificatione consideramus ut instrumentum, non Physicum,
quasi effectum pari necessitate, ac agentia naturalia per connatas qualitates
effectus suos producunt, justificationem efficeret: sed morale, cujus tota vis
dependet ex divina institutione: non aliter quam aenei serpentis aspectus
valebat olim ad levamen and salutem Israelitarum. Licet interim fatemur dari
passivam quandam aptitudinem ( quam non diffitentur Adversarii esse rationem
quare Deo visum est hanc Foederis conditionem instituere) justitiae Christi
apprehendendae accommodam; qua ex dignatione gratiosa utitur Deus ad talem
finem. Perinde ac Verbum and Sacramenta sunt instrumenta, quae quicquid habent
efficaciae debent institutioni divinae. Per instrumentum igitur intelligimus
medium applicationis, in cujus usu ex ordinatione divina participes facti sumus
Christi, ejusque justitiae; quod objectum fides justificans essentialiter
connotat: Non quod fides sit conditio solutionis pretii, vel motivum voluntatis
divinae ut velit nostri misereri, quod prae se fert Remonstrantium doctrina de
fide praevisa; neque quod fides ulla organica causalitate justitiam Christi
producat; sed quod oblatam in Foedere Evangelico amplectitur.

Quinto, Distinguendum est instrumentum efficiendi ab instrumento reciplendi.
Posteriori modo fidem esse instrumentum asserimus. Fidem agere in apprehensione
Christi non negamus, and moralem efficientiam ei tribuimus, qualem patitur id
genus instrumentorum natura; at justificat ratione passivae receptionis.
Agit-mendicus dum manum extendit, at non ea action ditatur, sed in quantum
recipit thesaurum vel potius thesauro quem recipit. Neque hinc colligitur
hominem se justificare magis, quam aegrotos Christi temporibus se sanare, quia
credendi exerebant actus in ordine ad curationem: vel mendicum se ditare, quod
ei qui eleemosynam erogat aptius tribuitur, and merito in ejus cedit lauds and
honorem. Sic fide justificamur* sed non ex dignitate fidei, sed ex dignatione
divina, cui de integro debetur tanti and tam gratuiti beneficii honos and
gloria.

Sexto and ultimo, Fides consideratur vel in persona justificati, ita radix est
omnium virtutum in quantum operatur per charitatem; vel in effectu
justificationis, sic janua est ad vitam aeternam; vel in actu justificationis,
and eo respectu dicimus esse instrumentum, non quatenus ad extra operatur, sed
quatenus ad intra recipit Christum, in relatione ad quem tota vis fidei
justificantis consistit.

Veritatem hoc modo explicatam quatuor firmabo argumentis, and perorabo.

Argumentum primum sumitur ex frequenti and usitatissimo loquendi modo in
Scripturis, in quibus justificari dicimur (...), ad Romanos, cap. 5. ver. 1.
(...), cap. 3. ver. 22. (per fidem Ibid. ver. 25.
Jesu Christi, ut objecti videlicet formalis). (...). iterum hic fidei mentio
fit connotative ad objectum, uti saepius alibi: nunquam vero (...), quasi
habitum aut actum fidei insinuaret sub ratione conditionis; sed ut veram
indigitet causalitatem, non principalem, ergo instrumentalem: neque aliter
sonant phrases antedictae [(...)] quae semper notant instrumentum, cum ordinem
dicunt ad effectum causae principalis: nullibi autem legimus homines per
amorem, aut poenitentiam justificari. Imo Scriptura terminis utitur exclusivis
respectu omnium universaliter operum. (...), ad Romanos cap. 4. ver. 6. (...),
ad Titum, cap. 3. ver. 5. (...), ad Ephesios, cap. 2. verse. 8. (...) (ubi
observandum iterum objectum connotari) ad Galatas, cap. 2. ver. 16. e quibus
singulis apertissime constat, peculiarem aliquam causalitatem fidei competere
in negotio justificationis.

Argumentum secundum sumitur a subordinatione fidei ad Deum, ut causam
principalem justificationis. Formalis ratio instrumenti est subordinari and
subservire causae principali in ordine ad effectum. At hoc fidei proprium esse
diserte loquitur Scriptura. Arbitramur fide justificari hominem, ( sed a quo?
Certe a Deo) ad Romanos, cap. 3. verse. 28. Unde patet quam nihili sit palmare
illud argumentum, quo triumphum, sed ante victoriam, agunt Adversarii, [Si
fides sit instrumentum, tum vel Dei, vel hominis]. Respondemus utriusque
diverso respectu, Dei ordinative, and ratione institutionis, tum efficienter,
and collative, in quantum Deus nobis fidem, and per fidem justitiam Christi
confert, qua justificamur. Neque hinc sequitur quod observat vir doctissimus,
ut Deus credere dicatur, cum credere sit actus immanens; proindeque Deum non
aliter denominat, quam eff^ctus causam, non ut affectio subjectum. Hominis
autem instrumentum est respectu receptionis, and applicationis quoad actum
fidei excercitum; quae omnia evidentissima and firmissima habent in Scripturis
fundamenta. Deus unus est qui justificat circumcisionem ex fide, and praeputium
per fidem, ad Romanos, cap. 3. verse. 30. Ideoque Dei est instrumentum, quo
utitur ut nobis conferat justificationem, fide saepius in Scriptura dicimur
recipere Christum, ad Colossenses, cap. 2. ver. 6. Joannis, cap. 1. ver. 12.
Ergo nestrum est instrumentum applicativum. Unde oritur

Tertium argumentum, quod desumitur a peculiari respectu quem fides dicit ad
Christum, ejusque justitiam. Quicquid instrumentaliter recipit Christum
instrumentaliter concurrit ad justificationem; at hoc fidei peculiare est. Unde
Scriptura utitur vocibus (...), quae significant recipere illud quod ab alio
offertur, and traditur: hinc oculo, pedibus, manui, brachiis, in sacro codice
fides comparatur; quippe qua videmus, recipimus, amplectimur Christum, eique
innitimur ad justitiam, and remissionem peccatorum. Quorum fide facti sumus
participes, remissionem peccatorum accipimus per fidem, Actorum, cap. 26. ver.
18. and etiam donum justitiae, videlicet Christi, recipimus sine operibus, ad
Romanos, cap. 5. verse. 17. Quae ideo saepius (...), ad Romanos, cap. 10. ver.
6. justitia fidei vocatur, hoc est, Christi fide apprehensa. (...) (...), hoc
est, recepta, ad Romanos, cap. 3. verse. 22. Nullibi scriptam legimus (...), vel
(...); ergo phrasis illa peculiarem prae se fert emphasin. Fides unice
innititur promissioni Evangelicae, qua promittitur and offertur; unice
apprehendit, and applicat satisfactionem Christi, qua parta est justificatio
and promerita, ideoque specialem habet in justificatione (semper intelligo
passivam) influxam. Profecto nugas meras mihi videntur agere, qui fidem
fatentur esse instrumentum receptivum Christi, sed non justificationis. ( Ac si
quis solemn videre possit, non viso and recepto lumine.) Cum nos asserimus fidem
justificare objective, in quantum recipit Christum, ejusque justitiam, (quae
Christo ut Mediatori essentialis est) ad quem effectum peculiarem habet
aptitudinem. Cognitio recipit solam speciem Christi ut objecti; amor tendit in
Christum ob excellentiam personae, vel consideratione bonitatis, and gratiae
Christi; Fides cum apprehendit in quantum nostro loco mediatoriam praestitit
justitiam peccatis nostris adaequatam, and respondentem, quam dum fides
amplectitur Deus personam absolvit a reatu and pro justo habet.

Argumentum quartum and ultimum sumitur a remotione causarum instrumentalium,
quas fidei loco succenturiarunt Adversarii in negotio justificationis.
Socinianorum dogma elevat meritum Christi. Bellarmini sententia dividit naturas
in officiis mediatoriis. Tridentinum dogma Sacramentorum supra quod par and
aequum est evehit efficaciam, quae tamen externa and obsignantia instrumenta si
quis dicit, non recuso.

Foedus novum non justificat nisi aptitudinaliter, and remote, ex suppositione
conditionis praestitae fidei, videlicet, sine qua nemini efficax est ad
justificationem. Quid? quod non agitur controversia de instrumento externo, and
offerente, sed interno, and applicante, quale fidem esse asserimus. Quod in
promptu esset fusius probare ex necessitate imputationis justitiae Christi
activo-passivae, quam ratione acquisitionis asserimus esse causam meritoriam;
respectu applicationis esse causam materialem justificationis nostrae. Unde
justificamur, non solum quia Christus justus est, (uti calumniantur Adversarii)
sed quia ejus justitia fit nostra gratiosa imputatione ex part Dei, reali
applicatione ex part nostri, quam (dum opera adjungunt ut concausas) efficient
(...), and assumentum justitiae nostrae, quod certe Christo, ejusque omnimode
perfecta justitia indignissimum.

Possem etiam in causae subsidium eruditissimorum hominum suffragia accumulare
ni taedio vobis essem; sufficiat impraesentiarum duorum Theologorum, quos
merito pluris aestimant Adversarii, testimonia coronidis loco apponere.

Primum Bradshavi, Fide tota, inquit, justificari dicimur, quia ea unice
apprehendit, and applicat justitiam Christi imputatam:

Alterum Reverendissimi Davenantii, determinatione tricesima octava. Fiduciae
in Christum Mediatorem tribuimus instrumentalem vim justificandi potius, quam
ulli actui hominis peccatoris; quia constat eo modo justificari homines, quo
gloria divina maxim illustretur, and honor salutis nostrae ad solum Deum
referatur. At qui aliis virtutibus and operibus statuunt hominem justificari,
gloriam salutis humanae non integram Deo relinquunt, sed merito suo aliqua
part adscribunt. Nos vero, uti totam gloriam eleemosynae promissae and datae
non mendico accipienti, sed liberaliter eam donanti, adscribere solemus: Sic
totam gloriam justificationis, and salutis humanae, non fidei in Christum
tendenti, and eum ad se attrahenti, sed Deo ipsi assignamus credentem gratuito
justificanti. Haec ille. Et hanc gloriam ut Deo nos etiam servemus illibatam,
concludimus

Fidem justificare sub ratione instrumenti. FINIS.
THE LIGHT and DARKNESS OF NATVRE, Discovered In a Sermon at S. Mary's in
Cambridge on the Commencement-Sabbath, June 29. 1656.

BY JOHN FROST, B. D. then Commencer.

Deus est quod vides, and quod non vides. Senec.

Deus ubique secretus est, ubique publicus, quem nulli licet ut est cognoscere,
and quem nemo permittitur ignorare. Aug. ep. 44.

geometric pattern

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

ACTS 17. 23. (...). To the unknown God.
ANd what such an inscription upon an Altar at Athens, the eye of Greece, and
that the eye of the world? and yet so blind, as not to discover the true
worship of the true God? Had this Altar been erected in some ruder, more
obscure part of Greece, it would have been just cause of wonder: for the
Grecians were the most raised, and eminent of all the Gentiles, the most
curious and inquisitive searchers into the secrets of all knowledge; which the
Apostle takes notice of, (...), the Greeks seek after 1 Cor. 1. 22.
wisdom. In which they were such exquisite proficients, that all other
nations, even the Romans themselves, in comparison of them, are in
Scripture Phrase accounted but Barbarians, I am a Romans 1. 14.
debtour, says the Apostle, (...): which he seems to amplify, or explicate in
the next words, (...), to the wise, and to the unwise. But that such an
inscription should be found at Athens, a famous University, so named from it is
dedication to Minerva, the Goddess of Learning; the fountain from which the
streams of knowledge were derived to the rest of the world; the seat of the
most eminent Philosophers, who here disputed with Paul, (which Verse. 18. Lib.
de Anima cap. 3. Lib. 1. Deipnosoph.
therefore Tertullian calls linguatam civitatem, in the same place stiling the
Athenians caupones sapientiae and facundiae, the ingrossers and monopolizers of
knowledge; whence as Athenaeus calls Rome (...) the compendium of the world, so
the Grecians termed Athens (...), the Greece of Greece, and (...), the mother
of reason): yet that this Athens should be no less infamous for Idolatry then
famous for Learning, must needs much heighten and enhance your admiration. Let
the advocates of the power and improvements of nature produce their case, and
bring forth their strong reasons (as the Prophet speaks) to evince a saving
Isai. 41. 21.
knowledge of God attainable by them: surely we shall have the less reason to
credit them, since we have the wisest, most raised and improved amongst the
Gentiles confitentes reos in the Text by the inscription of their Altars (...),
to the unknown God.

Many such Altars there were erected at Athens, if you credit Grotius. Some of
the Ancients, as Oecumenius and Hierom especially, Grot. in loc.
conclude, that this was not the whole inscription, only the Apostle makes use
of so much of it, as might with advantage usher in his discourse of the worship
of the true God, from verse the four and twentieth to the one and thirtieth.
Calvin conceives that the inscription was not to any single Deity, but Diis
omnibus peregrinis. Heinsius doubts not, but it was erected upon the account of
some signal unexpected benefit received; as those which we read of in Tacitus,
inscribo adoptioni, and ultioni whence the Apostle takes a suitable argument,
from the consideration of the benefits of Verse. 24. 28
God, as his making the world, and giving to all things life, motion, and
being, to urge upon them the worship and service of the true God. Some think
the Altar was erected upon the Persians invading A Lapide, B^za, Giotms.
Greece. Others say it was upon the Athenians deliverance form the pestilence,
which they, having in yain attempted to remove by homage and service to their
native Gods, at last consulting the oracle of Apollo receive a command to
Instrate their city by sacrifice, but no God named, to whom they should perform
it: Epimenides, then at Athens, counsels them to let the beasts for sacrifice
loose, and where they stood still there to erect an Altar, Deo ignoto and
propitio; To the unknown and propitious Deity: which being accordingly
performed, the plague ceased. Others think it was set up out of superstitious
fear: lest some Deity, whom they had omitted in their sacrifices should be
incensed, and so plague them. I shall rather conclude this inscription to point
at the true God: neque enim ibi alius ignotus Deus praeter verum, says the
learned Heins. in locum.
Heinsius. Else the words following the text would scarce be reconcilable to
truth, whom ye ignorantly worship preach I unto you; intimating the inscription
to have been to the true God. Though whatever the occasion of the erection of
this Altar was, it is plain the Apostle had a fair opportunity offered him to
discourse of the knowledge of the true God, of whom they betrayed most gross
ignorance by this inscription, (...), To the unknown God.

The text presents to your considerations, 1 the light, 2 the darkness of
nature.

First, The light of nature; it is inscribed (...). Here is a God discovered
and a worship acknowledged due to him by the erection of an Altar.

Secondly, The darkness of nature, it is (...). These discoveries are but
dark, and imperfect, the true God of the Jews was but an unknown uncertain God
to the wisest of the Gentiles: as appears by that of Lucan.

-- and dedita sacris Incerti Judaea Dei. Hence two notes obviously arise,

1. Some discoveries of God may be made by the light of nature.

2. Natural light in it is most elevated and raised improvements, can make no
full and saving discoveries of God.

By this introductory explication of the words you easily perceive what is the
subject of my present discourse, which none I presume can rationally judge
unseasonable or unsuitable either to the place I speak in, in an Athens, an
University no less famous for Learning then that of old, and infinitely
surpassing it for Religion: or the persons I am to speak to, men of eminent and
raised improvements. If by the first of these I may quicken any stupid supine
sluggard to a diligent industry in reviving and improving those principles,
which God in nature has implanted in him: and by the second knock off any
proud wits from resting or vainly glorying in their acquired accomplishments,
(which is the sin of most, and ruin of many Scholars) and persuade them,
amidst their highest improvements and exquisiteness in Arts and Sciences, to
look up to God for higher, spiritual, supernatural discoveries; I shall compass
the greatest part of my design in the choice of this subject at this time:
which I shall endeavor in the Application, having first handled the points
Doctrinally, which I shall now enter upon.

The Socinian (in this an enemy of man's nature as in the whole model of his
doctrine he is of Gods grace) denies all natural, whether innate or acquired,
knowledge of God.

The Remonstrant advances the light of nature too high, while he asserts the
improvements of it to be sufficient to reach a saving discovery of God: either
immediately, or (as those who speak with the greatest modesty assert) mediatly
and dispositively (ut disponantur homines ad praedicationem Evangelii, as the
Dort-Remonstrants determine) as obliging God to the bestowing and disposing men
to the receiving farther and saving discoveries from God. Each of these
doctrines is suited, and fitted to comply with that model of Divinity, which
these Doctors have broached and vented to the world.

The Socinian must not acknowledge man at first to have been created after the
image of God in righteousness and knowledge, (which Smalcius therefore calls
Idaea quaedam in cerebro nata) lest he be necessitated Contr. Frantz. disp. 2
to confess his immortality in that state, and so death to have come into the
world as the punishment of sin: for then he must consequently confess the
necessity of a satisfaction by Christ for that punishment, in order to man's
recovery; to the completing of which this Divinity must be acknowledged as
necessary, both which the Socinian blasphemously denies. Now, as consistent to
all this, it is his interest to deny all natural knowledge of God, which we
truly assert to be the relics and remains of that Divine image, which God
drew upon man's soul in his first creation.

The Remonstrants, in order to uphold the Doctrine of universal Redemption,
must of necessity assert an universal sufficiency of means allowed to all,
and consequently to those who never heard of the Gospel; which their English
Advocate knew well, and therefore roundly asserts, that men may by the light of
nature gather (...), the effect and substance of the Gospel, and (page 11. of
the Pagans debt and dowry) that the words of the heavens day and night, which
they speak in the ears of all nations, are the words of eternal life, as well
as those which our Savior himself did speak. Surely S. Peter was of another
mind, who, when our Savior seems to charge him with an intention of
Apostasy, makes him this reply, John 6. 68.
Lord, whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life, but of this
more anon. Thus you see while the Socinian would blow out the candle of the
Lord, the Remonstrant endeavors to set it up instead of, or to usher in the
Sun of righteousness.

I shall speak briefly to the first of these, as introductoric to the second,
which I chiefly intend.

Discoveries of God may be made by the light of nature two ways.

First, By those inbred and implanted notions, those (...), which are the
remains of the image of God in decayed nature; those principles which
discovered themselves in the very Heathen: which are partly speculative, the
first of which is that there is a God; partly practical, the first of which is,
that this God is to be worshipped. This is the (...), which the Apostle takes
notice of in the Romans 2. 15. Romans 1. 18.
very Heathens, which he elsewhere calls (...), which still remained impressed
upon their hearts: the imprisoning which in unrighteousness left them without
excuse, which it could not have done, had there been not remains of natural
light to awaken and convince conscience to a self condemnation. Had there not
been some natural practical knowledge of good and evil, conscience could not
accuse, but upon apprehensions of a Deity, as the supreme judge of the
violations of some law known to them. The justice of God in punishing sin, was
one of those natural truths, which the light of nature discovered, which the
Apostle calls (...), known to the Heathens. The very Barbarians could conclude
against Rom 1. 32.
Paul as a murderer, liable to the vengeance of God, when the viper hung upon
his hand. By these common notions I mean Acts 28. 4.
not the intelligent faculty, nor yet the species of things impressed in the
mind, as if all knowledge were nothing but (...), which was Plato's opinion;
nor yet any Idea which God has formed of himself in the mind of man; but some
habitual notions and principles, as the remains of that habit of knowledge,
which was part of the image of God upon man in his first creation: which lie
indeed as sparks under the embers till cherished and blown up by acts of
reason, improving them unto actual knowledge. In respect of which Aristotle's
Rasa tabula may go for a truth. But the general consent of Nations, who had
sine doctrina anticipationem quandam Deorum, as Tully speaks, their wholesome
laws for the worship of God, their industrious Idolatire, that they would
rather Lib. 1. de not. Deor.
debase their nature to stocks and stones, to their stinking garden-Gods, then
worship none, are pregnant arguments of apprehensions of a Deity by the light
of nature, which is the same in all men, quoad prima principia and secundum
rectitudinem, and secundum notitiam, as Aquinas determines, as to the first
principles both of knowledge 12, 2dx. 2u. 94. arl. 4.
and practice.

The Socinian thinks he sufficiently confutes all this by saying, That the
Heathen had it sola fama, only by report and tradition: but Tully tells us,
they had it duce natura, and the Apostle (...), by nature. The first principles
of which may be born down, and obscured Romans 2. 14.
by Passion, custom in sin, Satan's blinding men's minds; especially if to all
these be added Gods giving men up (...), for the abuse of this natural light,
as we read he dealt with those Heathens, Romans 1. 28. but they can be no more
wholly abolished then reason it self. I like the determination of Ale^sis in
this Part 32. 2u. 27. membr. 3. art. 1.
point, who asserts the light and Law of nature to be delibilis quoad effectum,
but indelebilis quoad naturam, which he fitly illustrates by the Eclipse of the
Sun, in which the light is obscured, but not extinguished.

Men may arrive at that senslessness and stupiditie, as to live without actual
apprehensions of God, (...); but none can be without those principles which
dictate, and, if improved, would Ephesians. 4. 19.
lead them into some knowledge and discoveries of God. I call to witness the
secret lashes of those, who most endeavor to stifle and choke these natural
principles, which God left in corrupted nature, for the upholding humane nature
(for man without these would be equalized to beasts) and that by their light
and improvement man may seek after, and arrive at some knowledge of God. (...),
the Apostle tells us was the end of them: that which may be known of God is
manifest in them, says the Apostle, Romans 1. 19. (...). That Is the first.

Secondly, By the contemplation of the Creatures, and Providence of God.
Natural reason by a climax, and gradation of causes and effects, may ascend to
a discovery of a first being; something of the nature of which is discoverable
by Natural light, (...) it being one received Maxim of Reason, that What ever
is in the effect is in the cause, either formally or eminently, and therefore
the light of nature may discover not only the existence, but some of the
glorious Attributes and Perfections of God. The Apostle mentions his Eternity
and Power, as knowable by the creatures of Romans 1. 20.
those who had not the Gospel. It is true, while the Heathens dazzled with the
glory of the creature, terminated their contemplation in them, the creatures
proved occasions of their Idolatry and Atheism. Pliny, that great searcher
into Nature, denies a Deity: Lib. 2. Hist. not. cap. 7.
and Galen has nothing (as some observe) by which in charity he can be
excused from Atheism, but one single hymn in a good mood composed Creatori.
Yet the creatures in themselves are as so many mirrors, in which is
discoverable the glory of the Creator, which the Psalmist tell us, Psalm. 19.
1. the heavens declare, namely objectively, as giving man just occasion to
celebrate the glory of the Majesty, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the
Creator. From whose creating all things, the Apostle argues the Gentiles into
an acknowledgement of a worship due to God. We preach unto you, that ye should
turn from your vanities unto the living God, who made heaven and earth. I find
Augustine in his Confessions, thus bespeaking Lib. 10. cap. 6.
God, Coelum, (says he) and terra, and omnia quae in iis sunt, undique mihi
dicunt, ut te amem, nec cessant dicere omnibus, ut sint inexcusabiles. Job send
us ( chap. 12. 7, 8, 9. verses) to the creatures to learn God. Can a man see a
fair exquisite picture, and not admire the Artificer? ex pede Herculem, Natural
light may trace God by those footsteps he has left of himself in every
creature. So from the management and ordering of affairs in the world, reason
discovers the Power and Wisdom of God. Tully concludes that nothing Lib. 2 de
not. D^or.
is so manifest, when men contemplate the heavenly bodies, as that there is
aliquod numen praestantissimaementis, quo haec regantur, some admirable wisdom
to manage them: and the Apostle tells us, Acts 14. 17. God left not himself,
(...), even amongst the Heathens, which he proves by Gods giving them rain and
fruitful seasons, the issues of his providence, though they had not the
Gospel-testimonie of God.

It is true, the belief of a God was sometimes weakened and shaked by observing
the seeming inequality of providential dispensations to good and bad. Cur bonis
mala, and bona malis, was a question which puzzled them, which Seneca has (I
had almost said, divinely) resolved: and no wonder when Scripture tells us of
Job, David, Jeremiah, the Saints of God were at a loss and stand upon the
consideration of the providence of God in this particular: but these did but
retard not overturn their acknowledgements of a God, of whom there are such
visible discoveries in the least creature (for God is maximus in minimis) that
Augustine professes he doubted S^liloq. cap. 31.
more sometimes whether he had a soul, the effects of which he daily
experienced, then, utrum in hac rerum universalitate sit Deus, whether there
were a God ruling the world.

It is true, what ever may be known by the creature is in more legible
characters in Scripture: whence the Apostle says, that by faith we believe
that the worlds were framed. The creation of the Heb. 11. 3.
world is a truth discoverable by natural light, though the wisest Philosophers
erred much in the manner of it, which Moses has exactly described. The
Platonists, as Augustine tells us, asserted the bodies Lib. 12. de Civit. Dei.
cap. 26.
of men to be produced by their minor Deities, though their souls were created
by God. The same truth may be the object of science, as made out by rational
demonstration; and of faith, as built upon the authority of God in
Gospel-revelation: whence God falls under the object both of Metaphysics and
Divinity. (...), says the Apostle, speaking of those who were destitute of
Gospellight. Romans 1. 19.
God has manifested something of himself to them namely by that common light
by which he enlightneth every one; who comes Joh. 1. 9.
into the world: to wit, by the light of nature, which improved may bring us to
many, though no saving discoveries of God. And that brings me to the second
Truth contained in the Text: though it be (...), yet it is (...), whence
arises the second assertion.

That natural light in its most elevated and raised improvements can Doctrine.
make no full and saving discoveries of God.

In the handling which point I shall not dare so far to intrude into the Arc
of Gods secrets, as to enquire or determine what extraordinary way God may take
to manifest himself savingly to those, who had only the guidance of natural
light. Secret things belong Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
to God, revealed things belong to us: but if God did use such, as for my part
I will not limit the holy one of Israel, I assert,

First, It was not as the issue of natural improvement; nor

Secondly, A fulfilling any promise revealed in the Word; nor

Thirdly, Any retribution by way of distributive justice; nor

Fourthly, Any answering a just claim could be made to farther communications:
for

First, Suppose a man to have improved natural light to the utmost height, and
this is but suppositio per impossible;

Secondly, Suppose him to have attained all moral virtues in gradu Heroico;

Thirdly, Suppose him most industrious and quick-sighted in the study of the
creatures and the providence of God: yet I assert that all this cannot reach
to any saving discoveries of God, upon this fivefold ground.

1. Because natural light can reach no discoveries of Christ, whom Chrysostom
thinks to be here meant by the unknown God, In locum.
(...). The Athenians were wont to worship the Gods of all nations, whence the
Apostle justly charge them of overmuch superstition, verse. 22. and, because
they knew not Christ whom the Christians worshipped, they erected this Altar to
him under the notion of (...): however this may be but a conjecture, certain it
is that the utmost light of nature improved cannot discover Christ. You know
the old charg, which Augustine lays against Tullie's works, that he could not
find the name Jesus in them. Plato seems to bid the fairest for such a
discovery, when he says (...), which sounds like that Scripture, Joh. 1. 3.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made: but the learned Casaubon well notes that Plato's Exercitat. lib. 1.
(...) differs vastly from S. John's (...), that being only the supreme reason
and wisdom used in the creation, which natural light might discover from the
creatures; the other the eternal subsisting word made known only by the
Scriptures. There is a natural connection between God and the creature, as
between the cause and the effect, so one may be a due medium of discovering the
other; but there is no connection imaginable between the creature and a
Redeemer: some indeed lead us a tedious circuit here, and tell us that natural
light discovering God to be just, and yet observing his patience, might from
thence gather a satisfaction made by a Mediator; but I presume you easily
discern a non sequitur in this Argument: for the patience of God argues at the
greatest advantage but a reprieve, not a pardon. For it is often exercised
toward the vessels of Romans 9. 22.
wrath as the Apostle tells us: or if it might argue the mercy of a Creator,
it could not rationally conclude a purchase made by a Redeemer, for the
discovery of whom natural light was never intended, which should have been most
perfect, had man persisted in innocence, yet the discovery of a Savior would
then have been as unnecessary as it is now impossible by the light of nature,
which remained in Adam after his fall, who yet never dreamt of a Savior, but
lay under fears and terrors of an offended justice, till God revealed Genesis 3.
15.
to him the promise of the seed of the woman.

But suppose natural light could reach the knowledge of a Mediator, yet not of
Christ as the person, which yet is indispensably necessary, if Scripture may be
admitted umpire; This is life eternal, etc. Joh. 17. 3. And, There is no name
else given under heaven whereby we must be saved: without whom whosoever dare
promise any salvation, Acts. 4. 12. Sermon. 14. de verbo Dom.
S. Augustine doubts whether that man shall be saved by Christ^ and yet some
dare entail it upon every Religion, which is the ground of mere Scepticisme and
equalizeth Turkey and India with England. The Apostle describes those who had
only the light of nature, Ephesians. 2. 12. Matt. 2.
therefore to be without hope, because without Christ. The Magi, though
Astrologers, yet needed the guidance of an extraordinary starr to lead them
unto Christ: of whom when Peter had made that eminent confession, our Savior
tells him that flesh and blood had not revealed it unto him, but his Father.
Matt. 16. 16, 17. This Sun of righteousness, as that in the firmament, is only
discovered by its own light.

Secondly, Because natural light cannot discover the means of salvation, as
justification, regeneration, faith, repentance: which are matters only of
Gospel-revelation, if the Scripture may be heard to speak. The Apostle gives
this as the reason of his high valuation of the Gospel, because it only was
the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16, 17. Romans 10. 14.
and he concludes expressly that there is no ordinary way of faith but by
hearing. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? yes, says
the Remonstrant so they might by the preaching of the creatures; Sun, Moon and
Stars: for verse. 18. it is said, Have they not heard? yes, their sound is gone
out into all the earth; which by the Psalmist is spoken of the creatures
manifesting God. True, Psalm. 19.
the Apostle uses that Scripture by way of accommodation, to note the intent
of Gospel-preaching, not thereby to license the creatures as preachers of it:
but to note the extent and success of the Apostles preaching in the world,
(...), not of the creatures but of the Apostles, and those whose feet bring the
gladtidings of peace, verse. 15. Natural light can never discover says in
Christ as the means of salvation: those who would tie that faith mentioned by
the Apostle, he that will come to God must believe that God is, and Heb. 11. 6.
that he is a rewarder, etc. to a faith in God only as creator should in my
opinion do well to consider, that God since the fall is a rewarder to none but
through Christ as Mediator, who therefore must consequently be included in the
object of that faith by which we please God. So repentance is not discoverable
by the light of nature, it was a riddle to the Apostles themselves that
repentance unto Acts 11. 18.
life should be given to the Gentiles.

So the righteousness of justification is indiscernable by natures light; it is
in the Gospel only that the righteousness of God is revealed Romans 1. 17.
from faith to faith: yet the discovery of all these is necessary to salvation.
He that believes shall be saved. Except ye repent, ye shall perish, Mark 16. 16.
Luke 31. 3. These are those mysteries into which the Angels desire (...), to
stoop that they may pry into: and is the light of nature more prying then the
Angelical understanding? By the Church is made known to the Angels the
mysteries of salvation: and Ephesians. 3. 10.
can the Heathens read them in the stars? I think Chemnitius was not too severe
in his charge, when he calls such assertions, non humana, sed diabolica
ludibria fidei justificantis, and verbi divinitus patefacti.

Thirdly, because the light of nature cannot discover the true worship of God.
(...) as S. Paul charge these sublimated Verse 32.
Athenians. The light of nature led them not to a true object of their worship:
the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 8. they did worship to them who were no gods; nay,
to devils, and not to God. But suppose the right object of worship, yet the due
manner is not discoverable by natural light, but only to be learned from the
word of God. S. Paul lays it to the charge of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 25. that
they worshipped the^ creature more then the Creator. (...), besides, as Mr.
Mede says, it should be rendered: but if they did worship the only true God,
as Augustine thinks, and Lipsius contends on the behalf of his Stoics; yet in
such a manner as God could not accept. Tertullian is express. Eo irreligiosior
Ethnicus, quo paratior: the more zealous, the more superstitious. The
Samaritan-worship was no less magnificent and pompous, then that at Jerusalem,
yet being not suitable to the word of God, our Savior rejects it, John 4. 22.
Ye worship ye know not what: But salvation is of the Jews: Why? because they
had the true worship according to the word of God, which natural light cannot
discover. Nay, nothing has more prejudiced Spiritual, Gospel Worship, then
measuring it by man's reason, which has always begat pompous, superstitious
outsides in worship, the easiness and splendor of which has made them
grateful to corrupt nature.

Fourthly, From the necessity of divine supernatural revelation, in order to
saving discoveries of God: the Apostle speaks expressly, 1 Cor. 2. 14. that the
natural man perceives not the things of God; neither indeed can he, (...), the
souly man, elevated by the highest improvements of reason and understanding, if
destitute of the Spirit, cannot reach the things of God. That this is the
proper importance of the word (...), appears from the Apostle Jude, verse 19.
(...). Any man, solis naturae facultatibus praeditus, says Calvin; qui humanae
tantum rationis luce In locum. In locum.
ducitur, says Grotius, who has no other guidance then the light of nature,
is he, to whom S. Paul denies a possibility of any saving discoveries of the
things of God. The outward shinings of the Gospel can bring us to no saving
knowledge, unless the Spirit withal shine into the heart to give the knowledge
of God in the face of 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Jesus Christ; much less can the dim light of nature: if thousands remain
blind under the full beamings and sunshine of the Gospel, no wonder they
should be in the dark who have only the candlelight of reason.

These enlightnings of the Spirit will appear necessary, if we consider,

1. Man's corrupted condition, in which he wants not only light, but eyes; and
these the Spirit must communicate; the outward discoveries of the Gospel are
ineffectual to it without the Spirit, though Christ himself, the Sun of
righteousness, displayed many beams of glorious light in his miracles and
doctrine, speaking as never man spoke, still the Pharisees remained in the
dark; our Savior gives you one account of it, Matt. 13. 11. Unto you is given
to know the mysteries of the kingdom, but to them it is not given, much less
can the most vigorous ray of natural light effect this. Could it discover the
object, it cannot renew and change the faculty, nor open the blind eyes, which
alone is the work of the Spirit, which therefore S. Paul prays for on the
behalf of his Ephesians, Ephesians. 1. 17. that God would give them the spirit of
revelation to the knowledge of himself, that the eyes of their understanding
being enlightened, they might know what was the hope of his calling, and so on.
No man has John 1. 18.
seen the Father at any time but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him.

2 The manner of these discoveries, which is spiritual, which the Apostle gives
as the reason why the natural man perceives them not, (...). Every object is
discovered by a suitable light, therefore the light of reason can no more reach
the mysteries of the Gospel, then the light of sense can the objects of reason.
The Author of the (...) in my opinion strengthens this argument, while he
endeavors to elude it, for he would have the (...) to be (...), the babe in
Christ: for certainly if he, who has some measure of spiritual discerning by
divine illumination (as the least Saint has) cannot reach such discoveries,
they who are wholly destitute of the illumination of the Spirit cannot attain
to them.

Fifthly, From the Scripture-description of those, who had only the guidance
of natural light, described to be without Christ, without hope, without God,
Ephesians. 2. 12. Alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance and
blindness of their minds, Ephesians. 4. 18. Not to know God, 1 These. 4. 5. to be
darkness in the abstract, Ephesians. 5. 8. And but to grope after God, Acts 17. 27.
(...), as the Egyptians under their thick darkness, or the Sodomites when
struck with blindness: and farther characterized as those who had a disrelish
of the Gospel, which was to them but foolishness. Nay, the most improved 1 Cor.
1. 23.
of them were the greatest opposers of the Gospel; you have here not only the
lesser voluptuous Epicurean, but more strict, refined, Verse 18.
elevated and severe Stoics, one of whose principles was to love virtue for
virtues sake, opposing S. Paul, and esteeming him but a babbler, and a setter
forth of strange gods, while he preached Christ. Chrysostom thinks their
bringing him to Areopagus was to punish Verse 19.
him, as they had done Socrates to death by two hundred elghtie one suffrages,
for innovating in religion, such an undream't of thing was a Jesus amongst the
wisest Philosophers even at Athens, who set up their Philosophical principles
in opposition to the Gospel: upon which account the Apostle warns his
Colossians, to beware lest they be spoiled by Philosophy, Colos. 2. 8. Not that
the Apostle decries all use of Philosophy (as some in our days, it is hard to
say whether with more ignorance or impudence, do) but only so far as it is
(...), and (...), and surely all is not such, unless it be in vain to be
rational, that is to say, to be men; for Philosophy is nothing but the genuine
birth of right reason: and res Dei ratio, says Tertullian (the candle of the
Lord, says Solomon) who yet decries Philosophers, as Haeresiarcharum
Patriarchas* so far as corrupted; but the errors of Philosophy do no more
argue the uselessness of Philosophy, then the errors of Divines evacuate the
study of Divinity. These belong to Philosophy no otherwise then wens or boyls
to the body, which being cut off, or cured, the body remains useful and
necessary. Philosophy is not opposite, but assistant to Divinity (and while
Hagar will wait upon Sarah, no reason why she should be thrown out of doors)
though Philosophers have often been the greatest enemies, and opposers of it. To
sum up all, if those who had only the light of nature be thus in the dark,
if neither Christ, nor the means of salvation, nor the true worship of God were
discoverable by it, it is sufficiency to any saving discoveries, may, I hope,
from the premises be rationally concluded.

But the Remonstrants have one salve for all this, which is that the ( facienti
quod in se est) improvements of the light of nature, though they be not
immediately sufficient to salvation, yet do dispose to the receptions of farther
communications of grace, and saving discoveries of God: so the
Dort-Remonstrants determine. Truth Page 327.
is, they have so many subterfuges in making out a sufficiency of means to
those who had only the light of nature, that we may say of them, what the
Historian observes of some of the enemies of the Romans, Major aliquanto labor
est invenire quam vincere. Give me leave a little to trace those footsteps I
observe they have left behind them in their writings, as to that universally
pleaded, facienti quod in se est. I say,

First, Who ever improved natural light and abilities to the utmost? If the
Remonstrants please (though I think it will not quit charges) to send out a hue
and cry after such, I am confident the return will be a non est inventus, nor
could they, though often solicited to it, bring one instance of any who have by
natural improvements arrived at faith: could any have been produced, we should
have heard of it with both ears long before this time. Arminius sure was
sensible of this, That none ever improved nature to the height, therefore in
his writings against Perkins flees to a minus male, those who improve somewhat
better a natural light then others. But then I demand,

1. What degree of improvement shall dispose for farther grace? and,

2. Whether all, except some few of the most profligate and vicious, be not
upon this account disposed for saving grace? especially if we stand to the
verdict of the Dort-Remonstrants, who determine all to be disposed, qui omnem
rationis usum non excusserunt, and then few, if any, are excluded.

Secondly, How this assertion differs from the Popish merit ex congruo, I shall
leave it to you to judge, and to them to make out. I am sure both are equally
contradictorie to the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has called us not according to
works, but according to his own purpose, and grace: but if upon improvements of
nature, it certainly is of works.

Thirdly, Does not this Doctrine friendly shake hands with old Pelagianisme, in
making grace and nature of the same latitude and extent? Mutant vocem propter
horrorem hominis Haeretici evitandum, ut sic eandem pravitatis sententiam
Sophistici palliatam introducant: sicque corda simplicium facilius corrumpunt,
they are the censure of the profound Bradwardine in this very particular: they
Lib. 1. cap. 26.
gild the pill to make it more grateful to the vulgar, and while they hug
the Heresy, they would not be branded for Heretics. To make any antecedaneous
works of ours but the causa sine qua non of grace, is the highest that ever
Pelagius went, if you credit the same profound Author. Ibid.


Fourthly, God is no way obliged to make farther discoveries of himself upon
the improvements of nature:

1. The improvements themselves cannot oblige God, as being not acceptable to
him, the highest moralities of the Heathens, being but corrupt fruit of a
corrupt tree, Matt. 7. 18. and being not the actions of persons in Christ, nor
issuing from faith, without which it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.
cannot bring any obligation upon God.

2. God has not engaged himself by promise, to make such additions of grace
upon the improvements of nature: for

1. Then God should often be false to his promise, it being evident that he has
often bestowed his Gospel and grace upon those, who have least improved their
naturals, as upon the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 10.
who were the grossest of sinners; Tire and Sidon were better then Chorazin and
Bethsaida, yet the Gospel was denied to those, given Matt. 11. 22.
to these.

2. There is no such promise upon record in the word of God; if there be, we
demand the Text, and it is at hand, Habenti dabitur. A very great encouragement
for you indeed ( My Fathers, Matt. 25. 29.
and Brethren of the Ministry) to be diligent in improving your talents of
Ministerial gifts and abilities: for these are meant in the Parable, the
talents were given when the Master went into a far country. Matt. 25. 14.
Ephesians 4. 8, 11
Christ when he ascended gave these gifts, Pastors, Apostles, and the rest.
Ministerial gifts are like the widows oil, which increased by being poured
out; whereas wrapping these talents in a napkin, by a careless negligence or
remissness, endangers the loss both of our talents, and of our souls, Take from
him the talent, verse. 28. Cast the unprofitable servant into uttter darkness,
verse. 30. but here is not the least assurance, or promise given of grace upon
the improvements of nature. The improvement was in the same kind, and so the
good use of naturals may be recompensed with a superaddition of greater natural
abilities: as God crowns the improvements of grace with farther degrees of
grace. Besides the immediate result of the good improvements of these talents,
was glory, Enter into the joy of thy Lord, which the Remonstrants themselves
will Verse 23.
not have to be the reward of a good use of nature, but only a collation of
saving grace.

God therefore is free from all obligation, either by man's merit, or his own
promise. Yea, but God will do it, sine alique obligatione, ex meraliberalitate,
says Corvinus often in several places of his writings against Moulin; but we may
justly wonder how Corvinus came to be of Gods secret council, that he can
determine what God will do, where there is no promise declaring that will; or
what assurance can be given to any of grace upon the improvements of nature?
where there is no promise to engage God, or found any well-grounded
expectation. And what less then the height of impudence is it for the creature
to fix laws to the Creator, and prescribe methods to God, which he has not
fixed in his word; but this method is laid ipsa aequitate Dei naturali, says
Corvinus, upon the equity of Gods nature, which obliges him to it. But is it
not as rash pride and presumption, to determine of Gods justice, otherwise then
God has done in Scripture? on, but God says, What could I have done more for
my vineyard? Esaias 5. 4. but what? because God gives a sufficiency of outward
means to his Church, shall his equity therefore oblige him to give
sufficiency of inward grace, to those who are without the Church? I leave you
to judge of this Logic, and shall conlude this point with that excellent
determination of Alvarez, Nulla lex fuit unquam statuta de dandis auxiliis
gratiae facientibus totum quod in se est ex facultate naturae, neque Christus
morte sua meruit, aut merere voluit talem legem: God never made, and Christ
never did, or would merit such a law, which should oblige God to the conferring
of grace upon the improvements of nature.

Fifthly, Are not the Remonstrants in this Doctrine direct Antipodes to
Scripture? which every where resolves all saving discoveries and communications
from God, into his discriminating will, not man's previous improvements. Cur his
conferat, praeteritis aliis, Act. 2. These. 2.
pendet ex miserecordia and liberate Divina, our Divines solidly determined at
Dort: (...), says Christ, blessing his Father for communicating himself to
those who were least disposed, Matt. 11. 25. Even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in thy fight* God will if you will, say the Remonstrants: I will because I
will, says God, Romans 9. 15. If you improve, God cannot be wanting to you, say
the Arminians: It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, says
the Scripture, verse 16. But after all this there is one shift more, Deus
paratus est dare fidem omnibus, quantum in se est; why then certainly
omnipotent grace can effect it: certo ordine, says Corvinus, which neither
Corvinus, nor any man else can discover. Nay, he never denies special grace,
nisi spretae vocationis respectu, say the Dort-Remonstrants, unless the common
call be refused: woe were to the best of us* did Gods grace depend upon such a
condition, for who does not refuse common calls? nay, without special grace we
cannot but refuse them. Nemo been uti potest libero arbitrio, nisi per gratiam,
is Augustins Divinity, and our Saviors doctrine too, John 6. 44. No man can
come to me except the Father draw him. True, but God gives an universal
assisting grace to all in order to the good improvement of natural light: this
is the plea, which their great English Advocate makes for them. But ( Brethren)
this is a Chymaera, and a dream, which the Scripture gives us no ground to
believe: nay, that tells you that God suffered those who had only the light of
nature, the Gentiles, to walk in their own ways, that is to say, extra suam
gratiam degere, if Prospers Acts 14. 16.
gloss may be admitted, to live without the necessary supplies of his grace.
Besides, it would be resolved, whether this assisting grace be effectual or no:
if so, then all must be in a capacity for saving grace: if effectual, or
ineffectual, according to the compliance of man's will, then all is still
resolved into nature, nothing given to grace; which is the height of
Pelagianisme. Sed quorsum haec perditio? may some say, To what purpose is all
this waste of time and words? I shall hope to evidence it no labor in vain, by
discovering the practical importance of this truth in the Application, which I
shall with all possible brevitie dispatch.

Application.

First, This may help us to discover the sandy foundation on which the Doctrine
of universal redemption, and consequently the whole fabric of Arminianisme,
stands. For, if this pillar be pulled down, the whole building falls about
their ears, which makes them so industriously voluminous in asserting this
doctrine above all the rest. Or if the purchase be particular, then the purpose
of God, the execution of which that purchase makes way for, must be particular;
the necessary consequents of which must be the certain efficacy of grace and
perseverance of Saints, because Gods purposes cannot be frustrated. Now this
Doctrine of universal redemption cannot be upheld without the designation of
sufficient means afforded to all men, which to those who never heard of the
Gospel can be nothing else but the improvements of nature: God not affording,
nay (that I may prevent that common cavil Deus paratus est) resolving not to
afford, the Gospel to many of them. Paul was expressly Acts 16. 6.
forbidden by the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia: and the Apostles at
first commanded not to go into the way of the Gentiles. Matt. 10. 5.
Well but though they had not the Gospel, yet non defuerunt media quaedam
communiora, says Corvinus: but what other those should be besides the light
and improvements of nature is not imaginable, the insufficiency of which to
salvation has, I hope, been in some measure evinced by the former part of this
discourse.

Secondly, Hence be persuaded to set your selves in opposition to this
doctrine, in doing which you appear for the honor of Gods grace and Gospel.
Bradwardine justly entitled his book de causa Dei, when he wrote against the
Pelagians: whoever peruseth it seriously will find it a most sovereign
Antidote against the poison of Arminianisme, against which in this point it is
Gods and your interest to appear. First, As you are ministers of the Gospel.
The Doctrine of the sufficiency of the light of nature vilifies and debaseth
your office: for what need the Commission of Christ to his Apostles and their
Successors to teach all nations, if God had before commissionated Matthew: 28.
19.
and improwered Sun, Moon, and Stars to do it? or what need the Stars in the
right hand of Christ, if those in the firmament have light enough to lead us to
him? Nay does not this argue you the greatest impostours, while you impose
hearing, reading, prayer, conference, meditation, grapling with the
difficulties of Scripture upon the people in order to the knowledge of God and
Christ: which an Indian or American can arrive at by the contemplation of the
creatures and providence of God?

Secondly, As you are Scholars. This Doctrine, I apprehend, makes Universities
and Commencements useless: no need sure of the Schools of the Prophets; you may
go without any expenses to school to the creatures. What need youth hazard
their eyes in studying the apices and points of the Greek and Hebrew Text, for
the understanding of the New and Old Testament, (in the latter of which some of
natures Advocates tell us, there is not a word to be found of faith in Christ)
which the Gentiles can arrive at by the improvement of Nature, and read written
in the legible characters of the heavenly bodies?

Thirdly, As you are Christians especially: for this Doctrine,

1. Robs you of your privileges in the enjoyment of the Gospel and means of
grace. Surely, the Apostle was out when he put a (...) Romans 3. 2.
to this as the greatest privilege of the Jews, that to them were committed
the Oracles of God: and our Savior mistook, when he said, Salvation was of the
Jews. Why it seems by this Doctrine the Joh. 4. 22.
Gentiles were every whit as near it, whom yet the Apostle describes to be
without hope. And surely we Christians do but flatter Ephesians. 2. 12.
our selves in a fools-paradise, while we imagine our selves so highly advanced
in our privileges above the Indian or American, who by this Doctrine can
oblige God to give them that grace, which we profess no claim to after our
utmost improvements of the Gospel; but say as our Savior has taught us, We
are unprofitable Luc. 17. 10.
servants. What great privilege is it to enjoy Ordinances, if the creatures,
and providence of God, can bring any to a saving discovery of him? Or what
great advantage to be planted within the pale of the Church, the enclosed
garden of God, if the dew of grace fall as plentifully upon the wilderness of
the world? Or what need their being added unto the Church who should be saved,
if they Acts 2. 47.
might as well have attained it out of the Church? Certainly ( Brethren) God
cannot but be highly provoked by such undervaluing these high
Gospel-priviledges.

2. It voids the exercise of Christian duties; it destroys a Christians
gratitude and thankfulness. It is in event to tell God that he was at an
unnecessary expense, when he gave us the Gospel; and it must needs dull and
take off the edge of our devotions for the Heathen, and quench all zeal, and
cut the sinews of all endeavors for bringing them over to the embracing of the
Gospel; and tells us we are guilty of a foolish ignorant commiseration when we
pity them. Nay, they might rather (were this Doctrine true) pity us, who go
about a circuit for that knowledge, which they have a more compendious way to.

Thirdly, Then no reason so highly to admire (as some do) the moralities and
improvements of the Heathens, which as glowworms might have some glimmering
luster in the night of ignorance; but now the Sun of Righteousness is arisen,
they appear to be but of an earthly extraction. Put antur esse virtutes, in
quibus regnat superbia and quaedam sibi placendi altitudo ruinosa, says
Augustine. A vein of Lib. 21. de Civi^. Dei, cap. 16.
pride and vainglory run through all their moralities, which besides in the
best of them were checkquered with some grosser sins.

Fourthly, Let us with thankfulness advance the mercy of God, in making known
himself to us by Gospel-discoveries, he was but (...) to the best of the
Heathen: but in Judah is God known. Psalm. 76. 1.
Blessed be his name, we can say, in England is God known. Raritas In 1 Cor. 2.
14. Psalm. 147. 20.
ipsa pretium augeat, says Calvin. God has not dealt thus with every nation.
The Psalmist might well close up with a, Praise ye the Lord, etc. Let us
commiserate and pray for those who sit in darkness, let us in Goshen pity
Egypt: but let us not advance nature in them to the disparagement of the grace
and Gospel of God amongst our selves: lest while we would seem charitable, we
prove unthankful, and by magnifying the light of nature, we disparage the
light of the Gospel, and rob God of his freeness, and specialty of his grace.
Holy Bernard, complaining to Pope Innocent of Abelardus (Professor at Paris,
who it seems amongst many other errors, had broached this, which I have been
discoursing of,) censures him thus, Dum multum sudat quomodo Platonem faciat
Christianum, se probat Ethaicum; While he would make Plato a Christian, he
proves himself a Heathen. And certainly those, who so highly advance natural
light, can have but low, mean, and very undervaluing thoughts of the Gospel.

Fifthly, Improve Gospel-discoveries of God, by walking answerably to such
revelation, let your conversations be such as become Phil. 1. 27.
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Let Us blush that moralities in a Heathen should
outshine Christianity in us. We know more, let us not practice less. Let Us
not, as Salvian speaks of some, Gentes agere sub 2 Timothy 2. 19.
nomine Christiano; but let every one, who names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity: otherwise our knowledge of God will but increase Luke 12. 47.
our stripes. Though the utmost improvements of nature cannot save the
Heathens, (excuse them they will in part, Fabritius shall fare better then
Catiline) yet the abuse of it condemned them: they perish without the law, Romans
2. 12. And if this left them without excuse, that they held natural truth in
unrighteousness; and Romans 1. 18, 21.
when they knew God, glorified him not as God, as the Apostle says it did; how
much more inexcusable shall the abuse of Gospel Light, and imprisoning it by
sin, leave Christians? Solons, Socrates, Scipioes, Catoes will appear in
judgment against many pretended Christians: It shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Sidon. When God Matthew. 10. 15 Romans 2. 9.
comes to administer justice upon the ungodly: it will be (...). Darkness seems
never so dismal as to those, who go immediately from the light: the darkness
of hell will be sadder to none, then to those, who fall into it from under the
light of the Gospel. The Pagans plea of ignorance will not excuse him, because
voluntarily contracted, and wilfully lived in; but a Christians improved
knowledge will much more condemn him.

Sixthly, Then let us not pride our selves in our natural improvements, in our
parts and endowments. We are here in a place of improvement, and let us improve
to the height (for questionless we must be accountable to God for our talents
of natural abilities, depth of judgment, acuteness of wit, strength of memory,
quickness of apprehension, which I wish they did really believe, or seriously
consider, who abuse these to the reproach of Religion, and opposing the truths
of God): but let us not rest in these, as in themselves setting us a whit the
nearer to the saving grace of God. Nay, if not sanctified, and joined with
humility, they may set us at a greater distance from God, and heaven. Great
parts and gifts are not just matter of pride and vainglory; but arguments of
usefulness and engagements to serviceableness for God; for, to whom much is
given, of him much shall be required. These will heighten our account when God
shall examine how we have traded with his talents, how honored him, or
benefitted our selves or others by the knowledge we have of him.

Indeed pride is the Scholars sin, (...): there was a tumor 1 Cor. 8. 1.
of pride breeding in the Apostle, by reason of his multitude of revelations,
had not God let it out by the thorn in the flesh. That 2 Cor. 12. 7.
chain of gold, which adorns my neck, helps to sink me deeper, if I be a
drowning; Arts and Sciences are your ornaments, but if not sanctified, may sink
you the deeper into perdition. Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, was a sad
complaint of old. One dram of grace will save a man, when a talent of gifts often
presses men to hell.

Seventhly, Let us examine, whether there be not many amongst those, who go
for Christians, to whom God is (...), many who know as little of God, as if
they lived in America. I believe, you ( my Brethren) who deal with the
multitude, find this too sadly true, that many worship God upon no other
account, then the Romans did their Jupiter, or the Ephesians their Diana;
because he is the God of the nations, and country, in which they were born, and
their forefathers God, and his worship in credit, and under the magistrates
command: who serve God by tradition more then out of conviction of judgment.
My Brethren, our spirits should be stirred in us (as Paul's was) with an
affection mixed of grief and compassion, Verse. 16.
when we observe this. But may not we (even at our Athens) find some to whom
God is an unknown God? I hope not; yet ( Brethren) notwithstanding all our
high-raised notions and speculations of God, he is truly in a Scripture-sence
unknown to so many of us as know him not;

1. Experimentally. The Devils have more notions of God then the greatest
Philosophers in the world. It is possible for a man to have many conceptions,
and be able accurately to distinguish and solidly to determine concerning the
grace of God, and yet in a Scripture-sence know nothing of it, unless he taste
and see that the Lord is gracious. Nicodemus a master in Israel, yet ignorant
of the work of regeneration, in respect of which an ordinary Christian may know
more then the greatest Scholar. I have read of one Didymus a blind man, whom
for his incomparable learning S. Jerome was wont to call his Seer: many such
there are blind as to the abstruse notions of God; but Seers in respect of
experience, which is the only true saving knowledge of God.

2. Practically and operatively, as our knowledge influenceth upon our lives;
to conform them to what we know: otherwise the Gospel and God are but notions
to us; and Scripture interprets it as a denial of God, They profess they know
God, but in works they deny Tit. 1. 16.
him. All our notions of God without this suitable practice can but amount to a
(...), a form of knowledge, not to any saving Romans 2. 20.
discovery: If ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them, not John 13. 17.
else: If knowledge would do it the Devils might be in heaven. The exprobratory
sentence will be at last, not well read or disputed, great Scholar: but well
done thou good and faithful servant. Seneca speaks of some Philosophers of his
days, Boni esse desierunt simui ac docti evaserint, who ceased to be good when
they began to be learned: I shall charitably believe no such will be found
amongst us, for I speak not these things (as S. Paul says to his Corinthians)
to shame you, 1 Cor. 4. 14.
but as my beloved Brethren and Friends, I warn you and exhort you in the words
of S. Peter, to add to your knowledge virtue, that you 2 Pet. 1. 5.
may be such as Seneca would have every teacher to be, Magis miremur visum quam
auditum, such as may be admired more for holiness of life, then subtilty of
learning, which God accounts no knowledge, if destitute of the study and
practice of obedience, Hereby know we that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. He that 1 John 2. 3, 4
says he knows him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him.

Eighthly and lastly, I beseech you, Fathers and Brethren, suffer the word of
exhortation, which quickens you to zeal and diligence in the dispensation of
the Gospel committed to your trust: that you may effect in your people by the
preaching of the word, what the highest improvements of nature (as you have
heard) cannot reach, to wit, a saving knowledge of God. God instituted the
preaching of his word and Gospel to supply the defect of natural light, the
Apostle is express, that when in the wisdom of God 1 Cor. 1. 21.
the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save those who believe. God has commissionated you on purpose, as
he did Paul, to open men's eyes, and turn them from Acts 26. 18. Mal. 2. 7.
darkness to light. The Priests lips must preserve knowledge, that the people
may seek the law at his mouth.

In order to bringing the people to a saving knowledge, let me (who would
willingly lie as Disciple at your feet) being by providence in this place, take
the boldness to give you a threefold direction.

First, Endeavor to bring those committed to your charge to a
Scripture-knowledge of God. Preach God not according to the abstruse
Metaphysical notions of Plato and Aristotle; all which Clemens Alexandrinus
says, are but like a rotten nut, (...), which has no kernel, nothing to feed
souls, which must have (...), as the same Author: but according to the
revelation God has made of himself in Scripture. Thus you shall approve your
selves to God in the discharge of your office. Empty aerie speculations may
(perhaps) gratify the humor, fancy, and curiosity of men; but
Scripture-truths only please and honor God. S. Paul's advice to Timothy is
very remarkable, Study to show thy self 2 Timothy 2. 15.
approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed: and the way to
that is (...), rightly to divide the word of truth.

Secondly, Preach a God in Christ. The Heathen can arrive at the knowledge of a
God abstractly considered; but a God in Christ is beyond the reach of natural
sagacity, but is your Commission to make known. God, says the Apostle, has
committed 2 Cor. 5. 19.
unto us the word of reconciliation: but what is that? why, that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Lay this as the foundation of all
your building, Christ in his person, and Christ in his offices: Christ in
opposition to nature, in contradistinction to merit and your own works and
righteousness.

Thirdly, Let all your other knowledge stoop to the discovering God savingly:
and so far as it is not consistent with a plain and profitable discovery of God
to the people, lay it aside.

S. Paul, though brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, yet laid down his learning
at the feet of Christ, and professes, that though he spoke with tongues more
then they all, yet in the Church he had rather 1 Cor. 14. 18, 19.
preach five words, that he might teach others, then ten thousand words in
anunknown tongue. At Athens indeed, a famous University, he quoteth a Poet,
Acts 17. verse. 28: but when he comes to 1 Cor. 2. 2.
his Corinthians, then he determines to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him
crucified: (...), non magni feci, is Grotius gloss, I valued no knowledge but
disesteemed it, that I might bring you to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ,
as crucified. Our Savior Coloss. 2. 3.
who had in him all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, yet condiscended to
the capacity of those whom he instructed, speaking Mark. 4. 33.
the word to them as they were able to hear it. In this Christ is a fit pattern
for our imitation, to teach us by a familiar plainness to descend to the
understandings of the people. Quomodo paratus esset impendi pro animabus eorum,
si eum pigeret inclinari ad aures eorum, says Augustine, in his book De
catechizandis rudibus. Rev. 2. 4.


In a word, you are stars in the right hand of Christ, which speaks both your
security, and your duty; it is the office of stars to shine in the night with
that light which they borrow from the Sun: so should you, now we are in a great
measure benighted in Atheism, and ignorance, shine with that light you have
borrowed from the Sun of Righteousness, who when he ascended, gave these gifts:
Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 8.
Pastors, Teachers, for the work of the ministry, the edifying of the body of
Christ.

There is another notion of the words, which I would willingly touch,
Tremellius's translation of the Syriack hinted me to it; that is to say, Deo
abdito, to whom the Athenians (understanding from their Sybills, Philosophers,
and others, that there was but one invisible, incomprehensible, ineffable God)
erected this Altar, as Spondanus conjectures. God was known to the Gentiles by
no name, and that, by which he was called amongst the Jews, might not
ordinarily be spoken, as Grotius notes. The name, Jehovah, had so much
immoderate reverence amongst the old Jews, that it might not be pronounced but
by the high Priest, and that only in the Sanctum Sanctorum, and only on the
Day of expiation, as Gregory in his notes observes. Others add that it was
used in their sacrifices, and in the solemn benediction of the people. Plato,
as quoted by Eusebius (lib. 1. cap. 8. De Praepa. Evang.) styles God, (...).

Note:

God is a hidden and incomprehensible God.

Hidden,

1. In his nature and essence, in which respect he is said to dwell in 1 King
8. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
thick darkness, and in light inaccessible.

2. In his counsels, and decrees.

3. In his ways and methods of his providence. They are (...), past finding
out, Romans 11. 33. a mine unfadomable. These things might have been profitably
enlarged. I beg your patience to a threefold improvement of this notion, and
I conclude.

First, As a check to curiosity, the Scholars sin, fatalis ingeniorum scabies,
as Lipsius calls it. O that we could learn contentedly to be ignorant where God
would not have us knowing! and let us not account it a disparagement to
acknowledge some depths in God, which our shallow Reason cannot fathom, (...),
says Chysostome on Timothy; and Page 598.
he that thinks to know God as he is, (...), Page 54.
says the same Father on John. The way to make us mere fools, is to affect to
know more then God would have us: Adams tree of knowledge made him and his
posterity fools. He that affects to pry into the body of the Sun, by gazing
grows stark blind, and sees less then he might by those scattered rays in the
air. So curiosity in prying into Gods secrets blinds many, and they know less
of him, then they might do by those discoveries he has made of himself in the
book of nature and Scripture. Nae intelligendo faciunt, ut nihil intelligant,
says the Comedian.

It is the credit of our Religion, to acknowledge such a God as is
unsearchable. Erubesce, Philosophe, tam parvum Deum habere, ut tu parvus per
parvam mentem tuam totum ipsum scruteris, as Bradwardine checks the prying
Philosophers.

God is most knowable, though we know least of him: as the Sun is most visible,
and yet our weak eyes least able to behold it, it is Aquinas's similitude. Non
est mirum si ignoratis, majoris esset admirationis, Lib. contr. Gentes.
si sciatis, says Arnobius: and therefore it becomes us to be modest, and
humble in our enquiries into God. The Apostle commands us, Romans 12. 3. to think
soberly, Sapere ad temperantiam, as Augustine reads it. Curiosity is a
spiritual drunkenness, that, Epist. 77.
look, as the drunkard, be the cup never so deep, he is not satisfied, unless
he see the botome of it: so the curious searcher into the depths of God, though
never so profound, he is unsatisfied till he comes to the bottom of them: and
where the Apostle stands as by the brink of the Ocean, and cries, (...), these
presume they can by the line of their reason fathom them; nay, rather then not,
they will make all Gods depths to be shallows, as the Remonstrants do.

Me thinks ( Brethren) our ignorance in the creatures, and being so far at a
loss as to fly to occult qualities, which Scaliger calls ignorantiae asylum,
should check our curiosity in the things of God, and teach us to sit down
contented to resolve Gods actions into some hidden causes, lying secret in the
abyss of eternal knowledge, and infallible will. The Heathen Seneca could say,
Nunquam verecundiores esse debemus, quam cum de Deo agitur: modesty never
becomes us better, then when we speak of God. It was good counsel Calvin gave
Beza, Cave ne te ullis inanibus argutiis irretias, I shall give the same,
especially to younger Students, to avoid entangling with unnecessarie niceties,
which perplex, not profit; such are thousands of School-niceties concerning
God; qui ut intelligatur tacendum est, says Arnobius; take the English from
the Apostle, become fools that ye may be wise.

Secondly, As a spur to industry. You must not think it an easy thing to
obtain a true solid saving knowledge of God: nothing so hard to know as God,
which the profound Bradwardine demonstrates thus, Si aliquid sit difficile ad
plenarie cognoscendum, and aliquid magis difficile, and aliquid adhuc magis,
and ita deinceps, aliquid est sum difficile: and quid nisi Deus? The Wiseman
tells you by what means you must come to this knowledge, If thou cryest after
knowledge, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5
and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures: then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Thirdly, As a quickner of desire, to provoke us to long for heaven, where it
it will be our happiness to know God perfectly, though then we shall not know
him comprehensively: for God is infinitae veritatis, cognoscibilitatis, as
entitatis; so must either lay aside his infinity, and cease to be God, or
elevate us above the condition of finite creatures, before we can be capable of
any comprehensive vision, which supposes an equal commensuration between the
object, and the faculty: but we shall know God so fully then as to make us
perfectly happy, and what we see now but in a glass darkly, we shall then see
face to face. Ecce sapientia qua curiositas hominis satietur! says Bernard.
Then your curiosity shall be wholly satisfied, and your understandings so
strengthened and elevated by the light, as to behold that God, which dazzles the
weak eye of reason, which elevated to its height, cannot reach any saving
knowledge of God: But still he will be (...), the hidden and unknown God.

FINIS.
SPIRITUAL THRIFT, OR GOOD HUSBANDRY FOR THE SOUL.

A Sermon preached in Greys-Inne-Chappel, and enlarged in several Common-Places
in St. JOHN'S Chapel in CAMBRIDGE: By JOHN FROST, B. D. late Fellow there, and
Preacher in S. Olaves-Hartstreet London.

(...). Plutarch.

(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 12.



CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

TO THE HONORABLE THE LADY ELISABETH TOLLEMACH, Relict and Dowager of Sir
LYONELL TOLLEMACH, Knight and Baronet, deceased, All happiness of this life,
and that which is to come.
MADAM,
YOur esteem of, and favor to the Author of these Sermons, has made me
presume to shroud them under your Patronage, as well to give some countenance
to them, as to testify my real Gratitude for your favors to me and mine. Such
are your excellent Virtues and Endowments; your piety to God, and devotion in
his service; your charity to all, and bounty to the poor; your care and
diligence in well-ordering, and good education of your Family; insomuch as not
only of your Children, but all your Children, are found walking in the Truth:
that I cannot think by these to add any thing to your present perfection. I
offer them to you, as poor men bring presents to the rich: if they may carry
acceptance from you, and bring profit to any soul, it shall abundantly satisfy
me. Two main duties of a Christian are the subject of them, Redeeming the Time,
and Profiting by the Word, in both which you are exemplarie to others, and so
the fittest Patroness for these Sermons: I therefore humbly betake them to your
Protection, and you to the Protection of the Almighty: to whose Grace you, and
yours, are daily commended in the weak prayers of,

MADAM, Your most humbly devoted servant, and unworthy Minister,JOHN FROST.

EPHESIANS. 5. 16. (...). Redeeming the time.
HOw beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things! says the Apostle, Romans 10. 15. (...), the word
signifies seasonable, opportune, or a word in its hour, and such indeed is
beautiful, as apples of gold in pictures of silver, says the Wiseman, Prove.
25. 11. And such will this appear to be, which I present you with at this time:
whether we consider our times in general, and take up the Apostles argument
here, they are evil both in regard of sin and suffering, of error and
profaneness, or the place we live in, we shall easily conclude, none to be more
engaged in this duty, then our selves (of this more in the progress of this
discourse); or lastly, if we consider that mispence of time, which (I speak it
to your shame, and am sorry that I have this occasion of speaking to the words)
to the dishonor of God, scandal to these places of education, so shamefully
abounds amongst us: so that we may complain of many among us now, as Seneca De
brevitate vita.
did, Plerisque simul ad temporis jacturam ventum est, profusissimi in eo,
cujus solius honesta est avaritia. Time is the only thing we can innocently be
covetous of, and yet there is nothing of which many are more lavishly and
profusely prodigal. Re omnium pretiosissima luditur, we trifle with that which
is most precious, and throw away that which is our greatest interest to redeem,
(...).

The Text is a lesson of spiritual thrift, and good husbandry, and resolves it
self into this plain Doctrine,

It is the concernment and duty of every one to be conscientious in redeeming
Doctrine.
his time.

In prosecution of which four things present themselves to our discourse.

First, what it is to redeem the time.

Secondly, why we are to be conscientious in this.

Thirdly, who are especially concerned in it.

Fourthly, the Improvement and Application.

First, what it is to redeem the time. In the explication of it, I shall lead
you no further then the expression in the Text, (...): which is a Metaphor
taken from Merchants, and so take the importance of our duty in these eight
particulars.

First, It speaks an act of wisdom in embracing the present opportunity, as
opposed to that dangerous folly, by which many befool, delude, and ruin
themselves, viz. by resting upon fond presumption of future times, as if they
had it at command. Utuntur illo laxius, says Seneca, quasi gratuito, as if it
were at their beck, and disposal, who mispend their present day of grace, and
put off the weighty concernment of their salvation, of their trading for
spiritual merchandise, till the day be spent, and the mart over; this is not
(...). A Merchant when he comes to a mart or fair, he takes his first season
and opportunity of purchasing his commodities, puts it not off to the hazard of
an evening, or the next days bargain, upon presumption then to have it
cheaper, lest the commodities be gone in the mean season. In this, the children
of this world are wiser in their generations, then we who pretend to be
children of light. How do most neglect the present time God puts into their
hands? play, idle, nay, sin away their market day, upon that presumption to
have grace and glory at a very cheap and easy rate, when they come to die?
resolve, perhaps, sometime hereafter to trade for such merchandise which are
spiritual, and while they are reckoning, the evening of death overtakes them,
and the mart breaks up, and so they are miserably disappointed. Like the
foolish virgins, who had their oil to get, when the Bridegroom came, Matthew. 25.
8. then they would have been buying, but then the trading was over, the
Exchange shut up. He was a wise Merchant indeed, whom we read of Matthew. 13. 44.
who without delay presently went and bought the field in which the treasure was
hid. (...), all in the present tense. This piece of wisdome-spirituall the
Scripture every where urges upon us, as Hebr. 3. 15. To day if ye will hear
his voice: and, Now is the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. and so our Savior, Joh.
12. 33. Walk while you have the light: Our Savior himself indeed set us a copy
and pattern of this in his own example: Joh. 9. 4. I must work the works of him
that sent me, while it is day. This language becomes every one of us, we must
wo^k while we have the day of grace: the night of death comes, in which none
can work. Let us get our work done while our day lasts, the present time is
only ours; Post est occasio calva, no fastening or taking hold of it: we can no
more secure our selves the future, then recall past time: therefore it is an
act of the highest wisdom to embrace the present; the want of which our
Savior lamented in Jerusalem, Oh that thou had known in this thy day! Luke
19. 41. This is only thine, the next is Gods day: This is our day of grace,
the next may be the day of Gods vengeance. The old world had a long day, while
Noah, the preacher of righteousness, warned them; the next was Gods day of
vengeance, then he brought the flood upon them. Let us then be so wise, as to
use that which only is ours. Non tantum est praesentis, sed vigilantis est
observare occasionem properantem, says Seneca. Let us be so wise as to
traffic for heavenly merchandise while our market day lasts, and so to redeem
the time: that is the first particular.

Secondly, An act of diligence and faithfulness to improve the time God allots
us, as opposed to sloth and idleness. Time is a talent, and God expects
improvement of it, and God will charge the nonimprovement of it upon us, as he
did upon Jezabel, Rev. 2. 21. A Merchant is diligent in improving his time for
the enriching himself; you shall not find him slothfully idle: so should we,
who are trading for heaven, for spiritual wisdom, be as much in seeking,
laborious in striving* you cannot have them upon easier terms: Prove. 2. 3, 4.
there must be getting, and seeking, and searching. Why stand ye here all the
day idle? says Christ, Matthew. 20. 6. asleep, says Calvin. But can we plead,
Not guilty? Have not we stood here many a day idle? and misspent much of that
time which God gives us to repent, and pray in? Surely, this is not to redeem
the time, but, as Zanchy observes, non permittere ut tempus otio elabatur
infructuose. Idleness is the very burial of a living man, (...) says the
^rist. Ethic. lib. 9. cap. 7.
Philosopher, lib. 9. cap. 7. Ethic. Seneca speaking of a most idle person,
describes him as one who had been long, but not lived long, diu fuit, non diu
vixit. Like the statues of Daedalus, which they tell us seemed to have souls,
but were inanimate: such spectrums an observant eye may take notice of daily,
which lodge in and about the College, as if they had not souls to improve with
knowledge and learning. That is excellent advice of the Wiseman, Eccles. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might* for Cursed is he
who does the work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48. 10. It is an act of
diligence, that is the second particular.

Thirdly, An act of discretion in laying out our time in our proper callings,
as opposed to those (...) in 1 Pet. 4. 15. It is possible for a man to study
hard, and take a great deal of pains to loose his time, and to be laboriously
idle, when he lays not out his time in reference to that particular calling he
is designed for. A Merchant we know regards not the traffic of other men, but
lays out his time and skill for that merchandise which belongs to his
particular trade: so should we in the improvement of our time, look especially
to that concernment of our particular callings. A man may mispend his time as
much aliud agendo, as nihil agendo, doing that which nothing concerns him, as
by doing nothing at all. Such are those Dictatores ab aratro, who leap from the
plough or shopboard into the pulpit: they may seem to be zealous redeemers of
their time; but indeed mispend it as unhappily in placing their endeavors upon
that, which God never designed them unto: therefore the Apostle often restrains
our diligence to our particular callings. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of faith: or ministry; let us wait on
our ministering, or he that teaches on teaching: or he that exhorts on
exhortation, etc. And so we may see how specially he instructs Timothy, 1 Timothy
4. 13. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine:
and verse. 15. meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them: fit
employment indeed for a Timothy, suitable to the special office of the
ministry. And in 1 Cor. 7. 20. he lays down a general derection for all: Let
every man abide in the same calling, wherein he is called, and in that improve,
and redeem his time. Domitian was very industrious, but in that unbeseemed his
estate and employment: viz. in catching flies. Nero lost his time, when he
studied and affected more the commendation of a skillful fiddler then a good
Emperor. Our employments should be fitted to our callings, and if so,
diligence in the meanest calling is acceptable service unto God: but if
otherwise, the greatest labor is but lost time. Thus for a Minister to be
immersed in worldly employments is mispence of his time, because a (...) as to
his main end and design of his office. Christ will endure no buyers and sellers
in the Temple. That diligence, which is commendable in one, may be loss of time
in another: thus Romances, plays, and such like are mispence of time in one,
whose design is the handling of the sacred oracles? the plea for them is that
they elevate the phansy, the truth is, rather they effeminate the mind, that
should in the mean time be exercised in deepest speculations.

Fourthly, An act of labor and solicitude in regaining time formerly misspent:
that is, by doubling their diligence for the future. Time let slip is
Physically irrecoverable, but in a moral consideration is accounted as
regained, when we double our endeavors and care. As a Merchant, who has had
great loss, doubles his labor in his future traffic: so should we who have
misspent our time (and which of us has not too much?) now redeem it, by a more
zealous and conscientious improvement of it. Thus we may at once testify the
sincerity of our sorrow for our former mispence, and in some measure repair the
dishonor we have thereby done to God. Thus S. Paul, who had wickedly laid out
his time in blaspheming and persecuting the Church, afterward redeemed it, by
laboring more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

Fifthly, It speaks an act of prudence, in choosing and embracing the fittest
opportunities and seasons for all our actions, and this is the proper import of
the word (...), season. To this the Apostle directs Galat. 6. 10. (...). A
Merchant watches the fittest opportunity for his trade and purchase: so should
Christians choose the fittest season for all their actions, wherein they most
promote Gods glory, their own and others good. All actions of Religion are not
seasonable at all times: the Wiseman observes, To every thing there is a
season, Ecles. 3. 1. as to instance. Fraternal correption, a duty, in which, if
duly exercised, the good of Christians is much concerned, yet not seasonable at
many times; as to reproove a scorner in the height of his scorning; or a
drunkard in the heat of his cups. When the poor begs, there is thy opportunity
of charity, or when their cause is represented to thee. When thou art wronged,
then is thy season to demonstrate thy patience and mercy in forgiving. When
thou see a Samaritane lie wounded, then is the opportunity of thy pouring in
wine and oil: and, when thy brother falls into sin, there is the opportunity
for exercising thy brotherly help to restore him in the spirit of meekness,
Galat. 6. 1. Some actions may be seasonable at all times, so for prayer every
time may be seasonable enough, (...) Ephesians. 6. 18. so Romans 12. 11. where some
read (...), others (...): whence Bellarmine would prove the text to be
corrupted; but I think good use may be made of both; as the perceiving the
fittest season for those other actions. And so some actions of Religion are
more seasonable at some times, then at others: as

1. The morning of every day for devotion: Aurora Musis; yea, and for the
Graces too: so David esteemed of it, Psalm. 88. 13. In the morning shall my
prayer prevent thee: so the primitive Christians judged it the fittest season,
as Pliny, no friend to them has it, They were wont, says he, Stato die ante
lucem convenire, and se Sacramento Plin Epist. lib. 10. ep. 67.
obstringere, ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent. And the
morning indeed is the fittest season for all religious exercises: of which one
of the Ancients gives this reason, because then the (...) is not disturbed with
those images and representations of things, which the variety of wordly
employments in the day time usually possess us with. This you may observe to
have been Job's practice, Job 1. 5. He rose up early in the morning, and
offered burnt offerings. And so we read of the Apostles, that they went early
into the temple, Acts 5. 21. So early should we be in our actions of devotion.

2. The Sabbath of every week. That should especially be redeemed, even from
those employments, which we may lawfully entertain upon other days: this is,
as I may so say, the market day for souls; in which you may especially trade
for spiritual Merchandise, and yet how sinfully lavish are many amongst us of
this day, that many amongst us sleep away the greatest part of the market! what
else means the absence of so many, especially on Sabbath Day mornings, from
these public exercises: the Chapel being thinner then, then at other times?
And yet there is a Divine stamp and impression upon this day; and that it be
carefully observed by us, all the quitie in the world calls for it, God having
indulged us the rest of the week for our selves and callings; and so we see the
Apostles care was to redeem it wholly to holy exercises; upon the first day of
the week, the disciples came together, for breaking of bread, and preaching,
etc. Acts 20. 7.

Sixthly, An act of expense and charge, when we are willing to be at cost for
the redeeming of our time, and to part with something that we may improve it.
As Merchants are at charge for their merchandise, they are often laying out their
treasure, have many a troublesome voyage and restless nights, for the securing
and bringing in of their merchandises: so should Christians spare some of their
lawful pleasures and recreations of their natural rest and sleep, that they
may redeem and improve their time; which is not only non abuti occasion, sed
etiam mill voluptatibus redimere, as Beza glosseth. Merchants prefer the least
gain before the fullest pleasure: he adventures all his riches; the Merchant in
the parable parted with all, sold it for the field, Matt. 13. It is said of our
blessed Savior, Galat. 3. 13. (...), (the same word that is in our Text). How
so? He parted with all, pleasure, profit, life and all, for the accomplishment
of this end: so should we in an ingenuous return of gratitude, part with our
pleasures and all, that we may consecrate our time to his service. Not, but we
may lawfully use pleasures and recreations, so they be not vain, and such as do
rather enervate, then refresh the mind, or too much expensive of that time we
should redeem to Gods glory, and the interest and concernments of our own
souls. It was the custom of the Primitive Christians to redeem some time from
their sleep for the service of God, which did (...) as Clement observes,
Clement.
exalt them to an Angelical perfection; which lies in a watchful, constant
observance, yea, and expense of their time, or eternity rather, in the service
of God. And I read in Nicephorus of Theodosius the Emperor, that after the
variety of worldly employments, relating to his elvil affairs in the daytime,
he was wont to conscerate the greatest part of the night to the studying of the
Scriptures: to which end, heh ad a lamp so artificially made, that it supplied
it self with oil, that he might no way be interrupted in dedicating that time
to God.

Seventhly, An act of watchfulness in avoiding what may betray us to the
mispence of time: such are especially frothy and idle discourses, and bad and
loose company. A Merchant will not engage himself in impertinent discourse, or
voluptuous company, when he should be driving on his trade. These every man
must avoid, that would redeem his time; for bad company draws into sin and
idleness: upon this account God forbad the nations to dwell with the Jews,
Exodus 23. 33. therefore David would have no commerce with such, Psalm. 119. 115.
as if he could not spend his time in the service of God, while such were in his
company. Idle company is the shame of Societies, the bane of piety, the
corruption of youth, the quencher of devotion, the lavisher of time. He that
desires to be provident of his time, must be prudent in the choice of his
Society, otherwise, in bad company, he may quickly throw awaytime, and
himself, soul, eternity and all.

Eighthly, An act of deliberate and resolved judgment, to lay out our time for
the best things. As a Merchant will not expend his time and money for toys and
trifles, but for pearls, and the like. Curiose merces considerat ut emat
meliores, says A Lapide on the Text; examines his wares, that he may purchase
the best: so should Christians in laying out their time, not lay it out for
trifles of the world, but for the greatest things of eternity: not with Martha
for the many things, but with Mary for the one thing necessary. The Merchant
in the Gospel indeed sold all, but it was to purchase the pearl: and S. Paul
counted all loss, but it was to gain Christ, Philip. 3. 8. Those who spend
their time for the vanities of the world, for the light air of popular
applause, for the shadow of honor, riches, or the like (not to mention the
debasing of their souls, which are born to greater hopes and designs): they
throw away their time, and often their souls, in such bargains: to whom let me
say with the Prophet Esaias, 55. 2. Wherefore do you spend your money for that
which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? We are here
at Athens, that Emporium scientiarum, trafficking for wisdom and knowledge;
but let me suggest this, We do but throw away our times, though laboriously
ordered to this end, if in the mean time we are careless of spiritual wisdom:
Those merchandises are better then the merchandises of silver, and her gain
then of fine gold, Prove. 3. 14. In respect of which, our trading here for all
other knowledge, is but mere downright pedlery. We may mispend our time Melch.
Adam in vit. Lutheri page 142.
in our studies, if so addicted to them, as to neglect our devotions, and other
studies to God. Melchior Adam tells us of Luther, that every day he spent three
hours in prayer, etiam studiis aptissimas, even those that were fittest for his
studies: and it was his usual saying, Been orasse est been studuisse: to pray
well, with him, was to study well. Prayer is as oil to the lamp, makes it burn
clearly, and lastingly. So again, if our solicitude for other knowledge makes
us neglect, and regardless of our knowledge of Christ. S. Paul gat much
knowledge at the feet of Gamaliel, but when he came to understand himself, he
counted it all dross for the knowledge of Christ, Philip. 3. 8. If we would be
wise Merchants, we must trade for heaven and eternity, and lay up our treasure
there, and amidst our heats, and pursuits of other knowledge, lay out our time
and prayers especially for the knowledge of Christ, whom only to know is life
eternal, John 17. 3. And that is the first General.

Secondly, Why we are to be conscientious in this. 2. General.


First, It is the very end of thy creation: and that,

1. As a creature: God did not create, and set us in the world, as the Psalmist
says of the Leviathan, to take our pastime, to be slothful and idle, but to
be in action and employment. God created all things for man, and man for
himself, therefore ought to be in continual motion, and tendencie toward God.
As all things naturally tend to their end, as their rest and perfection: so
should man to God, as his happiness and rest. Idleness is a contradiction to
the principles of our creation. Man in innocence should have been freed from
weariness, but not from employment: he was to dress the garden, and that by
Gods appointment: And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of
Eden, to dress it, and to keep it, Augustine. de Genesis ad. lit. lib. 8. cap. 8.
Genesis 2. 15. Cui summa cum voluptate vacaret, says Augustine. Vexing and
tormenting labor, was indeed the punishment of sin, In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread, Genesis 3. 19. Therefore as a creature, redeem thy time.

2. As the most noble creature. God at first did not create any one thing
useless: you cannot cast your eyes any way, but every creature checks, and
upbraids your idleness and sloth: and I hope this will not seem an impertinent
argument, to put you upon improvement of your time. Solomon sends the sluggard
to the Ant to learn industry, Prove. 6. 6. If you look up to the heavens, you
see them in a continual motion, and the Sun running his course to supply you
with light, and that not as children to play in the Sunshine, but that the Sun
arising, man may go forth unto his labor. If you cast Psalm. 104. 23.
your eyes down to the earth, you shall see it traveling with fruits, and
grass, and herbs for your use; and we may well go to school to these to learn
labor and industry. Our Savior sends us to the Sparrows, and Lillies to
learn attendance upon Providence: the Prophet Matt. 6. 26, 28.
sends the Jews to the Stork and the Ass to learn obedience unto, and waiting
upon God, Jerem. 8. 7. Esaias 1. 3. and I may send you to every creature to learn
this lesson of an industrious redeeming of your time. Christ judges the
fig tree but an unprofitable burden to the earth, when it brought forth no
fruit, Luke 13. 7. Now man is the most noble creature, into whom God has put
principles of the greatest activitie, as capable of the greatest enjoyments, so
fitted with faculties, and principles to move toward them: therefore idleness
is a forgetting man's dignity, forsaking the rank God has set him in, and
debasing himself below the meanest creatures, who constantly in their order,
and obedientially serve the law of their creation. Nay, look to the creatures
above you, the Angels, they are in constant employment, as ministering spirits
for your good, Heb. 1. ult. and these may teach you diligence in, and
improvement of your time.

3. Consider, Christ spent all his time in the world for thee: from his birth (
To us a child is born; Isaiah 9. 6.) to his death, he died for our offenses,
Romans 4. 25. His soul was in a continual travel to save thee: and shall not this
engage thee? Christ's life was a continual labor to redeem thee; and shall not
this engage thee to redeem thy time, and expend thy life in his service? In
this he was a pattern, and example for our imitation. The Apostle judges this
to be the most reasonable thing in the world, 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of
Christ constrains us, because we thus judge: that if one died for all, then
were all dead. And that he died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them. So that
mispence of our time is not only unanswerable to our creation, but unworthy,
and unsuitable to the work of our redemption. For he gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. The time thou enjoyest, is the purchase of
Christ's blood, and he bought it not for thee, to lavish out on thy lusts, or to
throw it away idly: no, the Apostle tells you of another end, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God both in your bodies and
spirits, etc.

4. Consider, that the Devil is very laborious and industrious in spending all
his time to destroy thee. He loses not a minute of day or night, that he may
compass this end: 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Oh that we could learn this lesson
from Satan himself, to be as industrious in laying out our time in working out
our salvation, as he is in plotting our damnation! The Apostle would have us to
learn this from it, (...), Be vigilant; and so we had need, if we consider,
that nothing gives the devil so much advantage of us, Hierom. ep. 4.
as idleness. It was good counsel, that Jerome gave to his friend, Facito
aliquid operis, ut te semper diabolus inveniat occupatum; that when the devil
comes with a temptation, you may answer him, you are not at leisure. The devils
temptations, which rush in upon us with an irresistible violence, cannot
without repeated and frequent solicitations get entrance into the soul, if it
be well employed. The fowler bends his bow, and spreads his net for birds, when
they are set, not when they are upon the wing: so Satan shoots his fiery darts
at men, when they are idle and remiss; it will not pierce the soul when it is
upon the wing in devotion, or industriously employed in any lawful calling. S.
Chrysostom mentions two originals of men's ruin; (...), idleness, and
remissnes.

5. Consider, that idleness and misimprovement of our time betraies us to the
vvorst of sins (and this follows upon the former) because it disposes the soul
to the entertainment of every temptation. Otlum diaboli pulvinar; Idleness is
the devils cushion; upon which Satan sits, and broods his temptations. How
was David's soul, as tinder to the spark of lust, which Satan injected and
threvv into it? The glance of Bathsheba so fired his heart, that it brake into
a flame of lust: what was the reason of this? He was idly walking, 2 Samuel
11. 2. The Heathens in their Hierogylphicks describe Cupid lifting up a hand
and a torch, and idleness managing the hand, and ordering the stroke to the
heart, whereby the heart is inflamed with lust. Isiodore calls idleness,
(...), the Isid. lib. 1. ep. 9.
garrison and sort of the passions, which are all unruly and disorderly: It is
promptuarium scelerum, apotheca vitiorum, as another: no sin comes amiss to
him; he is plotting himself, and as ready to comply with other men's
contrivements of sin, as being at a loss how to spend his time. With how easy
a temptation, was Peter brought to deny his Master? the chief reason
questionless was pusillanimous fear of suffering, but his idleness might
contribute much to it; he was sitting idle in the Highpriests palace, Matt.
26. 69. God prescribed labor to man, not only as a punishment, but as a cure,
and prevention of sin: ut laborando recuperet, quod otiosus comedendo perdidit,
says Stella. He was set to dress the garden, and he would Stella in (...). 10.
idly entertain a discourse with the devil. So pride, that is another product
of idleness: when men have little to do, they can find time to invent foolish
and ridiculous fashions, only to cherish pride and vanity: and others
spending their time on the Lord's Day, between the comb and the glass, which
should be employed in preparatorie acts of devotion, to be consecrated unto
God, as introductions to the publick-service: you may find this was the cause
of Sodomes pride, Ezekiel. 16. 49. abundance of idleness was in her. Thus you see
by Scripture-instancies, that Lust, Apostacy, and Pride are the sad issues of
an idle misimprovement of time: when men are not faithfully employed, the devil
will employ them, (the soul of man is so active, that it cannot be idle, and,
if not set on work, the devil will be sure to find work for them) and they are
in as ready a posture of obedience, as the Centurions servants: there is no
preserving the health of the body without exercise, and these diseases will
grow upon the soul too fast, if not prevented by a diligent improvement, and
redeeming of our time.

6. Consider, Time is a talent, and therefore God expects an improvement of it.
Our time is not at our own dispose to be lavished out in pursuance of our own
lusts and designs, but a talent to be improved for our Masters glory. And as
he expected suitable improvement according to the number of talents, delivered
to his servants, Matt, 25. 15. according as one, or more: so as God gives us
the longer time, the more years, he expects our improvement of it: every day is
a talent of time put into our hands, and therefore he expects we should every
day improve it. Nay,

7. Consider, Time is such a talent, upon the faithful improvement of which,
depends the improvement of all our other talents, God intrusts us with, whether
gifts or graces. Action, as it begets, so it increases, strengthens, and
secures the habits which are lost and weakened, not only by contrary actions,
but by remission of their proper act: gifts decay and wither, grace grows dull,
and gradually decays, if not acted and improved. The talent laid up in the
napkin you know did not increase, no more then if it had been lavishly spent.
How many by idleness have suffered their parts and gifts to rust, and by Gods
judicial proceeding, have lost them fearfully! So unexercised grace is, as
comfortless, so withering and decaying. The sword, that is kept bright by
using, rusts in the scabbard; and waters, which keep sweet and clean by motion,
contract filth, and stinch by standing; air without motion corrupts, and grows
pestilential; flames not in motion perish: so do men's gifts rust, and even come
to nothing, if not exercised. The soldiers valor decays, and is impaired in
the garrison, but is increased and quickened in the field and battle. Idleness
and remissness enervate the virtues of the soul, but they are strengthened by
improvement. As therefore S. Paul exhorts Timothy, (...), to stir up the gift
of God that was in him; to keep it alive, as fire, and that by constant
blowing: should we preserve our gifts and graces by redeeming of our time:
especially,

8. Considering, that time is such a talent, as God will certainly call to
account for. The Apostle urges an holy improvement of time upon this account.
1 Pet. 42, 5. these two verses compared together; one thing God will account
for at the great day, will be our Time. Oh! how sad will it be for many
gray-heads to appear at that day, as old in sin as years, to answer for the
expense of three or fourscore years, which perhaps they have uselessly spent in
vanity and sin? Then God will bespeak men thus: Come give me an account of
that time, which I gave thee to glorify me, and to work out thine own
salvation in, and thou have been spending it in pursuance of the lusts of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. What a sad charge will this
be at that day to thousands in the world? Oh that we had hearts to consider it,
before it be too late, while time lasts, before eternity overtake us! what
account shall they give of their time, who lavish it out in idle sports and
pastimes, in pride, excess, and vanity? as that King of Persia, of whom Aelian
tells us, Var. hist. lib. 1.
who promised a large reward to any, who would invent any new sports and
recreations. See how the Wiseman checks young men, (who commonly are most
profuse, and careless of their time) in the midst of their jollitie with
suggesting this account unto them. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let
thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. he speaks by an
Ironical concession, Go on, spend your time in vanity, but after you have done
so, know for certain you must come to judgment.

9. Consider, it is a day of grace, and the time of patience, which God now
affords thee. Now the door of mercy stands open, therefore we should not, with
the foolish virgins, sleep away this time, lest the door be shut against us, as
it was against them, Matt. 25. 10. So as Esau, who lost the blessing, because
he came to late: this is the time of our reprieve allotted unto us, in which to
sue out our pardon: Account that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, 2
Pet. 3. 15. Plutarch calls it (...), and that it is, (...): and much more to
the same purpose may be found in that excellent piece of the slotheness of the
gods in punishing sinners. The Scripture speaks the same, Romans 4. 2. the
goodness of God should lead thee to repentance: and Revel. 2. 21. (...), time,
that she might repent. He now stands at the door and knocks; he gives us a day
of grace, and it will be our interest to redeem it to those ends, for which he
affords it. Time is illud unum; quod ne gratus quidem potest reddere, says the
Heathen Seneca. Senec. ep. 1.


10. Consider, It will be your wisdom to redeem it: Ephesians. 5. 15. (...). It is
desperate folly and madness for a condemned malefactor to trifle away the time
of his reprieve, as arguing a slighting of the Princes favor in allowing it to
him: or for a Merchant to idle away the time of his trade: we are here upon our
reprieve; it does speak our unsensibleness of, and unthankfulness for this
mercy of God, if we foolishly lavish it out, and not improve it to get our
pardon, and peace made and secured. It is the time of our trading, let us not
be such fools as Solomon speaks of, Prove. 17. 16. as having a price in our
hand, and have no hearts to use it. Our Savior makes it a Character of a wise
man, that he got his house built upon a rock, before the floods came, and the
winds blew, Matt. 7. 24, 25. it will be our wisdom to get our selves built
upon the rock, Jesus Christ, by faithl; to lay out our time in making our
calling and election sure, Philip. 2. 10. It is your wisdom, especially if you,

11. Consider, This day of grace will not always last. The time will come, if
we now neglect them, that the things that belong to our everlasting peace will
be hid from our eyes, Luke 19. 41. Jerusalem's day had a night, and then she
was left in darkness, who had formerly slighted the light: you may see the
length of your time, Psalm. 90. 10. It is soon cut off, and we flee away; this
must have a period. The Apostle tells us, that the long-suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 20. yet that day ended in a deluge. If the
fig tree was spared three years, yet afterward it was cut up.

12. Consider, Thou know not how soon thy time may end, thy day be spent;
perhaps when thou least expectest it. The night may overtake thee, before thou
think thy day half-spent, and thereupon art remiss and secure, as promising
thy self a longer day: the bridegroom came at midnight, while the foolish
virgins slept, Mat. 25. The last day shall come upon many unawares, and
especially you know upon whom, and it is upon such, as mispend their time in
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, Luke 21. 34. How soon
a period may be put to any of our days, he only knows, in whose hands our
times are, Psalm. 31. 15. therefore it is our concernment to redeem our present
time. It is a saying of the Jews, which De Dieu quotes out of Hillell, Noli
dicere, donec vacabit mihi, differ studium Legis, fortasse non vacabit: and
it was good counsel he gave his Scholar, that he should be sure to repent one
day before he died; which came to this, that he should repent every day,
because he knew not, but that might be the day of his death. The Apostle uses
the shortness of life, as an argument of labor, 1 Cor. 7. 29. This I say,
brethren, the time is short: not over solicitous for the things of this world,
but employing our time for the concernment of eternity.

13. Consider, That time once gone is lost irrecoverably. We use to say, time
stays not the parties leisure, nor is it to be recalled at his command: the
foolish virgins knocked, but it was too late, and the door was shut upon them,
and they irrecoverably excluded. Time is the only thing irrecoverable: this is
a jewel, which if once lost, can never be found again. If you loose Heaven,
peace, liberty, ordinances, nay, God himself, you may recover them again with
seeking and pains: but misspent-time, as he in Gregory's days being su^mon'd
by death, cries out, Inducias vel ad horam, but an hour, a minute, but could
not obtain it.

14. Consider, That upon this time depends eternity. Every man is suae
fortunae faber in a sound sense: he is now laying out for himself an eternity
of miseries or happiness: he is laying up a good foundation for time to come,
laying up treasure in heaven, by improving his time, or else by despising and
neglecting this day of grace, treasuring up wrath to himself, Romans 2. 4. and as
the tree falls, so it will lie: as time leaves us, so eternity will find us:
therefore, let us redeem the time.

15. Consider, The longer our day of grace is, if misspent, and missimproved,
the greater will be our condemnation. And God, as Valerius Maximus observes of
Dionysius, tarditatem supplicii gravitate co^pensat: the blow of justice will
be the heavier, the longer it is in coming. The longer God is lifting up the
hand of justice, and our repentance prevent it not, the stroke will be the
greater: as Lipsius observes: Lips. lib. 2. cap. 13. de constantia.
Gods grace and mercy, ita poenae intervallum est, ut-sit and augmentum. The
time of Gods grace is so now a reprieve: that if we continue to abuse his
mercy, the execution will be the heavier. Gray-hairs found in the way of fin
at that day, will have the hottest place in everlasting burning.

16. Consider the greatness of our work, compared with the shortness of our
time, and this may provoke us to diligence in improving it. He that has a long
journey to go in a winters day, will not loyter, but make haste. This is our
case: our day is but a winters-day, both sad and short, our journey long, the
way narrow and strait, therefore we had need hasten, and strive to enter, and
press forward toward the mark, and run with patience this spiritual race. Our
work is to get God appeased, our peace made, our election assured, and for
these the Apostle tells us, we must (...), give all diligence. The best means
for 2 Pet. 1. 16.
us to use in this, is often to compute and compare our work, and our time
together; So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom. Men's inapprehensiveness of the greatness of Psalm. 90. 12.
their work, or presumption upon the length of their day, makes them so remiss
and negligent in improving their time, with the sluggard crying, yet a little
sleep, and Lord have mercy upon me, as if this would set all straight.

17. Consider, What a sad reflection it will be in hell to remember a misspent
day of grace. Son remember, said Abraham to Dives. Will it Luke 16. 25.
not be sad for Capernaum to reslect thus; I was exalted to heaven in the
enjoyment of means and ordinances, but am now cast down to hell for not
improving those means? And for souls to reflect thus; We had offers of grace
made us, we were beseeched tobe reconciled, we were told over and over, that we
could not escape, if we did neglect so great salvation: but now our case is
desperate, we lavished away that time in sin, which God gave us for repentance;
and much of that time in idleness, when we should have been at Church, and at
our devotions: Well, God is just, our destruction is of our selves. Such
thoughts as these will be the Hell of Hells. Oh! What would such souls give for
a reprieve? Would they not purcahse that time they idled and sinned away, with
some thousand years continuance there, if at last, they might be released?
Consider this you that forget God: while it is time redeem it, that you never
come to lament the miss-improvement of it in a sad etermtie, when time shall be
no more, and repentance will be too late: it is too late for Esau to weep, when
the blessing is gone, Hebr. 12. 17.

18. Consider, The best of us have done much dishonor to God in former
mispence of our time: let us therefore now redeem it. This argument the Apostle
uses to urge the laying out of our time in reference to the glory of God, in 1
Pet. 4. 2, 3. To live no longer the rest of the time in the flesh to the lusts
of men, but to the will of God: for the time past of our lives may suffice us
to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, etc. Hereby we may repair Gods
honor, and testify the sincerity of our repentance and conversion. Acerrimus
stimulus nobis esse debet; ad been currendum, dum reputamus, nos magna part
vitae extra via^ errasse, says Calvin. S. Paul had been a long time out of the
way, Calv. in loc.
but when once set into it, he presses for-ward to have the mark, (...): the
very same word by which he expresses his former persecution, (...):
intimating the same contention of, and Acts 22. 4.
zeal in his Religion, as before he had demonstrated in his persecution.

19. Consider, That the mispence of time makes thee odious to God. God
abominates idleness: time is his creature, and he has allowed none of it for
sin and idleness, though some of it for honest recreations. God has sent every
one of us upon some errand or other into the world: if we be negligent, and
sluggish in it, we are like smoke to the eyes, and vinegar to the teeth, and an
offense to the pure and holy eyes Prove. 10. 26. Hesiod. ^py. (...) v. 23.
of God. (...), says Hesiod.

20. Consider the argument of the Text here; (...): the days are evil. And if
ever this were pressingly, and rationally argumentative to enforce the duty, it
must be certainly for us. Musculus complained of his times, Adeo deplorate mala
sunt, ut ne emendari sustineant, nec diutius ferri queant: so may we of our
times, they are unsufferable yet uncorrigible. If you consider the words either
in respect of those common evils which attend mankind; such are common
afflictions, diseases, wars, uncertainty of our enjoyments of life it self: so
the argument is universal to all persons and times: but when times are evil in
respect of some particular evils, then especially is time to be redeemed, as
our times now are in respect of a double evil, each of which enforces this
duty upon us: viz. the growth of error, and the open and abounding profaneness
among us.

I. The Growth of error: and this should put us upon diligence, especially us,
who are in, or look toward the Ministry: we should double and redouble our
diligence, that we may be able to appear against error for the truth, and by
sound doctrine to convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. When S. Paul saw the
times coming, in which men would not endure sound doctrine, but after their own
lusts heap to themselves teachers, being turned away from the truth unto
fables, he thought it then very seasonable to write to his beloved Timothy, to
be instant in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 4. How much more
engaged are we to diligence and industry, upon whom those days which S. Paul
only foretold, are sadly fallen? When the devil sows most of the tares of
error in the field of the Church: then should the spiritual husbandmen be most
vigilant and industrious to cast them out, lest they choke and over-grow the
good seed of the word. And to this end, more knowledge (I think) is requisite
to the discharge of the Ministers calling now, then perhaps was when error was
more modest, and withal more restrained by a strict discipline. Every man is
naturally apt to applaud the production and birth of his own fancy and
imagination (so the Ethiopian thinks his black the greatest beauty) and
through pride (which is the womb of error) to vent and broach this fancy,
though to the disquiet of the Church: therefore, if not restrained by fear (for
men naturally are slavish, not ingenuous) much more if publicly authorized,
(usually it appears with the face of authority) and the devil will be sure to
promote it; he will send up the smoke of the bottomless pit, to obscure the
beauty of truth; he will get in his cloven foot, and divide the seamless coat,
it being the maxim of his Politicians, Divide and Impera, Divide and Rule: and
here indeed is the source of all the errors of our times. Now then we, as
Saint Paul, whose spirit was stirred in him, to see the idolatry of Athens; and
whose zeal would not suffer him to do any thing against the truth, but all for
it; we should lay out our time to fit our selves with weapons to fight against
error, and defend the truth, and to countermine Satan's devices. S. Paul met
with many oppositions; sometimes he had to do with loose Libertines, who made
the free grace he preached, a cloak of maliciousness: another while with proud
Pharisaical Justiciaries, who denied grace, and cried up works: the Apostle was
to grapple with both these, and so he labored more abundantly then all. The
great Controversy of the 1 Cor. 15. 10
former age was with the proud Papist, as S. Paul at Ephesus, with the beast of
Rome. But he that will look now into the ministry, must reckon to deal with
the subtle Socinian, the loose Antinomian, the canting Quaker, the petulant
Anabaptist, the conceited Separatist, the muddie Atheist: we had need to
provide our weapons, before we go into the field; and, having so many spiritual
Goliahs to encounter withal, it is our concernment and duty, to get our sling,
and our smooth stones out of the brook of the Scriptures, by which we may
strike them in the forehead: yea, and to go down to the Philistines to sharpen
our weapons, I mean to furnish our selves with tongues and sciences, and
rational improvements, to enervate the strength and subtilties, and detect the
vizards and fallacies, which error usually puts on to delude the ignorant and
inconsiderate. Scarce any of the Fathers had so many errors to oppose as S.
Augustine; the Pelagian on the one hand, and the Manichee on the other: so none
more laborious then he, having left us many monuments of his unwearied
diligence; whence he was styled, Malleus haereticorum. Now so many endeavor to
raze the foundation, the spiritual builders should labor more in edifying the
truth, and Church of God: the creeping in of so many wolves into the flock
should put the Pastors upon more vigilance, and diligence; now the darkness of
error, and night of ignorance is upon us: how should these stars shine in the
firmament of the Church? And while others, so many Sanballats and Tobiahs,
endeavor to obstruct, hinder, and overthrow the truth, we should endeavor to
lay out our time to enoble and patronize it.

II. The open and abounding profaneness that is among us, that Atheism,
licentiousness, contempt of God and his word, and those other crying sins,
which run in the midst of the nation, should powerfully provoke us to redeem
our time: and that upon a fourefold account.

1. That we may discountenance and give a check to profaneness, that our lives
may be a constant standing reproof to the wickedness of the times, so the
Apostle in this 5. of the Ephesians. enjoynes at ver. 11. Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them: but how shall that
be done? he tells us at ver. 8. walk as the children of light: and Philip. 2.
15. that ye may shine as lights amidst a crooked and perverse generation. The
more others lavish out and mispend this time in loose and licentious walking;
the more should we endeavor to redeem it by a strict, and conscientious
conversation.

2. It will be a Christians praise and glory to be good in bad times, to be
good husbands when others are prodigals about us. Thus S. Augustine gives a
reason, why God permitted Adam at first to be tempted, That he might have had
the more glory, if he had used his lilibertie to resist and withstand that
temptation. Non mihi videtur, says he, magnae laudis fuisse futurum hominem,
si propterea posset been vivere, quia nemo male vivere suaderet. It is less
commendation to be good when we have no temptation to be bad: but when in
licentious times, being on every side surrounded with temptations, we go still
on in a way of holiness; this is our just praise and glory, as it was of Lot,
to be righteous in the midst of unclean Sodom.

3. In such times we are in most danger to be misled. Piscator gives this
reason, why the profaneness of the times should put us upon the redeeming of
the time: quia periculum imminet piis a corruptelis mundi. When it is, as in 1 John 5. 19. the whole world lies in wickedness; the best are in great danger to
be seduced, either into error, sin, or both: we should therefore redeem the
time, that we may be able to prevent the one, and oppose the other.

4. Our redeeming the time may make the times better. It is the evil of sin,
that make the days evil. The Apostle speaking of the perilous times which
should be in the last days, in 2 Timothy 3. 1. he tells you the reason of it, in
verses 2, 3, 4, 5. the latter of which, (viz. Having a form of godliness, but
denying the power) I fear has a great influence upon the evil of our days.
Now the only way to amend the times, is to amend our selves. God would soon
amend the times, if once the men that live in the times were amended. It was
good counsel Daniel gives to Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be
a lengthning of thy tranquillity. All men cry out of the times; but who cry out
of, or leave their sins, which make the times so bad? When the Israelites had
sinned in making the calf, Moses spends his time in prayer, Exodus 32. It was
Achans wedge, that made it a bad day to Isreal: when he was removed, God was
appeased, Josh. 7. Our times are evil; let us not repiningly despond or
quarrel, but let us lay out our time in prayer and repentance to make them
better. And so much of the second General.

Thirdly, Who are especially concerned in this. Though indeed 3. General
none can be exempted from this, yet we shall see, that some are more
especially concerned in it: and these I shall reduce to these six ranks.

I. Young ones. These should especially redeem their time. Young Merchants are
most vigorous and active in their trading. It is the Wisemans counsel, Eccles.
12. 1: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: it briefly suggests
several considerations, which may provoke youth to a diligent improvement of
their time: as,

1. Consider, This is most worthy of, and most acceptable unto God, to give him
the best of our time, who best deserves it: it is most unworthy of God, to give
him our feeble age, when Satan has had the strength of our youth spent in his
service: to give the spirits of the wine to Satan, and the dregs to God. Nonne
pudet te id temporis bonae menti reservare, quod in nullam rem confer potest?
says Seneca: to give to God that time, which the infirmities of age makes
useless for any thing else? Give me leave to make Mal. 1. 8.
use of that of the Prophet Malachy, Will the Prince think you entertain a
cripled rebel, who has been all his days fighting against him under his
enemies colors? Will thou give the best of thy life unto Satan, be under his
service, and think to list thy self under Christ's banner, to fight the good
fight of faith, when thy strength and activity fails thee? Tunc vivere
incipere, cum desinendum est; and inde velle vitam inchoare, quo pauci
produxerunt, as the Heathen says: Then to begin to live, when you should die,
and to date your life from that time, to which the life but of a few is
lengthned. God, under the Law, would have no blind, or lame for sacrifice, as
in Deuteronomy. 25. 21. The firstborn were holy to God: and he required not only the
first fruits, but the first of those first fruits, Exodus 23. 19. All which was
to signify unto us, that young years offered to God, are a sweet smelling
savor in his nostrils.

2 Consider, This is most for your comfort: that you may in time of age,
affliction, and death, with peace and comfort reflect upon your youth, the
mispence whereof does often cause sad reflections of spirit in riper years, and
fills the soul with horror and amazement. Job was made to possess the
iniquities of his youth: his youth had the pleasure of those sins, which his
age now felt the smart of. When guilt shall fly in the face of an awakened
conscience, and God for them shall exercise the soul with inward terrors, as
Job describes the condition of a wicked man, Job 20. 11. Poenis quas sibi
sceleribus adolescentiae acquisivit, says Beza, with those punishments, which
are the issue of the sins of youth: nay, though God has upon your repentance
pardoned those sins, yet he may in old age chasten thee for them; then you may
come sadly to speak that language, Romans 6. 21. What fruit have we in those
sins, whereof we are now ashamed? These questionless cost David many a sad
tear, and mournful prayer, as we see in Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the sins of
my youth. As it is in the body, licentious youth contracts those distempers,
which are the burden and sorrow of old age, filling them with pains and aches:
So it is in the soul, those sins, which by mispence of time youth rush into,
may prove the sorrow and vexation of age: but well-improved youth makes age
comfortable.

3. Consider, It will be an Antidote and prevention against those sins, which
youth is most liable and prone to. Youth having less wisdom to discover, and
less strength to resist and withstand temptation to sin, more open to
solicitation by reason of unruly passions, bad examples, and council of others,
is most liable to sin. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? says David
Psalm. 119. 9. these being most subject to defilements: David answers the
question; By taking heed thereto according to thy word, and one of the precepts
of that word is To redeem our time. Flee youthful lusts, says Paul to Timothy,
2 Timothy 2. 22. the flames of lust are most apt to enkindle by the heat of youth.

-- Cereus in vitium flecti monitoribus asper, Horat. de Art Poet.
So Horace; Youth is wax to every impression of vice: and the Poet gives you
the reason of it.

Quaritur, Aegysthus quare sit factus adulter:
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
It was his idle mispence of time which blew up and fomented the sparks of
lust for

Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus. 4. Consider, It is your gathering
time, and an age most capable of improvement: as tender twigs, most flexible;
as wax fit for good impressions. Whereas, if this time be misspent, the heart
grows hard through custom in sin, the devil gets stronger possession, the
memory grows more unfaithful, the understanding weaker: God is provoked in a
judicial way to take away your gifts and parts which you justly forfeit by a
careless wrapping your talents in a napkin. The Wiseman sends such sluggards to
the Ant to learn wisdom: (...) provideth her meat in summer, Prove. 6. 8. So
soon as the sun arises the be flies abroad to gather in her honey: in youth
our parts are active and vigorous, therefore then redeem your time.

5. Consider, This will both sweeten and facilitate employment to you
afterward. The sins of youth often make men unserviceable in riper years, or if
repented of and forsaken, yet they are often a reproach and discouragement to men
in their employments. Ephraim was ashamed, because she bore the reproach of her
youth, Jer. 31. 19. S. Paul therefore writing to his young Timothy enformes him
how to secure himself from contempt: These things command and teach, and so,
Let no man despise thy youth, 1 Timothy 4. 11, 12. Sins of youth lay men open to
reproach, even then, when afterward they prove eminent and serviceable in the
work of God. Besides, mispence of youth must necessarily make our service and
employment abroad more difficult: for men to have their seed to seek, when a
harvest is expected from them: whereas your laborious improvement of this time
makes service easy and familiar, when having laid up a treasure and stock of
knowledge he is able, as the Scribe instructed to the kingdom of Heaven, to
bring out of his treasure things new and old. Matthew. 13. 52.

6. Redeem this time in conformity to Christ, and the best Saints. Christ was
at twelve years of age about his Fathers business, Luke 2. 44. Samuel in his
childhood was dedicated to the Lord. 1. Sam. 1. 28. Timothy from a child
redeemed his time to the study of the Scripture. 2 Timothy 3. 15. And it is
recorded as a just commendation of that good Prince Josiah, that while yet
young, he began to seek after the God of David his father, and at twelve years
old zealously appeared against Idolatry. 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. Let us then tread in
the footsteps of these Saints, and be followers of them, as they were of
Christ, who redeemed his whole time to the service and glory of his Father.

II. The second rank of those who are most especially concerned in this is,
such men as are of greater abilities and opportunities. To whom God gives ten
talents, he expects an improvement from them, answerable to that they are
entrusted with: the improvement of five will not serve for him, who hoth
received ten. To whom much is given, of him much shall be required, Luc. 12.
48. Men's great gifts and parts are ready to puff them up with pride: S. Paul
was in danger of this 2 Cor. 12. 8. and this is the abuse of the gifts of God,
which, if rightly used and improved, should not leaven us with pride, but
engage and quicken us to more serviceableness for God, and not censuring the
gifts of others (by which practice we either charge God for giving them no
more, or sacrifice sacrilegiously to our selves, that we have so much; when as
we have nothing, but what is received) endeavor to improve, and use our own.

III. The third rank: such, who by idleness and looseness have misspent much
time formerly: The Apostle Peter urges this. 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3. The later any of
us have come into the vineyard, the harder must we labor to get our work done
before the evening of our days, when our account is to be made. As the
Merchant, (to which I told you the expression (...) was an allusion) who comes
when the mart is ready to break up, he will hasten his traffic, and double his
diligence; so a traveller that oversleeps himself in the morning, will be upon
the spur all the day after, that he may come to his journeys end in time: so
should those who have loitered and idled away much of their time formerly, now
with the more earnestness press toward the mark, and run the race that is set
before them.

IV. Those who are engaged in special service for God: such are Magistrates and
Ministers. Of the first you know what the Poet Hom. II. ss.
says, (...), A Magistrate must not sleep a whole night: but the other is more
considerable; we must be laborers, not loiterers in Gods vineyard: as they are
described Heb. 13. 17. (...), the word signifies, Noctes insomnes agere, as
they that watch. S. Paul was (...), in these watchings often, 2 Cor. 6. 5.
Diligence and labor is commendable in any; but in none more, then in a
Minister of the Gospel. The Priest under the law had the shoulder in the
Sacrifice, to intimate that burden and labor, which lay upon him. See what
employment S. Paul puts upon his young Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14. Till I come,
give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, etc. And if you
consider duly that exact Scripture-knowledge, and in order to that, the
knowledge of tongues, arts and sciences, to qualify a man for that employment,
together with the end of it, the concernment of souls: (and add the danger of
negligence in this work, God having pronounced him cursed, Jerem. 48. 10. and
that those souls shall be required at our hands, who perish through our
negligence, Ezekiel. 3. 18. as Judah stood engaged for Benjamin, so Ministers for
souls: God will require, God Gen 43. 9.
will require an account of them from them;) you will easily conclude it their
interest more especially then others, to redeem this time.

V. Those especially are engaged, who live in these places, and that not only
because we have greater opportunities (of which before) but chiefly because our
improvements are the interest and concernment both of Church and State. All
men's eyes are fixed upon us, and their expectations are from us, and therefore
we must redeem our time, that we may be a credit to our places, and a blessing
unto the Church, and be able by our serviceableness, when God calls us out, to
give an account of the expense of our time here, by contending for the faith
against all novel encroachments of error, heresy, and the like.

VI. And lastly, Those especially, who have bad experience of the grace of God,
who are truly enlightened, and brought home unto Christ. And therefore you may
observe, that the Apostle urges this duty upon the Ephesians, from the
consideration of their regenerate condition, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; therefore it follows, walk as
children of the light: and having again said at ver. 14. Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give the light; it follows
in ver. 15. walk circumspectly, not as fools (as formerly, mispending, and
lavishing out your precious time) but as wise; and that has reference to this,
Redeeming your time. So the Apostle elsewhere frequently argues from the change
of our state and condition, to the change of our conversation: so Romans 13. 11.
And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for
now is our salvation nearer: and at verse 12. The night is far spent, the day
is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light, etc. However men Psalm. 104. 23.
sleep in the night, yet when the Sun arises, man goes forth unto his labor;
so however men idle in the night of their unregeneracte, when the Sun of
righteousness is risen upon them, then they must up and be working. Observe
again, how the Apostle urges this in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5, 6. Ye are all children of
the light, and of the day, we are not of the night, nor of the darkness:
Therefore let us not sleep, as do others, but let us watch, and be sober. And
therefore Paul himself, that had wickedly missspent his time, in persecuting of
the Church, and blaspheming God, when once he was brought home, desires to
improve it for God: and therefore calls out, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? and this Acts. 9. 16.
briefly upon these considerations, which I do but touch, and leave to your
selves to be enlarged.

1. They have more to improve then others. They have not only common gifts,
but a talent of special grace, which they should trade with, and endeavor to
improve.

2. They have the greatest mercy to engage them. The Wiseman urges it upon
some, in consideration of the great work of creation, Ecc^es. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: how much more should an
interest in the work of redemption wrought by Christ engage unto this? he
having redeemed us to this end, that we might redeem our time for his service,
Luke 1. 74.

3. They have the greatest hopes in their eyes to encourage them. Consider, how
laborious and diligent he will be, who has the obtaining of a kingdom in his
eyes: and should not Christians much more, eyeing their inheritance
incorruptible, and that kingdom, which fades not away: For which cause, says
the Apostle, we faint not, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 16. but upon what ground? because we
know that he, which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus,
verse 14. and, we look not at the things which are seen, which are but
temporal, but at the things which are not seen, which are eternal, verse 18.

4. They are best able to judge of the pretiousness of time, and how much it is
their concernment to improve it, they having the glory of God, and their own
salvation in their eye; they know what the mispence of time means; it has been
the burden of their spirit, and the sadness of their souls; they know and see
into the danger of lavishing out their time, which others, who discern none of
these, prodigally throw away.

5. And lastly, Their mis-improvement of time is the greatest scandal unto
others. Every one is apt to take offense at, and encourage themselves in
looseness by, the remissness and idleness of those, who own Christ, and profess
the Gospel. When my foot slippeth, Psalm. 38. 16.
says David, they magnify themselves against me. So the Apostle tells us of
the Jews, Romans 2. 24. that the name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles
through them. And, how apt are men to take an occasion by our idleness to
reproach Learning, and Religion too? The Apostle therefore, with whom I shall
conclude the Doctrinal part of these words, exhorts; Walk in wisdom toward
them that are without, Redeeming the time, Coloss. 4. 5.

Fourthly, The improvement of this by some Application. 4 General. Application.
And the Application of this shall be only twofold.

1. To check and reprove men's mispence, and mis-improvement of their time.
Nothing more precious, yet nothing less regarded: may we not complain of many,
who profess themselves Christians, as Seneca does of the Heathens; Magna pars
vitae male agentibus, maxima Epist. 1.
nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus dilabitur. We hold our time of God, as
our great Landlord, and how are most like to bad Tenants, who return little or
no homage to him for it: but improve Gods talents in the devils service. Quem
mihi dabis, says Seneca, qui aliquod temporis pretium ponat, qui diem
aestimat: Where shall we find a man, who sets a due value and estimate upon
his time? What between doing nothing, and that which is worse then nothing,
sin, most men's time slips away. I only suggest unto you this; Time will have
an end speedily, and what will you do, when God calls to an account of that
time which you have spent upon your lusts, and though it may seem to have been
pleasant, yet without repentance it will be very sad: even as it fared with
those jolly ones, in Job 21. 12, 13. They take the timbrel, and harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the organ. They spend their days in wealth, and in a
moment go down to the grave: and well were it for them, if they might rest
there; but it will be more horrible, as in verse 30 of that chapter, The wicked
is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth unto the day
of wrath.

2. To quicken us to a conscientious performance of this duty by a laborious
improvement of our time. This the Apostle presses, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. That ye
study to be quiet, and do your own business: and again in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10, 11.
For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not
work, neither should he eat: For we hear that there are some which walk among
you disorderly, (...). Disorderly walking, especially in mispending, and
mis-improving our time, is very unsuitable to a Christian. I shall therefore
show you briefly, to what end, and how you should improve your time
conscientiously, and so dismiss the Text. It must be done,

I. To the glory of God: Whatsoever you do, says the Apostle, do all to the
glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Did we consider this in the improving our time in
our studies, and ask our selves this question, Can God have any glory from this
kind of study? it would certainly cut off the study of many unprofitable,
impertinent, idle books, which enable men only for some idle frothy discourse*
to the dishonor of the great God, Time is Gods creature, and his talent,
therefore to be employed only to his glory.

II. To the good of others. So the Apostle expressly, Gal. 6. 10. (...): While
we have time, let us do good unto all. That Roman Emperor set a just estimate
upon his time, who accounted that day lost, in which he had done no good unto
some. This concerns those especially, who are entrusted with the care of
others. Titus Vespasian was wont to say, Hodie non imperavi, quia nemini
benefeci: a speech worthy of an Emperor, whose chief care should be for the
public good; so should we also, who are entrusted with the care of others,
account that day misspent, in which we have not endeavored some way to better
them, Ut non negligunt opportunitatem lucrifaciendi errantes, incredulos, inter
quos vivebant, says Musculus: so also the Apostle exhorts, Coloss. 4. 5. Walk
wisely to them that are without, redeeming the time.

III. To our own salvation, neglecting no opportunity whereby we may promote
it, willingly engaging in every duty and practice, which has a tendencie to
it: thus working out our salvation with Phil. 2. 12.
fear and trembling. But withal we must observe, that this must be done,

1. Presently, lest it be too late. As Thales being solicited to marry when
young, answered (...), It is too soon; when old, (...), It is too late: so
many, who have thought much too soon to dedicate themselves to God, in their
age have sadly in the despair of their spirit cried out, It is too late: let us
resolve therefore as Elihu in Job, Job 24. 32.
If I have done iniquity, I will do no more, that is, in mispending, and
mis-improving our time, but in the present redeeming of it. It is one of the
masterpieces of Satan, to destroy souls, by tempting them to defer and delay
the improvement of their time, suggesting unto them, It will be time enough
afterward: thus the young Gallant is persuaded to spend his time in pride, and
vanity, till he has none left to pray, repent, and return in. As a cunning
usurer flatters his debtour, tells him all will be well, till he has failed
his day, and then seizeson his land: so Satan flatters men into security,
persuades them that they have day enough before them, till they have sinned
away their day of grace, so God is provoked at last to give them up to that
master, whom they have served all their time, to receive their wages in
eternity of misery. Cursed be that Proverb, A young Saint, an old Devil: you do
not often see young Devils prove old Saints. Solomon gives better advice, Prove.
22. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will
never depart from it: and the Prophet Jeremiah, It is good for a man, that he
bear Lam. 3. 27.
the yoke in his youth: the yoke of obedience, as well as of affliction. Let me
reason then with you, as S. Augustine did sometimes with himself, Aug. Confess.
lib. 8. cap. 5.
Quam diu cras and cras, quare non hodie? Modo and Modo non habent modum. We
should redeem every day, as if it were our last. Ille beatissimus est, and sui
securus possessor, qui crastinum sine solicitudine expectat: Quisquis dixit
vixi, quotidie ad lucrum surget, says Seneca. Senec. ep. 12.
We should without anxiety or solicitude expect a morrow, and with diligence
and conscience improve to day. To day, while it is called to day, if ye will
hear his voice etc. Hebr. 3. 15.

2. Resolvedly, lest you be hindered: you will meet with many impediments, much
difficulty, and many temptations to mispend your time, we need therefore take
up a resolution to go through: so long as there is a Devil and a world without,
and flesh within, we must expect to meet with impediments in every religious
way: but we ought in the strength of God to resolve against them, to avoid, and
encounter them. Eccles. 11. 4. He that observes the wind, shall not sow, and
he that regards the clouds shall not reap; and he that makes difficulty an
argument against duty, shall never perform any. Difficulties should make a
Christian more diligent and watchful, not more secure, and careless. Solomon
marks him for a sluggard, that pretends a lion in the way, why he should not go
forward, Prove. 22. 13. Cum ita corruptum est seculum, videtur diabolus
tyrannidem occupare, ut non possit tempus Deo consecrari, nisi quodammodo
redemptum, so Calvin. Daniel would redeem his time for prayer, though Calv. in
loc.
he knew for certain, he should be cast into the den of lions: and the three
children would not worship the golden image, though they knew a fiery furnace,
heat seven times hotter then ordinary, was provided for them: nor the Apostles
desist from preaching though they knew they were sure to suffer for it: and not
only so, but they rejoice that they could redeem their time at this rate, Acts
14. 18, 19. You may perhaps meet with contempt, David was the song of the
drunkards; Psalm. 69. 12. 2 Samuel 6. 16. 2 Cor. 12. 10.
you cannot dance before the Ark of God, but you shall have a scoffing Michal;
be loaded with reproaches, as S. Paul was, who yet gloried in them; you must
remember to go through all resolvedly, to redeem your time to God. The
Primitive Christians bought this time with the price of their blood, that they
might consecrate it to God. S. Paul would go up to Jerusalem, to preach the
Gospel, though his life lay at stake for it, I am ready not only to be bound,
but to die at Jerusalem, Acts 21. 13.

3. Perseveringly, lest you be turned back. It is one of Satan's methods in his
temptations, when Christians have been performing duties, especially if with
freedom and enlargement, to tempt them after that to remit of their watch, and
be secure, and so gets advantage over them: we must not make the improvement of
one day an argument of mispending the next, but lay out every day by labor and
diligence. It will be the privilege of Saints in heaven, that they rest from
their labors; while they are here, they must (...): Rev. 14. 13. Phil. 2. 12.
work and work out their salvation with fear and trembling: they will find
constantly much work to do; old corruptions to mortify; sins to repent of, and
pray against; graces to act and increase; gifts to be stirred up; comforts to
be maintained and upheld; personal and relative duties to be performed; general
and particular callings to be attended; several relations to be filled up: and
this will take up our time here, if seriously remembered.

But do you allow (some may say) no time for Recreations? Yes, so they be not
too expensive of time, but enablements to our particular services.

No time for enjoyment of friends? Yes, much, and by that you may best redeem
your time, by discourses to the edifying and building up of one another in your
most holy faith. What no time Jud^, v. 20.
for secular employments? Yes, employment in thy calling is redeeming thy time:
and if thou do not so employ thy calling, as therein to provide for thine
own, thou art worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. I speak only of lavishing
out your time in the service of sin. And therefore, to draw to a conclusion,
Remember, that if he, that wrapped up his talent in a napkin, was cast, as an
unprofitable servant, into utter darkness, as it is Matthew. 25. what place in
everlasting burnings shall be laid out for them, who lavish out their talents
in the service of their lusts, and sacrifice their time constantly unto the
devil, and the world? But he that improves his time, and talents, though never
so small, shall be rewarded by God with a most ample and everlasting reward:
for, Blessed is that servant, whom his Master, Matthew. 24. 46.
when he comes, shall find so doing.

FINIS.
THE BARREN SOIL, OR, The GROUNDS and REASONS OF UNPROFITABLENESS under the
means of GRACE; Together with the suitable remedies and cures, discovered in
the following Sermons on HEBR. 4. 2.

By JOHN FROST, B. D. late Fellow of S. JOHN'S College in CAMBRIDGE.



CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

HEB. 4. 2. (...) The word preached did not profit them.
LUther lays this down as the character of a good Fabritius, loc. Com. Luth.
page 82.
Divine, To be able rightly to distinguish between Law and Gospel. Qui been
norit discernere Evangelium a Lege, gratias agat Deo, and sciat se esse
Theologum. Upon this account sure, they are bad ones who confine the Gospel to
the times of, and after Christ; as if the Jews before Christ had been wholly
under a Covenant of works, having Law only without any Gospel preached to
them: an assertion which the discovery of that (...), Genesis 3. 15. of the seed
of the woman; the prophesies, types, and sacrifices sufficiently evince to be
false and unsound; but we need go no further for a confutation of this error,
then the words immediately before my Text, where the Apostle speaking of the
Jews in the wilderness, tells us they were (...), evangelized, or gospelled as
well as we now, and insin^et idem Evangelium, says Camero, the same Doctrine
for substance, though not for clearness of Revelation, which the Apostle takes
notice of, as the chief privilege of the Jew above the Gentile, Romans 3. 2. and
this as their glory, that to them did belong the covenants and the promises,
Romans 9. 4. and the Psalmist as a distinctive privilege to the Jew, Psalm. 147.
19, 20. A promise they had of entering Canaan as typically of their everlasting
rest; but they fell short of it through unbelief, Heb. 3. 19. The Gospel was
preached to them, but because of unbelief, being not mixed with faith, it
became unprofitable to them, (...), says the Text.

A little for Explication. (...).] We translate it, the word preached; it is
fully, and so in your margins, the word of hearing, which briefly hints and
suggests these two things,

First, Most worthy to be heard. Whether we consider the author of it, God
himself; or the excellency of the things revealed, Christ, and Salvation by
him; or the excellent end of the word of 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17.
God, which is to make us perfect in every good work, and wise unto salvation,
the word being (...), as Clemens calls it: as Clemens, p. 27.
the manna to the Israelites; our viaticum to our heavenly Canaan. Others may
be heard in their time and place, Plato, and Aristotle, Aquinas, and Austin: I
think they are too severe and mo ose, who think these not worth lending an ear
too. The Gibeonites may draw water to the Sanctuary; the Egyptian pearls may
enrich the Israelites; the Gentiles may be afforded an outward room in the
Court of the Temple. There is certainly excellent use of the Fathers of the
Church, to evidence the consent of truth and unity in several ages; and if ever
to be listened to, in this age, (wherein we have almost lost the truth in a
crowd of errors) wherein yet they are most neglected. To me, next to
Scripture-evidence, universal consent (if there be such a thing to be found)
seems the most cogent for embracing doctrines of faith; we should especially
attend to what the Revel. 2. 7.
Spirit says unto the Churches. But others may be listened to, so they be cited
without affectation and vainglory. S. Paul was resolved against coming to his
Corinthians with enticing words of man's wisdom, as desiring to know himself,
and preach to others nothing but Christ, and him crusified: yet himself has
adopted more then one of the expressions of the Heathens into Scripture, and
especially, when he preached at Athens, cited one of their own Poets, Act. 17.
28. But all others are only to be heard, as they conform to the word of God,
which is (...), as most worthy to be heard. That Is the first.

Secondly, As most necessary to be heard; and that both in respect of Divine
command, and in reference to our own good, for our illumination: for as Clemens
says, (...), psalm. 19. 8, 9. Clemens, p. 30.
so is the world, so is the soul without the light of the word of God,
notwithstanding all the star light of other knowledge. So necessary for the
begetting and increasing faith, it is (...), Gal. 3. 2. and the Apostle makes
it an impossibility in an ordinary way, to believe without hearing, Romans 10.
14. (...); How shall they believe? that is, ordinarily they cannot. So again
necessary for the begetting and upholding the comforts through the Spirit,
creating the fruits of the lips peace. In a Isa. 57. 19.
word necessary, as the fiery pillar to gvide us to our heavenly Canaan: for
it is (...), Acts 5. 20. the word of life; (...), Acts 13. 26. the Gospel of
salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. Necessary for our spiritual strength and growth; the
want of it is compared to a famine. What weak bodies have men in a famine?
what starved souls under the want of the word of God? so as it is most worthy
of hearing in it self; so most necessary to be heard in respect of us. It is
(...). (...),] It did not profit; that is, not truly and savingly. From this
exposition you may easily prevent me in your thoughts, in what must be the
subject of my discourse; viz. Unprofitableness under the means of grace, the
preaching of the Gospel.

In speaking to which, lest (as it was said of Diogenes, that he trampled upon
Plato's pride, but majori cum fastu,) I should preach unprofitably, whilst I
speak against unprofitableness under preaching; I shall confine my self to this
plain, practical, and (I hope) profitable Doctrine.

The generality, or most of those who hear the word, do not truly Doctrine.
and savingly profit by it. A truth, which they that run may read in the
experience of this present age; in which (I think, I may say it without any
dishonorable reflection upon the former, or pride of present times) the Gospel
was never more frequently, or powerfully preached; yet how little profit by it,
I call to witness the profanation of Sabbaths, noon day-sins, neglect of
ordinances, contempt of Ministers, those monstrous Sects and Heresies, those
outrages and that profaneness, which prevails amongst us; which might justly
astonish and amaze us, did not this lessen the wonder, that from the first
preaching of the Gospel it has been so. At the first dawning of the Gospel, in
that promise of the seed of the woman to break the serpents head, yet Cain a
murderer: Afterward Noah was a preacher of righteousness, yet the old world
remain ungodly. Isaiah 2 Pet. 2. 5. Isa. 53. 1.
complains, who has believed our report? Descend to our Saviors times,
there you find Christ himself preaching, the Pharisees deriding him, Luke 16.
14. In the Apostles times, Paul preached Christ at Athens, and there he is
accounted a babbler, and a setter forth of strange gods, Acts 17. 18. Again, he
preaches to a company of women, and only Lydia's heart's opened, Acts 16. 14.
Simon heard the word, and yet remained in the gall of bitterness, Acts 8. 23.
And the Apostle applies the Prophets complaint to Gospel times, Lord, who has
believed our report? Romans 10. 16. The Word is compared to meat; but the richest
fare will not make some men fat and thriving: to seed; yet you know in the
Parable Mat. 13. 3. but one of those four grounds, into which it was cast, was
good, and brought forth fruit, verse 23. So, though this seed of the Word was
sown in Jerusalem by the hand, yea, and watered too by the tears of her
Savior, yet she remained fruitless and barren, Luke 19. 41.
and at Christ's second coming, he shall find iniquity abounding, charity
cold, and scarce faith on the earth, Matthew 24. 12.

In prosecution of which Doctrine I shall show,

First, What it is savingly to profit by the Word.

Secondly, The grounds and reasons of most men's unprofitableness under the Word.

Thirdly, Apply it in two words, one to the Minister, and the other to the
people.

For the first: 1. Partic.


In this it is necessary to speak distinctly, thereby to correct those common
mistakes whereby most men do dangerously delude themselves. One remembers the
Text; a second picks a flower of Rhetoric; a third runs away with a notion; a
fourth admires the preacher; a fifth gets a little floating head-knowledge; a
sixth makes a few formal resolutions; a seventh is somewhat moved and affected
at a Sermon; another lastly praises the quaintness and elegancie of the
preacher: and each of these thinks himself abundantly profited by the Word.

It is then,

I. Not to profit and advantage a man's self in the world by the profession and
constant hearing of the Word: though this be all the profit they look after,
who count gain godliness. Men care for 1 Timothy 6. 5.
the Gospel no longer then it is consistent with their wordly advantages, who
when they come to serve God in attendance upon his word, secretly sacrifice to
the Idol Self, and propound no more to themselves, then secular advantages.
Quantas nobis divitias comparavit haec fabula Christi? as Leo the tenth was often
heard to say. Men may esteem the Gospel but a Fable, and yet adhere to it for
outward advantages; care not for Diana, but her silver-shrines; that affect not
the Gospel so much, as that respect and profit it brings them in. That this is
the temper of many, is evident from this; that if the world solicites Demas, he
forsakes Paul; the Scribe 2 Timothy 4. 10. Mat. 8.
cares not for following Christ, though he profess zealously, when once he
understood he had not where to lay his head; and many such followers we have,
like those, John 6. 26. who followed Christ, not for love to his person or
doctrine, but for the gain of the loaves.

II. Not to admire or praise the preacher. The Church is not a Theater, but a
Market; and it is not a plaudite that is expected from you, to close the Sermon
with a humme; but that you should be trading here for spiritual merchandise;
that you may go from hence richer in faith, and more increased in all grace.
Ezekiels preaching was to the Jews as a very pleasant song, yet they profited
not by it, for they did not practice, but their hearts went after their
covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. So often as you approve the Preacher and his
Doctrine, and do not so profit as to practice it, you are self-condemned, and
guilty in the judgment of your own consciences.

III. Not only to be enlightened by the Word. I know spiritual illumination is
the first work of the Spirit by the Word, where it savingly profits; S. Paul
was sent to the Gentiles first to open their eyes: but that which I here assert
is, that there may much common illumination be wrought by the Word of God,
where it does not savingly profit. It is most evident from Heb. 6. 6. where we
read of some who were once enlightened, yet in a possibility to Apostatize, and
fall away, and that beyond the renewing to repentance, so consequently of
salvation. And indeed, this illumination is one requisite in the unpardonable
sin, it must be after the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10. 26. A man may have
his head full of the word of God, and be never the better for it. Simon Magus
was wrought into an historical belief by the preaching of Philip, yet not
savingly profited by it, but still remained in the gall of bitterness, Acts 8.
13, 23. A man may be enlightened to know, and to discourse of the Word of God,
and yet not savingly profited by it.

IV. Not barely to be affected and delighted with the Word of God. This may
arise not from the efficacy of the Word, but from the sublimity of the truths
contained in it. For truth, the more sublime it is, the greater delight it
brings with it; but this is neither solid nor lastin: those who receive the
seed into stony places, were such as heard and received the word with joy, but
they were but (...), Matthew. 13. 20, 21. it lasted but for a while. The night of
persecution damps his joy, and he turns Apostate. Ezekiel's preaching was to
the Jews as a well-tuned instrument in the place fore-quoted; Herod heard John
Baptist gladly, Mark 6. 20. Those we spoke of before, Heb. 6. 6. had tasted of
the good word of God; that is, found some relish and delight in it, and of the
heavenly gift, and the powers of the world to come; all which from verse 9.
appear not to be saving gifts. For the Author there tells those to whom he
wrote, that he hoped better things of them, and, such as accompany, salvation;
whence it is obvious to collect, that those whom he had mentioned in the
foregoing verses, were not sanctifying, but common gifts of the Spirit of God,
amongst which is this light, superficial taste, and relish of the Word of God,
which may arise either from our (...)
affection to the Preacher; or from some common work of the Spirit of God. As
the hearers of John, Joh. 5. 35. rejoiced for a season, yet, verse. 38. had not
the word abiding in them.

V. Not barely to be wrought upon by the Word, to reform some gross sin, or to
comply with a partial, outward, obedience unto God; for thus Herod when he
heard John Baptist (...). Mark 6. 20. he did many things. Gross sins spoil
credit, cross interest, rack conscience; and upon these motives a man may
forsake them, and yet not savingly profit by the Word of God. A man may hear,
and practice much of what he hears, the Word powerfully awakening natural
conscience, and stirring up, and closing with the dictates of it, till it comes
to some darling-bosome-lust; and then the word proves ineffectual. Herod hears
John Baptist gladly, till he came to his Herodias; the yong-man brags of an
universal obedience to the commands of Christ, till he comes to his
covetousness, and prescribes him to sell all. A man may in part be outwardly
reformed by the Word of God, and yet not inwardly renewed, and so not savingly
profited. So much negatively: I shall not lead you far for a positive
resolution.

The word then profits, when it is (...), a mixed word: that speaks a threefold
reference.

First, To seed.

Secondly, To meat.

Thirdly, To Physic.

Seed must be mixed with the soil, and with the dew and rain from heaven, or
else it will not spring. Meat must be mixed with the stomach, or else it will
not nourish. Physic must mix with the humor, or else it will not cure. When,
in analogy to all these, the word is mixed, then it may be said savingly to
profit. And first as seed.

I. When the word of God is rooted in the heart. This is the seed mixing with
the soil, it is not seed kept in your barn, or granaries, or cast superficially
on the earth, that will grow and increase; it is not the word of God scattered
upon the ear, or laid up in your heads, or in your paper-books; but treasured
up in your hearts which will savingly profit, therefore God promises this to
his people, Jer. 31. 33.

The reason why the seed thrived not upon the stony ground, was because it had
no root, Matthew. 13. 21. It is but sowing in the air, if the Word takes not
root in the heart: As it is said of Mary, she kept all Christ's sayings in her
heart, Luke 2. 51. The Wiseman requires, Prove. 2. 1. that we should hide his
commandments with us. (...), says Clemens, as seed in the earth, which he
calls Clemens, page 270.
(...), a spiritual ingrafting; the grast must be mixed with the stock, if it
thrive; the seed with the earth if it springs; the word with the heart, if it
profits, as it were incorporated.

II. When it fructifies in the life, As the seed did in the good ground, Matthew.
13. And this is consequent upon the former, if it takes root downward, it will
spring upward. It is a dangerous deceit many are under, who satisfy themselves
with a bare hearing of the Word, and never look to the fruit of it in their
lives. It may fructify diversely, as the good seed did, in some an hundred, in
some sixty, in some thirty; but it argues the seed lost; if it does not
fructify in some measure.

III. When mixed with the dew of heaven. Though the seed be good, and the
husbandman skillful and laborious, yet there must be influence and dew of
heaven, or else no fruitfulness. The Word may be good, the Minister laborious
in season, and out of season. Paul 1 Cor. 3. 6.
may plant, but it is God must give the increase. Adjumenta doctrinae tunc
prosunt animae adhibita per hominem, cum Deus operatur ut prosint, is Austin's
Divinity, cap. 16. lib. 4. De Doctrina Christiana. The manna mhich descended to
feed the Israelites, came down Exodus 16.
with dew; so when the dew of Gods grace and blessing descends with the manna
of the word.

Secondly, As meat. I. When it abides with us. Meat profits not, except it be
detained in the stomach; which is done often, when the stomach is weak, by mixing
something with it: so the Word of God then profits, when it is retained in the
heart: that will be when admiscetur dono fidei, says Camero on the Text.
Unbeleif is a throwing up of Spiritual nourishment again: faith retains and
digests it. Let the word of God, says the Apostle, dwell in you richly,
Colossians, 3. 16. Thus the word profited David, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word, says
he, have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.

II. When it assimulates. So it is in meat; Only with this difference, that
the meat is assimulated into the likeness of the body that receives it, and is
nourished by it: but our souls must be assimulated to that word which they
receive, and by which they are spiritually nourished. When we are delivered
into the mould, and formed into the image of the Word ( Romans 6. 17. (...), into
which you were delivered) framed as metal in a mould, into the likeness of the
Word of God; then we profit by the word; and when, as the Apostle says, we
beholding as in a glass the mirror of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory, etc. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

III. When it nourishes. This is consequent upon the former, the Word then
profits, when it is not only as an immortal seed to 1 Pet. 1. 23. Ibid. 2. 2.
beget us; but a spiritual food to nourish us, when as newborn babes we grow
by the sincere milk of the Word; when we grow in knowledge and in grace, not
only in high-flown notions, and ecstatical raptures, but grow inwardly, and
vitally. To grow in the head, while the vitals decay, is, you know, the
symptom of a disease: a Christian then profits, when by the Word he grows more
active in faith, more fervent in charity, which are the vitals of Religion.

Thirdly, As Physic. I. When it searches. As when Physic mixeth and meets
with the humor, it gripes and puts the patient to pains; so the Word of God,
when it meets with our corruption and searches it, it gripes and pains the
soul. So did Peter's Sermon, when it met with the particular corruption of the
Jews of crucifying Christ, it pricked them at the heart, Acts 2. 37. When Paul's
discourse meets with a Felix's injustice and intemperance, it gripes him Acts
24. 52.
so, that he trembles. That Physic works not kindly, which does not make the
patient sick: The Word of God then operates kindly, when it makes the soul sick
of sin. But this is not enough therefore,

II. When it purges and heals. And to this end, it must be mixed too. As there
must be due ingredients in every potion, suitably designed for the Cure of each
disease: so there must be in the Word of God; and this requires much spiritual
skill in the Minister, the spiritual physician. Some are lethargical in
security, these must have the corrosives of threatenings: Others fainting in
despondencies and fears, these must have the cordials of the promises: others
paralytical, weak in their graces, these must be brought to the bath of the
blood of Christ to strengthen them. There is a healing virtue in the Word of
God, whence perhaps it is that the Scripture is called, (...). the form of
sound Words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. efficiently, as making sound, and this must be added
to the former; for the Word often convinces where it converteth not, (as the
most obstinate sinner sometimes): The incision's made, but they run away from
the Physician before they are bound up, and so are not healed. Conviction is no
more conversion, then lancing a wound is the healing of it: then Physic is the
cure. So you have seen briefly what it is to profit by the Word of God.

Secondly, The grounds of unprofitableness may be drawn from 2. Partic.
five heads.

I. The Preacher.

II. The Hearer.

III. The Word it self.

IIII. God.

V. Satan.

From each of these we may take an account, why the Word profits not the
generality of men.

I. The Minister. For I think he cannot plead not guilty in this particular.
But as Diogenes, when he saw a loose scholar to be beaten, charged the Master;
so when we see so many unprofitable hearers, we may in a great measure charge
and blame the Preacher, and that in these ten respects,

First, Many preach unsent; run before they have their errand; thrust into the
office without a Commission; and that I confidently affirm to be one reason why
the Word profits so little.

It might seem a digression from the Text, but I am sure not impertinent to the
times, if I should enter a discourse of the necessity of a lawful call, in
order to the preaching of the word, and to enquire whether to preach without it
be not a neglect of a divine ordinance and institution, a closing with and
gratifying the Papist and Socinian, a contradicting the universal practice of
the Church, a violating the rule, of prudence, order, and right reason, a
prostrating the authority and exposing the function to contempt, and laying it
open to the presumption of every pretender to gifts. But I shall only at
present in all submission propound these two Queries as to the point in hand,
and wholly submit them to your judgment.

1. Whether he, who preaches without a lawful call and Commission, can pray in
faith for a blessing on what he preaches, as an ordinance of God in reference
to the end of preaching, which is Conversion of souls? If he can, he must have
some promise to ground that faith and prayer upon, which the Scripture, I dare
say, affords not; nay, God says the contrary of those Prophets, Jer. 23. 32. I
sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this people
at all: and if it be said these were false Prophets who prophesied lies, I wish
it were not the case of our pretenders, who are generally broachers of some
gross error; But however it is to be observed, that their not profiting is not
charged upon the falsity of their Doctrine, but their want of sending, and
being commissionated to the office. An Ambassador is not like to treat
effectually on terms of peace, if he neglects his Commission: no more are those
who negotiate upon terms of reconciliation of sinners to God, who run without
sending.

2. Whether for the people to expect profit by such, be not to look for Gods
blessing out of Gods way? That Scripture is express Romans 10. 14. where if the
Apostles gradation were rational it must argues a necessary a dependence of
preaching upon sending; as of hearing upon preaching; as of faith upon hearing,
viz. all in an ordinary way of Gods dispensation. Not to limit God, but that he
may work by extraordinary means, but for us to expect them, when we may have
ordinary means according to divine institution to patronize encourage disorder
in the Church and plainly to tempt God; No Manna in Canaan where you may plow
and sow: No depending on extraordinary workings (and such must the profit by
unsent preachers be, if ever it be) where God affords us ordinary means of our
spiritual proficiency.

Till I can satisfy my self in these two doubts, I must resolve the
unprofitableness of the Word into the preaching unsent. And pardon me if any
think otherwise here, though I with that learned Chemnitius conclude this to be
good Divinity, Ecclesiae non debent, Chemnit. in loc. page 129.
nec possunt cum fructu audire eos, qui non habent legitimae vocationis
testimonia. As you then intend to profit by the word, practice our Saviors
command, Matthew. 9. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would
send laborers into his harvest.

Secondly, The Ministers neglect of private prayer that the word may profit. A
duty cetainly much imcumbent on the dispensers of the Word of God, in reference
to the spiritual advantage of the people; for this cause Paul bowed his knee to
God for his Ephesians. The Ephesians. 3. 14. 1. Cor. 3. 6.
hearers profit ought to be the Preachers aim, which he cannot effect without
God; he may plant, but it is God must give the increase. It is the Lord, which
teaches us to profit; and no more effectual applications of our selves to God,
then by prayer. Paul, we know, was rapt up into the third heaven, ut ad
Apostolatum suum instructior rediret, says Musculus: so should every Minister,
by holy meditation and devout prayer, if he will be a profitable preacher of
the Gospel. Austin tells us, that a Minister may profit more, pietate orationis,
quam oratorum facultate, Lib. 4. de Civ. Dei. cap. 5.
by the piety of his devotion, then by an affected laborious studied eloquence:
and therefore goes and advises every Minister; by praeying for himself and his
people; to be orator antequam dictor, to be a solicitor at the throne of
grace, before an orator in the pulpit, that, priusquam exerat proferentem
linguam, ad Deum elevet sitientem animam; he should first breath the longings
of his soul in prayer to God, before he vents the meditations of it to the
people. The foolish virgins lamps went out for want of oil, Matthew. 25. David
calls the Word of God a lamp, Psalm. 119. 105. Those that carry this lamp to
enlighten others, must keep it alive by the oil of devotion. The neglect of
prayer is the Ministers sin, and a prejudice to the efficacy of the word he
preaches; as Samuel said; 1 Samuel 12. 23. God forbid that I should sin against
the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you; but I will teach you the good and the
right way. You see praying and teaching must go together.

Thirdly, Many do not preach what for the matter of them can profit: whilst
neglecting the wholesome word of God, they elevate the hearer into a stupid
ignorant admiration, soaring aloft in the clouds in high Platonical notions,
and abstruse Metaphysical abstract speculations, with which they stretch their
own, and break their auditories brain to conceive, which may gratify an
humor, please an itching ear, satisfy a nice curiosity, feed the fancy, but
never satisfy and nourish the soul, which comes hungring to the ordinance. For
souls, as Clement says, have (...), their proper nourishment; Clemens, page
272.
you may as well feed bodies with shadows, as souls with such lean jejune
notions: of such stuff in a pulpit (for elsewhere I disparage it not) I will
only say what the same Author says of all the Greek Philosophy, (...), like
a rotten nut, you may break your teeth in cracking it, and then meet with no
kernel, nothing which can satisfy, or nourish you. The Apostle speaks about
striving about words to no profit, but subverting the hearers, 2 Timothy 2. 14. it
is the Word of God which is the proper food for souls to thrive by; this is a
spiritual paradise, the flowers of which have not only (...), a grateful
savor, but (...), Hom. 1. p. 2.
as Chrysostom says, fruit to nourish the soul. All other things are but
husks, and this only the solid food. If Plato and Aristotle's Philosophy and
Metaphysics can build up a soul to heaven, we may spare our bibles.

Fourthly, Affectation of popular applause and credit, which purs the preacher
upon studying more what may please, then what may profit. A doctore glorioso,
was one of those things which Luther was wont to pray God to deliver his Church
from, from vainglorious preachers; such as he elsewhere calls Theologi
gloriae, and gives this description of them, dicant malum bonum, and bonum
malum, they can call good evil, and evil good; and then you may easily judge
how little they are like to profit their hearers. This affectation makes many
both unfaithful, and unfruitful in this office: S. Paul opposes this to the
service of Christ, as if they were inconsistent, Gal. 1. 10. These are like
unfaithful Ambassadors, who, when they are commissionated to promote their
Princes interest, they carry on their own: or like ill spokes-men, who being
sent to woo for Christ, speak for themselves only. I speak not against
approbation, as the result of the work, (for which God is pleased to crown the
laborious, and encourage his faithful ministers) but as the primarie
intention, or ultimate end of the preacher. This is oftenest the sin of young
Divines: how often has this put men upon preaching error it self, and so
poisoned, not profited their hearers? Tertullian mentions it as the policy of
Heretics, neophytos collocare ut gloria eos obligent, quia veritate non
possunt, to promote young upstarts as the broachers of their Heresies, that
whom truth could not, affectation of vain-glorie might engage. It is hard what
I say, not impossible, to carry on the interest of souls, and our applause
together. The Apostle telling the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 8. that he was
affectionately desirous of them, he tells you, verse 5, 6. we used not
flattering words, nor of men sought we glory.

Fifthly, Ignorance in the dispencers of the word: such as the Apostle
describes, 1 Timothy 1. 6, 7. who are desirous to be teachers of others,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Like Ahimaaz,
will needs be running upon the message, and yet have 2 Samuel 18. 22
no tidings to carry to the people, but need still to be taught the first
principles of the oracles of God. It is said, Mal. 2. 7. and they shall Heb. 5.
12.
seek law at his mouth: and so they may from too many and never find it; and
this is seriously to be lamented. I am sure God complains of it, Jer. 2. 8.
that they that handle the law, knew him not. I shall not digress to show the
usefulness of all knowledge to a Minister of the Word: only as pertinent to my
present subject, show that ignorance in the preacher must needs cause
unprofitableness in the hearer, for how shall he be (...), apt to teach? how
shall he rightly divide the Word, (...), to give every soul his portion? or be
able 2 Timothy 2. 15.
to speak a word in season: who has not that (...)? or how shall he unfold
Gods word to others, who knows nothing of it himself? We (says the Apostle)
have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16. and so must every profitable Minister
have, and this ignorance is seriously to be lamented in many new upstarts in
our days, who I do not say but they may promote a civil interest, for so did
Jeroboam's Priests of the lowest of the people, 1 Kings 13. 33. but little like
to advance the interest of souls, but a great deal more danger that these
blind guides should lead the people together with themselves into the ditch.

Sixthly, Miscarriage in the Ministers provision and preparations: which are
sometimes so nice and curious, like some dishes that are made of so many
ingredients, they rather nauseate then nourish: sometimes so careless, rude and
undigested, that they bring a disrepute upon the Ministry and account preaching
but, as the Athenians did, vain-babling. Observe S. Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15. Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine, neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Meditate on
these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to
all, that is, not only that whereby he himself was increased in his gifts, but
rather that by which the Church was edified and profited: mal^ de ministerii
effectu interpretari, says Calvin. S. Augustine Calv. in loc. Lib. 4. cap. 10.
de Doctr. Christ.
would have preachers look rather quanta evidentia, then quanta eloquentia,
with what evidence they speak more then with what eloqu^ce, and to use
diligentem quandam negligentiam, careful of their matter, but less nice of
their expression, so it be apt and significant; sic detrahat ornatum, ut sordes
non contrahat, that they neither too curiously affect the dress of Rhetoric,
so that the Auditour only plays with the dish, nor yet a sordid rudeness, lest
he nauseats his spiritual food: both these may cause unprofitableness in the
hearer, though I think an elaborate affected quaintness, more then a careless
plainness. An iron key will unlock what a wedge of gold will not, a powerful
plainness will open hearts sooner, then the studied words of man's wisdom.

Seventhly, Cowardice of preachers: which makes them afraid to preach what may
most probably profit their hearers; which upon some carnal interest or respect
durst not reprove sin, either to secure the friendship of some great one, or
the liking and love of the people, and this puts them upon preaching smooth
things, and placentia, so sowing pillows under men's elbows, and dawbing with
untempered mortar. Nathan is then like to rouse David, when he comes home to
him with a Thou art the man. You know the like 1 Samuel 12. 7.
good Theodosius got by Ambrose his sharp reproof of him, upon which the
Emperor professed, (...): that Ambrose only deserved the name of a Bishop:
which as it spoke the mild Christian temper of the Emperor, so the
faithfulness and courage which becomes a Minister of the Gospel; not to fear
the faces of men; but to cry aloud and spare not. This was the courage of
Paul, though a prisoner, to reprove Felix of his injustice and intemperance:
and John the Baptist to tell Herod of his Herodias. When Luther was charged by
some for too much bitterness against Henry the eight, he made this Apology,
magnum non est, si ego Regem terrae mordeo, quando ipse nihil veritus est Regem
Coeli blasphemare: he thought it below the courage of a Minister, to fear to
reprove an earthly Prince, who feared not to blaspheme the King of Heaven. If
ever we intend to profit by preaching, we must be instant in season, and out of
season, that is (as both Chrysostom and Theophylact) (...), in dangerous, as
well as in peaceable times, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and he tells you how, in the next
words, reprove, rebuke.

Eighthly, The unsuitableness of the Ministers gifts, as to that particular
charge he is set over. The misplacing of men's gifts and abilities is a very
great cause of unprofitableness. Many men, who for their great learning and
exemplarie conversation, might seem fit to be shining lights in the Church of
God, yet are not (...), as the Apostle requires, apt to teach, or condescend to
the capacity of a meaner auditorie, and so great parts often prove unserviceable
in the Church.

Ninethly, The want of a holy zeal in the preacher of the word. A cold preacher
makes a careless, and so consequently an unprofitable hearer. Every preacher
should be an Apollos, who was (...), Acts 18. 25. fervent in the spirit; and
the effect of it was answerable, viz, the conviction of his obstinate
auditors, verse 28. and as John Baptist a burning as well as a shining light.
Isaiah's Isa. 6. 6.
tongue was touched with a coal from the altar before he prophesied. The Spirit
descended upon the Apostles in fiery tongues, to inflame them with a holy
zeal: and presently after Peter converts three thousand at one Sermon, Acts 2.
41. When the Law was given, the mount was on a flame, before the Trumpet
sounded; and he that Exodus 19. 18, 19.
sounds the silver Trumpet of the Gospel to others, should himself be enflamed
first with a holy zeal and fervor, and this will make him profitable to his
hearers: because this holy zeal will put a man upon improving his gifts, and
laying out himself faithfully for God, and in an earnest desire of gaining
souls, willing with S. Paul to spend or to be spent; whereas it is as
improbable that cold, lukewarm preachers should inflame or enliven others, as
it is for dead embers to kindle others.

Tenthly, The Ministers living contrary to his preaching: this makes his
preaching unprofitable. Observe what God says, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. Unto the
wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, and
cast est my words behind thee. They, who would profit others, must magna
vivere as well as magna loqui, says Erasmus, they must live as becomes that
Gospel which they preach to others. Operum copia egregia est fandi copia, says
Augustine: he preaches best who lives best. Praebeat aliis exemplum, Lib. 4.
cap. 29. de Doctr. Chr.
and sit ejus quasi copia dicendi forma vivendi, says the same Author. Let
him exemplify his doctrine in his life, and preach that as profitably in his
conversation, as in the pulpit: otherwise he pulls down with his hands, what he
builds up with his tongue, and corrupts them more by his practice, then profits
them by his preaching: In prosecution of this, I shall say three things.

I. He may be a powerful and profitable preacher of the Gospel upon his
repentance and reformation, who has been guilty of sins of a deep die. I
speak this to vindicate and assert the absoluteness and freedom of God, in
making use of, and choosing what instruments he pleases. Paul, once a
blasphemer and a persecutour, afterward labored more abundantly then all the
rest of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Peter thrice denied his Master, yet after
his repentance profits three thousand by one Sermon. Potest fieri, ut quis Acts
2. 41. Parae^ ibid.
recte doceat alios, and seipsum non corrigat: ut qui aliis profit, seipsum
praetereat. Aegidius gives a reason why Christ chose some of his Apostles out
of gross sinners; ut non tam voce, quam exemplo concionarentur de gratuita
remissione peccatorum, that they might not only preach Christ by their
doctrine, but be themselves visible monuments of the free grace of God.
Matthew, once a Publican, may upon his return, make an Apostle.

II. It is possible that one, who himself is not converted, yet may be
instrumental to convert others. The word preached is the instrument of the
Spirit of God, who blows when and where he lists. John 3. 8. Paraeus in Phil.
1. 18.
Malitia Ministrorum non derogat efficaciae ministerii, is Paraeus's divinity.
God may strike a right stroke, although with a crooked instrument. It is not
Paul that plants, but God that gives the increase. The word is the sword of the
Spirit, it is the spiritual seed; the Spirit may strike home with his own
sword, though managed, and prosper his own seed, though sown by a leprous or
dirty hand. The carpenters may build an ark for Noah, and be drowned
themselves. The sea-mark may rot it self, and yet give others warning to avoid
shipwreck. Judas, though a son of perdition, yet used and called as an Apostle,
Luke 9. 6. Gifts and graces are two different things: it is heartily to be
wished, and carefully to be endeavored for, that these were never separated in
the Ambassadors of the Gospel: but he who wants grace for his own salvation,
may have gifts bestowed upon him for the edification of others.

III. It is not very probable they should, nor can I think they usually do
savingly profit their hearers. Observe what the Prophet says, Mal. 2. 6.
speaking of Levi, The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found
in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity. As it is said of Barnabas, Acts 11. 24. that he was a good man, and
full of the holy Ghost. Whereas he who lives contrary to his preaching, sermo
multus, nullus Lib. 2. de considerat. ad Eugenium.
fructus, as Bernard says; he may speak much, but profit little. And that upon
a fourfold account.

1. Because he prostitutes his authority and forfeits his hearers belief of
what he preaches, Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou
commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege, etc.
Romans 2. 22. As if he should say, It is a shame thou should, and thou
spendest thy breath to little purpose if thou do, With what face and
confidence can he appear against sin in the pulpit, who countenanceth and
patronizeth it in his life? Guilt makes men fearful in reproving others, and
this (though seldom acceptable to the hearer) is the most profitable way of
preaching: rebuke, exhort, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Nihilo plus fidei
continent conciones, Calv. de scandal. page 107.
quam si fabulam in scena ageret histrio, says Calvin. A loose liver is often
credited no more in the pulpit, then an actour upon the stage, who personates a
Prince, when all the bystanders know he is but a Beggar; who has Jacobs
voice, but Esaus hands; who acts a double part, of a Saint in the pulpit, of a
sinner out of it: and does not this justly put such an argument as this into
the peoples mouths, If it be true what he speaks, why does he not practice it?
If right as he lives, why does he not preach it? Thus both his authority and
credit are forfeited, and then it is easy to judge how little his preaching is
like to profit.

2. Because hereby he exposes his person and office to contempt and scorn. The
sin of Elie's sons caused the people to abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel
2. 17, It is not learning, or great preferments, or a studied quaintness, or
laborious eloquence, can uphold the credit or repute of the Ministers and
preaching so much as a suitable living and conversation. This raises, even in
wicked men ofttime, a reverent and high esteem of the works of the Ministry,
and of the person for the works sake: as it did in Herod to wards John Baptist,
Mark 6. 10. S. Paul's counsel to Timothy is very observable, 1. Tim. 4. 12. Be
thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in chsrity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity. An exemplary life is a good preservative against
contempt, or at worst a ground of comfort under it: whereas an unsuitable
conversation lays both office and person open to obloquie and disgrace. Give
me leave to allude to what is said of Naaman, 2 Kings 5. 1. he was a great man
with his Master, and honorable, he was also a mighty man in valor, but he was
a leper: this latter obscured the glory of his greatness, and riches, and
valor: so when it shall be said of a Minister, he is learned, judicious,
solid, quaint, elegant, powerful, but covetous, worldly-minded, idle, loose,
passionate, this spoils all; and the former cannot so effectually provoke
honor and esteem, as the latter procure contempt and shame. and if the person
and office be laid open to contempt, the doctrine is little like to profit. If
the Pharisees be offended with the person of Christ, they profit not by, but
deride his doctrine.

3. Because hereby he forfeits those gifts by which he should be able to profit
by his preaching. As he sinks into profaneness, so also into shallowness of
apprehension, weakness of judgment, slipperiness of memory, unruliness of
passion, prejudice against the truth, and the like. Add to this Gods judicial
with-drawments oftentimes of his gifts, and the knowledge of his truth from
those, who abuse the one, and hold the other in unrighteousness. God, as the
Apostle tells us, gives them over (...), to an irrational sottishness of mind.
Romans 1. 28. John 7. 17.
Holiness of conversation is the most effectual and compendious way to increase
our gifts: for the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14.
whereas it is not probable, he should know much of the mind of God, who
wilfully neglects to practice it. As when it is said of Elie's sons, 1 Samuel 2.
12. that they were sons of Belial, there follows, they knew not the Lord. Sin
obscures the undeerstanding, and corrupts principles, and forfeits our gifts,
and then they are little like to profit.

4. A bad example is more prevalent to corrupt and mislead men, then good
counsel is to profit and advantage them. Suadet loquentis vita, non oration;
Life-oratory is the most powerful: Seneca gives the Scneca. ep. 6.
reason, Homines magis credunt oculis quam auribus; Men believe what they see,
more then what they hear. And they who give their doctrine the lie in their
lives, are not like to persuade others to credit it. When those, whom the
Apostle exhorts to be (...), 1 Pet. 5. 3. the examples of the slock, lead the
sheep of Christ astray by their lives. Observe what God charge the Prophets
of Jerusalem with, Jer. 23. 15. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the
Prophets, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the
water of gall: for from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth
into all the land: and Mal. 2. 8. Ye are departed out of the way, ye have
caused many to stumble at the Law. When these stars are erratick, no wonder, if
those who walk by their guidance wander. If the salt want savor, no wonder, if
the people be not seasoned with knowledge and grace. A godly Minister is a
daily preacher, while his life is a standing reproof to sin, and an argument of
piety. Sermo tuus in exemple tuo videbitur, sic non solum praeceptor very,
Senec. ep. 20.
sed testis eris. It is said of Christ, that he was a Prophet, (...), Luke 24.
19. mighty in deed as well as in word. S. Paul, who so often exhorts other to
mortification, brings his own body into subjection, and himself runs, as an
example to provoke his Corinthians so to run that they might obtain, 1 Cor. 9.
24, 25, 26, 27. How beautiful are the feet of those, that preach the Gospel of
peace? Romans 10. 15. Their feet, their walking, not their tongues only, their
speaking. I shall end this with Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take
heed to thy self, and unto thy doctrine. We must do both, as ever we expect
savingly to profit either our selves, or them that hear us. I shall end all
with a double Application:

First, To the Ministers, that they should endeavor so to preach, that they
may profit; not barely that they might please: for delect are Lib. 4. c. 12. de
doct. Christ. 1 Cor. 9. 16.
suavitatis, docere necessitatis, says Austine: necessity is laid upon you,
yea woe too, if you preach it not to profit by it.

Preach to profit.

I. In conformity to the examples of Christ and his Apostles, that ye may
write after their copy, Christ came not to seek his own glory, John 8. 50. and,
I receive not honor from men, says he, John 5. 41. Christ makes it the badge
of a false prophet, to seek himself and his own glory, John 7. 18. Christ's
message and work was to call sinners to repentance, to seek and to save what
was lost, to bind up Matthew. 9. 13. Isa. 6. 1.
broken hearts, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening the prison
to them that are bound: And the Apostles trod in their Masters steps: take the
one example of S. Paul, who labored more abundantly then all the rest of the
Apostles, and all to the profit of the Churches: I have kept back nothing,
which might be profitable to you, says he to the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.
20. he was affectionately desirous of his Thessalonians: and he tells his
Corinthians, more then 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
once, of this, that he was made all things to all men, that he might 1 Cor. 9.
22.
save some; that he did not seek his own profit, but the profit of many, 1 Cor.
10. 33
that they may be saved; and again, I seek not yours but you: The care 2 Cor.
12. 14 2 Cor. 11. 28
he had of the Churches, he reckons as the greatest of his labors* and to name
no more, how desirous was he of the good of the Philippians, that he could
rejoice in being offered as a sacrifice upon the service of their faith, Phil.
2. 27.

II. To gain and uphold the repute of preaching and the ministers in the hearts
of the people. Nothing does this more effectually, then plain and profitable
preaching. The Apostle speaks to this fully, 1 Cor. 14. 25. Learned preaching
may beget such an admiratition in the people, as they may cry you up for a
Scholar; and quaint preaching may get you the elogiums of an orator; but of
the powerful and convicting preaching of a Christian, they will say God is in
you 1 Cor. 14. 25
of a truth: though such is the ingratitude of many in these days, that they
are ready to cast dirt in the face of that ministry, by which, unless wilfully
blind, they cannot but observe thousands, and confess themselves, if at all,
profited and converted.

III. Because this is the very design of your office: the end of your
ministerial gifts and abilities. The manifestation of the spirit is given to
every man to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12. 7. And the Apostle speaking of these
gifts, which Christ, when he ascended, gave to the Pastors of his Church,
Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. tells you the use and end of them, verse 12, it is; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. And S. Paul tells his Corinthians that his authority was
given him for edification. 2 Cor. 10. 8. Those titles, whereby Scripture sets
out the Ministers and their office, speak this. They are ambassadors; 2 Cor.
5. 20. that engages them to negotiate the peoples reconciliation to God:
Angels, Rev. 1. 20. and you know they are ministering spirits sent forth to
Minister for them that shall be heirs, Heb. 1. 14. builders, 1 Cor. 3. 10. that
speaks their duty to edify the people in faith and knowledge: stewards, Titus
1. 2. and therefore it is their duty, to distribute what they are entrusted
with for the good of the family of God the household of faith: nurses, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 7. and so must give out the sincere milk of the word whereby the children of
God may grow: stars, Revel. 2. and therefore must shine for the benefit of
others, especially in this night of ignorance and Atheism. For us then not to
aim at profiting by our preaching is to abuse the gifts of God to another end
then that for which God gave us them.

IV. For your own comfort, both here and hereafter. It will be your comfort
upon a deathbed, when conscienc shall testify to the sincerity of your
desires of profiting the people of God. It must be sad surely, at such a time,
for any of us to reflect upon our unfaithfulness in this office: when
conscience shall tell us to our faces, we ascended the pulpit, more to please a
fancy, or promote a party, or to advance our selves, then to profit or save
souls. On the contrary, a faithful discharge of our office, will be then
comfortable: this was the matter of S. Paul's rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12. for the
accomplishment of which he esteemed his life not dear to him, Acts 20. 24. and
so indeed he did, for when he was ready to be offered, this was his comfort, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is
at hand: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith.

V. Because your reward will be certain and great, Dan. 12. 3. One of those
three aureola's which the Schoolmen speak of, by which they mean some
additional accessions to the essential happiness of Saints, they assign to the
Doctors of the Church: and Scripture speaks of a Prophets reward, Matthew. 41. as
exceeding the reward of a righteous man, with which the Apostle Peter
encourages the elders in their duty, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 4. You see then how good
ground there is for this promise, and if you would preach to profit, you must
preach,

1. Constantly, in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. especially
considering we are fallen into those times the Apostle there foretold, and
uses as an argument of Timothie's diligence, v. 3, 4. The worse the times, the
more errors abound, the greater ought our zeal and diligence in the Ministry
to be. We must not only as the high priest under the Law, go into the Sanctum
Sanctorum once in a year; preach a Sermon, which smells of the lamp, now and
then, but we must be instant, attending to doctrine, and continue in it. 1 Timothy
4. 13.
Christ enjoined it thrice to Peter to feed his lambs, and his sheep, John 31.
16. If each Minister wrote after S. Paul's copy, Acts 20. 20, 21. many might
be kept close to that truth, from which of late they are apostatized, and reap
more profit by the Word of God.

2. Condescendingly, suitably to the capacity of those who are to hear:
nothing more easy, then to excuse the vulgar with an affected height of
eloquence and learning: quae quicquid non intelligit plus miratur, as Hierom
says: who are wont highly to admire, what they do not at all understand: but
this will never savingly profit them. If I come unto you speaking with tongues,
what shall I profit you? says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 6. and v. 4. that is
powerfully and plainly. This was our Saviors practice by familiar parables to
stoop to the capacity of his hearers, Mark 4. 33. and I know not whom we may
better imitate; in this we must, if we aim at profiting by our preaching.

Secondly, To the hearers: that they would endeavor so to hear, that they may
profit. For your thriving under means and profiting by preaching of the Gospel,
will be,

I. A credit to the Gospel, as proclaiming to the world that the Gospel is more
then a mere notion, and that there is a power, virtue, and efficacy in it:
while men's unprofitableness opens the mouths of the enemies of that Gospel to
charge it as a humane invention and policy to keep men in aw and subjection:
but when they shall see the Gospel having a powerful influence upon your
hearts and lives, they will presently conclude it to be the power of God unto
salvation, as S. Paul tells his Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. 4.

II. The joy of Angels, Luke 15. 7. I say unto you likewise, joy shall be in
heaven over one sinner that repents, more then over ninety and nine just
persons, that need not repentance. And the means of that is the Word preached,
compared to the grain of mustard seed, Mat. 13. 31. if you take it down, it
will make you weep, as Peter's Sermon did the Jews.

III. The advantage and comfort of your Pastor and Minister. I have no greater
joy then to hear that my children walk in the truth, says John to his beloved
Caius, 3 John v. 4. What comfort and joy must it needs be to a faithful
Minister, to be able to say, Behold, I and the children that God has given me,
Heb. 2. 13. When he shall see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied. When
with S. Paul he can say, Such have I begotten in Christ through the Gospel, 1
Cor. 4. 15. S. Paul calls his converted Philippians his crown and his joy,
Phil. 4. 1. and his Thessalonians his glory and his joy, 1 These. 2. 20. and as
it is his joy here, so it will be his comfort at the last day: upon which
account the Apostle urges this upon his Philippians, c. 2. v. 16. holding
forth the word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ that I have not
run in vain. holding forth] viz. in their lives; and upon the Hebrews, 13. 17.
Your profiting by the Word will several ways be the Ministers advantage; I Will
but hint.

1. As a testimony to the lawfulness, and evidence of the power of his
preaching: and at once a credit both to the Ambassador, and his message, the
preacher and his Gospel. The converted Corinthians were the Apostles
commendatorie Epistles to set off the worth and efficacy of his Apostleship, 2
Cor. 3. 1, 2. and he tells them 1 Cor. 9. 2. the seal of my Apostleship are ye
in the Lord: as if he had said, your conversion is as undoubted an evidence of
the truth of mine Apostleship, as a Princes seal added to letters patent to
commissionate an Ambassador.

2. As a security and encouragement to increase those gifts by which he may
profit. When a Minister sees no issue of his prayers and Sermons of many
restless nights, and weary days; how does it discourage him in his labors?
and while you are careless to profit, he proves idle in his study, and
negligent to improve his gifts, which consequently must rust and decay. An
unprofitable hearer often makes a cold, careless, dull preacher, and besides, God
for your unprofitableness, may withdraw his assistance and gifts, and dry up
the breast for your neglect of the sincere milk of the Word.

3. As that which sweetens all his enjoyments. A large revenue, a great living,
a fair repute, a fullness of outward accomodations, satisfy not a faithful
Minister, while the people remain unprofitable, that he sees not the fruit of
his labors.

4. It is your own concernment and interest. For it is sad if the Word preached
profits you not: for if not this, probably nothing else will: as Abraham told
Dives, soliciting for one to be sent from Luke 16. 51.
the dead to his brethren. If the Word profits you not the case is desperate.
You had better never have heard of the Word, a Turk and an Indian will come off
better then you at the last day, Mat. 10. 14, 15. It will be sad for Capernaum,
exalted up to heaven in the enjoyment of the word and ordinances at that day,
for not profiting by them, to be thrown down to hell: so for those unbelieving
Jews here, to whom the Gospel was preached as well as to us, but the word did
not profit them.

HEBR. 4. 2. The word preached did not profit them.
THe second ground of not profiting by the word preached is in respect of
hearers. II. Sermon.


First, A careless, negligent non-attendance to the word preached: when men's
thoughts are not gathered up, but roving, their eyes gazing about, their ears
not fixed upon the word of God; when they bring their bodies hither as so many
carcasses, but their souls are elsewhere. The covetous man's soul is locked up in
his chest at home, and there idolizing in his thoughts his Mammon of
unrighteousness, while he should be serving God in the Temple; the voluptuous
Gallant comes there for fashion, in the mean time his thoughts are taken up
with the newest fashion, or perhaps with his hawks and hounds; the ambitious
man, while taking a nap at Church, dreams of honors and preferments: so that
we may say as Seneca did of the Philosophers schools, Magnam hanc anditorum
Scnec. ^p. 108.
partem videbis, cui Philosophi scholae diversorium otii fit. Many make the
Church a meeting place of idleness: indeed God complains of this himself, Ezekiel.
33. 31. They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as
my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them, forwith their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness:
their thoughts are wandering in the world, while their bodies are confined to
the Church. And this nonattendance is much to be lamented, that many whom you
shall observe with a constant unweariedness attentive to a ballad, idle tale,
or at a stage play, at an hours Sermon and preaching of the word of God are
tired, dull, heavy, drowsy, and unattentive; so that we may lay it to the
charge of our Auditors, that Demosthenes reproves the Athenians for; that when
he made an Oration de Asini umbra, they were all very attentive to hear him;
but making another (...). C^s. Con.
de salute Graeciae, they all deserted him. Many can lend an ear to a tale, a
fable, or Romance, who are negligent and non-attendant upon the word of God:
and this must needs prove unprofitable upon a double account.

I. It is so in the acquiring of all other knowledge, if he that learns regards
not what is read unto him (as suppose a scholar his Tutours lectures, or an
apprentice his masters directions) he is not like to profit by them; so it is
in getting wisdom by the word of God: if we would profit by it, we must be
such as the Auditors were in Luke 19. 47, 48. of whom it is said, they were
very attentive to hear him.

II. When God comes by his Spirit to make the word effectual to any soul, he
raises it to an holy and careful attention to the word preached. This is most
evident in that pregnant place, Act. 16. 14. concerning Lydia, whose heart the
Lord opened, that she attended to the things spoken by Paul: and how often does
our Savior provoke the attention of his Auditors by this expression, He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear? You must bring an holy attention of body,
and intention of mind, if ever you intend savingly to profit by the word of
God: as it is said of those in Acts 8. 6. They gave heed unto those things
which Philip spoke.

Secondly, The proposal of wrong ends in hearing: the generality of hearers do
not propound to themselves those ends, for which God has appointed the
preaching of the word; such are the inlightning, strengthening, comforting,
quickening, convincing of souls; and upon search it will be found, but a few
come for those ends. Some come into the Church, as if a man should go into an
Apothecaries shop, (not for a medicine to cure them, that were well, but) for a
Recipe to sleep; I call to witness the drowsiness, and laziness of many. Others
are Athenian Auditors, come only to hear something that is new. Others out of
custom; because others do, Acts 17. 21.
and themselves have been accustomed to it. Others out of fashion, more then
devotion. Others come to contradict and oppose, as the Jews did Paul, Acts 13.
45. Others, not as they should do, willing to be judged by the word of God, but
to judge it, and the preacher for it; which make the pulpit, not a tribunal
before which they should be judged, but a bar before which the preacher must be
cited, censured, and judged; these come to pick a hole in the preachers coat,
not out of a conscience of their duty in hearing and obeying the word of God.
Others come out of affectation of eloquence, as a man goes to an Oration or
Comedy, and then it is no wonder, that whiles he catches at the shadow of
Rhetoric (as the dog in the fable) he looses his spiritual food, the bread of
life. These are like the proud Greeks, which seek after wisdom, to whom the
preaching of the Gospel seems but foolishness. Others come perhaps 1 Cor. 1. 13.
to promote their interest in the world, like those hearers of our Savior,
John 6. that followed him for the loaves. Others come only to hear, not to
learn or practice. Sicut in theatrum voluptatis Seneca ep. 108.
causa, ad delectandas aures, as Seneca speaks of some, who came to hear
Lectures of Philosophy; Non id agunt, ut aliqua vitia deponant, ut aliquam
legem vitae accipiant, mores suos exigant; sed ut oblectamento aurium
perfruantur; Aliqui and cum pugillaribus veniunt, non ut res accipiant, sed
verba, etc. Others come with their tablebooks, which, though good, is not
sufficient. Others to see, and to be seen, (...), as Clemens expresses it; as
Clem. page 272
Gallants flock to a city, not for any business they have there, but to see the
stately buildings, and to be seen themselves: and when men come for such ends
as these, it is no wonder that they go away without any profit. You should
come, if you intend to profit, as Naaman did to Jordan, to have your leprosy
cleansed, that you go away from it, as Seneca would have men from the hearing
of Philosophy, aut saniores, aut sanabiliores; or as the impotent persons at
the pool, John 5. that you may be put in, and healed, and strengthened: come as
to that word, which has Gods (...) upon it, in 1 Cor. 1. 21. and that in order
to your salvation. But you will say, If men come for these ends, were it not
better that they stay away? I answer, No, it is sinful to come thus in the
circumstance; but it is sinful in genere actus to neglect coming. However
come, though out of curiosity, so did S. Austin to hear S. Ambrose, yet was
caught by it: though perhaps to sleep (as old Father Latimer said) God may take
you napping: though to oppose and deride the preacher, so did the Jews, Acts 2.
13. charge the Apostles as drunkards; yet of them three thousand were added to
the Church. The net of the Gospel is spread, and thou may be caught, though
thou intendest it not. As he that comes into the Sun, though he intends it not,
may be warmed. Qui in unguentaria taberna resederunt, and paulo diutius
commorati sunt, odorem secum loci ferunt, says Seneca: so while you stay out a
Sermon, some savor of goodness may rest upon you, though perhaps you intend
nothing less: if thou come for these ends, thou may, though it is unlikely
thou should, profit.

Thirdly, Worldly mindedness: This much hinders the profiting of the word of
God. Our Savior tells you this expressly in, the parable of the Sower, Mark
4. 10. (...): there is a deceitfulness in the world to draw our hearts from the
word of God; and that three ways.

I. As it alienates the affections of men from the word of God. They whose
desires run after, and whose love is fixed upon the world, must needs have the
one dearer, the other cold to the word of God, You cannot, says our Savior,
serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 6. 24. The heart cannot be set upon both treasures
at once, no more then can one eye be lifted up to heaven, and the other cast
down upon the earth, at the same time. It was the farm, and oxen, that
disaffected those from the Supper, to which they were invited, Luke 16. 14, and
therefore the Apostle exhorts, Set your affections on things Col. 3. 2.
above, and not on things on the earth: you cannot do both together: and S.
John, Love not the world, nor the things of the world; if any John 2. 15.
one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him: and if not the love
of the Father, there is like to be little affection to the Word of God. Our
Savior expresses this, by sowing among thorns, Matthew. 13. 24. Wordly cares are
thorns (as in many other, so especially) in this respect; that as thorns eat
out the heart of the earth, where the seed is sown; so do the cares of the
world the desires of the soul toward the word of God; Nummus ill is magis
resonat, quam verba Ambr. sermon. 8. in Psalm. 119.
divina, says Ambrose.

II. As it prejudices them against the word preached, that they shut their
ears against it, and will by no means entertain it: the Psalmist compares the
wicked to the deaf adder, Psalm. 58. 4, 5. Augustine upon that place tells us how
the adder does it; allidet unam aurem terrae, and de cauda obturat alteram:
thus, when men have their hearts laid upon the world, it is no wonder, that
they are deaf to the word of God: clausas aures habent and sono aeris obtusas,
says Ambrose, the sound of their riches, deafens them to the word of God. A
worldly man's heart must needs be full of prejudices against the word, and the
great doctrine of it, self-denial, taking up the cross, and parting with all
for Christ: upon hearing of these doctrines, they are ready to say, This is an
hard saying, who can bear it. This was that which prejudiced the Jews against
Ezekiel's preaching, Ezekiel. 33. 31. that though they were convinced of the truth
of it, and brought into a liking of it, yet they did not profit by it: because
their hearts went after their covetousness. This prejudiced Demetrius and
others against the Gospel, as in Acts 19. 27. so those against Paul and Silas,
Acts 16. 19. The word of God does most hardly take place in a covetous man's
heart.

III. This worldly-mindedness often makes Apostates from the word of God: the
young man in the Gospel heard Christ, and pretended an universal compliance to
his commands, Matthew 29. 21. but covetousness lay at the bottom, and therefore,
when Christ prescribed his parting with all, he apostatizes from his former
profession. This made Demas leave Paul, 2 Tit. 4. 10 While men's hearts are set
upon the world, and their thoughts wholly taken up with earthly things, they
grow into a disaffection of the word of God, and the preaching of it: and when
any danger for the words sake appears, they fall from it: yea, notwithstanding
that seeming joy and delight they entertained it with. This is most evident in
the parable of the seed which fell on the stony ground, Matthew. 13. 20. If
therefore you would profit, when you come to hear the word, you must lay aside,
not only your worldly employments, but your earthly thoughts and desires,
which otherwise will choke the word of God. When Abraham went in obedience to
the command of God to sacrifice his son, he left his servants, and his Ass
behind him, Genes. 22. 5. ne impediretur, says Paraeus, so should we all our
earthly thoughts and designs, when in obedience to the precept of God, we come
to hear the word: that our hearts be emptied of these cares, ne intus existens,
etc. And we find worldly-mindedness called by the Apostle the root of all
evil, Tim. 6. 20. the root of this, amongst the rest, unprofitableness.
Therefore it is observed, there were fewer Apostates in the Primitive times
because then there was little worldly advantage to tempt and solicit them from
the Gospel.

Fourthly, Neglect of prayer. I showed you before the Ministers engagement to
pray for the people: in 1 Samuel 12. 28. now I shall show you the neglect of this
duty in the people is a great cause of this unprofitableness. You are to pray
therefore,

I. That God would open the Ministers mouth: this S. Paul often puts those upon,
to whom he wrote, as the Ephesians, cap. 6. ver. 18, 19 and the Colossians,
cap. 4. ver. 2, 3. both for inward gifts, and abilities, and the outward
exercise of them: from which place we may note, 1. That there can be no
profiting without a door of utterance: 2. That God must open it, as he did for
Moses, who was of slow speech, Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12. (...). so Clemens
Alexandrinus. God is the only teacher of us to speak, and of you to profit: He
must open our mouths and your hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, and the
word to both, before it can profit. So God says in regard of the people Esaias.
48. 17. and so Christ promises to his ministers Luke 21. 15. 3. Prayer is the
key to open this door of utterance, to reveal the secret cabinet of Gods will
and word: Knock, and it shall be opened is Christ's promise in Matthew 7. you must
knock by prayer at the gate of heaven, that this door of utterance may be
opened to the Minister: S. Paul mentions this to his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 11.

II. That God would open your hearts: God must do both, or neither will be
done, Acts. 16. 14. S. Paul prays for his Ephesians, chap. 1. ver. 17, 18. and
David for himself, Psalm. 119. 18. Cathedram habet in caelo qui corda docet,
says S. Augustine. You may open your ears Lib. 4. cap. 16. de Doct. Christ.
to the word of God, and all the while your hearts may be shut against it,
unless God open that. As our Savior spoke to his disciples; Having ears hear
you not? etc. so it will be with every one, whose heart God does not open: the
Minister may bring the Word to the ear, but it is the spirit only, can carry
it effectually to the heart: Prove. 20. 12. The hearing ear, and the seeing
eye, the Lord has made even both of them. God must not only give thee the
word, but an eye to see it, and a heart to embrace it: as it is said of Christ's
preaching to his two disciples, Luc. 24. 45. Then opened he their
understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures. The sum of it is,
Prayer is the means to open the Ministers mouth to speak, and your hearts to
entertain the word so, as to profit by it; and therefore neglect of this must
needs cause unprofitableness. The Wiseman directs you to this course, as in
Prove. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is the Lord only that gives it, and if you would
have it from him, you must cry after it: If any of you lack wisdom, you must
ask it of God, James 1. 5. How deeply are most men to be charged here? I accuse
none of you: but I wish you to deal faithfully with your selves. How seldom do
you pray seriously to God, before you come here? Have you this morning been
upon your knees, earnestly begging of God for the Ministers, and your selves?
if not, no wonder if you go away, as you come; charge it upon your selves
(quarrel not with God, his Ordinances, or his Ministers) as the cause of your
unfruitfulness; if you come without praying, I do not wonder, that you go away
without profiting.

Fifthly, Pride; when men come with proud hearts to the preaching of the word:
they are more ready to scorn and oppose the word, then to profit by it.

This hinders,

I. Pride of our own righteousness. When men are puffed up with a conceit of
that, they discover not their want of the word of God, and so undervalue and
slight it: this was the reason, why our Saviors preaching wrought so little
upon the Pharisees, as you may see John 39. 40. they were not convinced of
their blindness and sin, but lifted up with an opinion of their own holiness:
so it was with the Jews too, Romans 10. 3. If ever we intend to profit by the
word, we must come emptied of our own righteousness, and breathing after the
righteousness of Christ held forth in the Gospel. An humble, though notorious
sinner will profit more at the word, then a proud self-justitiarie: as the
Publicans did at the preaching of our Savior, more then the Pharisees.

II. Pride of our own knowledge: this makes men think that constant preaching
of the word is needless: we shall hear nothing, but what we have heard before;
we know it as well as the preacher can tell us: this is the pride of men's
hearts. It was the Athenians pride of their Philosophical notions, which made
them esteem Paul's preaching as a vain babbling, Acts 17. As some proud scholars
think themselves beyond their Tutours reading: so many are too goodly to be
taught. High Seraphical souls, that are lifted up above ordinances; that
pretend to such growth, that they can live without this spiritual food: there
is pride of heart at the bottom of all. In heaven we shall live immediately
upon God; but here mediately by his ordinances: there we shall see face to
face, but here in the glass of the word: and if we desire to profit by it, we
must bring an humble frame of spirit. Jobs language would become us well, Job
34. 32. That which I see not, teach thou me: wait at wisdoms gates for further
discoveries, for here we know but in part, and see nothing but darkly: the best
of us had need daily of eye salve from Christ to have our eyes opened by the
word: we Acts 26. 18.
must become sensible of our ignorance, and in this become fools, that we may
be wise: this pride must needs make the word unprofitable upon a three fold
account.

1. It makes men untractable, and unteachable. A proud heart is apt to set up
many carnal reasonings, and proud imaginations, which exalt themselves against
the word: those (...) in 2 Cor. 10. 4. whereby they quarrel with the truth of
God, as Nicodemus, when our Savior preached to him of regeneration, he was as
at his, How can this thing be? John 3. It was this pride made the Greeks count
the Gospel foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 23. This pride makes men despise the word,
and they think it a kind of pusillanimitie of spirit to submit to it: who is
the Lord? says proud Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2. and thereupon rejects all his
messages by Moses: so those proud Jerem. 44. 16
Jews in Jeremiah. Clemens Alexandrinus says, The word is not to be submitted
to the judgment of those, who are not yet humbled, but have their minds
pre-occupied and prejudiced by proud carnal reasonings. Observe what the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 10. 4. God is not in the thoughts of his heart. The proud
will not seek after God, that is, in his ordinances; he thinks it needless, or
else below him: the proud Pharisees were of all other men the most untractable
of Christ's doctrine.

2. Because pride makes men unwilling to hear what may most profit. A proud
heart cannot endure to hear his particular sins, his darling corruptions struck
at, or discovered by the word of God. A particular reproof of sin, is certainly
the most profitable, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and this a proud heart cannot endure. If
Christ reproves the Pharisees hypocrisy, they are enraged against him, and
plot his death. Herod must not endure to hear of his Herodias: see Prove. 1. 25.
where it is said, Ye set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: these were proud scorners at the 22. verse, and you may easily judge,
how little like these are to profit. He is not like to have his wound healed,
that cannot endure to have it searched.

3. Because God will have nothing to do with such in his Ordinances. He gives
more grace to the humble, but resists the proud, James 4. 6. God is his enemy.
God, as I may say, every Sabbath keeps open houses; every one may come, but,
believe it, a proud heart is like to go away without his alms. He fills the
hungry with good things, but sends the rich empty away, Luke 1. 53. and we
find at Isaiah 66. 5. that God speaks comfort to such as tremble at his word,
not that scoff at it, and slight it, as a proud heart does. God pours the oil
of grace and knowledge into empty vessels: and therefore, as you desire to
profit by the word preached, so labor for an humble frame of spirit. It is
said by the Wiseman, Prove. 11. 2. with the lowly is wisdom: and to this end I
shall suggest only three notes.

I. This is the proper qualification of scholars in any science. Nothing
hinders knowledge more then pride: this was intimated in the posture, which
scholars amongst the Jews were wont to use, viz. to sit at their Master's feet:
so we find it Acts 22. 3. as an expression of humility. It is Philo's
observation, that when the Essens came into the Synagogue, each scholar,
according to their standing, was wont to sit at their Masters feet: this
expression speaks aptness to learn, and also a modest humility. Quod si haec
reverentia terrenis praeceptoribus debetur, quanto magis nos ad Christi pedes
jacere convenit, ut ex coelesti solio loquenti dociles nos prestemus, says
Calvin. Calv. in locum
We read of Mary, Luke 10. 39. that she sat at Jesus feet and heard his word:
upon which says S. Augustine, Quanto humilior ad pedes Domini sedebat Maria,
tanto amplius capiebat. We must cast our selves at the feet of Christ in his
Ordinances, if we will be his scholars. It is said that the people stood at the
feet of the mount, when the Law was given, Exodus 19. 17. so must we sit at the
feet of Christ, when the Gospel is preached.

II. This humility will make us teachable by the word of God. An humble heart
is like melted wax, which is fit to receive the impression of the word of God,
and willing to be molded, and fashioned according to it. An humble heart
trembles at the threatenings, and so is like to profit. God will dwell with
such, Isaiah 66. 2. It closes with the commands of it: as Cornelius said to
Peter, Acts 10. 33. We are all here present, to hear all that is commanded of
God: and David tells us, that he will hear what God speaks, Psalm. 85. 8. It
submits to the reproves of the word of God; it accounts of them as precious
oil: whereas a proud heart holds up against the threatenings, Psalm. 141. 5.
slights the commands, and rages against the reproofs of the word of God. That
place of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jerem. 13. 15. is full and worth our
observation. Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud: for the Lord has spoken: as
if he had said, If you continue in your pride, you will never give an ear to
the word of God. But,

III. To make all sure, an humble heart shall have the Spirit of God for its
teacher, and then such shall be effectually and profitably taught: the humble
he will teach, Psalm. 25. 8, 9. it shall have the Spirit to lead into all truth,
John 16. 13. The more humble, the more of the teachings of God. It is said,
that the Spirit descended upon Christ in the form of a dove: the dove is a meek
creature, to teach us, that the discoveries of the Spirit are made to humble
hearts.

Sixthly, The sixth ground is carnal reasonings, and prejudices in the hearts
of men, which pre-possessing the soul, make the word ineffectual: which
prejudices, while they remain, obstruct the soul against the word of God: these
are as so many bolts upon the doors of our hearts, that the word can get no
entrance; these are naturally in every one of our hearts: and they are of two
sorts.

I. Against the word it self.

II. Against the preacher of it.

I shall discover and remove some of them.

I. Against the word it self, which although it be admirable in it self, and
appointed for most excellent ends by God, yet are many prejudices against it in
men's hearts: as

1. The meanness of this Ordinance, and seeming outward inconsiderableness of
some hours speaking, which makes many to disesteem it: whence the Apostle calls
it the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1. 21. because most men are apt to
judge it so. The ground of this prejudice is men's non-attendance to the
authority of God's institution: as if a man should consider the matter, not
the stamp of the coin, which may make baser metals current: we should attend
to Gods (...) upon it, which makes it valuable; as the diamond in a ring makes
the ring much more precious; and as the seal upon a scedule, which makes it
effectual to the purposes contained in it: so is it the institution of God,
that makes this Ordinance so worthy and considerable; and if we would profit by
the word, we must remove this prejudice against the word for the means of it in
it self, and come to it, as Gods institution, and in obedience to his command,
and then are you like to thrive and profit by it. The Apostle gives you this,
as an account of the Thessalonians thriving under the Gospel: that they
received the word, not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of
God, 1 These. 2. 13. and this made it to work effectually in their hearts.

2. The pre-possession of some politic opinion, it may be, in compliance of
some great ones, and the strain of the times; hence the word of God finds no
entrance: much truth is stifled upon this account, because it will not comply
with men's politic concernments, and the opinions they have taken up in
compliance with their outward advantages; when truth comes to cross these, then
it is rejected. This is no new thing, it was so in our Saviors time amongst
the chief Rulers, John 12. 42. and with the chief Priests and Pharisees, John
11. 48. and upon this account both Christ, and his doctrine was rejected; and
hence it is said, that the great ones received it not, John 7. 48. Thus many
make truth to stoop and vail to politic designs; and this makes the word of
God ineffectual. Ahab would not make restitution of Naboth's vineyard, because
it would not stand with his interest: thus doctrines do often ebb and flow upon
politic considerations, and and the truth is lost in the world.

3. All is done by the Spirit, the Word is but a dead letter: may we not
therefore better expect the whispers of it, then to be tied to a constant
attendance upon the word preached? As if the impotent people John 5. should
have argued, we cannot be healed unless we be put in, therefore we will not lie
at the pool: nay, they knew but one of them could be healed at a time, and yet
all lay expecting. Is it in vain to sow your seed, because you can have no crop
without the influence of heaven? so no sowing the seed of the word, because no
thriving without the Spirit? It is said, James 1. 18. Of his own will begat he
us of the word of truth. The word is Gods, yet we are begotten by the word. So
S. Paul tells his Corinthians, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Because the hand writes, is the pen therefore needless?
The Corinthians were S. Paul's epistle, written by the finger of the Spirit, and
Saint Paul's preaching too, 2 Corinthians. 3. 3. The Sun enlightens, but by a
medium: the Spirit begets and regenerates, but by the word: as in 1 Pet. 1. 23,
24.

4. I have already profited by the word, and therefore I have no further need
of it. The Apostle commands indeed, that we should attend upon the preaching of
the word, but no longer, then till the day star arise in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.
19. and I find that already in those appearances of Christ to my soul, and
these spiritual illuminations I have communicated unto me, therefore I am
disobliged from any further attendance upon the word. In the removing of this
scruple, I desire these particulars may be considered.

I. Thy former experience of the efficiencie and power of the word will, if
they have been true, sweeten the word more to thee, raise up thy esteem of it,
revive thy delight in it, and engage thee in a further, and more cheerful
attendance upon it. I beseech you, consider that pregnant place of the Apostle,
1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you
may grow thereby. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. A true
taste will sharpen our appetites, as a child that has tasted the breast, is
still longing and crying after it, and can hardly be weaned from it: so it will
be with every true child of God, who has rellished this sincere milk of the
word: he gets a stomach by eating. Indeed a man may have a light, superficial
taste of the word, and apostatize, as in Heb. 6. 6. and that is sad: but a real
experience of the power and sweetness of it most effectually quickens desires
after it. So it did in David, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. He had seen, and therefore
desires to see. As it fared with Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 27. Mine eyes have been
enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey: so it is with Christians,
who have tasted the sweetness of the word, they are enlightened to see the
excellency, and desirableness of it, which quickens their desires after it: as
in Psalm. 34. 8. taste that you may see. It is the want of taste and experience,
which hinders men from the sight of the excellency and desirableness of it. I
should suspect that man never to have profited by the word, who himself
pretends so to have profited by the word, as to be justly exempted from any
further attendance upon it.

II. We will charitably suppose it to be true, that thou have been converted by
the word preached: but art thou so perfect all on a sudden, that thou need
no furtherances and additions of further degrees? What? because thou art born
again, is therefore the sincere milk needless, by which thou should grow?
Thou professest the truth, well; but do thou not need to be confirmed by the
word preached? It was the Apostles work to confirm the souls of the disciples,
Acts 14. 22. and surely most needful in these unsteadie, unsettled, wavering,
and apostatizing times, when many who have professed highly, have apostatized
foully. Be your knowledge true, it is but imperfect, for we know but in part,
and therefore you still need the word to be a light and a lamp to you: your
affections sanctified, but perhaps are dull and heavy, they need the word to
quicken and inflame them, as Christ did his disciples, Luke 24. 32. Thou art at
the highest pitch of thy seize: why? Christ has given Pastors for the
perfecting of the Saints. Ephesians. 4. 12. or, if thy graces thrive and grow,
still thy comforts may be but weak and languishing; therefore, thou still
need the word quicken and strengthen them; for God creates the fruit of the
lips, peace. They are not sensible of their imperfection sure, who feel not the
want of a constant supply of the word of God. The meat of one day, will not
serve you for a week: and surely you do not pray only for bodily, but
spiritual food, when you say, Lord give us this day our daily bread. The
Israelites gathered their Manna in the wilderness daily, and not once for all;
if laid up, it putrified: while we are in our pilgrimage, we must daily gather
the Manna of the word of God to nourish us, till we come to our heavenly
Canaan, and then we shall not need it. Naaman washed seven times in Jordan
before his leprosy was cleansed: some of the old leprosy of sin cleaves to
the best, and we must be continually washing in the waters of the sanctuary:
and Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, etc. Prove.
8. 34.

III. As to the Scripture pleaded in Peter, it is necessary to observe, 2 Pet.
1. 19.
that the word (...), until, does not denote the term of time, but as Beza
notes on Matthew. 1. 25. tempus interjectum simpliciter denotat; it asserts the
present, but denies not the future time, as Scripture affords us many
instances: as Matthew. 28. 20. I am with you unto the end of the world. What, no
longer? Yes, it will be their happiness to enjoy him to eternity. So Matthew. 22.
44. Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool: But
shall Christ sit there no longer? Yes surely. So here, until notes the end of
the word, not the term of time for our attendance. We must attend so long, but
it does not say, then no longer use of it. The Enthusiasts use this place to
favor their neglect of the word; for by the day star, they would understand
extraordinary immediate revelations: so by the (...): but it is evident, the
Apostle meant the same with that (...), verse. 20. as opposed to those (...),
verse. 16. such are these pretended Enthusiasmes. But,

IV. Attend to the word preached till that time, and then you shall be
exempted: but I pray mistake not, it will not be till you come to heaven; then
only (...), the day star will fully appear in your hearts. The Apostle here
seems to me to oppose this and the other world. While we are here in this
world, we are but in (...), and therefore need to attend to the word (...) as
to a light to guide us: but in the other world, Christ as our (...) shall arise
with an immediate and clear light upon our souls. When we shall not need the
medium of Ordinances; but shall see God face to face; then shall that (...)
dawn, that the Apostle speaks of; then they shall arrive at heaven, where they
shall have no need of the candle of Ordinances, nor the Sun, but the Lamb shall
give them light, Apoc. 22. 5. So long as the best of us are on this side
heaven, we have but (...), and that in a dark place. Indeed we have a clearer
light shining now, then was in the Old Testament; but if compared with the
light we shall enjoy in heaven, it is but (...), in a dark place: and thus
learned and judicious Calvin in terprets the words. Ego hanc caliginem, cujus
Petrus meminit ad totum vitae stadium extendo, ac diem tunc demum nobis
illucere interpretor, cum facie ad faciem videbimus quod nunc cernimus per
speculum and in aenigmate. It is true that the Sun of righteousness does shine
in the Gospel, and by that into our hearts; but in the greatest communication
of light, there is a mixture of some darkness. We are in the body but as in
ergastulo, as in a prison, though some light come in by the craneys, yet more
darkness remains upon us. Then shall the day fully appear, when all clouds of
ignorance and error shall be scattered, and the full rising of the Sun of
righteousness be upon us. Here Calvin observes, Nos tantundem absumus a pleno
die, quantum a perfectione fides nostra abest: our light here is but dim, our
faith but imperfect; therefore while we live in the world, we shall want the
lamp of the word to guide us; without which we walk but in darkness. They live
upon death it self, as Clemens elegantly, and see no more then one wrapped up in
thickest darkness of the most obscure night. The full appearances of God are in
heaven, here he manifests himself by his word, and to expect other ways of
discovery is but to tempt God. Attend then to the word of prophecy till the
daystar arises, that is, till you come to see God face to face, and then no
use of Ordinances; in the interim attend upon it, as the ordinary instituted
means of your spiritual proficiencie. Content your selves with this manna,
while you are in the wilderness, and then you shall eat of the milk and honey
of that heavenly Canaan which is above.

5. I enjoy God in my private retirements, and live immediately upon God; and
is not this a happy anticipation of heaven? Yes, too happy for any one to enjoy
on this side heaven. It was above the estate of man in innocence, to whom then
there where means and Ordinances appointed, as the Tree of life, which some
assert as a means of preserving that immortality, in which he was created: but
all agree about it, as a Sacramental sign of that eternity, which he should
have enjoyed in happiness upon performance of obedience, which God required.
Our enjoyment of God here is in and by the Ordinances: we see the power and
glory of God in the Sanctuary, as it is Psalm. 63. 2. an immediate vision is a
reserve for heaven. Here God is to be seen as revealed in the word, there we
shall see him, as he is: here in a glass, there face to face: here enjoyed in
prayer, hearing and other duties, which are our spiritual converses with God,
there in an immediate vision and fruition. And this I take to be the meaning of
that expression in 1 Cor. 15. 28. That God may be All in All: when as it is
said ver. 24. that then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
kingdom of God: viz. as to the manner of Administration by the preaching of
the word, and other Ordinances: then there shall be none of these, for that
fruition of God immediately shall be in stead of them all.

6. And lastly, I have attended long, many years upon the word preached, and I
find no profit: therefore it is in vain to attend any longer. I confess the
non-proficiency of so many under means is a great discouragement both to
Minister and people. S. Paul was inclined to be discouraged upon this account
as appears by Acts 18. comparing the 6, the 9, and 10. verses together: and to
the people, as if their fields should yearly be sown, and yet remain barren, it
would much discourage them to sow them again: therefore give me leave to speak
a word or two to each.

I. To the Minister. Have thou preached long, and no profit appears in thy
people? First, mourn in secret for it: water the word with thy tears: thus did
Christ over Jerusalem, whom he had often discovered himself to, and preached,
Luke 19. 41. Peter wept himself before he converted others. Secondly, pray much
that it may profit: you may profit more pietate orationum quam oratorum
facultate, says S. Augustine: a praying Minister will profit more then an
eloquent orator. Thirdly, reform thy self: perhaps thy sin may hinder the
efficacy of the word, and the seed may not thrive, because thou sowest it with
a leprous hand. Observe what Christ says to Peter, Luke 22. 32. When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren: and when thou art converted thy self, it is
like that thou may profit more by thy preaching. But, Fourthly, by no means
give over: the peoples neglect of theirs, cannot exempt thee from thy duty. Woe
be to me, if I preach not, says S. Paul, and whether the people will hear, or
whether they will forbear, we must preach: for, 1. thy word may profit
afterward, we must not limit God, but attend our duty: when Elias was so much
discouraged, God had seven thousand reserved: so when Paul was disheartened, God
encourages him with this, I have much people in this city, Acts 18. 10. It is
an excellent saying of Seneca, An profecturus sim nescio: malo mihi successum
deesse Seneca ep. 25.
quam fidem. It is better for us to be unsuccessive, then disobedient. It is
not for us to know the times and seasons, which God has reserved. The
husbandman sowes his seed, though he can give himself no assurance of a crop:
which Metaphor the Apostle leads us unto Jam. 5. 7. he does not sow and reap
both in a day. 2. The sincerity of your obedience and endeavor will however be
acceptable unto God, as Abraham's was in offering his son, though the event
followed not, therefore in Gods account he did it, Hebr. 11. 17. God in his
accepts the will for the deed, 2 Cor. 8. 12. which is a special ground of
comfort to Christians in every calling and employment. But, 3. thy reward shall
be secured, Esaias. 49. 5. God rewards not only our success, but our
faithfulness. S. Paul would have the Philippians to hold forth the word of
life, that he might rejoice in the day of Christ, that he might not seem to
have run in vain, nor labored in vain: and indeed the Ministers of the Gospel
may seem to labor in vain, in respect of the efficacy of their Ministry, but
certainly it shall not be in respect of the reward of it.

II. To the people. It is serious matter of lamentation, that the Ministers
should have occasion to complain with the Prophet, Esaias 8. 18. Behold, I and
the children, whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel;
that is, because they were so few and rare: and that they should have occasion
to complain with the same Prophet, Esa. 53. Who has believed our report? And
it is sad for you, Brethren, if it be any of your case: if it be, mourn over
it, and pray against it, as the Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 18. Open mine eyes
that I may see into the wonders of thy Law: and withal observe with me;

1. God does not expect equal proficiency from all: as a Master, or Tutour does
not of all scholars, whom yet he may approve and commend for their diligence.
This I speak for the comfort of those Christians, who are the most
conscientious waiters on the Ordinances, yet complain they profit not
answerably. The good ground in Matthew. 13. 23. did not bring forth equally, but
some thirty, some sixty, and some an hundred: fruitful fields bring forth
unequal crops; so it is possible, that among those who conscionably attend on
the Ordinances, some may profit more then others.

2. Thy proficiencie may not appear presently: as often we are in despair of our
fields, yet afterward receive a good crop. In the night of temptation, or the
like, the word may be obscured, and not appear, but may afterward show it self
to the comfort of thy self, and rejoicing of others.

3. Perhaps thou profitest more in thy actions, then thy knowledge. They are
not always the best proficients in the word, who declare most, and know best;
if thy affections be enflamed toward the word, and thou be carefully
conscientious to practice suitably to thy knowledge, thou have profited more
then your notional highflown professors, which yet are cold and careless.

4. Be still constant in thy attendance upon the word. This is thy seed-time,
therefore practice the Wisemans advice, which he gives, Eccles. 11. 6. In the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand. The good
ground brought forth fruit, (...), Luke 8. 15. that is, though persecuted for
the word: or else though no present crop, or present profit. We read of the
impotent persons, John 5. 3. that they lay at the pool, though they were not
presently put in: and amongst them there was a man there, who had an infirmity
thirty eight years, at verse. 5. (...), as Chrysostom observes, stupendous
patience: and speaking in that Homily on John 5. of the admirable patient
waiting of that impotent person, he adds, (...): we grow cold and remiss after
a small time of waiting. He lay thirty eight years, yet not healed, and yet did
he not give over waiting: so should we at this spiritual Bethesda, to be cured
of our spiritual infirmities: though some of you may have lien as long
unprofitably at the Ordinances, as he unhealed at the pool, yet wait still, the
time may come, and will be: Who among you will hearken for the time to come?
Esa. 42. 23. Improve that thou have already received, and wait on God for an
increase in his own way, and thou art under a promise to receive it: for
Habenti dabitur, Matthew. 25. 29.

Secondly, Prejudices against the Preacher; and these are either,

I. Against his Person. We are offended at the meanness of it, he is a man like
our selves, or else we are disaffected to him, and both these cause
unprofitableness under the word preached, as it did in our Saviors auditors,
Matthew. 13. 55, 57. The Pharisees were offended at the person of Christ, and so
rejected his doctrine. Ahab hates Micaiah, the Prophet of the Lord, and
therefore refused to enquire of him, 1 Kings 22. 8. This sinful respect of
persons, hinders the efficacy of the word, as it often begets dis-affections in
the heart of people toward the ablest Ministers. These come not to hear the
word, but the man: till you esteem the person, you will hardly profit by his
doctrine. I plead not for a superstitious reverence of their persons; but as
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. I desire that they may be esteemed very highly for
their works sake. These prejudices are often times causeless, arising from our
own corruptions, either because we are too apt to entertain reports against
them, contrary to the Apostles rule, in 1 Timothy 5. 19. or else affectation of
novelty dis-affects us to them; or want of charity to cover their failings; but
pry into their faults and failings, though they be but the spots of Gods
children. This is most irrational, if we did but seriously consider, that the
efficacy of the word depends not upon the Minister. Peter at one Sermon in
Acts 2. converted more, then Christ did in all his time for ought we read. We
should not disaffect the message for the messenger, but rather esteem the
messenger for the message sake: we should mind the pearl that is brought us,
more then the hand that brings it.

II. Against his gifts: I would hear him, but his gifts are mean and small. I
could heartily wish, that there were not too great ground of this prejudice and
complaint at this day, when we have so many of Jeroboams Priests, every one
that will, as in 2 Samuel 1. 20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askalon. I dare say, some triumph at it; but for duly-constituted
Ministers, if faithful, though of lesser abilities, let me suggest,

1. Variety of gifts are for your good and advantage, as the holy Apostle tells
us, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. whether clegant Apollos, or profound Paul, or solid
Cephas; all are for your good. Observe diligently that full and pregnant place
in 1 Cor. 12. from ver. 7. to ver. 12. One interprets solidly, another reasons
profoundly, a third applies powerfully, a fourth wins affectionately, and
another demonstrates cunningly, and all to thy profit. There are two things
suggested which may help to unprejudice us in this particular: 1. the freedom
of the Spirit, in distributing these gifts, at verse. 11. and therefore we must
not quarrel with the wisdom of God in it. 2. the end, for which God has
designed this variety, viz. our profit, at verse. 7. there are not the meanest
gifts, but an humble self-denying Christian may make use of, and profit by.

2. This prejudice reflects dishouourably upon God, and takes his glory and
gives it to the instruments. God will have the glory of his power and mercy to
be magnified; and therefore sometimes uses the meanest gifts to the greatest
ends. As this advanced his glory at the first, that the Gospel should be
propounded by such inconsiderable persons, as a few fishermen. God consulted
his glory, when he put this heavenly treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7.
Look not on glittering of the sword, but to the hand that weilds it: look up
from men to God, as S. Peter spoke to the men of Israel, Act. 3. 12. concerning
the cure wrought upon the lame man: Why gaze ye on us, it was not we but God.
God often uses feeble instruments, that himself may have the greater glory; and
lays aside great parts, when men begin to glory too much in them. The same
truth is John 3. 8.
preached by all, and the Spirit blows where he lists.

3. Perhaps he denies his abilities for thy good. He could be Seraphicall, and
in the clouds, but he stoops and descends to thy capacity; and denies himself,
that he may gain thee. S. Paul was wrapped up into the third heaven, and could
speak with tongues more then all, 1 Cor. 14. 18. and yet desired to speak
rather to edification. Judge charitably; it is likely the Minister denies his
excellency, as desirous that thou should be brought in love with the naked
truth of the Gospel, and not with the dress it comes in, that the Gospel may
come by its own power and efficacy upon thy soul, therefore he studies a
familiar plainness.

4. The abler thy Preacher is, if thou profit not so much the more by him, the
greater will be thy condemnation. Satisfy not thy self therefore with this,
that thou live under an able Minister (men may affect this more for their
credit, then aiming thereby atttheir profit) nor let this exalt thee in
contempt of others, thy account will be the greater; and if thou profitest not
so much the more, very sad. How sad will it be for Jerusalem, who had Christ
preaching amongst them, yet refused and rejected him: and those, against whom
the Apostles shaked of the dust of their feet, for the not-entertaining of the
Gospel: and for you, Brethren, who enjoy as much of Gospel Light as ever
appeared upon the world, if you shall be found unprofitable at that day, when
many, who have lived under less means, shall be found improved suitable to the
means they lived under, and so consequently rewarded, and you, who have been
under the richest dews of heaven, be found unfruitful, you shall be dispatched
with the unprofitable servant, Matthew. 25. 30. Take you, and cast the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth. Away then with these prejudices, which must needs make the word
unprofitable: while one quarrels with the method, another with the expression,
a third with the matter, a fourth with the delivery, the word is like to profit
little.

Seventhly, The seventh ground is hardness of heart. That natural hardness,
which is in every one of us, much hinders the working of the word of God in us:
that heart of stone resists the divine impressions of the word; and therefore,
God when he promises to write his Law in our hearts, he first promises to take
away this heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. One thing in the stony heart is
impenitrableness, and this makes men threatning-proof, and judgementproof: they
tremble not at the one, nor are broken by the other. And this especially, when
the soul comes to be hardened by custom in sin: the seed, you know, which fell
on this ground, perished. Hardened Pharaoh slighted all Moses's messages, and
remains hard under variety of Gods judgments, both threatened and inflicted.
Observe the exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 3. 13. To day, if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts; as if he had said, If once your heart be
hardened, it will be to little purpose to exhort. A hard heart may be moved by
the word of God, but still remain, and afterward message of God, but still
remain, and afterward grow more obdurate. Pharaoh is a sad example, whom every
message of God hardened more. As rain may wet a stone outwardly, but still it
retains it is innate hardness; so it is possible, a hard heart may seem
outwardly to melt into some tears, the effect, perhaps, of a man's natural
temper and constitution, yet remain hard and unbroken: as it was with those in
the Prophet, Jerem. 5. 3. Thou have smitten them, yet they have not grieved,
etc. Notwithstanding the variety of Gods providence, and the Prophets
solicitations to return, they remained hard. The Scripture calls this (...),
Romans 11. 8. the spirit of slumber; so deep and dead a slumber, that the
threatenings of the word cannot raise, or awaken them out of it: (...), as the
Apostle speaks of the Ephesians, in chap. 4. 19. they feel no impressions of
the word upon them: nay, it makes them to rage against it, as the Jews did,
Acts 7. 51. Ye do always resist the holy Ghost; that is, speaking by the
Prophets and Apostles, as appears, verse 32. The hard earth must be broken up,
e're your seed will thrive in it: so must the hard heart, that the seed of Gods
word may take rooting in it. The word is the instrument of the Spirit to break
up the heart; and therefore compared to a hammer that breaks the rock in
pieces, Jerem. 23. 29. and till this be done, there can be no profiting by the
word. Josiah was of a tender heart, and so melted at the word of God, in 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. so must all be, who intend savingly to profit by the word. There
is indeed a hardness of heart, which excludes all possibility of profiting by
the word: I mean, when God seals up men judicially under unprofitableness for
their former resisting and opposing the word of God. Of which I understand that
place, John 12. 40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that
they should not see, etc. This was Pharaoh's case, when he had hardened himself,
God at last hardened him so, that he refused the messages of God to him by
Moses, till he was utterly ruined; when men's consciences, as the Apostle says,
are cauterized and seared; they grow insensible under the word of God, and the
shinings of the Gospel, (as the Sun the clay) more hardens them: as it fared
with the Jews, Ezekiel. 2. 4. for all his often speaking unto them, they were
impudent, or, as it is in the margin, Hard of face.

Eighthly, The eighth ground is unbelief. This the Apostle adjoyns in the Text,
as the cause of the Jews unprofitableness, because it was not mixed with faith,
and truly this must needs cause unprofitableness, both because we cannot draw
near to God in his Ordinances without this. Unbelief is a departing from God.
We may present our bodies indeed before God, yet without faith can we not
digest the word of God into spiritual nourishment, as Clemens Alexandrinus
says.

There is required of us,

1. An historical faith, whereby we believe the word of God to be the word of
God, and close with the truth of it in our assent and judgment. The
understanding is the leading faculty of the soul, and the guide of reason; I
shall never close with that truth in my affections to love it, in my will to
practice it, which I do not first assent unto in my understanding: nor can the
will embrace that as good, which the understanding assents not to as true. But
this is not enough; for there is required further,

2. A particular applying faith, whereby the soul closes with the word, as
proper to it self: when it particularly applies the promises, and closes with
the reproofs and threatenings of the word. This makes the word of God to be
ineffectual, because men shift it off from themselves; as, such a reproof of
sin concerned not me: the Minister reproved such an one, etc. A man may assent
to the truth of a promise, and yet it be a dry-breast to him without the
application of it by a particular faith: so to the truth of a threatening, and
yet not be humbled. Faith is necessary to the hearing of the word profitably.

I. As the eye of faith discerns the truth of the word, as it pries into the
mysteries of the Gospel, which the natural man perceives not. The Apostle 1
Cor. 2. 14. gives a reason why a natural man cannot perceive these; because
they are spiritually discerned, and so no object suitable to a carnal eye. It
is said of Christ's entertainment, John 1. 5. The darkness comprehends not the
light: every unbeliever is no better then mere darkness, though improved with
the height of acquired knowledge; as Nicodemus and Paul are very pregnant
proofs of this: and I appeal to your selves; Are men like to profit by the word
they perceive not, nor understand?

II. As it makes the soul to relish, and delight in the word of God. To an
unbeliever, the great mysteries of the Gospel are but foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.
23, 24. The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, says the Apostle,
Romans 8. 7. A carnal mind may approve of the word of God, as true and good, but
never close with it thoroughly and heartily, because it is contrary to it. As a
learned man may approve of the light, as excellent in it self, but will not
endure to look long upon it, because it may be hurtful to his weak eyes: thus
a carnal heart may assent to the truth of Gods word, and be convinced of the
equity and goodness of it, yet not close with it, because contrary to his
carnal interests, and corrupt principles; and so long no profiting by it. As S.
Augustine says, Quid haec duo conferunt Aug. lib. 4. c. 13. de doctr. Christ.
homini, qui and confitetur verum, and collaudat eloquium, nec inclinat
assensum? who inclines not his assent, viz. so as to practice it.

Ninethly, The nineth ground is love of some darling and bosom sin and
corruption. The Apostle indeed, James 1. 21. commands to lay aside all
superfluity of naughtiness; but especially any darling sin, which else will
make the word unprofitable upon a double account.

I. As it prejudiceth the soul against the most profitable preaching. Such an
one must have placentia, and speak the language of those in Isaiah 30. 10. They
say to the seers, see not: and to the Prophets, prophecy not to us right
things, but speak unto us smooth things, etc. Wholesome reproofs are too bitter
pills for him to take down, because they will stir the humors that are
corrupt. And therefore you shall observe, that some, who have seemingly made
large progress in the profession of the word, have been wholly offended at it,
when it has searched, and disturb their secret bosom corruption. Thus it was
with Herod, (...), he did many things, and demonstrated a very fair affection
to the word of God, as in Mark 6. 20. till it came to his Herodias; and then he
is incensed so far against John, as to take off his head: nay, the young man
went further, to his (...), all these have I kept, and that (...), from his
youth, Mark 10. 20. till it came to his covetousness, then the commands of
Christ prove ineffectual, and he goes away sorrowfully. While a man retains the
love of any darling sin, he is apt to come with a settled resolution, let the
Preacher say what he will, show him the nature, danger, and guilt of such or
such a sin, to go on still, as it is Jer. 2. 25.

II. As it disaffects them to the preacher. That did disaffect the Pharisees so
much against Christ, his reproving their darling sin of Hypocrisy. This caused
Felix to dismiss Paul, his touching upon his darling sin of intemperance and
injustice. And hence proceeds the ebbings and flowings of men's affections to
the same Minister. You shall have some, who will constantly attend upon a
Minister, and afford him a very fair aprobation, till he come powerfully to
search his bosom corruption, then he is offended, nay, and perhaps persecutes
the Minister too. Thus it fared with Christ himself,: one while they cry,
never man spoke like him, and another while, Crucify him, crucify him. See
the Galatians inconstancy to S. Paul in Galat. 4. 14, 15, 16. they afforded
him both reverence, verse 14. and love, verse 15. rari amoris indicium, oculos
eruere plus est, quam vitam profundere, says Calvin: but how soon is this love
degenerated into hatred and enmity, verse 16. and that only because he told
them the truth. Veritas odium, as says the Comoedian: so tell men the truth in
laying before them the evil nature and danger of those sins they live in, they
presently entertain a secret enmity against them: and if once men's spirits
come to be embittered against the preacher, suavis non erit doctrinae gustus;
they will find no sweet relish in the word of God.

Tenthly, The tenth ground is unpreparedness, when men rush out of their
worldly employments without prayer or meditation into the house of God, never
considering either into whose presence, or service they come. God requires a
holy preparation to all our services, and that not only habitually, but
actually prepared and disposed for them. Keep thy foot, says the Wiseman,
Eccles. 5. 1. when thou go to the house of God. This holy preparation was
shadowed out by the peoples washing their clothes before the deliverie of the
Law, Exodus 19. 10, 11. and by Moses his putting off his shoe, before God spoke,
and discovered himself to him, Exodus 3. 5, 6. intimating a putting off our
carnal affections, and purging our souls before we come to hear the word: this
is necessary, because to come without this preparation,

I. Is irreverent. You esteem it justly a high incivilitie to press into a
Princes Palace with ragged, dirtie clothes, or to sit at his table with
unwashen hands. How much do men affect cleanness, and study neatness, when
they present themselves to the presence of any great man? and is it not much
more irreverent to appear before God in his Temple in our sins and corruptions?
May we not justly fear to be an offense to his pure eyes? How do men study
words and gestures suitable to the person of any great one, to whom they make
their applications? and does not a resolved prepared reverence much more become
us, when we address our selves to God? David resolved himself upon this
preparation, Psalm. 26. 6. I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I
compass thine altar. Thus when Jacob went to worship God at Bethel, he purged
his house of all the Idols, and made his sons to wash their clothes, Genesis 35.
2, 3. We should not only have our hearts raised to awful apprehensions of
Gods Majesty and presence, but our outward man also composed to a decent
becomingness and holy reverence, as Jacob said of Bethel, Genesis 28. 16, 17. How
dreadful is this place! And thus did Cornelius, when Peter was to preach unto
him, set himself in the presence of God, Acts 10. 33. So should we come with
that reverence and preparedness, as becomes the presence of God.

II. Unprofitable. Hence that caution, Luke 18. Take heed therefore how you
hear. Thorns grow naturally; but seed, you know, thrives not, but when the
ground is first fitted and prepared: sin increases naturally in our corrupt
hearts, but they are no fit soil naturally for the word of God, they must be
first fitted and prepared before the seed will grow and thrive there.
Unpreparedness makes every duty to be ineffectual as you may see in Job 11. 13,
14. Give me leave to allude to that of the Wiseman, prepare thy work without,
and make it fit for thy self in the field and afterward build thine house,
Prove. 24. 27. so say I, Prepare thy self at home, and then come to build up thy
self in faith and holiness. And unprepared hearer will be an unprofitable
hearer.

Eleventhly, The eleventh ground is Curiosity: when men come to the Word,
affecting more the elegancy of the expression, then the wholesomeness of the
truth. Cui nullus in dicendo sermo placet nisi Grammatice fuerit conceptus,
Dialectice imaginatus, Rhetorice purpuratus, as S. Augustine expresses it. Such
like not their spiritual food unless it be adorned with the flowers of
Rhetoric, who regard more how handsome the provision be, than how wholesome.
Hence error many times handsomely dressed finds more entertainment, then a
plain truth. So men take poison instead of nourishment: thus when men catch
more at an elegancy in a Sermon, then a promise; they may be pleased perhaps,
but little profited. In seed you look not at leaves, as you do in flowers; but
at the inward virtue, whereby it has an aptitude to fructify: so should we in
the seed of the word, not prize the outward seeming dress and beauty of it so
much, as the inward efficacy of it, whereby it may fructify in your hearts and
lives. Qui maturitatis fructum quaerit, despicit amaena camporum, says
Chrysologus. Chrysolog. sermon. 18.
He that desires profit from a field, looks to the ripeness of the corn, not
to the beauty of the cockle, which may more gratify the eye but not fill the
barn and granary: so he that desires to profit by the word, must not attend the
adorning of Rhetoric, which may perhaps more please the fancy, but not at all
relish the soul, such may more gratify the palate, but it is not so good for
nourishment. The affected elegancy of a Sermon may more gratify curiosity, but
not profit and nourish the soul. It is true that S. Augustine observes, that
propter fastidia plurimorum, etiam ea, sine quibus vivere non possumus,
alimenta condienda sunt. But they live miserablely that live altogether upon
sauces. There is another curiosity, much like this, which makes the word
unprofitable, and that is a nice squemishness, that men nauseate truth, that
they have heard of before; as an ill squeasy stomach, which cannot make two
meals of the same meat: whereas, we had need, considering our dullness to
understand, our forgetfulness of what we have heard, to have the same truths
preached over and over again, and yet shall we find all little enough. We may
see what was the temper of those in Acts 13. 42. they besought the Apostles,
that the same words might be taught again the next Sabbath: this I speak, not
to patronize laziness in the preacher, but to correct the curiosity of the
hearer; which makes the word become so unprofitable to them.

Twelfthly, The twelfth ground is, Not attending upon a constant settled
ministry. This is that which God has used from the first planting of Churches
for the edification of his people, as appears from Acts 20. 28. and confirmed
by the practice of the whole primitive Church. Trees often transplanted can take
no firm rooting: a rolling stone, we say, gathers no moss: those, whose fickle
unsettledness prompts them to run from this Minister to that, and to settle
under none, are like to profit very little by the word. This S. Paul reproves
sharply in his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. He walks securely, that is
guided by some fixed star, whiles he who follows some meteor is led into some
bog or pit: so those, who walk by the light of some settled Minister as a star
fixed to his orb, are preserved safe in the way of Religion, but those who
follow wandering meteors fall into some pit of error. Many thrive and live
healthfully on one dish, while others surfeit of variety. By attending upon a
settled Minister, you come to be acquainted with his style, familiar with his
phrase, and learn his method; which will facilitate, and strengthen memory,
that you may carry away, and profit more by him.

Thirteenthly, The thirteenth ground is want of love to the word of God. Men
come out of custom, and not out of a real sense of the want of the word, or
with any love unto it. If men had such affections to the word, as David
professes of himself that he had, Psalm. 119. 20. that his soul did even break
for the longings he had after Gods word, much more would they profit by it. If
with Job they prized it more then their ordinary food, Job 23. 12. A man that
sits down to his meals, when he has no liking to the meat set before him, he
will not nourish kindly by it, neither will any nourish spiritually, that
brings not a good affection to the word of God.

I. It is so in all other knowledge: you may perhaps have it by experience. If
you put your children to a trade which they do not desire or love, they will
scarcely prove artists in it; so if men put their children out, intending to
make them scholars; if they do not love their books, they will prove but
dunces; and therefore many parents do wisely dispose of their children,
according to their affections and inclinations: so if men love not the word of
God, they are not probable to make any great proficiency in it. Love is a
quickening affection; what I love, I am ready to take pains for, and not to
endure to be without it. Thus if men did love the word, they would take pains
for it, familiarize it to them by much reading, frequent hearing, serious
meditation, and not endure to be without it. Let David be an example; Oh, how
do I love thy Law! and this puts upon meditating upon the law day and night:
and when he was without it, he mourns for it, and says, One day in Gods courts
is better then a thousand elsewhere; and he cannot reflect upon his former
enjoyment of that word without a tear, Psalm. 42. 4. The Apostle is very full
and pertinent to this purpose, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby: as a child finds
sweetness in nothing but the breast: so that it cries if it be without it; and
thus if we affect the word, we shall thrive by it.

II. This provokes God to proceed judicially, to give men up to
unprofitableness, and while they like not the truth, to give them up to error.
The Apostle is express in this, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. And here we see that notional
professors, who have got a notion of truth in their heads, but not the love of
truth in their hearts, often turn Apostates, and back-sliders, as these times
give us sad experience of. When the Israelites began to loath manna, God gave
them quails indeed, but his wrath with them, Numb. 11. 33. and leanness into
their souls, Psalm. 106. 15. So when men love not the manna of the word, etc.
Love of the truth puts men upon a constant attendance upon the word, as the
means of grace and knowledge: and so consequently, they are like to profit by
it: so it is said of the Thessalonians, that they were exemplary believers, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7. and the reason thereof is given, verse. 6. because they received
the word with much joy.

Fourteenthly, The fourteenth ground is a resting in the Ordinance, in the opus
operatum, the work done; and so look no further. And this men are very apt to
do, as Micah blesses himself, Judge. 17. 13. because he had gotten a Levite into
his house: so many conclude the love of God, and their own security, barely
upon the enjoyment of a ministry and preaching. So did those in Jer. 7. 4.
They cry out, The Temple of the Lord: and so many also of the Gospel, We enjoy
that, and therefore all is well. You may find some making plea of this unto
Christ, Luke 13. 26. Thou have taught in our streets; but Christ dismisses them
for all that, with a nescio; I know you not, verse. 27. Thus did the Jews of
old, as in Romans 2. 17. they rested in the law, and made their boast of God: and
so do Christians now, they think that they have done God service abundantly, if
they have heard two sermons on the Sabbath Day, and never look to their
proficiency. As many an idle scholar satisfies himself, that he has been at
his Tutours lecture, though he cares not to profit by it. If you rest only in
this, it may be so far from profiting you, that it may be your ruin. Christ at
the last-day will acquit none for enjoying the Gospel, but condemn them for not
profiting by it, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.

Fifteenthly, The fifteenth ground is Unfaithfulness of memory, and
forgetfulness, when the word goes in at one ear, and out at another. When this
spiritual food stays not with us, it is not like to nourish us. The word must
be treasured up in the memory, before it can fructify in our hearts. It is not
the forgetful hearer that is blessed, Jam. 1. 25. such an one is like a man who
looks his face in a glass, and presently forgets; so such an one takes a glance
at the word, and the word is out of his memory, as soon as himself is out of the
Church. If you would profit by the word, you must practice the Apostles
counsel, Hebr. 2. 1. (...), Let nothing slip: a Metaphor from a sieve or
leaking vessel, when the liquour runs out as fast as it is put in. But because
want of memory is a great complaint among many, and some of them, out of
question, serious Christians, I shall give these brief directions.

1. Pray for the Spirit: one office of whom is to be a remembrancer, John 14.
26.

2. Meditate in private upon the word of God. Men go out of the church
presently to their worldly employment, and give liberty to their vain thoughts,
and idle discourses, and so the word is forgotten.

3. Confer with others about the truths thou hear. This conference will both
strengthen memory, and fasten truths in it, and also quicken and inflame
affections to it; as coals lying together kindle each other: thus did the
disciples, Luc. 24. 14. Rather then forget a profitable truth consult the
minister: it is needless modesty in thee, if thou enquire not, and pride in
him, if he does not inform thee.

4. Get your affections raised and enflamed to truth. If men loved the word of
God, they would remember it more: did you ever know a covetous miser forget
where his bags were laid: if we could esteem the word as our treasures, and
greater treasures then those of Gold we should remember more of it.

5. Perhaps, what thou remembrest (though but little) keeps thee to close
walking with God. Be not discouraged, thou thrivest more then one, who can
carry away a whole Sermon, and lives not suitablely, and likely it is, that God
may bring into thy remembrance more, according as thou stand in need of it.

6. Improve what thou remembrest by prayer and practice. Retire thy self, and
turn the Sermon into a prayer, and that will rivet it in thy memory: however
turn it into practice, and thou will never forget it. An artist will never
forget the rules of that trade, which he daily practices: Sermons are but
notions to such, who experience not the efficacy of them in their lives.

Sixteenthly, The sixteenth ground is affectation of novelty and itching ears.
This puts men upon heaping to themselves teachers, and forsaking sound
preaching, and teachers too. The Apostle foretold such there should be in 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. and we may safely say, that it is fulfilled in our days. This
is one of the great springs of heresy and error, the mind of man is
novitatis avida; and hence new error pleases many more then old truth, and
every newfangled opinion, though he that runs may read it contrary to
Scripture and reason, creates in men's minds at least a suspicion of the truth,
which all ages of the Church has professed. I am sure Christ makes it the
badge of his sheep, that they will only hear his voice, and not strangers,
Joh. 10. 5. his voice in his word and by his Ministers. While men keep not to
the wholesome word of God, but affect this variety of phansy and opinion, they
surfeit, not thrive. Gellius Gell. lib. 3. cap. 13.
tells us of Demosthenes, that he being young and Plato's scholar, by chance
going to hear Plato, resolved experiri an ad digna auditu tanto properatum
studio foret; upon which he deserted Plato, and became Callistratus his
disciple: thus many affecting novelty, though formerly in profession disciples,
are now turned to fables, and in stead of being nourished by the word, are
poisoned with error.

The seventeenth ground is, Neglect of a careful practice of what we hear: if
men came with a resolution to practice, they would go away with much more
profit: for this would bring them with a great appetite and liking of the word
of God: as they in Acts 10. 33. They professed themselves to be as in the
presence of God to hear all; that is, to hear so as to practice. This is your
wisdom, Brethren, to come with a resolution to practice: for which you have
our Savior, Mat. 7. 24. He is a wiseman, that hears and does my sayings: and
S. James would have us not to be hearers only, but doers of the word, Jam. 1.
22. for such only are blessed in our Saviors account, Luke 11. 28. I pray,
consider that prophecy of Gospel Times, with what resolution they invite one
another to hear: viz. with a resolution to practice, Esaias. 2. 3. Come let us go
up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us his ways: and what more ordinary, then to call on one another in
these days, Come, we will go hear such a man to day? but observe what
follows; and we will walk in his ways: and do you invite one another,
Brethren, for this end? nay, rather when you go to hear the word, is there not
often a secret reserve in your heart to go on in your sins? They who come with
such a resolution, and not to practice, are not like to profit by the word. It
is by this that Christ will have his disciples known, Joh. 8. 31. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed: and to those God tells
us, that he will continue his mercy and goodness, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. To such as
keep his covenant, and that remember his commandments to do them.

The eighteenth ground is, Anger and malice either against the word, or the
Minister of it. Many, when the word of God searches and finds them out, rage
against it, or the Minister of it. As you may see they dealt with Stephen, Acts
7. 54. they gnashed upon him with their teeth: and at verse. 57. they ran upon
him with one accord, and cast him out of the city. Therefore the Apostle
exhorts those, who would so receive the word, as to save their souls, to
receive it with meekness, Jam. 1. 21. that is, with a mild, humble, tractable
spirit: that as the Preacher is to instruct you in meekness, 2 Timothy 2. 25. that
is, with gentleness and tenderness to your persons, with anger and zeal against
sin; so you are to hear with submissive and tractable spirits, as they did,
Acts 10. 33. laying aside all enmity against the word and the preacher of it.
And when by the word he convinces you, look upon him as a Surgeon, that
comes to search your sores in order to a cure; and when he presses duty, be
facile and tractable. The wisdom that is from above, says S. James, is
gentle, Jam. 3. 1^
and easy to be entreated: and where shall we find this wisdom in men? you
shall sooner enrage then persuade. As concerning the generality of men, those
the Apostle calls (...), absurd men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. that will quarrel with the
Chyrurgion, when he comes to bind up their wounds. You must learn, Brethren,
to submit to the word of God in humility, if ever you will profit by it; say as
did Samuel, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears.

The nineteenth ground is, Neglect of a special application of the word
preached. Each hearer almost is ready to put off the word of God to another:
Such a reproof concerned not me: there the Preacher hit such an one: such a
threatening is nothing to me: and many such like. If ever you will profit by the
word, you must do as the disciples did: when Christ had told them one of them
should betray him, each of them applied it to himself, saying, Lord, Is it I?
so you must make a particular application of promises, threatenings, and
precepts. The best food will not nourish, unless it be received; you cannot
live by feeding another man; no more will the word of God, except it be
particularly applied to our selves. It should at least put us upon a serious
examination; Does this threatening appertain to me? Have I interest in this
promise? The child may starve, though the mother has a full breast, if it
sucks not at it: so we at the breasts of the promises, unless by the
Application of a particular faith, we make them our own. We must not only hear
of the promises slightly, but we must search them out, and that so as we may
know them for our good, Job 5. 27. In a Princes proclamation, every one will
look to that which concerns himself; so should we in the proclamation of the
Gospel, look to that which in particular concerns us, and in particular apply
it to us. And therefore you may observe, that when God makes the word to be
effectual, he does it by a particular application of it to the soul; as in that
of Nathan to David, Thou art the man: for it is true that Job has observed,
Job 33. 14. God speaks once, yea twice, yet men perceive it not: but then in
verse. 6. He opens their ears, and seals their instruction: that is, by a
particular application of the word. I know there are and may be miscarriages
here: the presumptuous sinner is too ready to catch at, and run away with a
promise: the humbled dejected sinner to despair under threatenings: A great
piece of wisdom it is to apply the word suitably to our conditions: if
fainting, the promises; if secure, the threatenings: and this is so to be wise,
as to be wise for ones self, Prove. 9. 12. and so to profit by the word.

And this is the second ground of unprofitable hearing in regard of Hearers:
the third ground is in respect of the Word it self.

The third General ground of unprofitable hearing is in regard of the Word it
self. But you will say, How is it possible that the word it self should be a
cause of unprofitableness, which Scripture so much magnifies, and dignifies
with such glorious titles, that speak the power of it. As that, The Gospel is
our salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. The sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. The
ministration of the Spirit and righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9. and that it is
the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16? I answer, It is not the cause of
unprofitableness properly, but by reason of men's corruption it is so by
accident. The word in it self considered is (...) 2 Timothy 3. 16. but through
men's corruptions, it becomes unprofitable, because common: the Israelites at
first admired the Manna, but afterward loathed it, when it grew common, and
began to entertain longings after their onions, and garlic in Egypt; and we
may see how they quarrel, and murmr at it, Numb, 11. 5, 6. Oh disingenuous
ingratitude! what could they have better then meat from heaven? I wish this
were not the language of many! what, nothing but this preaching? the old
complaint was, that, men were like to perish for want of vision: now men begin
to surfeit on it. Man's corrupt nature affects variety, never long pleased with
the same thing, and long enjoyment breeds a disrellish in us of the best
things, we prize pearls, cheifely, because rare and costly: the Romans wore
them upon their shoes, when common: unions emergere e luto cupiunt, says
Tertull. much ado to keep them out of the dirt: thus the pearl of the Gospel
is trodden under foot, because ordinary and common. The Indians prize not
precious pearls so much because common; which our Merchants venture expense and
danger to procure: many prize not the preaching of the Gospel, which the
Merchant sells all for, that he may purchase it. And how do we disesteem that
means of grace which many a dark corner of the nation would be thankful to
enjoy? I pray God we be not taught at length how to value our plenty of the
bread of life more by the want of it.

How do they prize the salutes of the sun, who have half a years darkness?
which darkness teaches them the value of it; while we pass it over, and look
upon it as an ordinary thing, because we enjoy it daily. The Egyptians sure
never prized light so much, as when they had experienced the plague of
darkness. How would thousands in the nation, in the world, prize that light of
the Gospel, which we under-value, and grow wanton under? It is indeed much
pity and shame to us, that good food should be nauseated, because often set
before us: it is a sign our stomachs are not good; our spiritual appetites are
distempered. The Scripture speaks fully to the ready and cheerful
entertainment of the Gospelsound, when it was first preached to the Gentiles,
as appears by the instances of Cornelius's whole family, of Sergius Paulus at
Ephesus; yea, even Cesars household at Rome, Philip. 4. 11. and from the sudden
and large spreading of the Gospel in Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, and the rest. See
we how it was in the days of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 14. the public exercise of the
prophetical office was much decayed by the negligence of old Eli, and
wickedness of his sons. Pauci erant pii in populo, and his erat pretiosum
verbum, quia raro fiebat ejus audiendi copia: so Paraeus upon the place. When
preaching was more rare, some would have traveled to hear a sermon, who will
not now stir out of doors for it: and this must needs cause unprofitableness;
for while men have low thoughts of the Ordinance, they will profit little by
it. What the Wiseman says, Prove. 25. 17. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors
house, lest he be weary of thee; may be applied to this thus; That men are apt
to nauseate the word of God, because so often enjoyed by them. Men look at it as
a matter of course, and regard not the institution and Ordinance of God, and so
under-valuing it, remain unprofitable under it. See how God lays this to the
charge of Israel, Hos. 8. 12. I have written to him the great things of my law,
but they were counted as a strange thing. Written to him] in contradistinction
to all other people; yet he disesteems them. Singulari privilegio and eximio
illos prae aliis ornavi, Paraus in loc.
and ipsi susque deque habent, quasi rem nihili: so Paraeus. And this charge it
is to be feared, may be laid to many in these days, who pretend fair to the
word of God.

The fourth General ground is in respect of God. Unprofitableness, as a sin,
cannot come from God, but as a punishment of men's former neglect, and wilful
contempt of the word of God: for though Gods holiness permits him not to have
any hand in sin, as sin, it being a contrariety to his nature, and that which
he indispensably hates, yet God may will sin as a punishment, not out of love
to the sin, but to punish the person: for though sin be intrinsecally evil, yet
the manifestation of Gods justice is good: and God for former provocations often
judicially leaves the creature, and permits him to fall into further sin, as he
dealt with the Gentiles, Romans 1. 21. and so was the incest of Absalom, as a
punishment of David's adultery, 2 Samuel 12. 11. Now God proceeds judicially
against those who live unprofitably under the word, these eight ways.

I. Sometimes God proceeds in severity against their persons, ruins and
destroys them. If Christ comes year after year into the vineyard, and finds
the fig tree to bear no fruit, he gives commission to cut it down, Luke 13. 7.
When God expects, brethren, your fruitfulness under the means, and finds you
unprofitable, his wrath is provoked, and you cut up as a burden to the earth;
so Matthew. 3. 10. Thus God dealt with the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. he bare
with them a long time, till there was no remedy. God will not always endure to
have his messengers and messages contemned. Read Jerem. 7. 12, 13, 14. and see
there how God dealt with Shiloh, and what he threatens to do to the Jews, and
the reason of all was their unprofitableness, as we see at ver. 10. they
pretended fair to the word and house of God, yet did they not profit so, as to
leave their sins: for this God threats their ruin.

II. Sometimes he denies and with-draws that grace from them, by which they may
be enabled to profit; and thus God may be said to concur to men's
unprofitableness; as the Sun may be said to be the cause of darkness, by
withdrawing its light. When men obstinately resist the strivings of the Spirit
in the ministry of the word: God says, My Spirit shall no longer strive with
him. As he says, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone: and in
Revel. 22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still: so, he that is
unprofitable, let him be unprofitable still. Oh sad judgment! and is as sadly
expressed, Esaias 66, the 3, and 4. They have chosen their own ways, and their
soul delights in their abominations: I also will choose their delusions, etc.
which is as much as to say, he will leave them to themselves, and suffer them
to go on to be deluded by those delusions, as such they having wilfuly chosen.
Men care not to profit by the word, and God gives them over to
unprofitableness, as Christ cursed the figtree, Matthew. 21. 19.

III. By taking the Gospel wholly away, and removing the candlestick from them.
Thus Christ threatened to proceed against Ephesus, unless by a speedy return she
prevented it, Rev. 2. 5. Jerusalem was come to the height of wickedness, when
the Gospel was removed, Matthew. 23. 37, 38. The Jews by a wilful contempt first
put away the Gospel from themselves, before God took it away from them, as the
Apostle speaks expressly, Acts 13. 46. God will not always cast this pearl
before swine, who, as Clemens expresses it, delight more in the mud of their
lusts, then in the pure waters of the Sanctuary in the word of God. God will
not always cast his childrens bread to the dogs. God threatens a famine of the
word upon the Jews, Amos 8. Would you know the reason? see ver. 5. they began
to be weary of it, and unprofitable under it. As a master sometimes deals with
a bad servant, pulls his livery over his ears, and turns him out of doors; so
God often deals with men, takes away his Word and Ordinances, his livery and
cognizance: or, as a man divorcing an adulterous wife, takes away all her
jewels and garments, and puts them upon another; so God, when people go a
whoring, takes away from them the Gospel and Ordinances, which are the glory
and ornament of a nation, and gives them to others.

IV. If he does continue the Gospel, yet he takes away the able and faithful
Ministers of it. Observe how God dealt with his vineyard, Isa. 5. great expense
you may see he had been at, verse. 2. so much, that he appeals to their own
judgments, what he could have done more, what cost he should further bestow
upon them, as to outward means, ver. 4. but there being no suitable thriving
under all this, see how the Lord proceeds judicially against it: after the
threatening of a total devastation, ver. 5. he adds, that the clouds should
rain no more upon it. So does God deal with an unprofitable people, he removes
these clouds (as Ministers are called) who are to drop fatness into the soul,
and lets you sit under clouds without water, and none of the dews of heaven in
them to make you thrive. And how has God dealt of late in this Nation,
removing from us many eminent Preachers, and pulling down many pillars of the
Church? And may we not justly fear, that this has been by many men's
unprofitableness and wantonness under the word of God? Is it not a sign that
Gods vineyard has brought forth little fruit? when God has eclipsed so many
stars of the first magnitude? Is it not to be feared it is because men have
neglected to walk by, and improve the light of those, who have held out the
Gospel to them?

V. By taking away the Ministers gifts. The people are apt to complain of
nothing more, then that their preachers want abilities and gifts: perhaps it is
a judgment upon your unprofitableness under, and abuse of the word. Alas! the
Minister is nothing without divine influence, and communication in his
ministerial endowments. It is God that gives some Apostles, some Prophets, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 11. And he may oft-times withdraw this influence. God may dry up the
breast, because you thrive not by the sincere milk of the Hom. 12. in Ezekiel. 3.
26.
word. Propter malum populum, etiam bonis tollitur sermo doctoribus, so
Gregory.

VI. By denying success to the word preached, though he continue able
Ministers. God must give the increase, even when a Paul preaches, and an
Apollos waters; which he is pleased often to deny. Because of our neglect and
contempt of his word, and carelessness to profit under it, he denies the dews of
his blessing, which should make the seed of the word thrive and prosper. Or, if
the Minister preaches powerfully, yet perhaps not suitably to thy necessities,
not what may profit; and this by a secret judgment of God upon thy obstinate
unprofitableness under former enjoyments of the word. You have a very pregnant
instance of this, Ezekiel. 3. 26. where God tells the Prophet, that he should be
dumb, and not be a reprover unto them: and these reproofs (as I have often
hinted) are most like to profit; as S. Gregory says, Magna omnipotentis Dei
gratia est, cum inique agentibus Gregor. in Ezekiel.
durus a doctoribus s^^mo increpationis profertur.

VII. By (...) loose a spirit of delusion, and by suffering false prophets to
deceive, and gull the people, and to poysen them with error instead of feeding
them with the word of God. When Gods vineyard brings forth briars instead of
fruit, he suffers the wolves, and the foxes to eat it up, Esaias. 5. 4. sive
obrepant vulpes and lupi in Ecclesiam, hoc totum tribuere convenit
ingratitudini nostrae: quia fructum non reddidimus, qualem decebat, fuimusque
desides and otiosi, says Calvin. And Calv. in loc.
I cannot but in my serious thoughts resolve that inundation of Heresies upon
this nation, and all those delusions, which go abroad, into the judgment of
God, giving men over to strong delusions to believe lies, because they improved
not, nor delighted in the truth, in the love of it: as God gave the lying
spirit commission to go and deceive Ahab, 1 Kings 22. 22. And sure God has in
his justice and wrath, for our wantonness under and inconstancy to the truth,
let loose many lying spirits in our days, which miserablely mislead many into
damnable Heresies.

VIII. By delivering up to Satan, and permiting him to have power over them. It
is said of Judas, John. 13. 27. that Satan entered into his heart: if the word
take not possession of thy heart, the devil will, whom God uses as the
instrument and executioner of his just judgment: even that spirit, who works
powerfully in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. I add one caution,
lest I might seem to speak too harshly and severely of Gods proceeding, that
God does not proceed thus judicially presently upon every neglect of his word,
but after long exercise of his patience, and after much obstinacy, and wilful
contempt of his word. He did not presently cut up the fig tree, but expected
three years, and upon importunity spared it one year more, Luke 13. 8. God
forsakes not any till they obstinately forsake him: non deserit nisi
deserentem. Christ did not presently discharge himself of Jerusalem but after
many calls and warnings and wilful contempt of all these; How often would I have
gathered thee, and thou would not! Matthew. 23. 37. He warns Ephesus to repent
before he takes away the candlestick. Rev. 2. 5. Let us then improve this time
of patience and the Gospel, while we enjoy it, lest through the hardness of our
heart under it, we treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2. 5.

The fifth General ground of unprofitable hearing is in respect of Satan, who
does what he can to make the word unprofitable, several ways and devices Satan
has to compass this end. Sometimes he is at your elbow jogging you asleep,
that men sleep away a Sermon: sometimes he steals away the word you have
received, which our Savior expresses by the seed that fell by the ways side,
Matthew. 13. 4, and 19. otherwhile he presents your thoughts with the glory, and
greatness of the world, and so they are wandering and distracted: sometimes
begetting prejudices in your hearts against the word, or the preacher of it,
and so disaffecting you to the truth preached: sometimes suggesting suitable
motions and temptations to steal away your hearts from the word, as to the
voluptuous man's pleasure, to the ambitious man honors; so suiting their
corruptions, and by that they prove careless to profit by the word. And the
truth is, the more powerful the word is, the more the devil opposes it; and
the more the light of the Gospel has appeared, the more has Satan sent out
the smoke of the bottomless pit to obscure it; and therefore though the
multitude of heresies and errors which abound among us be real matter of a
lamentation, as being a sign that the devil has set his cloven foot amongst
us; yet I cannot but from hence conclude, there is agreater power of
Gospel Light, which the devil thus endeavors to extinguish; it appears, that
the sun is up, that these locusts swarm so. If now you ask me; why the devil so
much opposes the word and Gospel? I answer

I. Because himself has no share in it: he is fallen irrecoverablely from God
and as an (...), he endeavors to bring others into the same destruction with
himself; he envied man's estate in paradise, and thought to have ruined him, but
perceiving man by a second covenant in a possibility of a better state then
that, he more envies his recovery which the Gospel discovers and conveies, as
being the Gospel of reconciliation, and therefore he endeavors to make this
ineffectual.

II. Because it is a means to ruin and demolish his kingdom. The word of God
is mighty to throw down Satan's strong holds, 2 Cor. 5. 10. whereby he keeps
possession of the soul. As the walls of Jericho fell down at the noise of rams
horns, so at the sound of the Gospel the walls of Satan fall down. Some stones
out of this brook will conquer our Goliath: this sword of the Spirit conquers
Satan, Ephesians 6. 17. When Christ had sent out his seventy disciples to preach,
the effect of it was; that Satan fell like lightning out of heaven, Luke 10.
18. that is, that power and dominion he exercised before in the world. This was
one end for which God sent Paul to the Gentiles, Acts 26. 17, 18. Hence it is
that Satan employs all his subtilty and strength against it; for where the word
comes in power, the devil is a looser by it: he loses a subject of his
kingdom, who by the word is brought from under his obedience. While men remain
his subjects; he lets them alone quietyly, all is in peace while the strong man
keeps the house; but when the Gospel comes to bring his subjects to the
obedience of God, then he raises all the force he can against it by himself
and wicked men. He has the possession of our corrupt hearts, and therefore
will not submit to a dis-possession without much resistance. The Gospel brings
us from under Satan's power by a pure conquest; for he will not deliver his
right and possession upon terms. The devil looks upon it as his interest to
oppose the Gospel to uphold and secure his own kingdom. Observe what the
Apostle suys expressly to this, 2 Cor 4. 4. The God of this world has blinded
the eyes of them, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them:
when the Gospel shines in his full luster, the devil endeavors to blind men
with wilful unbelief, that they see it not. The ultimate end that Satan aims
at in this is the ruin of their souls: and therefore, in order to it, is
careful, that they come not to the knowledge of the truth, without which is
no salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 4. which he knovvs they cannot do, without the
shining of the light of the Gospel into their hearts, and therefore endeavors
to hinder it what he can. The Prince of darkness rules in dark ignorant souls,
holds them by those chains of darkness, and endeavors to shut their eyes, lest
by the light of the Gospel they should discover the delusions by which he has
held them captive, and so these should be taken from under his obedience: as in
the day we discover the vanity of our night-phantasies, dreams and
imaginations. In a word, Satan loses where the word profits, therefore he
does all he can to oppose it.

To conclude with these brief directions, by the use of which we may become
hearers with profit.

I. Go to the word as the word, and for the word, So thou meetest with the
wholesome word of God, regard not the dress it comes in: Bonorum ingeniorum
insignis est indoles in verbis verum amare, non Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 4.
cap. 11.
verba; Augustine. Say thou, Lord, here I come to thy word, nothing else will
satisfy me, not husks but bread in my fathers house.

2. Come to the word as the means of salvation. Were men convinced thoroughly of
this, that their salvation was concerned in the word, they would certainly be
more careful to profit. They who are soundly taught and instructed by the word
of God: (...), as Clemens observes, they mount up to heaven as on eagles wings.
Think with thy self every Sermon thou come to, Now I come to further my
salvation, my soul is concerned in this Ordinance, this Sermon will be but like
Vriah's letter to me a message of death, if I profit not by it: did men come
with these resolutions, they could not but go away with profit. I shall
conclude therefore with that of the Prophet, Esaias. 55. 3. Incline your ear,
and come unto me, hear (but remember so to hear, as to profit by your hearing)
and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
even the sure mercies of David.

FINIS.
THE SEVERITIE AND IMPARTIALITIE OF DIVINE JUSTICE.

A Sermon preached before the JUDGES, at the Assise at Cambridge, July 25. An.
Dom. 1654.

By JOHN FROST, B. D. late Fellow of S. JOHN'S College in CAMBRIDGE.

Justitia non novit patrem, non novit matrem, veritatem novit, personam non
accipit, Deum imitatur. Cass. in Psalm.



CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

To the right WORSHIPFUL SIR HENRY FELTON, BARONET, All increase of true
Honor with God and man.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL;
THere is store of Sermons extant; the Pulpit scarce affords more then the
Press: neither know I which is more advantageous. The sound of the Word
pierces more; the letter written endures longer: the voice extends but to
some few present; the writing to many absent, and the Author, though dead, yet
speaks. Here are two added to the number, and by the relict of the deceased
presented to the public view: which I crave leave to honor with your name.
Why I do so, I need not give account to the world, which already knows your
worth and deserts; and shall know by this that I acknowledge them: besides my
special obligations to you for your favor to me, and my son, unknown to the
world. Sir, you were willing to have been his Patron whilst he lived, be
pleased now to vouchsafe the Patronage of this his Posthumous issue: which I
humbly commend to your care, and you, with your virtuous Lady, to the grace of
the Almighty, wishing you both all that little happiness the earth can afford
you, and fullness of glory in heaven,

Your Worships most humbly devoted, JOHN FROST.

COLOS. 3. 25. But he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong which he has
done: and there is no respect of persons.
SOme of the ancients have charitably excused the Heathens Polytheisme, by that
probable conjecture, that they worshipped not diverse gods but one and the same,
according to those various benefits they received from him, or those diverse
apprehensions they had of him. As Lipsius, speaking Lipsius dissert. 9.
of the gods of the Stoics, says, they were rather multitudo nominum then
numinum, a multitude of names rather Lib. 4. de Civit. Dei, cap. 24.
then of natures. And Augustine, in his book de civitate Dei, brings in the
Heathens pleading for themselves, that they were not so ridiculously ignorant
as to think virtue, or fortune, and the rest gods, but only diverse expressions
of the same deity. Which opinion may gain further probability, if we consider
what unworthy, unsuitable apprehensions men are apt to entertain of God. Most
men (like that Roman painter Arellius, who was wont to draw the faces of all
his images according to the likeness of that beauty which himself most
affected) framing a god to themselves, suitable to their own carnal interests,
and corrupt affections, not conceiving of him as he is, and so truly making
God an Idol. Thus some fancy a god to themselves all of justice, breathing out
nothing but fire and brimstone against sin, armed with nothing but vengeance
and terror, and they can by no means frame to themselves one conception of his
mercy; and this is the misapprehension which the humbled and despairing sinner
lies under, who can speak no other language of God, then that of Job, The
arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison Job 6. 4.
whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of the Lord do set themselves in
array against me. Others (which indeed is the more frequent, and the more
dangerous mistake) fancy to themselves a notion of God as all love and mercy,
all tenderness and compassion, in the mean time either through unbelief not
crediting, or through inadvertencie not actually considering the justice of
God; and this is the misperswasion and error of the presumptuous, secure
sinner, and that which encourages him to a constant and confident continuance
in sin against God, and wronging his neighbor; this prompts and encourages
the superior to oppress his inferior, and him to rebel against his superior.
Therefore the Apostle here undertaking to press upon these Colossians a just
and suitable deportment to every subordination God shall set them in, (which is
the relative importance of the words:) having, verse 24. allured them by the
hopes of mercy, or a reward, he here persuades them by the terrors of the
Lords justice against those, who in any capacity or rank whatsoever (for so
Zanchy extends the words) wrongs or injures another. But he that does wrong,
shall receive for the wrong which he has done, etc.

As if he had said:

Let none lay aside the belief of the justice of God, or encourage themselves
Paraphr.
in sin, by hopes of impunitie; let not the poor inferior servant (for the
words are peculiarly spoken for the comfort of such, by the general consent of
expositours) repine despairingly, because here perhaps he suffers wrongfully*
nor yet the superior triumph proudly, because he can at present oppress
securely, for there will come a time (though now the poor and inferior are
oppressed without relief, and great ones Tyrannize without control, when he
(be he Prince or Peasant, honorable or despised, rich or poor) be he what he
will be (these circumstances of the persons are not valued or considered by
that impartial justice of God from which he) that does wrong, shall receive for
the wrong which he has done, etc.

The words you see are the description of Gods severitie against sin; their
terms may briefly be explained thus:

(...)) He that does wrong. (...) is the same with (...), says Budaeus. Or if
you will take the Philosophers account of it, it is, (...), to injure another
knowingly contrary Steph. ex Arist. Rhet.
to some law, either the superior law of God, or the subordinate (so far as
just) laws of men, agreeing with the law natural and eternal; so that every sin
as it is (...) in the Apostles phrase, 1 John 3. 4. so it is (...) too, a wrong
to God, our neighbor, our selves; and in this latitude I shall here consider
it.

(...)) Shall receive. The word properly signifies such a receiving as is by
way of return or recompense: that is, He shall have the just reward of that
injury whereby he wrongs another.

(...)) Non personam significat, sed personae attributa and circumstantias:
Stephan. Scripture speaks of God, as having a gracious respect to some men more
then to others: Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, Romans 9. 13. Thus God
had respect to Abel not to Cain, Genesis 4. 4, 5. But the persons here signifies
the outward circumstances and qualifications of men, those which make men
glorious and valuable in the world, such as Honor, Riches, Authority,
Greatness, Learning, Parentage, Country, which are the admiration and terror
of men, yet can neither procure Gods favor for, nor secure the sinner from the
stroke of Divine justice. Which interpretation is evident from the context, and
I shall further clear it anon.

In the words thus opened, four particulars are considerable. Division.


First, The indispensable necessity of justice: (...), he shall receive, it
cannot be otherwise.

Secondly, The equity of Divine justice: it is, (...), That is, pro gravitate
peccati sui, says Paraeus: According to the nature, and proportionably to the
greatness of the injury.

Thirdly, The extent and universalitie of Divine justice. And that is double,

I. Of the Person, (...), Let him be what he will be.

II. Of the Sin, (...), What ever his sin and injury be.

Fourthly, The impartialitie of Divine justice; (...), etc. There is no respect
of persons.

To which four particulars, if I may beg leave to speak,

First, Absolutely, in themselves:

Secondly, Relatively, as to the persons engaged in the affairs of this day, I
shall dismiss both the Text and Congregation. And

First, Of the indispensableness of justice upon those who do wrong: they shall
receive.

I. They may lawfully from the hand of the civil Magistrate.

II. They shall certainly from the hand of God.

I. They may lawfully from the hand of the civil Magistrate. The Apostle tells
us, he is Gods minister, (...), a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil, Romans 13. 4. There are indeed a generation of men in the world, who brand
all justice with the name of cruelty, and Magistracy with the titles of
Tyranny and usurpation: some such there were in the Apostles time; Peter tells
us of some who despise government, and speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10.
and Jude verse 8. of such whom he calls filthy dreamers, who despise dominion.
The Manichees conceived that Magistracy was a constitution of their b^d god;
such were the Weigelians, and Swenkfeldians of latter years, and such are many
amongst us at this day: and if we observe them they are the very same men, who
would pull the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, out of the mouths of
Min^sters; who would wrest the sword of justice out of the hand of the
Magistrate (the des^gn sure is, that so their licentiousness might go
unreproved by the one, and unpunished by the other) only here is the
difference, though they have already so far thrown off religion, as not to
regard the one, yet they have not so far laid aside the natural principle of
self-preservation and policy, as not to fear the other. Truth is, they fear
the Magistrates sword is too edged a tool for them to meddle withal; they know
that if they oppose it, they are like to feel it. It has always been so, that
the Magistrates and Ministry have had the same opposers; and the same
principles of Pride, Faction and Ambition carry men out to contemn both, as
imagining themselves too knowing to be taught by the one, or too good to be
ruled by the other. It was thus of old; those leading famous rebels, Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, gainsay and oppose as well Moses the Magistrate, as Aaron
the Priest: and think both of them take too much upon them, to lift themselves
above the congregation of the Lord, Numb. 16 3. and therefore they both envy
Aaron his Priesthood, and Moses his Authority; they will neither hear the one,
nor obey the other, v. 12. And it is so still; those who now cast dirt in the
face of the Ministers, would most certainly, if they had power and
opportunity, lay the Magistrates honor in the dust, and cry down them as
Tyrannical, as they now do these as Antichristian.

I question not ( my Honorable Lords) but we shall find you ready and
zealous (and the rest of the Magistracy of this Nation) to assert the sword of
the Spirit to us, and I shall (I am confident as the mouth of all the sound
Ministry of England) vindicate and assert the power of the civil sword to you,
and that upon these grounds; He that does wrong, must receive from the hand of
the Magistrate:

1. That the Magistrate may faithfully discharge that office which God has
entrusted him withal. God hat^ put a sword into the Magistrates hands, and he
expects he should not bear it vain, Romans 13. 4. not bear it for honor to
himself only, but for terror to offenders, verse 3. Rulers are not a terror
to good works, but for evil. He is not to wear it as a badge and ensign of
Honor, but draw it as an instrument of Justice. It is the very end of his
office: Governors, says the Apostle, are sent by God, there is their
Commission; if we 1 Pet. 2. 14*
would know the end wherefore, the next words resolve us, they are sent by him
(...), for the punishment of evil doers. And it is this Divine Authority,
which makes that justice in the Magistrate, which would be cruelty and murder
in another. The wise God has not entrusted the sword of justice in the hands
of every private man: how soon then would the whole world become an Aceldama,
if every man might be the revenger of his own wrongs? Therefore God, who has
forbidden private Christians to avenge themselves, Romans 12. 19. Dearly beloved,
avenge not your selves, etc. yet Chap. 13. 4. has authorized the Magistrate
with his Commission to be the avenger of wrath upon those that do evil. Et quis
obedientiam in crimen vocet? says Austin in this case, Quis obsequium pietatis
Lib. 1. de civ. Dei, cap. 26.
accuset?

2. That he may acquit, and clear himself of the guilt of other men's sins.
Those sins which the Magistrate, either out of Cowardice, or Partiality,
punishes not, he makes his own: and what men commit as encouraged by seeing
others go unpunished for the same sins, (and sure no greater encouragement to
a licentious corrupt heart to sin, then hopes of impunitie) the guilt certainly
is devolved upon the Magistrate, who by punishing it in some should have
prevented it in others. Camerarius tells us of a wise answer, though Camerar.
page 469.
made by a fool, to a King of France, who being solicited to give out a pardon
for a murderer made this the ground of his denial, that it was the third murder
that man had committed, No, my Sovereign, says he, it is but the first he has
committed: you committed the second, and the third, Nam si primi veniam illi
non dedisses unicum illud commisisset. It was his first pardon which made him
promise himself security, and so encouraged him to commit the like sin.

It is the charge God lays upon the Princes of Judah, Isa. 1. 23. that they
were companions of thieves, that is, coercendis and puniendis furt is operam
non impendebant, says Calvin, They did not endeavor to Calv. in loc.
restrain and punish them, and therefore are interpreted as partners with them.
Famous is that story of Ludovicus, one of the Kings of Camer. ibid.
France, to this purpose, who being at his devotions was solicited to pardon a
Malefactor condemned to die; he, as willing to shake off such an unseasonable
importunity, granted the request; but Psalm. 106. 3.
suddenly meeting with that passage of the Psalmist, Blessed are they that keep
judgment, and be that does righteousness at all times, recalled the
Malefactor, and revoked his former grant of mercy upon this reason,
Principem, qui punire potest crimen, nec punit, non minus coram Deo reum esse,
quam si id ipse perpetrasset: that Prince or Magistrate, which can, and will
not punish sin, is in the judgment, and sight of God as guilty of it, as if
he had committed it. There are no men in the world more guilty of other men's
sins, then Ministers and Magistrates, the first by not reproving, the other by
not punishing.

3. In faithfulness to the offendour: to him that does wrong, the Magistrate by
punishing him may do him a real courtesy (as certainly they did the thief who
condemned him to the same Cross with our Savior) and his receiving punishment
by the hand of the Magistrate may be a means of his repentance (for (...),
says Plutarch) and so prevent his receiving it from the just hand of God.
Magistrates in Scripture are often called Fathers, as Pater patriae among the
Romans; and we know what Solomon says of them, Prove. 13. 24. He that spares
his rod, hates his son: and severitie and justice against the sin, may often in
the event prove mercy to the sinner: but however, He that does wrong shall
receive, etc.

4. In order to the common and public security, that by one man's punishment
others may fear to sin. Which is the account Moses gives of Gods appointment of
capital punishments under the judicial law: as the seducer from the true
worship of God was by Gods command to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 13. 10. and the end is
expressed, verse 11. that all Israel might hear and fear, and do no more such
wickedness. And the false witness to be punished, Deuteronomy. 19. 19, 20. That those
which remain may no more commit any such evil amongst you. That which is a
punishment to one becomes a terror to all. Besides, punishments are necessary
for the protection of weak and unarmed innocence; to which Magistrates are, or
should be, a refuge and shelter; and which is chief, for the security and
defense of the Laws, which would be every villains scorn and derision, if they
were not hedged in with thorns (as I may say) and secured by punishments. For
though the most ingenuous principle of obedience be love, yet the most common
principle is fear: and those who will not for conscience sake, as the Apostle
commands, Romans 13. 5. conform to the Laws, yet will for wraths sake, for fear
of punishment: and many whom Religion will not, Policy will oblige to
obedience. God sees it necessary to secure his own Laws by annexing
punishments to them: man's corrupt nature is become now servile, and with those
in Psalm. 2. 3. would think of breaking all bands in sunder, and casting away
the cords of Gods commands from them, did they not fear as it follows there, v.
9. to be bruised with the rod of iron.

Many keep Gods Laws more out of fear of Hell, then out of any love to
Holiness: and much more invalid will any humane Laws be without punishments
annexed. If men could promise themselves security from the punishment which
the Law threatens, they would quickly indulge themselves the liberty of
violating what the Law commands. I like not indeed Draco's Laws, which were so
cruel, that they were said to be written in blood, not with ink; nor approve of
Caligula's decrees, which were termed furores, non judicia: and surely capital
punishments, should then only be inflicted, when the Laws cannot be secured,
nor the public safety and peace preserved without them. But without some
punishment, neither can be safe; the Magistrates authority would be contemned,
and the Laws, like Cobwebs, swept down by every hand: and therefore those same
men (I mean the Socinians and others) who inveigh against all punishments
(especially, if capital) as a breach of charity, charge the Laws too, as a
violation of Christian liberty: these are timely to be looked too. Magistrates
in Scripture are called Physicians; it is a cruel pity in a Physician, to Isa.
3. 6, 7.
spare an ounce or two of corrupt blood, and thereby endanger the health of the
whole body. A Gangrened member must be cut off, that the whole be not
corrupted, immedicabile vulnus ense rescindendum est, Ne pars sincera trahatur;
so must a corrupt member of the Commonwealth: and however this may seem
cruelty to the Offendour, yet, I am sure, it is mercy and pity to the
Public, which can often no otherways be secured and preserved from danger.

By this time, I hope, you see the Magistrates right to punish them who do
wrong; but lest the great Nimrods of the world might here take sanctuary, and
because of their own power or policy, or of the Magistrates cowardice or
partiality, they may hope to escape the stroke of the civil sword, and so be
encouraged to tyrannize and wrong others, let them know they shall certainly
receive at the hand of God for what ever wrong they do, etc. that brings me to
the

II. The indispensabilitie of divine justice. A truth very necessary to be
demonstrated, because though the worst of Atheists fear it, ( a clap of thunder
strikes a Caligula under his bed, as fearing the stroke of a revenging justice,
and a discourse of it strikes a cruel Felix into a fit of trembling) yet many
would go for Christians, who do not believe it, or at least do not express the
power of such a persuasion in their lives. Would there be so many mighty
Nimrods, hunters after their neighbors estates and lives? so many unjust Ahabs
and the like? if they really believed they should receive for that wrong they
do, from the hand of an indispensable impartial justice? Truth is, men must
offer violence to the principles of natural conscience (in which there are
strong impressions of this truth, as being that (...), that judgment of God,
which the Apostle says the Heathen, though given over to a reprobate sense,
had a Romans 1. 28, 32.
knowledge of) before they can cast off all thoughts and jealousies of a
revenging justice: but few live under the actual belief of it; the fear of it
scares them, but the belief of it does not reclaim them. Truth is, most men
have many carnal prejudices against it; as, to do thus is the mode of the
world; and, I shall escape as well as others; and, not to do it will cross my
gain and profit; and, that which indeed is the chief, and makes most Atheists,
is present prosperity: they can do wrong and yet thrive and prosper: and this
makes many think God rather likes and approves of the sin, then intends to
punish the sinner. Thou thoughtest, says God, Psalm. 50. 21. that I was such a
one as thy self, but I will reprove thee. As that Tyrant Dionysius, as Valerius
Maximus tells us, when he had robbed the temple of Proserpina, Val. Max. lib.
1. cap. 1.
having a safe voyage at sea, videtisne, says he, quam bona navigatio ab ipsis
diis immortalibus sacrilegis tribuitur? as if he had said, See how the gods
love sacrilege. I shall therefore endeavor, hoping to give a check to sin,
especially to injustice and wrong, to demonstrate the indispensabilitie of
Divine justice in three or four particulars.

1. From Gods absolute indispensable hatred of sin: the principle and rise of
which is not his revealed will, but his nature; he is of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity, Heb. 1. 13. God hates sin not only as a breach of his Law,
but as a contrariety to his nature and holiness; he may as soon not be God, as
not hate sin; and what is hatred in God, but voluntas puniendi? not any passion
or perturbation: as Aquinas says, all the affections of men are attributed to
God, quoad effectum, non affectum: and what is the effect of anger, and hatred
in us, but a desire of revenge and punishment? so in God it speaks his
indispensable will to punish. The Poets attribute to Justice, (...), slow feet:
so slow is Divine justice, that sometimes it overtakes not a sinner in this
life ((...), says Plutarch) but it will sooner or later reach him. God, says
Augustine, punishes some sins here, that men may not question his Aug. lib.
de civ. Dei, c. 8.
providence: not all, lest he should wholly anticipate the last judgment. But
it seems to me impossible, but God should sooner or later punish sin, which he
so naturally hates and abhors; therefore calls Jer. 44. 4.
it in the Prophet Jeremiah, that abominable thing which his soul hates.

2. To vindicate his glory, and repair his honor, which sin robs him of. He is
a jealous God, namely of his honor: God will have his Exodus 20. 5.
glory from every man one way or other; those that will not glorify him by
doing his will, God will glorify himself upon them by punishing them against
their own. The obedience of the whole creation, being a present debt, can never
make reparation for that dishonor the least sin brings to God: God will
therefore repair it by glorifying his justice upon their disobedience: and so
make them bear the severitie of his justice, who would not submit to the
justness of his commands.

3. To assert his dominion over the creature. Every sin is a throwing off, and
disowning the Soveraigntie of God, and affecting an independencie upon him. The
first sin was ushered in thus by our first parents ambitiously affecting, and
credulously believing what the devil most falsely promised them, to be like
Gods. Those mine enemies Genesis 3. 5. Luke 19. 27.
that would not I should reign over them, etc. That would not; this is the
language of every wilful sin, it is virtually a laying aside the rule and
authority of God, with that proud Pharaoh, Who is the Lord Exodus 5. 2. Psalm.
2. 3.
that I should obey his voice? Or, as those in the Psalmist, Let us cast away
his cords from us. As if they should say; we will be ruled by our own laws, and
not be bound up to any superior commands: and thus interpretatively deny their
dependence and subordination to God. God can no other way maintain his dominion
over them, then by punishing, which they have endeavored to cast off by
sinning. As a Prince cannot keep up and preserve his rule and dominion over his
subjects otherwise, then by punishing them if they turn rebels: so God upholds
his dominion, by punishing those who acknowledge not his Sovereignty in
commanding: and he that chooses to obey his own will in sinning, shall be
subordinate to Gods sovereignty in suffering. But,

4. Lastly, and particularly, as to the case of wrong and injury, God will
certainly punish, to assert and clear up his Saints innocence, which here in
the world is often trodden upon by the foot of pride and tyranny; which the
Apostle to the Thessalonians mentions as an argument of just dealing with our
brethren, Let no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter, because
the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. The Poets feign Justice to
be the daughter of Jupiter, whom he has set over the world to revenge those
injuries one man does to another: I am sure God (if he does not in this life
plead the cause of the oppressed, as sometimes he does) has appointed a day in
which his justice shall punish them, who here unjustly punish his. It is (says
the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.) a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled peace. You
may see, perhaps, the proud Neroes, and Caligulaes of the world treading
stately, and proudly vaunting, commanding, threatening upon the stage of the
world (as Emperors in some few Scenes of a Tragoedie) but if we stay to the
last act, we shall see their Scarlet double-dyed in blood; or if innocence be
thrown, and persecuted off the stage before the act be ended, there will come a
time when the righteous shall rejoice to see the vengeance; and wash his feet
in the blood of the wicked, those which here oppress and wrong him, saying with
the Psalmist, Verily there Psalm. 58. 11.
is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judges in the earth.

II. The equity of God's judicial proceedings; it is, (...). God's justice
lays out diverse and various punishments according to the nature, degree,
quality, and circumstances of men's sins. This is that which Scripture speaks
of so frequently: God will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.
6. every one shall receive according to that he has done, 2 Cor. 5. 10. (...),
receiving the reward of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 13. God shall cause every
man to find according to his ways, Job 34. 11. And indeed it cannot be
otherwise; for shall not the judge of all the world do right? says Abraham,
Genesis 18. 25. he can do nothing but right; the creature is under such an
absolute subordination to the Soveraigntie and dominion of God, being in his
hand as clay in the hand of the potter, (which is Scripture language) that it
is not capable Romans 9. 21.
of receiving any wrong from God; and God's holy will is so absolute
independent a rule, and square of all righteousness and equity, that he cannot
do any injury to the creature. Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? says
the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 3. 5. Indeed there may be some seeming
inequality in Gods judicial proceedings here in the world: Providence here
are often so intricate (like Ezekiel's wheels moving one within another) such
unequal distributions of rewards and punishments, the righteous often suffering,
while the wicked flourish, that some have from hence taken occasion to quarrel
with the Justice, and deny the Providence of God. But be sure God's ways are
always just, when most secret; and it will become the modesty and humility
of a creature (though God's judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out) yet Romans 11. 23.
to acknowledge with David, that the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works: and where we cannot fathom to cry, (...), oh the depth!
and at that last great day, that (...), the day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 2. 5. then God will
unriddle all his mysterious providence, and vindicate all his proceedings from
the imputation of injustice, which here the ignorance or malice of men may
charge them with. Then we shall discern, as the Prophet Malachy says (though
here, perhaps, we cannot) between the righteous Mal. 3. 18.
and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.
God lays not out equal punishments for unequal sins, but at the last day there
shall be a tolerabilius, a more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, for some sinners,
then for others.

III. The universality of Gods justice, both as to persons and sins. We must
all, says the Apostle, stand before the judgment- seat of Romans 14. 10, 12.
Christ, and every one shall give an account of himself to God. (...), says
Plutarch. The most hardened, proud, stout-hearted Pharaoh cannot withstand the
meanest instrument of Divine justice,, if armed with Gods Commission; the
guilty malefactor may many ways escape the stroke of civil justice; perhaps he
can conceal the fact from the knowledge of the Judge; but no hiding any sin
from the eyes of omniscience (as the sinner often desires, and sometimes is so
far deluded, as to think he can do it, and thereby is encouraged to sin more
confidently). (...), All things are anatomized and open to the eyes of him,
with whom we have to do, says the Apostle, Heb. 4. 13. and, He sets our most
secret sins in the light of his countenance, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 90. 8.
Well, but if the malefactor be convinced of the fact, he may break prison, and
flee; but whither shall a guilty sinner flee to escape Gods justice? If I go
into heaven, thou art there, Psalm. 139. 8. but thither he is not like to come;
for there enters nothing that works abomination, Rev. 21. 27. If he goesinto
hell, there justice finds him, God is there also, says David; yea, there as a
most severe Judge. In earthly judicatories, the person may be guilty, yet may
escape the censure of the law for want of witness to prove the fact; but God,
when he judges, summons in the sinners own conscience, which is instead of a
thousand witnesses, so he is (...), self-condemned, and (...), wholly without
excuse. Here many, though guilty enough, yet by their power or greatness have
out-grown civil justice, and are too big to be meddled with, such shall
especially receive from the hands of God. S. John saw in the Revelations, the
Rev. 20. 12.
great as well as the small stand before Gods tribunal; and judged according to
their works. The wrongs that Magistrates and great ones do to others here, as
being most exemplary, directly contrary to the end of their office; for which
they must be accountable to God, and forfeiting that trust God has reposed in
them to right others, and as being such, for which they seldom receive any
punishment from the hands of men, God will most certainly and severely punish.
Here it is possible, the Judge may be terrified by greatness, or corrupted by
money or favor, to be partial in the execution of justice; but God nec
terretur potentia, nec flectitur gratia, is neither scared by power, nor
prevailed with by favor; but he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong,
etc.

And lastly, here the sin may be such, as the law takes no cognizance of: de
minutis non curat lex, and cogitationis paenam in foro nostro nemo luit: but
the least sin shall fall under the Censure of Divine justice. Every idle word
must be accounted for, every secret and vain Mat. 12. 36.
thought; God, says the Apostle, shall judge the secrets of men according Romans
2. 16.
to my Gospel. Our Savior lays him who wrongs his brother by an immoderate
passion, unworthy language, or the like, open to, and Mat. 5. 22.
in danger of hellfire. God is especially a swift witness against those that
oppress others, that wrong and injure their brethren. Scripture Mal. 3. 5.
affords us many sad monuments, and signal instances of Gods justice against
such: Ahab gets Naboths vineyard and the dogs lick his 1 Kings 22. 38. Acts 5.
blood. How sudden and severe was Gods justice upon Ananias and Sapphira's
sacrilege? the consideration of which might justly make many in our days
tremble. How were Daniels false accusers made a prey to those lions, to whose
cruelty he by their false witness was condemned? I wish all that are interessed
in the employment of witnesses this day would consider this and tremble, for
certainly the false witness shall not go unpunished, Prove. 19. 5. So for
bribery, what got Gehazi by Naamans gifts, but his leprosy to him and his 2
Kings 5.
posterity?

IV. The impartiality of Gods proceedings; God is no respecter of persons.

1. Not in the communications of his mercy: this the Apostle Peter affirms with
much earnestness: of a truth, says he, Acts 10. 34, I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works
righteousness is accepted with him: and the Apostle, sure, spoke this
experimentally, who of a poor fisherman was accepted to be an Apostle. Truth
is, there is nothing which God more hates, or which Scripture more
industriously frees God from then this accepting persons: yet nothing, which
the proud corrupt reason of man (which the Apostle justly calls (...), enmity
Romans 8. 7.
against God) more ordinarily charge God with. If God from, eternity chooses
one, leaves another; if in time he confers his grace on one, which he denies to
another; gives one assistance to persevere, leaves another to the apostasy of
his own heart: presently one English Arminius and others cry out, he is a most
shameful accepter of persons, unjust, and what not? I wish these men would
give God that freedom, which sure themselves would, and every man may enjoy
without imputation of injustice and partiality; to wit, to bestow when, and
where he will, and upon whom he will, what he has an absolute interest in, and
right to: so, is it not lawful with God to do what he will with his own? Is thy
eye evil because God is good? by these men's good will, God should neither have
the sovereignty of his councels, nor the freedom of bestowing his graces. I
wish these men would consider the truth of that, in gratuitis non datur
acceptio personarum: surely a man is unjustly charged with partiality for
giving that to one, which he is not bound to give to any; for accepting of
persons is a sin against distributive justice; and locum habet Aquin. in Romans
2. 11.
in iis quae dantur ex debito, says Aquinas. Now God is no man's debtour, and
in giving his grace to some he does no wrong to others, because he might have
denied it to all: God may silence such reasonings as he did the murmuring
labourer, who quarreled with him for giving the other a penny; Matthew. 20. 13.
Friend I do thee no wrong. God, in the distribution of his graces, acts not as
a Judge but as a Lord: and the motives of it are not any outward, undue
circumstances of the persons, but merely his own will, dividing to every 1 Cor.
12. 11 Ephesians. 1. 11.
man severally as he pleases, and, working all things after the counsel of his
own will: as a demonstration of which he often bestows his grace upon those who
as to humane judgment seem most unlike, and unqualified; witness a
persecuting, blaspheming, Saul; a licentious Mary Magdalen; an unjust,
injurious thief; it will puzzle the sharpest wit to find any other motive and
ground of this then the soverainty and good pleasure of God, unless they will
say blasphemy and uncleanness be qualifications for grace. Surely, God does
this, as thereby to reap the greater glory of his grace, so to show his
freedom and Aquin. 2. 1. 2^ q. 63. art. 3.
absoluteness in communicating it. Gods bestowing his grace (says Aquinas
soundly and excellently) is datio pertinens ad liberalitatem, non ad justitiam,
a gift not of debt but of grace and liberality, and in such there can be no
respect of persons. God in this regards not the outward qualities and
circumstances of men; not greatness or learning; for not many wise after the
flesh, not many mighty, or noble are called; 1 Cor. 2. 26.
but has respect to his own counsel and purpose, and that must stand. I will
have mercy on whom I will etc. Romans 9. 15. And if proud reason (as it is usual)
charge this as arbritrariness and tyranny: that in Job may silence it, Is it
fit to say to a King thou art wicked? and to Job 34. 18, 19.
princes ye are ungodly? how much less to him that accepts not the persons of
princes, nor regards the rich more then the poor? for they ane all the work
of his hands. And I shall say with S. Augustine, scrutetur qui potest
profundum, veruntamen caveat praecipitium: while he quarrels with and pries
into the counsels and secrets of heaven, let him beware he falls not into the
depths of hell.

2. Not in the executions of his justice: but whom that finds under the same
guilt, it condemns to the same punishment. This the Apostle asserts, 1 Pet. 1.
17. Who without respect of persons judges according to every man's works: and
the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 2. 9, 10, 11. Tribulation and anguish to every
soul that does evil, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for there is no
respect, etc. Yet each of these had what to plead; the Gentile his ignorance,
the Jew his privileges as Gods peculiar: but justice spares them not, because
they enjoyed them, but punished them more severely, because they contemned and
abused them: it is (...), of the Jew first, at the ninth verse of that second
chapter to the Romans. The Gentiles punishment shall be less, (...), says
Chrysostom Chrysostom. in loc.
on the place, because they have not the law accusing them. It is not the
enjoyment of Ordinances, and outward privileges, which the Jews rested in, and
which (I fear) is the rotten foundation which too many Christians build upon,
which will secure a sinner from the stroke of an impartial justice; but if
contemned and mis-improved will Hebr. 2. 3.
make it heavier. The Jews rested in their outward circumcision as their
security, but Moses bids them circumcise their hearts, and that upon Deuteronomy. 10.
16 17.
this ground that, God was a terrible God, which regards not persons. No
outward circumstances of the person can overbalance this impartial justice;
not a man's greatness and honor, these too often aggravate his sin, and increase
his punishment. Magistrates sins are of a deep die, scarlet sins, and will
provoke a severer justice: (...) Chrysostom. in Romans 2. 9.
(...), says Chrysostom: In Gods judgment greatness of person is
inconsiderable. The Angelical excellency could not secure or exempt them from
the severity of Gods justice, they are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness unto the judgment of the great day, Jude 6.

Nor will riches profit in the day of Gods wrath; as God dislikes not holiness
though under rags, so he approves not sin under the gayest coat; nor will
patronize profaneness, and wrong under Princes robes and crowns. He accepts
not the person of princes, nor the rich man more then the poor; in the place of
Job before cited. Job 34. 19.
Lazarus's rags make him never the less fit or welcome guest into Abraham's
bosom; nor can all Dives his pomp, and wealth, and delicious fare, secure him
from the sentence of justice, dooming him to eternal flames. God likes neither
the one better for his riches, nor the other the worse for his poverty. All a
wicked man's riches purchase for him only a hotter place in hell, (at Rome
indeed they Jam. 5. 2.
may perhaps buy him a pardon) and but treasure up wrath; their Ezekiel. 17. 19.
silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the
wrath of the Lord.

Nor will a wicked Achitophels policy secure him; you know it hastened his ruin
here, and will increase it hereafter. Nor shall the great Scholars learning (if
without holiness, and doing the will of God) at the day of Gods judgment avayl
him any more but to increase his stripes. Surgunt indocti, and rapiunt coelum,
was an old and Luke 12. 47.
a sad complaint of the Father. Nay, that best piece of learning, to teach
others, will not stay the hand of justice, if such be workers of iniquity. Many
will come at the last day with that plea, We have Matthew. 7. 23.
prophesied in thy name, who yet shall be dispatched with a Nescio vos, I know
you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. All the fair shows and
appearances, the affected garbs, and hypocritical personating Religion, (if
without the power of godliness) will not then be considerable, any further then
to bring upon men's heads (...), greater damnation, as our Savior told those
arch-hypocrites the Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 14. Adams fig leaves will not secure
him from the summons of Gods justice: the paint of hypocrisy falls off at the
fire of Gods wrath. That of Chrysostom is full to this Chrysostom. in Romans 2. 11.
purpose; (...), God will judge at the last day not according to the quality
of the persons, but the difference of the actions, whether good or bad;
therefore God is described by S. John at the last judgment, as sitting upon a
great Rev. 20. 11.
white throne; which speaks both glory and purity; no spot of injustice or
partiality in it, but (as at the words following) both small Ibid. v. 12.
and great are judged, every one according to his works.

And now give me leave (Right Honorable) with that modest Application.
humility as becomes my years, and yet with that holy boldness as befits my
Office, to urge the imitation of this Divine justice upon you. I shall
endeavor to do it so, that I may seem neither to forget to whom, nor yet from
whom I speak. God has put his work into your hands: you are in the place of
God to the people, you judge Genesis 50. 19.
for him, you have the stamp of his authority upon you, he has honored you
with his name, I have said ye are gods; wherefore judge Psalm. 82. 1.
as he does. Arnobius tells the heathens, that their gods were such, Arnob.
page 190.
quorum similes nec vos esse, nec alium quempiam velitis; as they were ashamed
either themselves or others should imitate: but Scripture represents God to us
as a pattern for our imitation; Be ye holy as I am Matthew. 5.
holy, and perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. Imitate him as
Christians, much more as Magistrates. Imitate his vindicative justice; which is
sometimes in Scripture called his holiness: and herein Josh. 24. 19.
in imitate,

First, The equity of his justice, by proportionating punishments to the nature
of the offense; to punish less then the fact deserves, may be of bad
consequence to the public; to punish more severely then it deserves, is always
injustice to the offendour; so far innocence it self suffers, as any man is
punished beyond the demerit of his offense. The Roman fasces were a bundle of
rods, with an axe in the midst, to signify the equity of Magistrates in
punishing some only with a rod, others with the axe: the one for lesser
faults, the other for capital crimes.

Secondly, The universality of his justice. Let not any wrong go unpunished,
whether it be in men's good names (which to some are of as great concernment as
their lives) by defamation; in their estates, by injury, robbery, and
oppression; or in their lives, by murder; or in all these by false accusations
and witnesses. But I mention this head that I may commend to your justice
especially the wrongs of God; those which more immediately strike at his honor
and his glory. My Lords, God is very severe in revenging the wrongs done to
you, when the Apostle Peter speaks of Gods reserving the wicked to the 2 Pet.
2. 9, 10.
day of judgment to be punished, he ushers this in with a (...), chiefly them
who despise government, and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. And when
the people would have rejected Samuel from 1 Samuel 8. 7.
being Judge; says God, they have not rejected thee, but me. He interprets
injuries done to you, as done to himself; and therefore you have all the reason
in the world to be sensible of, and zealous in punishing those wrongs which are
done to God. Let me expostulate a little: Shall the least dishonorable word
against an earthly Potentate be punished? and shall those foul-mouthed
Rabshakehs, who reproach the living God by horrid blasphemies, go secure and
unobserved? Shall an affront to an Ambassador be justly censured as an
indignity to the Prince; and shall those who scorn, defame, injure, and evil
entreat the Ambassadors of God, (who come to them upon terms of peace and
reconciliation from him) as carnal and Antichristian, not be looked upon as
wronging God himself, and dealt withal accordingly? I am sure Christ esteems
them so; He that despises you, says he, Luke 10. 16. despises me, etc. Shall
an insurrection in the State (and that justly too) be punished as rebellion?
and shall those who are up in open arms against God, and bid defiance to his
Ordinances, Word, Ministers (which have been the glory and happiness of the
Christian world for this sixteen hundred years) escape without the least
censure? Shall a thief, who steals to the value of a few pence endanger his
life? and shall others rob God securely, and without danger? If you ask how
that is, not I, but the Prophet Malachi shall resolve you; In tithes, says he,
and offerings. Mal. 3. 8.
In a word, shall schism and faction in the State be punished as rebellion?
and shall open heresy (I speak not of circumstantial opinions) in the Church
be tolerated under the calmer title of tenderness? I must beg a (...). I cannot
imagine what plea can be rationally made for this; either we must say, The
Magistrate is not interested in the care of Religion, and that is directly
contrary both to Scripture practice, and precept; the Apostle making this the
very argument why we should pray for all that are in authority, that we may
live not only peaceably, but in all godliness also. It is, certainly, the 1 Timothy 2. 2.
Magistrates duty to preserve Religion, as well as keep the Peace. Or else we
must say, that no Heresy wrongs God, and that is to make Religion an
indifferency, and to cut the sinews of all endeavors after truth. What think
you of those damnable Heresies, which Peter speaks of? Even denying the Lord
that bought them, and 2 Pet. 2. 1.
is not to deny God, to wrong him? Else we must say, that we do not know what
Heresy wrongs God, and that is to turn Religion into a light Scepticisme, and
to make it the greatest uncertainty in the world. Or lastly, that no Heresy,
though broached and owned, is to be observed, and taken notice of by the
Magistrate, otherwise then as it has an influence upon the disturbance of the
State; and that seems to me to be as much as if we should say, The peace of the
State ought to be more dear to a Christian Magistrate, then either the truth or
the glory of God. In a word, to punish such as I have been speaking of
capitally, is unwarrantable cruelty; but not to restrain them at all seems
contrary to that zeal which a Christian Magistrate ought to have for God and
Religion. I shall end this point with a holy meditation of one of the burning
and shining lights of this age; In mine own wrongs I will hold patience
laudable, but in Gods wrongs impious.

Thirdly, The impartiality of divine justice, there is no (...) with God; nor
ought to be with you: nothing given so frequently in charge in Scripture that I
know of as this, not to respect persons. And that in reference to God himself,
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. ye shall not respect persons in judgment (for the judgment is
Gods): but hear the small as well as the greater. And elsewhere, Thou shall not
wrest judgment, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Lev. 19. 15.
thou shall not respect persons. And in Leviticus, Thou shall not honor the
person of the mighty, nor respect the person of the poor: neither cowardly fear
the one, nor foolishly pity the other; though the poor be especially the
Magistrates charge, and it ought to be his care to defend him and pity him, so
far as may be sine laesione justitiae, says Aquin. 2. 2. Exodus 23. 3.
Aquinas. So in Exodus, neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause:
that is, with violation of justice and equity. And to name no more; to have
respect of persons is not good, says Solomon. Prove. 28. 21.
The word (...) (if we believe Zanchy) is properly verbum Zanch. in Ephesians. 6. 9.
forense, a word of Assizes, and de judicibus proprie praedicatur. Accepting
persons is a sin incident to those who are employed in matters of judicature,
and transactions of Law; and is as commonly (I fear) practiced, as it is little
understood: when Jurours are by assed more by love or hate to the person, then
by conscience of their oaths or insight into the cause: when verdict is the
language of their affection, or praejudice, not of their knowledge and
conscience: when the interest of some near relation, or a suggestion from a
friend swaies them more then the equity of the cause; when witnesses swear home
in one man's cause and wont in another, though they know as much of it, and the
case depends on it: when a lawyer pleads the poor man's cause faintly and coldly
(though perhaps the most just) the rich man's with abundance of zeal, and heat
of passion; all this is a vicious and sinful respect of persons. And suffer me
( Right honorable) to be your remembrancer, though I confidently believe you
both know these things, and abhor them: when one man's cause is expedited and
dispatched upon the bare consideration of some outward qualification, (as
Riches, Friendship, Kindred, Country or the like) and in the mean time, a poor
man's case is deferred and protracted: when one man's case upon the like
consideration is sifted into, another man's perfunctorily passed over: or the
Jurie better informed in one man's case then in another: when one man's case is
weighed in the balance of equity; a second of prejudice; a third of favor
and affection: when of two involved in the same guilt one meets with a milder
sentence then the other, as being a friend, or rich, or powerful, or because
of some circumstantial opinion, or the like: when the person commends the case,
not the case the person: in a word when any consideration besides the equity of
the cause, and justness of the law, prevails with the Judge in judgment, this
is an unjust, and sinful respect of persons. God stands in the congregation
of the mighty, he judges among the Gods, says David, how long will ye judge
unjustly, and accept the persons of the Psalm. 82. 1, 2.
wicked? It Is a great and crying sin, certainly, the very ruin of societies: it
overturnes, and perverts the end of the Laws, (the protection of which the
meanest may challenge as his right) which as they were made, so should be
executed, without respect of person. It Is a sin, which robs the subject of his
liberty and security, and makes him slavish and servile, whilst he fears (if
he cannot be assured of an Impartial execution of the Laws) a lesser fault in
him may feel a severer hand of justice, then a greater in another. Riches or
Honor, Diversity of opinions, or what ever other circumstances of the person,
alter not the nature of homicide, or adultery, or theft: God is equally
dishonored, the commonwealth equally suffers, the law is equally violated by
these sins, be the person what he will be; therefore respecting these must
needs be an overthrowing of the laws, and a perverting of judgment. Besides,
this sin disposes a man to other sins, to all kind of iniquity; to have
respect of person, says Solomon, is not good; for a piece of bread that man
will transgress. Prove. 18. 21.
Yea, it lays him open to the curse of the people: so the same Wiseman, He that
says to the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the people Prove. 24. 24.
curse, nations shall abhor him. And that which is worse and most aggravates
the crime, Judges on their tribunals personate and represent God, and so by
respecting persons make God a partner in Drus^us in difficil. loc. in Deuteronomy. 3.
that sin which he most hates. Drusius notes that the Ancients painted justice,
peplo oculis obducto, with a veil drawn over her eyes; to signify that
impartialitie, which ought to be in the administrations of justice. Judges
should be seeing into the cause: (that is the Judges honor and the peoples
advantage and security; as S. Paul accounted it his privilege to answer before
Agrippa, because he Acts 26. 2.
knew him expert in all customs and questions; so I am confident others will
find this their advantage from you, Right Honorable) but blind to the
person; knowing, but not partial.

A Judge, says the Philosopher, is (...), living and breathing Arist. Polit.
lib. 5. cap. 7.
justice. The Judges in Egypt were painted without hands, and blind. And the
Areopagites, who were Judges at Athens, passed their sentence in the night,
and had their judicatures in some dark rooms, that so they might not be by
assed by prejudice or affection to the person, to give vvrong judgment: and, I
question not, but you will be found such in our Athens. And by thus imitating
the justice of God you may hereby;

I. Promote the end of the Laws, and the end of your office, which is the
public security, which is no way better consulted then by justice and equity.
S. Austin plainly denies, that ever the Roman polity Aug. de Civ. Dei lib.
10. c. 21. and lib. 4. cap. 4. Lipsius de constable. lib. 2. cap. 13.
could be called properly a Commonwealth, upon this ground, that; ubi non est
justitia, non est respublica: he calls Commonwealths without justice, but
magna latrocinia: or, in Lipsius his language, congeries, confusio, turba: it is
but an abuse of the word Respublica, Commonwealth, where the public good is
not consulted by an impartial justice and equity; it is but a confused heap, a
rowt of men. Or, if we will call it so at present, it will not be so long
without justice: for besides that injustice and oppression makes the multitude
tumultuous, and fills the peoples heads with dangerous designs ( Rehoboam's
oppressing his subjects occasioned the revolting of ten tribes; 1 Kings 12. 1 Samuel 8. 3.
and it was the injustice of Samuels sons (when Judges) which made the people
so impetuous in desiring a King.) Besides this, I say, it lays a Nation open
and obnoxious to the wrath and vengeance of God; as God threatens to Judah in
the Prophet: They (namely the Isa. 1. 23, 24.
Princes) judge not the fatherless; neither does the cause of the widow come
unto them: therefore says the Lord, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and
avenge me of mine enemies.

The Law is the pulse of the Commonwealth, you may know what temper the body
Politic is in by the motions of justice, and executions of the Laws: this often
prevents or diverts the judgments of God upon a nation. Phineas executes
judgment, and Number. 25. 11. 2 Samuel 21. 14.
stays the plague: so the three years famine cease upon David's executing
judgment upon Saul's sons. Justice is the best establishment of Commonwealths;
The King by judgment establishes the land, says Solomon, Prove. 29. 4. And it
is a good security against the proceedings of Gods justice against a nation;
Run ye through the streets of Jerusalem, says God, Jer. 5. 1. and seek in the
broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, and I will pardon it. This is the advantage ( my Lords) the public
will reap by your impartial execution of justice and equity. But

II. You may with the greater comfort appear another day before the tribunal of
Gods impartial justice, to give account of your stewardships. You are set up by
God, you judge for him, your authority is from him, that speaks your power, and
our obedience; even for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. And let me mind you, that
your account must be to him, and that bespeaks your care and faithfulness.
There is a day coming, wherein all, both small and great, must appear before
the judgment seat of Christ; and then with what judgment you here judge
others, your selves must be judged, and with what measure you Matthew. 7. 2.
mete, it shall be measured to you again. Then with what horror and amazement
shall an unjust cruel Felix appear a prisoner at the bar, to receive the final
sentence of that judgment, at a discourse of which he trembled here, though a
Judge upon the bench? How Acts 24. 25.
fearful a thing will it be for such a Judge as our Savior speaks of, who
neither fears God, nor regards man, at that day to fall into the Luke 18, 2.
hands of the living God, the impartial just Judge of all the world? How shall
Pilate tremble to see Christ then Judge, whom here he judged and condemned?
Then shall you, ( my Lords) having here faithfully improved that talent of
power and authority God has entrusted you with, receive the Euge of those good
servants, Well Matthew. 25. 21
done good and faithful servants, you have been faithful over a few things, I
will make you rulers over many things, enter you into the joy of your Lord. I
shall end all with that famous Jehoshaphats charge to 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
the Judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord;
wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there
is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of
gifts. Take heed, for God is with you in the judgment: he is with you, to see
and take notice of you, that calls for your faithfulness: he is with you to
protect you; that speaks your support and encouragement: And I shall pray, that
he would be with you to counsel and direct you, and that will promote your
comfort, and the Nations happiness.

FINIS.
DEI PECVLIVM, OR, GODS PECULIAR PEOPLE.

In a Sermon preached at S. Gregorie's by S. Paul's, at the Lecture there,
August 19. 1656.

By JOHN FROST, B. D. and late Fellow of S. JOHN'S College in Cambridge, and
Minister of Olaves-Hart-street in London.

ACT. 20. 28. Ut pascatis Ecclesiam Dei, quam acquisivit sanguine suo.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

TITUS 2. 14. (...), A peculiar people.
P (...), a word invented by the Greek interpreters, if you credit Stephanus,
upon their authority used by the Greek Fathers, and in this place only by the
Apostle adopted into Scripture: it is of near alliance to that other word
(...), which our Savior uses, Matthew. 6. 11. which Hierom understands of that
bread which came from heaven, Christ himself, spoken of, John 6. 51. the
peculiar nourishment of Saints, fed on by faith. But I shall not trouble you or
my self with any nice Criticismes as to the word; but shall engage into what is
of substantial and fundamental concernment. And so in the whole verse six
things are considerable.

First, A redemption asserted, as made by Jesus Christ; (...), that he might
redeem; the word signifies a redemption by way of price and purchase.

Secondly, The means of this redemption, or the price paid in order to it;
(...), who gave himself; the price was not silver and gold, but (...), precious
blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Justice in God could require no more, Love in Christ would
suffer him to give no less.

Thirdly, What this redemption is from: (...), from all iniquity; both as to
guilt and power. Whence the Apostle Peter makes the terminus a quo of this
redemption, our former vain conversation, (...). For Christ to have redeemed
men from the guilt of punishment, and not from the power and practice of sin,
would be no less then for Christ himself to have come into the world to have
been a cloak and patronage for impiety.

Fourthly, That to which we are redeemed by Christ: that is, to holiness and
purity. (...). Christ purchased not only pardon, but grace and holiness for
his people: that we being delivered, might serve Luke 1. 74, 75.
him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

Fifthly, The object of this redemption, (...), a peculiar people: such as
Christ's purchase gave him a peculiar right to; therefore it is added here,
(...), unto himself.

Sixthly, A description of the persons redeemed, a posteriori, of this peculiar
people by an inseparable effect or adjunct: (...), Zealous of good works; not
cold and perfunctorie, but fervent and zealous in practical holiness.

Each of these will fill up an hours discourse; I have singled out the fifth as
my present subject; to wit, the persons redeemed, whom the Apostle here calls
(...), a peculiar people, whence the observation is obvious and plain, that

God and Christ have a peculiar people in the world. Doctrine.


In the prosecution of which, I will show you,

First, In what respects a people may be said to be God's peculiar.

Secondly, What this peculiar people is.

Thirdly, How it appears that God has such a peculiar people in the world.

Fourthly, Improve all by some application. For the first, God has a peculiar
people in three respects.

I. In respect of outward dispensation, and distinguishing administrations.
Thus the Jews of old were Gods peculiar: his (...) whom Exodus 19. 5.
he calls his peculiar treasure. God caused his Word and Ordinances to be
dispensed amongst them, which the rest of the world were strangers to; he
entrusted them with his divine oracles, which the Apostle notes as their
distinguishing privilege from the Gentiles; and the Psalmist as their peculiar
prerogative. The rest of the Romans 3. 1, 2. Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
world were like the dry barren Wilderness, they God's Enclosure, his Vineyard,
who had plentiful showers of the dew of heaven falling upon them: and so they
shall be part of Gods peculiar again: the Scripture gives us evident ground to
believe their conversion to the faith, especially, Romans 11. from verse 23. to
verse 28. I think we are much in the dark as to the time of their restitution:
I verily believe the Idolatry of Rome (which is the Jews greatest
stumbling block) must first be removed, Religion reformed. This may be a
digression (however it is but a short one) as to the Text, but not to the
Intendment of the Lecture. And in this respect likewise the Christian part of
the world is God's peculiar, as distinguished from Pagans, and Mahometans, and
the rest: in the Christian part of the world, England is God's peculiar: in
England, let me say, London is God's peculiar; a place like Capernaum, exalted
up to heaven in the use and enjoyment of Ordinances; I heartily pray it never
have Capernaum's doom, to be thrown down to hell for the contempt and abuse of
them.

II. In respect of special office and employment. Thus Magistrates are God's
peculiar, (he has honored them with his own name in Scripture, Psalm. 82. 6.)
peculiarly representing his Dominion; his Deputies and Vicegerents on earth;
they rule by him, Prove. 8. 15. and should for him; they are his Ministers,
(...), as the Apostle, Romans 13. 4. Thus also the Ministers are God's peculiar,
in respect of Function: as the tribe of Levi was under the Law; as being a
special right of Ordination set apart for special services. Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, says the holy Ghost, for the work whereunto I have called
them, Acts 13. 2. which you may see was done accordingly, verse 3. by fasting
and prayer, and laying on of hands. The Ministerial office lies not in common
to all: but there must be such a calling, and lasting function as distinct from
the people. You may find them distinguished expressly, Revel. 2. 24. (...),
unto you, and unto the rest: whence the Ministry in antiquity is called (...),
a portion, set a part and dedicated to God's peculiar service, and acts of
worship and discipline; which no other can perform as acts of office. The
Magistrates duty is to uphold, but not to exercise these peculiar acts; which
when Theodosius the Emperor would have been intermeddling with, he received
this repulse by S. Ambrose: (...), that, his scarlet made him a Magistrate, not
a Minister.

III. In respect of special grace and favor: though God bear an universal
philanthropie to all men as his creatures; yet he loves some with special love
and distinguishing favor: which David Psalm. 106. 4.
prayed to God he might have the experience of, Remember me, O Lord, with the
favor thou bear unto thy people. Thus God has a peculiar people in two
respects.

1. In respect of choice and purpose; so many, who at present lie in common
with the rest of the world, not yet effectually brought home by the power of
God's Word and Spirit, (I mean elected though unconverted persons) are God's
peculiar. Many of God's jewels lie a long time in the mire and sink of the
world. S. Paul was a chosen vessel, though at present breathing out blasphemies
and threatenings. Acts 9. ^5. Verse 1.
These (me thinks) are like a piece of gold not yet refined, but designed by
the goldsmith for some special use. These our Savior speaks of, John 10. 16.
And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, etc. Whether you understand
there the Gentiles not yet called home by the Gospel, or all unbelievers
amongst Jews and Gentiles, who, in respect of purpose, belonged to the
sheepfold of Christ: sufficient it is to my purpose, that Christ calls some,
though in a present state of unbelief, his sheep; to wit, in respect of God's
secret purpose; ad arcanam patris electionem hoc Calv. in loc.
refert, says Calvin. So in a remote potentialitie, which, by virtue of the
purpose of God, and stipulation of Christ, is certainly to be reduced into act,
they may be called Christ's sheep, his peculiar which God loves with a love of
benevolence, not complacencie; for so to love any unholy person is a
contradiction to his purity and nature; the love of election is amor
ordinativus, not collativus, a love preparing mercies for us, not bestowing
them: praeparatio beneficiorum, as Augustine calls election, which being an
immanent act makes no change in the creature, but distinguishes persons only
as to a secret purpose in God.

2. In respect of actual claim and interest. And thus Saints believers who are
effectually brought home, and gathered by the Word, accompanied with the
Spirit, out of the world (and this is the fruit of the former) are his
peculiar: as our Savior* said Romans 8. 30.
to his disciples, John 5. 19. I have chosen you out of the world. And these I
conceive are meant here, the Apostle speaking of such as are a purified people,
and zealous of good works, the characters of Saints.

And this for the first.

Secondly, What this peculiar people is: of which briefly, because I intend the
third particular. The Original gives me ground of a sixfold description of them
by six qualifications.

I. An excellent people. So the Original in the Text imports, (...), a (...),
quod est praestare, as Grotius notes, coming from a Greek word, which signifies
to excel. So David esteemed of the Saints, (however the world accounts them but
(...), offscouring; 1 Cor. 4. 13.
and no wonder, for wicked men esteem Christ himself to have no form or
comeliness, etc.) as an excellent generation. Excellent in respect Isa. 53. 2.
Psalm. 16. 3.
of that image of God they bear, and those relations they stand in to him.
Solomon passes the same judgment upon the Saints, Prove. 12. 26. The
righteous, says he, is more excellent then his neighbor. Religion and
Holiness puts a splendor upon persons, such as even dazzles theeyes sometimes
of wicked men, and begets in them, though no true love, yet an aw and
reverence, as is evident in Herod, who feared John Baptist, Mark 6. 20. knowing
he was a just man, and an holy.

II. A separated people. Symmachus explains this word by (...), that is, e
numero electum, one that is chosen and taken out of the number of others. So
the Lord has a peculiar people, whom he has separated unto himself, both in
respect of Election, God, looking upon the corrupted Mass of mankind by a free
act of his Sovereign will, pitched his thoughts upon those, leaving these; the
first an act of the highest mercy, the other no act of injustice, because God
was under no obligation by grace to repair what man by sin wilfully lost and
forfeited. Deus de suo bonus, de nostro justus, says Tertullian. Separated
again by discriminating grace in effectual vocation: The Lord has set apart
him that is righteous for himself, Psalm. 3. And they shall be separated
hereafter at the day of judgment; that is the day in which he makes up his
jewels, and separates the sheep from the goats, the wheat from the chaff,
determining that to the fire, gathering this to his garner. Mat. 3. 12.


III. A hidden people. So (...) signifies, quasi instar peculii reconditum:
hidden to the eye of the world in their life: for their life is hid with Christ
in God, Col. 3. 3. hidden in respect of their comforts, A stranger does not
intermeddle with their joy, Prove. 14. 10. It is the hidden manna, Rev. 2. 17.

IV. They are a precious people. Quasi charissimas and pretiosissimas opes,
says Beza. Precious in respect of the price laid down to purchase them; the
redemption of their soul is precious, Psalm. 49. 8. Precious in respect of their
graces; precious faith you read of 2 Pet. 1. 1. Precious in respect of that
esteem God has of them; they are his jewels, Malach. 3. 17. Precious in the
eyes of God, Isaiah 43. 4. Precious to God in their lives, and precious also in
their deaths, Psalm. 116. 15.

V. A rare people. Quod rarum est, and inusitatum, that is (...), says Budaeus.
Thus the true Saints are but a rare people in respect of the wicked of the
world. Christ's flock is but a little flock, Luke 12. 32. Even amongst those who
are called the elect are but few, Mat. 20. 16.

VI. A beloved people: so Pagnin translates (...) Exodus, 19. 5. Thesaurum
dilectum, a beloved treasure: so Saints are called, the beloved of God, in the
epistle to the Romans, Romans 1. 7. whom he loves with a special distinguishing
love through Christ. God makes demonstration of universal love to all his
creatures, Mat. 5. 44, 45. in the exercise of his general providence,
upholding and ordering all things as his creatures; so his tender mercies are
over all his works, Psalm. 145. 9. But the love which he bears to his peculiar
is a peculiar love; that the love of a Creator, this of a Father; that founded
in his nature, the other in Christ.

Thirdly, The third particular, How it appears that God has such a peculiar
people in the world.

This peculiarity appears,

I. In the distinguishing love of the Father.

II. The special undertakings of the Son.

III. The peculiar workings of the Spirit.

The first of these is discovered seven ways.

1. In God's special purpose and election. Universal election is a
contradiction in adjecto: thus God had a peculiar from eternity: he has chosen
us, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 4. before the foundations of the world: and this
not upon a prevision of any moving impulsive conditions in the creature (for
whatsoever good is in the creature, faith, holiness, perseverance, are all the
fruits of this electing love, Acts 13. 48. Some goodness in the object must
provoke our choice, otherwise it is irrational; but God (who is Sovereign and
absolute) chooses persons to make them good, Ephesians. 1. 4.) but by his own free
and gracious purpose and will. Predestined, says the Apostle, according to
the purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will,
Ephesians. 1. 11. and, according to the good pleasure of his will, verse 5. That
conditional purpose pleaded for by so many must necessarily suppose a
fallibility in God's knowledge, which can have no foundation in respect of
things future, besides the free determinations of God's infallible will. And,
supposing God's foreknowledge of things, which the Patrons of conditional
purposes, must, and do confess (unless they will Socinianize): I do not see
(and, I confess, after my utmost search, here I stick) how they can avoid that
necessity of futuritions, which they condemn in others: for God's knowledge is
as undeceivable, as his will is infallible: a mistake or error in the one is
as inconsistent with divine perfection, as frustration in the other. The
Socinians indeed easily cut the knot, by denying the foreknowledge of God, and
making his knowledge co-existent with the objects known; which is a piece of
mad Atheism, if you credit Augustine, confiteri esse Deum, Aug. l. 5. de civ.
Dei. c. 9.
and negare praescium futurorum apertissima est insania: (known to God are all
his works from the beginning of the world, Acts 15. 18.) but to confess God's
foresight, and leave all events determinable by the arbitrary indifferency of
man's free will, is such a piece of inconsistencie, as, I must profess, I
understand not how it is reconcilable to reason. God has a peculiar people in
respect of his own foreknowledge; God has not cast away his people which he
foreknew, Romans 11. 2. contradistinguished to the (...) ( The election has
obtained, and the rest were blinded, verse 7.) Our Savior more then once
mentions, John 17. 6. a peculiar people given to him by his Father, which are
peculiariz'd and contradistinguished from the world, verse 9. The fullest
Scripture to prove this peculiaritie, is Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. For the children
being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of
God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls:
it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. As it is written,
Jacob have I loved, 'but Esau have I hated.

2. In respect of discriminating grace in effectual vocation: and this in
pursuit of and equal latitude with the former peculiarity of election, Romans 8.
30. These are (...), verse. 28. called according to his purpose. That this GRACE
is given to all, is an assertion so contradictory to the whole current of
Scripture, that, I profess, I have often wondered, that it should have any
abettours amongst wise and considerate men. Had the Gentiles this? whom God
suffered to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. and who want the Gospel, and
the preaching of Christ, and so consequently are without a possibility of
believing in an ordinary way; for Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard? Have all within the sound of the Gospel this? No
surely: for Christ says, Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee, O Father, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes. God gives grace sufficient to all men, to leave them without excuse, and
vindicate his judicial proceedings against them from all charge of injustice;
but that God gives all sufficient grace to elicite supernatural acts of faith,
and other graces in order to eternal salvation. I cannot believe, so long as
that discriminating Text is upon record in the word, Matthew. 13. 11. To you it
is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given. And while Scripture peculiarizeth this grace, and determines it to the
same latitude with divine purpose and election; God has called us, says the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 9. (...), according to his own purpose: therefore there can
be no universal grace without universal election; because the actual bestowing
of converting grace is the issue of election, Ephesians. 1. 3. (...), Who has
blessed us with spiritual blessings, according as he has chosen us before the
foundations of the world.

3. In respect of a peculiar providence of God; whereby he takes care of and
watches over his peculiar people: God exercises an universal providence over
the world, Psalm. 36. 6. he preserves man and beast; but he has a special care
of his own people; and thus, I conceive, you must understand that text 1 Cor.
9. 9. Does God take care for oxen? that is, not comparatively to the care he
has of his people. When judgments are upon the rest of the world God has
then a special care of his Peculiar, God calls his people his hidden ones,
Psalm. 83. 3. that look as you hide your jewels in time of plunder; so God hides
his peculiar by his providence in times of danger. Thus he hides Noah in the
Ark, when a deluge overwhelmed the world; and secures Lot, when fire from
heaven destroyed Sodom. David was confident of this special providence of God;
In the time of trouble, says he, he shall hide me in his pavilion, in the
secret of his Psalm. 27. 5.
tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me upon a rock: and so elsewhere he
says, Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from Psalm. 31. 20.
Psalm. 143. 9.
the pride of man: and, Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies I fly unto thee
to hide me. God hides good Josiah, lays him up under ground (as many do their
plate and jewels in time of war) safe from 2 Kings 22. 30.
the evil to come. He hides Jonah in the Whales belly from the rage and fury of
the waters. Observe Deuteronomy. 32. 9, 10. For the Lords portion is his people, he
found him in a desert land, in the wast bowling wilderness: he led him about,
he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.

4. In respect of peculiar audience and acceptance. They have, as the hand of
God to protect them, and the heart of God to love them, so the ears of God to
hear them. The eyes of the Lord are upon the Psalm. 34. 15.
righteous, and his ears are open to their cry, says David. As God has an
open hand to relieve them, so an open ear to hear them: whereas the wicked of
the world find God turning a deaf ear to their prayers; Prove. 15. 8.
they are but abominations unto him: If I regard iniquity, says David, Psalm.
66. 18. the Lord will not hear me. Quantum a praeceptis, tantum ab auribus Dei
long sumus, says Tertullian. If you ask the English of it Solomon gives it,
Prove. 28. 9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer
shall be abomination. But now, memoria praeceptorum viam orationibus sternit
in caelum, as the same Father goes on. Obedience procures us audience in the
court of heaven, as the Allegiance of a subject does in princes courts upon
earth. The prayer of the upright is Gods delight, Prove. 15. 8. These are Gods
peculiar favorites, therefore their petitions are heard, they have a friend
and Advocate at Court to put them up and present them, and a promise of
audience, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, Matthew. 21. 22.
ye shall receive. If at any time they miscarrie, it is by reason of the
unbecomingness of their petitions, either they ask what is not honorable for
God to give, or safe for them to receive; at least Jam. 4. 3.
not at present: or they ask amiss, as to the manner.

5. In regard of a peculiar covenant, which God has made with them: I mean the
covenant of grace. Indeed, all professing Christianity are, I conceive, within
the covenant, in respect of outward administrations and privileges; but the
benefits of the covenant, remission, justification, adoption, and the rest,
belong only to the elect-regenerate, Gods peculiar. The conditional covenant
is in the Ezekiel. 16. 8.
dispensation of the Gospel offered to all, and the grace of the covenant upon
the condition; but there are a peculiar people in behalf of whom God has
undertaken for the working of the condition in them, as well as bestowing the
benefit upon them, Jer. 31. 33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make
with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord: I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. Thus, I think, it may be safely expressed, The
covenant of grace is tendered to all, the grace of the covenant given but to
some. Gather my SAINTS together to me, those that have made a covenant with me
by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. Sacrifices were for confirmation of covenants.

6. In respect of peculiar chastisements and corrections. Daily observation
tells us, that God afflicts good and bad, but with a vast difference; he
afflicts his own people in a special peculiarity; these, as a father his
children; wicked men, as a Judge does a malefactor. Therefore, notwithstanding
what some of late have written to the contrary, I cannot submit to call the
afflictions of Gods people properly punishments, because they issue not from
pure justice, which was satisfied by Christ so far as vindicative, on the
behalf of believers: by which though afflictions and death it self were not
wholly removed, yet changed into chastisements and trialls. The afflictions of
the godly are sometimes the issue of the anger of a provoked father, and that
mixed with love: for, whom the Lord loves Hebr. 12. 6.
he chasteneth: but not the effects of his wrath as an incensed Judge. They
differ as much as a Lord's cudgelling his slave, or a Princes gibbetting a
rebel, and a fathers whipping his child. As Moses his rod, out of his hand a
serpent, in his hand a rod. To a wicked man afflictions are a cup of trembling,
fore-tasts of the vials of wrath: to a godly man but a cup in the hand of a
father (and though there John 18. 11.
may be some drops of the anger of a father in it, yet with an allay and
mixture of mercy and love) or a potion from the hand of our Physician who
intends our health. Augustine differenceth them, as a butchers cutting the
flesh, and the chirurgions doing it. God established it as his method of
dealing with Solomon; and so with all 2 Samuel 7. 14*
his people. And these chastisements are the badge and cognizance Hebr. 12. 7,
8.
of these peculiar ones.

7. In respect of that peculiar glory God has designed them to, which is the
portion only of his Benjamins. God, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. has not
appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. It
is your Fathers good pleasure, says Christ, Luke 12. 32. to give you the
kingdom: which Scripture calls (...), a kingdom prepared for them from the
foundation Matthew. 25. 34
of the world: laid out for them by Gods electing love; purchased and prepared
for them by Christ; they fitted and prepared for Joh. 14. 21. Coloss. 1. 12
Matthew. 25. 34
it by the sanctification of the Spirit; and at last put into possession of it
by Christ himself. This is the peculiar portion of those, who by God were given
to Christ, who will see to secure it to them: and Joh. 17. 24.
this glory is peculiarly laid out for some; and, if you would know to whom, S.
John tells you, Rev. 21. 27. to such as are written in the Lambs book of life.

II. This peculiarity appears in the undertakings of Christ: and here is a
fourfold peculiarity.

1. In respect of a peculiar covenant and stipulation with his Father, for the
bringing home such a peculiar people, given into his hands as Mediator; Lo, I
come to do thy will, O God, Hebr. 10. 7. God gave such a peculiar into the
hands of Christ, declaring his determinate will for their salvation: and to do
this will of his Father, John 6. 39.
Christ came to the earth, and submitted to all the conditions agreed upon, in
order to their recovery; All that the Father gives me, says Verse. 37.
he, shall come unto me. And this it it, which Divines call the Covenant
between the Father and the Son, as distinct from the covenant of grace made
between God and man.

2. In respect of a peculiar purchase, Gal. 4. 4, 5. To redeem them that were
under the law: (...); it signifies a purchase by price. Pray, observe that in 1
Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a peculiar people, (...): a
purchased people, it is in the margins of your Bibles: populus acquisitionis,
in the Vulgar. He lays down his John 10. 15.
life for his sheep: unbelievers are none of those sheep. It was his Church
only, which he purchased with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. Verse. 26.
Christ loved his Church and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. It is his
people only which he saves from their sins, Matthew. 1. 21. And where Christ is
said to die for all men, and for the world, you are to interpret it of all
sorts and conditions of men, of every kindred, Rev. 5. 9.
and tongue, and people, and nation; of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews, in
comparison of whom it is evident the Gentiles were called the world, as Romans 2.
15. And as to that middle reconciling opinion, so much contended for at this
time, that, Christ died intentionally for all upon the condition of believing,
and yet with a special intention, according to the determinate purpose of his
Father, of actual bestowing faith and salvation upon certain persons; it is, I
profess to you, to me (pardon my weakness) a most unintelligible thing, (Will
any wise man pay a ransom for a captive, and at the same time intend that the
captive shall have no benefit by it? It makes Christ's death to be in vain to
the greatest part of the world; whereas Scripture tells us, that not one soul
shall miscarry, John 10. 15. and shall any of those sheep finally miscarry,
compared with verse. 28.) unless it be asserted that the condition of faith be
in every man's power, either by his natural abilities, which is downright
Pelagianisme; or else by some supernatural grace given to all, which is
semipelagianisme, and both which the patrons of this opinion dis-own. For
Christ to die to establish a covenant with all men, upon an impossible
condition, is as much illusory, as if he had not died for them at all: for an
hypothetical promise upon an impossible condition is equivalent to a pure
negation, as any know who are the least acquainted with the principles of
Logic and Reason. And therefore (till I can see further light to the contrary)
I must think it most rational to proportionate the means to the end, and so
extend the death and purchase of Christ, to no greater latitude then to the
purpose of God, for the carrying on of which it was designed; unless it be
understood only of sufficiency of price.

3. In respect of a peculiar intercession. Christ's interceding at his Fathers
right hand is discriminate, Joh. 17. 9. I pray for them: I pray not for the
world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. And this I
humbly conceive to be a good argument a majori to prove the peculiarity of
Christ's purchase: for undoubtedly Christ would not have grudged the expense of
a prayer on the behalf of those, for whom he shed his blood; for, certainly,
Christ's intercession is in pursuit of his purchase; the effect of which is the
actual bestowing of what he here bought for them by his blood, viz. faith,
perseverance, which are the fruits of Christ's prayer, as appears by his speech
to Peter, Luke 22. 32. Now this intercession is determinate to a peculiar
people even to the elect, (and yet is of equal latitude with his death) who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is Christ that died, (says
the Apostle, Romans 8. 33, 34.) who also makes intercession for us. And
unquestionably had Christ given himself and now interceded for all, all should
be made partakers of spiritual saving blessings; for as the Apostle says Romans
8. 32. he that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us; how shall
he not with him freely give us all things? and John 11. 42. Father, I thank
thee, that thou have heard me, and I knew that thou hear me always, Non
dubito (says Vasquez) Christum peculiari oratione and voluntate In 1. qu. 23.
art. 5. p. 94. c. 3.
merita sua illis applicasse qui praedestinati and electi fuerunt: consonant to
this is Ioh. 17. 24. I will that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me, etc. they determinately, not others.

4. In respect of peculiar communications from Christ, which proceed from that
special relation which they have unto, and peculiar union with Christ, as
members to the head: for though there be a laying out of grace for some in
divine purposes, yet there is no effectual partaking of it, till actual
believing: for communion is founded in union, the bond of which is faith, Ephesians.
3. 17. by means of this union a Christian partakes of grace, of sense, motion,
growth, life, from Christ, as the head only communicates to the united
members, Christ is the Savior only of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23.

III. This peculiarity appears in the peculiar workings of the spirit, and here
is a fourfold peculiarity.

1. In respect of peculiar illumination. The Apostle speaking of the shortness
of natural light, as to saving discoveries, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 14. yet adds ver. 10.
but God has revealed them to us by his spirit, etc. so in that most excellent
Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. having said ver. 3, 4. that the Gospel is hid to those
that are lost, he adds ver. 6. an intimation of a special illumination
indulged to Saints: For (however he dealt with others) God, who commanded light
to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. David makes this an
argument in begging illumination of God, I am thy servant, says he, Psalm. 119.
125.) give me understanding. A wicked man may have much common illumination,
but such as vastly differs from the illumination of the Saints: those puff them
up with pride, these humble them; though I confess, this leaven is apt to
infect the best, as Paul 2 Cor. 12. 7. Notwithstanding those, the soul stands
at a distance and enmity from Christ, nay often apostatizeth from the profession
of him: but Heb. 6. 4.
these bring the soul effectually to close with Christ; Every man (says
Christ, Ioh. 6. 45.) that has learned of the Father, comes unto me. That Is a
head-floating illumination, this an heart-affecting illumination: that, like
the light of a glowworm, which has no heat in it, this like the light of the
sun warmeth and quickneth where it comes: it is called the light of life Joh.
8. 12. it provokes Saints to love God and to trust in God, Psalm. 9. 10. they
which know thy name will put their trust in thee. Common illumination in a
wicked man is like the sun shining upon a dunghill, calls out its stench and
corruption, whereas this illumination is a heart-changing and a life-reforming
knowledge. See Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22.

2. In respect of a peculiar sanctification so in the text, (...); that he
might purify unto himself a peculiar people: so Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost. Sometimes Gods peculiar
lie wallowing in the mire Ezekiel. 36. 25.
of sin a long time with the rest of the world, in the grossest pollutions,
till God by his grace and spirit sanctifies them to himself as a peculiar.
Therefore God promises in the Prophet his spirit, as clean water to sanctify
the people, I am sure so it was with the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. And
such were some of you: but how come they to be otherwise? why, ye are washed,
ye are sanctified by the spirit of our God. Christ is made Sanctification as
well as Righteousness 1 Co^. 1. 30.
to his people: Righteousness by imputation, Sanctification by powerful and
gracious energie, and operation.

3. In respect of peculiar sealing. Seals note propriety; we seal what is our
own. God sets the seal of his spirit upon believers, to note that propriety he
has in them; it is peculiar to such, Ephesians. 1. 13. in whom also after you
believed, you were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. So 2 Cor. 1. 21,
22. who has sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. It
notes that esteem God has of his people, (we do not use to seal up trifles but
jewels which we most value) and his special love to his chosen ones: Christ set
his spouse as a seal Cant. 8. 6.
upon his heart, the seat of love* thus you find out of every tribe a peculiar
number sealed to God, Rev. 7. 5. God seals none with his spirit, but whom he
has sealed with the privy seal of election, of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his.

4. In respect of special and peculiar communions with God, Ephesians. 2. 18. For
through him we both have an access by one spirit to the father: through Christ,
as Mediator meriting our access to God, by the spirit directing and assisting
us in our addresses to him: 1 John 1. 3. Our fellowship is with the Father and
the Son; a thing which wicked men are wholly strangers to; men in a natural
condition are described to be without Christ and God; that is, can have no
communion Ephesians. 2. 12.
with him, for, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16. What concord has
Christ with Belial? what communion has light with darkness? fellowship with
sin, and communion with Christ are inconsistent: all communion with God is
grounded in a covenant interest: by the fall man lost all communion with God,
and cannot be restored to it but through a Mediator, in whom we have interest
upon the account only of the covenant of grace: but wicked men are strangers
to the covenant, Ephesians. 2. 12. communion flows from union, now the spirit
being the bond of union must also be the means of Communion, (and this is the
Saints Peculiar, whose communion with God here, is mediate in Ordinances, in
which a wicked man enjoys nothing of Gods, which is the Saints privilege here,
as immediate Communion is their happiness and glory hereafter, sed quorsum
haec, may some say? This I shall endeavor now to show you, by some short and
plain Application.

First, It serves to silence those who rob God of his peculiar, or, at least,
of his glory in having a peculiar people: as those do, who assert the death of
Christ to have been equally intended for all; those, who lay all the success of
Christ's undertakings, and of grace offered, upon the arbitrary, uncertain
determination and compliance of man's fallible, nay, corrupted, will. By which
means it may come to pass, (nay, were it so, it would come to pass certainly)
that God should have no peculiar people: for the corrupt will cannot incline to
close with grace, till grace subdue the perverseness of it; or, to speak the
best, should God have a peculiar upon this account, he must account himself
beholding to man for it, who determined himself to accept of those offers, all
which would otherwise have been in vain and ineffectual. It would be most easy
to answer that question of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ?
or, What have thou which thou have not received? Lord, might the soul say, I
have this actual acceptance of thy grace offered, which I never received. But
Scripture has taught us the contrary language; It is God which works in us
both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. therefore we
cannot will before grace, because grace works the will. So to assert any
foreseen conditions in us, as the motives of God's eternal love, is to rob God
of the glory which he has of peculiarizing a people to himself; for, upon this
account, God did not choose us, but we him; whereas the Apostle tells us, 1
John 4. 19, We love God because he first loved us. God loves his people into
holiness, not because they were so, either in themselves, or in his foresight:
no, When I saw thee polluted in thy blood, behold, this time was the time of
love, says God, Ezekiel. 16. 6, 8. God could foresee no conditions as furure in
his people, but what his own will determined to work in them: and nothing could
move him to will it, but free and undeserved gr^^^ and love. So, those, who
assert the sufficiency of natural light to the salvation of the heathens, pull
down God's enclosure, and lay all in common, without any peculiarity of
privilege to those who enjoy the Gospel and Ordinances, which in the Apostles
judgment peculiariz'd the Jews of old, What advantage then has the Jew (says
he, Romans 3. 1, 2.) much every way, chiefly because that unto them were
committed the oracles of God.

Secondly, Let it be a warning to wicked men, to have a care how they in any
kind injure the godly: they are God's peculiar; he has a special care and
tenderness of respect toward them: all the injuries you do them reflect upon
God. Thou reproachest and revilest them, nick-nam'st and scoff'st at them, Isa.
37. 23, 24. but do thou think ^n the mean time that thou reproachest God by
this? Thou persecutest them, and do thou think by it thou persecutest Christ
himself? Acts 9. 4. Thou oppressest them, and do thou think that he that
touches them, touches the apple of God's eye? Zach. 2. 8. that is a part
sensible of the least offense; therefore (says God, Psalm. 105. 15.) touch not
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Let wicked men assure themselves,
that the godly, whom they persecute and butcher, will one day be thorns in
their sides, they do but kick against the pricks, as Paul, Acts 9. 5. What will
you do when God comes to make inquisition for blood? be sure God will avenge
the quarrel of his peculiar ones. God expresses his care and tenderness of his
people, by his carrying them upon eagles wings, Exodus 19. 4. It is observed of
the Eagle, that she only of all the creatures carries her young ones upon her
wings for their security, that whoever shoot at the young ones cannot hurt
them, but through her wings; wicked men cannot injure the people of God, but
they wound God himself; and will not God avenge the quarrel of his elect, which
indeed is his own? yes, he will avenge it suddenly, Luke 18. 7, 8.

Thirdly, This gives us an account why the world does not fall about the ears
of wicked men. God has his peculiar people, and some not yet gathered in: till
they be completed, the world shall endure. If there had been but ten of these
peculiar people in Sodom, God had spared it. So soon as Methuselah is dead,
then comes the flood. Godly men are the pillars of the world, which uphold it
from overwhelming wicked men: I bear up the pillars of it, says David, Psalm.
75. 3. God suffers the tares to grow for the wheats sake, Matthew. 13. 30. The
Saints are the security of the place wherein they live; Sodom was safe whilst
Lot was in it, Genesis 19. 22. Israel safe whilst Josiah lived, 2 Kings 22. 19.
Hippo could never be spoiled whilst Augustine lived, as Posidonius tells us in
his life: and Luther, it is said, while he lived, by his prayers kept of the
civil wars from Germany. Moses stood in the gap, and prevented the destruction
of the murmuring Israelites, Psalm. 106. 23. Phineas stays the plague.

Fourthly, Then censure not the godly, as guilty of unnecessary preciseness, or
affected singularity, if they be more scrupulous and strict, and fearful of
sin then others are. Wicked men strange at this, as the Apostle tells you, 1
Pet, 4. 4. They think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess
of riot, speaking evil of you. Beloved, if seriously weighed, it is no matter
of wonder; for they have peculiar engagements to holiness upon them: the
presence of distinguishing love to engage them against sin; as Joseph argues
from the special favors he had received from his Master, to the avoidance of
injuring him, Gen 39. 9. so Saints from determinating love. Christ has
redeemed me; and is not a redeemed bondslave under special engagements of
homage to his Lord? What, shall I wound my Savior by sin, who has already
been wounded for it? Besides, Saints are sensible of their engagements. No man
in the world but has sufficient engagement upon him to holiness, merely upon
the account of Creation, Providence, and common mercies; but their
insensibleness is the cause of their unthankfulness: but Saints live in a
meditation, and under a sense of mercy, thy loving kindness, says David, Psalm.
26. 3.) is before mine eyes. Their slips are more dishonorable to God, then
the sins of others. God's honor is wounded, and his ways reproached by reason
of their sins; therefore in tenderness to the honor of God, they are engaged
in a fear of, and watchfulness against sin; besides, they have a principle
within acting them to holiness: they have experience of the beauties of
holiness, and that peace which the practice of it brings in to them: and they
have more to lose then others by sin, the sense of Love, the smiles of a
Father, the light of God's countenance. They cannot sin so cheap as others can;
you may pardon them well, if they fear the loss of their peace, Divine Eclipses
and withdrawings; if they dread broken bones, which a David cries out of, Psalm.
51. 8. after a wilful sin.

Fifthly, Let this lay a threefold engagement upon Gods peculiar;

I. Unto thankfulness. Psalm. 135. 2, 3, 4. Ye that stand in the house of the
Lord, in the courts of our God, praise the Lord, for the Lord is good, for the
Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure.
Special praises should be the Echo of peculiar mercies. You may find the
Church magnifying Christ upon this very account, Rev. 5. 9. The Doctrine of
universalitie of grace destroys all thankfulness, unless to our selves; makes
all the sacrifices of praises needless, sacrificing to our own nets, applauding
the power and freedom of our own wills. It is discriminating grace will raise
the soul to thankful admirations of God, in that language of Judas (not
Iscariot) Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not
unto the world, John 14. 22.

II. To love; both to God, who thus peculiariz'd you, and to love one another.
However your heads may differ, let your hearts unite: you are Temples of the
same Spirit; spouse of the same husband; members of the same body, 1 Cor. 12
25, 27. and (what greater argument of love?) you are purchased by the same
blood, sanctified by the same Spirit, objects of the same special love; and, I
am sure, the Apostle from hence argues strongly for brotherly love: Beloved, if
God so loved us, (says he, 1 John 4. 10, 11.) we ought also to love one
another. You are eodem sanguine glutinati, as Augustine expresses it: and is
Christ divided? It is the check the Apostle gives to the uncharitable
dissentions of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 13. And lastly you are designed
for the same glory.

III. To special service for, and obedience to God. Discriminating mercies are
in all reason to be improved as arguments to peculiar services: (...) Matthew. 5.
47. What do ye more then others? as if he had said; more is expected from my
disciples, then from the Publicans; as your privileges are peculiar, so should
your services be too;

For,

1. This is the proper intendment of distinguishing mercy: the end of God's
peculiar dispensations to a person or nation. Observe what God says of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 26. 18. The Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people:
but to what end? that thou should keep his commandments. Has God
distinguished thee by Electing love? the end of it is thy Holiness: He has
chosen us that we may be holy, and without blame before him, Ephesians. 1. 4. Has
he peculiariz'd thee by Effectual grace and Vocation? It is that thou may be
holy, 1 Thessal. 4. 7. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto
holiness. Art thou Christ's by a peculiar purchase? the end of it is thy
Holiness, 1 Cor. 6. 20. For you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God
in your bodies, and in your spirits. Has God exercised any peculiar
providence toward thee? the end of them is thy obedience. The Psalmist having
spoken of all the Providence God exercised over Israel, infers this as the
just issue of them; That they might observe his statutes and keep his laws,
Psalm. 105. 45. So God's peculiar Covenant engages to Holiness, for it is
mutual. The end of God's peculiar Chastisements is his peoples Holiness, Hebr.
12. 10. God chasteneth, says he, for our profit: that we might be partakers of
his holiness. And then the hopes of that peculiar Glory we are designed to,
should engage to Holiness, 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope purifieth
himself. The special Sealing of the Spirit tends to this, that we be careful
that by sin we do not grieve him, Ephesians. 4. 30. so the end of Communion with
God is Holiness: what else makes the Angels and Saints in heaven more holy but
this? Thus you see, you frustrate the end of Mercy, if it does not make you
more holy.

2. It is the most ingenuous return of gratitude, which we can make to God for
his distinguishing love. Sins under mercies, as they have the highest guilt, so
are arguments of the greatest disingenuitie. What, Do you thus requite the
Lord? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Obedience is the best thankfulness: without which our verbal
returns for mercy are but a complement. The thankfulness of the life redounds
to the honor and praise of God in the world: and this God expects from his
peculiar people, if you consult that pregnant Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a
chosen peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has
called you, etc. Otherwise God is thus reproached by your sinfulness: "Yonder Is
a people who boast of being God's peculiar; do not you observe they live as
other men do? they can cheat in their shops, dissemble in their dealings, be
frothy and vain in their discourses, live in neglect of Familie-duties, as
deeply immersed in the love of the world, as compliant with every foolish
fashion, as ambitious of honor, as false in their promises as others, whom
they censure as of the world and cast-awaies. But now says Christ, Herein is
my Father glorified, if ye bear much fruit, etc. John 15. 8.

But how shall I know whether I be one of God's peculiar people, or not?

The Text is hemmed in with a double evidence, so that which purify goes
before, and zealous of good works comes after: so that inward Purity, and
outward Conformity, a pure Heart, and a holy Life, are the two special
Evidences of God's peculiar: for they are both the issue, and fruits of that
faith, whereby we have a peculiar interest in Christ, Acts 15. 9. Purifying
their hearts by faith; there is the former; and for the latter, Gal. 5. 6.
Faith works by love.

I. Then, art thou inwardly purified from spiritual pollutions? else thou art
none of God's peculiar as yet. Thou becamest mine, says God, Ezekiel. 16. 8. What
then? Why then washed I thee with water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy
blood, verse 9. Else thou art no branch engrafted into Christ, for every branch
he purges, John 15. 2.

II. Art thou holy in thy outward conversation? God's peculiar are an holy
people, Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2. For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and
the Lord has chosen thee to be a peculiar people. To pretend to a peculiarity
of interest in God, while men willingly continue wallowing in the mire of
iniquity, is a desperate soul-damning presumption. If you would lay any claim
to God's privie-Seal of Election, you must bring, and be able to show the
broad-Seal of Holiness. Mark how the Apostle joins these together, 2. Tim. 2.
19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows
them that are his: And, Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity: yea, and follow Holiness too. The Apostle speaks fully, 2 Corinthians. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. (...), in the Text, Zealous;
not cold or lukewarm, but cheerful and industrious in the practice of Piety;
and thus you may evidence your selves to be of that peculiar people, whom
Christ gave himself to redeem; so says the Text, Who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works.

FINIS.
THE UNHAPPINESS of the Wordly-Mans PORTION, Set forth in a Sermon preached in
S. Marie's Church in Cambridge, May 25. Anno Dom. 1654.

By JOHN FROST, B. D. and then Fellow of S. JOHN'S College in Cambridge, and
late Pastor* of Olaves-Hart-street in London.

Mundus iste periculosior est blandus, quam molestus: magis cavendus, cum se
allicit diligi, quam cum admonet, cogitque contemni. August. ad Diosc.

Quid vis utrum amare temporalia, and transire cum tempore: an mundum non
amare, and in aeternum vivere cum Deo? Aug. in 1 Epist. Joh. c. 2. v. 17.



CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

To the WORSHIPFUL CAPTAIN THOMAS OGLE, ESQUIRE, Increase of Grace, strength
of Body, and perfection of Virtue.
Worthy Sir;
SInce it is thought fit by some, at the importunity of many, that these
Sermons should come forth in public: I have attempted to Dedicate the same to
you, in respect of your many favors, and my obligations. You were pleased to
honor the Author with the tuition of your firstborn, Mr. Ashfield Ogle, the
excellency of your strength, the hopes of his country, the delight of all
that knew him; who prevented his Tutour in the heavenly glory, but he soon
followed after him: and, I trust, as they often conversed and prayed together
here on earth, so they are now together praising God, and singing Halleluiah in
heaven. Sir, the title to these is not unfitly yours; for you are one of those,
whose portion is not in this life only: but you have a glorious inheritance
reserved for you in the heavens, through the free grace of God our Savior, who
came into the world to save sinners; to whose grace I commend you, and your
virtuous Consort, and resolve my self,

SIR, Your Worships in all due observance, JOHN FROST.

PSALM 17. 14. Which have their portion in this life.
THat there is a providence watching over the world, ordering, and disposing
the events, and seeing to the management of things here below, has been, and
is as universal an acknowledgement, as that there is a God. But the
mysteriousness of Gods outgoings in his providence has often occasioned the
Atheism of some, and the distrust of others: especially in that
seeming-unequal distribution of these temporal blessings with a full and
liberal hand to the worst of men, whilst the best have no other portion carved
out for them, but the bread and water of affliction; as if God had no regard
unto the world, but all events happened by careless chance and fortune. Scarce
any Question troubled and perplexed the ancient Philosophers more then this;
Quare malis bona, and bonis mala eveniunt? Why the worst of men often enjoyed
the best of the world? this occasioned the Stoics Fate, and Epicures Atheism:
this made some of them call in question the Justice, others quarrel with the
Providence, a third sort to deny the Being of God. To consider that Licinus was
entombed in a stately marble, grave Cato confined to a strait and narrow
sepulcher, valiant Pompey laid in none at all, made them draw this inference,
Credimus esse deos? shall we think there are any gods? which Lipsius says were
affectuum voces, non judiciorum. Lips. Manud. ad Philos. Stoic.
Nay, the Scripture tells us how this has often occasioned doubtful repining
distrusts in, and shaken the faith of the best of Gods Saints. Jeremy desires
to enter a dispute with God concerning the righteousness of his judgments in
this particular, Jer, 12. 1, 2. which hence appears to have been his weakness
and infirmity, because in the midst of this distrust he acknowledges Gods
justice in all his proceedings. With this Job seems to be dis-satisfied, and
under a present temptation to question God, Job 21. from verse. 7. to verse. 16.
and the Prophet Habakkuk, chap. 1. v. 13. and David, that man after Gods own
heart, was often assaulted with this temptation to distrust, upon consideration
of the flourishing estate of many wicked in the world, Psalm. 73. from verse. 2.
to the 8. to consider that they were not plagued, v. 5. and he plagued all the
day long, verse. 14. This tempted David to three great miscarriages;

First, to conceive of piety and holiness, as an useless, vain, unprofitable
thing, verse. 13. when he saw piety persecuted, and wickedness enthroned.

Secondly, To uncharitable rash judging of the Saints, v. 15. intimating his
temptation to say so; so apt are men to judge the straightest staff crooked in
the water, and the most upright Saint hypocritical, when afflicted.

Thirdly, To question providence, ver. 11. as if the eye of God could not see
these disorders in the world, and permit them; so liable is the faith of the
best to weakness and infirmities: which David could not conquer, till he went
into the Sanctuary of God, and understood the miserable end of wicked men,
whatever seeming happiness they enjoy here, v. 17, and that their portion was
only in this life, as he says here in the Text; which words may fall under a
threefold consideration.

1. As the ground of David's prayer for deliverance from his enemies, v. 13.

2. As the matter and support of David's comfort, under the persecutions of his
enemies: that though Saul (upon whose persecution this Psalm was penned, says
Musculus) flourished and oppressed him here, yet he had but his portion in this
life, and David though at present persecuted and afflicted, supported himself
by the expectation of his future glory, ver. 15.

3. As a description of the misery of wicked men, amidst all the pomp, and
glory, and enjoyments of the world; while they are the worlds darlings and men's
envy; while set upon the pinnacle of worldly greatness, here is their misery and
unhappiness, they have their portion only in this life.

It is a miserable thing for men to have their portions only in this life.
Doctrine.
In prosecution of which I shall do four things.

First, I shall show that wicked men have often the greatest portion in the
world.

Secondly, How it comes to pass that they have so, to vindicate the justness,
and equity, and wisdom of Gods providence in ordering it thus.

Thirdly, Upon what accounts it is a miserable thing to have it so.

Fourthly, I shall improve all in some short inferences, or brief application.

First, To show that wicked men have often the greatest portion in the world: I
need not speak much to this, the experience of all ages since the beginning of
the world confirms it, your own observation, I believe, can seal to it;
how-ever Scripture abundantly evinces it. The first murderer that ever was,
carries possession in his very name: Cain signifies so much; Genesis 4. 8. Go on
in the whole series of Scripture, and you shall find Joseph persecuted by his
brethren; Esau (as Rivet observes on Genesis 32.) advanced in the world for a time
far above Jacob; go on, and you find the Israelites Gods peculiar in
captivity, and Pharaoh upon the throne; Saul ruling, and David in a cave, or
in a wilderness; Job upon the dunghill; Jeremy in the dungeon; Daniel in the
den, and the Children in the furnace, and Nebuchadnezzar on the throne. In the
new Testament you have Felix on the bench, S. Paul at the bar; Dives in the
palace, Lazarus at his gates: Luke 16. 19. he clothed in purple, Lazarus in
rags, and overspread with sores; he banqueted and fared deliciously every day,
the other desired but the crumbs from the table and could not have them; Dives
beset with his rich and stately attendance, Lazarus has no other society but
the Dogs which came to lick his sores, v. 21. all which Austin and Tertullian,
lib. 4. against Marcion, conceive to be a true history of what was really
acted, though others think it parabolical; Job tells us that the tabernacles of
robbers sometimes prosper, Job 12. 6. which prosperity he at large describes,
chap. 21. from v. 7 to v. 14. exalted in power, v. 7. multiplied in their
posterity, v. 8. 11. safe at home, v. 9. increased abroad, v. 10. have their
fill of pleasure, v. 12. and wealth at will, v. 13. David speaks his own
experience of this, Psa. 37. 35. Psa. 73. 7. So in the Text, they enjoy not
only common favors, as air to breath in, earth to walk on; but the treasure
of the world, the riches of nature: their bellies are filled with his hid
treasure, and that not for themselves only, but for their posterity too, they
leave the rest of their substance to their babes, in a word they have their
portion in this life.

Qu. But who are these wicked men? Ans. In a word, Those who haxe a full
affluence of the world and these earthly things, and yet are such as the
Apostle describes Ephesians. 2. 12. strangers to the covenant of grace: who can say
that estate is mine, and that honor mine, and those lands are mine; but cannot
upon any ground say, God is mine, Christ is mine, the covenant is mine, you
have them drawn to the life, Luke 12. 21. such who have the world for a
portion, but cannot say with David, The Lord is my portion.

Secondly, They have a portion here upon a five-fold account.

1. As the issue of that universal providence, which God exercises in the
world, to which every creature owes its being and provision; they are clothed
by the same hand of universal providence, which arrays the lillies, nourished
by that bounty, which feeds the ravens, and supplied from that hand, which
when God opens, he fills every living thing with good. Psa. 104. 28. God will
look to his whole creation, as a Lord provides for his meanest slave, though he
intends him not the inheritance. The whole world lives at Gods charges and
allowance, as he is the Sovereign and universal Lord; and to the worst of men,
for whom he has not resolved and laid out the inheritance of sons, yet he
gives them a portion here, as they are creatures. That is the first account.

2. As the result of that patience and long-suffering, which God (while he
expects their return, and solicites their repentance) exercises toward the
worst of men: For though God sometime to demonstrate the just demerit of every
sin, his hatred of it, and severity against it, and the more effectually to
awaken and deter others from the imitation of it, strikes a sinner in the act
of his iniquity; of which Ananias and Sapphira for their sacrilege, Corah and
his company for their rebellion, the children for mocking the Prophet, 2 Kings
2. and Herod for his pride, Acts 12. are sad Scripture in stances; yet it is the
more usual method of Gods proceedings, to demonstrate that he waits to be
gracious, and that mercy pleases him, and by his long-suffering to lead them
to repentance, Romans 2. 4. Romani non ideo tanti quod religiosi, sed quod impune
sacrilegi, neque enim potuerunt in ipsis bell is deos adjutores habere,
adversus quos arma rapuerunt; Arnob. advers. Gent. p. 226. And to show that our
sins wrest the arrows of his judgments from his hands, he lengthens out his
patience to sinners, during which time he often makes them an honorable
allowance in the world, the more powerfully by outward favors to win them to
himself; or if not, to render them the more inexcusable, while by despising
that patience and goodness, they treasure up into themselves wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. As a Judge often designs a fair allowance for a
condemned malefactor, while reprieved by his mercy, till the day of execution,
and provides that he starve not in prison. Thus wicked men, though now
sentenced and condemned (for, he that believes not is condemned already, says
our Savior, Joh. 3. 18.) God gives them a portion in this life, to maintain
themselves till the day of death, and execution by his justice.

3. As the issue of that universal goodness and mercy, which God demonstrates
to his whole creation: for, The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works, Psalm. 145. 9. From hence it is that he causes his sun to
shine upon the good and bad, Matthew. 5. 45. And God often does wicked men good by
these outward blessings, while the enjoyment of them prevents many sins, which
want and poverty might betray them to: and they, as being of a fordid, base,
mercenary spirit, are often bribed by these to give God an outward observance, to
abstain from many sins, and to comply with an outside Religion, for fear of
forfeiting their enjoyments by the severer judgments of God, or some stricter
Laws of the Land; and dum fortunam amittere metuunt, nequitiam derelinqunt;
which is the account profound Bradwardine gives of Gods providence in this
Bradw. p. 281
particular, that hereby they might be encouraged to a compliance with
Religion, if not out of love, yet out of interest; if not for love of virtue,
yet for fear of loss and punishment, which is the most ordinary principle of
men's Religion; for though meliores sunt quos ducit amor, yet plures sunt quos
corrigit timor, says Austin. It is more ingenuous to obey God out of love, but
more common to serve him out of fear: thus if nor love to Christ's person, nor
his doctrine, yet desire of the loaves will procure Christ many followers. You
shall often see wicked men complying with Religion outwardly upon carnal
interest, and for worldly advantages. As a dissembling lover covets the portion
more then the person; so do men court Religion, to get or keep their portion in
this life.

4. As the effect and issue of Gods remunerating justice. There is none so
profligate, or debaucht, but has something though not of spiritual, yet of
moral and civil goodness, as rewards to which God lays them out a portion here,
to demonstrate that love God bears to all goodness wherever he find it. The
Pharisees hypocrital prayers and fastings have their reward here, Mat. 6. 5.
Ahabs counterfeit humiliation protracts the threatened judgment, 1 Kings 21.
29. Iehu's false zeal is recompensed with a kingdom for four generations, 2
Kings 10. 30. So Ezekiel 29. 18, 19, 20. Nebuchad-rezzar had his reward for
serving against Egypt. The Heathens morality, in Austin's judgment, brought
them in a double Aug. de Civ. Dei.
advantage; first, of a lighter punishment hereafter; for mitius erit, the
furnace is made hotter for a Cataline, then a Cato, or Aristides: and then with
outward temporal prosperity here; for he imputes the Ibid. l. 5. c. 12.
glory, magnificence, state, and largeness of the Roman Empire to those moral
virtues, wherein they excelled other Nations, as love to their country,
liberality, divitias honestas volebant, justice and equity, not enervating
their minds, or emasculating their bodies by sordid pleasures, and the like:
quibus moribus meruerunt ut Deus verus, quamvis non eum colerent, eorum augeret
imperium: for these the true God (though nor worshipped nor acknowledged by them)
enlarged their Empire and dominions. In a word, as God sees in the best of men
some sins to punish and purge, for which he lays them out affliction in this
life; so he often finds some good in wicked men, for which, not as the merit of
that good, but as a demonstration of his love to, and to give encouragement to
goodness, he gives out to wicked men a portion in this life.

5. As the means of good and spiritual advantage to Gods own people, which next
to his own glory God designs as the end of all his providential dispensations
in the world. They are all for the trial, instruction, exercise, and comfort
of Gods people; so is this particular providence of God, in distributing to
wicked men a portion in this life, and that in these particulars.

First, As it is a just encouragement to them to go on cheerfully in the ways
of God upon an assurance of a better portion in another life; which David seems
here to respect v. 15. as if he had said, If they have their portion here, I
shall certainly have it hereafter, when I shall behold the face of God in
righteousness. And certainly, if God rewards the shows of goodness in wicked
men with a portion in this life; shall he not reward thy real holiness with
glory in another life? if those who are prodigalls, who run away from God, have
the husks to fill them; shall not thou have bread in thy fathers house? If
Jehu's zeal, Ahab's humiliation, the Pharisees prayer and fasting, though all
but counterfeit, go not without their reward in this life; shall thy true zeal
for God, hearty repentance for sin, fervent prayer for mercy not be rewarded
hereafter? Look as those afflictions, which the Saints suffer here, are sure
and sad arguments of that eternal wrath and destruction, which the justice of
God shall deal out to wicked ungodly men hereafter, as the Apostle evidently
argues, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. (Saints, the Jews were wont to compare to green
trees, as the wicked to dry trees, as our Savior argues, Grotius in Luke 2^.
31.
Luke 23. 31. if the Saints (and it is the reason Boethius gives, why wicked men
sometimes are permited to persecute the godly, ut exercitii bonis and malis
esset causa supplicii) be cast into the furnace of affliction, dry trees,
wicked men, shall certainly be fuel for eternal flames.) so the earthly
happiness of the wicked may give the godly assurance of everlasting happiness
in another life. Let me bespeak you as did Christ his disciples, Luke 12. 32.
fear not little flock; if the dogs have the crumbs under the table,
questionless the children shall have bread. They may divide the kingdoms of
the world: well; be assured, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a
kingdom in another. It is an excellent observation of Calvin upon Gods
rewarding the Rechabites obedience, Jerem. 35. 19. Scimus, says he, Deum saepe
mercedem rependere umbris virtutum ut ostendat sibi placere virtutes ipsas. God
often recompenseth the shadows and seeming appearances of virtue to show that
complacencie he takes in, and ample rewards he has reserved for true and
sincere piety.

Secondly, As it is a demonstration of the worthlessness, and vanity of these
earthly things: and so alienates and estranges their affections to them.
Parcius solent piis contingere, quo magis illis rebus honos and pretium
detrahatur, says Grotius. Hoc est propositum Deo, ut Grotius in Math. 6. 33.
sapienti viro ostenderet haec, quae vulgus appetit, and reformidat, nec bona
esse, nec mala, the heathen Seneca gives this account of Gods providence, it is
his meaning and design to demonstrate to good men, that those afflictions,
which the world so much fears, are not evil, seeing God often lays them upon the
best of men, nor those enjoyments, which the world with so eager desires
pursues, absolutely good, seeing they are often given to the worst, apparebunt
enim bona esse, si illa non nisi bon is viris tribueret, and mala esse, si
malis tantum irrogaverit; afflictions would appear as absolutely in themselves
evil, should wicked men only feel them, and the world as chiefly good and
desirable, should good men only enjoy it. But this consideration, that the
worst of men have often the greatest portion of the world, how may it deaden the
Saints affections to, and quench all intemperate heates of desires after the
things of this world, and teach them to undervalue and disesteem those pearls,
which they often see cast before swine. Nullo modo potest deus concupita magis
traducere, S^neca, page 387.
quam si illa ad turpissimos defert, ab optimis abigit, says the heathen
Seneca.

This providence of God may most powerfully work in us a disaffection to these
earthly enjoyments. How should this pull down the towering and ambitious
thoughts of men; to consider that cruel Neroes, ungodly Caligulaes, apostate
Julians, have often their crowns and Scepters? How should this take of all
immoderate covetous cares for the world, to consider that the fool in the
Gospel had his full barns? And this should teach Christians to abhor that
foolish affectation of delicious fare, and costly arrayment, to think that
Dives, now roaring in hell, in his life time enjoyed both these in abundance.

Thirdly, As it is an occasional means of trying his peoples grace, and
heightning their glory. Datur occasio majoris meriti and coronae, is the
account Lessius, in his tract de providentia numinis, gives of this Providence
of God. Had no persecuters, no Neroes, no Caligulaes ever flourished, the glory
of the Martyrs patience, faith, and constancy had been obscured. As Jacob
discovered the sincerity of his affection to Rachel, that he continued to love
her, notwithstanding all the hard usage he endured for her sake: thus the
luster of the Saints meekness and humility shines through those reproaches and
scandals, which the world casts upon them; they are all but foyles to set of
the beauty and glory of Christians graces. The portions of wicked men in this
life, are especially trials of the sincerity of a Christians affection to God,
and love to holiness; whose soul can burn in a holy flame of divine love,
though not fomented, nor cherished by the fuel of outward prosperity. That is
the hottest flame, which is increased by its contrary cold; thus is the flame
of true love augmented by an Antiperistasis of crosses and afflictions. It is a
kind of spiritual simonie, not love, which must be bribed by these outward
enjoyments. And as this tries their grace, so it adds to their glory: Quanto
plus tormenti, tanto plus erit gloriae, says Seneca. The persecutions of the
Heathen Emperors added new pearls to the Martyrs crowns: and the Apostle
assures us, that the light afflictions which the Saints suffer here, (whilst
wicked men often flourish) do work out for them a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Thirdly, Wherein lies the misery of that man who has his portion only in
this life. It appears miserable from Scripture; Luke 6. 24. But woe unto you
that are rich; for you have received your consolation. So, Woe unto them that
are at ease in Zion, etc. Amos 6. 1. and so it must needs be upon a six-fold
account.

I. Because he has no real satisfaction in this portion, as to his better
part. He vexes and disquieteth himself to get and preserve his portion, and
when he has done all, he grasps the wind, and courts vanity: he is filled
with nothing but emptiness: he shall not feel quietness, Job 20. 22. And being
without God, who is the only rest and center of souls, he is as far from true
satisfaction, as from real happiness. The Gospel brands him for a fool, who
dreamed of a requiem to his soul from his full barns, Luke 12. 20. Where there
is satisfaction, there must be suitableness and proportion; and that cannot be
between the world and the soul: therefore dis satisfaction is entailed upon the
fullest enjoyments of the world, if you believe Solomon, He that loves silver
shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase:
this is also vanity, Eccles. 5. 10. Now I appeal to you, how sad is it for men
to have souls made capable of an enjoyment of God, and happiness in eternity,
and yet to enjoy nothing but a dis-satisfying portion in this short and vain
life. Methinks, the soul of man is like Noah's dove: a wicked man's soul is like
the dove out of the Ark in a constant motion and ever restless; but a pious
soul is like the dove returned to the Ark, taking up its rest in God. And
herein is the excellency of a Christians portion, though he has nothing in
the world, that whereas the greatest portion of the wicked worldling brings
himin nothing but vanity and vexation, a Christian inherits full satisfaction
in his portion, as David adds ver. 15. I shall behold thy face in
righteousness: there is his, and every Christians portion, viz. the enjoyment of
God. and then see the satisfaction entayled upon this portion, When I awake
(says he) I shall be satisfied with thy likeness.

II. Because he enjoyes it without the love of God. His portion argues not the
truth of Gods love to his person; for being out of Christ, God accepts him not:
Ephesians. 1. 6. it is in the beloved only that our persons are accepted: nor does
it speak Gods approbation of their ways, the holiness and purity of his nature
permits not that. What comfort is it to enjoy the world with the frowns and
displeasure of God? what comfort in corn, and wine, and oil, without the light
of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. 7. The sense of the love of God sweetens the
least enjoyment and portion in the world: pulse and water are delicious fare
with these. Thy loving kindness is better then life, says David, Psalm. 63. 3.
Life is the coupler and cement of all our earthly portions; all is gone, if
life be gone: it is the love of God that sweetens that. The greatest portion in
the world must needs be uncomfortable without this. For a man to have enlarged
and full barns, and with all to have an angry God summoning him with a Stulte
hac nocte, how terrible is it and uncomfortable? Yet this is the case of all
those who have their portions only in this life.

III. Because he enjoys it without interest in Christ: through whom only it is
that our earthly portions become true comforts and real blessings, He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with
him also freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32. Then they are blessings indeed,
when they are given us together with Christ; and thus Christians enjoy their
earthly portions, as appurtenances to Christ, as entails upon the Covenant, as
(...), or (...), as an accession or overplus, as Grotius comments on Matthew, 6.
33 (...), to you, who seek first the kingdom of heaven, who have an interest in
Christ. How uncomfortable is it to enjoy a portion here, without a part and
portion in Christ? look, as interest in Christ sweetens the worst crosses and
afflictions of a Christian, (Christ being as the tree was to the waters of
Marah, Exodus 15. 25. he removes the bitterness of afflictions; or as the honey
in the belly of the lion, Judges 14. sweetning the most devouring affliction):
so the greatest portion of the world without Christ is a real curse to a wicked
man, who (I do not say they have no just right or title to their portions here:
for to found Domion in grace, is to leave the world to very uncertain Owners,
and is the principle of oppression and confusion) enjoys no portion in a
comfortable manner. Christ is the conveyance even of temporal blessings, when
enjoyed in a sanctified manner, All things are yours, and you are Christ's, with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23. And, truly, to enjoy all things without Christ,
is nothing; it is to enjoy the husk without the grain; the shell without the
kernel; the bone without the marrow; the casket without the jewel; the field
without the pearl; and thus do all wicked men enjoy their portions in this
life, who, as the Apostle describes them, are without God and Christ in the
world, Ephesians. 2. 12.

IV. Because he enjoys no true real comfort in his portion in this life. Some
counterfeit contentment, and seeming forced joy and delight he may have in his
earthly enjoyments: but we may truly say, as Solomon does, Eccles. 2. 2. What
does it? it profits nothing; this comfort is neither true, nor lasting.

And that,

1. Because of the mixture of some crosses, and many cares, which wound and
pierce the soul through with many sorrows, as the Apostle assures us, 1 Timothy 6.
10. Vexation of spirit is entailed inseparably upon this earthly portion:
Vexation in the procuring of it, Eccles. 2. 22, 23. What disquieting plottings
and contrivances to get this portion? and when he has it, how disquieted is
he, and distracted, and divided between care to keep, and enlarge it, and fear
to loose it? besides, how often does some outward cross embitter his portion. As
the Saints in their greatest afflictions have their lucida intervalla,
comfortable refreshings, intervals of joy and comfort, ( Prove. 10. 22. The
blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it): So he
that enjoys the most full portion in this life, meets often with that cross,
which robs him of the comfort of his enjoyments; as the rich man's summons,
Luke 12. dampt his joy in his full barns.

2. Because of the sting of conscience: which if once awakened, gnaws, and
secretly eats out all the comfort of his earthly portion, whose secret
suggestions and whisperings in the fullest enjoyments, often surprizeth, and
fills the soul with sadness and horror. The handwriting against Belshazzar
makes him tremble amidst all his carouzes in the cups of the Temple, Dan. 5. 5,
6. Judas threw away the thirty pieces, Matthew. 27. 5. no comfort in them when
summoned to the tribunal of conscience as guilty of the blood of Christ.
Multos fortuna liberat poena, metu neminem, says Seneca. What Tacitus Senec.
ep. 98. Tacit. Annal. lib. 6.
says of Tyrants, is true of all wicked men, Si recludantur mentes, posse
aspici laniatus and ictus. Though God reprieves wicked men from present
execution, yet they are often disquieted with inward fear: this vultur at the
heart preys upon their inward comfort, and thus in the midst of laughter the
heart is sorrowful, Prove. 14. 13. and the greatest portion in the world is no
more solace or comfort, then a velvet slipper to a goutie foot, or a crown to
an aching head.

3. Because of the secret curse of God, which is entailed upon a wicked man's
portion in this life; what ever he enjoys he has the curse of God going along
with it; has he a fair estate? that is a curse to him, Deuteronomy. 28. 17, 18.
Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Has he plentiful
and delicious fare and provision? this is accursed too, Job 20. 23. When he is
about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and
shall rain it upon him while he is eating: This curse appears sometime in the
insensible wasting, and decay of his portion; that the rich worldling puts
money into a bag with holes, Hagg. 1. 6. and it runs out he knows not how:
sometimes by blasting their comfort in them, stopping them in their most eager
carrier, and hottest pursuit of the world; and when they have riches, they have
no heart to use them, which Solomon takes notice of as the greatest vanity of
the world, Eccles. 6. 2. It is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich, Prove.
10. 22. From this it was that Daniel's countenance, after ten days living with
pulse and water, looked fairer and fatter, then those who eat the portion of
the kings meat, Dan. 1. 15. So on the contrary it is the secret curse of God
which blasts a wicked man's portion in the world; we read Levit. 16. of two
goats, the goat for the sin offering, and the scapegoat; the first sacrificed
to God, the other dismissed into the wilderness with all the sins and curses of
the children of Israel upon his head: Origin, after his usual manner,
allegorizing on that Orig. Hom. 9.
place, makes these two goats representations of good and wicked men: the
godly, being often sors Domini, are martyred and persecuted, but by it they are
made an acceptable sacrifice to God; the wicked (qui sunt de hoc mundo) the men
of the world, are set at liberty, have their freedom, and enjoy enlargement in
the wilderness of the world, but laded with their own sins, and the curses of
God upon their heads. And how miserable is this for the Israelites to have
Quails, and the wrath of God overtaking them, while they were eating them?
Numb. 11. 32. for men to have their tables richly spread with dainties, and
that table to become a snare to them, must needs be Psalm. 69. 22.
miserable: and yet thus it is with all those who have their portions only in
this life.

V. Because he enjoys it to his real hurt and mischief. It was that sore evil
which Solomon observed under the sun, that riches were kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt, Eccles. 5. 13: Periculosissima est felicitatis
intemperantia, says Seneca. Dives est aliquis malus? habet sibi in curam,
angorem, ruinam, says the same Author. Wealth is the worldlings vexation
here, and ruin hereafter.

A wicked man's portion in the world tends to his mischief four ways.

1. As it estranges him from God. We read of the Prodigal, Luke 15. that when
he had got his portion, he ran away from his father into a far country, and
spent it in riotous living, v. 12, 13. so does the portion of wicked men here
set them at a distance, and enmity to God; and truly nothing sooner alienates
men's souls from God and goodness, then a great portion in the world. The devil
offered this as a suitable temptation to prevail with Christ himself, Matthew. 4.
9. All these things, etc. He has kept this as his reserve, as his last
temptation; if this will not do, he knew his other assaults would be to little
purpose. It was a seasonable admonition which Moses gave to Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.
10, 11, When thou have eaten, and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy
God for the good land which he has given thee, etc. there was great danger
that the milk and honey of Canaan might make them forget God, and again, Deuteronomy
6. 12. Beware, lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. And this is none of the least
mischiefs of that portion wicked men have in this life.

2. As it betraies them, and lays them open to abundance of sin: their worldly
abundance is but fuel to their lust, exalts them in pride, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 73. 5, 6. As Alexander's victories caused him to subscribe
himself, The son of Jupiter; it heightens them into contempt and forgetfulness
of God, According to their pasture, so were they filled: they were filled, and
their heart was exalted: therefore have they forgotten me, Hosea 13. 6. It often
makes them more hardened at heart, and resolved in sin; and with Pharaoh to say,
Who is the Lord that I should obey him? Exodus 5. 2. It makes them unfruitful
under the means of grace, as Luke 8. 14. the seed that fell among thorns is
expounded of them that are choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of
this life. It betraies them to idleness, as you may see it did Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.
49. Common experience tells us that is the mother, and nurse of all impiety;
God knowing this, often (as a wise Physician opens a vein to prevent a disease)
cuts short his own people as to their portion in this world, lets them blood in
their estates and honors, to prevent in them those sins, which the wicked man's
abundance solicites and betrays him to.

3. As it imbitters every affliction, and makes death more terrible O death!
how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions? to a man that has nothing to vex him, and has prosperity in all
things? O death, acceptable is thy sentence to the needy, Ecclesiasticus 4. 1,
2. which place though I dare not adopt into Scripture, yet I dare take it for a
certain truth. Affliction disquiets him, and death terrifies him; he is
building Tabernacles here, and enlarging his barns, and hugging his present
enjoyments in this life, quam solum suam vitam putant, qui aeternam desperant,
says Augustine upon my Text. And, truly, they must needs tremble to part with
their portion in this life, who despair of getting any portion in another.

4. As it increases his woe, and undoes his soul to eternity. The prosperity
of fools shall destroy them, says the Wiseman, Prove. 1. 32. The abuse of his
earthly portion will render him the more inexcusable Romans 2. 4.
at the last day: and how sad is it to treasure up the world, and wrath
together? As it is comfortable for Christians to consider that all their
afflictions here will increase their future glory, when every tear they have
here wept shall turn into a pearl to beautify and enrich their crown: so it is
miserable to think how the wicked man's present prosperity shall afterward
increase his misery. That Is a terrible place, Revel. 18. 7. How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her:
the very remembrance of which will be part of hell to him. How will that strike
him to the very heart, Luke 16. 25. Son, remember that thou in thy life time
receivedst thy good things, etc? and that is the last account I shall give you
of this man's misery, who has his portion only here.

VI. Consider the miserable portion such a man shall have in another life which
Scripture acquaints us with, Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares,
fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their
cup: and it is parabolically expressed in Mat. 24. 51. He shall be cut asunder,
and his portion appointed him, etc. then shall he wish he had gone without a
portion in this world; then shall many an unjust Ahab curse the day that ever
he had any thing to do with a Naboth's vineyard. Then shall many an Ananias
and Sapphira curse the day in which they enriched themselves by Sacrilege;
when those hands shall burn in eternal flames, which here fingred that fuel
which should have kept the fire alive upon the Altar. Then shall an unjust
Felix curse his bribes, and oppressors their extortion, covetous worldlings
their usurie, and cunning Merchants their gains, their cheats and over-reaches
in trading. And, how miserable do you conceive their case to be? when many a
Dives, who here is arrayed in purple and silk, shall there lie down clothed and
enwrapped in flames: when many who here inhabit the stateliest palaces, shall
there dwell with everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. when many who here fare
deliciously every day, shall then with Dives call for, and that in vain too, a
drop of cold water, Luke 16. 24. when many who here chaunt to the sound of the
viol, as in Amos 6. 5. that take the timbrel, and the harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the Organ, as Job describes them ( chap. 21. 12.) shall have no other
music, but the weepings and howlings, and gnashing of teeth of damned
wretches. This miserable portion of wicked men is that which Scripture often
suggests to us, as the account of God's providence in dealing them out a
portion of the world here, and as a means of conquering all distrustful
repinings: to this Job refers us, chap. 21. 30. The wicked is reserved to the
day of destruction: they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath: and David
Psalm. 37. 35, 36. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself
like a green bay tree: yet he passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought
him, but he could not be found. David overcame his temptation, when he went
into the Sanctuary, and understood the end of these men, Psalm. 73. 17. that God
had set them in slipperie places, and so being the higher, they were in danger
of the greater fall, verse 18, 19. and that their present happiness was but as
a dream, verse 20. short and deceitful. Give me leave to allude to that place,
Genes. 48. 13, 14. when Jacob was to bless Joseph's sons, Joseph set Ephraim on
his left hand, and Manasseh on the right; but Jacob on the contrary laid his
right hand on Ephraim, and his left on Manasseh: many who are here set on the
right hand of the world, enriched with the greatest blessings it can afford,
shall at the last day be set on Gods left hand, and be dispatched with that
sentence; Go ye cursed, Matthew. 25. 41. and those whom the world sets on her
left, as scorned and contemned, shall be found amongst those on Gods right
hand, who shall receive the blessing, and the kingdom of their Father, verse.
34. I hope this is sufficient to clear up the providence of God, and to
demonstrate the misery of wicked men, having only a portion in this life. I
beg leave to illustrate all with a relation out of profound Bradwardine; and so
I shall conclude ^radw. l. 1. c. ^1.
this doctrinal part. The relation is of a certain Hermit, who was tempted to
blasphemy, as conceiving the judgments of God unjust, in that he saw the
wicked prosper, and the righteous afflicted: in which distrust there appeared
an Angel sent from God to him in the shape of a man, bespeaking him thus,
Follow me (says he) and thou shall see the hidden judgments of God: whom the
Hermit obeying followed to the house of a very religious man, who received
them with much courtesy all night, they departing the next morning the Angel
took away a cup which the good man much affected, and gave it to a very wicked
man, with whom they lodged the next night; the third night they were received
by a very godly man, whose servant the Angel in the morning drowned in the
well; the fourth night being entertained courteously by a very religious host,
the Angel slew his child, at which the Hermit much wondering desired to
depart, the Angel told him he was sent from heaven to discover to him the
hidden mysteries of providence: I took away the cup from the first man, because
his affections were too much set upon it, I gave it to the wicked man ut
mercedem suam recipiat in praesenti, that he might have his reward here in this
life; I drowned the servant of the third host, because he had it in his heart
to kill his master; so I preserved the godly man from death, and the ungodly
man from committing that sin, by which means he is less punished in hell; I
slew the fourth man's child, because before he had a child, be gave many alms,
therefore I took away the child, and carried that into heaven, and so removed
the occasion of the good man's covetousness. I hope the reverence of the Author
from whom I borrowed it, and the congruitie of it to my present subject will be
sufficient Apology for the length of this relation: it acquaints us with the
end and design of God's providence; he sometimes cuts his own people short in
the world to prevent their sin, to cure their corruption, to alienate their
affections from the world, and often gives to the worst of men, that they may
have their reward, their portion only in this life.

Application.

Have the wicked often a portion in the world? then,

First, Take hence an assurance of a future judgment. Wicked men have their
portion here: but the justice of God permits not that it should be always well
with them; his goodness here lays them out a portion, but his justice will lay
them out hereafter a punishment: I have Commission to assure the righteous it
shall be well with them, how-ever they fare here, Isa. 3. 10. and to speak a
woe to the wicked, for it shall be ill with him, how prosperous soever his
condition be here: For the reward of his hands shall be given him, ver. 11. God
has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness, Acts
17. 31. not then to correct the obliquities of his present providential
proceedings (for Gods will being the first rule and adequate measure of
rectitude, his way must be just, when most secret) but to clear up the equity
of them to the world, to vindicate them from that challenge and imputation of
injustice, which the ignorance, infirmity, or malice of men might here lay upon
them, then all those mysterious providence, which men are apt here to quarrel
with, and censure as not just and equal, shall be unveiled and discovered:
therefore the Apostle calls it (...), Romans 2. 5. The day of the revelation of
the righteous judgment of God: then as the Prophet Malachy says, chap. 3. 18
we shall clearly discern between the wicked and the righteous; though here often
through the promiscuous, mysterious dispensations of God, we cannot difference
him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

Secondly, Let Christians learn hence to live by faith. This is one end of Gods
dealing out a large portion of the world to wicked men, while his own people
are in want and afflicted, to teach them to wait by faith and in dependence
upon God for that portion he has treasured up for them in heaven. God suffers
the bricks to be doubled in Egypt, that so his people might the more long for,
and by faith live upon the promise of Canaan. A Master or Lord pays his slave
his present wages, while he cuts his son short in his allowance during his
nonage, that he may learn to depend upon his father for the inheritance. Thus
does God, the great Lord of all, deal with his slaves, who serve him for the
hire of some temporal advantage, he gives them their present reward, and wages;
but though his goodness has determined a better portion to be a reward to the
piety and obedience of his children; yet he gives it them in reversion, little
in hand, that they may learn to live upon the promise, and by faith to depend
on the goodness and faithfulness of their Father for their heavenly
inheritance; that they walking not by sight, but faith (which is a Christians
work and condition here) may not look at the things which are seen, etc, 2 Cor.
4. 18.

Thirdly, Envy not wicked men their portion. This is David's inference, Psalm.
37. 1. Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against
the workers of iniquity: for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and
wither as the green herb: and more fully, Psalm. 49. 16, 17. Be not thou afraid
when one is made rich; when the glory of his house is increased: for, when he
dies, he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him: thou
shall go out of the world as rich as he, and much more happy: and verse. 18.
Though whiles he lived, he blessed his soul: and men will praise thee when thou
do well to thy self: he will have little reason to boast of it in another
life; it is but a fools paradise he is in here, and falsa felicitas ipsa est
major infelicitas, says Austin. His conceived happiness ushers in his greater
misery. August. in P^al. 30. 1.
I would envy that man no more, then I would a reprieved malefactor, whom I
see gratifying his palate with the most delicious fare, or having his way to
the gibbet strewed with roses, who merits pity, not envy.

Fourthly, This should teach Christians contentedness with whatever allowance
they have in the world; it is a wicked man's portion, a Christians viaticum, S.
Paul had learnt this lesson thoroughly, Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have learned in
whatsoever state Iam, therewith to be content. And, truly, Christians have all
the reason in the world to learn contentation; while, though others have the
many things of the world, thou, with Mary, have the better part; though poor in
the world, yet rich in faith, therefore heir of a kingdom, Jam. 2. 5. That,
though accounted (...), the offscouring of the world, yet one of Gods jewels,
Malach. 3. 17. If thou have none, or a small portion in the world, yet if thou
can say, The Lord is my portion, with David, thou have reason to be
satisfied. Seneca brings in God answering the discontents of virtuous men thus,
Illis bona falsa circundedi, and animos inanes velut longo Sene^a page 389.
fallacique somno lusi: I have given them (meaning vicious men) these
counterfeit good things, and they lie in a deceitful short dream of worldly
happiness; auro illos, argento, and ebore ornavi, intus nihil boni est; they
are outwardly adorned, but inwardly defiled, and abominable; at vobis dedi bona
certa and mansura; but you have the true and permanent good; non egere
felicitate felicitas vestra est; it is your happiness that you stand not in
need of these worldly things to make you so. Check then ( O Christian) the
rising discontents of thy soul from the want of the world, as Elkanah did the
repinings of Hannah for her want of children, 1 Samuel 1. 8. Is not thy portion
in God better to thee ( O Christian) then ten, then a thousand portions in the
world: thou may say as David did, Psalm. 16. 6. The lines are fallen to me in
pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.

Fifthly, Hence, Christians, learn submission under the losses, and patience
under the crosses of this world. Justis quidquid malorum ab iniquis dominis
irrogatur, non est paena criminis, sed virtutis examen, Aug. lib. 4. cap. 3. de
Civ. Dei.
says Austin: omnia mala exercitationes putat. Crosses are but trials of his
patience and constancy. It Is no wonder to see wicked men repining and
desponding at the loss of earthly things, they are their portion, they look for
no other; but Christians should learn patience and submission, as the
deportment which is most suitable to their hopes of a portion in another life:
Every man that striveth for the masterie is temperate in all things: now they
do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible, Romans 9. 25. Upon
this future portion when Moses had fixed his eye of faith, he chose afflictions,
scorns the profits, and disrellisht the pleasures of the world; as you may
read in Hebr. 11. 25, 26, 27. (...), he had respect to the recompense of
reward: and David here comforts himself with this, ver. 15. As for me I will
behold thy face in righteousness, etc.

Sixthly, This regulates our judgments concerning true happiness: we are very
apt to mistake here. As Samuel viewing the beauty and stature of Eliab, would
have him anointed and the crown 1 Samuel 16. 6, 12.
set on his head; when yet God had designed the kingdom for little despised
David at the sheepfold: thus are men apt to set the crown of happiness on
those, who are most enriched, and highlyest honored in the world, and think
those the only happy men: when yet in truth, if wicked men, they are most
miserable, as having their portion only in this life. Therefore David seems to
correct his judgment of happiness, Psalm. 144. 15. Happy is that people whose
God is the Lord.

Seventhly, This may instruct our charity, and teach us to do good to our very
enemies: it is but to write after Gods own copy, who often gives the worst of his
enemies a portion and Alms here: and our Savior urges this as a motive and
incentive to our charity, and a pattern for our imitation, Matthew 5. 44, 45.
I say unto you love your enemies, etc. that ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven: for (...), children, is read in some copies (...),
like, as Grotius observes; which intimates Gods universal goodness displayed in
his general providence, as a pattern and rule for our charity even to our
enemies.

Eighthly, This discovers that rotten foundation, upon which many men build
their hopes of heaven. Surely. (are many ready to argue) if God did not love
me, he would not give me such a portion in the world: deceive not thy self in a
matter of so great concernment, Thou may as well say God loved Judas, because
he had the bags, or Div^s because he fared deliciously, who is now roaring in
hell. No, these earthly things are but the crumbs, which God does often cast to
the dogs, as Luther says the whole Turkish Empire is no more; the husks which
the swine feed on: take the judgment of the wisest of men, Solomon, and you will
see the rottenness of this foundation, Eccles. 9. 1. no man knows love or
hatred by all that is before them.

Ninthly, Let this awaken us all to a serious trial and examination of our
selves this day, whether we be of the number of those who have their portion
only in this life: the greatest part of the world are of this sort. But you will
say, Indeed this is worth enquiry into, but how shall a man discern and know
this. I answer; If you examine these three things.

I. How came thou by that portion in the world which thou have? or, How have
thou increased it? Art thou exalted upon the ruins of others? Have thy
advancements in the Church come in by Simonie? or is thy estate increased by
fraud oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor, by rapine, extortion,
cheats, and overreaching in thy trading? have thou possessed a Naboth's vineyard
by violence? I must take the boldness to say as Nathan to David; Thou art the
man: without repentance and restitution, (and truly the first will be but
counterfeit and hypocritical without the other; we read Zaccheus, Luke 19.
restored four-sold) thou art the man that have thy portion only in this life.
O my soul come not thou into their secret, Genesis 49. 6.
who by injustice and deceit hoard up a portion in this life, with the loss and
forfeiture of their eternal inheritance: and thus it is Jer. 17. 11. As the
partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches,
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a fool.

II. Examine thy affections. After what does the violence of thy desires run?
upon what is thy delight fixed? what sads and disquiets thy soul most at the
loss of it? whatever that is that is thy portion. It is a standing rule of
trial, which our Savior lays down, Matthew. 6. 21. Where your treasure is,
there will your hearts be also. Men's hearts and affections will discover what is
their portion. God was David's portion, Psalm. 119. 57. how did David discover
this? by his longing and breathing after him, Psalm. 42. 1. above what ever was
either in heaven or earth, Psalm. 73. 25. by his delight and rejoicing in him;
all the increase of corn and wine, and oil could not fill David's soul with so
much gladness, as one glimpse of the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. 7. and
nothing filled his soul with so much sorrow, as the loss and with-drawings of
God, Psalm. 42. 4. and, Has God forgotten to be gracious, and shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure? Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9. But now you shall see quite
contrary affections in that worldling, Luke 12. 18, 19. his plottings are how
to enlarge his barns, his souls requiem, joy, and delight is taken up in these
worldly enjoyments. Ahab is displeased and sad, if he cannot have Naboths
vineyard, 1 Kings 21. 4. Haman is enraged for want of Mordecai's bowed knee,
Esther 3. 5. Portio cujusque dicitur, in quo felicitatem suam quisque locat,
says Calvin: and do not most men's carking-care for the procuring innordinate
delight in the enjoying, distrustful fear of loosing, and repining sorrows for
parting with the world, speak that it is their portion, and their happiness?

III. What use and improvement do you make of your earthly enjoyments? are they
cords of love to God? engagements to obedience? encouragements and enablements
to do God more service? Do thou rejoice in them as giving opportunities to
do more good to others? Can thou say they are arguments and motives with thee
to walk cheerfully with God? They are thy viaticum to a better inheritance;
but if thou usest, or rather abusest, thy riches to luxury and riot, thy power
to tyranny and oppression, thy beauty as a bait to uncleanness, thy learning in
patronage of error and opposing the truths of God? If thy worldly enjoyments
draws thee from thy obedience to God; as fat pastures make beasts more unruly?
If with Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. thou waxest fat, and kickest against God; sadly
think of it, without repentance thou art the man, who have thy portion only in
this life. The sum then is, whoever gets his earthly portion unjustly, affects
it inordinately, uses it unfruitfully and ungodlily, he is the man, whose
misery it is to have his portion in this life.

Tenthly, Christians, prize your portion. Though you have little or no portion
in the world, there is an excellency in a Christians portion above what is to
be found in the largest portions of the world, which wicked men enjoy.

Eleventhly, Let us all seriously set upon it this day, to treasure up a
portion to our selves in another life: to take our Saviors advice, Matthew. 6.
20. to lay up for our selves treasures in heaven. To you especially I speak,
who have the largest portion in this world: none so apt to neglect the thoughts
and care of heaven, as those who have most upon earth, as being immersed in
worldly pleasures, and on every hand beset with temptations to sin, and
solicitations to forget God. Luther was wont to resolve, se nolle sic satiari,
that God should not put him off with an earthly portion. That you may get a
portion hereafter, take these directions.

First, Make it your first and chief business to lay up a portion in heaven.
It Is the most compendious way to get a portion in the world, Matthew. 6. 33. Seek
ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; You will be every way
gainers by it even in this life; for all these things shall be added unto you,
cast in as an addition and overplus, (Solomon had riches and honor cast in as
an additional overplus to that wisdom he asked of God) or else the sanctified
use of thy little portion in this life, and, as in Prove. 15. 16, Better is
little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith:
and Prove. 16. 19. Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, then
to divide the spoil with the proud. Thou shall have the world so far as it is
good for thee, and that little thou have shall be filled up with the blessings
of God here; and in the other life too: Godliness has the promise of both: 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come: of the one absolutely, and the other
conditionally.

Secondly, Live suitably to the nature and expectations of a portion in another
life, that is, holily: without this holiness no man shall ever see the face of
God, Hebr. 12. 14. and that is the portion of Saints hereafter, as appears verse.
15. after my Text, David opposing this to that portion the men of the world
have in this life.

Thirdly, Get a portion of grace here treasured up in your hearts: Psalm. 84.
11. The Lord God is a sun and shield, the Lord will give grace and glory: not
one without the other, all the glory in the world without grace will not
entitle us to glory hereafter: Let us then labor to make sure of God as our
portion in this life, that in another life he may be our exceeding great reward.

FINIS.
SALVATION BY CHRIST The Sum of the GOSPEL.

A Sermon preached in S. Benedict's Church in Cambridge, May 27. 1655.

By JOHN FROST, B. D. then Fellow of S. JOHN'S College, and late Preacher in
Olaves-Hartstreet in London.

Luke 19. 10. The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.
Nulla causa veniendi Christo Domino, nisi peccatores salvos facere: Toll
morbos, and toll vulnera, and nulla erit causa medicinae. August. sermon. 9. de
verb. Upon.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie, Anno Dom.
MDCLVII.

1 TIMOTHY 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
NOne can set an higher estimate and value upon mercy, then those who have the
deepest sense of their own sin and misery. Christ is more precious to none,
then to souls who have been truly humbled for sin. The revelation of
Gospelgrace is not so acceptable to any, as to those who see themselves
condemned by the Law. Thus S. Paul here reflecting upon his former sins, ver.
13. how does he exalt the mercy of God, and the grace of Christ, ver. 14.
(...), as if he wanted expression? and that Gospel-doctrine, That Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners (of which he now saw himself to be the
chief) which the Jews scoff at, the Greek counts foolishness, the Atheist
derides, the Pharisaical Justiciarie undervalues, to him is (...) and (...),
the most acceptable message, etc. Which words in their relative consideration
seem to refer to ver. 12. as a vindication of his Apostleship and Ministry from
that prejudice and calumny of those, who objected his former persecution, and
blasphemy to him, as a charge upon his present Ministry. The Apostle first
acknowledges the charge, ver. 13. and secondly, he asserts both right to, and
abilities for the Ministry to be from God, ver. 12. and thirdly, he lays down
the reason of Gods dealing thus with him, ver. 13, 14. and lest perhaps some
might think this false, or impossible; 1. he demonstrates the truth of his
conversion by the fruits and effects of it, Faith, and Love, ver. 14. and, 2.
the possibility of it from the general end of Christ's coming into the world,
which was to save sinners, (...), which word signifies notorious, infamous
sinners; that is in the Text, This is a faithful saying, etc. That Is the
coherence of the words, in which observe three things;

First, A preface, (...), This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance.

Secondly, A Doctrine or proposition, (...), Jesus Christ came into the world
to save sinners.

Thirdly, The proof of the proposition by a Particular accommodation to
himself, (...), of whom I am chief. And his example was, as he tells you; ver.
16. a pattern of that mercy, which God through Christ would manifest to other
sinners.

In the Preface four things are held forth.

I. The truth and certainty of the Gospel. (...), which is the same with (...)
or, (...): an expression much used by the Apostle, quoties aliquid magni
momenti adfert, cui fidem adstruendam putat, as Heinsius observes. The Apostle
uses it here, to secure Christians from those doubts which their own hearts,
or false Apostles, or justiciaries, or legalists might object against the
certainty of man's salvation by Christ. Is dignus, cui fides habeatur ut qui
fallere non potest, says Beza.

II. The worth and excellency of Gospel-revelation. That Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners is (...), a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance. (...) Sermonem non quemvis, sed eximium, and selectum declarat,
says Beza; a choice truth the sum and substance of the Gospel.

III. That esteem, and entertainment, which the Gospel deservedly calls for
from Christians. It is not only (...), that is, non tantum sententia vera, sed
digna quae fiat plurimi, says Grotius: not only a true sentence, but most
worthy also of our highest esteem and valuation: and not only so but (...)
worthy of our acceptance too. (...) is aliquid avide arripere, says Musculus;
as a poor man will money, or a hungry man his meat. Nay further, the Apostle,
by all means endeavoring to provoke us to an entertainment of the Gospel,
said it is (...), ut nihil relinquat quod sit avidius acceptandum quam
Evangelium Dei de peccatorum all at a salute per Christum, says Musculus on
the place. So that imagine the greatest, and most ready entertainment any
thing in the world meets with from carnal hearts, gold to the covetous, etc.
the Gospel deserves a more ready welcome from Christians, as being (...),
worthy of all acceptance.

IIII. A Paradox to reason; and ideo Apostolus seria illa obtestatione Gerard.
in loc.
utitur, says Gerard.

Secondly, In the proposition observe.

I. The person who came, (...), Jesus Christ, the eternal son of God.

II. The place whither, (...), into the world, a valley of tears, a stage of
misery.

III. To what end, or wherefore, he came, (...), to save. For God sent not his
son into the world to condemn the world: but that the world through him might
be saved, Joh. 3. 17.

IV. The persons whom he came for, (...), s^nners; and those not Angels, but
men, etc. Each word heightens the mercy of Christ, and should provoke us to an
effectual entertainment of that Gospel which reveals Christ's coming into the
world to save sinners.

I shall sum up these into this Doctrine,

The Gospel (of which this is the sum, that Jesus Christ came into Doctrine.
the world to save sinners) is a most certain truth, and most acceptable
doctrine. In prosecution of which I shall endeavor to show,

First, That the promised Messiah is already come into the world.

Secondly, That Jesus Christ, whom we acknowledge, and profess, is that
promised Messiah.

Thirdly, The importance of that phrase, Christ came into the world; what that
implies.

Fourthly, That the design of Christ's coming into the world was to save sinners.

Fifthly, How Christ carried on this design: or, in what respects Christ may be
said to save sinners.

Sixthly, Why it was necessary Christ should come in order to this end, viz.
man's salvation.

Seventhly, Upon what accounts this is and ought to be a most acceptable
doctrine.

I shall be brief in the two first, as knowing I speak to Christians: only
suggest some things to strengthen your faith.

And first, That the true Messiah is come appears upon a fourfold 1 Party.
account.

I. Because all those cities and places, in which Christ was in order to the
fulfilling of the prophesies in the old Testament, to be born, brought up, and
manifest himself in, are long since ruined, and utterly demolished. He was to
be born at Beth-lehem: But thou Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that
is to be ruler in Israel, Mic. 5. 2. He was to dwell at Nazareth, to come into
Jerusalem, Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem;
Behold, thy king comes unto thee, etc. Zech. 9. 9. And that while the second
Temple stood, the glory of which upon this only account was prophesied by
Haggai to be greater then the glory of the former Temple, because of the person
of the Messiah in it, Haggai 2. 7, 9. Add Malachy, who lived in the time the
second Temple was built, and was Mal. 3. 1.
contemporary with the Prophet Haggai. But now all these cities are ruined, and
which is a clear evidence the Messiah is come, the second Temple destroyed, and
Jerusalem demolisht by the Romans.

II. The ceasing of the Jewish polity and commonwealth: which was not to be,
till the coming of the true Messiah, according to Jacob's prophecy, Genesis 49.
10. which the Ancient Jews themselves understood of the Messiah. Per quem
CHRISTI ADVENTUM non est intelligenda Christi nativitas, stetit enim respublica
Judaeorum, Molin. Vates p. 289.
and firmam aliquam politiam habuit per annos septuaginta duos post Christum
natum; sed per adventum Christi intelligimus manifestationem Christi per
Evangelium; By which coming of Christ, we must not understand Christ's birth,
for then there was a commonwealth of the Jews, which had too some kind of a
settled polity for seventy two years after Christ was born: but we understand
by the coming of Christ the manifestation of him by the Gospel: in which sense
it is said Matthew. 10. 23. ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel till
the son of man be come. The power of life and death was taken from them in Idem
de disciplina and instructione Judaeorum.
our Saviors time, as appears by their own ingenuous confession to Pilate,
John 18. 31. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according
to your law; the Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death. Romani Judeae praefectos habebant, cogebant fidem homagii
praestare Caesari; numisma cudere illis ^ram. p. 91.
licitum non fuit.

I shall not dispute the punctual time when this Scepter departed, whether in
Herod's; or when Titus destroyed the Jewish State, which I must think most
probable, because then the gathering of the nations was to Christ, by the
coming in of the Gentiles: but this is evident, that that Polity is now
destroyed, and the Jews a scattered nation throughout the world.

III. The abrogation of the Jewish worship, and Levitical ceremonies. This was
prophesied by Daniel as one thing which should be by the coming of the Messiah,
In the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
cease, Dan. 9. 27. as wholly needless after the coming of the Messiah, whom
they typified and prefigured. God never intended the Jewish worship should
continue always, as being a heavy yoke, and, after the coming in of the
Gentiles (especially, as to the place of it) impossible, as Eusebius
demonstrates in the third chapter of his first book, De demonstratione
Evangelica. Moses himself spoke of another Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 18. who
should deliver from the bondage of sin to the heavenly Canaan; as Moses had
done from Egypt's; as a Law giver to the Gentiles, when the Jewish rites should
be wholly abolished; and prophesying and vision failed amongst the Jews, when
this great Prophet was come into the world.

IV. The heathen Oracles are silenced, and their idolatry destroyed; which was
to be at the coming of the Messiah, according to the prophecy of Zechariah,
And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord of hosts, that I will cut
off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be
remembered: and also I will cause the prophets, and the unclean spirit to pass
out of the land, Zech. 13. 7. and of Isaiah, And the idols he shall utterly
abolish, Isa. 2. 18. and, at verse 20. In that day a man shall cast his idols
of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to
worship, to the moles, and to the bats. And so it happened at the coming of our
Messiah, when Augustus, consulting the Oracle about his successor, received
this answer, (...), etc. An Hebrew child has bid me leave these shrines;
which Oracle Augustus having received, erected an Altar in the Capitol with
this inscription, Ara primogeniti Hottinger, p. 35.
Dei. Plutarch in his book, (...), de defectu oraculorum, concerning the defect
of the Oracles, confesses the thing, though he knew not the cause.

-- Delphis Oracula cessant, Juvenal observed in the time of Domitian; and the
rest decayed soon after.

Secondly, That our Jesus is the promised Messiah, appears,

I. From the evident fulfilling of all the prophesies of the old 2. Partic.
Testament concerning the Messiah in Jesus Christ the Messiah. He was to be
born of a virgin, Isa. 7. 14. Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son:
so was our Jesus, Matthew. 1. 23. And that too in the city of Bethlehem, Mich.
2. 2. But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands
of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in
Israel: and so was Christ, Matthew. 2. 11. brought up too in Galilee, Matthew. 2.
22. and he rode in triumph into Jerusalem, Matthew. 21. as it was prophesied of
the Messiah, Zech. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion, shout, O daughter
of Jerusalem, Behold, thy King comes unto thee, etc. There is not a passage in
the death of Christ, but was in answer to some prophesies of the old Testament,
his side pierced, as foretold by Zechariah, They shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, Zech. 12. 10. his drinking of vinegar, in Psalm. 69. 21. In my
thirst they gave me vinegar to drink: his crucifying amongst thieves, Isa. 53.
12. He was numbered among the transgressors: his death and burial, Isa. 53. 9.
He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death: yet so as
not to see corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor
suffer thy holy one to see coruption: but to be raised again, as in Acts 2. 25,
26. By the harmony of which events to the prophesies, the Gentiles were
convinced to leave their Idolatry, and to embrace the Doctrine and Gospel of
Jesus Christ: witness whole nations, whose conversion from a settled, inveterate
Idolatry, in a short time, without worldly power and force; no enticements of
pleasure or profit; no carnal means; in the face of fire and faggot, brought
over to the acknowledgement of a crucified Messiah, must needs speak God in it,
and must certainly be imputed to the care of God in fulfilling those
prophesies, which he that runs may read concerning the calling and coming in of
the Gentiles at the coming of the Messiah; see Isaiah 2. 2, 3. Jer. 16. 19.
Malachi 1. 11. Genes. 49. 10. all which evidently speak the truth of our
Messiah.

II. From those many miracles, by which Christ confirmed his Doctrine, which,
if you observe, are the very same, which the Prophet Isaiah foretells should be
wrought by the true Messiah, Isaiah 35. 5, 6. In reference to the fulfilling
which prophesies Christ bad John's disciples tell him, as an argument that
Christ was he which should come; that the blinds received their sight, etc.
Matthew. 11. 5. It was a rational conclusion which they made, John, 6. 14. when
they had seen the miracle of the multiplied loaves, This is of a truth that
Prophet that should come into the world: (...), a teacher (...). And far be
that blasphemy from the thoughts of any of our hearts, that these were done by
Magic, or the power of the devil; why did not his enemies accuse him of it?
especially when it was one condition in the judges of the Sanhedrim, that they
should be skilled in Hornbeck, page 234.
magic that they might detect and Judge others for it. For certainly, then
others, who envied Christ the glory that he got by these miracles, would out
of envy and emulation have learnt the same art, which yet no history makes
mention of, that ever I saw, or heard of. Nor were they done by the power of
the devil, for the manner of Christ's miracles were casting out of devils, and
Beelzebul could not cast out Beelzebul; and surely, Christ would have affected
privacie and solitude, if he had intended to have imposed upon the credulity
of the ignorant, who yet chose the most conspicuous places, and the greatest
multitude to work his miracles amongst, having often thousand eyes witnesses of
them. The Jews themselves can give no other account to a Pagan, why they credit
Grot. de veritat. Relig. page 222. etc.
the miracles of the old Testament, then the testimony of those that saw them:
the rapture of Elias, only upon the bare testimony of Elisha, 1 King. 2. 1. If
they will not give credit to the Apostles testimonies (though no reason why an
historical faith should not be given them) yet let them credit Josephus: which
the Jews say ^^s phus Antiq. lib. 18. c. 4.
cannot be found in their copies, and no wonder, Nam Judaei non habent Josephum
filius Malachiae, qui graves scripsit libros Antiquitatum de quo nos loquimur,
sed Josephum filium Gorionis, qui aliquid simile scripsit Hebraice, says
Bellarmine. And these things speak the Bellarm. de script. Eccles. p. 38.
truth of all these miracles, as he that was cured of his blindness argued with
the Pharisees, John 9. 30, 31, 32, 33. Why, herein is a mavelous thing, that
ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes: now we know
that God hears not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does
his will, him he hears. Since the world began was it not heard that any man
opened the eyes of one that was born blind: if the man were not of God he
could do nothing.

III. From that general expectation, which the Jews themselves had of their
Messiah to come into the world at that time, when Christ lived: which
expectations were grounded upon the prophesies of the old Testament, especially
upon Daniel the ninth, which occasioned a general conflux of the Jews from all
parts to see the event. That the Jews now expected their Messiah, is evident
from Luke 19. 11. So strong was this persuasion that the Messiah should appear
about this time, that, as Grotius observes, some took Gro^. p. 265. Hot^^ng. p.
12.
Herod to be him, whence the Herodians: others one Judas, whom they called
Bar-Cochebah, that is, the Son of a star, alluding to Numb. 24. 17. There shall
come a star out of Jacob, etc. some one, some another to be the Messiahs, by
which the Jews themselves subscribe to the truth of the Messiah. Though as
Vives observes, none before Vives, p. 491.
Christ durst profess himself the Messiah, yet the expectation was so general,
that the Heathens themselves had report of the Jews expectation of their
Messiah at that time, as both Tacitus and Suetonius relate. It was vetus and
constans fama, says Suetonius: which Hornb. p. 218.
they could not have but from the Jews computation, ex antiquis Sacerdotum
libris, says Tacitus. I might add further as confirmation of this
Gospel-doctrine the spotless holiness of Christ the Teacher; the exactness of
that holiness it requires; the repugnancie of it to interests, and carnal
designs (which speaks it no politic platform) the wonderful propagation of
it by weak instruments, and against strong oppositions, together with the
glory of that reward it promises to the obeyers of it; all which speak it to
be (...), a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. But this only as
a preface to the future discourse.

Thirdly, The importance of this phrase. 3. Partic.


This phrase does not speak,

I. Any local motion of the Divine nature: for that being infinite, and so
every where, is not capable of any local mutation; Venit per quod home erat,
nam per quod Deus erat, semper bic erat. August. Tom. 10. page 195. de verb.
Apost.
which is the property only of finite natures. Christ did not leave heaven,
when he came into the world: it is true, he is said, John 3. 13. to come down
from heaven, and to come from above, verse 31. Which is not to be understood,
as if he had brought his humane nature from heaven, as the Valentinians, and
Marcionists of old abused these places; for that was conceived by the power of
the Holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, the power of
the Highest shall overshadow thee. Nor yet must we understand it as by any
change of place: but either because his humane nature was produced not by any
earthly generation, but by a heavenly manner, or because of Christ's willing
submission, and humbling himself to take this nature upon him, and to appear in
the form of a servant, as he is said to do, Phil. 2. 7.

II. Not a real parting with any of his glory: for that being infinite and
eternal, as he was God, was as incapable of any diminution, as of any
accession: even then when he came into the world, and took upon him the form of
a servant, he counted it not robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. Indeed,
(...), verse 7. he humbled himself as to his Divine nature, not absolutely
confidered in it self, but in respect of that voluntary aeconomy and
dispensation, whereby he condescended to take upon him our nature, and the form
of a servant; but even then, when he was come into the flesh, the Apostle tells
you, he was God over all, blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. Achilde born, Isa. 9. 6.
yet the mighty God, Mich. 5. 2. noting his being before born, in those words,
whose going forth have been of old, from everlasting. But this phrase speaks
five things.

I. The pre-existence of the Divine nature: viz. that Christ was before he came
into the world. This is also hinted in other like expressions of Scripture; as,
first, that Christ was manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. which speaks that
he had an existence before he came into the world. see 1 John 3. 8. For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, and to name no more, 1 John 4. 23.
Hereby know ye the spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, etc. Hinc colligimus prius fuisse apud
patrem, quo ostenditur coaeterna ejus Divinitas, says Calvin upon this place.
The Socinians use many shifts to evade this argument for Christ's Divinity, as
that to come in the flesh is to appear in infirmity, misery, and contempt: but
though flesh in Scripture signifies sometimes weakness; yet to come in the
flesh, is never so used. Besides, the Apostle makes this an evidence of
believers, to confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: many unbelievers
saw and acknowledged that he lived without pomp, and worldly Majesty, in
poverty and infirmity. See Isaiah 53. 2, 3. A second like expression in
Scripture is, that God and man came to save sinners, which is from God, Mat.
16. 17.

Object. Yea, but Antichrist is said to come, 1 John 2. 18. and yet he does not
therefore exist before.

Answ. A lamentable shift, for Scripture must give light to Scripture: as the
Lamps in the Tabernacle were to be lighted by one another, according to the
Law. Our faith must be built upon the Analogy of Scripture, which in many
parallel expressions speaks Analogy and Parallel.
this truth: as Hebrews 2. 16. (...), He took on him, which must necessarily
include the pre-existence of that nature which did assume flesh: so S. John
tells you, That the word was made flesh, joh. 1. 14. and that that word was
from the beginning, and truly God, verse 1. And nothing in this point is more
clear then that saying of Christ's, John 16. 28. I came forth from the Father,
and am come into the world: again I leave the world, and go to the Father.

II. The asuming humane nature into unity of person and subsistence with the
divine, and so appearing in the world. This Scripture abundantly testifies
(though among the Socinian Doctors it be commentum hominum superstitiosorum) as
Heb. 2. 14. He was made partaker of flesh and blood, and verse 16. he took upon
him the seed of Abraham: and, the word was made flesh, John 1. 14. The humane
nature not existing before assumed, but assumed in the first moment of its
production by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, so that Christ took our
whole nature, body and soul, with all their Faculties, Properties, Affections,
nay, with all natural, though not Nihil minus habebat in natura, sed nihil
habebat in culpa; Aug. D. 106. Aug. ibid.
sinful, infirmities, that he might in all things be like his brethren, sin
only excepted, Heb. 2. 17. without conversion or confusion of natures or
properties. And in this nature thus assumed, Venit unus sine peccato, qui
salvos faceret a peccato, says S. Augustine, One came without sin, who might
save from sin. He appeared in the world, which is the great mystery the Apostle
speaks of, 1 Timothy 3. 16. namely, God manifested in the flesh: and by this
assuming humane nature, he was capacitated for that great design of his coming
into the world, which was to save sinners, in order to which, God required a
perfect obedience: therefore Christ is said to be made under the law, Gal. 4.
4. and Satisfaction by a price of blood paid; for without blood is no
remission, Heb. 9. 22. Both which were by the Justice of God to be performed in
the same nature, which had offended against the law, and so was liable to death
through sin.

III. Christ obscuring the glory of his Divinity by a veil of flesh. For
though, as I said before, he parted with none of his glory, yet he much
obscured it by our weak and miserable nature: though some rays of it broke out
sometimes in his discourses, and, especially, in his miracles, which often caused
the beholders to acknowledge him the Son of God; yet he seemed for a time to
have laid aside his Majesty, and Glory, while he appeared in the world
without form or comeliness. Therefore, when he was ready to leave the world,
see how he prays to his Father for a manifestatin of that glory, which here
was obscured in the world, John 17. 5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with
thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was:
where he prays not for any addition, or accession of further glory, but a
discovery of the glory of his Divine nature through that humane nature, which
he had assumed to himself.

IV. In taking upon himself a state of lowest abasement and humiliation. He
took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 7. and (...), quasi ex omni
seipsum in nihil reduxit, says Beza: and he became poor for our sakes, 2 Cor.
8. 9. Hic erat per divinam majestatem, venit per humanam infirmitatem, says
Augustine. He affected not earthly greatness and pomp, but declined it: and his
life, from the Cradle to the Cross, was but one continued scene of misery.

V. Christ's willing and ready undertaking for sinners. Coming is a voluntary
motion; Christ came into the world, freely, and willingly to undertake the work
of saving sinners. Assumpsit animam and carnem hominis, non antea a se
promerentis, nec ad illam percipiendam sublimitatem virtute propria laborantis,
sed omnino gratia, says Augustine. He was not merited, or pre-engaged, but out
of his love he gave himself, as the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of
the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. He was not forced to it,
but came freely, John 10. 18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down
of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again,
etc. Indeed, he is often said to be sent of his Father, John 3. 17. God sent not
his Son into the world, to condemn the world: and Gal. 4. 14. When the fullness
of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman; but it was by a
voluntary consent in Christ to the council and design of God, decreeing Christ
to the office of a Mediator: therefore, Acts 2. 23. it is said by Peter to the
scoffing Jews, Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel, and fore
knowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucisied and slain
him. Christ is said likewise to be sealed by the Father, John 6. 27. Him has
God the Father sealed: and to be sanctified and sent into the world by the
Father, John 10. 36. but it was by the consent and condescension of Christ,
offering himself as a Sponsor, and Mediator, and submitting himself to the
will of his Father, Heb. 10. 5, 7. Christ did voluntarily undertake for us, and
his submission to the Father was not an act of the Divine nature, but
voluntarily of the second person, willingly offering himself to his Fathers
justice, for the recovery of sinners: and therefore Christ is said often to give
himself, and that out of mere love, Ephesians. 5. 2, 25. This expression of coming
into the world does not only speak the event and issue, but the design, will,
and ultimate end of Christ's coming: quod non gravatum salvat, says Musculus,
that he did it freely and willingly.

Application.

First, This speaks infinite love; that God should send Christ, and Christ come
to undertake for sinners. God commends his love toward us, in that, while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5. 8. and, God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. Each word there heightens the
love of God, a Son given, a begotten Son, an only begotten Son, nay, a
welbeloved Son, as in Matthew. 3. 17. who was in the bosom of his Father, John
1. 18. that God should not spare his Son, Romans 8. 32. this must needs speak
love.

It was an argument of Abraham's love to God, that at his command he withheld
not his Isaac (Genesis 22. 2.) from God, who yet gave him, and had power to
command him again. But that God should give his Son to the wicked, ungrateful,
undeserving world, must needs speak a greater affection then that of Abraham's
and what can that be less then an infinite love? When Christ did but shed a
tear for Lazarus, the Jews collected his love from that: John 11. 35, 36. how
much more may we that Christ should come into the world to shed his blood for
us? This in^^eed is infinite love, etc.

Secondly, This speaks abundance of comfort to Christians. Is Christ come into
the world? has he taken upon him our natures then this speaks comfort to true
sincere Christians,

I. In case of their imperfect obedience, in case of their many failings and
imperfections. Why, Christian, do but maintain sincerity, and press on to
perfection, and remember that Christ has assumed thy nature, and in that
perfectly fulfilled the Law, and that obedience is made thine through
believing, and thou so accounted as righteous in the sight of God; which the
Apostle suggests as matter of comfort to Christians, Romans 8. 3, 4. For what the
law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and fox sin condemned sin in the flesh:
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. Christ in thy nature perfectly fulfilled the
law, and that for thee.

II. In case of outward affliction for Christ. Christ has taken thy nature,
and so is sensible of, and sympathizeth with thy afflictions. This was one end
of Christ's coming into the world in our nature, subject to many miseries, Heb.
4. 15. We have not an highpriest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin:
and this must needs be matter of comfort. Josephus tells us how that a part of
Joseph. l. 7. de bello Jud.
Rome being set on fire by the Jews, in which many of the Romans perished,
that this was their comfort, (...), to see Caesar, for whom they ventred their
lives, weep, as affected with their misery; surely, it must be much more solid
comfort for Christians suffering for Christ, to think that He suffers with
them. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? says the voice from heaven to him,
Acts 9. 4. and at verse 5. when he said, Who art thou Lord? it was answered, I
am Jesus, whom thou persecutest: yet was his persecution only against the
persons of the Christians.

III. Against fear of death. Art thou afraid to die? remember Christ has come
into the world, and has in thy nature tasted death, to deliver thee from the
fear of it; See Heb. 2. 14, 15. The tree cast into the waters sweetened them;
the consideration of the Cross and Death of Christ will sweeten death to a true
Christian.

Thirdly, This may instruct you in five great duties: or teach you,

I. A lesson of humility. Christ came into the world in a mean, low
condition^* in the form of a servant: the Apostle makes this use of it, ^iz. to
teach us humility, Phil. 2. 5, 6. Let this mind be in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus: who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, etc. Christ emptied himself, (...), verse 7. exhausit is Tertullian's
word by which he translates it: and art thou full, and bigg with pride? Christ
himself would have you learn this lesson from him, Matthew. 11. 29. Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.

II. Contempt of the world, and disaffection to outward pomp and greatness.
Remember thy Savior came into the world, and had not where to lay his head;
and when they would have made him king, he withdrew himself as scorning it,
John 6. 15. He was made poor for thee: this should teach thee to undervalue the
world; especially, if Christ calls for it; thou may know the world is little
worth, thy Savior so undervalued it. Thou should with Saint Paul count all
things loss for the excellency of Christ, Philip. 3. 8.

III. Cheerfulness in our obedience to Christ. He came into the world
cheerfully, and readily to undertake for thee. It was his meat and drink to do
the will of his Father, viz. in order to salvation: and how powerfully ought
this to provoke Christians to a cheerful observance of Christ? He came into
the world to die for thee; and therefore thou should in an ingenuous return
of thankfulness live to him; the Apostle judged this a rational inference, 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge;
that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that
they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves; but unto him, who
died for them, and rose again. His coming into the world to die for sinners
offered a holy violence to S. Paul. Yea, this was the very end of Christ's
undertaking, and giving himself for us, Titus 2. 14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works: zealous, or ready and cheerful. Christ's love
prompted him to a willing undertaking for us: and how should it provoke us to a
cheerful obedience unto him? Luke 1. 74, 55. That we, being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

IV. Endeavors and desires to partake of the grace of Christ. Christ is come
into the world, has taken our nature, and this to that end, that we might
partake of his grace: he came into the world as the Son of man, that by him, we
might be made the sons of God.

V. And lastly, Hatred and detestation of sin. This was it, which brought
Christ from the bosom of his Father, which pierced his sides, and wounded his
heart, that, in the anguish of it, he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? indeed, as to the event, we may cry out with him, Felix culpa, it
was an happy guilt, which brought us such a Savior; but in the mean time let
us eye our sins, through the Wounds and Blood of Christ, who came into the
world to save sinners, and mourn. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced: and they shall mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is
in bitterness for his firstborn, Zech. 12. 10. Thy sins brought Christ into the
world, and that leads me to

The fourth particular, viz:

That Christ's design of coming into the world was to save 4. Partic.
sinners.

Alensis and Scotus are of opinion, that though man had never sinned, yet
Christ should have come into the world, for the greater perfection of the
world, and communication of divine goodness, (though in natura impassibili,
which is a groundless rash conjecture) or else for the confirmation of men and
Angels in their state of righteousness and happiness. That Angels are confirmed
by Christ, I think may safely and piously be asserted (whence he is said to
reconcile all things, whether in heaven, or in earth, Coloss. 1. 20.) though
Burgess p. 133. Of the Covenant.
others think it was from God, as a rewarder of their continued obedience. But,
that Christ should have come into the world, if man had not sinned, Scripture
gives us no ground to believe; nay, both it and right reason do evidently
evince the contrary: as,

I. There would have been no necessity of his coming. Valentia thinks Christ
had not come for venial sins only; that assertion being built upon a false
ground, viz. that any sin is in its own nature and demerit venial, which is
contrary to Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. But, that is certain, had
there been no sin, there had been no need of Christ, for Toll morbos, toll
vulnera, and nulla est medicinae Aug. sermon. 9. de verbis Dom. p. 198.
causa, says Austin. What need of a Physician, where there is no disease?
therefore I observe that each Scripture-expression, whereby Christ is set out
to us, speaks a reference unto this. He is called a Savior, Tit. 1. 3, 4. and
what need of a Savior, where there is no sin? He is called a Mediator, 1 Timothy
2. 5. that had bin needless had God and man continued friends: a Physician,
Isa. 61. 1. that speaks a reference to a disease: a ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6. that
too had been needless had we not been in bondage to sin and satan: a surety,
Hebr. 7. 22. and that needless too had there been no debt contracted, no
obligation to divine justice: a fountain, Zech. 13. 1. no use of that, if man
had not been defiled by sin: a reconciler, Col. 1. 21. what need of that had
not man been estranged, and at enmity to God? a shepherd, useful when sheep
are strayed, 1 Pet. 2. 25. It Is the reason of his name Jesus, Matthew. 1. 21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins.

II. Scripture every where asserts the salvation of sinners, as the great end
of Christ's coming into the world: as Luke 9. 10. The Son of man is come to
seek, and to save that which was lost. Had not the sheep gone astray, the groat
been lost, the son a prodigal, they had never been sought for, Luke 18. So
Matthew. 20. 28. The son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give his life a ransom for many; that is, for the purchase of their
salvation: and again, John 10. 18. I am come that they-might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly: and Christ says, he came to call
sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9. 13. Now it is a known rule,, sublato fine,
tolluntur media ad finem: if you suppose not the ordination of the means to the
end, you make them wholly useless; for the necessity of them is relative to
the end: and therefore supposing man not to have sinned, we cannot rationally
imagine Christ should have come into the world, the Scripture laying down this
as the principal end of his coming.

Two cautions here must be observed;

1. This was his principal end, not in opposition to the advancing of Gods
glory; which was the ultimate end of all Christ's undertakings. The salvation of
sinners was but subordinate to this, see Ioh. 17. 4. and the glory both of
justice and mercy was magnified in this: for at the first coming of Christ was
proclaimed glory to God on high, Luke 2.

2. Not in opposition to the other subordinate ends: as setting Christians an
example, revealing the way of life and salvation: all which were in order to
this design, as shall appear presently.

III. Each undertaking of Christ had an influence upon, and ordination to this
end: his birth, as the Angels said shepherds, Luke 2. 11. his death, that was
the price of our salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 19. he came on purpose to take away sin,
1 John 3. 5. to destroy the works of Satan, v. 8. to set us an exact example of
piety, to reveal to us the way of salvation, to perform all those actions to
which he was anointed, and designed, Isa. 61. 1. and all these in order to the
promoting this great end of his coming, the salvation of sinners. Now that to
which a man orders and levels all his actions, we conclude to be his principal
end; so here, etc. The prayers he put up, Joh. 17. the sorrows he suffered, the
shedding his tears in the garden, his blood upon the cross, was all to this
end; his conflicts with the storms of the world, the frowns and anger of his
Father, were all in order to this end.

IV. Scripture highly extolls and magnifies the love of God, in sending Christ,
upon this very account, that he came to save sinners: as in Romans 5. 8. The love
of God would have been less admirable in sending his Son, if he should have
taken our nature, though we had never sinned. Observe, I pray, with what
account the Apostle advances the love of God, 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the
propitiation for our sins: not for the greater perfection of the world, which
is Scotus his account. The Scripture is wholly silent as to any such reason of
Christ's coming, but as a propitiation for sin.

V. This was the most suitable means to such an end. Christ's coming into the
world, as I have formerly opened it, is a most proportionable means for saving
sinners: for man by sin having endeavored to Estius, lib. 3. page 2.
lift himself above the condition of his creation, could by no means be more
suitably restored, then by Christ's humiliation, and taking upon him the form of
a servant. Man at first affected to be like God, eritis sicut dii, and God now
to save him condescends to appear in the likeness of sinful flesh, Phil. 2. 7.
and he humbled himself to the death of the cross, etc.

VI. Consider Christ did not come into the world by assuming our nature for the
dignity of it: (for then he might have assumed the angelical nature, when on
the contrary the Apostle tells us, he took not on him the nature of Angels,
Hebr. 2. 16.) but propter indigentiam, Bonavent. in d. 3. Art. 2. qu. 2.
because of our want and indigencie, that we had been utterly undone without
him: and therefore the Angels themselves, when they proclaimed the birth of
Christ to the shepherds, proclaimed this at the end of it, Luke 2. 11, 14. Good
will toward men. Therefore had not man been in this indigent, helpless,
hopeless condition, Christ had not come into the world: Si homo non periisset,
filius hominis August. Tom. 10. p. 195.
non venisset: perierat homo, venit Deus homo, and inventus est homo.

VII. And lastly this does most heighten that mystery of Christ's incarnation,
or coming into the world; and serves most to inflame Christians hearts with
pious affection to, and holy admiration of the love of Christ in coming into
the world: the first, because this had not been, unless upon the most cogent,
weighty reasons, as the undoing and ruin of one of Gods noblest creatures,
and the offense and dishonor of an infinite God; and the latter, that Christ
should come and condescend to take our nature, and a state of humiliation for
our salvation, which no other motive could have provoked him to. What thankful
admiration should it create in our hearts, and we say with Mary, Luke 1. 46,
47. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior: that he should thus come into the world to save sinners, of whom we
are chief?

Fifthly, How Christ carried on this design: or, in what respects Partic. 5.
be said to save sinners?

I. Not barely by giving himself an example, and pattern for a Christians
imitation. It is true that Christum imitari salutis via est, which Socinus make
his ground for this assertion, to imitate Christ is the way to salvation. It
lies upon Christians as a duty to walk as he walked, 1 John 2. 6. He that says
he abides in him ought himself also so to walk even as he walked. And it is
one end of Christ's death, to set us a copy of patience and submission, 1. Pet
2. 21. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye
should follow his steps. And it is as true that, whoever expects upon good
grounds Christ for his purchase must take him as his pattern and example; but
through the rebellion of the flesh and the temptation of Satan it comes to pass
that the best of us can but imperfectly imitate him, and so still stand in need
of a Savior, to satisfy for the imperfections of our obedience, through whom
it must be accepted. Besides, in this sense the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs
may be called Saviors, as setting us an example of piety and patience: and so
the Apostle bids us to account of them Jam. 5. 10. Take, my brethren, the
Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering
affliction, and of patience. And therefore we must rise higher then this, in
conceiving Christ to save sinners: therefore the Apostle, where he propounds
the death of Christ as an example of patience, suggests it also as an expiation
for sin, and purchase of our pardon, as 1 Pet. 2. where exhorting to patient
suffering for well-doing after the example of Christ, ver. 21. For even
hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps; he adds at ver. 24. who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sin, should
live to righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed. And it is the issue of
Christ's undertakings, his death and purchase, that we are redeemed from sin,
and freed to walk in imitation of Christ in righteousness and holiness: then
which Scripture speaks nothing more plainly, as is clear from Gal. 1. 4. Who
gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this present evil
world: and 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch as ye know, that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, etc. and
so Titus 1. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

II. Not as Christ is an instrument to convey salvation to sinners: which is
another account Socinus gives why Christ may be said to save sinners. It is
true indeed, that Christ does bestow and confer eternal salvation upon sinners;
yea, but not instrumentally, and principally, but in joint efficiency with his
Father, who, as one in being, so in working, as in John 10. 28, 30. therefore
he is called (...), the Author of eternal salvation. Hebr. 5. 9. and (...)
Acts 3. 15. the Prince of life.

III. Not only because he revealed the way of salvation to sinners: though
this be true, yet it is too short and insufficient: for thus the Prophets,
Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel may be said to save sinners; as laying
before them the way, and opening to them the Gospel of salvation. So the
Apostle of himself, 1 Cor. 9. 22. I am made all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some: and Acts 16. 17. it is the confession of the Damosel
possessed with the spirit of divination, These men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation: and he exhorts Timothy so to
preach, as that he may save them that hear him, 1 Timothy 4. 16. If Christ be only
in this respect a Savior, then after he had by his Doctrine revealed the way
to salvation, his death was altogether needless; upon which yet Scripture lays
the great stress of saving sinners: He is the Savior of the body, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 23. he tells you how, verse 25. he gave himself for it, and
expressly, Tit. 2. 13, 14. Who gave himself for us, etc.

IV. Not only by confirming this doctrine revealed. It is true, this was one
end of Christ's coming, so says our Savior himself to Pilate, demanding of
him, Art thou a king? John 18. 37. To this end was I born, and for this cause
came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. But, who can
imagine that God should give up his only begotten wel-beloved Son, expose him
to the scorns of men, frowns of God, and at last to a cursed ignominious death,
only for confirmation of Gospel-doctrine, which was sufficiently done by the
innocence of his life, and his miracles? for it is said of the Apostles, Mark
16. 20. That they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with
them, and confirming the word with signs following. The Martyrs and Apostles
might as well upon this account be called Saviors, who sealed to the truth of
the Gospel with their blood; as S. Paul says of himself, Acts 20. 23, 24. The
holy Ghost witnesses in every city, saying, That bonds and afflictions abide
me: But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my
self, etc. to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Christ is therefore said
to save sinners by way of a real price paid, and purchase made: this Scripture
speaks expressly, Mat. 20. 28. where it is said, The Son of man came to give his
life; (...), a ransom for many, which word (...) properly signifies to redeem
by way of purchase, as those other words, (...), so frequently used in
Scripture, as to Christ giving h^mself for sinners, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Coloss. 1.
14. So that Christ did truly pay to God a price for the Salvation and recovery
of sinners, Ephesians. 5. 2. The effects of which, in reference to this end of
saving sinners, were

1. A perfect satisfaction to Divine justice; which required the punishment for
sin, either in the person offending, or in his surety; hence (...), and (...),
and such like expressions in Scripture, an oblation, a ransom, a propitiation
for sin, 1 John 2. 1. hence those expressions, Isaiah 53. 5. The chastisement
of our peace was upon him: and verse 6. The Lord has laid on him the
iniquities of us all: it pleased the Lord to bruise him, v. 10. and, He made
his soul an offering for sin; and this satisfaction, by reason of the dignity
and holiness of the person, was exactly proportionable to whatever the justice
of God could require for man's sin. Acts 20. 28. he is said to have purchased
the Church with his own blood. Sin bound us over to justice; Christ satisfied
it, and so saves sinners: and supposing God's acceptance of a surety (which
was an act of his highest grace and favor, and wholly subject to the liberty
of his Will) his Justice could not require a more perfect satisfaction then was
made by Christ.

2. Pacifying of the wrath of God toward, and reconciling God to sinners.
Indeed by the Socinian divinity, God and man were never at odds. Christus non
placavit Deum, sed placatum ostendit, says Socinus. It is true indeed, that
the very coming of Christ into the world was an evidence and demonstration of
that great love of benevolence, or that Philanthropie whereby God was inclined
to do good to lost man, John 3. 16. but no love of complacencie or delight in a
sinner, till actually reconciled by Jesus Christ; but a mutual enmity between
God and man, and a hatred in God to man. Ephesians. 2. children of wrath, and, John
3. verse last, upon him who believes not, the wrath of God, which anger and
wrath of God stands in contradistinction and opposition, not to the general
love of God to his creatures, as such, whereby he may design to do them good,
but to the the special love and friendship of God to, and delight in his
creature, which cannot be till justice be satisfied, and reconciliation
perfected by Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Romans 3. 25. that is, his Justice in
punishing sin: and, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16. (...), says Chrysostom, reconciliation
supposes enmity, and making peace includes opposition; till which be removed,
the Holiness, and Justice of God permits not the salvation of any sinner.

3. Pardon and justification from guilt, Romans 3. 24. we are said to be
justified freely by his grace: freely in respect of us who confer nothing to
it; by grace, in respect of Divine acceptance of this price paid by Christ,
yet by justice and merit, if we respect Christ, who came into the world to die,
and by death to purchase our pardon, Romans 5. 9.

So then, Justice being satisfied, God reconciled, and guilt removed by the
undertaking of Christ, the design of saving sinners, for which he came into the
world, is effectually promoted.

Sixthly, Why, and how it was necessary that Christ should come in 6. Partic.
order to this end, viz. man's salvation.

I shall lay down these six positions for the determination of this

I. It is absolutely impossible that the sinner should be saved, till sin by
some means be removed, and taken away. As it is contrary to God's revealed will
to save any man in his sin, without repentance and faith in Christ; so it is a
contradiction to the holiness and purity of his nature, as being a God of purer
eyes then to behold evil, as it is Hab. 1. 13. I like not to dispute the
absoluteness of God's power; but we must have a care of exalting God's power to
the prejudice of his Holiness: as soon may God leave to hate sin (that is, as
soon may God lay aside his nature) as save any man obstinately continuing and
dying in his sin.

II. It was not absolutely necessary for Christ to come into the world to save
sinners. Not by any necessity of coaction, for he undertook this work
willingly; hence it is said, Isaiah 53. 12. He poured out his soul unto death,
etc. to note the willingness of Christ in the work. Besides, it could not be
absolutely necessary, because God might, without any prejudice to his Justice,
have suffered man finally to have perished in his apostasy: nor was he any way
more obliged, then by his love and mercy, to provide for the recoverie of lost
man, more then the Apostate Angels; therefore Scripture evidenceth the love of
Christ by this, Ephesians. 5. 2. and Hebr. 2. 16.

III. Supposing God's design of saving sinners, This was the most convenient
way. This I find readily assented to by all, that it was most convenient every
way: both

1. In respect of God, that the dishonor, which he had received by sin, might
be repaired by the undertakings of a person of infinite dignity, as Christ was.

2. That sinners might be saved with security to all Divine attributes, by
satisfaction to his Justice, by Christ's sufferings in the same nature, which
had offended.

3. For security to his Holy Law, by Christ's unsinning obedience; and

4. With the highest exaltation of his Mercy; for abundantioris erat
misericordiae, quam si peccata absque satisfactione dimisisset, says Aquinas.
The Apostle from hence magnifies the riches of Aq. 3. p. q. 46. art. 10.
God's mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. Hereby God did also most remarkably communicate
himself to the creature; a greater was not possible then a personal union to
the humane nature. And then

5. Most convenient in respect of us, as being the most cogent incentive of
love to God: Ferrea and lapidea corda esse oportet, quae non emolliet tam
incomparabilis amoris divini suavitas, says Calvin. Calv. in Joan. 15. 13.
Hereby we have the advantage of an exact copy of all virtue, humility,
patience, constancy, justice, and the like, and the most prevailing motive to
imitate it in all holiness and piety, 1 Cor. 6. v. last. And then,

Lastly, It was most eminent in respect of Satan, that he might be more shamed
and confounded, by being conquered in the nature, which he had seduced and
ruined.

IV. Supposing the decree of God, and his revelation concerning mankind, Man's
recovery and salvation was as impossible any other way, then by Christ's coming
into the world, as it is for God's purpose to be frustrated, or his will to be
fallible, or plainly for God to lie. To which purpose these Scriptures speak
expressly, Acts 4. 12. Acts 2. 23. Luke 22. 22. Luke 24. 26, 27.

V. Supposing God's purpose of saving sinners by way of a price and
satisfaction, Christ's coming into the world was indispensably necessary. And
in this Estius, though he thinks it possible, that mankind might have been
recovered, and reconciled to God by a mere man, or an Angel, yet this would not
have been a redemption by an adequate price or purchase, because Justice
required satisfaction in the nature offending, every individual of which being
corrupted, and so obnoxious to Justice, and indebted to God in more then it was
able to pay (as deriving all from him) was incapable of satisfying for its own
score, much less for the sin of all mankind: but supposing a man created pure,
or an Angel, still the obedience of this creature would be but finite, and so
in the rigor of Justice unproportionable to expiate an offense against an
infinite Majesty, or to repair that dishonor and injury which sin does to
God; and then, the more the creature is enabled to do, the more it is indebted,
therefore cannot merit, or satisfy for former sin, Psalm. 49. 7. None of them
can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him.

VI. And lastly, It is hard to conceive and imagine such a power so absolute in
God, as by which (supposing sin and the creature fallen from him) he should
restore and save it, without the undertakings of Christ. I confess I approve
not the rash curious searchings into the depth of God's power, as esteeming it
more the duty of Christians, thankfully and piously to admire God's revelation
of man's recovery by Christ, then nicely to enquire of the Vbi semel ostendit
Deus quid fieri velit, stulta est ac noxia de possibilitate disputatio. Calv.
in Job. 16. 7.
possibility of another way of salvation. Calvin says, God could have done it
solo nutu and verbo, as he created all things at first by a word; which I
cannot close with, for surely God would never have given up his Son to such
miseries and sorrows, might sinners have been saved by a word speaking: this
detracts from the glory of Christ's undertakings for sinners. Estius thinks
that minima passio Christi sufficere potuisset pro justo pretio redemptionis
mundi: by reason of the dignity of the person; but neither can this be without
the falling of God's truth to the ground, the truth I mean of this threatening,
Genesis 2. 17. Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat: for
in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die: which must be made good
either in the persons sinning, and so man had bin irrecoverably lost; or in
Christ, as their surety, and therefore death on him was indispensably required
by this threatening: therefore, this special way by the death of Christ was
necessary, though not absolutely, as I showed before, yet ex suppositione
finis, supposing God's purpose of saving sinners after the threatening revealed.

To make out this, consider three things.

I. The indispensableness of God's justice, requiring the punishment of, and
satisfaction for sin. A truth, which every man carries a demonstration of in
his own breast, even those who were wholly strangers to God's revealed will of
punishing sinners: the Heathens I mean, who had inward fears of an avenging
justice for sin. And, if we assert justice to be an attribute essential to God,
we must assert, I think, that God punishes sin out of nature, not will only,
(though all the circumstances of punishment be subjected in the freedom of
God's will) otherwise, we must suppose it possible for God not to hate sin; and
so sin, or no sin, would be all one to God: now the Scripture founds God's
hatred to sin in his nature, Heb. 1. 13. if then the justice of God be
indispensable, then satisfaction must be made before the sinner can be saved.

II. The impossibility of satisfaction to justice any other way then by the
undertaking of Christ. For no mere creature could lay down a price
satisfactorie for the salvation of lost man, though Aquinas Aq. 3. p. q. 1.
art. 2.
thinks, that the obedience of the creature might have been available to the
salvation of sinners, yet confesses that this would have been Satisfactio
sufficiens imperfecte secundum acceptionem Dei, non perfect per adaequationem
ad compensationem culpae commissae: only satisfaction improperly to divine
acceptance, not properly by a proportionable compensation for an offense
against an infinite God: but of this formerly.

III. Christ did by his undertakings fully and perfectly satisfy Gods justice,
in order to the salvation of sinners: hereby fully repairing the dishonor God
sustained by sin, by an obedience more satisfactory to God, then sin was
displeasing; his undertakings were the actions of an infinite person, and so
proportionable to satisfy for that infinite evil that is in sin, and it was in
it self complete, not depending in its worth upon divine acceptance to supply
any defect in it: but supposing Gods acceptance of that satisfaction from a
surety which he might have required in our persons (which is of infinite love
and grace) he could not refuse this, or require a more full price, and perfect
satisfaction; Hebr. 10. 14. To sum up this, Gods justice required
satisfaction, the creature could not give it; Christ as God-man made it, and
only could do it; therefore supposing the design of God to save sinners,
Christ's coming into the world to undertake and die for sinners was necessary.

Seventhly, Upon what accounts this is an acceptable doctrine. 7 Partic.


I. The expression in the Text speaks it so, (...), an expression never used by
the Apostle, but in matters of the highest concernment and importance; as,

1. In the advancement of godliness and piety; so it is used 1 Timothy 4. 8, 9.
(...): and so indeed it is, as being indispensably necessary to a Christians
present and future happiness, as having the promise of this life, etc.

2. In asserting justification by free grace: so Tit. 3. 7, 8. (...), a
doctrine sure most acceptable to any, who have either a sense of sin, or
apprehensions of mercy. How acceptable must it needs be to an humbled sinner,
lost in himself, to see free grace coming in for his relief and succor?

3. In encouraging Christians to suffer with Christ: as 2 Timothy 2. 10, 11, 12,
(...), It is a faithful saying. It is true, afflictions in themselves are not
acceptable; but considering who-ever suffers with and for Christ; and how the
cross ushers in the crown; how if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him, as the Apostle says: it must needs be (...), etc.

II. The nature of the thing speaks it acceptable; take it under these six
plain notions.

1. As a revelation of pardon and mercy to guilty condemned malefactors. How
acceptable is the news of pardon to a sentenced person, expecting daily
execution? such is the Gospel revealing Christ's coming into the world to save
sinners. We are all in our natural condition guilty, liable, and sentenced to
death; John 3. 8. He that believes not is condemned already. When the soul
comes to be humbled for sin, and lies under sad fears, and expectation of the
execution of this sentence; O! how acceptable must the revelation of pardon
needs be, through the undertaking of Christ for sinners? such free pardon, as
Isa. 43. 25. nothing in reference to us though in reference to Christ's blood
shed, when he came, etc. Ephesians. 1. 7.

2. As a proclamation of peace to enemies. How acceptable is an Embassy of
peace from a prince to his subjects, who are in rebellion? We were up in Arms,
in open hostility against God, and by our first apostasy had cast of our
obedience, and broken our allegiance; now God by the Gospel proclaims peace to
such rebels through Christ pacifying his Fathers wrath, and undertaking for
man's offense, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Christ purchased our peace by his blood, Coloss. 1.
20, 22. Christ offered himself a hostage, a surety, nay a sacrifice to procure
our peace, and in the fullness of time came himself into the world to proclaim
this peace, Ephesians. 2. 17. viz. to the Jews in his person, to the Gentiles by the
Apostles his messengers: thus Christ spoke in S. Paul, and by him proclaimed
this peace; 2 Cor. 13. 3. and still sends his Ministers his heralds, and
Ambassadors to solicit your reconciliation to God, that you would lay aside
the enmity of your hearts against God, and to proclaim God reconciled to you.
He has committed to us the word of reconciliation, read this fully, 2 Cor. 5.
18, 19, 20. The first Proclamation of Christ's coming into the world by those
heavenly heralds was peace on earth; Luke 2. 14. and surely dulce nomen pacis,
as being a complex of all good desirable.

3. As a proclamation of liberty to captives, and bondmen. Imagine how
acceptable would a release be to a Turkish-gallie-slave; or how grateful the
release from the bondage of Egypt to the Israelites bound for Canaan: so, and
much more surely, must the revelation of liberty and freedom procured by
Christ be to souls enslaved to sin, and led captive by Satan at his will, as
the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 2. 26. With what ectasie of joy were the Jews
returning from Babylon surprised, that they doubted whether the thing were true
or not? Psalm. 126. 1, 2. This return and deliverance figured out our redemption
and freedom by Christ, as appears from Romans 9. 27. taken from Isa. 10. 21, 22.
So, sure, to those who know what it is to be in bondage to sin, and slavery to
Satan, to those who do not love their chains (as truth is we all naturally do)
the revelation of that freedom, wherewith Christ has set us free, must needs
be most welcome. Our natural estate is an estate of slavery, John 8. 34.
Whosoever commiteth sin is the servant of sin, the Gospel reveals liberty
through Jesus Christ, v. 36. and how acceptable is this? The chief captain
prized his liberty, because he purchased it with a great sum of money, Acts
22. 28. how much more valuable and acceptable is that Gospel which reveals
this liberty, bought at no less expense then the blood of Christ (1 Pet. 1.
18.) from sin and Satan to whom you were enslaved. We conclude them madmen,
that do not prize liberty, and surely they are not in their wits, who account
not this a faithful saying and acceptable, that Christ is come into the world
to save sinners.

4. As a discovery of treasures and riches to poor and beggarly persons. How
acceptable is the finding of a pearl of price to a poor man? and so Christ must
needs be to sinners, who are naturally poor, and miserable, and naked, as the
Church of Laodicea is described, Revel. 3. 17. And so Christ would be indeed,
were it not for the pride and blindness of men's hearts, that we are apt to say
as they did, that we are rich and increased in goods, and stand in need of
nothing; and that is the reason Christ is no more acceptable to sinners. There
are treasures hid in Jesus Christ; Coloss. 2. 3. and he came into the world
that we might partake of those riches, (2 Cor. 8. 9.) and be rich with those
durable riches of grace and glory, which are in the hands of wisdom, Prove. 8.
18. Christ is that pearl in the field of the Gospel, Matthew. 13. 46.
which ( Christians) will enrich us, though we part with all to purchase it.

5. As an offer of cure to diseased persons. That Is our condition out of
Christ, as I have largly showed before, now the Gospel reveals healing by Jesus
Christ, Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their backsliding. Christ came into the world
to be both our Physician, and physic: de pulvere creatus de pulvere sanaris;
caro te creaverat, caro te sanat, says S. Austin.

6. As the marrow, sum, and center of the Gospel. What the Patriarchs desired
( Joh. 8. 56.) the Prophets foretold, the types prefigured, the Apostles
preached, the promises contain, the Sacraments seal, the covenant of grace
assures, whatever concerns a Christians comfort or happiness is epitomized and
summed up in this; that Christ came to save sinners: and therefore it is
worthy of all acceptance.

Application.

First, To the ministers. Let them then preach this acceptable doctrine, and
lay open this truth, the great design of God in saving sinners by Jesus Christ.
Christ is the sum of the Gospel, and so should be of our preaching. Observe
the Apostles practice, 1 Cor. 1. 23. preaching Christ in opposition to their
carnal wisdom, which the Greeks affected, ver. 22. and though it be a
stumbling block to the Jews, and to the Greeks foolishness, ver. 29. Thus Paul
preached Christ at Athens, though the Philosophers there accounted him but a
babbler for it, and a setter forth of strange gods, Acts 17. 18. Thus Philip to
the Eunuch took occasion from the Prophet to preach Christ unto him, Acts 8.
25. So should the Ministers of Christ take all occasions to preach Christ; they
are his Ambassadors to negotiate for him in the world, they have both their
gifts, and commission from him, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. and therefore should act for him
and preach his interest up: S. Paul tells you why he was commissionated to be a
Minister of the Gospel, for this very end to preach Christ, Ephesians. 3. 7, 8.
Brethren, we are Gods Trustees (as I may say) to whom he has committed the
Gospel, as it is 1 Timothy 1. 11. We are false to our trust, if we don't preach
Christ, who is the sum and substance of the Gospel. Austin laid this to the
charge of Tullies works, for which he rejected them, that he did not find the
name of Christ in them, and may not many dislike our Sermons, as hearing no
more of Christ in them.

Secondly, Then, how acceptable should the ministry of the Gospel be to you?
How beautiful even the feet of those who bring you these glad tidings? Romans
10. 15.
What provision is made for the entertainment of Ambassadors, who come to a
Nation on terms of peace? so should the ambassadors of Christ be acceptably
entertained, as commissionated from Christ, to offer rebellious sinners terms
of peace, and to beseech them to be reconciled to God, Psalm. 68. 8. The Apostle
tells us those are ministerial gifts, Ephesians. 4. 11. It is the Apostles
exhortation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. We beseech you, brethren, to know them which
labor among you; what is that? their work is to discover and offer Christ to
you. Surely, the dove was very welcome into the Ark, when she brought an olive
branch in her mouth, the Emblem of peace: so acceptable should the ministry of
the Word be, which reveals Christ as your peace, etc.

Thirdly, Examine whether you be of the number of those sinners Christ came to
save. You will say, that is needless, Did not Christ come to save all? Is it not
said expressly, Christ died for all? 2 Cor. 5. 15. and that he tasted death
for every man? Hebr. 2. 9. and that God was in Christ, reconciling the whole
world unto himself? 2 Cor. 15. 19. How far Christ's intentions extended in his
undertakings, would be too large to discuss; it will be sufficient at present
to note, that the price Christ paid is sufficient in it self for the expiation
of all sins, and that it extends to all sorts of sinners; notwithstanding this,
we know from Scripture, that the greatest part of the world shall perish, even
of those who are under the Gospel; Many are called, but few are chosen; and
Christ does expressly restrain that universality which many to little purpose
contend for, when he says, he laid down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. 15.
to redeem his Church, Acts 20. 28. and to save only his own people, Matthew. 1.
21. and for those who were given him of his Father; in contradistinction to the
world, Joh. 17. 9, Therefore there is room left for enquiry, whether we be of
the number of them who shall be saved by Christ's undertakings for us. Such are

I. Repenting, returning sinners: so Christ tells you himself, Matthew. 9. 13. I
am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance: that is, such as
are not righteous in their own opinion, for as if man had continued truly
righteous, he had not stood in need of a Savior; so if self righteous; he
shall receive no benefit by Christ: such he came not to call, but sinners. So,
you will say, we are all: yea, but humbled sinners; such as are inwardly convinced
and truly humbled for sin. Quest. But does not Christ call all? Matthew. 11. 28.
Answ. Yes, but mark the limitation: such as are weary, there is ease for such:
so Luke 19. 10. The son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.
So we were all lost, you will say: True, but these are such as see themselves
lost, and irrecoverably undone without Christ. The prodigal was lost long, but
never returned to, nor was entertained by his Father, till he saw himself so,
and mourned that he was so, Luke 15. 18. Christ's commission was to bind up
such only as mourn, and to proclaim peace, and the acceptable year of the
Lord, to such only, Isa. 61. 1.

II. Believing sinners: those are the terms upon which the Gospel offers
salvation by Christ, for so runs the promise, Mark 16. 16. He that believes
and is baptized, shall be saved. And Christ tells you himself; he came into the
world for this end, John 12. 46. I am come a light into the world, that
whosoever believes on me, should not abide in darkness. And this was the
design of God's sending Christ for sinners, that, Whoever believed should not
perish, John 3. 16. This is the condition of the Covenant of grace and
salvation, as Scripture every where expresses: as Romans 10. 9, 10. to this Paul
directed the trembling jayler, Acts 16. 30, 31. All a Christians life is in
Christ, and faith is the hand that receives him, John 1. 72. Whatever a
Christian derives from, or partakes of by Christ, as forgiveness, Acts 10. 43.
is all by faith: the Spirit of Christ, Gal. 3. 14. inward purity, Acts 15. 9.
perseverance, 1 Pet. 1. 5. sonship, Gal. 3. 26. and at last, eternal salvation
by Christ, John 3. 36. all which are received by faith.

III. Reforming sinners. Christ came not to save any man in his sins, but from
his sins, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity. Utique venit medicus ad aegrotum August. Tom. 10. p. 200.
constat, sed ideo venit medicus ad aegrotum, ne semper sit aegrotus. Quod vult
facere amat, non quod invenit, says S. Augustine. Whether do you then live, as
those Christ came to save? Christ came not to save you only from the guilt of
sin, but from the power of sin, that sin might have no more dominion over you,
Romans 6. 14. So that let no presumptuous sinner flatter himself in a continuance
of sin, upon this consideration, that Christ came to save sinners, for Christ
saves and delivers them from sin here, whom he saves from wrath hereafter, Luke
1. 74, 75. And the promise of mercy is made upon forsaking sin, Prove. 28. 13.
Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall have mercy.

Fourthly, Let us all heartily entertain this so acceptable a doctrine, as that
message of Christ's coming to save sinners. Entertain it in your ear, by
attendance upon the Gospel preached; but that is a small matter: welcome it in
your hearts, by believing it; otherwise, it will not profit you; as it is said
of them, Heb. 4. 3. The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with
faith in them that heard it. And not only so, but in your lives too, by
obeying it, and living suitably to the Gospel, which discovers this acceptable
doctrine to you, Phil. 1. 27. Let your conversation be such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. The end of this Gospel-revelation was obedience and holiness,
suitable to our belief: so the mystery of Christ is said to be made known to
all nations for the obedience of faith, Romans 16. 26. for so our lives may
witness our acceptance and hearty entertainment of this, as (...), a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sins, (...), of whom I am chief. It was a fond opinion which the
Manichees, and others of old maintained from this place of Scripture, That
Adam's soul was transfused into Paul's body; because the Apostle says here he
was (...), the first; but he means not time, but in nature and quality. Primum
se dixit non peccatorum ordine, sed peccati magnitudine, says Augustine.
August. Tom. 10. p. 202.
And that, I think, is not a much better interpretation, which Grotius puts
upon the words; as if they were spoken (...), ex summa modestia; as if the
Apostle had only spoken by a Rhetorical modesty, as when he calls himself the
least of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 9. The Apostle sure intended not these words
as complements. Cave, n^ existimes Apostolum modestiae causa mentitum, says
Calvin. Whence it seems some, long before Grotius, had mis-interpreted the
Apostle thus; as if he had but told an humble officious lie; perhaps as a bait
to the applause of others, as it is the practice of some to pretend low
thoughts of themselves, that so others may magnify and extol them. But the
Apostle spoke not to know what others thought of him, but he spoke the real
sense, and inward persuasion of his soul, when he says, Of whom I am chief.
Why the Apostle speaks this, and how he could truly say it of himself
(especially, as an Apostle converted, and brought home to Christ) I shall show
you in these eight particulars.

Consider the words, as

I. Vox recognoscentis statum pristinum: as they were the words of the Apostle
sadly reflecting upon his former condition, while in the state of
unregeneracie, casting his eyes backward upon his blasphemy and Recolite
Saulum, and invenietis Paulum; attenditis ad Paulum, and obliti estis Saulum;
attenditis ad Pastorem, obliti estis lupum. August. Tom. 10. p. 200.
persecution, verse 13. with which his life formerly, (though then conformed to
the strictest Sect of the Pharisees) had been notoriously stained; so that
though now a convert, yet he could not but reflect upon it, and in that respect
entitle himself, the greatest of sinners. He says, I am, because his former
condition was fresh, and alive in his memory. It is a very useful meditation
for true converts and sincere Christians, often to recollect and think of that
miserable condition, which they lay in in their blood, before God reached out
to them a hand of mercy; this the Apostle exhorts his converted believing
Ephesians to, Ephesians. 1. 11, 12. and that the more to magnify the riches of God's
mercy, which he had mentioned at verse 4. So David, Psalm. 51. 3. I acknowledge
my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Nothing promotes more a real
thankfulness for, and pious admiration of mercy, then frequent reflections on
our natural misery: so it did here in the Apostle, verse 13. Besides, how will
this meditation keep men humble, when they see all their receipts to be the
product and issue of free grace; and what miserable creatures they were before?
See Ezekiel. 20. 48. and, Ezekiel. 16. 63. Of all the Apostles S. Paul was the
humblest, who often reflected on his unconverted, natural condition. This also
will put us on resolved serviceableness for God, to consider how much a
dishonor ( Christians) we were unto him in our natural condition. Paul, while
unconverted, a Nemo acrior inter Persecutores, ergo nemo prior inter
peccatores. August. Tom. 10. p. 202.
furious persecuter of the Church, when converted, was the most Zealous
propagatour of the Gospel, as laboring more abundantly then all the rest of
the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 10. And how watchful, and circumspect in their
walking will they be, who often think of the falls of their natural estate? A
mariner in a second voyage will carefully avoid that rock, on which in a former
he was like to be shipwrackt; so will a true convert of those sins, which would
have ruined him, if infinite mercy had not stepped in for his relief and pardon.
Who more endeavoring against sin then S. Paul, while he was running his
Christian race? 1 Cor. 9. 27. And now as reflecting on his unconverted estate,
he calls himself the greatest of sinners.

That Is the first.

II. Vox aggravantis peccatum. The Apostle here, respecting the circumstances
of his sins, whereby they were aggravated and heightened, calls himself, the
greatest of sinners, because joined with a furious persecution of the Chuch of
God, it being especially with rage and malice, Acts 26. 10, 11. Many of the
Saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief
Priests, and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them: And I
punished them often in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and
being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities.
Where you see the height of iniquity, to which nothing was wanting but a clear
knowledge, to make it unpardonable; upon the account of which circumstance of
his sin, he esteems himself unworthy the name of an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 9. And
another heightning aggravation of his sin was, That it was done in unbelief,
verse 13. where some for, because, read, quamvis, although, and so make it an
aggravation of his sin, and a further commendation of the mercy of God in
pardoning; for his ignorance and unbelief, must needs have been in a great
measure wilful and affected, he enjoying the means of faith and knowledge. A
high sin questionless. Alensis gives this reason of it, Quia destruit
fundamentum totius Christianae religionis: whereas other sins strike but at
some particular virtue. And besides, if this be final, it is the cord which
ties all other sins upon the soul, and makes it in the event damning. And then,
farther, as they were sins against knowledge; the Apostle having been brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel; and that is a high aggravation of sin. James 4. 17.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. Now the
Apostle eying all these, calls himself the greatest of sinners: whence observe
a distinguishing character between a sincere Christian, and an hollow-hearted
hypocrite: he extenuates and lessens his sin, with the unjust steward writing
down fifty for an hundred, but heightens his but seeming and pretended
holiness; the world shall hear of it, if the Pharisees fast twice a week, and
tithe mint and cummin: but a sincere humble Christian in mentioning his graces
and gifts is lowly, but full and express in aggravating his sins; thus good
Hagar, Prove. 30. 2, 3. Surely, I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man: I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of
the Holy. The Publican smites upon his breast, with a God be merciful to me a
sinner, etc. And we need go no further for an example of both, then our
Apostle; who of Saints counted himself the least, Ephesians. 3. 8. but here of
sinners the greatest.

That Is the second.

III. Vox esse accusantis: The words of a self condemning and selfaccusing
Christian. S. Paul's eyes were turned inward upon his own sins' not prying too
nicely into the sins of other men; so that this speaks at once the Apostles
humility and charity; his charity prompted him to think and judge better of
others, though his humility would not suffer him to think otherways of
himself. And here is another character of a true Christian, as distinct from an
hypocrite: hypocrites are quick-sighted, eagle-eyed abroad, but blind at home.
Some shifting off their sins to others, nay, to God himself, rather then charge
themselves with them. It is an hereditarie miscarriage, derived from our first
parents, Genesis 3. 12. Another sort seemingly zealous, and rigid in censuring
others, never condemning themselves, though guilty perhaps of greater sins,
then what they so severely censure in others: believe it, to censure
uncharitably in others what we reform not in our selves, is but counterfeit and
hypocritical. That zeal, which is ready to consume others, and yet burns not up
our own corruptions, is but the wildefire of passion and selfish design. The
Pharisee, whose prayer was hypocrisy, would see often a mote in his brothers
eye, and pretend to a skill and desire to pull it out, when he neglects the
beam in his own. He that is so much abroad, it is to be feared he seldom turns
his eyes inward, to consider the plague of his own heart. The Pharisee boasts,
that he is not as the Publican; but the good Publican strikes upon his own
breast, and says, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. It is our duty, Brethren,
to reprove others, but nor uncharitably to condemn them. This censorious
uncharitableness is commonly the issue of a Pharisaical opinion of a man's own
righteousness. It was otherwise with the disciples, Mark 14. 18, 19. they say
not, Is it he? or, he? but each ready to suspect and accuse himself, Lord, is
it I? so the Apostle here accuses himself by a particular indictment, here in
the gross, of whom I am the chief. Whereas in respect of others, a Christian
thinks it better to wrong himself by an over charitable credulity, then others
by unjust censures and suspicions, but before God none accuse themselves more,
hereby magnifying more the grace of God in pardoning: haec ejus accusatio est
laus salvatoris, says Ambrose, accusing himself he exalts his Savior, who
came into the world to save sinners, of whom he accuses himself as the chief.

That Is the third.

IV. Vox spiritualiter illuminati: as the words of the Apostle inwardly
enlightened to see and discern the nature of his former sins, and this is one
thing in which every true Christian is enlightened. S. Paul in his unregenerate
estate thought in his conscience, he was bound to oppose the Gospel of Christ,
as he tells you himself, Acts 26. 9. but now he discovers the horrid nature of
his blasphemy, and persecution, and unbelief, and therefore often heightens it,
Gal. 1. 13. Carnal hearts do not see the evil of sin, and therefore think it a
light small matter; they will be playing with the serpent, as not feeling the
sting of it; but when a Christian spiritually enlightened sees sin through the
glass of the law, and the blood of Christ, it appears in its proper colors.
Thus to S. Paul by the law sin appeared exceeding sinful, Romans 7. and himself
here The greatest of sinners.

That Is the fourth.

V. Vox confitentis: as the words of S. Paul confessing his sin. He was primus
in ordine confitentium, says Aretius upon the place, as ready to acknowledge
his sin as any; and surely this is a great Christian duty: however many now
adays are high-flown into raptures, and ecstasies, and cry down Confession and
Repentance as legal. The Saints in Scripture have been express and frequent in
this duty; David frequently in the Psalms, Psalm. 32. 5. and fully, Psalm. 51. 2,
4, 5. confesses his original corruption. Read holy Ezra's confession, Ezra 9.
5, 6. See Daniels holy and humble confession, Dan. 9. 4. he recounts particular
sins, v. 5, 6. so continues till v. 16. thus Paul, v. 13. and here, I am the
chief of sinners. Hereby Christians acknowledge their liableness to Justice,
and magnify the grace of God in pardoning, as S. Paul, v. 13. yet he obtained
mercy. Much like this of the Apostle is that of Tertullian, in his book de
poenitentia; Peccator omnium notarum sum, nec ulli rei nisi poenitentiae natus:
that is, I am a most notorious sinner, as if I were born to no other end, then
to confess, and repent. That brings me to the sixth thing, as they are,

VI. Vox dolentis: as the words of S. Paul mourning and sorrowing, in the
remembrance of his former, and meditation of his present sins: ut se humiliet
adhuc dolet de sua incredulitate, says Ambrose upon the place; the Apostle
still mournes upon the consideration of his unbelief. Though many even of
those, who crucified Christ, as those Acts 2. were brought to a sense of their
sin, yet none more then Paul, who now converted, yet grieves for his former
unbelief. True Christians are tender hearted, and so easily melted into sorrow.
It is one thing, which God works upon the heart in conversion, viz. a melting
tenderness under sin. How does Mary Magdalen, formerly notorious, shed a
fountain of tears? how tender was David's heart, when he had cut of Saul's
garment, and numbered the people, 2. Sam. 24. 10. And Christians often mourn,
(even after God has pardoned them) that they should by sin formerly so much
dishonor him. I question not but upon this account David watered his couch
with his tears; and some say Peter never heard the cock crow, but he wept for
the denial of his Master: and Austin in his confessions often aggravates and
heightens his sin, while a Manichee; so the Apostle here reflecting upon his
former blasphemy, etc. seems with a tear in his eye to cry out, Of whom I am
the chief.

VII. Vox ingemescent is sub onere; the Apostle speaks this as sensible of the
burden of sin; so that he was the greatest of sinners in respect of his own
sense, and feeling. As suppose one sick of the toothache, or headache, cries
out, No pain is like my pain, because he feels that by experience, but other
men's by speculation only; so the Apostle here from an inward sense of his own
sins calls himself the chief of sinners. Here Is again a Character of a true
Christian, He is one, to whom sin is a real burden, whereas a wicked man makes
light of it, sin is there in its proper place. A wicked man is in his Element,
when sinning, and Elementa non gravitant in propriis locis; but a Christian
having a heart of flesh so tender, the least sin is a burden to him. David
complains of his broken bones by reason of sin: and that his sins were a
burden too heavy for him to bear; and Paul here confesses himself the chief
of sinners.

VIII. Vox fidei applicantis: the words of S. Paul by a particular faith
applying to himself that general truth, that Christ came into the world to save
sinners. As if he should have said, Ad quo^ venit primus ego sum. Aug. tom. 10.
page 200.
I am the chief of those sinners which Christ came to save. This is the special
art of saving faith, to bring down Universal truths by particular application,
so did David, Psalm. 116. 5, 6, 7. See, he applies the general mercy of God to
himself. It is not enough to believe in the general that Christ came to save
sinners (for this is but historical, which the devils believe, and tremble
because they have no part in him, and thousands will be damned, who profess
they believe this:) but true saving faith is a fiducial relyance upon, and
particular application of Christ, as coming to save me in particular, as S.
Paul did, Gal. 2. 20. so, 2. Tim. 1. 22. and hereafter there is laid up for me
a crown, etc. c. 4. v. 8. and here he brings down this general doctrine by a
particular application to himself, of whom I am the chief.

Application.

I. See hence why this Doctrine finds no more entertainment in the world, why
no more acceptable to most; this is the account, they do not see themselves the
chiefest of sinners but the generality are either secure in sin, or else
resting upon some self-righteousness, and so Christ is not valued or accepted.

II. Let sinners hence be encouraged to come to Christ: Paul here the chief of
sinners (arrived at a greater height of sin, then it is likely thou have, viz.
blasphemy and persecution) has found mercy, which was partly for this very
end, that God ostenderet ceteris, qui inimico tam benevolus exstiterit, qualis
esset futuris ad se decurrentibus, says Ambrose. Si Paulus sanatus, ego quare
despero? ut hoc dicerent homines, ideo Saulus ex persecutore factus Apostolus,
so Austin. As a Physician, when he comes first to a place, ventures upon the
most desperate patients, that they may encourage others to go to the same
Physician, saying; Vide plura ap ^d August. om. 10. page 202.
He cured me, etc. No discouragement then to humbled sinners from the greatness
of their sins; Paul is here a monument of mercy, and a pattern, v. 16.

III. Take hence one ground of the Saints patience, under the reproaches and
calumnies of the world: you can scarce think so ill of them, as they do of
themselves; and therefore though they deserve them not from you, and your
accusation is false, yet they can see God just in opening your mouths to
reproach them; as David of cursing Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11. and so of
scoffing Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 22, I will yet be more vile. In this Christians
imitate their Savior, who, when he was reviled, answered not again. Paul was
esteemed a babbler, a madman, a murderer, not worthy to live; yet he gloried
in all reproaches, and acknowledged himself the chief of sinners.

IV. See hence both the power, and the freeness of the grace of God, which so
suddenly made the wolf a lamb; the chiefest of sinners, the greatest of the
Apostles. You can imagine no desert, or meritorious preparation in a
blasphemer, and persecutour, to the grace of God; himself attributes it only
to mercy, verse. 13, 14. and Gal. 1. 13, 15.

V. See the infinite and unsearchable abyss of divine wisdom, that makes a
persecutour a preacher, and he who formerly blasphemed his name, now a chosen
vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles and Kings, Acts 9. 13. This is best
resolved into Gods absoluteness, who makes use of whom he will. Though it may
be he chose his Apostles some of great sinners, ut non tam voce, quam exemplo
concionarentur de gratuita remissione peccatorum, as Aegidius notes, That they
might preach free grace by their Examples, as well as Sermons. As the people
said of the other Saul the King, 1 Samuel 10. 11. Is Saul also among the
Prophets? so may we of this Saul, Is he among the Apostles? O the depth of the
wisdom of God! etc. Romans 11. 33.

VI. Let us all then look after this particular faith, whereby we may receive
Christ; rest not upon this general belief, that Christ came into the world to
save sinners in the gross; thou may perish for all this; but apply Christ
particularly to thy self, as Thomas, My Lord, and my God, Joh. 20. 28. and the
Blessed Virgin, Luke 1. 47. and S. Paul, Who loved me, etc. The promises of the
Gospel will be but dry breasts to thee, no comfort from them, if thou drawest
not from them by the mouth of a special faith: and to believe that Christ came
to save sinners, will be little comfort or advantage to you, unless by a
particular relyance you rest on Christ, and by a special application receive
him, as S. Paul, Gal. 2. and here, of whom I am chief; viz. of those who fly
to Christ for salvation, and to whom this is an acceptable doctrine, That Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of which, says he, I am the chief.

FINIS.
A LOOKING-GLASS FOR MAGISTRATES.

A Sermon preached September 29. in Cambridge, at the Major's entering upon his
Office.

By JOHN FROST, B. D. then Fellow of S. JOHN'S College, and late Preacher in
Olaves-Hartstreet in London.

Bonus Magistratus servus Publicus. Six. Senens.



CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. Anno Dom. MDCLVII.

JUDGES 2. 7 And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of
the Lord, that he did for Israel.
HAd we no other argument to convince us of the necessity and usefulness of
Magistratie, not only for preserving the Peace of the State, but for the
security of the Service and Worship of God, and protection of Religion; it were
sufficient to consider that constant provision, which the providence of God,
watching over the Jews (then his own peculiar Church and people) made for
succession in this Office. For proof of which we need go no further then Joshua
in the Text, Moses his successor as well in his Piety as Government, designed
and appointed to it before Moses his death by God himself, and that upon Moses
his request, who well understood the necessity of good Magistrates, Numb. 27.
16, 17. Which request God granted him, and therefore commanded him to set apart
Joshua for his Successor, who might perfect that work he had begun. In which
some observe a mystery: That Moses led the people out of Egypt, but Joshua
brought them into Canaan. The Law may be a means to bring us out of our natural
Egyptian bondage and darkness; but only the true Joshua, Jesus Christ, of whom
Joshua was a type, can bring us to our celestial Canaan. But to omit
allegories, I find Joshua was thrice appointed to this office. First, Deuteronomy.
31. 7, 14. Again, Numb. 27. 22, 23. And then the third time after the death of
Moses, God himself giving him his charge and commission, Josh. 1. 1, 2. The end
of all which was, as to give the people the greater assurance of Gods will in
designing him, which might command their more ready obedience to him, so for
the greater encouragement of Joshua himself, to undertake with courage and
resolution those great and difficult services God had laid out for him, as
being hereby assured of divine assistance to enable and carry him through,
which God himself suggests to Joshua, Josh. 1. 9. And as Joshua received his
commission and power by a remarkable and immediate designment of God; so he
with much zeal and answerable success, managed it for the glory of God: For the
people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, etc. The words represent to us
three things.

1. The pattern of a good Magistrate 1. In Joshua. 2. The influence 2. Upon
Religion. 3. The charge and duty 3. To look that the people serve God.

For, sure, this was the issue of Joshuaes zeal and pious care of Religion,
that that people, who were so stiff necked, as that they often murmured and
repined under Moses government, insomuch that Moses could not stir up into the
Mount to converse with God, but presently they fall to idolatry, (Exodus 32. 1,
2.) that this people should for the space of between twenty seven and twenty
eight years, (for so long Joshua ruled, by the computation of the learned
Masius) keep them to the true worship and service of God, spoke certainly his
diligent care and zeal. Which is further evident from verse. 11, 12, 13. where
we read that Joshua was no sooner dead, but the people fall to idolatry, and
serving Baal, and Ashtaroth, in stead of serving God. These three particulars
shall bound my discourse and your patience.

First, for the pattern of a good Magistrate, Joshua. And so he may be in these
nine particulars.

I. His resolved piety, which you may read, Josh. 24. 15. Thus when God bad
Moses to set apart Joshua for this office, he described him thus, Numb. 27. 18.
A man in whom is the Spirit; not only the Spirit of government, but of
sanctification and holiness: and such should all Magistrates be, Men fearing
God. Such Jethro, though an Heathen, would have Moses choose, Exodus 18. 21.
That accursed Machiavel allows a shadow and appearance of Religion as useful
unto Magistrates, but the power and realitie pernicious. A principle perhaps
suiting with the designs of a carnal Politician, but not of a Christian
Magistrate, who lies under all possible obligations to the reality of Religion
and Piety. If there were nothing else, the law of an ingenuous gratitude
challenges this, as considering that promotion comes neither from the East,
nor from the West, nor from the South: But God is the Judge; he puts down
one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. Therefore considering that the
powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1. it must needs engage him to the
pious service of that God, from whom he derives his power. But, besides this,
there are many other weighty engagements to this real piety; as the command
of God, Psalm 2. 10, 11. and the pious examples of good Magistrates. David, a
man after Gods own heart, danced before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 20. Some think this
Acts 13. 22.
intimated, Josh. 1. 1. where Joshua is called Moses his Minister, to note
(says Ferus) that none is fit to be a Magistrate and to rule others by his
laws, but he, who has first learned obedience to the law of God; Nisi qui
prius legi Dei se subjecerit. Add to these the titles Scripture gives to
Magistrates, who are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. They have the stamp of his
authority, and should therefore bear the image of his holiness. They are called
Fathers, Job 25. 16. which is Nomen pietatis and potestatis, says Tertullian:
an engagement to piety as well as a title of authority; and speaks their duty
to be above the people in holiness as well as honor, in goodness as well as
greatness. Besides, piety and Religion is necessary in a Magistrate, that he
may (as he ought) rule in the fear of God, as David says, 2 Samuel 23. 3. This
will make him just to others, humble in himself, faithful in the discharge of
his calling and particular trust, conscientious in his actions: and it will
keep Magistracy from degenerating into Tyranny, command the peoples obedience,
and beget in them reverence and awful respects to their Superiors, and
promote the happiness and security of Government; most of which you have
excellently expressed, Deuteronomy. 17. 10. Besides, there is no such cement and sure
tie of affections and love between Magistrate and people, as Religion is: none
so fit to rule others as those, in whose souls piety and the fear of God rules
and bears sway. Observe what Moses says to the people, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Take ye
wisemen and understanding, and known among your tribes; known for Religion and
the fear of God. The great duty of Magistrates is to appear against, and
discountenance sin in others, which an ungodly Magistrate will never do to the
purpose. Nothing makes public persons more fearful to appear against sin in
others, (whether Ministers in reproving, or Magistrates in punishing) then
guilt at home, fearing lest, as the Apostle says, Romans 2. 1. wherein they
judge others, they should condemn themselves, seeing they themselves do the
same things. But if all this prevail not, if neither the honor of God, nor
their own good; yet tenderness and pity to the people under them should prevail
upon them to be religious, lest their sins involve the people in public
misery, as the sins of Magistrates often do: Quicquid delirant Reges, etc.
Seventy thousand of the people died for David's sin in numbering them, 2. Sam.
24. 15. Therefore if Magistrates regard either Gods glory, their own happiness,
or their peoples safety, they must write after Joshuaes copy, viz. piety
toward God. That is the first: as parts of, or helps to this piety,

II. His diligent study of the word of God. For questionless, what was Gods
command to him was his practice, and that ye may see, Joshua 1. 8. An excellent
employment, a most proper exercise for a Christian Magistrate; which therefore
we have under the divine command, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. The Magistrates power is
not absolute and arbitary, but limited and contracted; and the exercise of this
power should be answerable to, and regulated by the rule of the word of God:
not by emergencies of State, or the like, but by the word. Their laws are
unjust, their power is pernicious, their commands tyrannical; if the one enact,
or the other impose a thing contrary to the word. It was the just commendation
of Alphonsus king of Arragon, that he conversed much with the word of God,
which he perused ten times over with a Comment. It is the Magistrates duty to
maintain and propagate the true worship and service of God, as I shall show
more anon. But how to distinguish the true worship and service of God from
idolatry or superstitious worship can be known only by the word of God, in
which God has laid down a platform and Idea of the true manner how he will be
worshipped.

III. Prayer and devotion to God. God when he gave Joshua his charge, Josh. 1.
2. bad him Arise, etc. Surge. Videtur Joshua in oratione jacuisse, says Ferus
upon the place. Prostration was then the usual posture of prayer. A duty well
becoming a Christian Magistrate; which David knew well, and therefore resolves
Evening, and morning, and at noon to pray, and cry aloud unto God, Psalm. 55.
17. It is reported of Charles the fifth, that he was so frequent G^rard. page
786.
in his devotion, that his Courtiers were wont to say, Quod saepius cum Deo,
quam cum hominibus loqueretur, That he conversed more with God, then with men.
And truly, they who seriously consider the burden of Magistracy, and (through
the turbulency, disquiet, and unruliness of many spirits) the difficulty of
managing it, and how much wisdom and prudence is required to it, and withal
that all the enablements, and assistances to go through it, come from above
from God, will easily see, that prayer and devotion is necessary to a
Magistrate. Magistrates should be men of knowledge and understanding; as it is
said of David, that he was wise as an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 14. 20. Moses bid
the people seek out men of knowledge and understanding to be Rulers over them,
Deuteronomy. 1. 13. The way to come by this wisdom is prayer: which Solomon was
sensible of, when being put to his choice what to ask, he prayed for wisdom, 1
King 3. 9. The same his father David had prayed for for him before, 1 Chronicles.
22. 12. The Lord give thee wisdom and understanding: both to govern thy self
and others. And the Apostle bids expressly those, who want wisdom, to ask it
of God* Jam. 1. 5. And if ever this were needful, then now certainly in our
days. A skillful Pilot and Mariner is most required in a storm, when the
boisterous tumultuous waves threaten a shipwreck: and wise and skillful
Magistrates, to secure the Church from splitting upon the rock of error and
heresy, or the State of Anarchy and confusion.

4. His courage and resolution to undertake any service for God, though upon
the greatest improbabilities, and most difficult disadvantages. If he sends him
against Jericho, only with Rams-horns, he undertakes it. This God often urges
upon Joshua, Josh. 1. 18. Only be strong, and of a good courage. A good
qualification of a Christian Magistrate; Courage, to stand up for God, and
Courage to appear against sin: Courage to bear up against reproaches and
calumnies of men (for these you must look to meet with) that you be not afraid
of the face of man, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Alexander was wont to say, that this was vere
regium, well becoming Authority to do well, and to hear ill: such a Courage
and equal greatness and magnanimity of spirit becomes a Magistrate, as may
neither be over-heightned by anger and passion, which often makes Magistracy
degenerate into a cruel Tyranny; nor yet emasculated and weakened by timorous
low fearfulness, which may cause him to pervert justice, whilst he fears
either the Malefactors greatness, or his own disgrace and inconvenience.
Solomon's Throne was upheld by Lions. A Lions heart upholds the Magistrates
power and authoritle; whilst a base pusillanimous cowardice betraies his
Government to contempt, his person to reproach, and encourages the people
(whilst through his cowardice they promise themselves impunitie) to confidence
in sin and profaneness. It was a brave resolution of David (which if all
Magistrates, as it is their duty, should take up, we should not see such an
overflowing of open profaneness) Psalm. 101. 7, 8. He that works deceit, etc.

V. The mild and sweet tenderness of his Government. He rather chose to lead
the people, then to drive them; to persuade, then to force them. An instance of
this you have, Josh. 1. 12, 13, 14. etc. He might by his power have commanded
and compelled them, or else justly stripped and deprived them of that possession,
which was allotted them by Moses, which was only upon condition of their
obedience in passing Jordan, Numb. 32. 29, 30. But see, he chose rather
friendly to admonish and entreat them; and see the fruit of it, it overcame the
people into obedience, Josh. 1. 16, 17. And no wonder Joshua was so tender and
gentle, being instructed and educated by Moses, the meekest man upon the face
of the earth, Number. 12. 3. A fit temper sure of a Christian Magistrate, as being
that by which these God's of the earth resemble the God of heaven. This is it
which preserves and secures Government, Prove. 20. 28. The reason sure is,
because nothing does so powerfully, yet so sweetly command the peoples
obedience. Thus Absalom stole away the hearts of the people of Israel, 2 Samuel
15. 5. Whilst a morose imperious cruelty exasperates men's minds, and makes
them tumultous and rebellious; a sweet mild elemencie makes them facile and
flexible. Historians observe, that the cruelty of Nero, Vitellius, Domitian,
Heliogabalus and others betrayed them to hasty and violent deaths, whilst the
sweetness and clemency of Trajan, Augustus, Adrianus, and Titus Vespasian (who
was hence called deliciae humani generis) caused their Bellarm. p. 95.
longer life, and more honorable and natural death. Pliny tells us that the
king of the Bees has no sting: a Magistrate should be of such an equal temper,
that neither by an overmuch facility he might encourage sin, nor yet by a too
severe cruelty oppress and tyrannize.

VI. His Vigilancie and watchfulness: of which we have an instance, Josh. 3. 1.
And Joshua rose early in the morning, etc. A duty, which lies much upon
Magistrates: Continual dangers attend them, and difficulties offer themselves
to them: and they must be watchful, lest, whilst they sleep, the enemy comes
and sows tares, the Tares of Mat. 13. 25.
Heresy in the Church, or Faction and Sedition in the State. (...), It becomes
not a Magistrate to sleep a Hom. Iliad. ^.
whole night, the Heathen could say. The Apostle exhorts them who rule, that
they should do it with diligence, (...), Romans 12. 8. Magistrates would do well
to consider whose work they are employed in, viz. the work of God. His Deputies
they are, and therefore may tremble to think of that, Jer. 48. 10. Cursed be he
that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, or, negligently, as it is in the
Margent; and this may provoke them to care and vigilancie in their duty.

VII. His care in the execution of justice: carefully enquiring into the cause,
before he passed sentence. A pregnant instance of which we have, Josh. 7. in
his dealing with Achan: how he searched, first into the Tribes, then into the
Families, then into the households, till at last he found the person? Then he
was as just and severe in punishing, as he had been diligent and careful in
enquiring. This becomes all Magistrates in the execution of justice, not to
pass a rash judgment through a precipitate have or passion; but to search out
the truth of the cause, by which means they may come, neither to spare or
countenance the sin, nor yet to wrong the person. God himself has set
Magistrates a pattern in this: before he would pour fire and brimstone upon*
Sodom, Genesis 18. 21. I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me: and if not, I
will know. Which is spoke after the manner of men. This God commands
Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge
righteously, etc. And again, Deuteronomy. 17. 4. And it be told thee, and thou have
heard of it, and enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, etc. This was
the custom of the Romans, Acts 25. 16. not to deliver any man to die, before
that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to
answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him. Magistrates should be
indeed blind to the person, but seeing into the cause.

VIII. His consulting the Priest of God, and asking and taking his direction:
which was God's command, and his practice, Number. 27. 21. And he shall stand
before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the judgment of
Urim before the Lord: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall
come in, both he and all the children of Israel with him, even all the
congregation. This was the practice of good Magistrates of old, as Jehosaphat
asked counsel of Micaiah, 1 Kings 22. 5. David of Nathan: Hezechiah of Isaiah,
2 Kings 19. 2. Theodosius of S. Ambrose: and it would speak the humility and
the piety of the Magistrates to do so still. This good and advantage we should
likely find by it, that Magistrates would rule more according to the word of
God, and be less acted by carnal interests, and worldly policies and designs.

IX. And lastly, His public* spiritedness; his minding the common interest,
and preferring the public good of the people before his private advantage. A
signal instance of which we have in dividing the land, Josh. 19. 49. When they
had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the
children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them. He
might have taken first, and the greater part too; but he prefers the peoples
good before his own. This excellently suits with a good Magistrate, who should
not seek great things for himself, or to exalt himself, or promote his own
interest; but to carry on the public good and concernment. It was good
counsel which the Philosopher gave Di^teric. p. 723.
Alexander his scholar, That he should undertake the government, (...): Not for
his own honor so much, as for the peoples good. And the same Philosopher makes
this distinction between a good and a bad Magistrate, (...), Arist. Eth^c. lib.
8. cap. 10.
A bad Magistrate seeks his own, a good one the peoples good and profit. When
God promised Moses, Exodus 32. 10, 11. to make of him a great nation, but would
destroy Israel; he had no mind to that preferment upon those terms. Nothing
more contrary to the nature of the Magistrates office, which was appointed by
God for the good of others, nothing more destructive to the public, then
private interest and base self-seeking, unworthy of a Christian, and more of a
Magistrate, the very end of whose office is the public good.

Secondly, The influence of a good Magistrate; which he may have,

I. By his good and religious example. Examples are very prevalent, and of
great force with most men: and by this Joshua promoted the service of God,
Josh. 24. 24. You may see the peoples resolution to serve the Lord, which was
sure the issue of Joshua's resolve, verse 15. But as for me and my house, we
will serve the Lord. Therefore Origin, after his usual manner, allegorizing
upon this place, interprets all the days of Joshua, all the virtues of Joshua,
as Justitia, Misericordia, etc. whom Hugo and Lyra follow. The examples of
great ones, of men in place and authority, do powerfully incline others,
whether to good or bad, to sin or holiness. Observe what the Wiseman says,
Prove. 29. 12. If a ruler bearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. As it is
said of Israel, that their leaders made them to err, Esaias. 9. 16. This was the
account of the Pharisees rejecting Christ, John 7. 48. Have any of the rulers
believed on him? Thus the Israelites wrote after the copy of Solomon's
Idolatry, 1 Kings 11. 5, 7, 33. How is Jeroboam branded with this, that he
made Israel to sin, viz. the example and president of his Idolatry? 1 Kings
14. 16. Their Religion or Idolatry ebbed and flowed according to the temper of
their Kings. S. Augustine speaking August. Conf. lib. 1. cap. 16.
of that youth in Terence, who was encouraged to the sin of Adultery by the
example of their God Jupiter, meditates thus, Vide quemadmodum se concitat ad
libidinem coelesti quodam Magistro: so men are emboldned by the sins of
Magistrates to commit the same as they, whom Scripture calls God's. There is
a kind of Soveraingtie in the examples of great ones over men's lives and
actions; and, as Lactantius notes, men account it, Obsequii quoddam genus
Lactan. instit. l. 5. c. 6.
Regis vitia imitari; and therefore cast of all piety, ne Regi scelus
exprobrare viderentur, lest their contrary virtues might seem to upbraid their
Governors vices. Therefore Magistrates upon this account are engaged to the
service of God, lest they incur the guilt of other men's sins, and by their
example countenance those sins, which by their sword of justice they should
punish. Wickedness invalidates the Magistrates authority, and weakens his hands
in the execution of justice, and encourages sin in others; as the Egyptians
esteemed it graceful and their duty, to halt on that leg on which their
King limped. On the contrary, a Magistrates religious example provokes piety in
others. This makes Religion glorious and lovely in the eyes of others, when it
shines with the rays of greatness and Majesty. David, by his liberal
contribution to the building of the Temple, provokes the people to a willing
benevolence, 1 Chronicles. 29. 6, 7. etc. The Ninevites humble themselves by the
example of their king, Jonah 3. 6. There may perhaps be something to this
purpose in that expression, Hagg. 2. 23. where God says of Zerubbabel, that he
will make him as a seal, or a signet, to intimate the care and account God
makes of good Magistrates, as men do of a Ring or Seal, he has them
continually in his hand; see, what an impression Great-ones may make upon the
people, and how readily the people will receive that Signature and impression
of Holiness, which they see engraven upon their Governors and Superiors. This
then may engage Magistrates to Holiness, that they may go before others in a
holy life. It was the honor of that Roman Caesar, that he was never heard to
say, Ite Milites, but Venite Commilitones.

-- Ignave, venire
Te Caesar, non ire jubet. --
A most prevalent course: for this makes the people conceive of the Magistrates
commands as equal and reasonable, when they see Holiness and Religion, not
only enacted by their laws, but legible in their lives.

That Is the first.

II. By punishing sin. Herein appeared Joshua's zeal, in causing Achan to be
stoned, Joshua 7. 25. This is part of the Commission God has given you; to
this end he has put a Sword into your hand, Romans 13. 4, 6. and 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Magistrates should punish sin without fear or favor, by an impartial execution
of the Laws, as for Sabbath breaking (a reigning sin) swearing, drunkenness,
etc. Nor be Gallioes, when these sins are brought before you, You care for none
of these things, Acts 18. 17. Magistrates should be zealous in punishing
First-Table-sins; for the Second-Table-sins, such as Thefts, Murders, and the
like, are the issue and birth of Atheism, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, etc. as,
I suppose, you have heard men, when brought to suffer (then we may judge them
most serious) crying out of their Sabbath-breaking, as that which brought them
to it.

Thus a Magistrate may promote the service of God, by punishing Irreligion and
Profaneness, etc.

III. By countenancing and encouraging the godly; viz. those who desire to walk
strictly with, and attend the public service and Ordinances of God. Thus did
David, Psalm. 101. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that
they may dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

IV. By upholding the public worship of God, and bringing the people to the
public Ordinances. Thus did Joshua, if we credit Brentius, who gives this as
the reason, why wickedness prevailed so much after Joshua's death, Quia post
Joshuam ministerium collapsum erat. Then the Ordinances and Ministry were
neglected; upon which followed Atheism, and contempt of God, and that let in
an inundation of Profaneness. I know Religion is an act of the mind and soul,
and so not liable to any outward restraint, but is only subject to him, who
has an absolute command and Soveraigntie over the conscience: but conformity
to an outward worship may be commanded by a Superior, without any Tyranny
over conscience, or infringement of Christian liberty. I know the Spirit of
God can only put them in, but, I believe, it is the Magistrates duty and
charge to see them brought to the pool.

V. By protecting and countenancing the Ministry of the word of God, and the
public preaching of the Gospel. Magistrates are compared to Gates in
Scripture, Ruth 3. 11. intimating their duty to let in, and give a passage to
the Gospel. Then the Church and State is like to flourish, sin discountenanced,
Religion propagated, when Read Theodoret, l. 1. c. 2.
Moses and Aaron go hand in hand together; the Magistrate to correct sin, the
Minister to reprove; when the Magistrate makes use of the Ministers direction,
and the Minister enjoys the Magistrates protection. It is said of good king
Jehosaphat, that he sent princes to teach in the cities of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17.
7. not that they did publicly dispense the word; for they had Levites with
them, verse 8. and they taught, verse 6. But they were sent to provide for, and
countenance the Levites in that office; and this is certainly the Christian
Magistrates duty, to protect the Ministers of the Gospel,

1. In their repute and credit: lest the Gospel come to be scorned; as we have
found by lamentable experience; that, since the Ambassadors of the Gospel have
been disrespected, and opprobries of ignorant men cast upon them to cloud their
credit; the Gospel has been undervalued, errors multiplied, the Scriptures
questioned and vilified: and, I fear, the Magistrates will scarce wash their
hands from much guilt of all this.

2. In their maintenance and just rights. Famem ministrorum sequitur Fames
verbi, as Luther long since foretold, That famishing the Ministers would usher
in a Famine of the word. And if ever the maintenance of the Ministry comes to
be arbitrary, we should have none but Micha's Levites, who serve for ten
shekels by the year, and a suit of apparel, and his victuals. This is
Scripture, Judge. 17. 10. And if you mark the circumstance of the story, it was
when there was noking in Israel, etc. verse. 6. And that will befall the
Ministers, which God threatened as a curse upon Elie's house, 1 Samuel 2. 36. And
it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine house shall come
and crouch to him for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, and shall say,
Put me, I pray thee, into one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a piece of
bread. Would you account him a friend to the child, that should starve the
nurse, that she can give no milk to it? no better friends are they (pretend
what they will) who would starve the Ministers, and so rob the people of the
sincere milk of the word, by which they should grow, 1 Pet. 2. 2. This
Scripture speaks of as the badge of bad Magistrates. A persecuting Ahab, that
counted Elijah the troubler of Israel, 1 Kings 18. (the language of too many
now adays) and those ungodly Princes, who cast Jeremy into the dungeon, Jer.
37. 15. Good Hezekiah was of another spirit and temper. See his remarkable
zeal, 2 Chronicles. 31. 2. that the people might not want the service of God: and
verse. 4. he orders the Priests and Levites maintenance, that they might neither
want subsistence nor encouragement. A good pattern for good Magistrates, who
desire to promote the worship and service of God.

VI. By building or repairing the places of Gods worship and service. Thus we
find David both by his example and entreaty prepare for the building of the
Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 2, 3. Solomon building it. It was David's trouble, and that
which he looked upon as an absurdity, that he should live in an House of
Cedars, and the Ark of God remain within curtains, 2 Samuel 7. 2. Thus Joas, 2
King. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. Josiah, 2 King. 22. 3, 4, 5. took care for repairing it.
And it spoke the pious care of Constantine, that after the Church was come out
of those ten furious persecutions, he caused the Idol Temples to be shut up,
and the Christian Churches demolished by Dioclesian to be reedified. And this
piece of promoting the service of God you are not ignorant how your Magistrate,
now in being, has imitated in reedifying that place of worship formerly famous
for Perkins and others; which as you cannot without ingratitude but acknowledge
as a testimony of his affection to your town (thus they argued of their
centurion to Christ, Luke 7. 5. For he loves our nation, and he has built us
a Synagogue) so we cannot without uncharitableness but apprehend it, as a good
presage of his future zeal in his Government for promoting and upholding the
true worship and service of God.

VII, And lastly, The influence of a good Magistrate will appear, if we
consider the sad effects of the want of Magistracy. For which I shall lead you
no further then this Church of the Jews: read at your leisure the five last
Chapters of this book of Judges, where you may see the sinful and miserable
estate of the Jews, when there was no King in Israel; not only outrages and
filthy abominations abounding, as the abusing of the Levites Concubine unto
death, Chap. 19. But also Irreligion and Idolatry in the Church, Micah makes
himself Idols, and an Ephod and Teraphim, and consecrates one of his sons for
his Priest, Chap. 17. 5. and then the cause of all this is expressly set down,
ver. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which
was right in his own eyes. It is controverted what time all this fell out:
Josephus is of opinion, that F^ru^, p. 472.
this Idolatry fell out presently after Joshuaes death, before there was either
Judge or King in Israel. And you may observe how the Religion of Israel decayed
upon the loss of a good Magistrate; as after the death of Gideon, Judge. 8. 33.
and after the death of Joshua in this Chapter, ver. 11, 12. who, whilst he
lived, had such an influence upon them, that the people served the Lord all the
days of Joshua: and that is the second thing; The influence of a good Magistrate
upon Religion.

Thirdly, The charge and duty of a good Magistrate,

To uphold religion and the worship of God: which must be understood,

I. Not of the immediate exercise of the public worship of God, as preaching
or administering the Sacraments. This is not the Magistrates duty, as Theodoret
tells us of Theodosius the Emperor; who Theodoret. l. 5. cap. 16, 17.
when he would come to have encroached upon some acts of worship peculiar only
to the Priest, S. Ambrose made him this answer, (...) His scarlet made him a
Magistrate, not a Minister. These are acts of office and belonging to
Ministers, as a peculiar and distinct function from Magistracy. Therefore for
them to engage in these, is but (...), to be busy bodies in other men's matters.
But

II. Their charge is to uphold the Ordinances, and to propagate and countenance
the public worship of the true God, and preaching of his word. Jehoiadah, when
he anointed Joash, gave him the Book of the law to keep, 2 King. 11. 12. as
minding him of his duty in taking care for Religion and the worship of God.
This is that which was prophesied of Gospel Times, Esaias. 49. 23. Kings shall be
thy Nursing-Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing-Mothers, etc. And in
discountenancing all false worship of God. This has been the constant
practice, and the deserved glory and praise of good Magistrates: as it was the
glory of Jehoshaphat, that he sent out Levites to preach in Judah, and Princes
to protect and countenance them: as you read, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8. Non enim
usurparunt sibi functionem alienam, says Lavater. Therefore they did not
preach; but through Lavater. in locum.
the zeal of that good Magistrate were sent to provide, that the word of God
might be upheld by the civil authority. So he that shall read, 2 Kings. 23.
will evidently see Josiahs care for Religion in his destroying Idolatry, and
providing for the teaching of the law. Hezekiah provides for the keeping of the
Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. Darius makes a public edict, that the God of Daniel
only should be worshipped, Dan. 6. 26. And, to name no more, Joshua here: what
care did he take for the worship of God? See, how he exhorts the people to it,
Josh. 24. 14. And this is the duty of every good Magistrate upon a fourfold
account.

1. To secure the peoples obedience. Observe how ready an obedience the people
gave to Joshua, Josh. 1. 17. According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things,
so we will hearken unto thee, etc. And truly, I think, there is no more
effectual means to keep the people in obedience, then to uphold the Ordinances.
For the word of God, where it converts not, it often civilizeth, and lays a
restraint and curb upon men's Spirits. It takes cognizance of, and reproves,
and censures those sins (inward lurking sins) which the civil sword cannot
reach. Si vis omnia tibi subjicere, subjice rationi, says Seneca: Seneca,
Epist. 17.
I will say Pietati. They will be more readily subject to the Magistrate, who
are kept in subjection to and compliance with the Ordinances of God. It was a
notable trial which Constantine made Eusebius. l. 1. c. 11. de vita Constant.
of his subjects: He pretended, that those who would sacrifice to the Idol
gods, should secure their preferments at Court; and those who refused, should
forthwith be banished and stripped of their preferment. A great part (not knowing
the Emperors design) complied with the Heathens Idolatry; whom presently the
good Emperor caused to be excluded from the Court, giving this reason of it,
(...), etc. How shall they ever keep their fidelity to me, who have already
cast off their religion to God. And our own sad experience tells us (he is
wilfully blind, that sees it not) that the Magistrates have no greater
enemies, then those, who have thrown off the public Ordinances and service of
God, and are crept into houses. Their pretense is against the Ministry, but
they are enemies to the Magistracy. As I am informed, some scattered papers
have been in this Town to that effect: and they can spit damnation in the
Magistrates, as well as in the Ministers faces. They pretend to be only
against bad Magistrates, and they would have the civil sword only in the hands
of the Saints; but then the next thing is, they must be accounted the only
Saints; so that the design is, either no Magistracy at all, or else they are
the only Saints (forsooth) must have it. And truly this would be no other
then to put the sword into mad-mens hands.

2. To preserve the peace and safety of the Nation. This is the Magistrates
duty, called therefore Sheilds, Psalm. 47. 10. and Foundations, Psalm. 82. 5.
Both speak defense and protection. Which, sure, is most effectually consulted
by upholding the public Ordinances and worship of God. The two pillars Jachin
and Boaz (that is, Establishment and strength) proceeded from the Temple, 1
Kings 7. 21. The true worship of God is the Nations security. The Philosopher
among those things, without which a Commonwealth cannot long subsist, reckons
(...), The care of Religion. Troy Arist. Polit. lib. 7. cap. 8.
was safe, while the Palladium was preserved; but when in the Trojan-war that
was taken, the city soon after was stormed. While Magistrates endeavor to
keep up the public exercises of Religion, they do the State the best service
that can be. Thus they interest God and his providence; his glory is wound up
in their good, so long as Religion is consulted. Livie tells us it was a
custom of the Romans, Live. lib. 1. Decad. 3.
when they besieged any city, Quibusdam sacris evocare genios loci tutelares,
ne eorum conatibus obstent; To endeavor to get out their tutelar gods, lest
they should hinder their design. Religion and the service of God is the
protection of the Nation. Socrates says, that any one who considers it may
easily observe, (...): Socrat. Praesat. ad lib. 5. Hist.
That the same miseries fell together both upon Church and State. The Peace of
the one, and the Religion of the other, ebbed and flowed together. Sometimes
disorders in the State ushered in irreligion in the Church; and irreligion in
the Church oftener brought confusion upon the State. And this Scripture speaks.
Observe but how it fared with Israel, Judge. 5. 8. They chose new gods, then was
war in the gates, etc. That Is a notable place, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. For a long
season Israel has been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest,
and without Law. See the decay of Religion: and verse. 6. read the sad event of
it, And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and city of city: for God did vex
them with all adversity. The Calves at Dan and Bethel, which Jeroboam thought
good policy to set up for the security of his kingdom, proved it is ruin, and
betrayed his kingdom to the Assyrians, 2 Kings 17. Certainly Religion is the
best policy to preserve and secure the blessing of God upon a Nation. How did
God bless the house of Obed-Edom while the Ark remained with him? 2 Samuel 6. 12.
and Pharaoh for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39. 5. So Micah, Judge. 17. 13. Now know I
that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. So the
public Ordinances and Ministry are the best blessings to a Nation. As Elisha
said, when he saw Elijah taken from him; O my Father! The chariots of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof (in those times therein consisted their strength). So
if once the public Ordinances and Ministry be taken from us, the strength and
security of the Nation is gone.

3. To uphold the glory of the Nation. It is observable what the Lord says to
Joshua, (chap. 5. 9. This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off
you.) after they had circumcised the people: that is, says Junius, The
profaneness of their Fathers in Egypt, ^aylor, Types, page 47.
whereby they grew careless and negligent of the Ordinances of God. God rolled
away this reproach, Dum per circumcisionem admittit ad celebrandum Pascha,
(says learned Masius) which had for Masius in loc.
so many years been omitted. This the Apostle reckons as the great privilege,
Romans 3. 2. so also the great glory of the Jewish Nation, chap. 9. 4. When the
Priests were slain, and the Ark taken, Phinehas his wife named her child
Ichabod; For (says she) the glory is departed from Israel. So if ever we come
to lose the Ministry and Ordinances, you may well sadly say, The glory is
departed from England.

4. To preserve their own glory, repute, and honor. Thus was our good
Magistrate in the Text glorious in the eyes of all the people, Josh, 3. 7. and
4. 14. This is it which good Magistrates have always gloried in. I do not
remember that the title of any one of David's Psalms is David the King of
Israel, but the thirtieth Psalm is inscribed, David the servant of the Lord. He
thought this surely the more glorious title. S. Austin tells us of Theodosius
the Emperor, S. August. de Civ. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 26
That Ecclesiae se membrum esse, magis quam in terris regnare gaudebat: He
accounted it more his glory and honor to be himself a member of the Church,
then Emperor of the world: and in the 24 chapter of the same book, S. Austin
tells us what Magistrates are truly to be accounted happy and honorable; Not
those, who reign long, or whose conquests are many, successes great, or power
arbitrary; sed qui suam potestatem ad Dei cultum maxim dilatandum Majestati
ejus famulam faciunt; They who improve their power for the propagating the true
Religion and service of God, and make their power subservient to his glory to
which they are obliged as Christians, more as Magistrates set up by God for the
protection of Religion. It is here spoken as the glory and honor of Joshua,
That the people served the Lord all his days.

The Application shall only be briefly this: Let both people and Magistrate
from all this learn their duty. Has the Magistrate such an influence upon, and
charge over Religion and the service of God? Then let the people learn a
threefold duty to Magistrates.

First, Of prayer for them. This David foretells as part of the glory of
Solomon's government, that prayer shall continually be made for him, Psalm. 72.
15. Tertullian shows that it was the constant practice Tertul. Apol. cap. 30,
and 31.
of Christians, to pray even for the persecuting Emperors; Hoc agite (says
he) boni Praesides, extorquete animam Deo supplicantem pro Imperatore; Send
these Christian souls to heaven breathing out prayers for their persecuting
Emperor. And how much rather is it our duty to pray for those Christian
Magistrates, who stand up for the defense and protection of the true worship of
God? This is the use the Apostle makes of it, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort
therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

Secondly, Of honor and reverence. Romans 13. 7. Honor (says the Apostle) to
whom honor is due; as being the Ordination of God, bearing the image of his
authority; as also because of those blessings, which God derives unto us by
them as instruments. Entertain honorable thoughts of them, as set over you not
by chance, but providence; and though by man as the instrument (in which
respect the Apostle Peter calls it (...), 1 Pet. 2. 13,) in electing, or the
like; yet by God as the supreme Lord, in which respect S. Paul says, all
Magistrates are (...). Honor them in your words, speak no evil of them, or
their administrations, without just cause; Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not curse
the ruler of thy people. Then give him an outward civil reverence in thy
gesture and deportment. They certainly do not know the usefulness of
Magistracy, who do not honor them. It was a Law among the Persians, that
G^^rd. page 54.
upon the death of the King, (...), That for five days no laws should be in
force, but every man left to do what he list, that they seeing the confusion,
outrages, and inconvenience of the want of Magistrates, might afterward more
reverence and esteem them. And so should we, if we rightly considered the
misery of the want, or the happiness of enjoying good Magistrates.

Thirdly, Of subjection and obedience. This is the Apostles direct inference;
Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. But why?
first, For his authority and greatness, verse. 4. He is (...). secondly, For his
usefulness: it is (...), It is to thee for good; not only for thy outward
civil good, but for thy spiritual and eternal good; for thy natural good,
protecting thy life; for thy moral good, by wholesome laws restraining thee
from sin; thy civil good, in securing thy outward enjoyments and interests; and
thy spiritual good, while he upholds and propagates the preaching of the word,
and the exercise of religion: thus Paraeus glosseth. And are they not
prevailing arguments of our subjection? How does Apostle Peter charge and
reprove those, who pretend their Christian liberty (as many do now adays) as an
exemption from obedience and subjection to the civil pwer, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of man, etc. and verse. 16. As free, and not
using your liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness, but as the servants of God. As
is he had said, Use your liberty, but not to disobedience. Yet by way of
caution let me add; Your obedience to them and subjection must be limited and
restrained to those commands, which are agreeing to, or not contrary to the
commands of God; for to such commands you owe the Magistrate no obedience. The
three children refuse obedience to the Kings command of bowing to the golden
image, Dan. 3. 18. And Scripture speaks of it as an Act of faith in the
Midwives, to disobey the Kings command of killing all the male children, Exodus
1. 17. and Heb. 11. 23. Daniel prays three times a day, notwithstanding the
edict to the contrary, Dan. 6. 10. Saul's servants refuse his wicked command in
killing the Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 22. 17. Ideo magnus est, quia coelo
minor, says Tertullian. We must so give to Caesar the things that are Cesars,
that we reserve to God the things that are Gods, Matthew. 22. 21. In other things
the Apostles resolution must be ours, Acts 4. 18.

Secondly, Hence, Magistrates, see your charge, and learn your duty; no light
or easy one. It is not only the Crown upon your heads, but the Government
upon your shoulders. The earth is dissolved; I bear up the pillars of it, says
David, Psalm. 75. 3. Join you your shoulders to uphold it; join hand in hand
together (I wish the Magistrates of both bodies would do it) to discountenance
profaneness, to uphold the service and public Ordinances, to the punishing
sin; and let not any self-interests or animosities break your strength, or
weaken your hands in acting for God and for Religion. Let me enforce this upon
you by a threefold consideration.

I. Consider, from whom you have your power. It is from God, Romans 13. 1. For
there is no power but of God, etc. And, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said ye are gods,
and all of you are children of the most High: which expression, as it speaks
that tender fatherly regard God has to good Magistrates, as fathers to their
children; so it speaks participation, that they derive all from God, as a son
has all from his father: therefore it is but equity, that you should employ
that power, which you have received from his goodness, to his glory.

II. Consider, from whom you receive enablements, to put this power in
execution. God as he gives you the power, so he must enable you to execute it.
It was God that gave Solomon wisdom in answer to his prayer, ( Solomon knew
from whom he must have it) to go in and out before the people, 2 Chronicles. 1. 10,
12.

III. Consider, to whom you must be accountable for it. It is not only a
power, but a talent and trust God has put into your hands; and he will one day
call you to account for it: then what a terrible word will that be to a wicked
Magistrate, Luke 16. 2. And he called him, and said unto him: How is it that I
hear this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no
longer steward. He that had improved his Talent, appeared cheerfully before his
Lord to give an account of it; so may you, if by protecting Religion and
discountenancing sin you improve your Talent of Authority for your Master's
glory, Mat. 25. 16.

And for your self (Mr. Major) it being your choice to authorize me to be your
Remembrancer this day, I shall end all with a particular application to you.
Remember you are in a place of opportunity of doing God service: do you, if
others neglect it, (though I hope the rest of your Brethren will friendly go
along with you, and put the shoulder to the work) stand up for Religion and the
service of God; do not look upon your self only, as entrusted by the Town, for
the preserving its peace, and immunities, and privileges, but as entrusted and
empowered by God for the good of the Church, and to keep up Religion in the
Town; which that you may cheerfully and courageously go through, I shall hint
unto you these motives.

The care of Religion,

1. Will make your Government prosperous. So God tells Joshua, chap. 1. 8. This
book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according unto all that is
written therein: For then thou shall make thy ways prosperous, and then thou
shall have good success. So David told Solomon, 1 Kings 2. 3. And keep the
charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, etc. that thou may prosper
in all that thou do, and whithersoever thou tarnest thy self. Uphold
Religion, it will secure you, 1 Chronicles. 22. 13. Then shall thou prosper, if thou
take heed to fulfill the Statutes and judgments, which the Lord charged
Moses with concerning Israel. Thus Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18. 6, 7. For he clave to
the Lord, and departed not from following him, but kept his commandments which
the Lord commanded Moses. And the Lord was with him, and he prospered
whithersoever be went forth.

2. It will make your life honorable, and perpetuate a good name to you; which
is better then precious ointment. So says the Wiseman, Prove. 4. 8. Exalt her,
and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honor when thou do
embrace her.

3. Your death comfortable. It is a fit meditation for a Magistrate to think of
death. Alexander had one to be his constant Remembrancer of this: and the
Psalmist puts the gods of the earth in mind of it, Psalm. 82. 6, 7. But ye
shall die like men, and fall like on of the Princes. Now this will sweeten
death to reflect upon our faithfulness in our particular callings. S. Paul,
when he had finished his course, and kept the faith, could desire to be
dissolved. Moses, a faithful Magistrate, zealous for God, and against
Idolatry (with what courage did he cause the Calf to be burned?) the Jews say
of him, that he died ad osculum oris Dei, at the kisses of Gods mouth, and in
divine embraces. How comfortably did Hezekiah reflect upon this on his
deathbed, Esaias. 38. 3. And he said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. Thus happy shall you be both in life and death, if
you make it your care, what was Joshua's here in the Text, that as they did all
his days, so all your days the people may serve the Lord.

FINIS.
SCRIPTURE-SEARCH: A Duty very necessary for these times, To ground unstable
Christians, and to prevent Apostasy: Laid down in several Sermons, By JOHN
FROST, B. D. sometimes Fellow of S. JOHN'S College, and late Preacher in
Olaves-Hartstreet in London.

Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, Coloss. 3. 16. You do err, not
knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22. 29. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem,
Tertullian. Ama sacras Scripturas, and amabit te sapientia. Hieron.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. Anno Dom. MDCLVII.

JOHN 5. 39. Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they that testify of me.
THere are three things, that may secure Christians from being scandalized at,
or seduced by the Errors, and Heresies of these times.

First, That Scripture has clearly foretold there must be such.

Secondly, That these are but the revivings of those Heresies, which have been
in all ages of the Church.

Thirdly, That Scripture affords us plentiful provision of arguments to
confute them.

And to instance in that one Heresy, or blasphemy of the Socinian at this
day, viz. denying the Divinity of Christ. We shall find it was foretold by
the Apostle S. Peter, in 2 Pet. 2. 1. (denying the Lord that bought them) and
condemned of old by the Fathers, and Councels, in Samosatenus, Photinus, Arius,
Ebion, Cerinthus, and others: and lastly, the Scripture abundantly silenced
this horrid blasphemy, especially by S. John, both in his Epistles, and
Gospel. In his first Epistle, where, by his (...), 1 John 2. 18. his many
Antichrists, he means Marcion, Ebion, Cerinthus, and such like. And in his
Gospel, which in the judgment of Irenaeus and diverse others of the Ancients,
was written on purpose against the blasphemy of Ebion and Cerinthus, the
predecessors and Fathers of our late Socinians. And to evince this (To omit
the first chapter, which is so clear a testimony of the Godhead of Christ,
that Junius confesses, he was converted from Atheism to an acknowledgement of
Christ by his reading of it) I need travel no further then the context of this
chapter, wherein my present Text lies, where our blessed Savior disputing
against the Jews, he demonstrates himself to be the true Messiah, and so
consequently true God, by a four fold testimony.

I. Of John Baptist: whom the Jews were obliged to believe, because they had
before sent to him, to enquire of Christ, v. 33. Ye sent unto John, and he bare
witness of the truth.

II. Of his own works and miracles; which evidently argued the arm of
omnipotency to effect them, at verse 36. The works which the Father has given
me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me, that the Father has
sent me.

III. Of the Father, at verse 37. The Father himself which has sent me, has
born witness of me; viz. that very testimony which the Father gave of the Son,
at his being baptized, in Mat. 3. 17. This is my well-beloved Son.

IV. Of Scripture, here in the Text, which though it be mentioned by our
Savior, as the last, yet is not to be accounted of as the least testimony, as
we shall see in the further handling of them. Search the Scriptures, etc.

The words therefore, for the better handling of them, we shall consider two
ways.

First, Relatively, as they stand to the context.

Secondly, Absolutely, as considered by themselves.

First, Relatively.

Thus considered, they are an argument to prove the Godhead, and Office of
Christ, which was denied and rejected by the Jews. And this he puts last, that
he might vindicate his Doctrine from the suspicion and imputation of novelty:
and also, and that more especially, because all the former testimonies lay
exposed to the cavils, and exceptions of the Jews: as thus,

Against the testimony of John the objection was obvious, that he was one sent,
and suborned by Christ, and therefore his testimony very inconsiderable.

Against his working of miracles, they could easily answer, as sometimes they
did, that he cast out devils by Beelzebub.

Against the testimony of the Father from heaven, it was as easy to cavil,
and say, that it was but a fantasy and delusion, a deceptio sensus, or,
perhaps, a Satanical revelation.

But, when he appeals to the Scriptures, which the Jews themselves
acknowledged, and were even superstitious searchers into, they could have
nothing to cavil, or rationally to object: therefore he says, Search the
Scriptures, etc. as if he had said, If, or, although you will not believe any
of the former testimonies, yet, sure I am, you cannot deny this.

And from hence the observation is this,

Observe. Scripture testimony is the most certain, and infallible ground and
evidence of saving truth.

More certain then Humane testimony, then Miracles, or Revelations.

And this may be cleared by these reasons.

I. It is more certain then Humane testimony; for

1. Scripture testimony is (...), to be credited, and believed for it self,
upon account of that Divine authority it brings with it. It was a blind
reverence that Pythagoras's scholars gave him; whose (...) was sufficient to
command their assent to, and entertainment of whatsoever he taught them. This
is that we ow to Scripture; what it speaks, we must receive as the voice of
God: for so it is, if we credit the Apostle, Hebr. 1. 1. God spoke unto us
sundry ways, etc: No humane testimony can be (...): because the best of men
are fallible, subject to error in judgment, or to be perverted by passion, or
interest of wrath, or to speak contrary to truth; therefore I believe no
humane writing, but what brings satisfaction to my reason, and suspend my
assent till I meet with a rational conviction: but in Scripture-testimony,
though I meet with no other satisfaction to my reason, then this, that God has
said it, I give my assent and belief to it. And thus the Prophets of old used
no other arguments to persuade what they delivered, then, Thus says the Lord.
Divine testimony is above all exception, and to be believed for it self; not
because of the suffrage of the Church, nor the consent and approbation of
reason; for this were to exalt Humane testimony above Divine, and the dictates
of a fallible reason, above the infallible revelations of God, and to set that
in the throne, which God would have us captivate and subdue, as in 2 Cor. 10.
5. The assent we ow to Humane testimonies upon rational conviction, is an
assent of science and demonstration; but the assent I ow to Scripture
testimony, is an assent of faith, grounded only upon Divine revelation, which
is to be believed, though the the testimony of all the world, and the seeming
plausible pretenses of reason should contradict it. As the mystery of the
Trinity, Incarnation, Resurrection, and the like, are to reason seeming
contradictions, yet to be believed upon the account of Scripture testimony; in
which the ultimate resolution of our faith ought to be made not into the
fallible evidences of reason, or the erring dictates of men. If you find a
scriptum est, Let God be true though all men be liars, Romans 3. 4.

2. Because of that consent and harmony that is in Scripture testimony: no
jarring or contradiction in it; but what the Prophets foretold, the Evangelists
speak of, is fulfilled. In humane writings how frequently may we observe one
contradicting another, and this reason clashing with that? Nay, the same
author through ignorance or forgetfulness inconsistent to himself: but in
Scripture, there is a full and perfect consent, as all proceeding from the
dictate of the same infallible spirit, as in 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, etc. and 2 Pet. 1. 21. For the prophecy came not
in old times by the will of man; but Holy men of God spoke, as they were moved
by the holy Ghost. And though there may seem sometimes to be some
contradictions, and inconsistences; yet these arise not from the Scripture it
self, but from our shortness, weakness, or ignorance, and the like: therefore
we say what our Savior says at verse. 46. of this chapter, Had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me: and, as Paul speaks in his Apology for
himself, Act. 26. 22. Saying none other things then those, which the Prophets
and Moses did say should come. A sweet consent there is between Christ, Moses,
and Paul.

3. Because Scripture was given to this very end to be a certain and infallible
ground of truth: for though God, during the infancy of the Church, while it was
enclosed in some few families, revealed himself by visions, and communicated
his will from hand to hand by tradition, from Adam to Moses, and by
extraordinary revelation; yet, when the Church increased, and the people grew
more corrupt and inclining to the heathen Idolatry, God gave the law by Moses,
and so successively by the Prophets and Apostles, by whom it pleased God to
reveal his mind and will to all in writing, both that it might be the better
conveyed unto posterity, as we find it in Psalm. 102. 18. This shall be written
for the generation to come: and the more easily secured from corruption. Had
God still conveyed it unto us by the way of tradition: either through the
unfaithfulness of man's memory, or his being subject to error, or affectation
of novelty, it had been laid open to a multitude of corruptions, which if (as
experience shows us) scarce prevented by the penning of it, how much less, if
it never had been written? And also, that the Church might have an exact
standard of faith, and a perfect rule, and an infallible judge of truth, and
therefore Ephesians. 2. 20. The Church is said to be built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.
Faith builds surer here then upon the testimony of the Prophets, and Apostles.
And this S. Luke tells us expressly was his reason of writing the Gospel, Luke
1. 3, 4. That thou might know the certainty of those things, etc. And thus
more certain then Humane testimony.

II. More certain then miracles: for though it pleased God at first to confirm
the truth of the Gospel by miracles to the conviction of the Adversaries, as
Nicodemus speaks to our Savior, in John 3. 2. Yet now, God having completed
the Canon of Scripture, and warned us, not to receive any other doctrine,
though an Angel from Heaven should bring it, Galat. 1. 8. and pronounced a woe
upon all those, who should add or detract from it, Revelat. 22. 18. if any
should bring any doctrine contrary to Scripture, with pretense of confirming it
by wonders, and miracles, we ought to reject it as erroneous and Antichristian:
and so we see the Apostle makes this one of the badges of Antichrist, 2
Thessal. 2. 9.

III. More certain then Revelations. There is a place, that I have often thought
of, it is in 2 Pet. 1. 18. A true voice of God from heaven of his son Christ:
yet the Apostle tells us, that we may more infalliblely find Christ in in the
word of Prophecy, (what that is, he tells us ver. 20. (...)) then by
extraordinary revelations. Revelations we acknowledge, viz. of the spirit
revealing, and clearing up Gospel Truth: and this is that the Apostle prayed
for in behalf of the Ephesians, in Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18. I cease not to give
thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers: that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom, and
revelation in the knowledge of him, etc. and thus Christ revealed the
Scriptures to the disciples, Luke 24. 45, 46. that they might understand them,
but not that under that pretense of Revelation they should reject, and lay them
aside. It is fond, and ungodly to pretend to Revelations, besides or contrary
to the Scripture. S Paul would have an Angel from heaven, if he brings it, to
be accursed, Galat. 1. 8. and what are they then, who receive them? Again he
tells the Church of Ephesus, that he had declared unto them the whole council
of God, Acts 20. 27. and yet at Acts 26. 22. he professes that he said nothing
but what Moses and the Prophets had said should come: yet this S. Paul was rapt
up into the third heaven, and there heard (...), unspeakable words, in 2 Cor.
12. 4. There can be no security for our faith from Revelations, unless they be
such as bring evidences and assurances that they are from God; for Satan can
transform himself into an angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. Now how shall we
distinguish Satan's delusions from Revelations, but by the Testimony of the
Scriptures, by which we are commanded to try the Spirits, 1 John 4. 1. For
these Revelations, and Enthusiasmes men pretend unto, are often as contrary and
inconsistent to themselves, as they are all contrary to the truth; and
therefore must be tried by some infallible rule: otherwise we shall constantly
lie exposed to delusion, unsettled in judgment, and irresolved as to practice,
as not knowing what the next revelation may be, perhaps quite contrary to the
former. Wherefore, believe it, they who will not rest upon the Scripture as the
foundation of faith, can rest no where. When the Rich man in the Gospel would
have had one extraordinary to have been sent from the dead to his brethren:
observe what answer Abraham gives him, Luke 16. 29, 30, 31. They have Moses,
and the Prophets, and if they hear not them, neither will they hear, though one
come from the dead. If one comes with Revelation, and tells me, It comes from
God, he must convince me of the truth of it, or else I may with the same
easiness say, It is from Satan: and this conviction can be made no otherwise
but by Scripture, which is the most infallible ground of truth.

What the Pharisees said of Christ, we may truly say of our late pretenders to
Enthusiasmes and Revelations, We know not whence he is, John 9. 29. They may be
from Rome (as it is more then probable some of them are:) or whence soever they
come, certainly not from God, if they disown the voice of God in the
Scriptures. Wherefore my counsel to you shall be that of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessal. 2. 2. Be not soon shaken in mind, nor be troubled:
and in 2 Timothy 1. 18. Hold fast the form of sound words. And this will be
useful thus:

First, Then make your last appeal to Scriptures in matters of faith. The
Papists appeal to uncertain traditions, the Enthusiast to deluding Revelation;
let us to the Scriptures, for this is both the precept of God, and the constant
practice of the Scriptures: To the Law and to the Testimony, Esaias 8. 20. So
our Blessed Savior always appeals to the Scriptures, as in the business of the
Resurrection, Matthew. 22. 29. And to prove himself the Messiah, he appeals to
Moses and the Prophets, Luke 24. 26, 27. Thus the Apostles, though acted by the
same infallible Spirit, yet always appealed to Moses, and the Prophets: so did
S. Peter, Acts 2. 25, 31. and from thence did Apollos confute the Jews, Acts
18. 29. and so Paul to prove the resurrection of Christ, in Acts 13. 23. So
then ( my brethren) appeal not to the judgment and testimony of man, what he
says: (as S. Cyprian was much delighted with Tertullian, that he was wont to
say, Da magistrum;) nor to the dictates of dark reason: but to the infallible
Testimony of the Scriptures, and attend to Gods voice in them.

Secondly, See here the ingenuous boldness and confidence of truth, that dares
appeal to Scripture. Christ was confident of his cause, and therefore declines
not the test of Scriptures: Search them, says he; as if he had said, If they
do not testify of me, then do not acknowledge me. It argues a timorous
diffidence and consciousness of men, when they like not to be tried by the word
of God; as in the Papist, who appeals from the Scripture to traditions; and it
speaks the errors of those Revelations, which will not subscribe to be tried
here: you may safely reject that doctrine as erroneous, which will not be
weighed in the balance of the Scriptures; or if it be weighed there, proves
light and wanting. Tertullian of old notes, that Heretics were lucifugae
Scripturarum. As blear eyes decline looking upon the sun, so corrupt doctrines
the light of the Scriptures.

Thirdly, Embrace and entertain nothing as saving truth, which will not bear
the test of Scripture. It is one use of Scripture, to be profitable (...), 2 Timothy 3. 16. to confute, and silence heresy and error: and whatever the
Scripture reproves is such. Be not imposed upon by the proud imperious dictates
of men, nor deluded by the pretenses and delusions of Satan, and his
instruments; but let this be your rule to try by.

Fourthly, In all your doubts consult the Scriptures. So did David in Psalm.
119. 24. He made the Testimonies of God his delight, and his counselors to
enform and resolve him: and that, 1. In doubts of the head for reformation:
this is one excellency of the Scriptures, to make wise the simple; as in Psalm.
19. 7. Scripture, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 16. is profitable to inform the
judgment: and by this did David become wiser then his teachers. 2. In doubts
of the heart for consolation. That was one end of Gospel-revelation, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope, Romans 15. 4. And
so David found the statutes of God, to be the rejoicing of his heart, Psalm. 19.
8. In inward doubts of conscience have recourse to the Scriptures, there thou
may find those cordial promises, which will put joy and gladness into thy
heart. In thy duty consult the Scripture, which will direct thee; In thy
troubles to comfort thee; In thy fears to support thee; In all thy doubts, to
comfort and resolve thee.

So much for the words considered Relatively.

Secondly, Absolutely in themselves. And so they will fall under a double
consideration too.

First, As taken by way of Concession, Indicatively, and so Beza, Camero,
Paraeus, and others understand them; and so also they speak I. Our Saviors
commendation of these Jews, as diligent searchers into Scripture: Or else, II.
His discommendation of them and reproof: and that, 1. either of their
ignorance, that notwithstanding they did search into Scripture, yet they
attained not to the knowledge of him, as the true Messiah: that though they had
frequently Bibles in their hands, yet they had not the word of God dwelling in
their hearts. Or, 2. of their malice, that, notwithstanding they searched the
Scriptures, which did so evidently testify of Christ, yet they maliciously
rejected him, and would not come unto him, that they might have life; as in
verse. 40.

Secondly, As taken by way of exhortation, Imperatively, speaking a command to
all, to search the Scriptures. And I shall take it in this second acception: it
being the drift of a great part of this chapter, to exhort these Jews to hear
the word of Christ, and Paraus himself acknowledges, that uterque sensus est
pius and commodus. And thus taken, there are three things considerable in the
words.

First, The nature of the duty, expressed in the word (...).

Secondly, The universality of the duty, and that is double.

I. Of the Persons engaged in it, expressed indefinitely.

II. Of the Object, (...): that is all Scripture.

Thirdly, The motive and arguments of the duty, and they are two.

I. The benefit of Scripture-search. Ye think ye have eternal life in them.

II. The object of Scripture-discoverie: that is Christ, they testify of me.

All which particulars may be reduced to this one general Observation, That
Scripture-search is a duty every Christian ought to be engaged in. Or thus,

It is the duty of every Christian to search the Scriptures.

In the handling of which observation, this method shall be observed.

First, To show the importance of the word (...).

Secondly, What searchers of Scripture Christ here points at.

Thirdly, The universality of the duty.

Fourthly, The grounds of this search.

Fifthly, The Application.

First, To show the importance of the word, (...). The word signifies such a
search, as diggers in mines make for gold and silver in the earth, and implies
five things.

I. A valuation and esteem of the Scriptures. He that digs in a mine for gold
evidences his valuation of it; otherwise he would never dig for it: so
searching of Scripture speaks an high estimate and prizing of Scripture. Such a
searcher of Scripture was David, Psalm. 119. 72. who prized the truth of God,
more then thousands of gold and silver: and such a searcher was S. Augustine
also, who says of himself, sacrae Scripturae tuae sunt sanctae deliciae meae.
And surely, the more a man searches into these mines, the more will he prize
and value them, and he that these mines, the more will he prize and value them,
and he that has the spirit of God cannot certainly but prize those Scriptures,
even because they come from him.

II. A particular enquiry into Scripture. He that digs in a mine turns over
every particular clod of earth, in which there is probably any gold; lest he
should lose any of it: so should Christians in searching the Scriptures
particularly examine every Scripture, lest they lose any of that treasure that
is hidden in those mines. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, says Tertullian.
There is a fullness of divine treasure in the Scriptures, which is able to make
a soul rich in faith and enriched in all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. And this
treasure is not discovered by a perfunctory, general view of Scripture: but by
a particular enquiry, and examination into it: for there is not any Scripture,
but has more or less of this treasure in it: every (...) of it, says our
Savior, shall be fulfilled, Matthew. 5. 18.

III. A diligent and frequent perusing of Scripture. He that digs in a mine
makes it his every-days-work, and gives not over, till he has found the riches
and treasure in it. It is not a superficial glance upon Scripture, which will
make a discovery of that heavenly treasure to us. Scripture-search must be our
every-days-work; and, indeed, it calls for our daily diligence: thus David
describes the blessed man to be one, that meditates in the law of God day and
night. Psalm. 1. 2.
This searching S Paul commends to Timothy, Give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy
4. 13. and for which the Bereans are commended, Acts 17. 11. and this God
commanded the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. These words which I command
thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto
thy children, and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, etc.
There is more golden oar in a clod of earth, then he that digs in a mine
discovers at first: so there is a mysteriousness in Scripture, which by a
cursory reading of Scripture cannot be discovered. Great mysteries lie sub
cortice literae, wrapped up in the letter of Scripture, which is discovered by
often reading and examining. A Christian meets with that information, those
quicknings, supports, and comforts at one time, which he does not at another.
It is said of Alphonsus, that he had read over the Bible ten times with a large
comment upon it: and of another, a Transylvanian Prince, that he had read over
the Bible twenty seven times: and of Theodosius the Emperor, that (as
Nicephorus relates) had a lamp so artificially made constantly supplying
Nicephor. lib. 4. cap. 3.
it self with oil, lest any thing might disturb or interrupt his study of
Scripture. And this certainly is the ready way to discover the heavenly
treasure, which is hid in Scripture: as we see God by the ministry of Philip
revealed Christ to the Eunuch, while he was A throughsearch, profundius
effodere. (...). So S. Chrysostom.
thus diligently reading the Prophet Isaiah, as it is in Acts 8. 28.

IIII. A through search and scrutiny: a digging deep in these mines. We do not
find mines of Gold upon the surface, and superficies of the earth, but in the
bowels of it, and therefore there must be a digging deep: this word in the
Text, sometimes in Scripture expresses Gods searching, as (...), Romans 8. 27.
which is so through and exact a search, that not the deepest thought of the
heart can escape this searching of God. There are depths in Scripture which we
must dig for, before we can fathom them. The Sctipture is a mystery, 1 Timothy 3.
16. a mystery hid from ages and generations, Coloss. 1. 26. Here are the
(...), 1 Cor. 2. 10. the deep things of God: his Nature, his Attributes, his
Councels and Decrees; which the Apostle calls (...), unsearchable, Romans 11. 33.
So there are the (...), Revel. 2. 24. the depths, methods, wiles, and
subtleties of Satan, which the Scripture discovers, and provides us with armor
against them, Ephesians. 6. And there are the depths of our own hearts. (Psalm. 64.
6. the inward thought, and the heart is deep): and this Scripture discovers, 1
Cor. 14. 25. But we must dig before we can find them. The secrets of Gods
Councels had lain hid in his own breast, had he not discovered them in his
word: and Satan does not lay his plots above board, obvious to every eye: and
for our own hearts, they are deceitful above all things, who can know them,
Jerem. 17. 9. and therefore it must be a deep search to discover them.

V. And lastly, It signifies labor and pains. Digging in mines is a very
tedious laborious work: so is searching these spiritual mines; Prove. 2. 4. If
thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures. We may
observo what S. Peter says of the Prophets enquiring after salvation, 1 Pet.
1. 10, 11. (...), at verse 10. searched diligently; and so again at verse 11.
(...). No gold without digging, no heavenly treasure of knowledge and grace
without a diligent and laborious search of Scripture. And that for the first:

Secondly, What searchers of Scripture Christ here points at.

There may be much searching to little purpose: and people may take much pains,
and no profit may come of it, but sometimes a great deal of mischief.

I shall show them therefore,

First, Negatively,

Secondly, Positively.

First, Negatively: and here our Savior means not,

I. The curious searcher of Scripture, who reads it more to satisfy his
curiosity, then to regulate his life: who in searching neglects that which is
obvious, and most necessary, and is prying into that, which is more difficult
and nice: that feeds upon the husks (as I may speak) and pleases his fantasy
with a few nice critical observations of some few passages of Scripture, in the
mean time neglecting the more subst antial food of his soul, the plain truths
of the Gospel. One who plays the Chemist with Scripture (which some think is
intimated in that expression of Scripture, in 2 Pet. 3. 16. (...)) who would
get that out of the Scriptures (as those out of natural bodies) what God never
put into them: such as with that accursed Politian prefers an Ode of Pindar,
before all the Psalms of David: because there he finds more satisfaction to
his nice and vain curiosity. Scripture was never written for this end, to
satisfy any man's curiosity.

II. Not the presumptuous searcher of Scripture, who would measure all
Scripture-mysteries by his own reason and apprehension; and, neglecting
learning of his Christian duty, presumes to examine, and thinks to comprehend
Gods secret councels: and where the Apostle is put to his (...)! he questions
not but he can fathom. He is searching more what God decreed from enternitie,
then what himself ought to do in time. It was a good saying of Seneca, Nusquam
verecundiores esse debemus, quam cum de Deo agitur, Modesty never becomes us
better, then when we speak of God: especially, when we seach into his Actings
and Councels; which, it is modesty and piety to admire; boldness and
presumption to search too much into: which the Apostle calls, An intruding into
those things he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, Coloss. 2.
18.

III. Not the discoursive searcher, who searches into Scripture, only that he
may have matter of discourse, not that he may have matter to practice: and that
perhaps scoffingly, as that Apostate Julian, who said, (...), that he had read,
understood, and contemned the Scripture. This is to read it only as a
history, or idly, and vainly jesting with the Scriptures: and those
searchers have Scripture at their tongues end, but not at their hearts: which
our Savior reproves here in these Jews, who were great searchers of
Scriptures, verse 28. such who have Bibles in their houses, but not the word of
God, dwelling richly in their hearts, as the Apostle commands in Coloss. 3. 16.
Scripture-discourse is good, if it be pious, serious, and to build up one
another: but Scripture-practise is better.

IV. Not the prejudiced, opinionated searcher of Scripture, who comes
prepossessed with an opinion, and so prejudiced against the truths of the
Gospel, and only searches Scripture so far, as will comply with, and
Patronize that opinion. Men come possessed with some high notions, and
fantasies of their own, and then they wrest the Scripture, and make it stoop
to those prepossessions, and this is the reason, why many men find so little
in Scripture: that they find it very hard to veil and submit their
Speculations and Notions, to the simplicity of Gospeltruth.

V. Not the superstitious searcher of Scripture, who rests in the opus
operatum, the work done: such searchers were these Jews, who were wont to
number the letters in the old Testament, and could tell you how often every
letter was used: so careful were they of the Bible, that in an heap of books,
they would not suffer another book to lie on the top of a Bible, and if any did
by chance let it fall, they were certainly punished for it; so writes Brentius:
but this they Brentius in loc. (...). Chrysostom.
accounted their righteousness, and thought to have life and happiness in the
bare reading of the Scripture, which was that, for which Christ here blames
them; not that they searched, but that they thought to have life by doing it;
though they neglected and persecuted Christ, at verse 40. Plus aequo illis
tribuistis, says Grotius. They thought, if they did enlarge their
Phylacteries, and read the Law so many times over, they were secure of
everlasting life.

VI. Not the careless and irreverent searcher of Scripture, who sometimes runs
over a few chapters of the Bible, (as the Papists mumble over their Ave-Maries)
without any reverent apprehensions of God the Author of Scripture, or minding
the matter, or mystery of Scripture. (...) Chrysostom.
He does not say, only barely Read, and know, but Search the Scriptures.

VII. Not the carnal secure searcher, who comes to the reading of the
Scriptures with a resolution to go on in his sins, whatsoever the Scripture
says to the contrary: Let Scripture say what it will, they will do what they
list: such as these can read the Promises of God, yet remain unbelieving; his
Threatenings, and not tremble; his Judgments, and with a proud Pharaoh, grow
harder by them; his Commands, yet neglect and disobey them: that as Noah's
unclean beasts in the Ark went in unclean, and came out unclean: so these come
to the reading Scripture, and hearing the Word, and remain still secure in sin,
and hardened in their iniquity: as those in Jeremiah, 44. 16, 17. that told the
Propher plainly, As for the word, which thou have spoken to us in the name of
the Lord, we will not hear it.

VIII. Not the the profane searcher of Scripture, who searches the Scripture,
only to find what may seemingly be wrested to Patronize his licentious, and
wicked practices, who makes use of Scripture to cover, and excuse his
wickedness: as we read of those Heathens in 1 Maccab. 3. 28. that made diligent
search into the book of the Law, that they might print thereby the likeness of
their Idols: so many search the Scripture, only to find something, that may
favor a corrupt opinion, or a licentious practice. Thus Julian the Apostate
robbed the Christians of all their goods and estates, Patronzing that practice
by Matthew. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor, etc. not considering what followed: and
Chemnitius tell us of one, who Chemn. loc. de paupertate.
reading that place, Go, and sell all that thou have, went and sold his Bible
too, saying, jam plene Christi mandato satisfeci. And thus indeed do the
Papists, who never flee to the refuge of Traditions, but when the Scriptures
fail them. And, truly, there has been no erroneous principle, or wicked
practice, but has endeavored to shroud it self under protection of the
Scriptures: and by this means men have been engaged to wresting Scripture, to
their own, and other men's destructions.

IX. Not the partial quarrelsome searcher of Scripture, who quarrels with, and
casts away all Scripture that makes against him, and admits only that, which
may suit with his corrupt doctrines. Such searchers of Scriptures have
Heretics been in all ages. Thus Arius wrested the eighth chapter of the
Proverbs out of the Canon, as speaking of the eternity of Increated wisdom,
and so contradicted his blasphemy in denying the Divinity of Christ. It is
that, which Irenaeus notes, as the Genius of all Heretics, Cum ex scripturis
Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 2.
redarguuntur, says he, in scripturarum redargutionem convertuntur, If
Scripture reprove their Heresy, they will presently fall out, and quarrel with
Scripture. So the Manichees of old rejected all the Old Testament; and
Cerinthus all the Gospels, but Matthew; and the Ebionites all the Epistles; and
so the Antinomians reject the Law, as no part of Scripture, or at leastwise not
obliging them. In a word, what Epiphanius of old observed of the Gnostics, we
may truly observe of the Heretics of our times: his words are very full, and
suite with our present Heresies: When they find any thing (...), etc. Epiphan.
hares. 26.
in the Scripture, that may make against their opinion, then they say, That
comes from the spirit of the world: but if they can find out any thing, that
may but seem in the least to maintain any of their phantas^s, then they cry
out, This comes from the spirit of truth. So that whereaes S. Paul says, All
Scripture is given by inspiration, and is profitable, etc. these look only
upon that Scripture as divine, which will suite with their temper and error.

X. Not the calumniating Antichristian (as I may call them) searchers of
Scriptures, who search it, only to oppose it. Such searchers were the Jews of
old, who searched the Scriptures, that they might contradict Christ; as the
Pharisees said to Nicodemus, John 7. 52. Search, and look, for out of Galilee
arises no Prophet. Such searchers are the Socinians at this day, who are,
indeed, nice searchers of the Scriptures, but it is to dishonor Christ, and to
rob him of the glory of his Divinity, and us of the comfort of his
satisfaction: and if they can find but the least title or (...), that seems to
favor their blasphemy, they can cry up that, though in the mean time, they
either wholly disown, or else cry down as obscure (as the late Socinians do
the Gospel of S. John) or else pervert and clude all others, that directly make
against them. Me thinks, these are such searchers, as Herod in Matthew. 2. 4. who
sent the wisemen to search diligently for Christ, under a pretense to worship
him, but indeed it was to kill him: so these pretend high to honor Christ, but
indeed in effect they destroy him, while they invent a few idle niceties to
cheat him of his Divinity. These are such searchers as the devil himself is,
who knew how to quote scripture against Christ, as we may read in Mat. 4.

XI. And lastly, Not the contentious searcher of Scripture, who searches it
only to find out, and fill the world with a company of idle questions,
impertinent and unnecessary controversies. Such as these the Apostle describes
1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. that they are proud, doting about questions, and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railing, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, etc. and from these the Apostle would have
Timothy to withdraw. And these are none of the searchers which our Savior here
points at: and having viewed these, we are now to show,

Secondly, Positively, What kind of searchers of Scriptures our Savior would
have.

And they are these.

1. The humble searcher: one who comes to the search of Scripture in a real
sense of his own ignorance; not puffed up with high thoughts, and conceits of
his own knowledge. Pride and self-conceit a^^ great obstructions to any
knowledge, but most to a Scripture knowledge. If any man thing, he knows
nothing, a^ he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. Humility is most becoming a
Christian in the search of Scripture, if he shall consider,

1. The depth of Scripture-mysteries compared with the streightness and
shallowness of our understandings. In Scripture are revealed the deep things of
God,, the mystery of the kingdom, which the natural man receives not, 1 Cor.
2. 14. Even in the search of the nature of earthly things (where yet reason is
in its proper sphere) how short and dark is it? The nature of the meanest
creature puzzles, and puts to a non plus: not the least, and most contemptible
creature, but may teach us a modest humility, much more in the search of these
great mysteries. Dicmihi formam lapidis, so Scaliger to Cardan: we are puzzled
in the forms of created, material compound Beings, and shall we proudly intrude
into Gospel-mysteries, mysteries hid from ages and generations: we are all
darksighted in natural things, but stark blind in spiritual mysteries.

2. God commmunicates himself in the search of Scripture only to the humble:
he fills these empty vessels. Eliah bids the widow get empty vessels, that
her oly might be multiplied, 2 Kings 4. 3. We must get vessels empty of pride
and self-conceit, if we would have our spiritual knowledge increased, for with
the lowly is wisdom, Prove. 11: 2. Observe we the promise in Psalm. 25. 9. He
will teach the humble: and what our Savior says, Mat. 11. 25. Thou have
revealed these things unto babes: that is, in their own opinion. Believe it for
true, that, to know your ignorance is a good step to true and saving knowledge.

3. Without this humility we cannot entertain, and embrace Gospeltruth. Men
pust up with a proud conceit of their own knowledge have often proved greatest
enemies unto the Gospel: hence it seemed at first to the Greeks foolishness, 1
Cor. 1. 23. It seemed absurd to their reason to expect life and salvation by a
crucified Savior. Paul's preaching of the Gospel seemed but babbling to the
Epicurean, and Stoic Philosophers at Athens, Acts 17. 18. And they were the
Scribes and Pharisees, men high and proud in their own donceits, which reject
our Saviors person and doctrine. It is hard for men not to be puffed up with
pride, and exalted above measure. S. Paul himself was in danger of it. Galen
rejected the coctrine and profession of Christianity, because he could not meet
with Mathematical demonstrations to prove every thing in it, as he did in other
sciences. It is the grace of humility makes men to submit to the simplicity
of the Gospel: Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, James 1. 21. and it so
received will help to save the soul.

II. The reverent trembling searcher, that, when he reads the Scripture, does
it with an holy aw and reverence of that God, whose word it is, and of those
mysteries of life and salvation by Christ, which it discovers. This is the man
God looks at: Isaiah 66. 2. To him will I look that trembles at my word. One
that fears, lest by his own fantasies and ignorance he may misinterpret
Scripture, or wrest it to his own, or other men's destructions. This holy fear
becomes especially the Ministers of the Gospel in their search of Scripture,
that they do not, as Spiders, suck poison out of those flowers to the
poisoning, and infecting of others. This does S. Paul urge upon Timothy, 1 Timothy
4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and thy doctrine; that thou may save both thy
self and others: intimating, that if he did not take heed, he might destroy
both himself and others. Ye know how the Beth-shemites fared for their
irreverent gazing into the Ark, 1 Samuel 6. 19. and so thou have cause to fear,
who do with an irreverent boldness search into Scripture, without any awful
thoughts of the Majesty, and Mysteries of God. Moses was to pull off the shoes
off his feet, when he conversed with God, and heard his voice. When thou
read Scripture, thou have God speaking unto thee; for it is his voice, Heb.
1. 1. and therefore come with reverent affections. What the Apostle says of
speaking, 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God;
the same say I of searching into the Scriptures, and that bespeaks reverence.

III. The orderly searcher. Order and method is great in the acquiring of all
knowledge: method facilitates the understanding, and strengthens the memory;
it makes things more perspicuous, and so more easy to be understood, and more
strongly and certainly retained. That knowledge must needs be confused, which
is gotten by amethodical study. Method demonstrates the dependence of one
thing upon another, and so makes all easy and facile. So that in search of
Scripture we should not pick here and there a chapter, or verse, but read in
order; first the easiest, and then the more difficult: for pascimur apertis,
exercemur obscuris. Milk is easiest for nourishment, and strong meat to
exercise our sense with. First therefore those, that may build us up in the
faith, as the Gospels and Epistles, then what may exercise our parts and
learning. I take it a preposterous way of Scripture-search, which many take, to
search first into the Prophesies, Revelations; and the darker places of
Scripture, and neglect the Epistles of the Apostles, and other easier places.
It is in Scripture-search, as in all other sciences, there are some more easy,
and obvious principles, and these first to be learned, before we go to
deductions and the like. First, let us go where the lamb may wade, and then
where the Elephant may swim.

IV. The judicious searcher, that reads with judgment and understanding. As
Philip said to the Eunuch, when he was reading the Prophet Isaiah, Acts 8. 30.
So say I to every searcher of Scripture, understandest thou what thou read?
No profit by searching without understanding: therefore children and madmen
are no competent searchers of Scripture; there is required an act of judgment
and discretion. Or if, as the Eunuch, thou understandest not, then consult with
those that do. Read still in obedience to God's command, (nay, let this double
thy endevaours) but remember to consult with the Philips, that is, the
Ministers of the word.

V. The thankful searcher, who, when he reads the Scriptures, meditates of and
thankfully acknowledges the goodness of God, in giving and revealing to him the
Scriptures. Christ himself esteemed this thank-worthy, in Matthew. 11. 25. I
thank thee, O Father of heaven, etc. and how much more should we do it in
regard of our selves? if we shall but consider,

1. What a great privilege it is to a person or nation, to have the
Scriptures, the word of God entrusted with them. This was the great privilege
of the Jews, which the Apostle takes notice of as their greatest advantage
above the Gentiles, Romans 3. 1, 2. (...): He made them Trustees of his word and
promises. And the same would the Psalmist have observed with thankfulness,
Psalm 147. 19.

2 How this is the onley light, which can lead us to heaven. This is the cloud,
which will lead you through the wilderness unto Canaan: the light of nature is
but a groping after God, Acts 17. For though the invisible things of God are
clearly seen by the things that are made, as we have it, Romans 1. 20. yet cannot
the knowledge by nature at all discover Christ: without which knowledge no
salvation, if you credit our Savior himself, John 17. 3. The Scripture is our
only star to lead us unto Christ. The light of nature may lead men to hell and
leave them there inexcusable, but the light of Scripture can only light us to
heaven: In them you think you have eternal life, as our Savior speaks here.

3 If you consider seriously, How many thousands in the world sit in darkness,
left to the natural blindness of their corrupt hearts: How many are in Egypt
while we are in Goshen, a land of light. Look abroad into the world, and see,
what palpable darkness is the greatest part of it overclouded with and what
fond guides do the most follow. The Mahumetan regulated and guided by a
ridiculous Alcoran: the Papists enslaved to fond and uncertain Traditions the
Jew being left to his own hardness, refusing the Gospel, following a few
Curious Rabbines: and many thousands, who never heard of the sound of the
Gospel, but are even without God in the world, having their understandings
darkened, as it is Ephesians. 4. 18. while we enjoy the clear light of the glorious
Gospel, to guide our feet into the ways of peace. Observe we what God says to
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. What nation is there so great, that has statutes
and judgments sorighteous, etc. These make a nation great: so may we say; and
so often as we read, or hear the word of God, should thankfully acknowledge it.

VI. The Practical searcher, who searches the Scripture: that he may thereby
regulate his life, and order his conversation aright. It is one end why God
has given the Scriptures unto us, Psalm. 119. 9. It is as a rule to walk by:
Galat. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them: such
should all searchers of Scripture be: for

1. Otherwise Scripture-search will be in vain: it will be no otherwise
profitable to us to know Scripture, if we do not live by it, then to aggravate
our sin, Jam. 4. and to increase our condemnation, that we shall have double
stripes, Luke 12. 47. It is better to be mere Idiots and Dunces in Scripture,
then not to live according to them; better had we never search for these
heavenly treasures, and spiritual pearls, then when we have found them to
trample them under our feet. We should search Scripture for that end, for which
God gave it: and that the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 3. 17, is that we might be
thoroughly furnished unto every good work. He truly searches the Scripture, who
resolves, what ever command he meets with, though never so contrary to his
lust, that he will obey it: therefore did the Prophet David meditate in the law
of God, that he might make it a light unto his feet, Psalm. 119. 105.

2. No other searchers are like to find the hidden treasures of Scripture. God
has engaged to reveal himself to such as these, Joh, 7. 16, 17. If any one
will do his will he shall know, etc. and David gives this as an account of his
great knowledge, Psalm. 119. 98. Nothing improves knowledge more then a suitable
practice* and the true reason, why men find no more in the searching of
Scripture, is, because they read it more out of curiosity then of Conscience.
It is grace in the heart, and obedience in the life, that makes men fruitful
in Scripture-knowledge: Consider that Emphatical place in 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6. where
the Apostle exhorts to a diligent acquiring, and practicing of several graces,
and gives the reason of it at ver. 8. For if these things be in you, you shall
not be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Turk writes upon his Alc^ran, Let none read this book, but he that is holy:
None are fit to be searchers of Scripture, but who either are or at least
resolve to be holy.

3. Every ungodly and wicked man is really prejudiced against Scripture Light,
and knowledge. Joh. 3. 19. Light is come into the world, and men love darkness.
So many corruptions and lusts have all wicked men reigning in their hearts: so
many real bolts and bars they have against the true Scripture-knowledge: it is
irksome and troublesome to them to entertain that truth which will discover
their sins, and so break and disturb the security they have been in a long
time: and therefore they rather with those in Job desire God to depart from
them. As the Philosopher observes (...): Arist. M^ta^^ lib. 1.
men desire a doctrine suitable to their corruptions: (and this is the reason
of that variety of doctrines and religions now in the world) which the doctrine
of the Scripture will not in the least comply with: and that is the true cause
of men's averseness from an effectual entertainment of the Gospel: and of their
shutting eyes against Scripture Light and convictions. The Philosopher gives
this as the reason, why young men are not fit scholars in morality: (...):
because they are guided by lust and passion; and the Apostle gives the same
reason, why some are learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth,
because they are such as are led about by diverse lusts, in 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
That soul, which is resolved to give up it self unto obedience of the
Scripture, is that which will readily embrace the doctrine of Scripture:
because inwardly complyant with, and conforming to the will of God. Whereas a
wicked man, when he searches Scripture, he has something within him, that
rises up against the truths of God: a carnal mind within him, that is enmity
to God, which disputes the commands and quarrels with the truths of God. ^ A
(...), says the Heathen, that is, What we learn that we may do, while we do
it, we further learn it. As knowledge must regulate our practice: so our
practice will promote and increase our knowledge of the Scripture.

VII. The praying searcher, that interchangeably reads and prays. This the
Wiseman directs unto, Prove. 2. 4, 5. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her, as for hid treasures: then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, etc. This is an excellent way sure: for, as the Scriptures will
afford us matter for our prayer, so prayer will lead us into the knowledge of
the Scriptures. Searching scripture will inflame our zeal in prayer, and prayer
will promote and facilitate our study of Scripture. Moses when the Ark set
forward, and when it rested again, prayed devoutly, as we may read, Numb. 10.
35, 36. so when you set upon reading of the Scripture, and when you rest from
it, do it with prayer. S. Austin August. prafat. ad lib. de Doct. Christ.
has two remarkable stories to this purpose; One of Antonius the Hermit, who
was so (...), that he could, though he knew not one letter, fully understand,
and by heart repeat the whole Bible: the other, of a certain servant converted
from Heathenisme to Christianity: Qui triduanis precibus obtinuit, ut codicem
oblatum stupentibus qui aderant, legendo percurreret: who by praying three
days obtained of God that he read through the Bible, when offered him, to the
amazement of them that were present. This was it the Apostle directs unto: If
any want wisdom, let him ask it of God, Jam. 1. 5. and David practiced, Psalm.
119. 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous thing out of thy law.
God infuseth not knowledge into us by miracles immediately, as into the
Apostles, but by the use of means: compare Prove. 2. 4, 6. The freeness of God
in giving does not dismiss us from endeavoring: for though faith is said to be
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. yet it is said also faith comes by preaching,
Romans 10. 17. Prayer is the way to come by the spirit, which discovers the
depths, and treasures of the Scriptures: Luke 11. 13. Your heavenly father will
give the holy spirit to them that ask him. This is the only key to unlock
those rich cabinets, wherein are contained those precious jewels of saving
truth and knowledge.

VIII. The believing searcher: and indeed without the eye of faith we are like
to do little good in searching: the Gospel is an hidden thing says the Apostle
to them that perish, 2 Cor. 4. 3. and who those are you may see at verse. 4.
those who believe not. They, who come not with faith, may search into the
letter, and history of Scripture, but not into the mystery and spirit of
Scripture. The Apostle tells us, the Jews had a veil upon their hearts, and
their minds were blinded, while Moses was read, 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15. viz. the veil
of unbelief, that they could not see through those ceremonies, or those clearer
prophesies, which in the old Testament were made of Christ. So there is still a
veil of unbelief upon every natural man's heart, which veil is done away in
Christ, ver. 14. viz. by faith in him, then God reveals himself to such. God,
when he manifested himself to Moses put him into a rock, Exodus 33. 22. and this
wo^k resembled Christ: God discovers himself, and his mind to those who are in
Christ by faith. We have the mind of Christ, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 16.
that is, we believers. Scriptura peculiaris est filiorum Dei schola, says
Calvin, They are the only good scholars, who read the Scriptures with faith.
The Scriptures are able to make perfect the man of God, in 2 Timothy 3. 17. The
man of God: Nihil hic faciet filius hujus seculi, says Musculus. A carnal
heart will hardly be a proficient here.

IX. The Christian searcher: He who searches Scripture that thereby he may
come to know and enjoy Christ, and indeed without this all is in vain. The most
curious, exact, learned searcher does but search them to his own destruction,
if he does not hereby come to a saving knowledge of Christ. They testify of
me, says Christ, and therefore (or to this end) that you may know me, whom
they testify of, Search. In searching the Scriptures, search, that you may
know me. And this brancheth it self into two parts.

First, No knowledge of Christ without the Scriptures. The things that are seen
may lead us to the invisible things of God: that is, his eternal Godhead and
power, as it is in Romans 1. 20. but these lead us not to the knowledge of Christ.

Secondly, The whole Scripture gives us a full testimony and discovery of
Christ: more darkly in the Old, more expressly in the New Testament. That
testifies of Christ to come, this of Christ as already come: this is but the
fulfilling of that. Our Savior here sends these to the Old Testament, in which
they were exactly versed, so as Joscphus cont. Appion. l. 2.
Josephus tells us, they could tell you any word in it, as readily as their own
name. All the Prophets spoke of Christ, as Peter tells the Jews, Acts 10. 43.
Three ways the Scriptures of the Old Testament speak of Christ, which I rather
mention, because it is the chief interest of the Text, as also to strengthen
our faith in the true Messiah against the Jews: and hereby to admonish us in
reading and searching them to look after Christ, and the knowledge of him.

I. By promises: as the promised seed to Adam, Genesis 3. to Abraham, Genes. 15.
to Isaac, Genes. 26. to Jacob, Genes. 28. to the tribe of Judah, Genes. 49. and
all these are great assurances to our faith.

II. By plain prophesies. Christ is Jacobs Shiloh, in Genesis 49. 10. Balaams star
coming out of Jacob, Numb. 24. 17. Isaiahs Immanuel, Isaiah 7. 14. Daniels man,
standing before the Ancient of days, Dan. 7. 13. Jeremiahs the Lord our
righteousness, Jerem. 23. 6. Zechariahs branch, Zech. 3. 8. and Malachies Sun,
Mal. 4. 2. And this in general: it would be infinite to descend to particulars:
not a circumstance of his birth, life, or death, but was foretold by some of
the Prophets. The place of his birth, Micah. 5. 2. the manner of his
conception, Isai. 7. 14. his humility and poverty of life, Zech. 9. his
death, Isai. 53. 7. Judas's betraying and selling him for thirty pieces of
silver, Zech. 11. 12, 13. his scourging, Isai. 53. 5. his being spit upon,
Isai. 50. 6. his crucifying among thieves, Isai. 53. 12. and after death his
resurrection and ascension, Psalm. 110. and Hosea 13. 14.

III. In types and shadows. The whole Ceremonies were nothing else but shadows:
Christ the substance. Thus was Christ's passion typified by the Passover, by the
Brazen serpent lifted upon a pole, John 3. 14. His taking away our sins by his
death typified by the escape goat, Levit. 16. 10, 21. His lying three days in
the grave, and his resurrection, typified in Jonah, chap. 1. The pillar of
cloud, and of fire, the Red Sea, Manna, Rock, all types of Christ; of which
latter, the Apostle speaks expressly, that rock was Christ, 1 Cor 10. 4. I have
mentioned these, to lay an engagement upon you in search of Scripture,
especially to look after Christ: he is the scope, and substance, and center of
all Scripture. Do thou read the Ceremonies of the old Law? look upon them as
shadows, of which Christ is the body and substance. Do thou read the
Promises? look upon them all, as Yea and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Do
thou read the Sacraments? eye Christ as the thing sealed by them. Do thou
search the Law? Read it as thy schoolmaster to bring thee unto him, Galat. 3.
24. The Prophesies? Christ the fulfilling of them. Thus all the lines and
draughts of Scripture meet in this center: all Scripture light centres in this
Sun of Righteousness, without which, search Scripture never so much, you are
still in the dark, if it be not your star to lead you unto Christ.

And so much of the second thing, What searchers of Scripture Christ here
points at.

I come now to the third General,

The universality of the duty.

And this is two fold, I. The subject, All men. II. The object, All the
Scriptures.

I. The universalitie of the subject, All men; none being exempted from this
duty. Ministers of the Gospel are especially concerned in this, who are to
dispense the Mysteries of salvation unto others. It is an old and true saying,
sealed by the experience of all ages, that Bonus textuarius est bonus
Theologus; A good Scripturist is a good Divine: and therefore does the Apostle
give this especially in charge to Timothy, Till I come, give attendance to
reading, in 1 Timothy 4. 13. But, not only these, every Christian is concerned in
this duty, if upon no other considerations, then these in the Text; they are
abundantly evincing. Every Christian is concerned in eternal life: Therefore,
ought to study Scripture, which directs him the way thither; and it is
therefore called the word of life, Philip. 2. 16. and, the Gospel of our
salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. As a traveller, that is ignorant of his way, wili be
often consulting his Maps, examining, and enquiring which is the way: we are all
naturally ignorant of the true way to life, and therefore we must often search
Scriptures, which are the Map of that Jerusalem, which is above, directing us
the way thither. So Christ is the only way, out of of whom, no man can come
thither, John 14. 6. And then, the knowledge of Christ is every Christians
interest and concernment. Hence are those frequent exhortations of Scripture to
Christians, To grow in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
And this we come to by Scripture; They testify of me, says our Savior in the
Text. Besides these, all are engaged to the search of the Scriptures upon these
accounts.

1. In obedience to Divine command. God exempts none from this duty, Deuteronomy. 6.
6, 7, 8. but sends all to the law and testimony, Isai. 8. 20. and it is the
Apostles frequent command, Coloss. 3. 16. and his charge is very short, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. and what are all the Elogiums and commendations of those who
conscienciously perform this duty, but so many motives and arguments for us to
do it? Such are that character of a godly man, Psalm. 1. 3. that he meditates in
the law of God both day and night: that commendation of the Bereans, who
searched the Scriptures, Acts 17. 11. and that of S. Peter to whom he wrote,
telling them, that they did well in taking heed to that sure word of prophecy,
2 Pet. 1. 19. Therefore the neglect of this searching Scripture is a
disobedience to a Divine command.

2. In conformity to the practice of the Saints in all ages. Aquila and
Priscilla, ordinary tent-makers, so well skilled in the Scriptures, that they
were able to instruct an eloquent Apollos, Acts 18. 24, 25, 26. It spoke Gods
approbation of the Eunuchs searching the Scriptures, when he sent Philip to
him, Acts 8. 28. Timothy was an apt scholar in this school, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
instructed, questionless, not by his father (who was a Greek) but by his
grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice, whose faith the Apostle highly
commends, 2 Timothy 1. 5. whence it is obvious to collect the industry of Godly
women in those times, in searching themselves, and instructing their children
in the Scriptures: a good copy for others to write after. Amongst the Jews it
was accounted a crime to have a family without a Bible; I wish it were so now.

3. Thereby to promote the interest, and advantage of their own souls. Hereby (
Christians) you may be enabled to try the Spirits, to discern truth from
falshod, and not so easily to be imposed upon, or tossed about with every wind
of doctrine: hereby to prove all things, that you may hold fast that which is
good, 1 Thessal. 5. 21. Hereby you may be built up in the holy faith,
strenghned in the truth, quickened in holiness, and, in a word, through faith be
brought unto salvation, as is intimated in that of our Savior, John 20. 31.
These things are written that you might believe, and that believing you might
have life. But a little more particularly, these are concerned in the search of
Scripture.

1. Those that are ignorant to be informed, and enlightened. This is one use of
Scripture to be profitable, (...), for instruction, 2. Tim. 3. 16. and the
Apostle elsewhere tells us, that whatsoever was written before was written for
our learning, Romans 15. 4. and this is it for which David so much extols the Law
and word of God (both in Psalm. 19. and 119.) so frequently; confessing that by
these commandments he was made wiser then his enemies, verse 98. that he had
more understanding then his teachers, verse 99. and so in many other
particulars.

2. The more learned and knowing Christians, to be quickened and established.
None are so learned, but may be scholars in the school of Christ: none but may
be further informed, or by often searching the Scripture be more strengthened and
confirmed. Desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, says
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Grow in grace, and grow in knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
The word of God is not only seed to beget Christians, but milk to strengthen
and nourish them. The want of the word is compared to a famine, Amos 8. 11. In
a famine, when men have not a daily and constant supply of bread, the strength
and activity of their bodies decay and languish: so will it be in the soul;
without a daily supply of this Manna, this bread which comes down from heaven,
the Scriptures or word of God, there will be a decay in knowledge, and a
languishing in our graces. The most knowing Christian must search the
Scripture, to have his affections to Gospel-mysteries quickened and enflamed,
his faith established, and his memory quickened: what the Apostle says of his
writing to the Philippians, Phil. 3. 1. To write the same things for you it is
safe: and no less safe for the most knowing Christian still to be reading the
same things again and again.

3. Those that are distressed Christians to be comforted. It was one end of
writing the Scripture, that we through patience of the Scripture might have
hope, Romans 15. 4. and therefore must be one end of our searching them: and
David by experience found this true in Psalm. 19. 8. where he says, The
statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: and very frequently in
Psalm. 119. as that the word was his comfort in his affliction, verse 50. that
Gods statutes were his songs in the house of his pilgrimage, verse 54. that the
law was his delight, verse 92. and so in many other places, much to the same
effect. And, indeed, here may we meet with supporting comforts, suitable to
every condition. Here are examples of the patience, and comforts of the Saints
in the like cases. Art thou in want and poverty? Consider Daniel preferring
his course fare of bread, and water before the kings portion, Dan. 1. Art thou
under reproach, and affliction for Christ? Consider the Apostles rejoicing,
that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ, Acts 5. 4. Art thou called
to the fiery trial? Consider the three children untouched in the midst of the
furnace. Art thou despoiled of goods and children? Consider Job upon the
dunghill. S. Chrysostom writing to Cyriacus the Bishop, then in banishment,
tells him how he was comforted in the like case; (...), etc. If the Empress
(says he) will banish me, let her; Ch^ys. ep. 125.
my comfort is, the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. If she will
saw me asunder, she may: I fare no worse then the Prophet Isaiah. If she will
cast me into the sea: I have the the example of Jonah. If she will cast me into
the fiery furnace, so were the three children cast: If she will cast me to
wild beasts, so was Daniel cast into the den of lions, etc. Besides all these
encouraging examples, how many gracious promises are there upon record, which
are full breasts of consolation, as it is in Isai. 66. 11. a metaphor (says A
Lapide upon that place) taken from crying children, who are quieted by the
breast: so are perplexed Consciences by the promises. I have read of a woman,
that was much disquieted in conscience, even to despair, endeavoring to be her
own executioner, but was comforted with that place, Isai. 57. 15. For thus
says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I
dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of an humble and
contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. And of another man, who being ready to dye, Lord, says he,
I challenge thee by that promise, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me, all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; and so was comforted.
Here is a word of season to him that is weary, as in Isai. 50. 4.

4. The tempted Christian, for strength against the onsets of Satan. Here a
Christian may meet with that armor by, which he may quench the fiery darts of
Satan, Ephesians. 6. 17: David overcame Goliath with a stone out of the brook: and
Christ Satan (not by his omnipotency, as he might, but) by a Scriptum est, It
is written. If Satan assault thee, this spiritual Goliath, take one stone out of
this brook, a plain text of Scripture; thou may conquer, and triumph over
him. He enters the lists disarmed, that is ignorant of the Scriptures; (...),
says Chrysostom. Does Satan Chrysostom. Hom. ^n Coloss.
set upon thee by force? Here is the spiritual panoply, the whole armor of
God; especially the sword of the Spirit of which we may say (as he of the sword
of Goliath) There is none like it. Or does he more cunningly endeavor to
circumvent thee by his wiles, and subtleties? here thou may be so instructed,
that thou shall not (as the Apostle says) be ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor.
2. 11. that so you may easily countermine his plots. As he tempts to sin,
perhaps upon that suggestion, that It is a little one: but Scripture will tell
thee, Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin (that is, of every sin, and the least) is
death. He bids thee, Do what others do: but the Scripture says, Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2. He bids, Put of thy repentance;
thou may repent afterward: but the Scripture says, Esau found no place for
repentance afterward, although he sought it with tears. He tells you, You shall
gain by sin: but the Scripture tells you, that this seeming gain will prove a
real loss, Matthew. 16. 26. Or, that, these sins are full of pleasure; but the
Scripture tells you, that those pleasure of sin are but for a season, in Heb.
11. 25. and the punishment is eternal, Mat. 25. 46. And so much of the
universalitic of the subject, that it concerns all to search the Scriptures.

II. I come to the universalitie of the object, expressed indefinitely, (...),
the Scriptures; as well the Law, as the Gospel; as well the old Testament, as
the New. The Manichees of old, and many of later days, have refused the search
of the old Testament, as not useful, or necessary to Christians, under a
Gospel dispensation. I shall therefore endeavor at this time to demonstrate
unto you the duty of a general and universal search, which lies upon all
Christians. If we had nothing, but this text of Scripture to confirm it, it
were unanswerable: our Savior here speaking of the old Testament, as is
evident from the persons to whom he directs this command, who were the Jews,
enemies to the Gospel, but great admirers of the old Testament, and diligent
searchers into it. Now observe the argument, In them ye think ye have eternal
life, therefore, profitable: and they testify of me, therefore, necessary:
and all this is spoken (...) by way of commendation to the Jews, and therefore
much more to Christians; as S. Chrysostom observes in his fourteenth homily
on the Gospel of S. John, (...) The Lord, exhorting the jews to the search of
the Scriptures, does much more press us Christians thereunto, even by their
example. But there are many other Scriptures, which demonstrate unto us the
usefulness of the Scriptures of the old Testament, as Romans 15. 4. (...)
Whatsoever was written before, was written for our comfort and instruction; that
is, what was written by the Prophets was written for the comfort and
instruction of us Christians. And again, Ephesians. 2. 20. You see the faith of the
Christian Church is built upon the foundation of the doctrine and writings, as
well of the Prophets, as of the Apostles, both leading us to Christ, as to that
only foundation, Cor. 3. 11. viz. of salvation. Again, 2 Pet, 1. 19. To which
(that is, that sure word of prophecy) you do well that you take heed: even
that which was written before, by the Prophets, is as a light to direct you.
And therefore observe, how Abraham dispatcheth the Gluttons brethren to Moses
and the Prophets, Luke 16. 29. whence it is obvious to collect, that the
writings of Moses, and the Prophets are to be read, heard, and assented to by
Christians under the Gospel. To all which we may add that full place of our
Savior, Matthew. 5. 17. 19. I come not to destroy the Law or the Prophets, etc.
If Christ did not dissolve them then certainly Christians must not neglect to
search them: but Christ was so far from dissolving, that he did fulfill them,
and that in his doctrine, which was suitable, and comformable to that of the
Law and the Prophets; in his life by obedience, exactly answering the commands
of the law, and in his sufferings to what the law threatened, and the Prophets
had foretold. The reasons then, why Christians are to search both, are these.

I. Because both are the voice of God to us. The Apostle tells us expressly that
the same God, who at diverse times, and in diverse ways spoke to the fathers,
has in these last days spoken also unto us, Heb. 1. 1. both are by divine
inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given: not this or that: and 2 Pet.
1. 21. The prophesies of old time, etc. what they wrote, they were God's
Amanuenses, and wrote not their private fantasies, but the dictates of the
Spirit of God. Holy men they were of God, and therefore their authority
unquestionable and immutable, their value and use great and excellent. To the
moral law we are all obliged, as a rule of our obedience, and though not to the
observance of the ceremonial, yet to the knowledge and meditation of it, as
very useful, both to acquaint us with variety of God's dispensations, and by
the comparing of those shadows and types with Christ, the body and substance,
they may be evidences of Christ already exhibited, and come in the flesh. The
consulting all Scripture is both our interest, and duty, as having God the
author of it.

II. The harmony, and identitie of Scripture doctrine both in the Old, and New
Testament. The same for substance, though different in degrees: the same object
of faith, viz. Christ, to whom all the Prophets witnessed, Acts. 10. 43.
otherwise those under that dispensation had been in a lost, undone condition:
for Acts. 4. 12. There is no other name given under heaven, whereby men may be
saved. The Prophets represent Christ in his person, as God and Man, Isai. 7.
14. In his offices, as a Prophet, Isai. 42. 1, 2, 3. as a Priest Psalm. 110. 4.
as a King, Psalm. 2. 6. and in all his benefits, as Redemption and Salvation.
That in Isai. 53. is a most pregnant testimony in our justification by faith,
verse 11. And both old and new Testament prescribe the same holiness,
obedience, and love to God, and our neighbor. They differ indeed in the
clearness of Revelation, not in the substance of the doctrine. The Gospel takes
off the veil, and lets us see the mysteries of Salvation more clearly. Now the
argument is evident, that if the doctrine of salvation be the same in both,
then both are to be searched.

III. Because all the Scriptures, both of old and new Testament, were written
for the use, and good of Christians. The commands of the Law for our practice,
as our Savior told that Lawyer, Luke 18. 26, 28. How read thou in the law?
The promises for our comfort; as that promise which was peculiar to Joshua,
chap. 1. 5. is repeated to all Christians, Heb. 1. 3. 5. The threatenings and
judgments for our example and terror: as the Apostle speaking of the
judgments which fell upon the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11, 12. So the types:
observe how our Savior applies the type of the brazen serpent to his own
death, John 3. 14. and that for the comfort and support of our faith, verse 15.
That, as he, who looked upon the brazen serpent, was healed of the stings of
the fiery serpents; so they, that look up to Christ by a true faith, are healed
of the spiritual wounds made by sin and Satan.

IV. Because of the excellency of all Scripture, which the Apostle fully
describes to us in 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. What are useful as children to know; what
may make us wise to salvation; what is profitable for doctrine to inform us;
for reproof to reclaim us; for correction to reform; for instruction to guide
us, and furnish us unto every good work. This the Apostle affirms universally
of all Scripture, not of this, or that part of it; therefore of the old, as
well as new Testament.

V. To strengthen and confirm the doctrine of the new Testament; to which both
Christ and the Apostles often send Christians, and blame them for their ignorance
in them, Luke 24. 25. Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken, etc. Therefore it was the constant
practice of Christ and his Apostles to assert their authority, and confirm
their doctrines by the old Testament; as in the Text here: and he grounds these
Jews unbelief upon their not believing Moses, verse 46, 47, For had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me: But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words? Where Christ confirms his doctrine by
Moses, who wrote of him. This was the Apology S. Paul made for himself, and
his doctrine, in Acts 26. 22. So our Savior proves the doctrine of the
resurrection by Moses, Matthew. 22. 31. and the doctrine of his sufferings and
resurrection, Luke 24. 44, 45. And the truth is, much of Gospel-doctrine can
neither be understood, nor proved without the old Testament: as that of the
Israelites in 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. whence should Christians understand that,
but out of the history of Moses, of the Manna, the cloud, the sea, and the
rock; and especially, the epistle to the Hebrews without an exact knowledge of
the legal sacrifices, priesthood and the like; and the lives of the Patriachs
mentioned, Heb. 11.

VI. And lastly, To convince the Jews of the truth of Christ our Messiah, and
satisfy Christians in their temptations concerning it: as the fulfilling of
the Prophesies, the realizing of the Types concerning Christ. This Apollos
found to be the most convincing way to confute the Jews, Acts 18. 28. And there
is no other possible way to effect this: for the New Testament they reject.
Reason is no competent judge, and cannot fathom the depths and mysteries
concerning Christ, nor judge of the true Messiah; nor can you convince them by
the miracles of Christ, for they deny them, or else impute them to Beelzebub.
If we would convince them then, we must build upon some Principles, which they
grant, otherwise they deny the whole: therefore the only way to convince them
is, to show the conformity and agreement of all Christ's doings and sufferings
to what the Prophets of old foretold of the true Messiah. Which course our
Savior himself took to prove himself the true Messiah, Luke 24. 44. and
therefore the search of the old Testament is much conducible to the
strengthening of our faith in Christ against the Jews. For when we consider the
exact Prophesies of the time of Christ's coming, Genesis 49. 10. and while the
temple stood, Hag. 2. 7. the place of his birth, by Micah, chap. 5. verse 2.
born of a virgin, Isai. 7. 14. the miracles to be wrought by him, Isai. 35. 5,
6. his passion and sufferings, Isai. 53. these are sufficient, when we find
them so punctually fulfilled in Christ, to strengthen our faith in him, and to
convince the Jews of their desperate unbelief: therefore those, who deny
Christians the use of the old Testament, rob them of their weapons, whereby
they should contend for the faith, and fight against the enemies of Christ, the
Jews.

Fourthly, The grounds of this search.

And these I shall reduce to these four heads.

I. The Scripture-fulness and sufficiency: and this is clear in the words of
the Text: In them you may have the knowledge of Christ, and eternal life:

Where we may consider,

1. It is a full and perfect foundation of faith, as containing all things
necessary to be believed, either expressly, or by convincing, and undeniable
consequence. So full and perfect it is, that it needs not to be eeked out
with unwritten traditions, or pretended enthusiasmes, and revelations. That
tradition, which brings down, and conveys Scripture-truth to us through the
successive ages of the Church, we cannot cast out, but acknowledge as an
eminent instance, and testimony of Gods Providence: and in this sense the
Church is called (...) 1 Timothy 3. 15. the pillar and ground of truth. In sensu
forensi, etc. Not that it contributes authority to them. And in this sense S.
Augustines Non credidissem may go for good and current Divinity, because we
could not have had them else. So for revelation; we acknowledge a spiritual
revelation to understand, which the Apostle prays for, Ephesians. 1. 17. but any
thing additional to Scripture-truth, we reject, as detracting from the wisdom
of God, and his revealed truth. Observe we what the Apostle says, Gal. 1. 18.
If we or an angel from heaven preach any other doctrine. He does not say,
Contra, against, but praeter, beside, says Paraeus. Here is enough to bring
you to salvation; else S. John was out, who tells us, These things are written
that you might believe, and believing might have life, John 20. 31. and if not
sufficient, we may say, as the disciples, Matthew. 26. 8. To what purpose all
this: but when God himself sends us, To the Law, and to the Testimony, Isai. 8.
20. and Abraham sends the rich man's brethren to Moses, and the Prophets, Luke
16. 29. it intimates that here is enough, which if known and practiced, is able
to keep them out of hell.

2. A full and perfect rule of righteousness. No duty, which can concern any
man in any relations, either to God or man, but you may have full direction for
it in the Scripture. Those three words of the Apostle speak the whole duty of a
Christian, (...), and (...), soberly, righteously, and godly, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
When the Lawyer came to tempt our Savior with that question, What shall I do
to inherit eternal life? our Savior sends him to the Scripture; What is
written in the law: How read thou? Observe we what Wisdom says, Prove. 1.
9. My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee:
shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity, yea, every
good path. Art thou a Magistrate? Scripture tells thee how thou must rule, in 2 Samuel 23. 3. He, that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God.
Art thou a Father: Scripture directs thee in that relation to thy children, To
bring them up in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Art thou
a child* Scripture tells thee how to carry thy self in that relation, Ephesians.
6. 1, 2. Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right, etc. Art
thou a servent? Scripture tells thee how to behave thy self in that condition,
Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according
to the flesh, etc. Art thou a Master of a family? Scripture shows thee how to
behave thy self in that relation, Ephesians. 6. 9. And ye, Masters, do ye the same
things unto them, forbearing threatening, etc. In a word, here is direction for
every Christian in every condition and relation, in which the Scripture is able
to make him thoroughly perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 17. Nay, it is so perfect a rule, that
the most specious observances, and most glorious performances, and most exact
works, are no way acceptable unto God, if not commanded in, and regulated by
this word. They may have (...) a show of wisdom in will worship, as the
Apostle speaks, Coloss. 2. 23. to the pleasing of men, but not to the glory of
God. God gave Moses a pattern for making the Tabermacle, and David of the
Temple: God has set us a perfect rule of worship and holiness in his word, and
nothing pleases him, but what is according to that rule. When our Savior told
the woman of Samaria, John 4. 22. We know what we worship: We, that is, the
Jews: the ground sure was, because the Jews had a particular appointment of God
for their worship, which the Samaritanes had not. Therefore nothing must be
imposed upon Christians, as obligatory to conscience (though something for
order, and decency, 1 Cor. 14. 40.) as Divine commands, or as the immediate
worship of God, or as duties essentially necessary in order to salvation. This
is justly abhorred, as the Tyranny of the Church of Rome, and as an
infringement of Christian liberty, and as a detracting from the perfection of
the word of God. Non ex arbitrio Deo serviendum est, sed ex imperio. What
Tertullian says of the Heathen worship, I shall say of all will worship, which
is besides the word of God: Ex religione superstitio compingitur, and eo
irreligiosior, quanto Ethnicus paratior. Men in this case are laboriously
superstitious, and take a great deal of pains to be irreligious. It seems to be
a strange expression, Hos. 8. 14. Israel has forgotten his maker, and builds
temples; but sure the reason is, because God had appointed but one Temple. To
be righteous without, or beyond the word of God, is to be righteous overmuch
and to make our selves over-wise, indeed wiser then God himself: which is
forbidden, Eccles. 7. 16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
over-wise: why should thou destroy thy self? To offer to God observances,
not prescribed in his word, is but with Nadab and Abihu to offer strange fire
unto the Lord, Levit. 10. 1. strange, because God had not commanded it. The use
whereof, before we pass further, shall be,

First, An encouragement to search. What encouragement must it be to men to dig
in a mine, when they may find a fullness of what may supply all their
necessities: there is such a fullness in Scripturemines. Do thou want
information in matters of faith? Here is a fullness of Saving truth. Or, do
thou want direction for thy life, and walking with God? here is a perfect rule
of holiness.

Secondly, When you have searched it, walk according to this rule. Take the
word of God to regulate your lives by; this is an evidence and note of a true,
upright, sincere Christian, to take the word of God as his rule. So David
describes them, Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in
the law of the Lord; that is a note, that they are undefiled, upright, and
sincere. This evidenced Jobs uprightness, Job 23. 10, 11, 12. And yet how few
walk by this rule: some by the fashions of the world, custom, and example of
others, education, the invention of men, and the like: but David had another
rule, Psalm 119. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy law I love. And there is a
new, lately unheard of, generation, now start up, who neglecting the Scriptures
pretend to be wholly led and guided by a light within them. Let us (if you
think it worth the while) examine this opinion, and I think it may be confuted
sufficiently by Mat. 6. 23. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great
is that darkness? Whence these things are obvious to be collected.

1. That it is possible the light within a man may be darkness: as the light,
which the Heathens had within them, was, who had their understanding darkened,
Ephesians. 4. 18. and as the light of every natural man is, I Cor. 2. 14.

2. That if it be so, it is a miserable darkness. (...); How great is that
darkness? that is, he that follows such a light is in a lamentable,
deplorable condition; as he that follows the light of some Meteor in the
night, which leads him into ditches.

3. This light within (as being every man's pretense, and in most men a false
light, and in one contrary to another) must be tried: and then presently, it
supposes some certain rule, by which it must be tried, (otherwise, we shall
never be secured from delusion and error) and this rule can be no other, then
the infallible word of God. All that light is darkness, which is not lighted at
the Lamp of Scripture: so the Prophet Isaiah tells us expressly, Isai. 8. 20. If
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
Therefore as David, so all Christians should walk by that light, Psalm. 119. 105.

4. If this opinion supposes a light naturally set up in every man's soul,
which by following its direction may bring them to heaven, then this is plain
down right Pelagianisme, and speaks the grace of God needless, and tells God
that he was at an unnecessary expense of wisdom and mercy, when he gave us
Scripture, which the Apostle tells us is only able to make us wise unto
salvation, in 2 Timothy 3. 15.

5. God has no where commanded us to walk by any such rule, as a light within.
By the Prophet David he sends us to his word, Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewith shall a
young man cleanse his way, by taking heed according to thy word: and S. Paul
would have all walk by the same rule, Phil. 3. 16.

6. Suppose it a true law and light, an effect of regeneration, yet not a rule,
because imperfect: for still the Prophet remits us to that law written in the
volume of the book of God, Psalm. 40. 7, 8. and by it, it does evidently appear,
that there is no law or light within the heart, to be accounted of, but what is
agreeable with, and consonant to the law written in the volume of the book. But
however, be it what light it will be, which these pretend to walk by; I shall
demonstrate to you, that those are not in the light, but in darkness, from 1
John 2. 8, 9, 10. And certainly into the number of those, whom the Apostle
there mentions, it is no uncharitableness to put these, whose constant practice
is to spit hell and damnation in every man's face, though such as walk holily
and umblameably.

But you will say, Is not every man concerned to follow the light, and inward
guidance of his own conscience? I answer, No, unless his conscience be rightly
informed, and regulated by the word of God. For conscience is but
Regularegulata: and though he cannot disobey a false light of conscience
without sin, so nor follow it without sin neither: so that the obligation,
which an erroneous conscience lays upon a man, is not to act contrary to it;
but he ought to get that false light extinguished, and his conscience better
informed, and a true light set up from the word of God. Notwithstanding this
therefore, and all other pretended lights or rules, contrary to, or besides
this: I shall close this argument with that of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 16. As many
as walk according to this rule, Peace be on them, and the Israel of God.

The second argument or ground for Scripture-search is Scripture plaineness and
perspicuity. It is the desire and plot of the Church of Rome, to fasten an
imputation of obscurity upon the Scripture, that hereby she may with the more
plausible pretense exalt Peter's pretended successor in the infallible chair,
as an unerring interpreter; and also discourage the people from reading them,
as persuading them, that the treasure lies too deep for them to find, and
therefore it is to no purpose for them to search: but this is to bring a false
report upon the Scripture, as the spies did upon the land of Canaan. All truths
necessary to salvation are plainly laid down in Scripture: whence the
Scripture is so often compared to a light; as in Psalm. 119. and Prove. 6. Indeed,
here we must distinguish between the mysteriousness and obscurity of the things
revealed, and the manner of the revelation. Scripture-mysteries indeed are
obscure and deep, in which respect S. Peter observed (...), some things hard to
be understood, in S. Paul's epistles, 2 Pet. 3. 16. but the revelation of these
mysteries are plain to those that use the means; as devout prayer, serious
meditation, frequent reading, and the like. This is that, which David says,
Psalm. 119. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful; there is the mystery: but in
verse 130. The entrance of thy word gives light; there is the perspicuity.
Some things are less plain ob futuritionem, because they foretell things to
come, as Prophesies: and some ob majestatem, for the loftiness of them, as, to
instance; The mystery of the Trinity is incomprehensible, yet most plainly
revealed in 1 John 5. 7. what greater mystery then for God to take flesh? for a
child to be born of a virgin? yet these most clearly revealed in Scripture: 1
John 1. 14. and the other, Luke 2. 6, 7. Thus that, which is obscurely
insi^^ated in one place, is clearly revealed in another, at least in those
things that be absolutely necessary to salvation; for to this very end Nihil
continetur fidei necessorii, quod Scriptura per sensum literatem alicubi non
manifest^ tradit. Aquin p. 1. q. 1. a. 10.
it was written, John 20. 31. Yet Scriptures are dark, and obscure as to us.

1. Because of our pride: and though God be said to resist the proud, yet he
teaches the humble, Psalm. 25. 9.

2. Because of men's unbelief. 2 Cor. 4. 3. The Gospel is hid to them that are
lost. So that while men-are in a state of unregeneracy, they are (amidst all
their acquired knowledge) in the dark, as to any true saving knowledge of
Scripture-mysteries; they have no relish of these things. A carnal eye cannot
see those things which eye has has not seen, they being the things of the
Spirit; therefore Christ councels us to buy of him eye salve, Revel. 3. 18.
without which we can see but little. The cloud was light to the Israelites, but
dark to the Egyptians: so is the word of God, light to the true Israelites;
that is, believers, but dark to unbelievers; the dark side of the cloud is
toward them, who are conversant only in the letter.

3. Because of our weakness and infirmity. The mysteries of the Gospel are
profound; our capacities but shallow: we may say of them, as the woman of
Samaria said of Jacobs well, John 4. It is deep, and we have not to draw with.

4. Because of our curiosity; as not content to know only what God has
revealed.

5. Because of our idleness and carelessness in searching. Difficultas non est
ex re ipsa, sed ex nostra oscitantia, says Paraeus. He that rides post cannot
take a map of the country he rides through: so he that makes too much have in
reading the Scriptures cannot take an exact account of them. To the best, by
reason of the remainders of their natural blindness, it is not so plain, as it
is in it self; therefore Scripture is more perspicuous to some, then to others:
some are better scholars then others in this school, according to the means of
grace God has bestowed upon them, Ephesians. 4. 7. and according to the diversity
of the Spirit working in opening their eyes: but they who understand most, have
reason to say with the Apostle, We know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. and to pray
with David, Psalm. 119. 18. Open thou mine eyes.

The use of this will be twofold.

First, Here we learn the unexcusableness of men's ignorance of Scripture. Thou
can not pretend, that it does not concern thee; for Christ has bidden thee,
search it: nor yet make the obscurity of it a plea, for all saving truths lies
obvious and plain in it. There is indeed strong meat for grown Christians; but
here is milk too for Babes in knowledge: here are mysteries to exercise the
acutest wits, depths for the profoundest judgments: but what may make thee
wise to salvation is so plain, that a man of the meanest capacity may
apprehend it: therefore (especially, amidst so many means of knowing it, as
public reading, and preaching) the ignorance of it in any is inexcusable.

Secondly, Pray to God for the Spirit to be your teacher in these
Gospel-mysteries: that you may all be taught of God, as it is in John 6. 45.
Without this you will be in the dark, and grope at noonday. The Sun is most
perspicuous, yet we cannot see it without its own light: the things of the
Spirit revealed in Scripture are clear and perspicuous in themselves, but will
not be so to us, without the light of the Spirit. There is indeed an external
perspicuity of Scripture in the words; this may be made out to the worst of men
by the improvement of natural abilities, and by accomplishment of Arts; nay,
the devils may have a clear understanding of this: but then there is an
internal perspicuity of Scripture, evidenced to the soul by the enlightening of
the Spirit of God shining into the heart, so irradiating the mind with a
Divine light, that it sees through the veil of the letter, and discovers the
mystery of the word. This light conveys an experimental taste, and a sweet
relish of the truths of the word of God. In a word, the Scripture is plain,
though we want light to see it; the Sun may shine, though a blind man cannot
perceive it: but now the Spirit brings a suitable light into the soul,
proportioned to these Scripture-truths; which were indicted and can only be
evidenced by the Spirit, in 2 Cor. 4. 6. and Prayer is the way to come by the
Spirit, Luke 11. 13. How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Spirit
to them that ask him.

The third argument for Scripture-search is Scriptures authority, which is
divine and infallible. S. Paul affirms, that it is of divine inspiration, in 2 Timothy 3. 16. and it is said to be a more sure word of prophecy, by S. Peter, 2
Pet. 1. 19. And herein I shall demonstrate this one thing,

That these Scriptures are the word of God.

That these Scriptures are the word of God, I shall not trouble you with a
multitude of arguments to evince it, but yet I could not wholly omit it;
because all, who do profess it, do not really and fully believe it (as I shall
evidence to you anon) and the faith of many Christians, through the strength of
Satan's temptations, and the corruption of their own hearts, may sometimes doubt
of it: that I may therefore convince some, and strengthen others, I shall
present to you these considerations.

I. The testimony of the Church is not the first or chief ground, nor is it a
sufficient argument of that faith, whereby we believe the Scriptures to be the
word of God. Into this indeed the Church of Rome does ultimately resolve its
faith. Bellarmine openly professes that, He would believe the Bible no more
then the Alcoran, if it were not for the testimony of the Church. It is true,
the outward testimony of the Church may be a motive, or a means of our belief
of the Scripture, for so she is called the pillar and ground of truth, to hold
it forth, and declare it; as the pillar holds forth the Princes Proclamation,
but adds no authority to it. It may inform us of the truth, but not persuade
us of the truth. The Church has the charge of Scripture, (...), the Oracles of
God being committed to her, (as it is said of the Jewish, Romans 3. 2.) as a
Trustee of Divine truth, to maintain, uphold, expound, and declare Scripture;
but not the first ground of our belief of it. As the Queen of Sheba believed
the report of Solomon's wisdom by others, but more when she heard it her self:
or as the Samaritans believed, because of the report of the woman, but more
when they heard him, John 4. 30, 40. The Church may hand the Scriptures to us,
and we may believe them by, but not for the testimony of it. Or, as a mother
may show the child the sun, and tell him, that is the sun, but yet the sun
manifests its self by its own light: so the Church may tell us, this is
Scripture, but it is impossible, that the ultimate resolution of a divine faith
of supernatural truths should be made into any humane, and so consequently
fallible, and uncertain testimony, when as we are to judge of the true Church
by the Scripture. Nor can this be a conviction to any, that the Scriptures are
the word of God: for either it must be to believers; and to them it is
unnecessary, for they have already effectually entertained it upon other
grounds, viz. The inward evidences of the word, and Testimony of the Spirit:
and it cannot be to unbelievers, for they reject the Church as well as the
Scripture; and therefore they must be convinced of the true Church, before they
will admit its testimony: and of this there is no other possible means to
convince them, then by the Scriptures, which must be first evidenced unto them:
Therefore,

II. There are in Scripture sufficient evidences and convictions, even to
ingenuous reason, that it is the word of God. And this is necessary; for
though, after any testimony appears to be Divine, reason must not be suffered
to dispute and question the thing so attested: yet I cannot see, why reason
should not be used, as an instrument or means to evidence such a Revelation to
be divine; otherwise (though I may be otherwise convinced my self) it is
impossible to convince an Heathen, or gainsayer, that this is the word of God.
Our faith is not irrational, and though the things revealed be above reason,
yet that it is supernaturally revealed, must be evidenced to reason; otherwise
my belief is rash, precipitate, and irrational; nor can I give a reason of the
hope that is in me, as the Apostle requires, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Therefore (omitting
those which I conceive less evincing) I shall lay down these few considerations
to evidence this.

1. Consider the sublimitie of, and mysteriousness of the things revealed in
Scripture; such as the most prying reason could never search into, nor the most
improved, raised parts and abilities ever reach; such as the Philosophers never
dreamt of: such is the fall of man, and our corruption by it, of which if the
Philosophers had some ruder notions, yet the means of man's sin and misery, viz.
by the wilful transgression of that Covenant, made between God and man, of not
eating of the tree of knowledge, etc. this they were wholly ignorant of; and
much less could reason fathom the depth of that Wisdom and Mercy which
Scripture discovers in man's recovery by Christ; this is a depth which the very
Angels desire, (...), in 1 Pet. 1. 12. to look earnestly into. That
Apostatized, fallen, miserable man should again be brought to life by the death
of the only Son of God; and that in a way of such unspeakable wisdom, and
security to all the attributes of God, with such a full reconcilement of
justice and mercy, is a mystery reason can scarce apprehend now it is
revealed, much less discover, and find out at first. So God's entering into
Covenant with lapsed man; an Unity in Trinity; Redemption by the blood of
Christ; Regeneration by the Spirit (you know Nicodemus's reason was non-pluss'd
here, with a Quomodo? How can this be, John 3.) Resurrection of the body, being
crumbled into dust: A last judgment, before the tribunal of that Christ, who
was crucified here: these are things which the eye of reason could never have
discerned, and which the most acute profound Philosophers knew nothing of.

What Plato knew of God, it is very probable, he had from Moses, of whom he was
very studious, if we will believe Clemens Alexandrinus. S. August. l. 7. c. 21.
confess.
S. Augustine confesses, when he had diligently perused Plato, he found nothing
of our misery by sin, and recovery by Christ: nothing of the blotting out the
handwriting of Ordinances by the blood of Christ. Hoc illae literae non
habent, says he. He could find none there crying out with S. Paul, Quid
faciet miser homo? etc. What shall miserable man do? Who shall deliver him?
None crying out, Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ: yet says he, Haec mihi
inviscerabantur miris modis, cum minimum Apostolorum tuorum legerem, etc. Lord,
these truths were incorporated in me, when I read the least of thy Apostles.
And truly, one end of Gods giving us Scripture was to supply the defect of
reason. This consideration will yet be more valid, if you consider whom God was
pleased to make use of, as instruments, to convey these mysteries to us: not an
eloquent Tully, profound Plato; but Amos an Heardsman, David a Shepherd, Paul
a Tent-maker, and many of the Apostles poor fishermen; men no ways enabled by
acquired parts. Moses indeed was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
Acts 7. 22. but there he could not learn the Law and Truths of God, where
Idolatry was so much overspread. So Paul was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel; but there he did not learn the mysteries of the Gospel, but during
that time he thought himself bound to blaspheme the truth, and to persecute the
Professors of the Gospel, which himself afterward preached. Matthew, a
Publican, made a Penman of the Scripture. All which speak as the admirable
wisdom and omnipotent power of Gods grace, in conquering their hearts to a
closing with the Gospel, so Gods revealing these things unto them, and in an
extraordinary manner furnishing them, and acting them by his Spirit, to write
the Scriptures.

2. The exactness of Scripture-holiness: such as you shall meet with in no
humane writings; faith purifying the heart, working by love. What exact
patterns and examples does Scripture hold forth of Purity and Holiness? Enoch
walking with God: Abraham the friend of God: and David a man after Gods own
heart. What strict laws does it prescribe? whereas Humane laws tolerate some
sins, this discovers the wages of the least sin to be death, Romans 6. 23.
whereas other Religions are fitted with Fleshly liberties, to gratify men's
corruptions (witness Mahomet's Alcoran indulging a liberty to the flesh) this
commands those pieces of holiness, which are most contrary, and repugnant to
our natural corruptions; such as selfdenial, taking up the cross, etc. It
discovers Original sin, and man by the guilt thereof liable to the challenge of
God, the censure of the law, in the first moment of his being: and that the
least sin (every idle word) must be accounted for, Matthew. 12. 36. Had it been
an Humane invention, you shall have found the flesh gratified; as all Religions
in the world have some way or other to do it. Non habent (says S. Augustine of
Plato) istae Paginae vultum pietatis hujus, lachrymas confessionis, sacrificium
tuum, spiritum contribulatum, cor contritum: nemo ibi cantat, Nonne Deo subdita
erit anima mea? that is, All the Heathen Philosophy has not so much as a show
of this piety, the tears of a broken heart, and a contrite spirit, which is thy
sacrifice: no man here cries out with David, Let all that is within me praise
his holy name, Psalm. 103. 1. The principles of morality might deck and granish
the outward man, but Scripture holiness only repairs and renews the soul,
commands the very thoughts, and curbs the very first irregular motions of the
heart. In a word, this only transforms the soul into the image of God from
glory to glory by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

3. The excellency of Gospel-promises; such as Philosophers never hinted: such
as the apprehensions of man cannot comprehend now they are revealed, much less
could they imagine, or invent. It would be infinite to enlarge; I shall
therefore instance but in two: Ease to troubled, wearied souls: Nemo ibi audit,
Venite ad me, qui laboratis, says S. Augustine, speaking of the writings of
Philosophers. He could not among all the Platonic Philosophers find such an
expression; so comfortable a promise, as this, Come unto me, all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden. No sanctuary for troubled souls, but the blood of
Christ, which this Scripture only discovers. Isai. 40. 1, 2. Speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, etc. And another Promise in Isai. 43. 2. I will be
with thee when thou passest through the fire, and through the water: not such a
Promise in all the writings of men: a Promise of Gods gracious presence here,
and then the Promise of eternal rest in another world. The Heathens might dream
of an Elysium; Mahomet promise a confluence of sensual carnal delights in green
meadows to his followers; but an happiness made up of an eternal enjoying God
by vision and love, is a thing their reason could never reach, but must
certainly be a Divine Revelation, as being that which Eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive of.

4. The nature and event of Scripture prophesies: which are such as the eye of
omniscience only can reach, as being beyond the foresight of the most perfect
creature. Moses foretold, the seed of the woman should break the serpents head,
much above three thousand years, er'e it was accomplished. So Jacobs prophecy
of the coming of Shiloh upon the departure of the Scepter from Judah, Genesis 49.
fell out accordingly, a little before Christ's birth, when the Jews were
subjected to the power of the Romans. Thus all the Prophets foretelling the
calling of the Gentiles, a thing so strange, that when accomplished, many did
not understand it, and more were offended at it. Isaiah prophesied the
captivity, and destruction of Jerusalem, even then, when the kingdom was in a
flourishing condition, both which afterward fell out. Thus Josiah's name and
actions were foretold three hundred years before his birth, 1 Kings 13. 2. and
Cyrus's an hundred years before his birth, Isai. 45. 1, 2. etc. And what does
all this speak but a Divine revelation. Man may see some things future, as they
are in their causes, but to foretell such future events, as are merely dependant
upon the Divine will, such as these are, is only proper to God. Testimonium
divinitatis, veritas divinationis, says Tertullian, The certainty of
foretelling is a sure Testimony of Divinity. And so we find that in Isai. 41.
22, 23. the foretelling such futurities is made a distinction of the true God,
from all false ones.

5. Consider how these Scriptures have gained authority and acceptance from the
world by quite contrary means to other writings: not by sinful compliances
with the humors, and lusts of men (which has much promoted the Alcoran of
Mahomet) for these it impartially and severely taxes, and condemns: not
insinuated into men's minds by the pomp and pleasantness of Rhetoric: (no
adornings with the flowers of Rhetoric, to make them seem grateful to the
world) but by a plain style, and homely expression. It gains acceptance by the
mysteriousness of the things more, then eloquence of the style: so the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 4. My speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. It is the
custom of men to slatter Great ones by a complemental dedication, and thereby
to gain honor and repute to their writings: but observe the dedications of the
Scriptures, they are to the poor, condemned, scattered Saints at Corinth, and
elsewhere; so 1 Pet. 1. 1. Humane writings gain acceptance by the command and
Patronage of Great ones: as Mahomet's upheld by a continued war; Nebuchadnezzar
makes a fiery furnace for them who will not bow down to the Image he sets up:
but here it was quite contrary, a furnace, fiery trials, and persecutions
prepared for them, who did receive, and profess the word, under many Heathen
Emperors, yet it thrived, and the professors thereof multiplied, not
withstanding all opposition, and disadvantages. Which certainly, even in the
conviction of reason, speaks the hand of God stretched out to preserve his
word, and bringing in many to the acknowledgement of it: that notwithstanding
the opposition these Scriptures have met with from persecuting Emperors,
cunning Heretics, and at first promulged only by a few poor fishermen, sent
out with that commission, Matthew. 28. 19. to preach a crucified Savior to an
obstinate world: that notwithstanding all this, I say, it should be preserved,
and propagated, speaks it from God, as Gamaliel a Pharisee argued, Acts 5. 38,
39. Had it not been thus from God, surely God would long since have stopped the
mouths of us, Ministers of it, as the greatest deluders and impostours in the
world (whom yet he has often miraculously preserved and encouraged) and have
countenanced the opposers of it; whom yet his severest judgments have
overtaken: witness Antiochus, Julian, and the rest. That the Professors of the
Gospel should be as lambs among wolves, yet not devoured; that persecution
should be illecebra magis sectae, as Tertullian says: and that it should
thrive by Tertull. Apol. cap. 49.
opposition, this speaks it surely to be from God.

6. Consider the confirmation of this word by miracles, such as created power
could never reach. The Apostle indeed foretells the coming of Antichrist to be
with many signs and wonders, 2 Thessal. 2. 9. yea, but lying wonders; but
Scripture-miracles are such, as can be effected only by the arm of
omnipotency: as, Dividing the sea, curing one born blind, Feeding thousands
with a few loaves and fishes, Raising the dead from a settled corruption, as
Lazarus: these are such as Antichrist, I think, never pretended to: therefore,
as the Magicians, when they could not do the like miracles, as Moses did, cried
out, This is the finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. so we here, This is the truth, the
word of God. God would never certainly lay out his power, or work miracles to
confirm, or seal to alye. At John 5. 36. our Savior urges this as an
argument, why his person and doctrine should be entertained.

7. Consider Satan's enmity against the Scripture. His great design is, (if
possible to keep men from the letter of the Scripture) to hinder men from an
effectual entertainment of the Gospel: and therefore has stirred up, in all
ages almost, Persecutours to oppose it, and Heretics to delude and wrest it.
It strikes at, and threatens ruin to his kingdom, therefore he endeavors his
utmost to subvert it: and therefore all the designs now on foot against the
Scripture, you must look upon them, as the plots of Satan. You may read a piece
of Philosophy, History, or any Humane writing, and find little, or no
reluctancie against the entertainment of it. Now, why should not men bring as
ready a belief to Scripture, or entertain the truth of it, when they read it?
surely it is from the Devil, tempting them to unbelief: even because the God of
this world has blinded their eyes, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Tertullian gathered the goodness of the Gospel from this, Quod a Nerone
damnatum, because it was so persecuted by Nero: and we the excellency of the
Scriptures from this, because the Devil so much malignes it.

8. Consider how it advances God, and debases man. It gives God the glory of
all his Attributes and Works: both in the work of Creation and Redemption. It
gives him the glory of what we have and do: What have thou, that thou have not
received? I Cor. 4. 7. there in what we have, and in what we do, S. Paul
acknowledges I Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly, yet not I, but the
grace of God within me. It tells us, that of our selves we are not able to
think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. yet that we are able to do all things
through Christ, Phil. 4. 13. Now in Humane writings men seek their own applause
and credit, and this moves them to write; but these writings the glory; of God,
which our Savior more then once makes the badge of the truth of his doctrine,
John 7. 19. and John 8. 50. etc. Scripture advances God, as the first cause and
last end.

And thus having finished the Doctrine, I proceed to the

Fifth General,

The Application of it.

Use First, See here the cruel Antichristian tyranny of the Church of Rome,
which forbids private Christians the use and search of the Scriptures:
Antichristian surely in this; Christ bids, Search them, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life: they forbid the search of them, for fear of Heresy and
Error. The Apostle tells us, The Scripture is profitable, they say, it is
pernicious: our Savior would have the light be set upon a candlestick, Matthew.
5. 15. they put it under a bushel, and so leave the people in darkness. How
much against nature is it, to withold milk from a child? so much it is to
withhold the sincere milk of Gods word from his children: or to send a soldier
into the field unarmed, how cruel is it? So to rob the people of this spiritual
armor, this sword of the Spirit, and expose them naked to the power and fury,
the delusions and stratagems of Satan. As the Philistines out of envy dealt
with the wells of water, Genesis 26. 15. so do these with the Scriptures, they
envy the people the water of life, therefore stop up these wells of salvation,
or else throw dirt into them; so that the people can have little of the pure
water, but as it is pudled with the dirt of their traditions, or Monkish and
Jesuitical glosses and depravations: and being thus robbed of the compass of
the Scripture, they quickly split upon the rock of error.

Use Second, Hence we learn that they are inexcusable, who neglect this duty:
whom neither the command of God, their own good and advantage, neither Religion
or Policy can prevail with: but a few obscene Poets, or idle Romances, or
ridiculous Ballads are more searched by them, then the Scriptures. Get you
Bibles (says S. Chrysostom) which are the physic and medicines of your souls.
Surely, the neglect of this is intolerable. God has not overburthened you with
Scripture. There are many things that Jesus did, which are not written, but
these are written, John 20. 30, 31. that is these few. It is neither so costly
nor dear, but the meanest may purchase it; nor so voluminous, but the most
employed may read and search it. The motives to it (as you heard before) are
weighty, and therefore the neglect of it the more dangerous. But, because many
things may be pretended for the neglect hereof, I shall remove a scruple or two.

First Object. Say some, I am unlearned, I cannot search into it.

Answ. To this I answer; I wish thou were learned, and able to read they self:
but then know, thou ought so much the more carefully to attend, and
conscienciously wait upon the public reading of the Scripture in these public
assemblies. This has been the constant practice of the Church in all ages, as
is evident partly in Luke 4, 16, 17. and partly in Acts 13. 15. where you see
in both places, it was the usual custom to have the Scriptures read in their
public assemblies; and after reading followed preaching. The ground whereof
was, surely, as to preserve the purity of Scripturedoctrine in the Church, that
the people, hearing the word so frequently read, might not be imposed upon by
error, or delusions of men: so also for the profit, advantage, and edification
of those, who cannot read, or search the Scriptures; and that the preaching of
the word might come with more light and power upon their hearts. If you cannot
read your selves, get others to read unto you, and be you so much the more in
prayer and meditation.

Second Object. I have so much employment in the world that I have no leisure
to search the Scriptures. If I should privately search Scripture, and attend
frequently upon the preaching of the word, it would set me behind hand in the
world, and hinder my thriving.

Answ. I answer, This is much what the Apology, that those made, who pretended
their farms, and oxen, as an excuse for not coming unto the wedding, Matthew. 22.
But, Christians, break through your worldly employments, prefer God before the
world, and your souls before your bodies, an act of Religion before all worldly
business, and believe it, you will be no losers by it; God will succeed, and
bless your labors more. Never was any man a loser by his Religion. See what
God promised to the lews, Exodus 34. 24. that He would secure their land for
them, while they went up to Jerusalem to worship the Lord. And what our Savior
said to the Disciples, Luke 22. 35. When I sent you out without purse, and
scrip, and shoes, lacked ye anything? Thou pretendest no leisure; the truth is,
Non parum temporis habemus, sed multum perdimus, says Seneca, Yes, we have
time enough, but we loose too much of it. Thou have no leisure for this: but,
Art thou at leisure for thy pleasures, and not for Religion? for the world, and
not for God? for shame cheat not your own souls with such vain pretenses, but
as thou desire the knowledge of Christ here, and the enjoyment of Christ
hereafter, be conscientious in this duty of Searching the Scriptures.

Use Third, It reproves those, who believe not this truth, that the Scripture
is the word of God. But you will say, This concerns not us, Go charge the Turks
and Indians with this. No, (my Brethren) many of our selves here are guilty of
this, for though men's mouths profess it, yet their hearts deny it, as the
Apostle speaks of some, In words they profess God, but in works they deny him,
Tit. 1. 16. Did men really believe the corruptions of their natures, and their
constant liableness unto wrath; would there be so much pride, so much
confidence in sin? Did men really believe, that of every idle word they must
give an account; would there be so much idle, frothy, ungodly, profane,
lascivious talking and discourse? Did men believe the Apostle, Gal. 5. 19, 20,
21. that all those vices there rehearsed were the works of the flesh; would
those sins so much abound? Did men believe that they who did no wrong to their
neighbor should enter into, and dwell in the Tabernacle of God, Psalm. 15. 1,
5. would there be so much oppression and extortion? Did men believe that God
will come in flaming fire to render vengeance upon all them, that know not God,
and obey not his Gospel, as in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. would there be such a contented
wilful ignorance of God? Truth, where it is effectually entertained, will have
an influence upon the life. How do most men hold Gospel Truth in
unrighteousness? as the Apostle says, the Gentiles did the light of nature,
Romans 1. 18. so these withold Gospel Truths: for, certainly, wickedness in the
life speaks an ineffectual entertainment of the truth.

Use Fourth, It condemns those who do not value and prize the Scripture. How
did the Heathens prize their Oracles? yet the generality of Christians do not
prize these Oracles of God, as the Apostle calls them, Romans 3. 2. Three things
there are, that make this out unto us.

1. Men's wilful and contented ignorance of Scripture. What things we prize, we
search into. How does the Scholar pry, and search into those notions, he
affects and values? So would men do, if they did value and prize the word
aright; but the contrary to this rather is evident by their language, Depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21. 14.

II. Men's weariness in searching the Scripture. What things we prize, in the
search of them we find delight: but, how are men tired at a Sermon, or
Sabbath, in which the Scriptures are read? Is not the language of those
Israelites in Amos 8. 5. the language of too many among us? When will the
Sabbath be ended? etc. Men are sooner weary of this, then any other

III. Men's seldom discoursing of Scripture. As they said to Peter in another
case, Matthew. 26. 73. Thy speech bewrays thee: so men's speeches bewray their
want of affections to the Scriptures. The Scholar upon every occasion is
discoursing of those notions, which he prizeth: but men are far more wise to
discourse of the world, then of heaven, and heavenly things.

Use Fifth, Of exhortation: That you would endeavor to get your faith well
grounded in this fundamental truth: that neither Satan tempt you, nor men
dispute you out of it; for till then

I. Your faith will be uncertain and weak; as a building without a foundation;
as a ship without ballast or anchor, soon tossed and ship-wrackt: and this we
may think is the cause of most men's Apostacy in these declining times.

II. Your lives will be but loose. If you be not thoroughly convinced of your
duty of walking by Scripture-rule, you will walk at uncertainties, and so
amiss.

III. Your comforts weak, if not grounded on Scripture-promises. This is one
main reason, why men's comforts ebb and flow so much; they are not grounded on a
sure belief of Scripture; and if once your faith in this truth waver, the
foundation of your comfort must needs be shaken. For the attaining whereof I
can give you no better direction, then that you Pray earnestly for the Spirit,
that he would please

I. To open the eyes of your mind, illightning, and irradiating the
understanding to see those arguments, and evidences of this truth, which lie in
the Scriptures. So S. John tells us, I John 2. 26. These things have I written
unto you, that no man seduce you. And, without this, all other arguments will
be ineffectual to the begetting of a saving and through belief of this truth.
As Agar, when her eyes were opened, saw a well of water, Genesis 21. 19. so there
are arguments to evince this truth sufficient in the Scriptures, but they will
never be brought home to the soul with a full conviction, till the Spirit open
our eyes to see them: for this is one end, why the Spirit of God is given to us
and received of us, that we may know the things that are freely given unto us
by the Spirit of God, as in I Cor. 2. 12.

2. To remove that natural enmity and prejudice, that we have against an
effectual assent to the Gospel, and so sanctify our hearts, as to make it
close with, and heartily embrace it, as the truth and word of God. Truth
resists our corruptions, and they it. What is the great Gospel truth, but
Christ his coming to undertake as our Jesus? this we cannot savingly assent
unto, but by the Spirit, as in I Cor 12. 3. No man can say, that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the Spirit. Corruption fills the soul with prejudices against the
truth. The Philosopher observes, that the Mathematics (though abstruse in
themselves) are sooner learnt by a young man dissolute, and that has not tamed
his passions, then morality: because those, being mere speculations, bring no
oppositions to his lusts, which the precepts of morality curb and restrain. So
men's corruptions and unsubdued lusts prejudice the soul against the belief of
Gospel Truth, which the sanctifying work of the Spirit does subdue and remove,
and so disposes the soul for the entertainment of the truth of the Gospel: as
we see in S. Paul, who, having his lusts subdued once, came to preach that
Gospel, which before he had persecuted.

FINIS.

