A Special VVarrant Given forth (from the SPIRIT of GOD (Who is Lord over all
Lords, and King above all Kings) against the Spirit of Envy and Persecution,
who has been, is, and will be the Greatest Enemy to God and Godliness, and to
all People.

ALSO, Some Descriptions set down how this unsufferable Enemy (the Spirit of
Persecution) may be known, and what he is, and from whence he came, and where
he lodges in the Night, and what Weapons people may be armed with against him
when they go to take him, that he may not hurt them, that so they may bring him
to Judgment, and Sentence may be past upon him.

Satan shall go forth to deceive the Nations, and Gog and Magog shall appear
together, for the stirring up of an Army to Battle against the Saints, the
Number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea; and they went upon the breadth of the
Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the Beloved City, and
fire came down from God out of Heaven and devoured them, as in Rev. 20. These
shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. 17. 14. Written by Joseph Fuce.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663,

A Special VVarrant Given forth from the Spirit of God.
A Special Warrant given forth from the Spirit of God (who is Lord over all
Lords, and King above all Kings) against the Spirit of Envy and Persecution,
which has, is, and will be the Greatest Enemy against God and Godliness, to
Kings and Kingdoms, Nobles and Nobility, Neighbors and Neighborhood; and
therefore would the God of the Spirits of all flesh have both Kings and Nobles,
and all other People, in all parts of his Creation, and that more especially in
those Parts where Kings, and Nobles, and People of all sorts profess to own
God, and his Christ, to be awakened, and moved to stir and stand up, and to
set unto their helping hand, and to lend their best assistance for the
stopping, apprehending, and taking this Great and Notorious Enemy to God and
all Mankind, from the very Highest to the Lowest of all in the Creation, and to
True Religion it self: With some Descriptions what this Insufferable Enemy is,
and from whence he came, and where he Lodges in the Night, and how he may be
known and taken, and what People of all sorts are to be Armed with against
this Thief that comes in the Night, so that they may not be hurt by him, nor
hurt one another about taking him, and bringing him to Judgment and
Condemnation; for they that professed themselves to be Religious people that have
gone forth heretosore, and have not been Armed with the True Armor, nor led
by the True Leader, they have Struck at this Enemy and missed him, and Wounded
and Killed one another, and Taken and Imprisoned one another, and let him go
at Liberty in every Nation and Country, City and Town like a roaring Lion to
devour, to the great Grief of the Spirit of God, who created: Mankind, and
would have them all to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, as the
Scripture says; and then how peaceable people of all sorts may live, and how
in Life and Spirit they may Serve and Worship their Creator, and in Love serve
and do one for another as Brethren and Friends and Neighbors, and so every
one may come to sit down under his own Vine, and none shall make him afraid.

First, What this Great Enemy unto God and Godliness, and all Mankind is,
against whom this Special Warrant from the Spirit of God goes sorth?

This Great Enemy to all Mankind is that Old Envious Spirit of Persecution that
got into Cain, and moved and stirred him up against his Righteous Brother
Abels, (Genesis 4, 5, 8.) So he made Cain his Servant to Murder or Kill his
Righteous Brother Abel, and brought misery and sorrow and Everlasting Torment
upon himself, who then became a Vagabond from God to wander with a Burden too
heavy for him to bear; and although he built a City to make himself an
Habitation, yet his Punishment: was Greater than he could bear, because he had
done the Murdering Spirits Work (in Slaying his Brother) and so became worthy
of Everlasting Punishment, like unto him that was a Murderer from the
Beginning: And the same Envious, Persecuting and Murdering Spirit was in
Pharaoh, who burdened and grievously Oppressed and Afflicted the Lords People
for a long time, (Exodus 3. 7.) which grieved the Lords Spirit, who heard the
Groanings of his People in Egypt, (Exodus 5, to the 14.) And this Envious Spirit
made Pharaoh the King do so Wickedly against the mind of God as to provoke the
Holy One of Israel to bring the Plagues on the Kings own self, and the whole
Land of Egypt; and yet this Great Enemy to the King and Kingdom would not let
the King be quiet, but made him to oppress them more than before, and at last
to pursue the Lords People with a Great Army of Horsemen and Charriots,
intending to Destroy those whom the Lord had Chosen to himself to be his
People; and by so doing the King brought everlasting destruction upon himself
and all his Host, who were destroyed by water in the Red Sea; and that was the
work of the Envious Spirit to bring to everlasting destruction. And the same
Enemy was in Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazar, and in the Presidents and Princes,
and in Haman, and in all the rest of the envious Enemies of God and his People
in those Generations. (Esther 7.) And oh how did that great Enemy, the Spirit
of Persecution, betray Haman even to the Gallows to be Hanged for devising
mischief against poor Mordecai, and all the Jews, which were the Lords
People? And also how was the great King Nebuchadnezzar deceived by the same
Deceitful Spirit of Envy and Persecution, that stirred him up to Persecute the
Lords Holy Children, and to exalt himself in the Pride of his heart, until his
Kingdom was taken, and he drove our from amongst men to eat Grass like an
Ox, and his Body to be wet with the Dew, until his Hairs were grown like
Eagles Feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws, (Dan. 4. 33.) And he
humbled himself, and looked up to Heaven, and his Understanding returned to
him, (Dan. 5.) by which he spoke, to the great Praise of God and his Kingdom,
and Ways, and Judgments; and he confessed, that they that walk in Pride, he is
able to abase, and he knew it was the Most High that Ruled in the Kingdom of
Men, and that he appoints over it whosoever he will.

And then after Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazar was King, and Reigned, (Dan. 5.) and
he made a great Feast to a thousand of his Lords, and drunk Wine before them,
and then he sent for the Vessels, that his Father had taken out of the Temple
at Jerusalem, and he, and his Wives, and Nobles drank wine in them; and in the
same Hour came forth Fingers of a Man's Hand, and wrote upon the Wall of the
Kings Palace (for a sign against the King,), and the King saw the part of the
Hand that Wrote, and his Countenance was then changed, and his Thoughts
troubled him, so that he cried to bring in the Astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
the Southsayers, which were the Wise Men of Babylon, to see if they could read
the Writing, and tell the King the Interpretation thereof, which none of them
could do; then the King and his Nobles were sore troubled and astonished: and
in that time of trouble the Queen remembered Daniel the Lords Servant, in whom
was sound the Spirit of Light and Wisdom, who read the Writing, and told the
King the Interpretation, which was, that God had numbered thy Kingdom, and
finished it, and he told him, Thou art Weighed in the Balance, and art found
wanting, and thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. And
the King advanced and honored Daniel to be the Ruler in the Kingdom, although
that Night Belshazar was slain, and his Kingdom took from him by Darius; and
then it pleased Darius to set over the Kingdom an Hundred and Twenty Princes,
(Dan. 6. to the end,) that should be over the whole Kingdom, and over three
Presidents, of whom this Daniel was first, and he was above the other, and they
were to give accounts unto him, and then the King should have no Damage,
because there was an excellent Spirit in Daniel; and therefore the King thought
to set him over the whole Realm, and so both the King and Princes, and all,
were like to do well, and be in peace, because of that excellent Spirit in
Daniel, who would let the King have no Damage; for the Damage, dishonor,
confusion; overthrow, and utter destruction came upon the Kings and their
Kingdoms, by reason of their following the Proud, Envious, Darkning Spirit of
Error, that was known by his Persecution and Enmity; but when the Excellent
Spirit of Light and Wisdom, that was found in Daniel the Lords servant, was
hearkened unto, then the King was liable to have no Damage, although Daniels way
of Worshipping of God was altogether contrary both to King and Princes, yet all
was well toward the King and Kingdom and Princes and Presidents, because of
that Excellent Spirits leading Daniel. But then the Old Serpent, which is the
Devil, the King of Pride, and the greatest betrayer of man's Soul and Body,
which is and ever was the chief in doing mischief, the Persecutor and
Murderer of Gods People, I say, this subtle Serpent seeing the Spirit of God
and of Wisdom (that was found in Daniel) bearing Rule so in the King, and over
the Princes, that there was like to be no Damage to the King, nor Daniel, nor
Princes, nor Presidents, so that all was well and in Peace, and his Kingdom of
Enmity, Pride and Darkness lay wast, then mark, how subtly he gets in
amongst the Princes, and begets them into Pride and Discontent, because of
Daniel's being set above them, for that Excellent Spirits sake that no evil
might besall the King or Kingdom; and when this proud Envious Spirit was got
up, in and among the Princes and Presidents, he exalted them into Pride and
Discontentednesse with their places, and then they began to watch for evil
against honest harmless Daniel the Lords Servant, and knowing they could find
nothing against him, except it were concerning the Worship and Service of his
God, which was differing from all their Worship and Services; yet all was well,
and no Damage was against the King or Princes by Faithful- Daniels Worshipping
and Serving his God, though differing from them all, because of that Excellent
Spirit of Light and Wisdom that was found in Daniel: And then this Serpent led
the Presidents and Princes subtly to go to the King, and to stir up the King
to make a Law and Decree for Conformity, to make all Bow and Conform to their
way of Worship, or to be cast into the Lions Den, intending this mischief
against poor Daniel, because he was confirmed and steadfast in the Worship and
Service of his God, and also Faithful to man in what he could do for
Conscience sake, or in whatever he undertook whomsoever bare Rule, because
there was in him an Excellent Spirit; and the King Darius being innocent of
their intent, and not foreseeing their Plot they laid against Daniel, in
stirring him up and pressing him to make a Law, or Seal a Decree about Service
and Worship, that none might ask a Petition of any, God or Man, for thirty
Days, save thee O King, so for all to Consorme at such a time, or to be cast
into the Lions Den: And this Wicked Cunning Serpent he stirred up the Princes,
and Presidents, and Governors, etc. of the Kingdom, to Assemble together and
vehemently to urge the King to Sign their mischievous Decree, that it might be
unalterable; and when he had persuaded the King, and he had Sealed the Statute
or Decree, then they Assembled themselves and took Daniel Praying before his
God, as he did aforetime, then they came near and spoke before the King of his
Decree, and of Daniel, who could not for Conscience sake leave the Worship and
Service of his God, although the Decree was Sealed against him; but when the
King did see, how it reflected upon his True and Faithful Subject Daniel, he
was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to Deliver him,
and he labored till the going down of the Sun to Deliver him; and then those
men pressed upon the King to have the Decree executed upon Daniel, who was
brought according to the Decree, that was contrived in the Envy of their
hearts, and cast into the Den of Lions, and the King Believed, and said to
Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, will Deliver thee; then the King
went to his Palace, and passed the Night pasting, neither were Instruments of
Music brought before him, and his Sleep went from him: But oh how glad was he
in the Morning, when he saw how that Daniel was saved by his God, and that
because of his Faithfulness and Innocence that was found before the Lord, and
who had wronged no man; and then the King in the exceeding Joy and Gladness of
his Heart, caused Daniel to be taken up out of the Den; when they had taken him
up, no manner of hurt was sound about him, because he believed in his God; and
the King commanded, and they brought those men which had accused Daniel, and
they cast them, and their wives and children into the Lions Den, and they were
destroyed; And thus were they blinded by the spirit of darkness and envy, and
betrayed even unto death, and that was the fruit and work of the envious spirit
of persecution, to stir up to destroy the most honest and upright in the sight
of God and man, from off the earth, or else, to stir up, and lead such
destroyers to be destroyed, and that more especially, about and concerning
Religion and Worship; and if I were led to speak of what I see of this
soul-betraying spirit of envy and persecution, and of his fruit, surely it
would sill a larg volume, but the Spirit of the Lord (who has made men wise in
this Generation) leads me briefly to hint of some of the fruits of the old
spirit of persecution, in this special Warrant to all sorts of people in
Christendom, so called, who upon consideration with the Light of Christ in
their Consciences, may see those things to be true, and that so much the more
plainly, because the Lord in the largness of his love has spoken so plainly,
and called unto man so often in this age by his Spirit, through many of his
chosen vessels, who have suffered deeply by all the Powers that have born rule,
ever since we departed from evil, and by the voice of the spirit (through the
Lords chosen vessels) have many minds been turned from darkness to light in
their own Consciences, which has made this Generation wiser than many
Generations heretofore in the Apostasy; besides the great and marvelous works
that God has brought to pass in the sight of this Generation of men, in
overturning, and changing, and converting thousands from darkness to light, and
from evil to good, and from envy to true love; besides the overturning of
Governors and Governments and Armies, and that at the last, without fighting
or shedding of blood, which is enough to awaken this Generation, into a
consideration of things past, present, and to come. And thus did the old
Serpent work before the days of Christ's coming in the flesh, to end the Jews
worship in outside things, and their Law, and to set up the everlasting
worship of God in the Spirit.

And now take notice, how the old Dragon got in among the Jews, who had Moses
and the Prophets writings, who had been great sufferers, and who had known by
writings how their forefathers were scattered, and led into Babylon, after God
by a mighty hand had brought them through the Red Sea and Wilderness; and these
professing Jews said, if they had been in the days of their fathers, they would
not have persecuted the Prophets; but while they were in their Zeal,
worshipping in outward things, the envious spirit of persecution got into them,
and blinded their minds, and hardened their hearts; and in those days, this
spirit of envy and murder and persecution, began to work in Herod against
Christ, for he sent forth, and slew all the male children in Bethlehem, and in
all the coasts thereof, thinking to destroy Christ, (Acts 13.) And after John
was beheaded: And see what the spirit brought Herod to at the last, he was
eaten with Worms: And because the Envious* Jews did not look for the Messiah or
Christ to come in so low a degree, as to be born in Bethlehem, and laid in a
Manger, they knew him not: And although their forefathers had suffered
persecution and great affliction, and they had said they would not have
persecuted the Prophets, whose words they had, which prophesied of Christ, who
wrought wonders and miracles among them, yet they Crucified the Prince of life;
and these were they that worshipped in Temples and Synagogues together with
their Priests and Rulers, that were stirred up by this persecuting spirit,
mostly through the Chief Priests, against Christ and his Disciples, who went up
and down preaching the truth, and doing good, and wronging no man; yet they
cried vehemently, Let him be Crucified: And as they Crucified Christ, so they
persecuted his Disciples, and put many of them to death, and provoked the Lord
against them, until he gave them up to be scattered, and to be a hissing to all
the Nations, as the natural seed of those Jews are at this day, so were they
blinded and hardened, and then betrayed to utter ruin, as the persecutors had
been before by the old Serpent, the spirit of envy and persecution; and then
when he had done his worst against Christ and Christians, in and through the
Heathen, Jews, Rulers, Priests and people of all sorts, then he got in amongst
them that were called Christians, that did not watch in the Light, and low
meekness of spirit, which were such as had the Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
were ravening Wolves, the ravening, wolvish, doggish, envious spirit of
persecution made them so, and such in that nature had a form of godliness, but
denied the power thereof, and from such the true Christians were to turn away,
who were in the meek Spirit, and harmless innocent nature of Christ, that kept
them always ready to do good, and to receive wrong, rather than to do any
wrong, to Jew, or Gentile, or the false Brethren, that were false like the
Jews; and then this envious persecuting spirit led the deceivers that came to
the Saints in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly were ravening Wolvs, out into the
world, and they that were of the world went after them into a profession of
Christ, and yet of the worlds nature, and they got a form of godliness, but
denied the power thereof, and from such the Saints were to turn away, and so
there was a difference in the nature of them that professed Christ, for some
were of the Lambs nature, and others of the worlds nature, yet all professed
God and Christ, and from that, they had all the names of Christians, but all
were not of the divine nature of Christ; and this was in the latter days, or
last times, of the Apostles age, as John said, Little Children, it is the last
time, as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many
Antichrists; whereby they knew that they were the last times, and the
Antichrists went out from the Apostles into the world, and the world went
after them, and so the Apostasy came in, and then they daily increased in the
error and degeneration, from the (leader) pitiful, meek, suffering and saving
spirit; so darkness, ignorance, hardness of heart, and envy increased among
them that had the name of Christians, but had lost the nature of Christ, and
the spirit of envy and persecution began to appear to be chief among them; then
the Beast rose up out of them, that were like the Sea, who received this
imposing power from the old Dragon, that stirred up the Jews to Crucisie the
Lord of life; and so the Beast set up an Image, and caused the people to
worship his Image; and the Saints of the most High that would not worship the
Image of the Beast, nor receive his Mark in their foreheads, or in their right
hands, were to be stain, such was their imposition for their imagined way of
worship, and they made war with the Saints of the most High, and overcame them,
and killed both small and great, that would not worship the Beast and his
Image; and the man* child Christ Jesus was caught up to God, and the woman sled
into the wilderness, where she has been nourished in the time of Apostasy, and
blindness of peoples minds; and oh what havoc has this soul-betraying spirit
of envy and persecution made, with and among the Christians, so called in the
Apostasy? and how has he set Kings, and Princes, and Nations, and Kingdoms,
and Priests, and people, one against another about Religion and Worship? and
how grievously have people been enslaved through Christendom by this spirit of
persecution, to martyr and murder one another, the Papists against the
Protestants, Lutherans, Presbyterians, and other Sects, and the Lutherans,
Protestants, Presbyterians, and others, against the Papists, and all about
Religion, and all called Christians, and all liable to suffer (as often they
have done) by the Heathen; so mischievous and treacherous has this persecuting
spirit betrayed people to death, about their form of Worship, that has stood
in outward things, and all has been without the spirit of love unfeigned, and
out of natures affection; and they were the persecuters that had the powers of
the earth on their sides, and were uppermost; and so they have rolled to and
fro, and tumbled up and down like the Sea, and broke one another like the waves
thereof, and destroyed and devoured one another like the fishes of the Sea, and
beasts of the field, and all about Service and Worship, and every one counting
his own way right, and all others wrong, while all their hands have been full
of blood, and all are out of the Spirit that teaches to love enemies, and to
forgive enemies, and so to overcome the evil with the good spirit of love and
forgiveness; and so they have been all wrong in persecuting one another, and
revenging one upon another, and seeking to overcome one another with the evil
spirit of cruelty and persecuting, and so the very name Christian is abhorred
among the Heathen, Turks, and Indians, and Jews also, by reason of this
devilish spirit of envy and persecution, which has made slaves of whole
Nations of people called Christians, who has done or fulfilled the lusts of
the Old Dragon, from whence all these Wars and Jars, and killing one another
about Religion and Service, did first arise in this long Night of Apostasy,
which Christ, the true Prophet, said should come, wherein no man should work,
etc.

And now take notice how this great enemy has wrought in this Age in which we
live, after that it pleased God to enlighten men's understandings somewhat more
than in some Ages past, and to awaken the Consciences of some to seek after God
more strictly than before: Then they began to reform from some Idolatry, as
they counted it, and to learn some of the Traditions of their forefathers,
which were almost all Papists, about a hundred years ago, and many were zealous
for godliness; but then this spirit began to work afresh among people in this
our native Country of England; and after some reformation inwardly, the enemy
got up among them, and led many into new inventions, and Traditions of their
own; and then the envious spirit of persecution got up, and then they that were
in the old Traditions and Invented ways of Service and Worship, and they that
imagined and invented new Inventions, and set up other Traditions, rose up one
against another in the spirit of envy and persecution. And oh what a work has
been within this 20 years, which may never be forgotten. First, what killing
and slaying one another, and throwing down others Traditions, and slighting
their Way and Ministers, and setting up others that had stolen more of the
good words and fair Speeches, whereby they so much the more deceived the hearts
of the simple? And oh how lovly were the Reformed Ministry and people! and how
did they crow over others that did not reform, while they had a dunghill to
stand upon? and then what hunting was there among the best reformed Ministers
for great Benefices, and sometimes laying two or three little ones together,
and then they mounted into the chief Seats in their Temples called Churches,
and there they cried against the Church of Rome, and against the Common Prayer,
and Organs, and Singing Boys, and the like, and yet would take Tithes, which
was the Romish wages and hire, although they refused to do the Romish Service;
and so that has stood, notwithstanding their changing; and that was not enough
to serve some, but they would run and complain to the Powers that then were to
get Augmentations: And notwithstanding their good words and fair speeches,
their hearts went after their covetousness. And as the Priests did, so did many
Rulers: Oh how they sought after Lordships, and others Estates, and so threw
down others, and exalted themselves, notwithstanding their Reformation, so full
of Pride, Covetousness, and Envy, was their hearts: And when the Presbiterians,
Independents, and Baptists, and the like, who pretended for Liberty of
Conscience, were at the highest, and had the Rule among them, and the Papist
and Episcopal were very low in England (which one would think were enough to
make them remember a poor low, and afflicted people, throughout their
Generation) I say their Liberty of Conscience was but to themselves, for it
neither reached back to the Common Prayer men, nor the Papist: Then the Lord
would try them a little further with a poor, despised, low and humble people,
whom he chose out from among them all; some from the Common Prayer men, and
some from the Presbiterians, and some from the Independants, and some from the
Baptists, and the like; and when the Lord had called us, and begun to break our
hearts in pieces by the power of his living Word, that was as a hammer in us,
and thereby were we made to fear, tremble, shake and quake, and weep and mourn,
like the holy men of God in Ages past: And when the Lord was thus fitting us
for his own service, to sound sorth his praises, then the Professors they stood
and wondered; scoffed and mocked at us, calling us Quakers, both Rulers,
Priests, and people; and although they pretended Liberty of Conscience, yet we
were haled out of our Meetings, and put in the Stocks, and beaten and abused,
and imprisoned (for declaring the Truth) and our Goods made havoc of, because
we could not uphold such covetous hypocrites, as these Priests were: And much
more did we suffer, notwithstanding their talk of Liberty of Conscience; and
then in the power of God we were made to cry out against deceit and hypocrisy,
for which we suffered by the hands of the unreasonable; and this wicked,
envious, persecuting spirit, was the Author of all that mischief: And we were
so mortified in our minds, and humbled in our spirits, by the opperation of the
power of our God, which we received in his eternal Light, that we could do them
no evil, but good for evil; and thereby were we made both able and willing to
do, or to suffer, whatsoever we were called unto for his Names sake; and
waiting in his true Light, we have seen how this wicked soulbetraying spirit of
envy and persecution, has betrayed and took Captive, and then made slaves of
the sons and daughters of men, both souls and bodies, who were Gods people by
Creation, but the Devil, he stole their hearts and minds from God, and out of
the true Liberty of the sons of men, as men; and in that wretched and
deplorable state were all Mankind in, we as well as others, before the new
Creation, or being Regenerated, and Ransomed, and created again in Christ Jesus
unto good works; by his living Word; and then the love of God the Father, which
he has shed abroad in our hearts, did abound toward all Mankind upon the face
of the whole earth, insomuch that our hearts were made sad, and heavy, and our
souls did mourn in secret for them, and on their behalf, to see their bondage
and slavery, and how this unreasonable, envious, persecuting spirit, ruled over
them, and made them unwilling to hearken unto the counsel of God their Creator,
who sent many of us in his love and pity, to call them to repentance, that they
might receive the remission of sins, etc. and embrace the love and mercy that
God held forth unto them-wards, not only in these near Nations, out also to
them that are afar of; but they have required us evilly for our goodwill, and
true love toward them, both soul and body, even because we have told them the
Truth, and spoke against, and struck at their greatest Enemy, the
soul-betraying spirit of envy and persecution; and they would not hear and
consider, nor lay those things to heart, which most concerned their peace, and
everlasting welfare of body and soul, but went on in hardness of heart, very
contrary to the Light of Christ in their own Consciences, until they had filled
up their measures of iniquity, and provoked the Holy One of Israel utterly to
overturn them, and cast them out to be made a prey upon by the old betrayer of
Persecuters to be destroyed and cut off as others have been before in Ages
past, and that is the persecuting spirits work, to lead to destroy, and then to
bring destroyers to destruction also, as all may see, that reads these lines
with a good understanding. And this is a true and brief Description of this
greatest and most destructive enemy of Mankind in the whole Creation, and how
he has betrayed Kings and Princes, and Kingdoms, and Nations of Jews,
Heathen, and Christians, so called, and also how he may be known and
apprehended by a special Warrant.

And further, be it known unto all that reads and understands, that God, the
Creator of Mankind, has wholly and firmly decreed the taking and binding of
this old Serpent, which is the Devil, shortly, and to cast him into the
bottomless pit, and to shut and seal him down, that he may deceive the Nations
no more; and God will also cast them into the Lake, to be tormented with the
Devil and his Angels for ever, that will not return to the Lord in the time
while he calls unto them, and striveth by his Light and Spirit with them, and
waits to be good, and merciful, and gracious unto them; and this old Dragon
is in a great rage, because his Kingdom and Reign draws toward an end, and he
has but a short time, as it is written in Rev. 12. And then shall those words
of God be fulfilled, which he spoke by the mouth of his Prophet Isaiah, For out
of Zion shall go forth-the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and he
shall judge among the Nations, and rebuke many people; and they shall beat their
Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pru^ing hocks; and Nation shall
not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more, and
they shall rejoice together in love, and cry, Come let us walk in the light of
the Lord, and go up unto the house of God that made us; for he shall teach us
of his ways: And then shall the people sing a new Song unto the Lord, and his
people shall praise him from the ends of the earth, and they that were as a
barren Wilderness shall lift up their voice unto the most High, and shout for
joy of heart, to see the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, that
betrayed them into the curse and bitterness, and enmity one against another,
taken and bound, and cast out into the bottomless pit, and sealed down, that he
no more can deceive them; and then all may dwell together in love safely, and
their souls greatly to rejoice in the Lord of Hosts, and be exceeding joyful in
God their Savior, who clothes his with the Robe of righteousness, and covers
them round about with the garment of salvation; And the Wolf and the Lamb shall
feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock, and they shall
not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, says the Lord.

And we the people, whom God has called, and chosen, and made faithful and
acceptable to himself, through the work of his Son. Jesus Christ in us, and for
us, who are thereby made the first fruits unto God, in this Age, after the long
Night of Apostasy (into the gross darkness, and great ignorance) from the true
Light and Spirit of God, and Christ, that reveals and gives the knowledge of
the things of God; and from the first of our true convincement of sin and
evil, by the Light in our Consciences; and from that very day in which God
began to work in this great work of conversion out of the evil envious nature,
into true love and humility, and out of the flesh into the Spirit, and to be of
the new Birth, being born of the blessed womb of love, and to be translated out
of the Kingdom of darkness and Satan, into the Kingdom of the Dear Son of
God: I say, even from the very beginning unto this day, have we been hated,
rejected, vilified, despised and reproached, and greatly afflicted and
persecuted, and oppressed beyond measure; and all has been for the exercise of
our Conscience in the Service of God, and in love and good will toward men.
And thus have they sought to weaken and break us, and scatter us into division,
like themselves, and so to wear us out; and none of all the Powers of the earth
that has reigned in their time, has been for us, but against us: But the Lord
God Almighty, who raised us up out of the Dust, he has been with us, and among
us all along, and his right hand has upheld us, and his outstretched arm has
sustained us, and they of us that had used carnal weapons heretofore, some in
the former Kings Army, and some in the Parliaments Army, when they came to seel
the stroke of the Sword of the Spirit of God upon that nature that led to draw
the Sword; then he fell and perished by the Sword of the Spirit, that led to
draw the carnal Sword, as Christ said it should be; and notwithstanding the
great occasions, and provocations without number, that has been given us, we
have been kept (by the power of God, and through Faith in Christ) from putting
forth a hand or a finger, to take up a carnal Sword, or other weapon, for, or
against any creature any more, notwithstanding the tumults, changes,
overturnings and strivings, and buffettings, that has been among the sons of
men, since the Lord, in the infiniteness of his love, has called us out from
amongst them, into peace with God on earth, and love to all Mankind, who are
his creatures. But many of us have been moved of the Lord to break our Swords
in pieces, and other Instruments that were prepared against creatures, so that
they might do no hurt; and this was as a signal testimony that we should war no
more, as we hope whole Nations will do in due time, when God has slain the
enmity that is in and among them by the power of his love, which is stronger
than Death, as he has done in us, Glory and Honor be given to our God, who
lives for evermore, who has brought us to stand witnesses for him, and of his
works, as a Pattern to all Mankind upon the face of the whole earth; and as
Christ said, By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have
love one toward another: And through Faith and Patience, and Long-suffering,
with love and goodness have we been made instruments to overcome the hearts and
minds of many which has been turned to the Light in their own Consciences, and
to the Grace of God given unto them; and it is given unto us, and remains in
our hearts, to continue in love to our very enemies, in the Faith and Patience,
unto the finishing our course, for the Name and Glory of God, whether it be by
life or death; for we have full assurance, how that it is better to dye in the
Lord, than to live in sin. But let all spiritual Israel know assuredly, that
the rod of the wicked shall not always be upon the backs of the the righteous;
for God will remove the yoke from off their necks, and wipe away all tears from
their eyes, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away, although some may, as some
has finished their testimony in being slain for the Word of God, and are
received into the Kingdom of everlasting peace, and Glory for ever; and our
warfare is spiritual, and our weapons are not carnal, but mighty, through God,
to the pulling down of strong holds, and to the cutting down of every thing
that rises up against Christ within, that all may be insubjection unto him,
whose right it is to reign; and so our victory is spiritual, and we do give
thanks unto God, who has given us victory over sin and death, hell, and the
grave, and over the tempting spirit of envy and persecution in our own
particulars, through faith in Christ Jesus, who is the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls; and we do not at all desire victory over men's persons, as
they do, who strive and fight with carnal weapons, but our striving, and
smiting, and fighting with our spiritual weapons is against sin, and he that
tempts to sin and, evil, which is the greatest enemy to man's everlasting peace,
who is the Devil and Dragon, and in the power of the meek spirit and Lambs
nature, our-stroke is and shall be against him, in all his appearances within
and without, as it has been in the pure love of God the Father, Unto whom be
honor and glory, now and for evermore.

And now all you that do own this Special Warrant from God, and his Law and
Command from him, which is Light in every Conscience, and that which it
requires, and are awakened and stirred up thereby, against the spirit of envy
and persecution, and in whose hearts it is to join with the Lamb, to make war
with the Dragon, lend your ears to wisdoms voice in you, and so far as these
lines are according to the same, even so be instructed, how, and with what to
arm your selves, so that you may not be overcome with this persecuting spirit,
nor do any hurt to any of the Sons or Daughters of men, for as the Scripture
says, Wisdom is better than strength, or weapons of war in this work, and the
lips of knowledge is a precious Jewel, and every purpose (herein) is
established by Counsel; and with good advice make war, for I, says the Lords
Spirit, will make the soul-betraying spirit of persecution feel the stroke, and
woe, and misery, and plagues, and Vials double filled of the wrath of the
Almighty shall come upon the head and crown of thee thou subtle Serpent; but I
have pity and bowels of mercy toward all mankind whom I have Created, says
the Lord, and I will wait yet a little longer for the return of the captivated
ones, that I may show mercy unto them, that do look unto me from the ends of
the earth and be saved, and that I may show compassion unto ten thousand times
ten thousands of those that do return at my reproof, and come unto me by true
and unseigned repentance, yea, a numberless number, that I may be exceeding
good, and gracious unto them, as I have been unto thousands, that are already
come home unto me by my true and everlasting Light, says the Creator of
mankind.

And now all you that do own, and obey Gods Special Warrant, the Light which he
has sent forth into your own hearts and consciences, you are all required to
wait low in it, to see what you are to be armed with, and then to receive it in
the Light, and put it on, then you are still to wait, and to keep low, to hear
the voice of the meek soul-saving Spirit, and then to obey, and meekly to
follow him, who is the Captain of our salvation, and then you will see how you
are to war, and fight against the foes of your own house in every particular,
and that not without hope of overcoming; and so, as you put off the works of
darkness, put on hope for an Helmet, and faith and love for your breast plate
and your shield, and let righteousness be your covering, and keep low in the
patience, and let your feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace; and put on therefore (as the Elect of God) bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another: If any man has a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye; and above all these things put on Charity, which is
the bond of perfection; and so take unto you the whole Armor of God, and hold
fast the sword of the Spirit, which is the power and word of God, that so you
may be able to quenoh the fiery darts of the enemy; and through the strength of
your Armor, and sharpness of your weapons, and through the word of God, and
his grace, and the word of patience, or the opperation of his power to effect
the work in you, you may be made victorious in the end of the Lambs war with
the Dragon* in your particulars, that you may enjoy the presence and peace of
God to your own souls, and then will you be for peace among men; and verily,
this, thousands of your own selves cannot be ignorant of, how that there has
been many thousands, that have gone forth against the old Serpent in several
Sects since the Apostles days in the Apostasy, and for want of the inward
spiritual Armor, and weapons, and love, and wisdom to order them, and to beat
the enemy out of their own hearts first, they have armed themselves with
outward Armor, and carnal weapons, and so in the ignorance have rose up one
against another, and smote and killed one another about Religion and Worship,
and what grievous havoc has been made about service of God in killing one
another, and so the Devil has escaped, and creatures has suffered, and this
has been in the night, etc. Even as a great man's servants, although their Lord
and master was very patient and exceeding loving, and kind to them all, and
though they all did amiss, and contrary to his will, yet he continued his
goodness to them all, to see if they would learn to do as he would have them,
and be quiet one with another, and if they would not, but continue in
naughtiness, and rebellion against him, and one against another, then at the
last he would reward them according to their doings; but those servants after
they had done evil against their Lord and master, they would not agree
together, but find fault one of another service, and then fight and beat one
another impatiently about their masters service, and so provoke one another the
more, till the enmity become so great that they began to kill one another, and
then blood that touches blood, and so some destroyed others; and when he that
was Lord over all saw that, he called them to an account that had killed their
fellow servants, and required their blood at their hands; so they that had
killed without mercy, they must dye without mercy; and that has been, and will
be the end that the persecuting spirit has and will bring persecuters to, that
will not return at the Lords reproof.

But they that have been armed with the Armor of Light and love, they through
the faith, and power, and patience thereof overcome the envious persecuting
spirit in themselves first; and they are the called, and chosen, and faithful
ones, that are with the Lamb, who have been exercised in the warfare within,
against the Devil, and all the fleshly lusts, that have warred against the
soul, first, before they came forth into the field, to join with Christ their
Captain against his enemies, or else the enemy within would make them turn to
the enemy without, and so they in the faith and patience follow the Lamb, that
takes away the sin in the regeneration within, before they come to join with
him in open proclaimed wars against the Dragon and old Serpent, and Gog and
Magog, and all others that rise up against the holy Seed Christ the Lamb, who
is the leader of all the whole Camp of God, and the Captain of their salvation.

And now all you great and small, high and low people, even from the Kings and
Princes to the middle sort, and from them to the meanest or least degree of
all, to whom this Information does happen, you have a description of your
greatest adversary, the spirit of envy and persecution, which you are all
required (and that by Special Warrant from your God that made you) to agree
together, and stand up with one consent, and with all your strength of love,
join your selves to the noble Principle of God in every particular, in order to
the finding out, stopping, apprehending, and taking of this insufferable enemy
to man's peace on earth, and good will toward one another, that Christ the
Prince of peace may be chief among you all, to bring your souls into
everlasting peace with the father, in his everlasting Kingdom.

For of a truth, the Lord of Hosts and his Son is arising in power and great
glory from on High, to destroy the gross darkness, and great City Babylon and
Confusion, which has reigned over the Kings of the earth, and set them one
against another to destroy one another: And this Author of confusion and
strife, which is the spirit of pride and persecution has no place in Heaven,
but is cast out, and thrown down to the earth, and has been, and still is in a
great rage, because* he has but a short time to reign there, and woe has
been, and still is to the inhabitants of the earth, as it is said in the
Revelation: And the Devil upon earth, and in the hearts of the children of
disobedience has stirred many Kings one against another, and Nations, and all
has through ignorance rose up against the Light and Lamb of God, but all they
have and may do, and Gog and Magog together may rise up, and join in battle
against the Lamb, and his chosen ones the Saints of the Most High, yet as it is
said, The Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
Rev. 17. 14. And they that are with him that over comes, are called, and
chosen, and faithful; and when Gog and Magog, and their Armies, has made
themselves in number as the sand of the Sea, and has spread themselves on the
breadth of the earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the
Beloved City; then shall fire come down from God out of Heaven, and devour
them, and the Devil that deceived them, shall be cast into the Lake, where the
Fire never goes out, as it is in Revelations the 20. He that has an ear to
hear, let him hear; and the meek shall eat, and he satisfied, they shall praise
the Lord that seek him, your hearts shall live for ever, that draw near unto
him. Oh let all the ends of the world remember, and turn unto the Lord, and all
the kindreds and Nations shall worship before thee, that obey thy voice, and
their peace shall be as a flood, and their righteousness as the waves of the
Sea, and they that through faith and patience, and by the power of the word of
God do overcome, they shall inherit all things in the Kingdom of God and his
Christ, and they shall sit down at the right hand of the Son of everlasting
life and glory, even as he overcame, and is sat down at the right hand of
God, where is joy and pleasure for evermore, Amen.

THE END.

