A Full and Perfect ACCOUNT OF THE State and Condition OF THE Province of
Vlster in Ireland: In a LETTER from WEXFORD Of the 15th of January, 1689/0.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Dear Brother,
I Make use of this opportunity of this small Vessel entered, for France, ^^o
let you know the sad Condition we who are in these parts are in: Both
Protestants and Papists are quite weary of their Government, we are all so
oppressed with Soldiers: they have hardly left an Englishman the value of a
Farthing; and such Wast is committed by them, that we all dread a Famine next
Summer; so that we are all a thinking to get away as soon as the weather may
favor, and the nights grow shorter a we have here a Fisher-boat by our house,
which will make a hard shift for that purpose. I have often repented my riot
going over with you; all you have here, as well as of all Absenters is Seized,
and the old Proprietors are got into part; the rest King James keeps for those
who Beli^ve themselves well this next Campaign. I have no great reason to fear
any great effect it will make upon their Courage. For one while the Protestants
were all in ^ayl, which gave the Villains an opportunity to plunder their
Houses, and Rifle them of what they had* (...) present they (...) out, but how
they will subsist I know not in the condition they are in, and now that
Provisions are growing dear. I am endeavoring to dispose of what little I had,
in order to come off, but here is not a penny of Money to be had for Goods; we
are forced to give eight or ten shillings in the pound to exchange Brass for
Silver, and glad we can meet with it so to.

Here are very few or no ^lows ^going, the silly Irish never thinking of the
morrow, or what Misery must inevi^^bly attend them thereby.

The Soldiers here are extremely sickly, and dye of a kind of Spotted Fever:
some have gone to b^d well a^ night, and found dead in the morning: and the
Soldiers being sent throughout the Country to Quarter, have brought the
Infection along with them.

We hea^ that Macc^^^^ is certainly go^ to (...) and great Rejoycings.

Colonel Butler who is Governor of this place now, and had a Regiment,
brought but Eighty Men from the Campaign; he is daily getting Re^ruits; but
those who now Lift themselves in hopes of a little Winters Plunder, will I am
sure desert when they know they are to go upon Service.

Captain (...) who brought over my Lord Dever from France, is turned out of his
Command, his Lordship having accused him, for being the cause why a certain
Ship of Arms which accompanied them was taken.

King James has disposed of the Ship, but I hear not to who. The Irish here are
daily looking out for French Succors. I with the English Fl^^^ did but appear
upon the C^^^, and had any Landing Men on Board, it might do great Execution
upon them, now at a time they expect and only rely upon what Foreign Force
they shall have, and are unprovided to receive such G^^^s. (...) to your good
Family, and believe me always,

Your most Affectionate Brother,

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for H. Young near Ludgate. 1690.


