A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the GREAT BATTLE Fought betwixt the Turks,
Hungarian Rebels, and Polish Army, Before the City of Presburg. WITH The
Glorious VICTORY obtained by the Polish Army, under the Conduct of Prince
Lubomierski, sent from his Camp.

With Two Latin Letters, One from the Emperor, the other from the Duke of
Lorrain to the King of Poland, and Communicated to the Polish Envoy in London.

Translated from the Original.

London, Printed for Edw. Brewster at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

A True and Exact ACCOUNT OF THE DEFEAT OF THE TVRKS and HVNGARIANS BY THE
POLISH ARMY, Under the Command of Prince LVBOMIERSKI, now in conjunction with
the Duke of Lorrain. Written out of the very Camp.
NOtice was given to the Duke of Lorrain, Generalissimo of the Imperial Forces,
That Count Tekely was drawing with his Army under Presburgh, to join the
Ottoman Troops, and that he had Commanded the City, which had surrendered it
self to him, That they should under the loss of their Goods, repair with all
expedition to the Bote-Bridg, perhaps to the end he might have Correspondency
with the Turkish Army under Vienna.

Since therefore it was altogether necessary to prevent this their
Communication, the Duke of Lorrain moved with his whole Army he had, about the
Bridges of Vienna; But having scarcely been gone Two Miles, notice was given to
him, as if Count Tekeley was with his Armies passing the River Mark; for which
reason the Army, whereof the Polanders held the right Wing, proceeded in
Battalia to the very River, where they also had their Nights quarters. The
Hungarian fore-Troops were burning the Villages at the other side of the River,
and in several places appeared in some small Bodies.

The next day about Noon, the Army drew up toward Presburg, and passed the
River; the German Horses passing above half a Mile higher; but the Polish Army
partly swam over with their Horses; and partly, waded the River. Thus the River
being passed, Three hundred of Hungarian Horsemen, under the Command of
Colonel Pelinatssy, came forth out of the Wood; against whom Prince Lubomierski
Commanded a Hundred Horse of Polish Knights, which were seconded by Two
Companies; one whereof was of Sieur Mroczek, and the other of Sieur Kroyets; and
they having met the Hungarians, made them quit the Field, pursuing them a whole
Mile, till Night overtook them. So that it being impossible upon that Day to
reach Presburg, the Army staid all Night about a Mile from the City, in that
same posture as it had Marched in before. That same Night Prince de Croy, with
his Regiment of Dragoons, went toward Presburg, for the Recognizance of the
passages, and of the posture the City was then in, where he was acquainted,
there was 3000 Hungarians left for its safe guard.

Next Morning the City would not open the Gates to Prince de Croy, when in the
interim the whole Army drew nearer before Presburg; under which, from the other
side, at the distance of about a good Ordnance-shot, the Turkish and Hungarian
Armies were standing at their fore-Troops, somewhat further drawn out into the
Field.

Hereafter a Council of War was called; whereof these sentiments were the
chiefest: That since the City had shut up their Gates, and the Enemies Armies
stood ready, neither had they any information about the number of the Enemy,
they having conveyed some hundreds of Men into the Castle, which was kept by
the Imperial Garrison, and having cut off the Bridge, should betake themselves to
the abovementioned River. But Prince Lubomierski and Prince Lewis of Baden
judged otherwise, That, viz. since the Army had drawn before the City, and was
seen by the Enemy, it was not expedient to deny them a Battle; otherwise,
'twould be to make the Enemy more stubborn and resolute, to make him think we
feared him, to give him an occasion of Pursuing us closely, since we would not
do it to him; to lose the City, to dishearten the Castle-Garison, to afford
them Liberty for the Rebuilding of the passage over the Danube; and by this
means, to grant them a Correspondency and mutual Intelligence with the Armies
under Vienna.

So that the last Reasons bearing sway, Two Regiments were left about the
City-Walls, and the whole Army set in Battalia, upon a Plain under the City.
Prince Lubomirski did take the Right-Wing, and from about the half of the
Field, drew out his Polish Squadron to the very Banks of the River Danube;
whereto was added a Regiment of Dragoons, under the Command of General Schultz.
But the Left-Wing, and the Main Body, was managed by the German Forces, which
did Possess themselves of the rest of the Field, to the Very Mountains. The
Hungarians with a Troop fell out to Skirmish, and Advanced very near under us;
against whom, Prince Lubomirski, sent his Advance-Guards, to the end they
should free the Camp from the Skirmishers, themselves keeping close together.
Afterward when the Army was ready to give Battle, Trumpets, Kettle Drums,
Shalms, sounding, the Squadron was rearing toward the Enemies Forces, which
presently begun to Skirmish; the Skirmishers did not proceed so furiously, till
at length, within the space of some Minutes, they begun to retire: Prince
Lubomirski seeing this, desired the Duke of Lorrain to grant him leave for the
sending out of some Fore Troops, and Seconding of the same with some Companies
of the Polish Nobility, in order to his obtaining an Information about the
strength of the Enemies Forces. As soon therefore as the Fore Troops had fallen
upon the Enemy, being Seconded by Sieur Protskele a Captain of the Horse, and
by Sieur Perewitsh, with some Hussarian Companies, the Gentlemen of Prince
Lubomirskies Court, Sieur Hilski, Crogoledi, and Sieur Soboski having in the
mean time Assaulted them from the side, they took a Notable Turk, Secretary to
Bassa Giuli; by whom having understood, That though the Turkish Forces under
the Command of the Bashaws of Eger and Waradyn were not inconsiderable,
together with these Troops that were under Count Tekely, whose Armies were all
in one Body; yet they had sent away their Fieldpieces the Night before, and
had no resolution to stand out a Battle. Prince Lubomirski upon this thought
sit to Attack them with all his Forces, and not to grant them time for their
Reinforcement. Accordingly for their first Recruit, he commanded out the
Companies of Sieur Modrzejefski the Crown-Hawkier, and the Companies of Sieur
De Niszewits, who very timely came to the succor of Sieur Krotsek, who having
Thrice already met, and pursued the Enemy, and behaved himself dexterously,
showed a great deal of Valor and Courage; as having by his own Hand laid upon
the Place above Twenty Turks, and taken some of them alive. Sieur Modrzejefski
Attacqued the Enemy from the other side, and Valiantly broke his Spear upon
him. Immediately after, the Third Two Companies of Colonel Groboleski, and
Sieur Bieleski being ordered, the latter Fronting his Enemy, brought him to a
great deal of Confusion, who without any further Opposition, turned filthily
his back, and fled. Which Prince Lubomirski perceiving, sent instantly the rest
of his Division, and all the Polish Companies after them; as also the
Magnificent Lord Tetwin Underchamberlain of Derbia, together with his
Blunderbuss-Regiment, under the Command of Sieur Butler Lieutenant Colonel.

In this Fight the Polish Companies did so vigorously Attaque the Turks, that
they presently Cut them off from the Body of the Hungarians, who betook
themselves to the Left-side toward the Mountains: The Turkish Forces in the
mean time Flying toward the Isle of Schuts.

Thus the said Colonel going to Recruit the Fighting Polanders, and having
immediately with Sieur Butler, perceived Two Hungarian Companies, they did
proceed by certain Bushes (that they might not be discovered) to Face the Enemy
with a Noble Resolution. Whereupon, presently Sieur Glasnob, a Captain of the
Horse, and Sieur Debeli, Fronted the Enemy; but Lord Tetwin Attacked the Enemy
from the one, and Sieur Butler from the other side, who was presently
Dispersed, and so in Pursuit put to the Sword; till at last, the Enemy being
Dismounted, and Flying into the Vineyards, made the Polanders to leave their
Horses also, and to Pursue them thither, where they after the like manner
severed their Heads from their Bodies.

Upon the Place there fell many Thousands of the Hungarians; and for the most
part in the Vineyards. Hence the Polish Companies having resumed their Horses,
did with great Fury kill the Turks, Pursuing them to the very Elbow of
Danubius, where after the Turks had Reinforced themselves, (as being near their
Camp) afterward seeing the Polanders to approach, fled further by the side of
the River Danube, having left their whole Camp, wherein many Thousands of Turks
were put to Death; besides them that were taken Alive. Afterward his Highness
Prince Lubomirski not thinking it convenient to Pursue the Enemy any further,
set up a Standard in their Camp, which became a Prey to the Polish Army; who
then obtained a Reward for their Magnanimous Courage, in Moneys, Clothes,
Tents, Horses, Oxen, Household Goods, and all sort of Attire, the half of which
they did not possess themselves of, having had many Hundred of Oxen, with
Wagons richly laden with Provision, about many Thousands, and above many more
of Sheep; which Cattle after they had driven over the River, they left at
Maydan, and so they fell into the hands of the Imperialists.

The whole German Army, during the time of the Battle, was about a German Mile
and a half, in a Park, except that two Regiments of Dragoons, under the Command
of General Schultz and Stremow, were Commanded to approach about a Mile nearer;
from whence the Polish Army (God forbid they had stood in need of a recruit)
could expect but very little subsidy. The Servants of the Polish Nobility fell
afterward to Plundering, in so much that it was not possible for them to be
repulsed, till at last Prince Lubomirski Commanded that the Camp should be set
on Fire at three Corners, by which means he assuaged the disorder of the Rabble.

This so notable a Victory, must of necessity be totally ascribed to the Polish
Army; but in particular, to the Conduct of their Superiors, who used great
moderation in Opposing the Enemy, and in pursuing him according to occasion,
where the Noble Colonel Grochofski gained a great deal of Immortal renown.

The City on the other side, seeing the Enemy fled, did again surrender it self
to the Prince de Croy, and delivered those 3000 Hungarians, that were put in
for their safeguard, together with the Secretary of Count Tekeley.

In this Expedition, many Turks and Hungarians were taken alive, amongst which,
those of the best rank being preserved, the rest were put to the Sword.

That same Night the Army rested upon the Plain at Presburg, from which they
had repulsed the Enemy, and the next Morning returned to the River Mark, for
the refreshment of their Horses, since about Presburg there is no Corn, besides
only Vineyards.

And above all, this must be counted the greatest happiness the Polish Army had
obtained, That not one amongst them was either taken, killed, or wounded; And
that the Turks did not fix Place until they came before the New Castles; And
Count Tekeley, not before he came before the Cappathian-hill, where they did
pass the River Waage all Night long.

This is the True and the Exact Account of that Fight and Expedition.

COPIA LITERARUM A B IMPERATORE AD SERENISSIMUM REGEM POLONIAE
Serenissime ac Potentissime Rex, Frater ac vicine Charissime,
IN aerumnosa quam Hungarorum Persidia and Turcarum velocissima immanitas,
Austriae nostrae inflixit; Literae Serenitatis, 18. Augusti, peramanter nobis
scriptae, insigniter nos recrearunt. Etenim relictis omnibus aliis armorum
destinationibus, Serenitatem vestram rapto celeriter, expeditoque exercitu suo,
festinatis itineribus progredi; ut Viennam arctissimo pressam obsidio e
fancibus Barbari hostis eripiat, perjucundo sane nuncio intelleximus. Quam
grato autem synceroque hanc auxiliorum promptitudinem non ex percussi tantum
Foederis ratione, sed Serenitatis vestrae proprio ergo nos fortunasque nostras
prospensionis benevolo affectu provenientem amplectimur. Et quibus hoc in
salutem totius Reipublicae Christianae redundans benesicium in posterum
officiorum retortimentis agnituri summus, Ablegatum and Consiliarium magnificum
nostrum Sacri Romani Imperii Fidelem dilectum, Liberum Baronem de Sierowa
Sierowski planius Interpretari Jussimus. Ispraeterea in mandatis habet ut quae
ad strenuam belli administrationem and imprimis oppugnationem dictae urbis
abrumpendam ex usu presenti proficua and necessaria, censuimus Edisserat, and
sublimi militari Serenitatis vestrae prudentiae submittat. Quapropter fraterna
amicaque siducia Serenitatem vestram obtestamur, velit Memoratum ablegatum
nostrum in cunctis quae nostro nomine expositurus est cum omnimoda side audire,
tunc quam ingressus est viam alacriter prosequi. Siquidem hac suppetiarum
praestatione Liberatae assertaeque Urbis sibi cum aeterno nominis decore parare
animumque nostrum, Serenitati vestra pridem auctius devinctum Magis Magisque
Regiae suae prosapiae obstringere valeat, quem in sinem eidem omnigenae
felicitatis cumulum a proposito nomine vovemus.

A COPY of a LETTER FROM THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY TO THE KING of Poland.
Most Serene and most Potent King, Brother and Dearest Neighbor,
IN the midst of these Troubles, which the Perfidiousness of the Hungarians,
and the swiftest Cruelty of the Turks have inflicted upon our Austria, Your
Serenities friendly Letters have after an eminent sort refreshed us.

For We have understood, by a very pleasing Message to Us, that Your Serenity,
(laying aside all other Appointments of War) having quickly Raised and
Dispatched an Army, comes with all Expedition for the Deliverance of Vienna
(oppressed by a very narrow Siege) from the Jaws of a barbarous Enemy.

But with how grateful and sincere a Heart We embrace this Readiness to Assist
Us, not only proceeding from our Confederacy, but also from the benevolous
Affection of Your Propension toward Us and Our Fortunes; and by what future
Returns of Friendship We shall acknowledge this Benefit, tending to the Safety
of the whole Christian Commonwealth; We have Commanded our Envoy and
Privy Council, the Magnificent, Faithful, and Beloved of the Sacred Roman
Empire, Christopher free Baron de Zierowa Zierowski, to expound more plainly to
Your Majesty. Moreover he is Commanded to discourse at large with Your Majesty,
and to submit to Your Serenities sublime Military Prudence, these things which
we have judged profitable and necessary in this jointure of Affairs, for the
Administration of the War, but more especially for the Raising of the
abovementioned Siege, before the City of Vienna.

Wherefore with that Brotherly and Friendly Confidence of Ours, We beseech Your
Serenity, to give full Credit to whatsoever the said Ambassador is about to
declare in Our Name and Behalf; and lastly, to prosecute your Journey with all
speed and alacrity; since in Effect, by the Means of these Your Subsidies, Your
Serenity shall purchase to Your Self the Glory of Delivering and Asserting of
the City of Vienna, together with the ever-during Honor of Your Name, and
shall more and more engage Our formerly bound Propension toward Your
Serenities Person, to Your Royal Family, upon which, for this end, We desire
the Propitious Heavens may accumulate all manner of Happiness, etc.

COPIA LITERARUM DUCIS LOTHARINGIAE AD SERENISSIMUM REGEM POLONIAE.
SATISFACTURUS desideratis a vestra Majestate refer necessum credidi,
quemadmodum heri castra metatus super Marchiam, circa Angerinam, ex slammis and
fumo judicavi adesse Rebellos incinerantes circumvicinos pagos. Quae cum mihi
confirmata fuerint, ex relatione Praefectorum, Principis a Leitenstein,
eorumque numerum esse ad 400 circiter, dimisi Sexcentos Polonos, quatenus
Rebels ad terminum praesixum insequerentur; Duobus abhinc milliaribus non 400
sed 4000 invenere. Quos licet in numero long inferiores aggressi sunt
fortiter, atque sugaverunt, redemptis Austriacis captivis, praeda Rebellibus
recuperata, eorum occisis usque ad tria millia, aliquot centenis equorum
Hungarorum, cum aliquot vexillis, ad castra haec Caesarea reductis, Informatus
circa noctem de numero hostium, Accurreram cum cattafracto equite, assistendi
ergo Polonis verum pugna jam sinita ad castra revertentes inveni, idque mirum
fuit, quod licet a tergo and a front habuerunt Rebels, Indefessa eorum
virtus talls fuit ut numero nec cesserint nec unum hominem perdiderint, ubi
Latius intelliget ex duce Lubomerski. Mihi sufficit vestris Majestatis Laudare
actionem, inclitae Nationes innatum ardorem, and in omni occasion
Generositatem. Intelligo ex Literis Praefecti Possomieres, Tartaras qui usque
ad numerum 15000 in opido Kitensi castramentabantur, post tentatum inutiliter
ad has parts transitu, Per diversos in Insulae Schutensis Danubii, ramos per
Aterburgum ad pontum Strigoniensem descendisse. Ideoque non gravabitur vestra
Majestas (uti spero) si hesternas instantias renovem pro praemittendis copiis
Magnifici Dom. Sieniuski and Generosi Dom. Lasinski, and accelerando motu suo
regio pro liberanda Vienna ad incrementum Gloriae Majestatis vestrae cui omnia
prospera Devovio.

A COPY of a LETTER FROM THE DUKE OF LORAIN To the Most Serene KING of Poland.
I Being desirous to satisfy your Majesty's desire, I found it necessary, viz.
having fixed my Tents upon Mark, about Angerin, I discerned by the Flames and
Smoke, that the Rebels were at hand, burning the Neighboring Villages into
Ashes. Of the truth of which things I being assured, by the Account I had from
the Governors, and the Prince Leitensten, and that their Number amounted to
about 400, I dispatched away 600 Polands in pursuit of the Rebels at the place
prefixed; About two Miles from this they found their Number not to be 400 but
4000. Whom they assailed (though they were far fewer in Number) Valiantly, and
put them to flight, together with the Redemption of the Austrian Captives,
besides the Spoil recovered of the Rebels, three thousand of them being killed
upon the place, some hundreds of the Hungarians Horses, with some Banners
reduced to the Imperial Tents. I being informed about night concerning the
Number of Enemies, hastened thither with a Company of Horsemen in Armor, for
the Assistance of the Polanders. But the Battle being already ended, I found
them returning to their Tents; And this was remarkable, that though both behind
and before they had the Rebels, their indefatigable Valor was such, that they
neither yielded to their Number, nor lost any men; these things shall be more
amply expounded to you by General Lubomierski It shall suffice for my part to
applaud to Your Majesty the Activity, the Natural Affection, and the Generosity
of the Nation upon all occasions. I understand by Letters from Governor
Possomiers, that the Tartarians, about the Number of 15000, have fixed their
abode in the Town of Keiten, after that they found their Passage to these Parts
difficult and unprofitable, and that they came down upon Danubeus, near the
Island of Schuten, by Aterburg, toward the Strigonian Sea. Therefore I hope
Your Majesty will not be displeased, if I renew my yesterdays Instance for the
sending forth of the Forces of the Magnificent Sir Sieniawski, and likewise
those of the Generous Lasinski, and also for Your Majesty's hastening your
Journey for the Deliverance of Vienna, to perpetual increase of Your Majesty's
Glory, to whom I pray for all Happiness, etc.

FINIS.

