A Full and True Account of a most Horrid and Barbarous Design, intended to be
Executed upon the Body of Mr. J. Frampton, a Wire-worker, Living upon
London Bridge: Who by Providence has escaped the Wicked Conspiracy of Mary
Roberts; the Effects of which was to have ended in his Death, and utter Ruin
of his whole Family, Which is as follows,
THE Chief Actoress in this Affair was the aforesaid Mary Roberts, who having
been kept some Years by a certain Gentleman in London, about a Month since (and
not without some good Reason) the said Person and She has parted; now she
mistrusting that the Cause of her Usage was from the Suggestion, and through
the Means of the aforesaid J. Frampton, who is an intimate Friend of the
Gentleman; she to satisfy her Revenge, which Passion in Women is always Cruel
to Extremity, did contrive how to Murder the said Frampton in the manner as
follows. About three Weeks since she concludes with her self to hire some
Ruffian to murder him; and to Effect which, she accordingly goes to Lincoln's-
Inn-Fields, there thinking to find out amongst the Ring, some Instruments that
were fit to execute her bloody Design; and at last chanced upon two (who as she
thought) were fit for her turn; the one of which was a Black-moor who uses that
Ring, she urging she had a great Secret to disclose to them, and that if they
would do a little Business for her, she would well Reward them; they seemed to
be willing, so she then told them the whole Matter, which was to murder one J.
Frampton, giving them Directions how to find him, and for a Reward she gave
them each a Crown down, and Contracted to give them Two Guineas more when the
Thing was done; likewise she told the Black, that if he would kill him, she
would settle 20 l. per Annum upon him for his Life, and to have good Security
for the Payment of the same, all which the Black confessed since, before diverse
Witnesses; which they both willingly embraced, and in order to Effect it, they
went both the next Morning to his House, and when they came, there was only the
Boy in the Shop; the Black asked the Boy for his Master, but he, the Boy told
them, was not stirring; they began to enter in some Discourse with the Boy,
asking him some Questions, as what House his Master kept, and to what Places he
went to in the Day, and motion'd to the Boy of giving him some Guineas to do
something: However, they made no further Progress in it that Morning, but went
away, but returned again the Day following; in the Interim the Boy declared to
his Mistress what they said; when they came again, the Boy called his Mistress
down to them, she began to be Inquisitive with them, and talking a little
sharply to them, they both fearing something, withdrew suddenly, and got out of
the Shop, and meeting with these Repulses, had Thoughts of going no more about
it; but went immediately to the aforesaid Mary Roberts, and told her that they
had performed their Bargain (namely, that they had been at Framptons, and
Surprising him alone in the Shop, fell upon him and beat him, Wounding of him
in several Places, leaving him in a Condition not likely to Live long in this
World; after that they had (because she desir*d it) broke his Windows, leaving
a Mob about his House; she crediting there Report, not doubting but they had
done it; gives them the two Guineas, and furthermore promised, that she would
be as good as her Word to the Black: Next Morning she takes a Coach, hugging
her self in her late good Success, and goes to London Bridge only with one
Person, who has since Confessed the Matter; when she came there she Lights, and
going to a House near the Place, she inquired concerning it; but finding how it
was, she presently swore that she was Cheated of her Money, that Revenge was
hers, and by the Eternal God she would have it; upon this she goes to one Jennins,
a Fellow who beats a Drum and sings to it at Weddings, applying her self to him
in the same Manner, as she had to the former, offering him a good Gratuity; he
perceiving what her intent was, Answers, Why what would you have me do to him,
would you have me kill him. If there comes a Press out, I Will get him Pressed
for you, if that will do you any kindness, she hearing him make such an Answer,
made a slight Excuse and went her Ways; telling the Person that was with her,
seeming angry, that she wonder she should bring her to such a Blockhead as that
was.

Immediately after this, her Maid passing along in High-Holbourn met with one
Mr. Hartly, who would have her Drink with him, which she readily Consented to,
thinking him a fit Person to perform her Mistresses Business, so while they
were drinking the Maid very frankly told him the whole Matter of her Mistresses
Intentions, and how she was served: he seemed at the first to be scrupulous,
but at length, with the Maids Entreaties, he did comply; saying, that he would
undertake the Thing for her Mistress; so having talked about it some time, they
both went to a House, where the Mistress came in a Coach to them; and being
made acquainted by the Maid, that that Gentleman was for her Turn, and a Man of
Honor, the Lady was pleased with her new Ingin, so they soon struck the
Bargain; so the Maid and he came away together in Pursuance to their Design,
and comes to London Bridge, near Frampton's House; where Mr. Hartly leaves the
Maid, pretending to go seek a Man to help him in the Business, but instead of
that goes directly to Framptons House, and finds him at home, where he related
to him the whole Matter; which did not a little surprise him, when he reflected
upon the Barbarity of the Matter, but considering the Danger of his
Circumstances, goes along with Mr. Hartly to a Friend of his who he thought
capable to advise him; his Friend soon put him in a Method, whereby to prevent
any further Danger which was this: His Friend and Mr. Hartly goes presently
back to the Maid who waited hard by for his Return; when they came into the
House to her she seemed a little shy, but satisfied by Mr. Hartly of the
fitness of the Person, together with his Tragical Expressions, she took Heart
and said that this of all the rest seemed be the likeliest Man; and the Maid
further said, that her Mistress had been disappointed several Times already,
and that now she was Resolved to see it done her self, or to have some Friend
whom she could trust to see; but Mr. Framptons Friend told her, that they would
take him out from the Town and in some Convenient Place there do it; having
heard all his Proposals liked of them, and went and told her Mistress, who also
liked of it too; and likewise told her Mistress, they would have nothing
beforehand, but when the business was done, would have five Guineas, and that
it should be performed to their Hearts Content, all which the Mistress agreed
to, and liked off, and bid the Maid hasten that it might be done. The Maid
returned with the Answer, that her Mistress approvd of their Method, and urged
the speedy Execution of it; all things being thus concluded on, Mr. Hartly, Mr.
Framptons Friend, and the Maid, went away to Cupid's Gardens, being the Place
fixed for the Design, which was upon Saturday, being the Fourteenth of this
Instant May. Where the Maid sent for two or three of her Mistress's Companions,
and accordingly, in less than two Hours, came three Women, who were to be
Spectators, no sooner they appeared, but they sent Mr. Hartly away for Mr.
Frampton, who was in a readiness to receive the Messenger, and came accordingly
with him; who when the Women spied they knew, and his Friend stepped up to them
and said Ladies is not that he, they all Replied Yes, that is he that is gone in
to the Arbor, follow him, and do your Business; so he went into the Arbor to
Mr. Frampton; and seemingly fell upon, and with a Sheeps bladder which they had
about them, filled with Blood, they all smeared his Face and Body, he all the
while lay Groaning: When they thought that it was well enough, they went out to
the Women and asked them to come in, for that they had effectually done the
Business; so one bolder then the rest came into the Arbor, and viewed the Body;
which was so well Acted, that she had seen enough of the Spectacle, and having
no sooner withdrawn to the rest of her Company, who stood waiting with
impatience to hear the Joyful Tidings, which when they heard were well
satisfied, and slid five Guineas into Mr. Hartly's hands, which they had no
sooner done, but were unfortunatly seized on by a Constable, who waited there
upon the Matter; all which the supposed dead Body hearing, arose and walked to
Captain Cupid's Pump and there washed his Face and cleared his Clothes and went
to Complement the Ladies, they being somewhat affrighted at the sight of the
Constable and the Dead-man, sent away a Message in all have to Mary Roberts to
come and Comfort them, who coming in hopes to rejoice with her Friends, was no
sooner Landed on the Shore, but to her disappointment was likewise seized on by
the Constable, from thence they were all carried before two Justices o^ the
Peace, who were then at Fox Hall, where they were examined; upon their
Examination they at first behaved themselves very impudently, which could not
be expected any otherwise from such Persons as they were, bu^ the Matter was
soon proved too plain upon them, and their Mittimus wa^ made for the County
Jail, but they are since admitted to Bail.

If any Person doubts of the Truth of this Relation, let them inform themselves
at any of the Places before mentioned.

London: Printed for the Author, and Sold by E. Baldwin in Warwick Lane; And at
the Bible in Grace-Church Street, School.


