A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Besieging and Taking of CARRICK FERGUS BY THE
DUKE of SCHOMBERG; As also a RELATION Of what has lately passed in the Islands
of ANTEGO, MEVIS, and MONTESERRAT in the West Indies: Where Their MAJESTY'S
have been Solemnly Proclaimed.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

In a Letter from Chester of August the 31st.
THE Irish finding that they had not gained much Reputation by their Actions in
the Field, or by being valiant and successful in the taking of Towns, were
resolved at last to try what they could do in keeping of Towns committed to
their Care and Courage: Carrick fergus was the place where they thought sit, in
some measure, to retrieve their Credit and Reputation: But when our Frigates at
Sea, and Land Forces at Land had appeared before it, and made such Breaches in
the Walls, and Destruction in the Town, by their Guns and Bombs, they judged in
safest for them to Capitulate and Surrender; which they did on Wednesday last.
The Garrison consisted of near Two thousand Men, and though at the first
Summons sent them by the Duke of Schomberg, they were so stout as to refuse to
hearken to any Conditions of Surrender, yet their Courage not continuing long,
they accepted of the Terms of Marching out with Colors flying Arms, and Drums
beating, etc. and to go to Charlemont. But such was the ill nature of the
Rabble, that they fell upon them in their March, and disarmed them. The Town
has been so miserably defaced by the continual playing of the Bombs for Five
Days together, that it looks like a dismal heap of ruin. Sir Henry Ingolsby is
made Governor of the Town and Castle: A great deal of Arms, Ammunition, and
Provisions of all sorts, was found in the Town. This has cleared the North, for
the most part, of any considerable Party of the Irish: many come in daily to
the General. The Ships come last Night to High-lake, assure us of the Arrival
of the Four Regiments of Horse into the Bay of Carrick-fergus; who were turning
in into the Lake on Wednesday, as the Ships that are arrived here were turning
out from thence.

Neither is it in Scotland and Ireland only, where Success does so constantly
attend their Majesty's Affairs, but even the West Indies afford us variety of
Examples of Zeal for his Majesty's Service: For the Blossom of London coming
from Antego, in June last, and arrived here two days ago, brings the News, that
Sr. Nathaniel Johnston not finding it safe for him to continue longer upon
those Islands, whereof he had the Government committed to him in the late
Reign, is gone to Carolina, and that the Inhabitants of Mevis and other Islands
had constituted Major General Codrington Governor in his room; That the Irish
Planters and Inhabitants of Montserat had declared for the late King, and
appeared in a Body of Seven or Eight hundred Men for that Interest, but that
Colonel Blakeston, the Governor of the said Island had raised what English men
he could, to the number of Two hundred, with which he was resolved to attack
them: But the Irish no sooner saw him appear with that unequal number of
English, and to march toward them, but they all offered to lay down their
Arms, and upon Articles promised to disperse; at which instant of time a
Reinforcement of an Hundred and fifty Men arrived from Antego and seized the
chief of the Irish, brought them up Prisoners to Antego, and solemnly
Proclaimed King William and Queen Mary, with all possible Demonstrations of Joy
and Gladness. The new Governor Codrington has sent an Hundred Men from Mevis
to St. Christopher's to strengthen the English Interest in that Island.

Lord Hewets, and Colonel Villers Regiments of Horse are to embark with the
first fair Wind for Ireland to join the Duke of Schomberg.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Black-Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.


