A Full and Exact RELATION Of Two Old MEN Aged above a Thousand Years, Coming
Invisibly into the great City of THOLOUZE in FRANCE, FROM DAMASCVS in GALILEA;
Going in a most Miraculous Habit, Preaching up and down the City, and exhorting
them to Repentance and Penance, and telling them that their City shall be
Destroyed by Fire if they do not Repent.

How several Jesuits Disputed with them in Prison, in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew
and Chaldean Tongues.

ALSO, How their Irons dropped off from their Legs in the Streets when they were
Chained.

With their Infallible fortelling the Day of Doom to be in the Year of our
Lord, 1690.

In a LETTER to a Friend in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for N. Thompson MDCLXXX.

A Full and exact Relation of two old Apostles, aged above 1000 Years, coming
invisibly into the great City of THOLOUZE, etc.
Honored Sir,
I Promised you when I left LONDON to give you a particular account of what
remarkable Passages which might happen in these parts; at present I can meet
with nothing worth your acceptance, but this ensuing Story concerning these two
old Men, which causes here great admiration; The ^tory as it is represented to
us here, I pray take as follows, (viz.)

A Few days since arrived in this City Two very Ancient M^n who call themselves
Apostles, and they say they have the Spirit of Truth; No Person at any time
ever saw them enter into this City: they go in such an extraordinary strange
Habit as never was seen before in any Country in the World They walk about the
Streets Preaching, and exhorting the People to Repent, and do Penance, and to
quit their evil Lives, Because they say that God is angry against the Romans;
They say that this City is as another Sodom, and that the Iniquity of this
People is mounted up to Heaven, and that within Three Months, (if they Repent
not, and amend their Lives) this City shall be destroyed by Fire as Sodom was.
They have continued still in this City Preaching from day to day; they go with
their Feet bare, and their Hands and Eyes always lifted up to Heaven; They have
not been known to sleep ever since they came hither; they have been often
forbidden by the Magistrates to Preach; But they answered, they were sent on
the behalf of God, to move the People to Repent and do Penance; whereupon they
were caused to be put into Prison, where several Jesuits, and Learned Men went
to visit them, and Disputed with them in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Chaldean
Languages. They certainly know those that live a wicked life; and when any such
come before them, they particularly exhor them to Repent, and amend their
Lives. Their Food is nothing but Bread and Water; they lift up their Hands and
Eyes continually toward Heaven, and are continually exhorting the People to
Repentance; They precisely nominate the day that our Savior shall come to
Judgment in: And when they were asked how long time shall yet pass before the
general day of Judgment; They answerey, that the World shall have an end in the
year One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety; But about two or three years before
that time, all the Christian World should be troubled with Wars. They say they
are much above a Thousand Years of age; And being asked from whence they came,
they answered, they came from Damascus a City in Galilea, and were sent by God
to Preach Repentance to the World. The Jesuits have obtained of our
Magistrates, that these Men should be sent to ROME to the POPE; But these
(Apostles as they call themselves,) answered, that they knew very well all that
must happen unto them; And that it was altogether unnecessary to force them,
for they had a great desire to go voluntarily to ROME: their Chains were made
of strong and heavy Iron; and when they were in the Streets, and their Chains
very strongly fastened on their Legs, they brake them in Pieces before all the
People, who were wonderfully astonished thereat, which caused them all to
believe them to be very great Saints; they are now on their Journey for ROME. I
shall shortly give you an account of their behavior in their Journey. and of
their behavior and reception at Rome.

Tholouze, Aug: the 18th. 1680.
FINIS.

