A Full and Impartial Account Of all the SECRET CONSULTS, Negotiations,
Stratagems, and Intriegues OF THE Romish Party IN IRELAND, From 1660, to this
present Year 1689.

For the Settlement of Popery in that Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC LXXX IX.

TO THE READER.
TO Preface to the ensuing Pamphlet, will (I am sensible) be attributed to a
vain humor of the Age, rather than to more important Considerations. But
however that may be the Apprehension of some, yet the more Judicious will (I
doubt not) be of another Opinion, when they perceive a whole Series of the most
profound Policies and Designs, drawn with that rudeness and disproportion, as
equally requires their Candor, as well as my Apology. Indeed to give an exact
pourtraicture of this Intriegue (which in all its circumstances appears very
extraordinary and surprising) would require Apelles his favorable chance, or
at least a more Artificial Representation than must be expected in the
following Discourse. All that I can pretend to, is, an Impartial Account of the
Matter of Fact: and that being chiefly aimed at, will, with sober Men, be, in
some sort at least, interpreted, A Dispensation for the want of exterior
Ornament; or however that may prove, I deemed it much more serviceable to the
Public to present the Reader with this rough draught, rather than conceal
that, which (with what imperfection soever it is managed) must needs be useful
to all Protestants, and especially at this Juncture: For here the Reader has an
Account of the first steps, that were made in Ireland for the Introduction of
Popery into that Kingdom; together with a Description of what obstacles and
repulses this Design met with; how 'twas still carried on, notwithstanding its
frequent Interruptions and Discouragements, and by what private Cabals, and
after what secret Machinations. Here is represented the admirable diligence of
an indefatigable Romish Genius for the promotion of the Catholic Cause, which
in several periods of State, and vicissitudes of that Government still kept its
design on foot, sometimes retreating a few paces backward, when they found it
necessary; and at others, not only retrieving that disadvantage, but continuing
a greater Progress, when they met with occasions favorable to their Design;
which at last they carefully improved to that ripeness wherein it now stands,
and to which it has attained by an unparalled Violation of the Laws and
Constitutions of the Realm, by the most violent and unjust Proceedings in the
Reign of the late King James; of which you have an ample and copious Relation
in the following Sheets.

Full and Impartial Account Of all the SECRET CONSULTS, Negotiations,
Stratagems, and Intriegues OF THE Romish Party in Ireland, from 1660, to this
present Year 1689. for the Settlement of Popery in that Kingdom, etc.
WHEN the natural Consequent of our late intestine Differences had (in a short
time) produced so many various Scenes of Government, till by a circular Motion
we centered in our first Model; and so like Pythagoras his transmigration of
Souls -- were metamorphosed into so many differing Shapes, till at last, in the
Year One thousand six hundred and sixty, we became animated with our first
Dispositions to Monarchy, by the Restoration of King Charles the Second; then
it was that several Disputes arose (which were Debated before the King and
Council) concerning the Settlement of Ireland; the Lord of Santry, Lord Chief
Justice of Ireland, (a Man equally eminent for Law as well as Loyalty) in an
excellent and learned Speech represented to the Board the horrid Rebellion of
Ireland; together with those Barbarous and Inhumane Massacres which he had been
an eye Witness of.

In Opposition to which, Sir Nicholas Plunkett, a Man also very skilful in the
Law, but a Knight of the Pope's making, and one that had acted his part in all
the Rebellion of Ireland, assumed the Defense of the Natives of that Kingdom:
but as his Cause was too apparently bad to be maintained with any tolerable
Success; so was his Understanding in the Law inferior to the Lord Chief
Justice Santry's, who carried the Debate with great Applause, in the Opinion of
all that heard it; and had his Advice been accordingly pursued, 'twas thought
few of the Irish would have got their Estates: and at that time, if (by
mistake) the Lord of Ormond and Lord Anglesey had not joined with the
Court-Party, 'twas believed that what the Lord Santry urged, as Law, must have
prevailed in point of Right; for in those days the Interest of the Duke of York
(which afterward grew to a mighty height, as you will perceive by the Sequel)
was not so powerful as to have prevented it. That which he chiefly insisted
upon, as to matter of Law, was, That 'twas most agreeable to the Law of the
Land, as well as most equal for the Subject to be Tried by the Common Law,
where they would meet with a fair and indifferent Trial by Juries of their
Neighbors, and in this case could have no wrong done them; but that the Court
of Claims was like the Usurper's High-Court of Justice, Arbitrary and
Unlimited. This touched the Irish to the quick, for they being conscious of
their Guilt, most of 'em Indicted and Outlawed for Treason, despaired upon
their Trial at the Bar to make any considerable Defense.

The Government of Ireland was first put into Lords Justices, which were Sir
Maurice Eustace, Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Mountrath and the Earl of Orrery;
the first a Lawyer, the latter, Men that had signally behaved themselves
against the Irish, during the whole Rebellion. Under the Government of these
Men, a Parliament was called in the City of Dublin, and the Convention, which
sat upon the King's Restoration, dissolved. The first thing they proceeded
upon, were the Bills sent them from England, for by the Law of Ireland,
Entitled, Poyning's Act, the Parliament of Ireland can read no Bill in their
House, which proceeds not by these Steps: First, The Chief Governor and
Council of Ireland draw up a Bill and send it over to the King and Council in
England, who either approve or correct it as they think convenient; and so, in
the second place, return it back to the Chief Governor and Council, and these
send it to the House of Commons, who have only a Negative Voice, and can
neither alter nor amend a word of it. This, by way of Digression, which
differing so much from the Practice of the Parliament of England, induced me
not to think it altogether unpleasant, or unnecessary, to present the Reader
with this brief Account of it.

But to return to the Parliament, the variety of interests in that Kingdom gave
birth to several Disputes among them; for the accommodating whereof it was
thought necessary at Court to send over a Lord Lieutenant, for about this time
a great Controversy arose among all Parties, which was founded upon this
occasion: A new interest was set on foot, in which neither Soldier,
Adventurer, nor Irish (according to the first Declaration from Breda) were
concerned, and yet it related to the first Soldiers that fought against the
Irish, which were now called Fortynine Men; these being King's-Men, were not
provided for in the Parliament and Usurper's time, and how to make Provision
for them now, was the matter in Dispute. Some Lands indeed there were that had
not been set out to Soldiers and Adventurers, which were allotted these Men;
but this Provision was not considerable, and therefore the forfeited
Corporations and Houses that were in them, were hereunto annexed; and to render
'em the more valuable, a Clause was inserted in the Act, That no Irish Papist,
in what manner soever he justified his innocence, should enjoy any House within
a Corporation, except the Natives of Cork and Featherd. This the Irish
vehemently exclaimed against as barbarous and inhumane, that, to serve the
convenience of a particular Set of Men, a Man must appear innocent in the
Country and enjoy his Estate, but be adjudged a Rebel in the City; and upon
that account be dispossessed of his Houses. On the other hand, the English
complained, That the Natives by an Illegal, Arbitrary Court, were made
innocent, though they were known to have been concerned in the Rebellion; for
that in truth 'twas beyond all peradventure that not Ten of the Irish Papists
were free from Rebellion and Murder: The Duke of Ormond had a great Arrear due
to him upon this Fund, and after mutual Contests on either side, the Affair was
settled, to the Satisfaction of the Protestants.

But in order to a firmer and more mature Establishment of things, it was
(amongst other Consultations) resolved in Council, to send over the Lord
Roberts for Ireland in Quality of the Lord Lieutenant, as a Person whose
indifferency as to the various and opposite interests of that Kingdom, might
bring forth a complete and impartial settlement; but his being an Englishman,
and not related to, and so consequently not interessed in favor of the Irish,
occasioned the Duke of York (whose Affection to the Natives of that Kingdom,
has appeared by too pregnant and demonstrative Proofs) to work with the King
his Brother to send over the Duke of Ormond, whose Acquaintance with, and Irish
Nobility and Gentry, did rationally promise a more favorable regard to their
Interests; though what probability soever this Prospect had in it, it finally
turned to their disadvantage, and that by the even steerage of the Duke of
Ormond, who, though placed at the Helm, in favor to the Irish, yet so signally
espoused the Interest of the English Protestants in all their just and legal
demands, that upon that very account he lost the favor of the Duke of York.

This management of things, made the Popish Party very sensible of their
mistake; but to correct it in a very high measure, they procured the removal of
some of the Commissioners of the Court of Claims, and got others put in,
exactly calculated for their present design: The leading Man was one
Rainsfoord, who drove so furiously, that complaints were made to the King.
Talbot (now Tyrconnel) was at this time made principal Agent for the Irish
Papists at Court, and upon the account of soliciting for them, had Sums of
Money raised him by way of Tax, upon all that passed the Court of Claims; and
in such cases wherein men had no Friends, nor good Titles, he bought their
pretenses, and by Rainsfoord's means passed the Claim; from all which illegal
courses, 'twas visible to the English, that they were in a lost condition,
which brought many of them under such apparent discouragements, as to part with
their Estates for a year or two's Purchase; neither could any man make a
measure of his Title, so arbitrary were the Commissioners in their Proceedings.
And as the Irish insinuated themselves into the favor of Rainsfoord, and the
Commissioners of the Court of Claims, or by the powerful solicitation of their
Agent at Court, procured Recommendatory Letters from thence; in the same
proportion they passed their innocence, not according to their demerit.

For what Complaints soever were made by the Irish, of the Cruelty of Oliver's
Court, in criminating them; yet some who proved their innocence there, were
decreed nocent by these Commissioners; and where they had no pretense of taking
away an Irish-man's Estate, that was adjudg'd innocent in the Usurper's time,
in that case they obtained Proviso's in the Act of Settlement to deprive them
of their Estates for Rebellion: As for instance, the Knight of Kerry, who
though a Papist, yet always so faithfully adhered to the English Interest, and
had been so great an instrument of diverse of the Protestants preservation, that
for that reason he was by the Usurper restored to his Estate; his case was so
notorious, that the Parliament (though their whole Fortunes depended upon the
Act of Settlement) refused passing the Act, except that clause in prejudice to
the Knight of Kerry, was struck out, notwithstanding that they were informed at
the same time, That if the Act was sent back, and altered, it should be to
their disadvantage, as indeed it proved; however it was Corrected as to that
Clause.

So much of this Act did so manifestly incline to favor the Irish, as justly
created Complaints by the English, which seemingly to redress, a new Act was
prepared, Entitled, The Act of Explanation; the consequence of which was, That
the Protestants were glad to sit down with the loss of one third; and where the
Irish had either been so notoriously criminal, as that no Palliations could
extenuate the blackness of their Rebellion; or else were Men of that
inconsiderable interest, as rendered them incapable of passing their innocence,
in such cases their Estates were claimed by other Irish, whose interests at
Court were more prevalent; such were the Earls of Clanearthy, Clanriccard, Lord
Costela Dillon, Earl of Carlingfoord and many more, who passed their Claims for
twice more than ever they had before the Rebellion.

Pursuant to the Act passed for the payment of Quit-rent to the Crown, for all
Lands that were Seized, and Sequestered, the English paid Quitrent in many
places where their Lands were scarce worth it; but when the Court of Claims was
over, and the Parliament of Ireland Dissolved, then the Irish that paid
Quit-rent, obtained Grants by means of the Duke of York (who omitted no
opportunities of testifying his good will to them) not only to be remitted of
their Quit-rent, but of their Arrears also.

To this height had the Popish Design advanced it self at a Juncture, when the
English Interest seemed not only to carry the preeminence, but even to have
reached the Meridian of her Triumph at Court: and though it was believed upon
the King's Restoration, there could not have been the twentieth part of
Ireland gained from the English; yet what with the thirds taken at one blow
from the English, and by Nominees, and other Stratagems of State, there was
almost an half of the Kingdom in value lost, notwithstanding at the same time
the most innocent of the Irish were deprived of their Estates, and the greatest
Rebels got more than their own. This was the first step advanced for the
introduction of Popery into that Kingdom; and notwithstanding the small
Progress it had then seemingly made, it so far encouraged (even in this time of
its Infancy) the most considerable of the Irish, as often to intimate to the
English, That in a short time the Protestants, and they, must be of one
Religion.

'Twas very remarkable, That in the Year Talbot, Brother to Tyrconnel, and
Titular Archbishop of Dublin, Landing at a place called the Skerish, within
Twelve Miles of that City, and being very Hospitably entertained by one Captain
Coddington, Lodging all Night at his House; the next Morning took him aside,
and after the most Affectionate Expressions of Kindness, asked him what Title
he had to that Estate, for that he observed he had expended considerably upon
its improvement? Coddington answered, That 'twas an old Estate, belonging to
the Earl of Twomond. Talbot replied, That was nothing, it did belong to the
Church, and it would all be taken away: therefore advised him to lay out no
more upon it, but get what he could, and then desert it. All this was offered
upon strong injunctions of the most Inviolable Secrecy.

The Duke of Ormond was then Lord Lieutenant, and nothing advantageous to their
Interests could be managed whilst he continued in that Post; which was the rise
to diverse Consultations at Court for his removal. It had been too palpable for
the Popish Party to have appeared interessed in it; wherefore an Intriegue was
then formed of renewing the ancient Animosities betwixt him and the Duke of
Buckingham. This was reduced to Act, and the effect was proportionable to the
design. The next thing to be considered, was, who should succeed him, which was
a matter that required a very nice and critical management. They pitched upon
the Lord Roberts, as a person that had been formerly disappointed Ormond, which
was the end of the Court-Intriegue, and of his advancement; as knowing that his
uneasiness to those of that Kingdom, would serve to prepare a fair reception
for the L -- B -- a Man of whose inclinations to their interest, the Popish
Party had the most convincing assurances; and agreeably to this whole Scheme of
policy, the Lord Roberts remained Lord Lieutenant about Six Months, and then
the L. B. was sent over. Talbot, now Tyrconnel, leaves the Court, and Titular
Archbishop, and lives privately; but notwithstanding his Retirement, is still
engaged in all the Secret Counsels with Sir Ellis Leaton the Lord Lieutenant's
Secretary.

And now to accomplish their purpose, the first thing to be done, was to set up
a pretense that the King when in Exile, had obliged himself to the French King
to restore the Irish to their Religion and their Estates; and lest a neglect of
this should occasion a Breach with France, something must be acted in pursuance
to it: So it was ordered, That notwithstanding the Law, to prefer Irish Papists
to the Commission of the Peace, in which they behaved themselves with that
partiality and insolence, (Properties inherent to most, if not all of them)
that they became odious, even to the judicious of their own party.

The next thing was to regulate the Corporations, Council Board. The next day
there was sent to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Dublin, an Order for them to
call a Common Council, and to turn them out, and to make a new Government in
the City. This they well understood would create a disturbance, which they were
desirous so to improve among the Citizens, as to render the Protestants
disaffected; for which purpose they industriously labored to irritate and
provoke them, as the L -- B -- had done the Year before, when a number of Boys
got up in a Tumult to pull down a Bridge which was erecting contrary to the
desire of the City; where when the Lord Mayor, and Constables had suppressed
them, the Lord Lieutenant ordered Soldiers, as they were carrying them to
Prison, who discharged several Shots amongst them, and killed some of them.

But to return to the Order of Council for modelling the Corporation, the
Aldermen gave ready obedience, though they feared the bottom of the Design.
This compliance of the Aldermen necessitated them to take new measures; for the
most considerable of the Aldermen were Men of New Interest, and had been noted
for keeping out Papists from the City Freedom: and whilst these Aldermen were
in Power, no Popish Design could succeed: and therefore to facilitate by
another, what they could not effect by former Stratagems, the next work was to
prepossess the Populace with prejudice against the Aldermen, representing them
as the Authors and Contrivers of this New Model, though (as it was afterward
proved, upon an hearing before the Earl of Essex and Council, when Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland) they never heard word of 'em till they were brought to
'em to the Tole-sale with orders to put 'em in Execution.

At that time there came over to Dublin a Person Rome, and as common, as that
of variety of Shapes, and Professions) sometime he went by the name of Pain,
at others by that of Nevell, and was found to be the same person that was
afterward committed to Newgate for some high Misdemeanour relating to Coleman
and the Popish Plot. This Nevell (as has since been apparent in the instance
before named) had his part with Coleman, and was sent over for Ireland as his
proper Province, wherein to act the designed Tragedy: He remained for some time
obscure in Dublin, and after that was received into the Castle; but never
appeared till this (as was deemed) seasonable juncture, and then in the
capacity of Under- Secretary to Sir Ellis Leaton.

His business was to infuse into the Populace of the City of Dublin, an Opinion
of the Treachery of their Recorder, Sir William Davis; and to make the pretext
the more plausible, he had Instructions to add, That the Recorder and the Lord
Primate, then Lord Chancellor, counseled the L. -- B. -- to enact those Laws
for the abolishing of the Ancient Government of the City; and farther
insinuating, that this was done at the desire, and instigation, and by the
contrivance of the chief Aldermen. This impious suggestion being not only
artfully spread among, but also too easily credited by the Citizens, induced
'em to pitch upon Nevell as their most proper Agent, and in order to this,
advanced Money which they presented to Sir Ellis Leaton, who, together with
Nevell, brought the then Lord Mayor, Totty, with the Sheriffs to the Lord
Lieutenant, who publicly declared the Relation above; and withal promised to
recall his former Order. Upon which he called a Council, but the unravelling of
the business discovered a Popish Intriegue, which occasioned their not agreeing
with the Lord Lieutenant.

After this a Consult was held by the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, with Colonel
Talbot, now Lord Tyrconnel, and his Brother the then Titular Archbishop of
Dublin, as also with Sir Nicholas Plunkett, an old Irish Lawyer, before
mentioned (who was formerly one of the Pope's Supreme Council at Kilkenny in
Ireland.) This Consult was upon a Sunday, at Talbot's House, Three Miles from
Dublin, where it was resolved, That the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs should call a
general Assembly of the City, and by the Act of that Assembly turn out the
Recorder, together with those Aldermen which were opposite to the Romish Party.
Matters were so far acted, in pursuance to this intended Subversion, that the
Assembly was already in Council, but found all the Twenty four Aldermen
unanimous; so that they could not, according to the Laws of that City, pass any
Order, in regard that none could be made without the Assent of the Court of
Aldermen, who sat in a Room by themselves. This was a fatal obstacle to their
Design, whereupon they sent to the Lord Lieutenant to be Instructed how, and in
what manner, they should proceed; and in the interim kept the Assembly shut up
all the day. At last they received the following Directions, That one of the
Sheriffs, with several of the Commons, should come into the Aldermen's Court,
and bring a Petition in the name of the whole City, to turn out Sir William
Davis, the Recorder, and Seven Aldermen, who were of the greatest account in
that City. But notwithstanding the depth of this Policy, which was lain with
all the artifice and subtilty it could be capable of, yet was the whole of it
privately discovered by one of the Sheriffs, which put the Aldermen into a
posture of Preparation for their Defense; which was managed with that success,
that upon its coming to be debated, the adverse Party obtained only the
Suffrages of two indigent Aldermen, which gave a considerable check to the
Intriegue. But then the Lord Mayor called a private Assembly, and not one of
the Seven Aldermen were present: The Commons were called into the Aldermen's
Court, and there, in a tumultous and irregular manner, they were turned out,
and Seven of the Rabble put in their places; as also Leatone the Lord
Lieutenant's Secretary was made Recorder.

This Revolution so awakened the Eyes of the Citizens of Dublin, that they
began to make a more narrow Inspection into the main drift and tendency of it;
which, within a Month after 'twas set on foot, they plainly perceived was
immediately levelled at the Foundation of the Protestant Interest and Religion.
They now became apprehensive how miserably they had been imposed upon,
especially when they saw Papists brought into the Common Council, and every day
the disguise so thrown off, that they remained no longer doubtful of a most
apparent and palpable Design of introducing Popery.

About this time Talbot, the Titular Archbishop of Dublin, applied himself to
the Lord Lieutenant, and borrowed some of the Hangings of the Castle, Silver
Candlesticks, Plate and other Utensils to use at an High Mass, which Sir Ellis
Leaton got to be sent with the Complement of saying, That He hoped to have High
Mass at Christ's Church at Christmas; and which in all probability had been
effected, if a discovery of a most bloody and inhumane Conspiracy to be acted
in this Year, had not seasonably prevented it; of which take the following
Account:

The Priests (by Directions from their Superiors) ordered their several
Congregations at Mass, That at such a time every Roman Catholic should fix
over their Doors a Cross made of Straw: The People were curious to understand
the reason of this Order; but the matter was carried with so much secrecy, that
the Priests themselves, 'twas believed, knew no more than that it was designed
to bless the Peoples Houses. This, in pursuance to the Advice and Instruction
of the Priests (who like so many Infallible Oracles, are, upon all occasions,
how difficult or unreasonable soever, most punctually obeyed) was generally
performed, and at the same time vast multitudes of Priests came from beyond the
Seas; and it appears by the Sequel, That some of these were better acquainted
with the bottom of this black and damnable Intriegue, than generally the poor
ignorant Priests of Ireland were, to whom, 'twas not by the Hellish Conclave at
Rome thought fit, to Communicate a matter of this private and great importance.
For one of these Foreign Priests finding several Houses which had not Crosses
fixed at their Doors, he warned the People, with great earnestness, to put them
up; and further told them, That this omission might be their Ruin, though he
would not name to them the particular Instance wherein. But amidst the People's
various conjectures, as to the occasion of this so general an Order, one of
these Foreign Priests, more open-hearted than the rest, acquaints a Friend of
his with this Design; which being by him communicated to another, and this
other acquainting some Friend of his, till at last by this Relation of it to
several hands, the matter was so far divulged, that 'twas impossible to conceal
it any longer from being publicly known. This intended Bloody Massacre was
formed after the ensuing manner: Upon a certain day (appointed for the
Execution of this dismal Tragedy) all the Protestants were to be barbarously
Murdered, and the Signal appointed to distinguish the Irish from these
Heretics, was, a Cross of Straw put up before their Doors, which wheresoever
that was not found, all those Houses were to be destroyed. But this being
opportunely discovered, search was made, and Crosses were accordingly found at
most of the Irish Doors, in the whole Province of Munster; which being made up
in a very small compass, were not before taken notice of. Search was made for
the Priest, who was the first Author of this Discovery; but he was not to be
found: and the Government in Ireland was then so extremely biased, and
discovered so partial an affection to the Irish Interest, that no encouragement
was given to a farther Inspection into this horrid Plot; which upon a narrower
search would doubtless have answered the whole of the Relation given of it by
the Priest, and would have appeared a most Unchristian and Unnatural, but upon
these accounts, (in the present sense and practice of the Church of Rome) a
more Catholic Design. But such as were active and industrious in laying open
this mischievous and pernicious Conspiracy, had their Cattle stole from 'em,
and were threatened to have their Houses burnt; with such like terrifying
devices of the Irish, which they are not only wont to give out, but also to
practice against such of the English, as endeavor to confront them in their
evil Designs. This (together with the connivence of the Government) put a stop
to any farther discovery; so that the whole was hushed up, and passed over in
silence.

Thus we see, (that to what proficiency soever the Popish Interest had attained
by the violent and irregular proceedings of the Court of Claims, and other
artifices of its first rise and production) that it was at that time but in its
infant state, when compared with that maturity it had now insensibly aspired
to, under the Government of the L. B. The Duke of Ormond, when in the
Government, did in the whole conduct of Affairs so vigorously support the
Protestant Interest, that he remained an inseparable obstacle to their Design,
unless some method were taken to put him out of that Station: in order to which
(as you have heard) the Lord Ro^erts was to be practiced upon, whose prejudice
(they doubted not) would carry him to very severe Reflections upon the Duke of
Ormond's Government, and indeed the experiment answered the design of the
undertakers; for the first thing that the Lord Roberts did (which I should have
mentioned when I spoke of his succeeding the Duke of Ormond, but however may
not improperly be inserted in this place) was to pry into the Duke of Ormond's
Government, and in a manner to encourage and invite persons to make their
Complaints; but 'twas found a difficult task to find Faults after a Person of
so great Honor and Integrity, as he was. But however to put his Design in
Execution, he first gave opportunity to the Officers of the Army to make their
Complaints, which not succeeding, then he countenances the private Soldiers to
offer their Grievances; and in order to this, appoints Commissioners to go
round the Kingdom, but all to no purpose: afterward he attempts the same in
the City of Dublin, to see if they would complain for Quartering of Soldiers;
but that Device came likewise to nothing. But, alas, all this would not fix him
long in the Government: He was sent over but to serve a turn, and after being a
necessary Instrument for a while must now give place to a fitter Agent, the L.
B. who was now appointed to guide the Chariot:

Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis; Though he could not hold the
Rein so steady as fully to complete the course, yet was the undertaking noble
in it self; and how ever it succeeded, could argue no less than a Gallant
Resolution for the Catholic Cause; and which indeed, he had at last brought to
that high pitch as to draw in the Populace (by amusing them with specious
Pretenses against the Magistracy) to an espousal of his interest. But however
'twas happy for the Protestants that the Rabble at last became sensible that
they had looked at the wrong end of the Perspective, and that things had been
represented to them in a false light, and in colors quite different from what
they now appeared: Popery had now almost arrived to its Zenith, and wanted but
little of that Perfection which that horrible, Bloody contrivance before
mentioned, was designed to compass; a practice of a parallel nature with the
former Irish Rebellion, and Parisian Massacre, and the like infallible
demonstrations of the Church of Rome's undoubted Catholicism.

But it is high time to hasten to the aforesaid Affair of the Corporation. The
seasonable discovery of the aforementioned Sheriff, gave the A^dermen the
opportunity of sending over Sir William Davis to London, who representing a
true Description of this Design to the Earl of Shaftsbury, made that great
Politician swear, That the L. L. was a mad Man; which Negotiation with the said
Earl, produced so successful an effect, that about a Month after the Earl of
Essex was nominated Lord Lieutenant, which Popish Design in Ireland, though the
Natives of that Kingdom were so elevated in their Expectations of its
succeeding, that they forbore not boasting to their Confidents of its
improvement at Court.

This Romish Design, which had fully appeared in its proper shape in Ireland,
began soon after this to unmask it self in England, and a remarkable Passage
occurred, which not a little contributed to the untwisting of this Intricacy of
State, which had been carefully spun with so fine a Thread. The King, the Duke
of York, and Clifford, the Lord Treasurer, were one day at a certain House, in
a private Room, where one Sir W. B. (a Commissioner of the Excise of England,
and of the Revenue of Ireland) came, and being a Person that frequently
accommodated the King with Money, was wont to gain access at all hours, and in
presumption of this liberty was at the Door, ready to enter the Room; but his
hearing the King speak, with more than ordinary earnestness, begat in him a
curiosity to hearken with some Attention, but could hear only some broken and
imperfect Expressions. The Duke also spoke so low, that he could not understand
him; but Clifford was loud as in public, answering the King in a very audible
and articulate manner, in these words, Sir, if you are drove off upon fears,
you will never be safe; the work will do, if you declare your self with
Resolution, there is enough to stand by you. The King replied, This name, Popery,
will never le swallowed by the People; upon which the King started off his
Seat, and said, Some Body is at the Door. Whereupon Clifford hastily opened it,
and without speaking, fell furiously upon B --, dragging him to a pair of
Stairs, from whence he kicked him down. Soon after this B. dyed, which was not
improbably imputed to that. Misfortune.

Here we may reasonably reflect upon those Politic (and for some time)
imperceptible steps, by which Popery gradually gained ground upon us, both in
Ireland, and England. In Ireland the whole Scheme had been managed with so much
address, as to engage the Populace to their Party, as has been already shown,
in England; the Design was lain with that depth, and so profoundly disguised
with the most artificial Delusions, That few (except some of the most
Judicious, and these no otherwise than by Conjecture) were able to fatham it.
But God, who brings to light the hidden things of darkness, and whose powerful
Prerogative is such as oftentimes to disappoint the wise in their own
Craftiness, did wonderfully infatuate the wicked Devices of these Men, and that
by an opportune discovery, when they were possessed with the greatest hopes of
its attaining its designed effect.

But to proceed upon the former Discourse, interrupted by this Digression. In
this Year a little Instrument of the Pope appeared, who by degrees became no
inconsiderable Actor in the Affairs of the Romish Court, one Thomas Sheridon.
This Man was Educated in Trinity College near Dublin, where he commenced
Master of Arts, and after that entered into the Holy Order of a Deacon of the
Church of Ireland; but upon an intimate Acquaintance contracted with the
Jesuitical Party, was discovered by these politic Engineers of State, to be a
Person, whose natural sagacity, joined with his artificial improvements (as to
which none of his co-temporaries in the University could dispute the
Precedence) might justly render him a fit Object for their purpose. This Design
of theirs, cooperating with his boundless Ambition, made him not sollicitous
to aspire to an higher rank in the Church (though otherwise his pregnant parts
might reasonably have entitled him to very eminent preferment in it) but now
that he had another Game to play, he suddenly (to the Admiration of all that
knew or heard of him) abandons his Sacred, and assumes a Civil Profession, that
of a Collector of the Customs in an out-Port of Ireland: a place he was as
unqualified for, as he was deemed capable of that of the Church; the place but
an hundred and twenty pounds per annum. He remained three or four Years in this
place, but not to the small amazement of such as were acquainted with his
profuseness: For 'twas visible that his Sallary could not answer a quarter of
his Expense, living at a very extravagant height in imitation of his Master
Coleman.

At last the Intriegue appeared more intelligible to some inquisitive Men, who
began more narrowly to pry into it. For 'twas considered, that his being
Collector of Corke^ (a great place of Commerce by Sea) afforded him
Intelligence from all parts, whereby Letters from Rome, Spain, etc. to all the
Popish Clergy could arrive safely through his Hands: and as this was answerable
to their first design of fixing him in that Station, so did it render him the
more considerable amongst them; notwithstanding that, to avoid all suspicion,
he still put on the disguise of the Protestant Religion, which he counterfeited
with so ingenious an air, that most believed him extreme in that Profession,
and were apt to think him inclined to Presbytery, as deriving it from his
Masters the Farmers, who were called The Fanatic Farmers, being a Set of
Brewers in London.

Thus we see how this bigoted Votary of the Romish Church transformed himself
into a different shape, and eovered his black Design with the Mask of
Presbytery, as the Stalking Horse to other Foul, upon which his aim was set.
But as this disguise could not remove the suspicions of the most judicious,
discerning Men, who considered his assuming an Employment (quite contrary to
the Stream of his former Education, and to that eminent Figure which in all
probability he might have aspired to in the Church) as an Introduction to some
secret Project, which at present they could not comprehend, but soon after
became fully informed in it. For the aforesaid Farmers going off, Sheridon
(before their time was fully expired) obtains leave from them to go for London,
and there the Vizard he had formerly worn was soon thrown off, and he (as in
his proper colors) appeared an absolute Creature of the Duke of York's, and at
that time a great Consult was held to bring on the Deliverance of Ireland. For
now the poor Catholics there (after their late disappointment in the
beforementioned Intriegue of the Corporation) were almost in despair, and
moreover his Royal Highness was in danger of losing his most faithful
adherents, many hundreds of them having continued there incognito since the L
-- B -- 's time, expecting to be Officers; and these Men were very impatient.

The Earl of Essex was then in the Government Ireland, a person whose great
integrity and prudence in the steady piloting of this tottering Ship of the
State, is not easy to describe. This Skilful Manager of the Helm, Steered so
judiciously, at this nice juncture, that notwithstanding the unwearied
endeavors of the Papists, nothing could be effected to their advantage,
whilst he kept the Sword. Wherefore a Project was thought on to take the Farm
of the Revenue of Ireland, by which the whole Revenue of the Kingdom must pass
through their hands; besides that, this offered to them the command of the
Seaports, together with the convenience of employing in the Revenue, Fifteen
Hundred Officers fit for their purpose. This being set on foot, took well, and
Sheridon acted his share in it with great applause: For his being a Collector
(added to his Natural Ingenuity and great parts) had now rendered him a great
Proficient in the Affairs of the Customs and the Revenue. The Caution required
in the management of this Intriegue, hindered the Duke from appearing in it,
and Coleman was deemed also a person very unfit to be concerned: for though he
assumed the shape of a Protestant at that time, yet was he shrewdly suspected
of Popery.

After several Debates, it was concluded, That Sheridon was the most proper
instrument to carry on this affair; but then his credit in London was not
considerable enough for a matter of this great moment: So after several
attempts, recourse was at last had to one Muschamp, then in London, an old
Projector, and one of the present Farmers, but a poor man. This Muschamp
acquaints another greater Projector than himself, one Sir J. S. but he was a
man of moderate fame, however they could get none of substance to join with
them, and both these were projecting heads, and acquainted with Sir W. P. a man
of Ireland of a great fortune, and whose Principles were most consonant to this
concern; who upon the proposal being made to him, embraced it with this
assurance of having men of Estates joined with them. This being related by
Sheridon to the Duke and Coleman, to effect it, 'twas found necessary to draw
in some man of value, which seemed to be a matter of great difficulty. But at
last one Ryder (a young man that had of his own, and Sisters Fortune, Twenty
Thousand Pounds) was named, but his being publicly known as an intimate
Favorite of the Duke's, was looked upon as almost an inseparable Obstacle: For
all matters relating to Ireland, were so closely and tenderly handled; that
notwithstanding the Duke carried the greatest stroke, yet acted so much at a
distance, that he appeared to be outwardly unconcerned, However the exigency of
this affair was such as necessitated him to show himself more open in this than
upon former occasions; and therefore to facilitate their purpose, Ryder was
engaged, together with some other small men, who were also prevailed upon. The
business thus lain, they appeared upon the Stage, and bid for the whole Revenue
of Ireland.

The Earl of Essex, who received constant intelligence from Court, and from
some of the Popish Clergy in Ireland, about this time had an account of designs
to remove him from the Government; and how one part lay in taking the Farm:
upon which he obtains leave to go for England, Primate, and the Lord Granard
Justices. Upon his arrival at Court, he perceived the Game ran high for Popery,
and the best way to prevent it, was not by downright opposition; he therefore
concludes upon a more prevailing method, which was to make court to the Duke of
York, which he managed with so much art, and so skilful an Address (as indeed
he was very capable of doing beyond their Conclave at Rome) that
notwithstanding it was resolved that he should depart; yet was he kept so long
in England, till orders came from the Holy Fathers, for his return to Ireland.

He had so far wound himself into the Duke's good-opinion of him, that he
thought him secure for their Party; and as the first testimony of his
Integrity, he had Instructions from him to promote Sheridon and the Farmers:
which the Earl managed with such great wisdom, as at once to please the Duke,
and yet to be serviceable to the Protestants of Ireland, who had now been in a
lost, irrecoverable condition, if his admirable Conduct had not prevented it.

And now this great Man returns for Ireland to steer again in that Government
threatened by approaching Tempests; the Farmers also going over, enter upon
their business. Sir W. P. became very notorious in declaring not only to employ
Papists, but that he would have the Priests collect the Hearth-money. Some were
apt to believe that this was done on purpose to get off: but those who were
most intimate with him, speak quite otherwise, and that the hopes of being
created a Lord, and a Privy Counselor, so transported him beyond all the
bounds of moderation, as induced him to take this violent course, the more to
ingratiate himself with the Duke; but like the Ass in the Fable, beat his
Master down in imitation of the Spaniels fawning; and though he was a man of
great Learning, and of a Mathematical Head, and bred abroad, yet so vehemently
desirous of Riches, as hurried him often into great Extravagancies.

The Earl of Essex being Landed in Ireland, had a difficult Game to play, he
had ('it is believed) made fair Promises of being kind to the Irish, and to stand
by the Farmers; to the first he gave good words, and received them well at
Court: but the Farmers they began to model their. Officers, and if some speedy
and effectual stop was not put to these Proceedings, the whole Ports of the
Kingdom would soon be in Papists hands, which was like to prove a matter of
most dangerous consequence. To defeat this Intriegue, required a more than
ordinary presence of mind, and a deep foresight, which as this wise Earl was
endowed with in a very high measure, so did he signally show it upon this
occasion. There was but one way to effect it, and that was by raising scruples,
as to the value of the Farmers and their Securities; but this he must not
appear in, but instructs some of his Confidents of the Council, to act that
part sor him, and there was one, who, till this late Catastrophe, was thought
to be of great Integrity and Honor; the Lord Granard he was bold and daring,
and a Mortal Enemy to Sir J. S. wherefore he moves at the Council Board, that
inspection should be made into the Securities of these Farmers. The Proposal
was well accepted by the rest of the Council: For indeed they were Men, (as Sir
W. P. said truly of them) viz. Farmers picked up in the Streets, with this
disadvantage, that take the-first seven men you meet, and they shall exceed
these for every thing, but cheating. The Earl of Essex seemed to oppose the
Council in this Vote, put it off, and acquainted the Farmers, and also gave an
account of it to the Duke, whom he had now so far gained upon as to become a
Confident. But every day ushered in new Complaints against the Farmers running
away with the Money of the Kingdom, etc. which for some time the Earl seemed to
decline; but at last (in appearance against the Grain) agrees with the Council,
and sends over to the King the Objections against the Farmers, which in short
were so great, that they were not to be trusted. Whereupon Commissioners of
inspection were set over them; one was the Earl of Essex's Confident: and these
men attended to the motion of the Farmers with so vigilant an eye, that nothing
could be effected.

In this manner was this great and dangerous Plot, (carried on for several
years by the Duke and his Minions) most miraculously defeated by the
unparalleled Conduct of that Prudent Earl, who so far out-vy'd the Romish
Politics, as to cajole that party into an approbation of those Proceedings,
which proved fatally destructive of their design: which so disheartened those
two accomplices, R -- and Sheridon, that they flung up their Parts, and
returned to Court; the last to attend his Master Coleman, who happened to come
in a fit time to succeed him in his Employment: for not long after this, the
Popish Plot was brought upon the Stage, in which Coleman was Prime Minister,
who being afterward Executed, and Sheridon speaking something in favor of his
cause, was apprehended, and after some time was brought on his knees at the Bar
of the House of Commons, where he had impudence beyond humane shape, to set
forth in a flourishing Speech the greatness of his Family, (viz.) that he was
in the right Line of the Kings of Vlster, anciently called O Sheridon; that to
his Father belonged a vast Estate, which by the misfortune of War (meaning the
former Rebellion) he was wrongfully put out of; with abundance of the like
impudent falsehoods, and most notorious untruths. Whereas indeed his Father (too
honest a man for so base, and so degenerate a Son) was before the late
Rebellion in the County of Caven, taken in a poor Boy into a Bishop's House for
a Turn-spit; and the Bishop observing the Boy to be of a Docible Temper, and
capable of instruction, and finding him educated a Papist, charitably put him
to School, where he was taught his Grammar, and was found to be so industrious
a Proficient in School-learning, as encouraged the good Bishop to Ordain him a
Deacon, in which capacity he continued under the Bishop till he died. And when
the Rebellion broke out so violently, that few English were left in the
Country; yet this poor man remained with such as stayed, and read Prayers
among them, till all were either Murdered, or had deserted the place. But he
being a poor Old Man, and having nothing to remove, continued where he was, the
Irish suffering him to reside amongst them; but by all their Importunities
(notwithstanding their great eagerness to make Converts, compassing both Sea
and Land, to proselyte any to their Church) could never prevail upon him to go
to Mass. This Man had three Sons, which (as well as those turbulent times would
admit) he educated Protestants, and upon Oliver's reduction of Ireland, he was
so taken with the Character of this poor man, which was faithfully represented
to him by the English of the North, that he not only ordered a maintenance for
himself, but also for his three Sons, whom he ordered to be maintained in the
College near Dublin, where they all improved themselves to an eminent degree
of Learning and parts. This is an Impartial Account of Thomus Sheridon's
Pedigree, whose Sisters, and other Relations, were in Broges and Kerchiefs, the
Irish Garb for Women. The Author saw them not many years ago in this condition,
and knowing this Story of Sheridon, was heightened in his Curiosity of being
the more inquisitive after it in the County where his Father was born, and
found that he was of the Scologues, a Name which the Irish call Cotchers. --
And none of his Kindred, as the Irish affirm, were ever better. I should not
have given the Reader the trouble of this Digression, but that I deemed it not
altogether unpleasant to him to represent the unparalleled Impudence of this
Man, who could attempt to speak of his high Extraction before the House of
Commons, when the meanness of his Original and Descent was so universally known
in most parts of the North of Ireland. But to what degrees of extravagancy will
not the Confidence of an Irishman transport him? And whither will not that
audacious Arrogance (with which the Natives of that Kingdom are most
plentifully stocked) carry and invite them? The ridiculous Genealogies which
the Irish have framed of themselves, as to their Heroical Ancestry, Antiquity
of their Nation, their eminency for Literature and extraordinary Piety in
former Ages, are Fopperies not to be wondered at; when in these days the Author
by his own Experience can give an account of several of the Irish Gentry, who
have laid aside both their former Names, and Relations, and have created new
ones to themselves, which they pretend to be derived from a numerous train of
Noble Progenitors, though this be publicly known to be a Chimerical and
Fictitious Invention.

But to return again to the Earl of Essex, (from whence this account of
Sheridon, has caused me to digress) though his politic Carriage in the
business of the aforesaid Farmers, discovered a dextrous and prudent
Government; yet did it contract upon him the hatred of the Duke of York, who
from this time set up private designs against him, which the Earl had constant
intelligence of; but at last was not able to withstand them, the prejudice
rising so high, till the Duke obtained a resolve for his removal from the
Government. Bridlington was pitched upon. Talbot had (by the Relation of a
Brother of his Married into that Family) some interest, but was not looked upon
as a fit person to break it to the Earl; so another was found by the Earl of
Orrery's means, who had been disobliged by the Earl of Essex, and by that way
it was pursued. But though the Earl of Bridlington might have had a mind to the
Government, yet would he part with no Money, and the King's necessities were the
great inducement whereby to prevail upon him to remove Essex, and Bridlington
being unwilling to supply 'em, no other pretense could be found out to work on
the King.

'Twas admired by all for what reasons the Earl of Bridlington should be
thought on, in regard that none but the Duke's Party were in the Intriegue. But
the Romish Faction well understood, that although the Earl of Bridlington was
not fit to carry on their main Design; yet they knew him governable, and were
in hopes to put things upon him, that might bring matters into a leading way
for another they had in their Eye, not fit here to be named. But these things
missing of their designed effect, they were now at a full stop, though no
occasions were omitted of making daily Objections against the Earl of Essex.

The Popish Conspiracy (as has been already hinted in discoursing upon
Sheridon) advanced apace by Coleman, and the Parliament began now to be
apprehensive of the present proceedings, and of the Alliance with France, which
they utterly disapproved of. The L -- B -- was sent in quality of the King's
Ambassador to France, and Sir Ellis Leaton, his Secretary in Ireland,
accompanied him; but neither of 'em were judged fit to be trusted with the
secret Designs. For at that time there was a Design for the French to set up
their Demands for the Irish, to have the Articles made by King Charles the
Second with the French King in their favor, to be performed; and the King of
England was to admit the French to land Men, under pretense of being got by
private compact of the Irish. The Earl of Tyrone, Lord Brittas, and others,
being to raise Men in Ireland, in order to make a Diversion to the putting the
Popish Plot in force in England. But the whole of this was kept private from
the King, only so much of it as referred to the French King's demanding the
Promises, made by him (when in Exile) in favor of the Irish. The Duke
undertook to qualify the King, if any discovery should be made of the Irish
intended Insurrection; but this was divulged by some of the Irish, and the King
hardly prevailed with not to believe it. The L -- B -- was recalled from
France, and sent to Nimeguen, and Complaints were made by some Merchants
against Sir Ellis Leaton, who being questioned before the King and Council,
spoke very intemperately, and among other words, said, He wondered how these
Merchants durst presume to speak any thing against the greatest King in Europe,
as the French King was; for which indecent Expression, he was committed; it
being justly accounted great impudence for him to affirm, in the presence of
the King, That there was any other King, greater than himself.

The King and Council finding some cause to believe, that there were Designs of
introducing Popery in Ireland, pitched upon the Duke of Ormond as the only
Pilot for that Kingdom in a Storm; and accordingly he was sent over. The Duke
of York did not then think it seasonable Ireland, under the Notion of Foreign
Service. They were all composed of the Natives of the Kingdom, excepting some
Protestant Officers fit to make Catholics of. The Duke Ormond would give them
no Arms, so they were Exercised with Sticks; and in a little time the Plot in
England was discovered, and they all disbanded. Upon which a discovery was made
by the Irish, of the Popish Conspiracy in Ireland, and it was very remarkable,
that in the whole discovery, not one Protestant appeared as an evidence against
the Papists. A pregnant instance of the great impartiality and equal demeanor
of the English toward the Natives, who although they were now presented with
various opportunities of destroying those, whom they knew to be their
implacable Adversaries; yet declined all Informations against them, a practice
as peculiar to those of the Protestant Communion, as different from the
Indirect Principles, and barbarous proceedings of that of the Church of Rome,
as has been but too manifest, in those horrid Perjuries, and notoriously false
Accusations, which the Irish have been palpably convinced of, in their daily
Impeachments of the English, in the Reign of the late King James, as will
appear in the Sequel of this Discourse. But notwithstanding that it is so
universal a practice of the Irish to swear such of the English (as they bear
prejudice to) out of their Lives and Estates, if possible, or at least so
vigorously endeavor it, as to stick at no Affidavit how inconsistent soever
with truth, or but a rational probability; yet were the English more just than
to transcribe so base an Example, or to propose that impious Maxim of the
Romish Church, Of doing Evil, that Good may come of it, as a Rule of their
Imitation, which the Apostle St. Paul has so plainly pronounced Damnation unto.
And indeed if we descend to an impartial enquiry after the opposite Principles
of the Two Churches in this case, we shall no longer wonder at the great
integrity of the English, nor at that barbarous Violation (in the other Party)
of a Rite of the greatest Solemnity, and most Sacred Institution, which all
Christians ought to account an Oath to be, and which the whole Christian Church
(expect that lame and corrupt part of it which we call the Romish) does upon
its being administered under legal and requisite circumstances, justly reckon as
indissolluble. But what if the other Christian Churches, which are but a vile
Rabble of Heretics and Schismatics (though if dividing Christendom into five
parts, they make up more than three) can pretend to no dispensing power in this
case; yet what cannot the Vicar of Christ do in Cathedra, who has the Keys of
Heaven at his Girdle, and can lock and unlock as he pleases, according to our
Savior's Commission, which he will needs have limited to his Person, as his
Vicarial Prerogative, but unlimited in its Authority; whatsoever sins ye remit,
they are remitted; and whatsoever sins ye retain, they are retained. But to
leave this despotiek power of Absolution in the Chair of Infallibility, which
(God be thanked) we are neither ambitious of, nor do pretend to, it will not be
unreasonable to consider, that whatever complaints were made by the Irish as to
their severe usage in the Popish Conspiracy (of which they make many tedious
harangues) 'twas plain that if there was any such, 'twas acted by those of
their own Party, and such as professed their own Religion, who were indeed the
fittest Agents for so black an Intriegue, there being none of the English any
way interessed in it. Neither can I omit mentioning the great Integrity and
Justice of the Duke of Ormond, then Lord Lieutenant, in his unbyassed and equal
management of this Affair. For though prejudice and partiality might have
prepossessed some Men, and have served to awaken their resentments against the
Irish at such a Juncture as this; yet did he carry himself with so single an
eye, and observed so steady and even a course, that 'twas difficult to perceive
the least deflection in him upon either hand: it is true indeed the Law had its
due course; but this was owing to the Evidence, which those of their own Party
and Religion made against their Associates in the Conspiracy; and therefore if
any irregularity was committed, it cannot justly be charged upon the Duke or
his Subordinate Ministers, by whom the whole was managed with an equal
Moderation and indifferency.

But I pass from these Reflections upon the Carriage of the Duke of Ormond and
the Protestants, to a Discourse of Affairs relating to the Plot in Ireland:
upon the discovery whereof, Orders came from England to disarm the Papists;
Creatures at Court, that there was not found two hundred Arms in all Ireland,
the Irish having a contrivance of concealing their Arms by thrusting them into
Boggs, filling the Barrels of their Guns with Butter, which suffers them not to
take any harm; and as for the Locks they can easily hide them. The Lord Brittas
and others made their Escape for France, but the Earl of Tyrone was taken, and
committed to the Gate House. Sheridon was seized in London, but nothing could
be proved against him. Talbot, now Tyrconnel, was confined a Prisoner in the
Castle of Dublin, together with his Brother, the Titular Archbishop, where he
dyed. The Duke of York went for Flanders; which made the Irish even to despair,
and made one of their Lords to declare, with a great Oath, That He believed
Jesus Christ was a Protestant, for that nothing they could do did prosper. The
Duke of Ormond was extremely sollicitous to settle the Militia in Ireland, and
ordered their watching equal with the Army. And now notwi^hstanding the public
fears of the Popish Conspiracy in England and Ireland; yet was the English
Interest in Ireland of greater value than ever, grounded upon a general Opinion
of the English, that the Plots of the Irish were now so fully unravelled, that
the King would extend no favor to them for the future.

The Duke of York goes for Scotland, and with him the Second Coleman, Thomas
Sheridon, who still professed himself a Protestant, though his Actions at this
time gave a sufficient Demonstration to the contrary: For from Scotland he writ
over private Encouragements to the Popish Party in Ireland, and put them in
some hopes. But the English were not apprehensive of any danger, improving
their Estates, and the Trade of the Kingdom more than ever, and never esteeming
themselves more happy than at this juncture, as being quietly seated under the
Care and Influence of the Duke of Ormond's Government, who now endeavors to
have a Parliament called in Ireland, and succeeded so far as to obtain a Grant;
in pursuance whereof a Bill drawn by the Lord Lieutenant and Council, is sent
over to the King: but the Duke of York's interest interceding, obstructed any
farther Progress, who came with all expedition from Scotland to put a stop to
that design; which the Irish were so confident of before it was done, that they
stuck not to affirm that they were well assured there would be no Parliament
whilst King Charles lived, and would frequently discourse with that liberty and
boldness, as if the Duke of York had been actually Seated in the Throne, upon a
Presumption that he would arrive speedily to it.

Ireland had now continued for two or three years in great Tranquillity and
Quiet, when upon a sudden a Stratagem was set on foot, lain as deep as Hell,
and yet seemingly for the advantage of the English, which take as follows: In
the Settlement of Ireland, there were overplus and concealed Lands, said to be
in the possession of diverse of the English, but in truth much more in that of
the Irish. Now to insure the Titles of the English from any future Discoveries
(as was pretended) a Court of Grace was to be erected, Claims: and upon proving
their possession, and compounding with the Commissioners for payment of such a
sum, as they thought fit to impose on them; they were to pass new Patents. It
was also given out, that it was safe for all new Interests, to pass that Court,
and that it would strengthen their Titles. This Policy had its intended effect,
for many persons came in, and considerable Sums of Money were paid. But under
what plausible pretext soever this Court was set up, 'twas soon perceived as a
snare to the English: For its design was to make a narrow inspection into all
Men's Titles, and thereby to discover what advantage might be derived from it.
For by the Act of Settlement, all the forfeited Lands in Ireland were only
invested in the King, as a Royal Trustee, for the use of the Soldiers and
Adventurers, and could be no way disposed of, but according to the intent of
that Act. Now whereas there were several Irish out of their Lands decreed them
by the Act for want of Reprisals; the King's Patent could not give any Land
away, but in pursuance to the intent of the Act. By which it appears, that this
Court was erected to prepare Pretenses for the Irish, when opportunity should
invite; and though all this was negotiated through the Duke's Interest: yet
none of that party appeared in it, but the whole of it was transacted by the
Duchess of Portsmouth, who had the Money got by Fines out of it.

Because there will be occasion in the farther discovery of this Treachery, to
name a principal Actor in the Catastrophe of Ireland, I shall now nominate him
that was the Abettor and Contriver of this mischief, 'twas one W. who sometime
ambo-dexter formed this Intriegue, which had proved fatal to the Protestant
Interest of Ireland, if affairs had succeeded in the same Current they had now
put them. But I must not forget to add, that to make this poison go down the
more easy, the Pill was gilded over: Most of the Judges were made
Commissioners, and had part of the Fines; the Lawyers and Attorneys got Money
by the Court: so that consequently all that were capable of understanding the
Cheat, were interessed as Parties in the Intriegue, and by this means some of
the Lawyers and Attorneys purchased Estates, to the ruin of the former
Possessors. And it is to be observed, that in the several Designs of the
Papists, Protestants were the Tools, whereby they acted, by which they appeared
to have nothing of Catholic in them. And now to force men into this Tonnel,
another Oppression was imposed upon the Subject, and that was, that no man
should pass Patent for Fairs, Markets, Manors, etc. without passing his Estate
through this Court: whereas by the Act of Settlement all persons had liberty
for the improvement of the Country, to pass Patent for them, so that they were
not within three Miles of one another.

Here you may perceive a most black design speciously represented as a fit
occasion to lay hold on, whereby to corroborate the English Interest, though in
truth nothing could more effectually weaken the Protestants Titles to their
Estates, and strengthen or improve those of the Irish; and this not only
managed, but at first set up by a Protestant. And indeed this gave a more
plausible color to it, and made it the more easily gain belief with the
English, that the true Reasons of its erection, were the same with those that
were pretended, because first advanced by one of their own Party: A sad thing
indeed, that Englishmen and Protestants, should by base and unworthy
Compliances become such Servile Instruments to the advancement of the Popish
Cause! A Calamity which as it had made some steps before, so did it improve to
an infinite Progress, when the late King James was in possession of the Throne.
In which time, too many men, who were reputed Protestants, through a mean, and
pusillanimous Disposition, were not seldom Co-adjutors with the Papists in such
violent Proceedings, as carried a direct opposition to the Laws, and their
Religion.

But to proceed where I left off: The Duke of Ormond, perceiving by the
tendency of these Affairs, that the Romish design was agitated with greater
earnestness than ever, with great difficulty obtains leave to go for England,
and pursuant to that comes over, leaving his Son, the Earl of Arran, Lord
Deputy. Upon his Arrival at Ireland, with an heavy heart, as he himself
declared to a Great Man of that Kingdom. He had Instructions to Regiment the
Army, and some other things that were Preparatives to what followed soon after.
But now the Fatal Stroke was come, the Death of the King, a Mystery not to be
inquired into, though one can hardly omit remarking that the Irish Papists
could for some time before fix upon the utmost Period of that Reign, and the
Duke was sent for in haste from Scotland three years before, without any
apparent reason for it, besides that, the King's permission was obtained with
some difficulty.

From this time we may Commence the Date of the Irish greatness: Fate now
smiled upon 'em, and that which they had long expected with so much impatience
and importunity, which had cost them so much pains, and had involved them in
such great Perplexities: That which had exposed them to so many dangers, and
been so frequently blasted with cross Accidents and various Disappointments,
was now fallen into their Lap. Now their long-look'd for day was come, and
their Game which had been played with so much difficulty and loss, did now
assure them of better success. These Apprehensions so transported them with
such pleasant Raptures, as were eminently visible in all their actions,
especially in Public Days of Rejoicing, as the day of the King's Proclaiming
that of his Coronation, the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, and the
like: in all which they demonstrated the most extravagant Symptoms of a
Superlative Joy, which they expressed in making of Bonfires, Beating of Drums,
playing upon the Bag-pipes, and other Musical Instruments, in Drinking, and
Serenading in the night time, forcing the English out of their Beds, and
breaking open their Doors, and drinking Confusion to the Kings Enemies upon
their Knees: by which 'twas plain that they understood the Protestants. And all
these unlawful Revellings oftentimes continued for two or three Nights and Days
without intermission, wherein such of the English as refused to join with them
to that extravagant height, were accounted Persons disaffected to the
Government, called Fanatic and Oliverian Dogs, with the like Expressions of
Calumny and Reproach. But this was not all; the most judicious of them, were
now so animated in their hopes, that 'twas impossible for them to bear them any
longer with moderation, or to contain themselves from the most violent
Outrages, and from instigating the Rabble to steal from, and rob the English,
which at first was looked upon as the most Expeditious Contrivance, whereby to
expel them the Kingdom. The Duke of Ormond foresaw what was now past remedy,
and told a Friend of his, that nothing could now preserve the English but a
precipitateness of the Irish: For (said he) let my Countrymen alone, and they
will spoil their own business: And so indeed they had in any time but this,
when it might be said according to our Savior's Prediction, That the time was
come, when they that destroyed the Protestants, thought they did God service.

King James and his former (but now more especial) Favorites the Irish, were
now equally furious in their course, and seemed to contend (the one in his
Commands, the other in their forward Obedience) which should exceed in their
joint design of extirpating Heresy. The Duke Ormond was called over, but
before his departure, labored with an Indefatigable diligence, to establish
matters on such a foundation, so as that it might not be easy for them to
create a present change, without a manifest violation and infringement of the
Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom. The new Hospital, a stately Fabric near
Dublin, erected for poor Soldiers, would (he foresaw) be made a Nest for
Hornets, which to prevent, as well as possible, he sat several days with the
Council and Judges in private, in the Castle, and there made all the provision
that could be for it, against the imminent storm. One remarkable Passage I must
not omit to mention, which demonstrates the great spirit of that excellent
person. At the aforesaid Hospital he appointed a Dinner for all the Officers of
the Hospital, and the Officers of the Army then in Dublin; which being over, he
took a large Glass of Wine in his hand, bid them fill it to the brim, then
stood up and called to all the Company. Look here, Gentlemen, they say at
Court, I am now become an Old Doting Fool; you see my Hand does not shake, nor
does my Heart fail, nor doubt but I will make some of them see their Mistake;
and so drank the Kings Health: But upon his Arrival at Court found that King
James's Bigoted Opinion would carry him to the most violent actions; a dismal
apprehension whereof (as is believed) at length broke his heart; for though he
was of a great Age, yet was he of such health of Body, and cheerfulness of
mind, that in course of nature he might have lived Twenty Years longer, as his
Mother did. 'Twas plain, that the Irish could fasten no Calumnies upon him,
when the first thing they reproached him with, was Cheating the Army in
building the Hospital, and that Robinson the Architect had enriched himself by
it: when indeed not to lessen any thing of his due Character, Robinson showed
the parts of an Excellent Artist in the Contrivance, and of an Honest Man in
the Charge, as men of Value and Experience in Building affirm.

Upon the Duke of Ormond's removal, the Government Primate, and the Lord
Granard, in the Quality of Lords Justices. The Irish fell immediately to their
old trade of making Plots, but with this difference, That whereas they had
formerly been the Actors themselves, they now placed them upon the English,
which they daily impeached of designs against the King and the Government: The
Grandees had the confidence to appear in Vindication of such Evidence as was
given against the English, (though it was altogether as unreasonable as untrue)
and pressed the Lords Justices for Orders of Council to empower Irish Papists,
and Mongrel Protestants to examine them, and to commit (if they saw cause)
without Bail, any person impeached. This Arbitrary Power, the Lords Justices,
and Council, would not agree to; yet were so hectored and insulted upon by
them, that they issued out Orders of Council to examine and commit, but always
they were directed to Protestants, which wearied the Irish of that Stratagem.

One thing has been omitted, which was, that before the Duke of Ormond left the
Government, an Order came for regulating the Council, which he left for the
Justices to do, and most of the English (that were active) of the Privy Council
were turned out, but as yet no Irish Papists put in. The Irish Lords and Gentry
repaired in great numbers to Dublin, and as well Gentry as Commonalty of the
Natives in all places reproached the Protestants and their Religion, with all
the Calumnies and Impious Reflections, that the rankest Satyrists could invent.
At Leslip seven Miles from Dublin, the Lord Clanriccard, Sir Valentine Brown
(now created a Viscount by the late King James) Colonel Moore, and some others
upon their Knees, drank Confusion to all Protestants and their Religion. This
was taken notice of, and the wiser sort of their Party blamed these Men for
their forwardness, as judging it could not be safe to go on so fast; but to
stifle the noise of it, such as were Eyewitnesses of the Fact, and threatened
for not Pledging the Health, were seized with Warrants, and menaced with having
their Throats cut, and the like terrifying Arts, if they denied not the thing.
Sir Standish Harston one of the Barons of the Exchequer, was threatened to be
eased of his Employment, if he took not off his Son-in-Law who reported the
matter.

These daily repeated Insolences of the Irish made the Lords Justices weary of
their Government; and one of them (the Lord Granard) writ to England to be
dismissed. But in a Consult of the Papists, it was resolved, to represent him as
a Man fit to be kept in; for that his interest was very prevalent in the North
among the Scots, and had for many years in King Charles's Reign been a
Pensioner, and had Five Hundred Pounds per Annum given him to distribute among
the Presbyterian Clergy; of which Persuasion his Lady was. For the aforesaid
Considerations, and besides, that he was a Popular Man in the Army, 'twas
judged convenient to retain him in the Government: For which end King James
writ him a Letter with his own hand, with great Promises, and assurance that
nothing should be acted prejudicial to the Protestant Interest, which at that
time this Lord was accounted to be zealous for, however he has now prevaricated.

Monmouth's Rebellion soon broke out, and Granard was in suspense who to
declare for; but the Lord Primate was a person of firm, and inviolable Loyalty,
and his unalterable steadiness hindered the other from deserting. These two
persons by their united Interests, one for the Church, the other for the
Dissenters, kept things in a quiet posture in Ireland, and were so Cajoled by
King James, as made them not only of opinion, but persuaded others to be so
too, that the King would never expose himself to the hazard of preferring
Papists in that Kingdom, where the English and Scots were so unanimous against
'em: And besides that, they were so well furnished with Arms, as having the
Arms of the Militia (so lately settled) in their hands: But the Popish Party
grew bold and insolent, and every day afforded but too convincing occasions of
new fears to the Protestants.

Monmouth's Discomfiture gave liberty to the Irish (more than ever) to contrive
Plots, and to fasten them upon the Protestants, which put the whole Kingdom
into a Ferment; for the Irish pretended, that the Protestants assembled
together in great numbers in the night: and to gain the more credit to these
Hellish Inventions, the Vulgar Irish were instructed to leave their Houses, and
to hide every Night in their Bogs, upon a pretense of fear that the English
would come in the Night and cut their Throats; a Practice as notorious in the
Church of Rome, as unheard of among Protestants, and which there could not

be the least Ground or Foundation for, at this juncture. For besides that in
most parts of the Kingdom the Irish were infinitely more numerous than the
English; nay, in some an hundred Families for one, (I suppose I speak much
short of the true account) which showed the impossibility of putting any such
thing in execution, had it been ever intended, and must needs be accounted an
absurd and ridiculous contrivance to any man of common sense. So were the Irish
(though conscious to themselves of their own Bloody Actions in the former
Rebellion) well enough assured that the English never imagined, much less would
attempt any such thing. They were convinced as well by their Practices (which
had been but too favorable and indulgent to the Natives in the former Reign)
as by the Principles of their Religion, that they were not men of Blood; nay,
and would frequently confess, that they were never known to be addicted to
Cruelty and Murder, to Barbarous Massacres, and Inhumane Assassinations, which
they could not excuse some of themselves from. And indeed whoever considers the
difference betwixt the Reformed and Romish Church in this respect, must needs
acknowledge a most strange opposition betwixt them. To see the Ancient
Practices of the Heathen Emperors, so drawn to the life, nay, outdone by the
present Romish Faction, is to some a Demonstration that the Persecuting Spirit,
which reigned with so much predominancy in the Infant days of Christianity, is
now strongly revived in this degenerate Church, which is apparently in this,
and other Principles, upon her Retrograde motion to Ancient Gentilism. And upon
the other hand, whoever considers that Spirit of Peace and Meekness, of
Mercifulness and an Universal Charity, which governs with so absolute an Empire
in the minds of those who have duly embraced our Profession, must needs own,
That our English carries that true Badge and Characteristick Evidence of
Christianity, for which the Primitive Church was justly accounted so
illustrious. But not to dwell any longer upon this Reflection, with what malice
and injustice soever the English were represented as Night-Walkers, and
designing to murder the Irish, yet were Examinations of these Impeachments
taken by Justices of the Peace, calculated for the purpose; and these were sent
to the Lords Justices and Council: and although the Accusations were
notoriously false, and irrational (as has been already shown) yet for not being
prosecuted with that open partiality and rigor, which these envious,
implacable Spirits were impatient for, Complaints were made to the King by the
Irish, and he to gratify their malice, sent private instructions, with a
Reprimand to the Lords Justices, about this affair: Upon which a Proclamation
was issued forth forbidding all Night-Meetings, etc. though the Lords Justices
and Council well knew there was no such thing. This Artifice of the Irish, was,
but in order to make way for greater mischief, by preparing Evidences to bring
the most considerable of the English into Plots.

Their first onset was with one Moor of Clonmel, who was Indicted for
High Treason before Sir John Mead in the Palatinate of Tipperary. This Moor was
a person of a vast Estate, which made them bend their whole force against him.
Now to countenance the design, Tyrconnel, and Justin Mac Carthy, came to
Clonmel to the Trial, and in the Public Court assumed to reproach the Judge
and the Jury; Mac Carthy calling him Fanatic, and he and Talbot aspersing him
and the Duke of Ormond for employing such a Rogue, with other Calumnies, in
such Language as was only fit for such Bloodhounds to express. Notwithstanding
Moore and some others that were impeached, were quitted: But such an
extravagantly partial account was sent over to the Court of that action, that
the King questioned the Duke of Ormond, how he came to employ such a Fanatic;
to which the Duke replied, he did it in duty to his Majesty, as believing he
could not entrust a better man than one of his Majesty's Servants, for so he
was when Duke of York, being then his Attorney General in Ireland.

Tyrconnel then began to model the Army, but Protestants, and this design was
varnished over in as fair Colors as the Ground would bear. But however its
direct tendency was plainly obvious and visible to every Eye. The King and
Council writ over to the Lords Justices and Council, that there was reason to
believe that the Rebellion of Monmouth had been of that spreading Contagion, as
to infect many, and delude more. It was not therefore safe for the Kingdom to
have the Arms of the Militia dispersed abroad, but they would be in a greater
readiness for the Militia, and their own defense, to have them deposited in the
several Stores of each County: Upon which instructions a Proclamation issued
forth, and to make it take the better effect, the Lord Primate first began with
the City of Dublin, and sending for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, makes an
Elegant Speech to them, magnifying their unshaken Loyalty in the worst of
times; and withal adding, that their ready Obedience and prevalent example
would be of great service to the King and Kingdom: And in the close of his
Speech tells them, that they expected their compliance in bringing in their
Arms, which should be always ready for their Service. The City were sensible of
their condition, but knew likewise, that 'twas to no purpose to dispute as to
their obedience, so brought in their Arms. The Country pursued this Precedent,
and to render the design more effectual, the Irish gave out, That if any Arms
were reserved in the Protestants hands, such would be interpreted as persons
disaffected to the King and Government, and that it would be no excuse to say
they were their own Arms, and not belonging to the Militia. This frighted many,
and operated so powerfully, that abundance delivered in their Arms bought with
their own money.

The Protestants being thus disarmed, Tyrconnel proceeds to destroying the
Army, and first begins with the Officers in the same method, which was designed
immediately before the Death of the King, which was to displace all Officers
that had been in the Parliament, or Oliver's Army, as also the Sons of any
such. This the Duke of Ormond had directions to proceed in when he came last
from England; but he made no Progress in it, under pretense of gaining time to
find them out, for he foresaw it was to make room for Papists.

Tyrconnel (for so we must call him for the future) proceeds in his design, and
after turning out a great part of the Officers, returns for England, and
carries along with him one Neagle a Cunning Irish Lawyer, since Knighted by
him: Neagle's Business at London was to be engaged in their secret Consults;
for he was a man of great parts, educated among the Jesuits, and consequently
very inveterate. Upon their Arrival at London, 'twas some time ever Neagle
could gain admittance to kiss the King's hand, but was constantly with Father
Petre, and the rest of that Furious Cabal. The Queen was altogether for their
Counsels, but the King was not so forwardly inclined, being every day set upon
by all his Popish Lords, not to proceed too fast, in the revolution of Ireland,
for that would spoil the general interest of the Catholics: and upon the Lord
Bellasis, Powis, and some others of that Factions understanding that Neagle was
come over, they were so transported with Rage, that they would have him
immediately sent out of London: But whatever mischiefs he effected in private,
his Public Transactions were of no great prejudice to the Protestants. However
to complete in Retirement, what he durst not attempt at Court, and upon the
Public Stage, 'twas agreed in Council, that he should set forth by way of a
Letter to a Friend, the great Oppression and Injustice of the Act of
Settlement, which he did under the pretense of a two hours waking in a Night at
Coventry, but was indeed two Weeks labor in London. In this Letter he ran so
high in his Invectives against King Charles the Second, (which nothing but a
mere Tiger, or Savage as himself would have done) that he durst not own it to
be his, but in Ireland gave out, that he would Arrest any Man in an Action of
Ten Thousand Pound, who should father it upon him. But now a Consult was held
(the design of Tyrconnel's coming over) and the Debate variously canvass'd as
to a fit Person to send over for Ireland, in quality of Lord Lieutenant.
Tyrconnel was mentioned with some tenderness, as being a person very Obnoxious
to the English, and therefore 'twas not thought seasonable (till matters were
come to a greater Maturity) to bring him upon the Stage. The Lord Bellasis was
proposed, but that was too barefaced; besides, he was infirm, at least to
carry on their design with success, and not altogether to disgust the English,
'twas resolved that Tyrconnel should return Lieutenant General of the Army, and
the Earl of Clarendon Lord Lieutenant. In the mean time the Irish Papists in
all parts of the Kingdom, proceeded in their former Stratagems of Impeaching
the Protestants for Plots, etc. but these were generally so ridiculously
contrived, and made up of such Palpable Contradictions, and Incongruities, that
they served only to demonstrate the Protestants innocence, and the Horrid
Perjuries, and Implacable Inveteracy of the Informers: But seeing that these
Impeachments were so unskilfully managed (which yet were repeated upon every
pretended occasion of disgust they had to an Englishman) as to miss of their
Wicked and Diabolical intent; then they applied themselves to other Courses;
many went out Toryes, and robbed upon the Highway, broke up Houses, stole
Cattle, killed them in the Field, and cut out the Tongues of Sheep alive, with
other innumerable Barbarities, all acted upon the English, which were so
frightened and discouraged with these Tragedies, that thousands deserted the
Kingdom, and came for England under as great Fears and Jealousies, as if there
had been an open Rebellion, and Five Hundred together departed the Kingdom, to
Transport themselves to Virginia, Carolina, Pensilvania, West Indies, and New
England.

This was extreme grateful to the Irish, who set all their Engines at work, so
to dishe^^^en and discourage the Protestants, as to force them to leave the
Kingdom. Tyrconnel now drives with greater fury than before, not only
displacing the Officers of the Army, but also turning out the Private Soldiers,
and to both, prefers which of the Irish he thought fit; his Will was his Law,
and his Actions purely Arbitrary, none daring to question him; for he brought
over Blank Commissions Signed by the King, for such as he was willing to put
in. This Part he acted in a most Insulting Barbarous manner, causing poor Men
that had no Clothes on their Backs, but Red Coats, to be stripped to their
Shirts, and so turned off; and of all this he himself was an Inhumane
Spectator: He seized the Horses of some Officers and Troopers, giving Notes
that amounted not to a fourth proportion of their just Values; to others he
gave nothing but ill words, and vile reproaches. In the midst of this Tragical
Scene the Earl of Clarendon comes upon the Stage in the Capacity of Lord
Lieutenant; his Relation to the King added to the violent Proceedings then in
Ireland, so vigorously drove on by the Popish Party, afforded but little hopes
of any redress of these Evils to the Drooping Spirits of the Protestants, who
were by this time entered into a very Desponding and Dejected Condition.

But these Discouragements of the English were alleviated in a very high
measure, if not changed into Ecstasies, and perfect Raptures of Joy, when
perceiving the Lord Lieutenant acting as a person of inviolable Integrity to
the Protestants, and the English Interest, they looked upon him as a fit Man to
stem the Torrent of the Popish Faction, which had been so violent and
impetuous: and indeed his very first action gave no small proof of it, which
was to cherish and revive the broken hearts of the Protestants, with those
great Assurances his Master had given him of protecting the Protestant Interest
and Religion, which he good man could not disbelieve. In pursuance of this, he
issued out Proclamations for bringing in of Torys, and proposed Rewards to such
as should apprehend them: He rid a Progress round the chiefest parts of the
Kingdom, to give life to the English; but at the same time the Grandees of the
Irish proceeded in their design, animating their Vassals, with hopes that he
should soon be removed; the Irish composing Barbarous Songs in praise of
Tyrconnel, and that his Heroic hand should destroy the English Church; with
Bloody and Inhumane Expressions, very ungrateful to a Christian Ear.

These restless Endeavors of the Papists made the Earl of Clarendon find
things very uneasy; whereunto one Remarkable Passage not a little contributed,
which was reported to be thus: That upon a Sunday Morning going to Church, he
perceived an Irish Officer he never saw before, Commanding his Guard of
Battle-Axes that attended his Person, which exceedingly surprised him:
whereupon he made a stop, demanding who he was, and who put him there? The
Irishman (for they are naturally Pusillanimous and fearful) was as much
frighted, as the Lord Lieutenant was disturbed; but with some difficulty, and
in broken Expressions, occasioned by fear, told his Excellency, he was a
Captain put in by the Lord Tyrconnel. His Excellency demanded of him When? he
replied, That Morning: His Excellency bid 'em call the former Captain, and
dismiss this of Tyrconnel's. The next day the Lord Lieutenant sent for
Tyrconnel, and questioned him for this Action, who replied, He did nothing but
by the King's Orders; to which the Lord Lieutenant returned answer, That whilst
His Majesty entrusted him with the Government, he would not be disposed by his
Lieutenant General. Complaints on both hands were made to the King, and so
ended.

Tyrconnel having completed his design in modelling the Army, goes for
England, and there consults with his Party to obtain the Government of Ireland.
The King, Queen, and Father Petres were for him; but the whole Council of
Papists opposed it, still urging how unacceptable he was to the English; others
therefore were named in private by that Popish Party: But all the while the
Protestant side were wholly ignorant of any design to remove the Earl of
Clarendon, not questioning but that he stood upon a firm Foundation, (namely)
the Kings late assurance to the Earl of Rochester, Lord Treasurer, who was
seemingly Prime Minister of State, but not thought fit to be confided in, as to
those dark Secrets of the Catholic Designs.

About this time there was a general metting at the Savoy before Father Petres,
of the chief Roman Catholics of England, in order to consult what Methods were
fittest to be pursued for the promotion of the Catholic Cause. The Papists
were universally afraid of the King's Incapacity, or else unwillingness of
exposing himself to the hazard of securing it in his Reign. They were sensible
that he advanced considerably in Age; besides, they were not ignorant of what
almost insuperable difficulties they had to contend with, before they could
bring it to any ripeness: Wherefore upon these Considerations, (carefully
weighing and ballancing every Circumstance) some were for moving the King to
procure an Act of Parliament for the security of their Estates, and only
liberty for Priests in their own private Houses, and to be exempted from all
Employments. This Father Petres Anathematized as Terrestrial, and founded upon
too anxious a Solicitude for the preservation of their Secular Interests; but
if they would pursue his measures, he doubted not to see the Holy Church
triumphant in England: And indeed his Politics have taken, but in a quite
different manner than he expected; for (God be praised) a Church triumphs in
England, as much superior to his in Holiness, as the means of its preservation
have been in justice, to his, which were intended for its destruction. Others
of the Papists were for addressing the King to have liberty (now that they
might do it) to sell their Estates, and that his Majesty would intercede with
the French King to provide for them in his Dominions. After several Debates, it
was at last agreed upon to lay both Proposals before the King, and some of the
number to attend his Majesty with them, which was accordingly done; to which
the King's return was, That he had before their Desires came to him, often
thought of them and had (as he believed) provided a sure Sanctuary, and Retreat
for them in Ireland, if all those endeavors should be blasted in England,
which he had made for their security, and of whose success he had not yet
reason to despair. This Encouragement to the Papists in England, was attended
with the most Zealous Expressions, and Catholic. Assurances of his Ardent Love
to the Holy Church, which he said he had been a Martyr for. Thus we see how the
Bigottry of this unhappy Prince, transported him beyond all bounds, and carried
him to such Extravagancies in Government, as the moderate of the English
Papists themselves thought to be extreme hazardous and insecure; and would all
of them have been content with a private exercise of their Religion, as
thinking it abundantly more safe, rather than endanger the losing their Estates
and Fortunes, (which they almost looked upon as inevitable) if such violent
extreme courses were followed.

But alas these self-preserving, and the furious Principles of the Jesuits had
no Congruity; and the King was too much a Creature of the last, to attend to
any but their Counsels. He said he was resolved to die a Martyr, rather than
not advance the Catholic Cause. He had entered himself into the Order of the
Jesuits, and was become a Lay-Brother of that Society; and so in consequence to
his Profession, must needs look upon it as meritorious to extirpate and destroy
Heresy. He was told that this would be a most glorious action; and doubtless
would be Canonized for it. To reduce three Kingdoms to an entire obedience to
the Holy See, which had Apostatized so long, and been the Nursery of so many
Damned Heretics, who by their Heterodox Doctrines had created so much
disturbance to the peace of the most Holy Catholic Church, was doubtless the
greatest action on this side Heaven, and deserved no less than that for its
reward. No time, nor story, could parallel this Heroical Achievement, which
would be commemorated to Eternal Ages. This would be a Work of Supererogation
indeed, which would not only convey him to Heaven, without touching at
Purgatory; but also lay up such an infinite overplus of merits, as being
deposited in the hands of the Church, and frugally applied, would not only
preserve thousands of others from these Flames, but waft them immediately into
Abraham's Bosom. These or the like we may suppose to have been the constant
suggestions of the Jesuits, which as they endeavored to instill into the Kings
mind, with Tongues as smooth as Oil, and with the most prevailing Flatteries,
and Artificial Insinuations; so on the other hand, did he as greedily imbibe
these Poisonous Doctrines, as they could infuse them, and eagerly swallowed the
Bait, when all the while the Hook lay concealed, and he so far entangled, till
'twas too late to discover it. And now how can we suppose that a Prince thus
wholly at the Devotion of the Jesuits, swayed altogether by their Councils, and
upon every occasion consulting them as so many Oracles, should resist the voice
of these Charmers, who Charmed so wisely in his biased opinion. These Sirens
kept a very harmonious Consort, which they exactly tuned to the Key and accent
of this Votary's fanciful Genius: every stroke sounded so melodious in his Ear,
as made him not consider that this pleasant Music presaged a dangerous
Shipwreck to himself and his Party, as we find it afterward proved.

But to go on in my former Discourse: After the aforesaid Encouragements given
by the King to the English Papists, to allay their fears, fresh Consults were
set on foot, relating to the Government of Ireland. This by accident the Lord
Treasurer received some account of, which he immediately acquainted the King
with, who absolutely denis, that there was any intention of changing the Chief
Governor; but on the contrary assured him of his great satisfaction with the
Lord Lieutenant there. Within a few days the Lord Treasurer received from his
Brother the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the same Intimations, which he had
informed the King of; and upon which he again accosts his Majesty, who as
positively disowns the whole matter as he had done before, and to remove the
Jealousies of the Lord Lieutenant, writes (for his greater satisfaction) a
Letter to him, as was said, with his own hand, assuring him there was yet no
thoughts, and he believed never would be in him (whilst both lived) to remove
him from the Government of Ireland; notwithstanding which the Papists in
Ireland, confidently affirmed, that the day before the King writ the Letter, he
had given assurance to Father Petres, That Tyrconnel should be Lord Lieutenant;
but it is certain that no other Creature but the Queen was privy to this, no not
Tyrconnel himself, for he could not keep a Secret.

'Twas at the same time also resolved to put Sunderland (Principal Secretary)
to the Test, as to what they would do in compliance to the Catholic Cause; it
not being at all advisable to cherish Serpents in their Bosoms that might
disembogue their venom upon every inviting Revolution. The King undertook the
management of this Affair, and made his first Onset on Sunderland, for he was
observed to be most docible, as appeared already, by his submissive bowing and
cringing to the Altar. What the Tenor of that Discourse was, which the King
had with him, is not yet known; but however Sunderland's Obedience was
extremely magnified and approved of in the Conclave; and Father Petres at a
meeting with the Jesuits, gave a good account of this Negotiation with
Sunderland; adding that 'twas necessary for him as yet to appear a Protestant
for Important Reasons of State.

Upon meeting with this success, the King descends to an attempt upon the
Treasurer, whom he endeavors to manage with good words and gentle arts of
Persuasion. For he was haughty, as knowing that his signal Services might
reasonably entitle him to considerable Favors from the King: And therefore
upon this account must be amicably dealt with, and gently stroak'd into humor:
which the King strove to perform with all those Specious Arts and Policies
dictated to him by his Holy Council. And the more to prevail upon him, he urged
to him, that Sunderland, a Wise and Religious Man, though he was knowing in his
Religion, yet refused not to admit of a Conference with those that were
Learned, and desired him to do the same. The effect of this Negotiation became
so public, that 'twill be unnecessary to mention it here: but Sunderland, like
an easy and tractable Child, though fed at first with Milk, came at last to
digest strong Meat, by arriving every day more and more to maturity in the
Faith; and though still a Protestant, yet went every day with the King to Mass,
publicly kneeling before the Altar, and praying with Naaman, That God would
forgive his Servant in that thing.

But to come to the Lord Treasurer: No work of grace would take effect with
this obstinate Impugner of the Faith; and which rendered him a greater Infidel,
was, that the King could not prevail so much upon him as to obtain his silence,
or a desire from him, to have time to consider of it, but turns an open
Heretic: upon which one of the Fathers said, He must be Anathematized, and
that the King could never prosper whilst such an Heretic was near him.

Before it was public in London, the Priests Ireland gave out that the white
Staff was broke, and at that time by way of prediction told all that soon after
came to pass.

It was now become the public discourse, That the two Brothers must down, and
then the King in Council pretended (though he had before resolved) to ask their
advice, who was fit to be placed in the Government of Ireland. Several persons
were proposed, but none approved of: After that the inclination of the Council
had been sufficiently sifted, by offering of diverse, the King again brings on
Tyrconnel; which was withstood by all but S --, and in opposition to which the
Popish Party contended vigorously.

P -- (notwithstanding that they knew him to be both a C -- and a F --, as the
King in Passion one day told him he was; yet however) was considered as a
Person whose moderate carriage had entitled him to a reasonable good Character
among the Protestants; and therefore the fittest to be placed in this station,
the better to amuse them. This was chiefly insisted upon by them, and he was
strongly argued for upon this account. Powis was naturally covetous, and the
Government of Ireland, a Post of great profit: wherefore his Friends advised
him to agree with Sunderland, and do as the L. B -- did with the Duchess of
Cleveland, become Tenant for it; in order whereunto Powis comes to terms, and
agrees for Four Thousand Pounds per Annum; but whatever the bottom of the
design was, Sunderland never forsook Tyrconnel at the Council Board. Some
conjectured, that he acquainted the King of his Bargain with Powis; and that
the King made Tyrconnel agree to the same. For it is certain Tyrconnel (who was
of no great Conduct) would swear he got not so much by the Government, as
served to maintain him, notwithstanding that it was worth to him Eighteen
Thousand Pounds per Annum.

Sunderland was become so intimate a Favorite, that nothing could be got at
Court but by his interest; and when the King was told he got all the Money of
the Court, he replied he deserved it. Nay, his Interest was at last become so
remarkable, that the King himself would ask when any grant was given, if they
had spoke with Sunderland.

The Irish were still marvelously impatient for Dagon; and at last Tyrconnel
obtains the Government, notwithstanding all opposition. The confirmation of
this dismal News reaching the Ears of the Protestants in Ireland, struck like a
Thunderbolt: Perhaps no Age or Story can parallel so dreadful a Catastrophe
among all Ages and Sexes, as if the day of Doom was come; every one lamenting
the dreadfulness of their horrible condition, and almost all that could (by any
men's) deserted the Kingdom, if they had but money to discharge their Passage; a
demonstration of this were those infinite numbers of Families, which flocked
over from Dublin to the Isle of Man, and other places. Indeed I cannot recall to
mind the great Consternation, the dismal Apprehensions, and Panick Fears, which
possessed the hearts of all Protestants at this ju^cture, without reviving
(like Aeneas his repetition of the Trojan Miseries to the Carthaginian Queen)
those deep impressions of sorrow, those Infandos -- dolores, under which I was
then almost sunk, and overwhelmed.

Now every thing discovered a gloomy and Melancholy prospect, and seemed to be
attended with so many Discouragements, that many that had Patentee Employments,
obtained License from the Lord Lieutenant under the Broad-Seal, to come away;
and all that lay in his Excellency's power, for the help and assistance of the
Protestants, he zealously performed. It was interpreted by many as a signal Act
of Providence propitious to the English, that the Winds continued for some time
contrary, after that this furious Zealot for the Cause (as impatient as a Wild
Bull in a Net) was come to the Seaside, which disappointment did not a little
discompose him, whose prejudice and ambition equally inspired him with
eagerness to supplant his Predecessor, whom he had looked upon as his Corrival
in the Government. This favorable delay was religiously respected by many as a
certain warning, or admonition from God to his people to fly from those heavy
Judgments, which had been long imminent, but now in an actual readiness to
descend upon that Poor Distressed Kingdom.

But he whose Arrival was dreaded every moment, as the most fatal misery that
could fall upon the Nation; at last (after being thus retarded) to the
unspeakable terror of the Protestants, Landed at Dublin: And the Lord
Clarendon (who had a particular favor conferred upon him to continue for one
Week in the Government after Tyrconnel's Landing) at his Grace the Lord
Archbishop of Dublin's Palace, resigned the Sword to Tyrconnel with an
admirable Speech to him, setting forth his exact observance of the Commands of
the King his Master, and faithful discharging of that great trust, which had
been committed to him; and concluding with his Impartial Administration of
Justice to all Partys, in these, or the like words addressed to Tyrconnel: That
as he had kept an equal hand of Justice to the Roman Catholics, so he hoped
his Lordship would to the Protestants. Never was a Sword washed with so many
Tears, as this, a most doleful presage of its being so in blood: It would
surpass the Art of Rhetoric to set forth the dreadful Reflections which the
poor afflicted Protestants made upon this Ominous Revolution. No Orator could
find words to express the fatal Calamities which were now derived from the
consequence of this change; it presaged the worst of evils, and seemed to carry
in all its parts the most dismal Characters of an Irreversible Extirpation of
the Protestant Interest, and Religion. Most of the English were possessed with
the daily fears of a general Massacre to be suddenly put in Execution, and
that in a most inhuman manner; and this produced the strangest Convulsions in
the minds of men, that a most exquisite grief could be capable of. Others were
more temperate in their sorrows, and were of opinion, that notwithstanding
Popery was the Scene which must be acted, yet they were in hopes by some more
plausible way, than that of downright murdering. They considered that the last
Rebellion had heaped so much Infamy upon the Irish, and had justly rendered
them such Barbarous and Inhumane Savages to the whole Christian World, that to
obliterate that deserved reproach, they would now take some milder course;
which though it might have something more of Humanity in it, would yet be as
effectual to the design, the utter Subversion of the Protestant Interest and
Religion. In fine, Quot homines, tot sententiae; their Sentiments were as
various as their Fears: But however all concurred in this, That Popery was the
Game, that must not only be Played, but win too, whatever Arts were used to
obtain the upshot.

The Lord Clarendon before he surrendered the Government, was very curious to
inform himself of the Constitution and Condition of Ireland, and at his going
over carried with him Copies of Records, Surveys, etc. of that Kingdom, and
among other things, it is said, that he desired the Lord Chief Justice Keating,
(now in Rebellion in Ireland) and one of the fatal instruments for the ruin of
that Kingdom, to give him his opinion in Writing, both as to the Legality and
Justice of the Act of Settlement; as also to answer those Objections which had
been made against it by Neagle; all which he amply performed; and which my Lord
Clarendon upon his Arrival at Court, showed to the King, who sent the Copy over
to Tyrconnel, who spared not to reproach Keating for this action, which Keating
at first disowned; but the matter being too plain to admit of an absolute
denial, at length began to make the best Excuse he could.

My Lord Clarendon being shipped for England, now does the open and full
Triumph of the Irish ambitiously show it self in this advantageous light in all
its grandeur and magnificence: The dejected condition of the English made their
Victory more glorious. 'Twas now impossible for the Natives to forbear
insulting over the English at an insupportable rate, as if they had been
actually their Slaves, bound to the Wheels of their Chariots. That sober
thought of Sesostris, when he had his Coach drawn by four Kings, was not a
reflection to be entertained by them at this juncture. The Day was now their
own, and Post mortem nulla voluptas, they failed not to use it as extravagantly
whilst they enjoyed it. What Affronts and Indignities were now cast upon the
English? How barbarously Hectored and Insulted over by these Huffing
Rhodomontadoes? How injured and oppressed by public acts of notorious
injustice? How abused as to their good Names, reviled as to their Religion, and
reproached as Englishmen and Protestants? Called Fanatic Dogs, and Damned
Heretics, is so publicly known, as requires not much pains to describe. Those
of the Protestants who had been the most obliging to the Irish, were sure to
meet with the most ungrateful returns; and if they had been so charitable as to
relieve them in their necessities, as the English (a merciful and too easy
natured a People) had frequently done, they would now in requital seize upon
what they had, by open force, or else set others of their own Creatures to do
it. If any of the English had lent Money to them, or bargained for Goods and
Commodities of the Country, whereby the Irish were become their Debtors; their
usual payment (especially if they were in necessity, and afraid that Executions
would be obtained against their persons or substance) was repairing to the next
Irish Justice of the Peace, and swearing of High Treason against their
Creditors, though oftentimes (in kindness to them) they had been forborne with a
year or two from discharging the Debt.

But I pass from speaking any more of these Infamous Wretches (whose Mercies
are Cruelty) to Tyrconnel's first steps in the Government as Lord Deputy, in
relation to which, I shall now usher in at once, the removing of the Judges,
though some of them were turned out before Tyrconnel came to the Sword: As Sir
Standish Harston Baronet, one of the Barons of the Exchequer; Sir Richard
Reynolds Baronet, one of the Judges of the King's Bench; and Johnson, one of
the Judges of the Common Pleas.

The Consult was in London before Tyrconnel came to the Government, whether the
Judges should not be turned out before the Earl of Clarendon was removed, to
represent him odious to the People, if he complied; or disobedient to the King,
if he seemed unwilling in the matter, as they believed he would. For they
observed that he and the Lord Chancellor Porter, began to startle at the
Commands from England, before they received any account of their removal; and
Porter publicly declared, That he came not over to serve a turn; nor would act
any thing against his Conscience: and as a Testimony of this, he found at his
return to London, that he could not without some difficulty obtain the favor
of kissing the King's hand; but at length gaining admittance, he humbly asked
the King, What he had done, that he was so used? For it had been a considerable
expense to him to remove his Family. To which the King replied, That 'twas his
own fault; which was an expression not very unintelligible. Porter went several
times after to Court, and stood in the King's Eye; but he never vouchsafed to
speak to him, or to take the least notice of him. But to come to the Judges, it
was not thought safe to turn them all out, nor any more of them, till the
Government was in a hand that was Catholic: For some of the Council, I mean,
the Cabal, were afraid of proceeding in their design too fast; especially
Powis, who urged a slow Progress, as accounting it most safe; and this made him
not be confided in as to their secret and blacker Designs, though in his Lady
they reposed an entire Confidence, as being thought the greatest Politician
among them; and were not a little ambitious, that the Earl of Shaftsbury in the
Popish Plot, had given her that Character.

This Debate concerning the Judges, was long and often; some were for making a
clear riddance, and to have the Reformation begin in the Courts of Judicature.
They having already the Military part of the Government in their hands, might
with greater Facility secure the Civil: But the moderate Party prevailed, and
one in a Court (to color the actions of the rest) must be left: But that which
stuck with them was, that Sir William Davis, Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, must not be moved for two Reasons.

The First was, That he had been of the Duke's Party in the time of the Popish
Plot, behaving himself so loyal, that he had been sent over, if Dissolving the
Parliament had not preserved him: but this was the least part of his Strength.

The Second therefore, and most prevalent Inducement, was his Marriage with the
Countess of Clancarthy, whose Son had Married the Earl of Sunderland's
Daughter, and Sunderland was to be denied nothing: Besides, Sir William Davis
was a Diseased infirm man, given over for some years; and to expedite his
Journey for another World (for he was a thoughtful man) his Brother Judge
Nugent, (the first Popish Judge that was put in) passed Patent for Sir William
Davis's place of Lord Chief Justice in reversion: a sad Presage in those times,
where men must die when and how their Adversaries pleased. This being resolved,
the choice was soon made. Lord Chief Baron Hen makes way also for Rice, and in
Rice's room, Sir -- Linch succeeds in the Common Pleas.

In the High Court of Chancery, was placed Sir Alexander Fitton, a man
notorious on Record, so exempts me from the pains of giving the Reader a
Character of him in this place; but little regard was to be had to the man, so
long as he was fitted to that interest, which was then promoting; it being very
remarkable, That of what Persuasion soever they were, which they employed at
this time, they chose men of the most branded Reputations, and whose Principles
were such as could brave Conscience.

The three Protestant Judges had their several Capacities and Inclinations for
their Service, the Lord Chief Justice Davis, I speak not of, for he was decreed
to die, and did soon after: but the three Standards for the Cause, were the
Lord Chief Justice Keating for the Common Pleas, Lyndon for the King's Bench,
and Baron Worth for the Exchequer. The Lord Chief Justice Keating had always
been a Servant of the Duke of Yorks, was a Native of the place, as the Irish
call them, his Family for many Ages there, and Naturalized into Irish; he was
somewhat accounted to be Popishly inclined, and therefore that Party thought
themselves sure of him; but he was a person of more sense than to pursue the
Chase with greater expedition than safety: He was rich and single, and small
hopes would not spur him on to an indiscreet forwardness; however, as to the
main, they questioned not his Affection to the Cause.

Lyndon, though in his affection no friend to the Irish Government; yet lay
under the powerful temptation of a numerous Family, and his not abounding in
Riches made him the more Passive, though he behaved himself the best of the
three; and when it laid in his power, showed himself an Englishman.

Baron W -- was the Man they most depended upon, and he was so well known, that
English were concerned, as in the Sequel will appear in the Charters, and
private Causes of the English that came before him.

The Courts being thus settled, the next thing Tyrconnel endeavored to proceed
in the same method, that the Lords Justices had done before, in persuading the
City to deliver up their Arms. But one art in State Policy could not easily be
imposed twice in a year, and the English had a fresh Impression upon their
Memories, by what plausible persuasive Rhetoric they had been cajoled out of
their Arms, and now to have a like Delusion pass upon them, in depriving them
of their Laws, was a color not natural enough to deceive them a second time:
However this was the method of the proceeding.

Tyrconnel (during the Lord Clarendon's Government had procured the King's
Letter, that all Roman Catholics should be admitted into the freedom of all
the Corporations of the Kingdom: which Letter was artfully contrived with a
great deal of sweetness, and of endearing expressions, as that it proceeded
from his Majesty's great care of the general good of the Kingdom, and was
graciously designed by him for the encouragement of Trade, and the uniting of
the Affections of his Subjects: and in order to put this in execution, the City
of Dublin was to lead the way, and to be the Precedent to the whole Kingdom:
And therefore in pursuance to the tenor of the aforesaid Letter, the Lord
Mayor calls a General Assembly, wherein the Kings Letter was read; upon which
the City made their humble Address to the Lord Lieutenant and Council; setting
forth, that they found the City by Act of Parliament bound up, and the if they
should act according to the Letter, they incurred a Forfeiture of their
Charters; and therefore humbly prayed the Lord Lieutenant and Council, to lay
their Condition at his Majesty's Feet, who (they did humbly conceive) was
misinformed in this matter. This retarded the freedom of the Papists for some
time, but another Mayor, one Castleton, (who is still in Dublin) succeeding, he
passed the Irish Freemen, and in consequence to this, the same was done in the
whole Kingdom.

This was laid with ingenuity enough for promoting the Irish design; yet
received not its hoped for effect, which was by this means to procure freedom
for so many of the Irish in every Corporation, as by the Majority of their
Suffrages, might out-vote the English in the Election of Popish Magistrates,
which upon Tyrconnel's Accession to the Government, might facilitate the
surrendering the Charters, and so render the Kingdom (as they styled it)
entirely Catholic: But this device, how speciously soever contrived, did not
reach the end of its Projectors. For notwithstanding the great Endeavors, and
active Industry of the Irish; yet most of the Corporations out-ballanced them
in the number of Protestants.

Tyrconnel perceiving himself frustrated of his expectation, by the numerous
Party of the English, has an immediate recourse to the way beforementioned of
the Lords Justices, and to put this in practice, sends for the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, and there acquaints them, that he had in charge from his Master the
King, to tell them, as being the chief City of the Kingdom, and unto which, as
such, he intended the greatest Marks of his Favor, that it was his pleasure to
call in all the Charters of the Kingdom, not with design to take away any thing
from them, but to enlarge their Privileges, by which act of bounty and favor,
he might the more endear them unto him: He farther told them, that his Majesty
expected their ready compliance, so as that their cheerful surrendry of their
Charter, might become examplary to the rest of the Kingdom.

The Lord Mayor returned the answer usual in such cases; which was, that he
would call an Assembly, and move it to them; and the next day he accordingly
did so, acquainting them with what the Lord Deputy had given him in charge. The
Assembly was not long upon their Resolves, but the manner of delivering them
afforded the greatest matter of debate; the result whereof was this, That the
Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen should wait upon his Excellency, and
acquaint his Lordship, that as the City had ever been exemplary in their
Loyalty, and faithful Obedience to the Kings and Queens of England; so they
should ever continue in the same; and therefore humbly conceived it to be their
Duty to lay at his Majesty's feet the great Services they had done the Crown,
under the Grants and Immunities of One Hundred and Chirty Charters, they had
then in their Treasury from his Majesty's Royal Ancestors; and they humbly
prayed his Excellency to favor them in a kind representation of their
condition to his Majesty, which they hoped would prevail with his Majesty for
the continuance of their Ancient Government, under so many Gracious Grants and
Charters. Upon the making of this return, there was present the King's Attorney
and Solicitor. The first being a most Virulent and Inveterate Papist; nothing
of friendship was expected from him: but the latter was not doubted, yet
contrary to expectation, argued stiffly against the City. The Lord Deputy (as
extravagantly mad to meet with this return, which so absolutely thwarted his
design) fell into a great fit of violent Passion, and in a raging Tempest told
them, That this was the continuance of their former Rebellion, that they had
turned out all the Loyal Snbjects in the last War of Ireland, and that they
would do so now, were it in their power: And it was, because they so lately
disputed the King's Commands, for admitting Catholic Freemen, that caused his
Majesty to call in their Charters; and in the close of this furious Speech,
advised the Lord Mayor to call the Assembly again, and obey the King, or it
would be worse for them.

Wherefore the Lord Mayor humbly besought his Excellency to signify his
pleasure to the Assembly by a Letter under his hand, alleging, that they would
not regard a Verbal Repetition of it, which they had been already acquainted
with; as also urging, that it had been the constant practice of the Chief
Governor to send their Letter upon occasions of public business to the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons: And if his Excellency would please to follow this
usual method, he would act (as in duty bound) in obedience to it: To which the
Solicitor General replied, that there was no necessity of any such Formality,
but 'twas sufficient if his Excellency signified his Commands by word of Mouth,
in which they ought to acquiesce.

Upon this, the Lord Mayor called another Assembly, and great Debates arose,
how to demean themselves in this nice Criticism of Affairs: But as to the
surrendry of their Charter; 'twas what they unanimously resolved against: After
some Dispute as to the manner of Addressing the Lord Deputy in this case, 'twas
at last resolved, and concluded, That the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons,
should make their Application to his Excellency, with Reasons why they could
not surrender their Charter, and to pray his Excellency to allow them time to
Petition the King, not doubting but His Majesty would be graciously pleased to
take into his Princely Consideration as well their Exemplary Loyalty, as
Eminent Sufferings for His Royal Father, of Blessed Memory. Upon which they
produced a Letter from King Charles the First, dated at Oxford, which contained
great Acknowledgments of their great Loyalty and Faithfulness to him, which he
gave them high assurances of being eminently rewarded, if it pleased the Divine
Providence to restore him to his Crown, and its just Rights and Prerogatives.

The aforesaid Representatives of the City also prayed Tyrconnel to represent
their condition favorably to His Majesty; but he answered them roughly, and
according to his former Austerity, told them, That on the contrary he would
Write against them; and in the interim according to the Directions he brought
over with him from England, a Quo Warranto issued forth against the City: Who
called another Common Council, and there agreed upon a Petition to the King,
and sent over with it their Recorder, Sir Richard Rieves, who behaved
Tyrconnel, if he proceeded in it; yet however he goes for London, and there
sollicits the Duke of Ormond to introduce him to the King, where on his Knee he
delivers the Petition with a submissive tender of all the City Charters at His
Majesty's Feet: The King was already so prepossessed with the Partial Account
that Tyrconnel had given of this Action, with which he was so extremely
prejudiced, that upon the first sight of Sir Richard Rieves, he asked him if he
had the Lord Deputy's leave to come with this Petition? And that he had those
in Ireland that understood the Law better than himself, and so turned from him.

Sir Richard Rieves advised with the Duke of Ormond, who told him, That there
was no hopes of succeeding in the Enterprise; so was forced to go back for
Dublin with a short but unpleasant return of the ineffectualness of this
Negotiation. But however the City was resolved to stand the Brunt, and to stop
the violent Tide if possible, which now ran with so rapid a Current; and in
order thereunto they Fee'd four Counsels. Their first Evasion whereby to
procrastinate matters, was by urging, that the Sheriffs were interessed as
Parties in the Writ, the Charters being granted to Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Commons, and so could not properly make Returns to that Writ that came against
themselves; this was deemed to be Law, but nothing was to be accounted as such
by Judges that broke through all Enclosures, and stuck not to trample upon the
known Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, if opposite to their Popish and
Arbitrary designs. So this return of the Sheriffs was overruled, and a Fine
imposed upon them, if in four days they did not amend their Return, which some
though they would not have agreed to: but 'twas among themselves thought fit to
do it, and accordingly the Attorney General proceeded against them; and took
some advantage of their Pleadings, which the Court gave judgment upon. This
afforded matter of Triumph, and an universal excessive joy to the Irish, which
dispersed it self with a marvelous Celerity throughout the whole Kingdom; but
became on the contrary hand as much a Subject of Lamentation to the English
Citizens, who called themselves the Virgin City, as having never been tainted
with any action of Disloyalty or Rebellion in all the several Revolutions and
Vicissitudes of that unfortunate Kingdom, which, though never since it was in
the possession of the King's of England, continued forty years uninterruptedly
without an Insurrection of the Natives; yet was this City remarkably Loyal in
all Changes, and performed many signal acts of Bravery and Courage, as their
Records do amply testify, and of which (not to name many others) I cannot omit
one very remarkable Instance; which was, That when the Lord Duke of Ormond
received Orders by that Royal Martyr King Charles the First, of ever Blessed
and Immortal Memory, to give up the Sword and Government to the Parliament;
they being at that time best able to suppress the Irish Rebels: The Lord of
Ormond, in pursuance to this instruction, delivered up the Sword, and sent to
the Mayor one William Smith, ordering him to do the like; but he to show his
Loyalty went to the Lord of Ormond accompanied with his Brethren the Aldermen,
and told his Lordship, that he kept that Sword for the King, that the City was
the King's Chamber, and he would deliver neither, but into the hands of the
King's Servants: Upon which the Lord of Ormond took occasion to commend his
Loyalty, and told him, He had the King's Commands to do it; and for the Mayors
greater satisfaction, showed him the King's Letter, which when the Mayor read,
he observed there was order for the Lord of Ormond, to give up the Government
to the Parliaments Commissioners, but not a word that the Mayor should do it;
which the Mayor taking notice of to the Lord of Ormond, told him, he would
leave the Sword and Keys of the City with his Lordship, to use as he pleased,
he being the King;s Lieutenant; and so he did, and after took his leave. This
the City justly boasts of, as never being engaged in any Rebellion, nor ever
actually under the Usurper's Government in any other manner than by the King's
Appointment and Command.

But to return to the Charters, consonant to the Sentence against Dublin, so
was Judgment given against all the Charters of the Kingdom, except against such
as quietly surrendered, as most did, it being to no purpose to contend in the
lesser and inferior parts of the Kingdom, after their GOLIATH of Dublin was
slain.

I shall not impose upon the Reader's Patience with giving him an account of
what subtle arts of Address, and Obsequious Contrivances, were made use of, to
distinct Corporations, to prevail with them to surrender. This he will suppose
that they were not remiss or unactive in, if he considers that they dreaded
nothing so much, as that the Clamours and Outcries (of so many Bodies of people
which were to be sued and disobliged) should reach the Ears of the Court, and
be made use of by the adverse Party to their disadvantage; and therefore we may
be sure that they endeavored to silence them as much as they could: For both
Tyrconnel and his Voucher, ^eagle, had assured their Party that most of the
Charters would quietly be surrendered by the people, and that there was but one
Corporation in the North of Ireland, which they were afraid of; this was
Carrickfergus, which they managed with a great deal of Policy in the following
manner.

Ellis, Secretary to Tyrconnel, writes a wheedling Letter to the Mayor of that
City, insinuating how great an opinion the Lord Deputy had of his Loyalty, with
abundance of such impertinent stuff, and that his Excellency would enlarge
their Privileges: They were foolishly taken with this gilded Bait, and so
surrendered their Charter. Upon this success, Ellis was applauded as an
excellent Instrument to delude the Protestants with; and so he was, which he
improved, by the frequent opportunities which were offered to him of drawing in
honest men, he having been many years in the Secretaries Office, and a
pretended Protestant, though his Brother was a noted Champion for Rome; but
that was one of the Machinations of the Romish Conclave, (mightily practiced in
Ireland) to disguise one part of their Family under the Protestant Education,
though they were as much Papists as the other that appeared to be openly such
by a public Profession: A practice which the old English Families are rarely
free from in that Kingdom.

But to come again to Ellis, his Letters and Messages flew round the Kingdom,
and prevailed in many places, but more out of a Sentiment, That 'twas to no
purpose to contend, than any Belief, or Opinion they had either of his, or his
Masters assurances. But however that was, it is certain that Ellis acquired a
fair Reputation among the Popish Party for his success in these Arts of
Delusion and Treachery, and they in their Secret Cabals, did not a little
magnify and applaud their Politics, which they thought, they so amused the
English with, laughing at the Credulity of the Heretic Dogs, for so their
Grandees in their private Meetings would frequently call them.

Having thus obtained their wish as to the surrendry of the Charters, the next
work was to agree upon a Model for the men. This debate was strongly canvassed
several ways, and that which chiefly puzzled them, and even put 'em almost to a
Nonplus, was, that the King would have nothing of this transacted at Court,
for fear of meeting with opposition there.

This Exigency, of not being suffered to receive advice from England, exposed
them to great Difficulties; for they were utter Strangers to the Laws, and
Government of Corporations; as indeed they were to all matters of Government,
having been conversant in nothing but Secret Plots, and Private Contrivances,
how to unhinge and discompose all Governments; and as an aggravation of their
misfortune, except Rice, Daly, and Neagle, there was not a man of them in the
Privy Council that had common sense, if you will believe themselves: for Rice
and Daly would often complain that nothing could pass at the Council Board,
that concerned the Public, but their Countrymen must first ask Teig, If that
would not spoil his Pottatoe-Garden.

Necessity at last supplied the place of Invention; and a method was agreed
upon which reduced Corporations to perfect Slavery; and this in all the
Circumstances of that affair was their prime and ultimate aim: For as to matter
of Trade, or improving of the Nation; these were Speculations of too
Metaphysical a nature for men of their size, and former way of Education, as
was demonstrated in the first Proclamation issued forth by Tyrconnel and his
Council to break an Act of Parliament in taking off the duty of Iron, and
admitting it so into the Kingdom, whereby they might encourage Merchants to
bring in Pieces of Eight from Spain, and so hasty they were to have the honor
of this admirable contrivance, that without asking the King's leave (which is
always done before any Proclamation relating to the Revenue Pass) They put it
in execution; but as soon as 'twas heard of in England, a Proclamation came
from the King, forbidding this wise act made by these great Statesmen: And so
ill this presumptuous folly of theirs was interpreted, That the Lord Bellasis
swore in Council that, That Fellow in Ireland, was Fool and Madman enough to
ruin ten Kingdoms.

Father Petres corrected him severely for this foul miscarriage; and writ to
him, That if he acted not with greater Caution, the King could not possibly
preserve him in that Government. These Documents, and severe Reprimands of the
Ghostly Father, were so religiously observed by him, that for the future he
would proceed in nothing, but ball out at the Council Board, and call them
Fools and Blockheads, if they spoke any thing that was contradicted by the
English Privy Council: Their great Confident, was the Lord Chief Justice
Keating, who knowing that he had an Ascendant over them as to Parts, was so
imperious and insulting, that sometimes he was taken to task; but had wit
enough to submit, yet often was very uneasy to them: But however he in
public, and W. in private (for he was not of the Privy Council) directed them
in the management of the affair of the Charters: And when they had got the
shape and model of them presented by these Temporizing Painters, who drew to
the life according to the Popish fancy, then they proceeded to an Election of
the men to name in their Charters, and here they begged pardon of their
Advisers, and would be their own Directors.

'Twas their Rule to have in the great Cities (who were most English) one third
Protestants, and two thirds Papists; but then these that they called
Protestants were Quakers, or other Enthusiasticks, and two or three in a
Charter of such Protestants, as either their considerable Estates, or loose
Principles would secure to their Party; by that means leaving not a man of true
Value or Courage in any Corporation in the Kingdom: and although they took in
Lords and Gentlemen out of the Country into all their Corporations; yet could
they not complete them without additional numbers of Scandalous and
Contemptible men: In one Corporation in the North, the first Magistrate of the
Town was a Man that had been burnt in the Hand.

Here you see by what impious Arts, and fraudulent Machinations, the several
Corporations were cheated and trapanned out of their Charters, most of them
wheedled, and grossly imposed upon, by a Wolf in Sheeps Clothing, Secretary
Ellis, who stuck not to make great Promises of enlarging their Privileges, and
the like, though he knew nothing to be more destructive of the Protestant
Interest and Religion, of which he owned himself a Professor. And as his
wearing of a Protestant Mask contributed very much to the success of this
intrigue, so did the same Vizard, put on by Keating and W. not a little
facilitate the Model of the new Charters, of which they contrived the
Platform, and then 'twas easy for the Popish Faction to super-struct upon it,
the palpableness of whose design was in nothing more fully evident, than in
putting in of all manner of Fanatical Enthusiasts, into their new Charters,
under the notion of Protestants: For 'twas evident that some of these were as
irreconcilable Enemies to the Protestant Church, as they were Friends to, and
Confederates with the Romish. As for instance, The Quakers, concerning which
ridiculous Profession, Who is, or can be ignorant that 'twas derived from the
Jesuits? Who knows not that these have sharpened their Weapons at the Romish
Forge, and that their prime Leaders (whatever they otherwise pretend to) do
inwardly own Ignatius Loyola as their Founder? These were therefore too much
their own Creatures to be neglected by them, as not only appears by their
former Principles (if those monstrous Absurdities they maintain, may be
reckoned to be such) but also by their present Practices, as their vindicating
the late King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, though it manifestly
tended to the introduction of Popery, and their zealous espousing of his
interest at this day, do fully show. But amidst all the new arts of modelling
the Corporations, neither their Brethren, the Quakers, nor other of their
Adherents, could give them such effectual assistance, but that often they were
put to their shifts, and necessitated to elect men of the blackest Characters,
and most infamous Reputations, as appears from their choosing a Magistrate that
had been burnt in the Hand. Here was admirable justice indeed to be expected,
where he who had not only held up his hand, but been punished in so scandalous
a manner at the Bar, was now to sit upon the Bench.

But as the Popish Party were put to these Difficulties of getting any sort of
men (how notoriously infamous soever) to fill up their Charters, so were they
as much perplexed to find out men that would pay for them: For not ten in the
whole Kingdom would, or could discharge the Fees for them. Wherefore to
encourage them, the Lord Deputy ordered, That the Lord Chancellor, and Attorney
General Neagle should abate half of their Fees: But all would not do, so that
most of the new Charters are yet in the Attorney General's hands for want of
paying the Fees, and the several Corporations act without them.

The infinite numbers of people deserting the Kingdom from all parts of it upon
Tyrconnel's coming to the Government, made the Towns and Cities almost waste;
discouraged all manner of Trade, and sunk the Revenue to an incredible Ebb, and
deduction from its former value: These weighty Arguments were strongly pressed
at Court to Tyrconnel's disadvantage, upon which he obtains leave to meet the
King at Chester, and carries with him his great Minister Rice, who being chief
Baron of the Exchequer, was to be believed above any, it being King James's
Maxim, That he would hear no man in any thing that did not properly lie under
his Province. Rice was fitly enough qualified to sooth up the King with fine
Stories, and a specious representation of Affairs, which he could the more
easily do, in regard there was none present to contradict him, and so this
Cloud blew over, though many did believe, and were in hopes that it would have
broke with that violence upon Tyrconnel, that he would never have returned
again as Lord Deputy.

There as yet remained some Protestant Officers in the Army, which upon this
interview were ordered to be disbanded, excepting some few, who it is believed
had made fair Promises, which they had not occasion as yet to put in execution:
Nor did King James require more than a private assurance of their Faith, and
Inclinations to his interest, it being too early to make a public Declaration
as yet.

The Judges were abroad upon their Circuit Tyrconnel was in England, pursuing
such instructions as he had prescribed to them, before his departure, which
were severe and prejudicial enough to the English, and to their Protestant
Clergy, notwithstanding his late Proclamation, superadded to others before from
the King, that they should enjoy all their Ecclesiastical Rites, and Just Dues,
as they had formerly done: The Clergy having since the beginning of King
James's Reign, lain under great Grievances, as to the non-payment of their dues
(especially Surplice Fees, which in that Kingdom they call Book-money, and is
very considerable to them, by reason of the numerousness of Irish Families in
most places) took the opportunity at the Assizes in the several Circuits, to
represent their condition to the Judges, as Persons from whom they expected
Redress; but on the contrary met with very dissatisfactory, and unequal
returns. For though the Judges could not disown the legality of those small
Dues called the Book money, because founded upon the same Law with the greater
Tithes, as the Irish of the Country unanimously did, (notwithstanding that they
had paid them in the former Reign) yet did they so manifestly discourage the
Clergy in their Addresses to them, (taking all advantages against them that
could be offered, and as studiously declining every Argument made in their
favor, as they were ready to embrace, and hearken to what could be objected
against them, though mere Forgeries of the Irish) and thereby so animated the
Natives against them, that they seemed to do them as much injustice (though
under specious and fair pretenses) as if they had publicly told the Papists,
that they ought not to pay them any thing: Though at the same time, and with
the same breath that they were guilty of this execrable partiality, they had
the confidence to avow the justice of their proceedings toward the Clergy, for
whom they would have had them believe that they entertained the most equitable,
and upright intentions. This would require a large Discourse, if accurately
handled, but my unskilfulness in a matter out of my Province, and peculiar to
Ecclesiastics, will (I hope) be excused, though thus slenderly touched upon;
but thought it better to speak something imperfectly of it, than wholly omit an
Affair which was so universal in the Reign of the late King James, and so
publicly transacted in the whole Kingdom.

The Judges found the Gaols full stocked with Toryes and Irish Robbers; but
Irish Sheriffs and Irish Juries were so Gracious as to vouchsafe them so
general a deliverance, that not one in forty was found guilty: And in such
Cases where Matter of Fact was notoriously plain, or any of the Grandees were
any way interessed in belief of the Criminals (as 'twas rare almost to a
miracle if none were) and the Evidence not to be taken off; then 'twas usual
for the Prisoner at the Bar to be called by wrong Names, and so discharged for
want of Prosecution: To these Arts of evading condign punishment for their
Execrable Crimes, several Menaces were added, to terrify the Plaintiff from
prosecuting, as that otherwise their Houses should be burnt, their Cattle
stole, their substance destroyed, and perhaps their own Throats cut, which as
often threatened, so not seldom put in execution; a sad discouragement to the
poor English, who lay under the daily hazard of being Robbed and Pillaged by
the Irish; and if they happened to seize the Malefactors, must either
discontinue any farther prosecution against them; or else be exposed to greater
mischief: For the Proof and Demonstration whereof (not to insist upon too many
others) take the following Instance, which for the eminency of the Person, and
Barbarity of the several Facts, may supply the rest, acted by the Earl of C --

This Earls Eldest Son (a great Favorite of the Duke of York's) was with him
at Sea, and there killed, and leaving no Heir, his younger Brother was brought
out of a Convent in France, and instated in the Earldom. The Duke of Ormond,
who always endeavored to Naturalize the Irish Families into English, embraced
this opportunity (there being none living but his Sister and this Earl, who was
next to a Natural) to Marry him to a Daughter of the Earl of Kildare's in
Ireland, a firm Protestant, and capable of an Intrigue beyond her Sex; by this
Lady he had several Children, and one Son, who is now Earl: He was by the Duke
of Ormond sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and by him carefully bred up a
Protestant, and Educated at Oxford. His Uncle Justin Mac Carthy (as it since
appears, for the promotion of the Catholic Cause) without the knowledge of his
Mother, or the Duke of Ormond, Marries him when not Sixteen Years of Age, to
the Earl of Sunderland's Daughter, and immediately sends him for Ireland, where
he continued a Protestant until the coming of King James to the Crown; and then
like the rest of his Countrymen, at that juncture returned to his old Vomit: He
had then a Troop of Horse given him, which he soon made of his own Breed; for
before their inlisting, they were the greatest Vagrants of the Country, which
with himself now ravaged in the Country, in an horrible and most inhumane
manner, Forcing Women, Maiming of Men, Pulling down of Houses, and all other
Extravagancies, which he, and his Hellish Tribe could invent. I already assumed
(before I entered upon this Man's Character) to give a remarkable Instance of
the violence offered to the English for their just and legal Prosecution of
Notorious Irish Criminals and Malefactors; which I shall now set before you in
two remarkable Passages relating to this Earl, which were publicly transacted
at the Bar.

One was of a poor Butcher, at a Town near Cork, who refusing Clancarthy's Men
an Horse, they violently seized him by force, and would never return him to the
Owner, which the Man making Complaint of to the Judges of Assize, in presence
of the Earl: The Judges ordered satisfaction to be made to the Man for his
Horse, which the Earl promised to see performed: But as soon as the Judges were
departed the Country, he takes some of his Troopers along with him and goes to
the Man's House, and told him that he was come to give him satisfaction for his
Horse: Whereupon he forces him out of his House, and ordering the vile
Instruments, his Troopers, to get a Blanket, and upon a Pavement before the
Poor Man's Door, stood as a most Barbarous and Inhumane Spectator, whilst they
tossed him in a Blanket, ever and anon letting him fall upon the Stones till
they broke him, as if upon the Wheel, all to pieces, and so left him dead.

The other Passage relating to this fine Spark, was of a Man that had offended
him at a place called Clonmell; him he first had beaten with Sticks, and then
hung up by the hair of the Head: he was taken down alive, but what became of
him after was not known. The Accomplices of this Tragedy, his Villainous
Troopers, were brought to the Bar, and Tried for the Murder, and
notwithstanding that this horrid Action was done in the sight of an hundred
Men, yet were they quitted, and the Earl never Tried.

He to this day proceeds in these boundless Inhumanities, which perhaps may be
an occasion of great sorrow and trouble to his Mother.

But to return to the Judges which we left upon their Circuits: Little Justice
was administered by them to the English, but in such extraordinary Occurrences
where the Irish were so notoriousoy culpable, as would accuse them of most
gross partiality, to have passed Sentence in their favor. But in all things
that had but the least shadow of Justice, or of seeming equity and
reasonableness in it, they were sure to carry it; and this was acted in
pursuance to one of Tyrconnel's Instructions from Court, which was, That the
Judges should be directed in their Circuits to undermine and enervate the
Protestant Interest, which indeed they did so effectually, that no Englishman
could either get in Rents, or be secure of what they had formerly received. For
there being a Statute in Ireland, which we have not in our English Laws, for
Trials by Civil Bills, as they call them, which (in the nature of Chancery) is
such an Arbitrary way of proceeding, as gives the Judges of the Kingdom
opportunities, which too many of them (it is said) have made ill use of.

By this Arbitrary Method of proceeding, the Irish had now hit upon an
expeditious way, whereby to ruin the English: For 'twas no more but with a
Twelvepenny Process flung at any Man's Door, and a false Affidavit, made (which
the Irish can as easily digest as the most common Action they do) and so an
Execution was obtained, directed to an Irish Sheriff for a pretended Debt of
Twenty Years standing, it being very common for an Irish Tenant to sue and
bring a Fellow to swear that in such a Year his Landlord distrained Cattle of
Twenty or Thirty Pounds value, and had them appraised at the half proportion of
what they were worth: This was sufficient to obtain an Execution for the relief
of the poor distressed Catholics, a practice become as universal against, as
destructive to the English; insomuch that in the North of Ireland there was not
one man in five of the ordinary British that were not ruined; and had they
continued these Courses but few Years longer, together with their exorbitant
Proceedings against the English in their Manor, Sheriffs, and the like
Inferior Courts, (where such barbarous Injustices, and public Oppressions,
and Violences were acted, as never till then were heard of among Christians)
these without other means might have wholly reduced the Kingdom into Irish
hands. For as by their Civil Bills at the Assizes, and by their notorious
Perjuries in the Inferior Courts, they destroyed the smaller men; so by
Ejectments in the higher Courts, they took away men's Estates in Fee: It being
observed, That never one Cause came before them upon a Trial for Land, but the
Judgment was constantly given in favor of the Irish.

Complaints were continually made at Court of these irregular Proceedings, and
Writs of Error were brought from England, but generally the same Judgments
were confirmed in this Kingdom; the Judges here being most of the same Stamp.

Sheridon about this time began to be discovered Tyrconnel to sell places of
all sorts, both Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military: He was not

only Principal Secretary of State, but also one of the Commissioners of the
Customs: So that whenever he met with a convenience of making an advantageous
bargain for a place in the Custom House, he would pretend to the
Commissioners, That 'twas my Lord Deputy's Request to have such a Person
employed. This by degrees increased so much upon the Commissioners, that
Dickison, one of the Commissioners, writ over to the Lords of the Treasury,
that they were so burdened and oppressed with Irish Officers, recommended by
the Lord Deputy, that he was afraid that the Revenue would be lost by ill
management. Upon this, my Lord Deputy was ordered not to recommend a man, nor
any ways to intermeddle in the Revenue. The Commissioners also issued forth
their Orders, posted up at the Custom-house Door, That all Persons who had
Petitioned for Employments in the Customs or Revenue, should return to their
respective Abodes, for that there would be no Employments disposed of. This
Bustle created various Disputes betwixt Tyrconnel and Sheridon; and from this
time forward Sheridon contrived to undermine Tyrconnel. His first Stratagem was
to prepossess the Romish Clergy against him, which to accomplish, he contracts
an intimate Acquaintance with Tyrconnel's Chaplain, that most frequently
officiated: This Fellow picks up what he could of Tyrconnel's contempt of the
Mass and Prayers: One particular Charge was, That when the Army was in the Camp
at the Currah of Kildare, Tyrconnel being at play in his Tent, the Priest came
to him to know if his Excellency would go to Mass; who replied, No, he would
send, (naming some body by him) to stand in his place, and that would do as
well: Of this Sheridon being a Bigoted Zealot, gives an account to Father
Petres, whose Niece Sheridon had Married, by which means he obtained an
interest and freedom with the Jesuit, and not with him only, but with all the
Irish Clergy, especially with the Titular Primate of Armagh, who being an
Vlster man, as Sheridon was, had no kindness for Tyrconnel, who was of the
Pale, a sort of old English degenerated into Irish, but had in no esteem by the
Natives of the Province of Vlster. The aforesaid Titular Primate then
contracted an intimate Familiarity and Acquaintance with his Cousin Sheridon,
as he called him, and they (with the beforementioned Priest) formed Articles
against Tyrconnel; which having completed, and Sheridon disposed of his
Affairs, prays leave of the Lord Deputy to go for England, pretending some
private business of his own to dispatch there: But Tyrconnel being jealous that
he designed some prejudice to himself, would not give him permission to go;
upon which, Sheridon writes to a Cousin of his to London to take out a License
from the King, which Father Peter's looked upon as strange, and sent him word
back, That the King would enquire the reason why he had it not from the Lord
Deputy. This could not be transacted with that secrecy at Court, but that
Tyrconnel had some intelligence of it, which exigency drove him to have
recourse to his two Grand Counselors at a dead lift, Rice, and Neagle, who
advised him to take no notice, nor show any outward Symptoms of discontent
against Sheridon, but rather attend some opportunity whereby to entangle him in
a snare, which soon offered, it being fatile baculum invenire, etc. no
difficult matter to find out Treachery and Perfidiousness enough in an
Irishman whereof to accuse him. They observed that the Lord Deputy's Domestic
Chaplain was intimately conversant with Sheridon, and another Priest that was,
or called himself Cousin to him. To countermine these Intriegues the Lord
Deputy appoints a third Priest, a Confident of his own, to fall into an
intimate familiarity with his Brethren, who seemed inclined to unite his
endeavors with theirs, if they had any intentions of impeaching Tyrconnel: The
Priest managed this Affair with so much skill and dexterity (verifying the
vulgar saying of Setting a Thief to catch a Thief) that he soon wound himself
into a strict League of Amity with them, and so seemingly interessed in all
their Affairs, that they no longer questioned his espousing their Party; and to
delude them the more artificially pretended to find out new matter of
accusation against Tyrconnel, which he did so effectually, that against the
Post-day he brought his Charge against the Lord Deputy in writing under his own
hand, which Sheridon in his sight sealed up, with a great many more in a
Packet, and directed it to his Cousin in London: This being done, the Priest
takes leave of Sheridon, and gives notice immediately to Rice the chief Baron,
who doubted not to trapan him upon this favorable occasion. Sheridon (as
usually) makes up the Lord Deputy's Pacquets, sending all to the Post, with
instructions for the Packet immediately to go to Sea.

Rice and Neagle remained in the Lord Deputy's Closet, and at twelve of the
Clock at Night a Messenger was sent on Board the Pacquet-Boat to fetch off the
Male, which being opened, Sheridon's Packet was taken out, directed to his
Cousin, which discovered the whole Intriegue, and among the rest, the Irish
Primate's concern in the design. Sheridon's Packet was sealed up and put into
the Male, except one Letter, which was taken out, directed to a certain person
in London, full of vehement Exclamations against the Lord Deputy, and giving an
account of many of his Articles which he designed to impeach him of.

Rice and Neagle advised the Lord Deputy to write to the Lord Sunderland, which
he accordingly did, setting forth Sheridon's Briberies and other Sinister
Practices, not taking any notice of Sheridon's contrivance against himself. All
this was done when Sheridon was asleep, and not suspicious of any design
against him, which the better to disguise, Tyrconnel still carried himself to
him with the same unconcernedness as formerly.

At this time happened the death of the Bishop of Clogher, in order to which
Commissioners were appointed for setting and disposing of the Revenue of that
Bishopric: 'Twas adjacent to Sheridon's Country, who had abundance of Cousins
(especially upon such an occasion as this) some of which he endeavored to
prefer in that Employment, thereby hoping to have fished out something for
himself; but the Lord Chief Baron was now (though he knew it not) become his
formidable opposite, and there was one of the Commissioners of the Customs,
Dickison by name, that was a person, as well of great experience as of
integrity and honesty, who kept a vigilant eye upon Sheridon; for though he had
a great hand over, and much influenced the rest of the Commissioners, yet could
he never prevail upon Dickison.

Now arrives the return of his Packet to his Cousin in London, but with no
good account of his Affairs: The reason of which ill success was Sunderland's
acquainting Father Peter's with the complaints that were made against him by the
Lord Deputy, and thereupon showed him his Letter from Tyrconnel. That Letter
which was taken out of the Packet in Dublin was not missed by Sheridon's
Cousin in London, who only writ back to him, That he had delivered his several
Letters as directed, and no more.

'Twas now time for the Lord Deputy to break publicly with Sheridon, and in
order to it sends for him into his Closet, there being present with him, the
Earl of Lymerick, the Lord Chief Justice Nugent, the Lord Chief Baron Rice,
Judge Daly, and some others: The Lord Deputy demanded of Sheridon, Whether or
no he had written any thing against him to London? Sheridon who wanted not
Confidence, or rather Impudence (with which his Countrymen do universally
abound to an immense proportion and degree) answered, That he had not, but that
he had heard that his Excellency had writ against him, which so enraged the
Lord Deputy (who is a great Furioso, and can prescribe no limits to his
Passion) that he could not contain from calling him Traitor, Cheat, Rogue,
etc. and pulling out Sheridon's Letter, asked him if that was not his hand,
which for the present put him into great disorder and confusion, but after some
recollection he assumed to justify himself, and to enter into a Capitulation
with the Lord Deputy, at which Tyrconnel rose in excess of fury to kick him; so
he was turned out. Tyrconnel and his Party were in long consideration how to
proceed in this nice Conjuncture of Affairs: They dreaded not Sheridon's
interest, or Impeachments so much, as this opportunity of awakening his
Excellency's Enemies at Court: After various Debates, 'twas at last resolved,
That Daly should take Sheridon to Task, and so accommodate the matter as to
stifle any farther noise of it, which Sheridon was ready enough to embrace; but
at the same time both the Lord Deputy and he had mutual Jealousies of, and
strove who should first entrap one another.

The Lord Deputy (by reason of his aversion to him, for siding with Sheridon)
does now revive the Quarrel, that the Irish Clergy had with the Primate,
especially the Archbishop of Cashell. I call the Titular one so in this
Discourse. Upon an Assembly of the Titular Popish Bishops of Ireland, great
Debate arose concerning the Priority of their Jurisdictions; in reference to
which, the Primate insolently usurped over them all, not distinguishing the
Archbishop, which he of Cashell resenting as a great Indignity and Affront,
inflamed the difference to a great height, and caused them to break up
abruptly, and in great discontent with one another.

Cashell is the more Learned Man, the Primate being universally contemned by
their own Party, as neither respected by them as a Scholar, or a Man of Parts,
which general disesteem made most of the Clergy that were considerable (I mean
the Dignitaries) bandy against him; and their Prejudice ran so high, that they
sent over to Father Peter's (who promoted their Applications to the King) to
have a Co-adjutor imposed upon him. The King writes about it to the Pope with
aggravating Exclamations of the Primate's Miscarriages and Insufficiency; to
which the Pope replied, That he was one of his own Election, and so indeed he
was, being a Friar in Spain, and coming over Chaplain to the Spanish
Ambassador, at the time of the Primate of Ireland's being Executed, he
prevailed with the Ambassador to present him to the Duke of York, who writ to
the Pope in his behalf, upon whose recommendation he got the Mitre. This
Quarrel of the Irish Clergy had been dormant for some time, but the Deputy to
execute his Revenge upon the Primate, thought it now seasonable to awaken and
revive it: But this continued not long upon the Stage, for he soon received a
severe reprimand from Father Peter's for this rash Action, who was extremely
moved at the proceeding. This being the most effectual course whereby to render
their Party ridiculous and contemptible to the World, that whilst they were so
industriously contriving to establish their Religion, they should at once break
all their former measures by endeavoring to supplant and destroy one another:
And therefore 'twas immediately hushed up in a deep silence, and the Primate
(at least seemingly, and to outward appearance) reconciled to the Lord Deputy.

Sheridon again assumes to Petition for leave to go for England, assuring his
Excellency, That 'twas only in order to pursue some private business of his
own: That he had a Lawsuit for some Debt due to his Wife, which required his
attendance, etc. but all would not prevail to obtain permission, wherefore he
employs his Wife's interest at London, and by that way sollicits the King with
so much importunity, till at last an Order was got for his going over.

About the Ninth of December in this Year, Sunday Morning there happened such
an Inundation of Water in the City of Dublin, as no man was ever a Spectator of
the like: It carried away Stone-Bridges, destroyed Houses, and without
intermission continued three days overflowing a great part of the City, to the
unspeakable damage of many Thousands; and that which increased the Prodigy,
was, That no Rain, fell, save a few Showers upon the Saturday Night before.
This besides the considerable detriment to, or rather apparent ruin of many
English, was accounted by many as a miraculous act of the Divine Providence,
and interpreted as an ominous Presage of that Deluge of Troubles which has
since so universally descended upon the poor English in that distressed Kingdom.

But to come again to Sheridon, who now arrives at London, but 'twas near four
and twenty hours before he could speak with Sunderland, who after his
admittance gave him but a cold reception; the reason of which (as 'twas
conjectured) was, that Sunderland expected that which Sheridon was not yet
Master of; for he had but just began his Trade when the Lord Deputy and he fell
at variance.

This indifferency, or rather coldness in Sunderland, did not hinder him from
applying to the rest of his Friends, but was so unhappy as to find by them,
that there was no expectation of removing Tyrconnel; for he was fortified with
the French Interest, and was in a manner Deputy to Lewis, not James; it being
said in Paris when News came there of Tyrconnel's being struck out, That there
was none in England durst move him: and so it appeared as we shall find
hereafter.

Sheridon wanted not those which were Favorites and Well-wishers to his design
against the Deputy, as Castlemain, Powis, and another not to be named, but they
durst not trust Sheridon with their Sentiments, but sent some of their
Confidents to animate him with general Promises, without naming any body: He
found himself now involved in great danger, and in three days turned his Story,
and went to Sunderland, to whom he had at first only complained of the Lord
Deputy's unkindness, but now comes, and positively affirms, that he brought
over no Articles against him, nor could say any thing but what was honorable
of him, only that his Excellency had taken displeasure against him, he knew not
why, etc. and that the occasion of his coming over, was to follow his own
private business: Father Peter's, his Wife's Uncle, would not carry him to kiss
the King's hand, but at last his Friend, the Lord Sunderland, got him
admittance: However the King would not hear him speak, in so great awe stood he
to his Brother, or rather Master of France, whose Creature Tyrconnel was.

Sheridon had not continued three days in London, when he was followed by the
Lord Dongan, a Young Man, Son to the Earl of Lymerick: He brought Letters to
Sunderland and others, setting forth Sheridon in black Characters; which
Negotiation so succeeded, that Father Peter's would admit him no more in his
presence: And now those Lords which would have privately supported him against
Tyrconnel, deserted, and declaimed against him, when they perceived that he
publicly magnified his Master; by which means he was wholly left to himself,
and Tyrconnel's Party vigorously pursued him here as a Delinquent, and had it
immediately inserted in the News-Letter, That he was turned out of his
Employments in Ireland, and so he had notice given him, that he was too that of
being Secretary, and a Popish Bishop preferred to his place.

Sheridon was now involved in very great streights to go back; he considered
'twas to no purpose: To remain here 'twas not possible for him without the
assistance of Friends, and none would appear for him: At length he delivers a
Petition with his own hand to the King, desiring that he might be heard speak
for himself, and not be Condemned to utter Destruction, as he accounted it to
be, if he stood not in his Majesty's favor. The King gave him no other Answer,
but that he must return to the Lord Deputy, and there justify himself; this he
reckoned to be hard upon him, but waiting upon the Lord Sunderland for some
order to carry back, upon which he grounded his Trial, 'twas thought fit to
name the Chief Judges to hear, and to report back the Matter to the King, as
they should find it. With this order he returns for Ireland, together with a
Letter of Recommendation from Sunderland to the Lord Deputy, praying his
Lordship to take Compassion of the Poor Man, who was sufficiently mortified by
what he had already suffered in the loss of his Secretaries Place, and that if
his Excellency should pursue him farther to the losing of his Commissioners
Place in the Customs, he was a Ruined Man, for that the King had declared if
Matters alleged against him were proved, he should never have any Employment
in his Dominions; and in the Close added, That Acts of Clemency were suitable
to persons of his Excellency's Quality and Station, etc. But matters were now
come to too high a pitch, and the breach was too wide ever to be patched up
together again, as it had been once already by Judge Daly's mediation betwixt
them. Sheridon, or some in his stead had even in Dublin whilst this was
transacting, spoke contemptibly of the Lord Deputy, in order to applaud
Sheridon as a Triumphant Conqueror: For so the Populace had cried him up in
Dublin, and the Protestant Party in Ireland, out of Enmity to Tyrconnel, which
it seems they thought to be the worse man of the two, though in reality
Sheridon as an Apostate was the greater Villain.

Upon Sheridon's Arrival at Dublin, he repaired to the Castle with his Papers,
but was not admitted to the presence of the Lord Deputy: He then goes to the
Custom-house, and there sits among his Brethren. The next day the Lord Deputy
advises with the Judges what to do with him, for his Stomach could not digest
his enjoying any Place in the Kingdom, whilst he continued Chief Governor. The
Judges Counseled to appoint a Day of Hearing, and in the mean time to suspend
him from sitting in the Custom-House. Sheridon had this order sent him, upon
which he came to the Castle, and disputed his being suspended, as if not in the
Lord Deputy's Power. This Demeanor was an Aggravation to his former, and upon
farther consulting with the Judges, 'twas agreed, That since much of the proof
of Sheridon's Bribery depended upon the Officers concerned in the Revenue,
'twould be absolutely necessary to heap as much Ignominy and Disgrace upon him
in that Province, as was possible; which to effect, the Commissioners of the
Customs were sent for, and ordered to write to all the Collectors of the
Kingdom not to keep any correspondence with Sheridon, in regard that he was
suspended from acting in the Revenue.

A day being appointed for Sheridon to come to an Hearing, he moved for more
time, which was readily granted; for at this time another blow from Rome came
against Tyrconnel, which required his best Ministers to divert, which was as
follows.

The Earl of Castlemain had for some time been returned from his Embassy to the
Pope, but was Invested in no Preferment, which he complained of to his
Holiness, which was seconded by Father Peter's; upon the receipt of whose
Letters, his Holiness writes over to his Nuncio, to Address to the King in his
behalf; who was as ready to gratify him in something, as the other to embrace
it, but at present there was no vacancy: But to supply that, Father Peter's
takes opportunity to strike at Jeffreys the Lord Chancellor, for tampering in
the business of Magdalen-College, in order to which, he roundly acquaints the
King, That the most effectual course whereby to accomplish his design by
establishing the Catholic Religion, was, to let his Prime Ministers and the
World understand, that no service, they had or could do, should protect them,
or be deemed of any account if they failed in the least Iota or minutest
Circumstance relating to the Catholic Cause. This Argument was so pursued with
a constant uninterrupted vigor by the Nuncio and Father Peter's. that 'twas
brought to the Cabinet, and upon the Seventeenth of December at NIght in this
Year it was resolved, That Jeffreys should be put out, and that three of the
Lords of the Treasury should be made Lords Commissioners of the Broad Seal, and
that Castlemain should be Lord Treasurer. This Resolve continued not ten days,
but upon the sudden the Scene changed, and Jeffreys fixed more firm than ever.
The true cause of this was never known, but 'twas observed, that the Queen and
Sunderland adhered to him. This administered fresh cause of disgust to
Castlemain and to the Church Party; for now it began to appear that Affairs
moved by the French Interest, in opposition to that of Rome: Such insuperable
Difficulties had the Folly of that poor unfortunate King exposed him to: His
Zeal and Affection led him to adhere to Rome, but his dependence was entirely
built upon France.

The Church Cabal embraced the opportunity of the Lord Deputy's and Sheridon's
Quarrelling, wherein to recommend Castlemain as a fit person for the Government
of Ireland, representing to the full how injurious those Scandalous
Impeachments of the Lord Deputy and Sheridon had been to, and how much they had
retarded the Progress of the Catholic Cause: Farther urging that Tyrconnel had
proceeded by too slow a motion, and that he had effected nothing but the
turning out of a few Soldiers, and discourageing and frightening away the
Industrious English who might (many of them) by Indulgence and Encouragement
have been prevailed upon to espouse their Religion: That Castlemain was a Man
of great Parts, and of a fine curious Head for the accomplishing of such a Work
as the Reducing and Converting of Heretics.

This was soon sent to Tyrconnel, and by his Pensioner in London Communicated
to Paris, which the Deputy acquaints his two Grand Statesmen Rice and Neagle
with, who to dissipate this approaching Storm, sit up Night and Day, even to
the hazard of Rice's Life, who was an Infirm Man.

Their whole Consult was (as appeared afterward) what Apology to make for
their small Proficiency in Proselyting Men to their Religion, or at least in
indearing them to the espousal of the Romish Cause and Interest, and after many
Essays, the most Authentic was, that whilst the English were Masters of their
Lands, they feared not the Government, but as Satan answered in the Case of
Job, Touch them but in their Estates, and they will either run into Treason or
Conversion. This being resolved upon, Rice and Neagle were to draw up the
substance of an Act, which they did in that nature as gave (in a manner) the
Lands of the whole Kingdom into the power of the King, and although the
Catholics were to have but half of their Estates, yet the other part was to be
under such Qualifications, as that the King might dispose of it to such as he
found to be obedient Sons. This if the King would have pursued, a Parliament
they could have had when they pleased, fitted for their turn, all Corporations
being already put into Popish hands, and all the Sheriffs of the Counties being
Papists, would be sure not to make returns to their disadvantage.

This Consult being come to this ripeness, 'twas Rice should go over as
Plenipotentiary in negotiating this Affair, which was managed with that
privacy and reservedness, that not one of the Council knew of it till the
Warrant was signed for the Yatcht to carry him over: But as soon as this became
public, the Lord Chief Justice Nugent flew about like lightening to all his
Friends, to make an interest to go over with Rice, which Neagle and Rice
privately opposed; for as one of them told the Author, he was good for nothing
but to spoil a business; when nothing could prevail, he pretended some affairs
of his own, and so obtained leave to go over, and for the honor of the
business, was joined with Rice, to present that which was publicly to be
offered, but was not in any part of the cret intriegue, to render the
undertaking more prosperous. For the Deliverance of the Irish Nation, they
Embarked upon St. Patrick's Day; but considering the bad success they met with,
they might as well have put him out of their Calendar, as by a particular order
from Rome, they had formerly done St. Luke, because upon that Holy Day the
English had obtained a great Victory over them in the last Rebellion.

But to return to the Irish Ambassadors (for so they were called here in
England) over they came, and after Rice had paid a Visit to the Jesuits (of
whose Society he was once a Novice, and had been educated in their College) he
made his first Court to the Lord Sunderland. Father Peter's he found not
favorable to his design, but the French Faction was his chief dependence, to
whom he had always a recourse in his private Consults, without communicating
any thing to his Colleague, whom he kept in great ignorance of the private
intriegue of Castlemain against the Lord Deputy. 'Twas Rice's chief business to
possess the Conclave with a great opinion of the Lord Deputy's extraordinary
Zeal for the promotion of the Catholic Cause, and that he had made a much
greater Progress in it before that time, if the want of a Parliament, and the
continuance of the Act of Settlement, had not retarded that design; without
which Rice alleged, That 'twas impossible to make Converts, or to Proselyte
any to their Party, who thought themselves Masters of the Kingdom, whilst they
had the Laws on their side, and made it their boast, That the King durst not
attempt to meddle with them. So that as Affairs stood, there seemed a more
rational probability, that the Roman Catholics should condescend to the
Protestants, than they to the Roman Catholics. Thus was Rice very active, and
industrious, in urging and propagating the intriegue, which when it was fully
comprehended by his Party, Father Peter's was with much difficulty influenced so
far as to join in it, though at first he could not be prevailed upon to hear of
it: For he was absolutely biased for Castlemain's interest, and being no
Politician, but a perfect fury, and of an Imperious Temper, was wont to contemn
every thing that was not his humor: But this Project being a work of
expedition in Ireland, and (in his own Style) to Convert or Confound the
Heretics there; he at last embraced it, and when once he became interessed,
nothing must be done but by his direction and advice; so 'twas concluded upon,
that the Project should be laid open before Sunderland, and that when he was
made Master of it, he and Father Peter's would wait on the King with it: And to
oblige Sunderland's more cheerful and hearty concurrence in this Affai^ he was
to be made sensible what signal advantages would be derived to his Lordship
from so great a Revolution in that Kingdom, a matter which required no great
art so to instill it into him, as to make it intelligible.

But notwithstanding Father Peter's adherence to this Project, yet did he
continue in his former Inclinations for removing Tyrconnel: And 'twas believed
that happy difference among the several Romish Factions, was the prime occasion
of diverting this fatal blow designed for Ireland.

The business was in the Closet fully discoursed to the King by none but
Sunderland and Peter's, (who with the liberty of a digression, I must acquaint
the Reader, was not infallible in keeping Secrets.) The King was soon fully
inclined to the thing, but how to pass it at the Council, Hic labor, hoc opus
est, there lay the stress of the business; for he was very apprehensive that
such as were opposite to Tyrconnel's continuance in the Government of Ireland,
would be more violent against his being there with a Parliament too great for
such a Man whom the Council had in contempt. Peter's thought he could easily
remove that obstacle by introducing the Popes recommendation of Castlemain, but
over that the French King had laid his hand, to whom the poor King was become a
Vassal. Amidst these difficulties, 'twas hard to form a resolution, but however
'twas agreed to, that the two Judges should be publicly introduced to the King
with their project for calling a Parliament in Ireland, and to lay at his
Majesty's feet the deplorable condition of his Catholic Subjects there,
occasioned by the palpable injustice and oppression of the Act of Settlement,
which was so notorious, that the vety Protestants themselves were ashamed of
it, and would gladly part with enough to satisfy the Irish, in case that they
might have a good Act of Parliament to secure the rest. All this was put in
practice, and they brought to Whitehall, where the King received their Project
in writing, and told them, he would advise with his Council about it.

Now 'twas the constant method of King James in any thing of weight, or
importance, to consider it first in the Cabal, before 'twas proposed at
Council Board; yet this thing, upon which entirely depended the Settlement or
ruin of a Kingdom, had not that Sanction, but was carried immediately to the
Council, which was matter of admiration to many, but supposed to be done for
one of these two Reasons, either that the King was conscious that those of the
Cabinet would not suffer it to proceed any farther, but was in hopes so to
influence the Judges and other Tools, he had at the Council Board, to vote for
it: Or else that he would show his indifferency in the matter, that so it might
not be thought any private intrigue.

The King brought this project the first Council-day, and in few words
acquainted the Council with its importance and contents, and by whom presented
to him: no man spoke a word either in favor of, or in opposition to the thing,
but desired it might be read; which being done, the Lord Bellasis in a storm of
Passion inveighed bitterly against it, saying that, If such designs as those
were encouraged, they of England, (meaning the Catholics) had best in time to
look out for some other Country, and not stay to be a mad Sacrifice for Irish
Rebels. Powis, according to the best of his understanding seconded; and in
short, 'twas so run down, that neither Sunderland nor Peter's, durst attempt to
speak a word in its vindication, but only desired, that those Gentlemen which
brought over those Papers might be heard. Bellasis was for committing them, or
commanding their immediate return; but 'twas at last thought reasonable to hear
them, so a day was appointed.

The noise of this, and the success it had met with at Council Board, flew
abroad with great Exclamations, the Boys in the street running after the Coach
where Rice and Nugent at any time were, with Pottatoes stuck on sticks, and
crying, Make room for the Irish Ambassadors: 'Twas believed that some of the
Popish Party did blow up the People, that so the King might be sensible what
mischief this would tend to.

The day came on for these Ambassadors to be heard at Council Board, where Rice
made a Speech full of Policy and Artifice, and answered the Objections made by
the Lord Bellasis and Powis; but when Nugent came to speak, he kicked down all
that Rice had done, and Bellasis presently discovered the defect of his Irish
understanding, as he called it, abusing him beyond the respect due to the place
where the King was, calling him Fool and Knave, and Powis did the same. They
were not long in tearing this fine Project to pieces, which when they had done,
Bellasis bid them make haste to the Fool their Master, and bid him next Message
he sent, to employ Wiser Men, and upon a more honest Errand. Powis bid them
tell him, That the king had better use to make of his Catholic Subjects in
England, than to Sacrifice them for reprize to the Protestants of Ireland in
lieu of their Estates there.

In short, every one fell so violently upon them at the Board, that the King
remained silent, and without any resolve or order, broke up the Council, and
neither the Ambassadors nor their Project appeared more upon the Stage, but
kissing the Kings Hand, marched off with great have and precipitation; for they
were afraid that even the Roman Catholics themselves would have affronted 'em.

This Miscarriage of Tyrconnell's gave fresh opportunity Castlemanians to raise
Objections against him, setting forth what mischiess he had already done in
that Kingdom; that the Revenue was sunk to an incredible abatement, and that in
one year more there would not be left money enough in the Kingdom to discharge
the Army, and that this last Project of his would exasperate, and frighten away
those of the English which were left, who being the dealing and industrious
people of the Nation, would put a final period to all Trade and Commerce in
that wasted and depopulated Country: But all these just and reasonable
Allegations, (which matter of fact, and the present ruinous and distracted
Estate of that Kingdom, did but too fully evince the truth, or rather
infallibility of) though judiciously laid down before the King by sober and
considering persons, yet were they all to no purpose: For though the King kept
it private from most of his Council, yet certain it is, that he had promised
the French King the disposal of that Government and Kingdom, when things had
attained to that growth, as to be fit to bear it: This jumped near to the time
of the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and the Bishops Commitment
to the Tower: And as one had ruined England, if the visible hand of Supreme
Providence had not signally and miraculously interposed, by inspiring the
Bishops with courageous and invincible resolutions in a just vindication of the
Protestant Cause and Religion; so the other had struck the fatal blow to the
Laws and Fundamental Constitutions of Ireland, if some Hushai's even amongst
the Romish Faction had not turned the pernicious Counsels of these Achitophels
into folly.

The expected success of the aforesaid Ambassadors Negotiation, which by one
Party was dreaded, by the other hoped to prove answerable to its design, made
various impressions upon men in proportion to their different interests. The
English were apprehensive of no less a change than a total subversion of the
Government, and an unraveling of all the Laws made for the security of their
Estates and Religion, which the unhinging the Act of Settlement (the sole
occasion of this Solemn Embassy) would at one blow complete. The Natives were
(imaginarily) in actual possession: Their apprehensions whereof were such as
discovered all the outward signs and indications of so high a satisfaction, as
cannot be easily represented. Joy and Triumph was in all their Actions and
Discourses: Fancy and Imagination wrought very powerfully, and like Men in
Bedlam, who dream of nothing but Kingdoms and Empires, they seemed to show as
much Complacency, and to be alike transported with the airy hopes of getting,
as if they had been already invested in their Estates: But this Scene of Joy,
which had been represented with so much splendor and magnificence, soon
disappeared, and a Melancholy Prospect over-shadowed with a dark Cloud, was
quickly brought upon the Stage, when they perceived all their hopes blasted in
the fruitless consequences of this great intrigue. Parturiunt montes, their
high expectations soon descended to a low ebb and they were quickly under as
great despondency (by this sudden turn of the Spoke in the Wheel) as they were
before of satisfaction. For as they are wont to put no bounds to their
Ecstasies, and transports in prosperous, so neither do they limit their sorrow
and despair, upon adverse Contingencies. An unequalness of mind, and resolution
very remarkable among the Irish, who like the floating Euripus, have no
consistency in themselves, but are carried up and down in their hopes and
fears, according as every petty accident does either invite or discourage.

But to return to Sheridon whose Trial Rice and Nugent's absence had retarded,
and the ill effects of whose Negotiation had so exalted him that he begun to
vaunt over his Enemies, openly exclaiming upon the Lord Deputy, and withal
adding, That he would soon be removed from the Government, and such advantage
did he derive from this disgrace Tyrconnell met with in England, that he held
the Lord Deputy and his Judges, at defiance, and was now become so imperious
that his braging and threatening the Evidence took off several. And the truth
is, after that Rice returned from England they were in such despondency,
expecting every day a new Lord Lieutenant, insomuch that one day Tyrconnell
himself said publicly to some Officers at the Castle, that though he had great
assurance from the King, that he should not be removed, yet now he heard that
he should, and wished that he had given Five Thousand Pounds to have known it a
Month sooner, which expression was much wondered at.

Sheridon now comes upon his Trial, having four Protestants, or at least, who
pretended to be such, for two of them have since by their actions given cause
of suspicion, viz. Whiched and Donohan, two entire Friends; the first now with
King James in Ireland, and employed a Judge of Oyer and Terminer to try
Protestants for their Rebellion.

Donohan is here, and makes as fair a show for King William, as his Brother
Whiched for King James, but had the misfortune of being discovered to procure a
Pass for his Brothers Son that was here employed by King James, and one of his
Converts, who it is said, has since returned hither from Ireland with
Intelligence from King James. Two as good Protestants as Brethren, but both in
Iniquity: One acts by a Commission from King James against those of his own
Church, and Profession, and not only so, but interprets that to be Rebellion,
which was grounded upon no other design than an absolute preservation of their
Lives from the bloody Massacres of the Irish, who having robbed and pillaged
them of their substance, at the next step would have broke into their Houses,
and have cut their Throats, from which they were bound by the Law of Nature,
and consequently by that of Religion, (to which the last carries no opposition,
but is derived from it as its prime and original foundation) to defend
themselves. But is it possible for any one that styles himself a Protestant, so
shamefully to temporize and prevaricate as against the Laws of Nature and
Humanity thus (as it were) to prey upon his own kind? The other promotes King
James's interest, though not publicly, and upon the open stage, yet by private
and secret machinations, though at the same time he seems a zealous adherer to
the present Government: An Hypocrisy, which, I pray, may be as much beyond a
Parallel, as it is without excuse.

But I come to Sheridon: The Charge that was brought against him, was, for
selling of Plac^, and receiving extravagant Fees in his Office. To prove which
there were Witnesses of all sorts brought from all parts of the Kingdom, to
which Sheridon and his Counsel made defense only by criminating the Evidence,
or making them interessed as Parties that swore to get money, if they could fix
it upon him. The chief Evidence produced against him was a Priest that he had
employed to bring in Grist to his Mill.

This Priest he brought Evidence to prove he was a Man of a lewd and infamous
Character, guilty of several vile actions, as of Bastardy, etc. Much time was
consumed in hearing impertinent stuff, not worth my filling Paper with, or the
trouble of the Reader's perusal, but in the end he was dismissed of his
Employments, and so went off the Stage the worst of men, had he not left an
Ellis behind him, a Miscreant of all Shapes, that has since been the Engine of
Murders and Rapins in that Country.

But now comes into Ireland one Captain Bridges, supposed Prince of Wales: For
which he received the Honor of Knighthood by the Name of Sir Matthew Bridges.

What Tongue can express, or man describe the extravagancy of those Joys which
possessed the Irish at the arrival of this News? Their former apprehensions of
the shortness of their triumph, by reason of King James's declension in Age,
and the prospect of a Protestant Successor, had extremely imbittered their
greatest Comforts, and caused an intermixture of hopes and fears. But now that
they had got a Young Prince that would become a Patron to the Holy Church, this
soon dissipated all their troubles. They now considered, that their Religion
would be perpetuated to future Ages, and that upon this fund they might not
only extirpate Heresy, but so establish the Holy Catholic Religion, as to
remain to all Posterity: For now (in the Scripture Phrase, which they
usurpingly monopolize and improperly apply to themselves) The Gates of Hell was
never like to prevail against their Church. These were such sweet Reflections
as they never before had a perfect relish of, and which such narrow Breasts,
and earthy Souls, were not capable to contain, or to contemplate upon, without
making a violent eruption into all the outward demonstrations of an
inconceivable satisfaction. 'Twould require a Volume to describe the
particularities of those various Scenes of Joy, which they showed upon this
occasion Let this suffice, That no Arts of Extravagancy were omitted, whereby
to represent their boundless Complacencies. This News gave them so victorious
an ascendant over the English, that they were now become the scorn and contempt
of those individual persons who had been their Slaves and Vassals, insomuch,
that the meanest Labourer would now upon the least provocation, threaten to
hang his Master. One pleasant instant to this purpose, I cannot omit, the
Author being an Ear-witness of it. A Labourer came to his Master very soberly,
and told him he owed him a Cow, and bid him give it him presently; the
Gentleman laughed at him, for he owed him not a Penney; upon which the Fellow
growing angry, the Gentleman called him Rascal, and offered to beat him; but
the Servant was not only too quick, but too strong for the Master, whom he was
very fairly about to Cudgel; but Company interposing diverted him from his
intention: But the Jest still remains, which he spoke in Irish, but being
interpreted runs in English thus, You English Churse, (with an Oath by his
Maker and St. Patrick) I will Hang thee with these hands, as well as ever thou
waste Hanged in thy life. But the poor Gentleman was afraid that he would have
given him such an Hanging as is never used but once.

The News of the Bishops being committed to the Tower, came some few days
before that of the Prince of Wales's Birth, either of which gave them
abundantly more joy than they could possibly bear, but being united, put them
into strange Convulsions. Their Passions were now outrageous, having both these
at once upon their hearts, and now that they must vent themselves, 'twas a most
difficult thing to restrain their hands from cutting of throats, it being
natural to them in their drink and reveling Debaucheries, for want of Enemies,
to stab one another, and contrary to other Brutes (for they deserve no better
Name) they are most mischievous when best pleased. Then is revived an old
Quarrel of the Grandfathers (commenced an hundred years ago) and the revenge
must be executed, if any of the Clan (as they call them) be in the Company.

Before I take leave of our supposed Prince of Wales's Birth, I must not omit
to acquaint the Reader of the universal confidence of all the Irish in the
Kingdom, that the Queen (as soon as 'twas said she had Conceived) was with
Child of a Son. This they were so certain of, that they would lay you Twenty
Guineas to one, or any other Wager in proportion to that, from the highest to
the lowest amongst them. This confidence was much wondered at by the English,
and judged to be very unreasonable, if not built upon some private Grounds and
Inducements, which I leave the Reader to guess at, which some amongst them were
certainly acquainted with, whose Discourses among the rest created in them a
belief of some extraordinary design then in agitation: Otherwise they would
never have been so forward in proposing such extravagant Wagers, which when the
English inquired the reason of, they attributed their great assurance to the
Prayers of their Infallible Church, which were daily offered to God upon this
account, and would undoubtedly meet with a suitable return: But it appeared
plain enough, that though this was generally ascribed as the true cause of
their great confidence, yet that they had other Latent Reasons which were not
fit to be discovered.

But to leave this and proceed to other Matters. Daly that was the justest man
amongst them, and who in the first Circuit he went did good service in hanging
of his Countrymen, did now this Summer-Circuit favor all Criminals, and
having Sheriffs of their own, packed such Juries as neither Murder nor Felony,
if committed upon Protestants, was adjudg'd to be a Crime, and where Matters
were so apparent, that they could not possibly but find them, the utmost
extremity used was Burning in the Hand. 'Twas said, that the Lord Deputy had
particular Commands from King James in this matter for these Reasons. First,
They Hanged none but Catholics. For it is scarce known in an Age (which
bespeaks the great honesty and integrity of the ordinary sort of Protestants)
that any Englishman turns a Tory, or is guilty of Theft.

In the second place, 'twas thought the best way to destroy the Protestants,
and 'twas observed that none were robbed but Incorrigible English Fanatics, as
they called them, and those were deemed to be such, that were so inflexible to
all their blandishing arts of persuasion, and alluring enticements, as there
remained no hopes of their Conversion. Whereas in all parts of Ireland there
were too too many Laodicean and Temporising Protestants who being related to
the old stock of the Kingdom, could easily shelter themselves under the covert
and protection of the Irish Gentry and Grandees, and these lukewarm
Indifferents were those which the English were most afraid of.

The Judges pursued their Instructions to the utmost, and now that notorious
principle which the Church of Rome is ashamed to own, but daily practices, That
no Faith is to be kept with, (and give me leave to add) nor justice given to
Heretics, was signally demonstrated at this juncture. For now, though both Laity
and Clergy lay every day more and more under additional grievances, yet 'twas
apparent that there was no hopes of any redress. The Laity had not only great
arrears of Rent due to them, but still more and more old pretenses were revived
by the Irish of Debts due to them ten or twenty years ago, which they now sued
for, as pretending that they could have no justice in the Protestant
Government, which was the reason they had retarded prosecuting so long, in
order to which they wanted not Knights of the Post, who for the value of
Sixpence in drink, would make as many false Affidavits against the English as
they pleased. The Clergy made their complaint to the Judges the year before (as
I have hinted to you already) as to the obstinacy of the Country in the non
payment of their small dues, and received no redress; but now the evils were
grown upon them to an higher pitch. The Priests were now become so confident in
their hopes of establishing Popery, that they could no longer contain from
showing their inveterate malice against the Protestant Clergy, against whom
they endeavored to prepossess their people at Mass (over whom they have an
unlimitted and Arbitrary power) with all imaginable prejudice and contempt. The
Priests now suggested to them, that by the same reason that they detained the
lesser from, they might also refuse the paying the greater Tyths to, the
Ministers, as Corn, Hay, etc. They told them that they saw by their own
experience, they had been discouraged in their pursuit after the first, and
after all their endeavors could get no redress, and now that the Catholics
had liberty of their Religion, they saw not why they should not deny them the
last: For the Law would not give these to them more than the former. Of right
they told them that all the Tithes belonged to them as their proper due, and
though by the oppression and injustice of the Protestant Government they had been
kept out of them so long to their apparent prejudice and disadvantage, yet now
things were in another posture: They had now a Catholic King, and Catholic
Magistrates of their own, who would not take their dues from them, but rather
invest them in them; and therefore charged the people under pain of
Excommunication and the severest Anathemas not to pay any manner of Tithes to
the Protestant Ministers. The vulgar Irish were so much overawed with these
arts of terror from their Priests (whose Sentence in any thing they reverence
with an equal fear, and alike profound veneration, as if pronounced by the Pope
in the Infallible Chair) that none would come to the Protestant Clergy, to take
Tithes of them, unless these dreadful Imprecations (which if incurred they
believed themselves to be certainly damned) were taken off. By this means the
great Tithes were like to lie upon the Ministers hands, a great inconveniency
in most parts of Ireland, where their Parishes being of a vast circumference,
and full of Bogs and Mountainous places, 'twould be difficult, if not
impossible almost, to gather their Tithes in kind, at least without having one
half of them embezel'd and stole by the Irish. This puts the Clergy upon a
necessity either of setting out their Tithes in small proportions; or else they
must lose them, and in those Countries where the Irish are most numerous, the
vulgar sort were wont to take the Tithe, which the Priests now prohibiting
under the aforesaid Penalties, would (as they were sensible) be an unspeakable
loss and mischief to the Ministers, for the reasons already mentioned, which
was what they studiously aimed at, and were desirous to improve, as high as
they could.

These malicious practices of the Priests put the Protestant Clergy to great
inconveniences in the disposal of their Tyths, especially in such Countries
where the Irish were most numerous: Most were forced to descend to an
accommodation with the Priests, bestowing a considerable proportion of Tithes
upon themselves (which was what they drove at) to suffer the ordinary Irish to
come and buy the rest. Some that would not be abused at that rate, made their
Applications to the Judges of Assize, complaining against these insolent and
irregular Proceedings of the Priests. But alas it was not to be expected that
these Catholic Judges would go and punish their Ghostly Fathers, a very
unnatural act in their Religion. In short no Law would be found out to punish
them, all that could be gained (and that very rarely) was a civil admonition to
them, not to disturb the Protestant Clergy in their rights and the like, and so
were dismissed, how plain soever the Matter of Fact was proved against them. By
this it seemed that those of the Clergy, though not the most Courageous, yet
were the most Politic, who dealt privately with the Priests, and by fair words
and considerable Largesses of Tythe-Corn, etc. prevailed upon them to be quiet:
for the meek and filial regard of these Judges to their Worthy Fathers, served
but to make them the more insulting and imperious over the Ministers, who still
animated the Country against them, and at last to that height that several of
the Irish in many Parishes violently seized upon the Tythe-Corn, etc. and
converted it to their own use, neither suffering any other to buy it, nor any
Servant of the Ministers to come upon the Land to collect it.

But to leave this Affair of the Clergy, and to join them and the Laity
together, if it happened that for money due by Bills under Hand and Seal, or by
clear and unquestionable Evidence, Executions were obtained from the Judges
against any of the Irish, then had the Natives another refuge to shelter
themselves under, and to fly to that of an Irish Sheriff, who would carefully
decline all opportunities of taking the Party; or if he could not avoid
apprehending him, then would either suffer him to make a voluntary escape, or
else an hundred two of Men should lie in the way, and rescue him from the Gaol;
or if they wanted force, the whole Country of the Irish would rise up and
assist them, if the Debt was due to an English Churl, as they called them.
These things so encouraged the Irish that had Executions over them, that they
would come and hector those of the English (to whom they owed the Money) in the
open street, and with their Swords by their sides, and Firearms and Skeens in
their Pockets (the last a bloody large Knife, with which they are wont to stab
the English, and not seldom one another) with half a dozen or more lusty Rogues
at their backs, would come to their Doors, and bid them public defiance.

Thus were the English either denied justice against the Irish, or if they
obtained it from the Judges, yet they were sure not to meet with it in the
Sheriff, and so have no other return of all their trouble, but the contracting
additional cost to their former Debt from one Assizes to another, which was
like to continue in infinitum, and all to no purpose, unless that of enhansing
the charges far above the principal Debt, and still be out of both. On the
contrary hand, if an Irishman had but any tolerable plea for a debt due from a
Protestant, a decree was presently granted, and as for the Sheriffs execution
of it, 'twas as swift as his implacable hatred could carry him, and then be
sure no failure was committed in the severe usage of the Debtor, whether in
relation to Body or Goods: If the last, then must three times value of the Debt
be taken, and apprais'd by Irish-men appointed for the purpose, who, the Reader
may presume, would not put too large an estimate upon them? 'twould fill a
Volume to give the particular instances of such violent and irregular actions
done, to the Authors own knowledge. But I proceed.

Now came by a Ship from Amsterdam bound to Dublin with Letters from a Friend
of Tyrconnel's to him, which intimated, that he writing nothing but his own
Conjecture, did imagine that the Prince of Orange had a design against England,
for none could otherwise guess what all those great preparations in Holland,
which they were so extreme hot upon, tended to. Tyrconnell sent this Letter
over to Sunderland, who showed it to the King, who made no other use of it than
to deride Tyrconnel, as appeared from Sunderland's Writing to him, and
ridiculing his intelligence. But every day ushered in fresh suspicions, the
effect whereof was looked upon as very strange, as being a thing which was
wished for both by Friends and Enemies. The Irish (to show their ancient Vanity)
triumphed before the Victory: They called the English, Rebels, by way of
Prediction; for they were sure that they would join with the Prince, and as
certain that they would be beaten, and be served the same sauce that Monmouth
and his Adherents had met with, only that they now spoke more bloodily, and in
more Malicious and Butcherly expressions against the Prince of Orange, Whose
Head they would stick on a Pole, and carry it round the Kingdom. For near a
Month this was only discoursed of, but at last arrived King James's
Proclamation, and then the English began to consider what they should do. The
most considerable persons amongst them hastened to Dublin to see how things
stood. The Irish also flocked thither in such Multitudes, that the City could
not contain them; yet the soberer and more prudent party were for sitting
still, and some for going over to England, as being differently possessed with
various fears and distractions, and when the happy News arrived of the Prince's
Landing, they hung down their Heads like Bullrushes, and were under the
greatest desperation and despondency; and on the contrary, the English bore up
as victors: Tyrconnell courted them, and made every day preparations for flight.

Yet the Term was then begun at Dublin, and the Ld. C. J. Nugent (than whom
perhaps the Bench never bore a more Confident Ignorant Irishman) gave the
Charge to the Grand Jury, in which he applauded and extolled above the height
of an Hyperbole, the Magnanimous and Heroic Actions of the Great and Just King
James; and on the contrary cast the most vilifying Reproaches upon the Prince
of Orange, and charged them to make a diligent disquisition after any that were
suspected to adhere to his interest, with such opprobious expressions fit only
for the Mouth of an Irish Vultur, or Cannibal; his conclusion was, That now the
States of Holland were weary of the Prince, and that they had sent him over to
be dressed as Monmouth was, but that was too good for him, And that he doubted
not before a Month passed, to hear, that they were hung up all over England in
Bunches like Ropes of Onyons.

About this time, as a Prelude to what has since Swan a Gentleman near Dublin,
most barbarously Murdered by the Sheriff, and a parcel of Irish Ruffins. The
pretense the Sheriff had, was to take possession of some Land that an Irishman
had recovered from the said Swan, but with so little right, that the Irish
Judges in the Exchequer (a Demonstration indeed, that 'twas palpably unjust)
refused to grant the Injunction; however their Tool, Worth, did it, and the cry
is, That the Blood of that Man lies at his door: But the Sheriff exceeded the
Tenor of his Warrant; for he had nothing to do with the House nor Land it
stood upon. Swan therefore kept his House, and the Sheriff coming to take
possession, Swan looked out of the Window, and desired him to call a Jury of
that Neighborhood, and if they found that Land or House in his order from the
Exchequer, he would give quiet possession; but otherwise he would not open his
Doors, for he was very sure the Sheriff had no order to come there. Upon this,
without any offer of Swan, more than keeping his Door shut, the Sheriff having
his Men ready, a number of them together, discharged a Volley of Shot at him as
he stood in his Window, and shot him in several places: they broke open his
Doors, and finding him wallowing in Blood, and groaning upon the Floor, they
took him up, and flung him out of Doors. Some more Compassionate than the rest
carried him into a Cabin, where he had so much strength as to ask for Drink. In
his House there was of several sorts enough, but those Inhumane Butchers would
not give the Dying Man a drop, who died there in the place. This Horrible
Tragedy I thought fit not to omit the relation of, (though by way of
Digression) as being but the introductory part of too many of the like
Barbarities repeated since.

Every day by all ways Expresses came to Tyrconnell, which gave him no good
account of Affairs, which made him give Commissions to any that would accept of
them, and that he might have the more custom without a penny of Fees to the
Secretary: For many of them that had Commissions, pawned them for their
Lodgings at their going out of Town, not having a Penny to carry them along,
but pawning their very Clothes off their Backs as they Traveled.

The English and some of the best of themselves laughed at this Poppet-play,
for no man believed that 'twas designed for more than a show, and that
Tyrconnel did it to make good his Word, of being able to raise an Army of an
Hundred Thousand Men at a Months notice.

Every day brought an additional account of the Prince of Orange's success,
which put the Grandees into so great a terror, and consternation, that those
who at first had expressed a great deal of alacrity and forwardness amongst
them, in raising of Men, began now to decline, and by degrees more and more to
draw back. Then the Lord Deputy sent to the Judges, and the Lord Chief Justice
Nugent, (to show his valor) undertook to raise a Regiment, and so others
pretended to do, but it came to nothing. The Irish were in greater trouble and
confusion than before, the English braving it in City and Country, every day
expecting to have an English Lord Lieutenant over, it being the unanimous
opinion of all the Protestants, that the Irish Lords would have contended who
should be the first Man to make their submission: but no relief coming to the
English as was expected, some began to draw for England, when an unexpected
Catastrophe had like to have swallowed all up. 'Twas the Earl of Mount
Alexander's receiving of a Letter, giving him an account, That upon the Ninth
of that Instant December all Protestants of Ireland were to be cut off. This
Letter he sends with several Copies to Dublin, and to all parts of the Kingdom;
it arrived at Dublin but on Friday, and the Sunday following, was to be the day
of Slaughter. This sudden alarm struck such a fear upon the English, that
upon the Saturday there got away about Three Thousand Souls. There happened to
be abundance of Ships in the Harbor at that time, but were so crammed that
many were in danger of being stifled.

The Run of these people happened to be so sudden, and in the middle of the
Night, that it resembled the flight of the Jews out of Egypt, and the Irish
were as desirous to have them gone, for some of them were in as great a terror
as the other. The Guards kept their Post in a Maze, and the Drawbridge of the
Castle was drawn up, thus they stood upon their Guard till Morning, and when
Tyrconnel understood what the matter was, he first sent the Earl of Roscommon,
and the Earl of Longford to Ringsend (this being Sunday Morning) to persuade
the People to stay, and ordered the Yatcht to sail after them that were gone,
and to fetch them back, but neither of his Orders succeeded: And the same day
sent to some of the most Considerable Persons, and Citizens of Dublin, that
were Protestants, making great Protestations and Oaths of his utter abhorrence
of the pretended design of Massacring the English, begging them to persuade
their Friends not to stir.

'Twas by all his actions at this juncture sufficiently apparent, that he had
then no thoughts of standing out, notwithstanding that he gave Commissions to
every one that would accept of them: For he now made great Court to the
English, desiring several of them to testify how just and equal he had always
been in his Government to the Protestants. This was a condescension to the
English, which carried no proportion with the imperiousness of his former
carriage to them, and was accordingly interpreted as an effect of inevitable
necessity, and of that great Consternation, of which such eminent Characters
were plainly legible in all the Circumstances of his Deportment; for he now
discovered as much awe and dread of the success of the Prince of Orange's Arms,
as upon the first News of his Arrival he had done of disdain and contempt:
Every Action he did had deep Marks of his Fears engraven upon it, and all his
Discourses expressed his disordered and evil apprehensions of the present
tendency of Affairs.

But as Matters were in this great hurry and confusion at the Castle, so is it
not easy to set forth the strange Effects and Consequences which attended that
sudden alarm in the City of an intended Universal Massacre: There you might
see Thousands of People deserting their Houses, and all their Substance in the
World, and running to the Ships with scarce any Clothes upon their Backs.

Never was seen such a Consternation as at this time: Never such a Confusion
and Distraction. All the Bloody Massacres in the former Rebellion were now
reflected upon under the most ghastly and dismal Representations, and those
Scenes of barbarity and cruelty seemed to threaten the same or worse usage,
which produced the greatest horror and amazement, grief and despair, that
humane nature could be capable of.

This facal News which had so terrified the Protestants of Dublin, as if the
dissolution of all things had been at hand, arrived not to several parts of the
Kingdom, till the very day 'twas to be put in execution, which being Sunday,
was brought to the People in the time of Divine Service in some places, which
struck them with such sudden apprehensions of immediate destruction, that the
Doors not allowing quick passage enough, by reason of the Crowd, abundance of
persons made their escapes out of the Windows, and in the greatest fright and
disorder that can be represented, the Men leaving their Hats and Perriwigs
behind them, some of them had their Clothes torn to pieces, others were
trampled underfoot, and the Women in a worse condition than the men. And this
disturbance did not only continue for this day, but for several Sundays after,
the Protestants were in such a Consternation and terror, that all, or most of
them carried Fire Arms, and other Weapons to Church with them, and the very
Ministes went armed into the Pulpit, and Sentinels stood at the Church doors
all the while that they were in the Church. But whether this (which created so
great a fear and uproar among the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom) were
a real thing designed, or whether by that discovery prevented, I leave it to
others to judge and determine; but certain it is, that never any thing which
happened in the Kingdom (no not all the occasions of fear which were given to
the English in the daily Progress of Popery in the late King James's Reign, or
even that of Tyrconnel's coming to the Government) made so great a fright among
the Protestants as this.

From this time we may commence those unheard Irish began to exercise upon the
English, such unparalled Villainies of open Robbery and Violence as no History
can equalize, no time produce, or scarce any Nation (however so barbarous) have
been known to be guilty of, at least never any that had the Culture of a Moral,
much less of a Christian Education, or that were so far civilized as to be
reduced to any sense of humanity, or to submission to Law and Government.

'Twas a Principle long imbibed by the Natives of that Kingdom, and which a
continued practice had given some proof and demonstration of, that 'twas no
crime to rob or steal from an Englishman as being an Heretic, and deemed a
public enemy to their Religion, as well as to their individual interests.
Though this principle was too notorious to be owned and defended, and in that
respect, is of a like cognation with too many of the Romish Church; yet their
actions evidenced the truth of it; I mean not of the Principle it self, but of
their being of that Opinion. For 'twas plain, that their forbearing to ravage
and destroy the substance of the English, when under the Protestant Government,
was to be attributed to a fear of the Laws, or rather of the Penalties annexed
to the breach of them, which had hitherto in some measure curbed and restrained
them from violence; and not to any Principle of Conscience, or distributive
Justice. On the contrary they were so far from respecting it as a Crime to
injure the English in what they could, (as is already touched upon) that they
looked upon it as an act of merit. Quo jure, quaque injuria, -- per fasque,
nefasque. If they could contrive any way to prejudice them in their substance
or Estates, though by the most sinister and impious devices, 'twas a lessening
of the Purgatory Flames, if not a quite Extinguishing; at least, 'twas a nearer
step to Paradise.

But although this vile Maxim was industriously concealed amongst them, and
though at the bottom of their hearts did only break out now and then whilst
they were kept under submission and obedience to the English, and this for fear
of an Human, not any Divine Law; yet when the face of things changed to their
advantage in the Reign of the late King James, and amongst many others, the
Laws against notorious Criminals, and public Malefactors, if Irish men, if not
quite cancelled, were much dispensed with: Then the Natives showed themselves
in their proper Colors, and manfully applied themselves to rob and steal from
the English, which though it was a continued practice in all the aforesaid
Reign, yet never arrived to its maturity till this time. Now all things were in
confusion, and the Reins of Government seemed to be let loose by reason of the
present Distractions. This therefore they looked upon to be their Harvest,
which they were resolved to make use of, as industriously as they could; and in
order thereunto would go in great Crowds in the Nightime with Fire Arms, and
other Weapons, and steal an hundred or two hundred Head of Cattle at once from
an Englishman This practice continued so long, till many English Gentlemen,
and substantial Farmers who had several hundreds of Black Cattle, and Sheep,
etc. had not one left; so that those who had lived in great Hospitality and
Plenty, had not now Bread to eat, or any thing left to preserve them from
starving. This Calamity was almost Universal throughout the whole Kingdom,
though in some Counties more than in others; and I have been told, That in some
County in the Province of Munster, Eleven Thousand Cattle were stole by the
Irish in nine days; and that hardly one English Gentleman or Farmer i^ (...)
Country had above two or three Cows left; and that for forty Miles together
the Irish Cabbins were full of Beef stolen from the English, which they did not
so much as bestow Salt upon, but hung it (...) ^^oak; and that it stunk and
looked as bad as any Carrion.

This I have by relat^^^ (...) that County, who are persons of very good
Credit, but not being an Eyewitness of it, shall leave it to the Reader to
judge; only this is certain, That an incredible havoc was made by the Irish in
all parts of the Kingdom: But I leave these Cannibals to devour one another,
after consuming in this Barbarous and Impolitick manner, the Cattle and Breed
of the Country, which in all probability will occasion a famine, or very great
scarcity in that miserable Kingdom.

'Twas exceeding strange, and unaccountable to see the English possessed with
such various distractions upon the news of the intended Massacre already
mentioned, some running to the North of Ireland among the Scots, others to the
Isle of M^n, and abundance for England, to shelter themselves; when at the same
time, all that had any sense believed, that Tyrconnel would be the first Man in
the Government that would endeavor his Escape: for most of his Goods of value
were already packed up, and some of his Treasure Shipped. In this posture they
continued till January, and then some of the Irish Lords moved to have him
surrender the Sword, and the whole Council board gave it for their opinion; to
which he only replied, Would they have him throw it over the Wall, for there
was none to take it. Thus unhappy was the delay, which with too much reason may
be feared to lie at the Door of Sir (...) ^here, and his friend Keating in
Ireland, two Men that raised their fortunes in the last Settlement, and were
making provision for the same Work again; and it is remarkable, that (...)
Brother to these here, is (as it is said) the most active among the Irish at
this day; and Sir (...) Houses the only Sacred place from violence in Dublin.
But of this Intrigue more may be expected, and time will show, since the
Honorable House of Commons have taken that matter into their prudent
Consideration.

The deplorable Effects and Consequences attending the wrong measures taken for
the reduction of that Kingdom, are perhaps, if duly reflected upon in all their
Circumstances, more doleful than the Massacre and Rebellion there in Forty One,
though it is much less considered: and it seems a Work becoming the great Council
of this Nation to bring the Authors of it to condign punishment.

But to return to the last debate betwixt Tyrconnel and his Council. They were
all of them in amaze, and in great confusion: What to do they knew not, all of
them were unanimous in their Resolutions to submit, except the Lord Chief
Justice Nugent, and the Lord Chief Baron Rice. The Priests put off their Wolves
clothing, and in most parts of the Kingdom turned Sparks with their Swords by
their sides and Perriwigs upon their Heads. In this Month the Irish assembled
together in great Bodies by the name of Raperees, armed with Sl^eens and Half
Pikes, and what Robberies they left unacted upon the English in the Relation
aforementioned, those they now completed, killing their Cattle, and robbing
and pillaging their Houses. Now their new Levies were Mustering every day, and
their Priests exercising the fresh raised Soldiers, and Hamilton's Arrival from
England, put them upon new resolutions, which necessitated the English to
fortify themselves, and to associate together for their ownpreservation,
against which Proclamations were issued out in the North, and at Londonderry,
and then followed the same in other parts of the Kingdom, commanding them home
to their respective Dwellings, and that such as did not immediately observe the
Proclamation, should be proceeded against by the Attorney General as Traitors.
This Proclamation was signed by several Protestants of the Privy Council, which
was fatal to the English, in regard that it possessed many of them with a
belief, that there was not so much danger as they were afraid of; and others it
put in fears of the Law. So that upon the whole matter, they were diverted from
any thoughts of making their defense, and so were dispersed and scattered up
and down, and by that means became an easy Prey to the Irish.

Every day brought in new hopes and fears, so that some got together again of
the English near Kilkenny and the Queens County, who were soon dispersed. Still
the Lord Deputy and Council remained in suspense what to resolve upon, when
upon a sudden they came to a conclusion, wh^^h might quiet the Irish Lords
that were for submission to the Prince and Government of England. The Project
was this, That two Men should be pitched upon, and sent over to the late King
James in France, only to set forth the impossibility of their holding out
against England, and then they were sure to obtain permission to make terms,
and so might surrender. But this was a Jesuitical Stratagem, contrived by Rice
and Neagle, and as one of them bragged since, carried on without the privity of
any but the Lord Deputy, and themselves. For they were afraid of the Cowardly
Temper of the rest, whose inclinations were favorable enough to the Cause, but
wanted Courage and Resolution. The Scheme being thus laid, 'twas moved at
Conncil, and took with general Applause. Rice, and the Lord Mountjoy were
pitched upon to be sent; and in the conclusion of this Affair at Council Board,
the Lord Chief Justice Keating believing now that their hopes of King James
were over, thought to begin with the first to show his Zeal and Affection to
the Protestant Cause, and in order to that moved, that since they were resolved
on this method, that his Excellency would put a stop to the raising Men, which
was agreed to, but not in the least observed.

Mountjoy and Rice proceed in their Negotiation, Waterford, but before they
arrived at Paris, the French Engineer Landed at Cork, and from thence rid with
all expedition for Dublin. Then the face of things looked with a far different
prospect to what they had done before, and those little hopes which had
supported the English till this time, did now evaporate into nothing, which put
them upon a necessity of associating together, and of getting into Castles and
the best places of strength, they had for the defense and preservation of their
Lives.

In Connaught, the Lord Kingstone behaved himself like the Son of so Noble a
Father, whose hand the Irish had felt in the former Rebellion.

In the North, Sir Arthur Royden did the like, but a fate attended him that he
could not divert. In Munster the English were thought to be more considerable
than in any part of Ireland, both for Horse and Foot; of the latter more than
three thousand, and numbers of brave Gentlemen of gallant Courage and
resolution, and of will enough to back it, to have drove the Irish out of that
Province, and to have marched through the Kingdom, Cork, Bandon, Kingsale, and
Youghall being offered to be delivered into their hands, which was so openly
and indiscreetly managed, that it became the public discourse for a Month
together in every Coffee house in Dublin. At this time there were not seven
hundred old Soldiers in the whole County of Cork, which forced Justin Mac
Carthy to write daily to Tyrconnel, that he could not hold out, without a
speedy supply of Men, which yet Tyrconnel could not spare; for he was afraid of
an insurrection in the North, and 'twas believed in Dublin, that if they in
Munster had done any thing, all parts of Ireland had been secure in the English
hands, except Lynster; for that Tyrconnell could have spared none of his own
Forces from himself, and the new raised men then knew not the right from the
left, if same be true. The fault lay but in two Men, but that being public,
time will show it, and my work here is to relate nothing but what there is good
authority for.

Matters were now reduced to that extremity, English, but that of making their
escape; for they were disarmed in one day throughout the Kingdom, and that
order executed with so much rigor, that few persons of whatsoever quality were
permitted to wear their Swords. In the Corporations they shut up the Gates, and
suffered none to pass in or out without searching them strictly for arms, and
when they came to search in their Houses, under pretense that the English had
concealed their Arms, they sometimes seized upon what Plate or Money they could
meet with during this hurly-burly, which lasted for several days together, most
of the Horses which belonged to English Gentlemen and Farmers in the Country
were violently seized upon for the King's use, as was pretended, and several
hundreds were brought into the Corporations, which were Garrisoned with Irish
Soldiers, who quartered upon Private, as well as Publick-Houses of the English,
which were so full of them that they had scarce Beds for themselves to lie in.
They now were in daily expectation of the Landing of the late King James: And
this possessed them with so triumphant a joy, that the more to discourage the
English, they not only gave out that he was arrived, when there was no such
thing, but rung the Bells, made Bonfires, the Mayor and Aldermen in several
Corporations drinking the King's Health, and the like. But this imaginary
formality was but a prelude to the succeeding Triumph, to the real Landing of
the late King. And then what they had done before in Effigy, or in empty show,
they now performed substantially, and to the life. It Is beyond any thing of
human art to imagine, much more to describe the greatness of their joy at this
time, and therefore I shall not attempt a representation, which would come
infinitely short of those extravagant Pageantries which were now acted. Public
fame has already given some account of it, and to that I refer the Reader.

I have now given (as without vanity and oftentation I may affirm it) as true
and impartial a Relation as is possible, of the design the Abdicated King had
from the happy Restoration of King Charles the Second, to make Ireland the
refuge (if all other endeavors proved unsuccessful) for ^is Catholic Friends:
and it is plain that 'twas the French Alliance, (which he always assiduously
made Court to) upon which he depended in the accomplishment of this Intrigue.
The Irish were very sensible of it, and since his accession to the Crown, would
frequently boast, that if England should upon King James's Death, or any other
misfortune, devolve into the Protestants hands, that they made no doubt of
preserving Ireland, by the power of the French, and that the Prince of Orange
(whom they always dreaded) would have his hands full at home: but that
Sovereign Providence, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree justice, has to
the great astonishment of other Nations, most miraculously confounded all the
wicked devices of his Adversaries, and preserved him to sit upon the Imperial
Throne of these Kingdoms (where may he long Reign) not only to maintain the
true Reformed Religion in his own Dominions, but to enlarge the best part of
his Titles, Defender of the Faith, throughout the whole Christian World For so
indeed (whatever opinion some prejudiced Men amongst us may have) do all the
Reformed Churches of Europe esteem him to be.

I thought to have put a period to this Discourse in this place, but observing
the complaints of many that are fled from Ireland (whose miseries may indeed
allow them grains.) I shall beg leave to animadvert a little as to their
mistakes in the hard usage which they think they have received here, in not
being all immediately reprized by the King's Bounty.

I shall not say what is too apparent of some who came from thence, and would
shelter themselves among Honest Men, as most of them are generally believed to
be: yet even in this Relation where they could not be left out, without making
it imperfect, some are found faulty, and yet may pretend as fair as the best.

Every day produces additional reasons why the King cannot be too cautious in
whom he confides; and it is to be feared that some of Ireland are not quite
exempt from all suspicion as well as others in England.

But then as for those whose deserts have entitled them to his Majesty's good
opinion, such as for their affection to the Protestant Interest and Religion,
have been divested of their substance, and are in present want, those we see
are not out of his Majesty's Gracious Care, and Princely Consideration. For how
many, I was about to say, how few, are excluded from Commands in the Army that
desired it; besides all that had Commands formerly, and could not be employed,
have half pay allowed them for their present subsistence. And then as for the
poorer sort, his Majesty was beforehand in making provision for them, in
issuing out his Brief for a General Collection throughout the whole Kingdom;
which Charity has been gratefully acknowledged by that most Reverend an^ Pio^s
Archbishop of Tuam, in a Se^mon at St. James's.

There now remains onl^ (...) part of the Clergy and Gentlemen unprovided for.
As for the Clergy, his Majesty graciou^^y cons^dering their condition, did soon
after his accession to the (^rown) graciously order, that whatever Benefices in
his Gift should become vacant, should be conferred upon them, besides the
supply which the Brief affords them for the present. Hence we may observe, to
what a narrow compass the noise of Forty Thousand People is reduced to there
being, according to the best account that is given, not Seven Hundred Men that
are not, in some respect, or other, competently provided for. But that I may
not be thought to have incurred a mistake in this computation, it must be
observed, That a great part of the List given in to the House of Commons, are
Men of Estates, or Money here in England; and though perhaps some of those make
the greatest clamor, yet would it better become them to relieve their
Distressed Brethren, than to abate the Charity, which the Parliament with great
generosity, and a Christian compassion designed for the support of such as were
really in a poor and an indigent condition. All I here say is matter of fact,
and how partially soever his Majesty's present management may be misinterpreted
by some; yet it is certain, that his silent, but wonderful conduct, in the
provision for the Distressed Protestants of Ireland ought to be engraven in
Golden Characters, and not defaced by the unreasonable Clamours of such, who
would devour that which they have no want of, and consequently no just claim
and title unto, to the apparent injury of their suffering and necessitous
B^^^hren, which the Parliament have most hu^^^^ supplicated (...) Majesty for,
who (no doubt) (...) in the most (...) and discreet manner, make such a (...)
as will bespeak his Royal Bounty and (...) sense of their condition, as well as
(...) opottionable to their pressing and great (...)ties.

FINIS.

