A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Lamentable and Dreadful Fire That Began in
Cinnamon-Street IN WAPPING On the Nineteenth of this Instant November, 1682.
About Nine of the Clock in the Evening, by which were Consumed a Thousand
Houses, besides vast quantities of Goods, Forty People Killed in attempting to
extinguish it. It continued Burning for the space of Twenty hours, Lamentable
and Dreadful to behold, with the Relation according to the best information,
how and by what means it began, together with all Remarkable Passuges that
happened during that Fearful Conflagration.

On Sunday the 19 of this Instant November. 1682 a dreadful Fire broke out in
Cinnamon-street in VVapping, near to Sir Richard VVarrens, the manner according
to the best Information is thus,

A Master of a Ship Living in the Street aforesaid, and having some Friends
with him that same day, Fires were made in the Chambers, perhaps bigger then
ordinary, but nothing was perceived till about nine in the Evening, when a
Child about eight years of Age, perceiving an extraordinary smoke, dried out
Fire, which alarumed several of the Neighbors, so that they came out of their
Houses, but perceiving no such thing at first, blamed the Child, but it
persisting therein, directed them to the House, when opening the Door they
perceived the great Beam into which the Gyses are Tennanted on Fire, and then
called upon the People, who were in such a consternation [the Floor up one pair
of Stairs being on Fire] that they came running down, some of them without
their Clothes, and before they could return to fetch them or take out any thing
considerable of their Goods, the whole Structure was in a Flame, first kindled
as some think by Timber laid from the Floor into the Chimney, and yet it is
greatly doubted whether the Maid of the House be not Burnt.

The Flame having got the Mastery and driven by the severity of the Wind, which
was excessive high, and but little Water to be got, it raged exceedingly,
destroying all before it on either side the way, and that so suddenly, running
through two or three Houses at once, that the Neighboring Inhabitants in a
hurry and amazement, were not capable of securing half their Goods, and some
none at all, thus the Flames Triumphing as it were over those Ancient
Buildings, drove on for the space of an hour and a half e're any Engines could
come in, and the Streets being so narrow, and the Fire following so fast, many
of them proved unserviceable, yet great was the Industry of the Ingeneirs,
insomuch that they Labored incessantly, though to no great advantage, Water
being at that time exceeding scarce.

After about 100 Houses were consumed Powder being brought by Water, orders
were given for blowing up, which accordingly was performed, and six Houses
immediately Levelled, but there being no place to put the Timber, and the Fire
coming fast on the fury of the Wind, drove it with such Vehemence, that burning
through the Ruins, it catched the Houses on the other side, and then raged as
fearful as at first, even to the River side, from whence the Ships weighed
Anchor, and stood to the other Shore, but in such confusion, that by cutting
their Halsers, and running foul of each other much damage was sustained, some of
them that lay nearest the Shore had their Shrouds Fired, though by the Industry
of the Sailers, they were soon extinguished, and one amongst the rest was near
Perishing, being Fired in her fore Castle, by a Flake or Sheet of Flame, She
lying near upon Ground, but being Towed off it was extinguished, and she
preserved, yet it is said amongst the rest that hastily came on board, two
tumbled into the River and there one of them Perished.

Whilst the Wind was South by East, the Fire not only went with it, but
likewise as it were crept under it, laying waste Lanes and Allys, and a Grocers
House chancing to have Gunpowder in it, either left through forgetfulness or
sudden surprise, blew up, and falling suddenly, overwhelmed several in the
Ruins, then several other Houses being blown up purposely, the Seamen and
others drew the Timber to the Waterside, and threw it into the Thames, so that
the River Floated with Timber, even till the Water in many places was scarce
discernable.

Thus it continued to the greatest Terrror of the Inhabitants, who every where
Fled before it, filling the Fields with their Goods, which through have, and
the little Regard that was had in taking them down or in pieces were Vastly
spoiled, about one in the Morning, several of the Guards came and brought
Powder and other necessarys, so that by the great Industry of those that
Labored to extinguish it, it was well hoped it would have been brought under,
but the Wind shifting its quarter, Blew harder then before, and several People
having been Killed by the unexpected fall of Timber, Chimneys, and pieces of
Walls, those that had it in hand grew fearful, so that for some time, the
narrowness of the Streets contributing thereto, it went on uncontrouled,
especially toward Shadwell, and Burnt down all or most of the New-Building
that were Burnt in the great Fire about five or six years since, as likewise
Cranes, Warehouses, and Storehouses; great were the quantitys of Tobacco and
Brandy that were destroyed, Wood-yards in abundance likewise consumed, no Carts
being to be got, and by reason the Tide fell Low, all means by sending the
Boards and Timber away by Water were cut off, so that by Eight in the Morning
six or seven hundred Houses were Judged to be Burnt, besides about twenty Blown
up, and many more pulled Down, nor were the Water men retained by the Insurers
less active then the rest, even to the indangering their Lives, Especially
about preserving those Houses that were insured of which there were a
considerable Number.

When it came to the place called Wapping-Wall; many were of the opinion it
would have stayed, but contrary to expectation it Burnt fiercer than before,
running along with such speed that it entering sometimes four Houses together,
took both sides of the way, and cleared with it all the Allys, when some
endeavoring to pull down a Wall that it might damp the Fire, it fell on three
or four and Buried them in the Ruins, and another House being on Fire, some
People ventured in as it is supposed to pilfer, but the House suddenly was Beaten
down by the fall of a stock of Chimnies, but how many perished therein remains
uncertain though some there were.

Thus huving consumed the greatest part of Wapping, with the adjoining Streets,
Allys, Yards, Courts, VVharfs, and the like, it entered Shadwell, not at all
abating its fury, and there taking both sides the way made lamentable
destruction, Burning all about the Dock, and destroyed a Lighter that lay on
Ground, consuming many stately Buildings; there again Blowing up was used as
opportunity afforded and effectually, that it was stopped from going to the
Left, yet kept its course as fierce as ever, Burning at three of the Clock most
extremely, when again two Seamen standing too long upon a House that was on
Fire underneath it fell, and one of them with it, but the other caught hold of
a Beam that came from the next House: Lamentable was it to behold, the poor
People Crying up and down for the loss of their Goods and Habitations; many
Hundreds that Yesterday were well seated, and Goods about them, this day turned
out to seek a place to repose in, on the other hand Women Lamenting the loss
of their Husbands Killed in endeavoring to extinguish the merciless Flames,
and so continued Burning the space of Twenty hours, in which time it is Judged,
as near as can be computed, Houses and Goods to an inestimable Value was Burnt,
besides about Forty Persons Killed.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.


