A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Taking the City of Mentz, BY THE Imperial and
Confederate ARMY.
Licensed ano Entered according to Order.

MENTZ being Attacked on the Sixth Instant by Four a Clock in the Morning, the
Saxon and Hessian Troops mastered the Counterscarp two Hours sooner than, the
Imperialists; but with the loss of a considerable Number of Men; the French
springing a Mine in the midst of the Action, whereby several of the Hessians
were blown up: But, nevertheless, after a very sharp Dispute, the Confederates
made themselves Masters of all the Outworks, saving one small Fortress, which
being Attacked and Won by some Sutlers, the Fifty French that were in it were
all put to the Sword: And indeed, in the whole Action the Germans gave no
Quarter. After this, the Confederates Entrenched, and maintained themselves in
their Acquisitions. As to the Number of the Common Soldiers Killed and Wounded
in this Action, we cannot as yet give an Account; But have the following List
of the Officers: Colonel Geriz shot through the Body: General Souches wounded;
General Wallis Dead; General Staremberg Wounded; both the Legs of Count Lomb^^g
shot off; Colonel Schench twice Wounded; Colonel Butler twice Wounded; Major
Lowestein Wounded through the Foot; Cap^ain Mey Wounded in the Calf of the Leg;
Captain Busch Wounded in the Body; Captain Schinck Wounded in the Arm; The
Captains Valentyne, Mohn, and Cramer Dead; Lieutenant Freyberg and Heyxmar
Wounded, and more other Officers. The Confederates being thus Masters of all
the Outworks, fell to Batter the Walls incessantly, with between Twenty and
Thirty Pieces of Cannon, in order to enlarge the Breach, tho it was already so
wide, that they could see plainly into the Streets. The 7th was employed by
them in filling up the Ditches with Bavins, Wool-packs, and the like; and
having on the Eighth made all the other necessary Preparations for a General
Assault; the Confederates being recruited with Eight Thousand fresh Men under
the Duke of Hanover, and General Chauvet; and the French, in Defense of their
Outworks, having lost Fifteen Hundred of their Best Men, though the Garrison at
first consisted of between Nine and Ten Thousand Men, The French Governor, the
Marquis d' Vxelles despairing of being able to withstand a General Assault,
hung out the White Flag on the Ninth, capitulated, and was surrendering; But as
yet we are Strangers to the Conditions, though they write, the Germans are so
embittered against the French, that the General Officers will find it a hard
matter to withold them from cutting them to pieces. This City has been
completely besieged no longer than Thirteen Days, and which is since the time
that the Saxon Battery was ready.

POSTSCRIPT.
They write us, That just upon the coming away of the Post from Holland, they
had advice, that the Governor General of the Spanish Low Countries had entered
the French General Calvo's Retrenchments which the French had abandoned in such
Disorder, that they had even left their Pots boiling; and a vast Quantity of
Provisions. That another Spanish General, the Prince of Vaudemont, was out with
a great Body of Men upon some considerable Design; and that the Marshall
d'Humiers retreated before the Prince of Waldeck.



ADVERTISEMENTS.
The History of Gustavus Adolphus, surnamed The Great, K^^g of Sweden; Together
with the Life and Reign of His Successor after Christina, Carolus Gustavus,
Count Palatine. Translated out of French by Ferrand Spence, Servant to Their
Majesty's. Sold by R. Clavel, W. Not, D. Newman, T. Dring, S. Crouch, J.
Hindmarsh, and R. Bentley, and most other Booksellers.

The Dilucidator: Or, Reflections upon Modern Transactions, by way of Letter
from a Person at Amsterdam to his Friend in London. Published Weekly. Sold by
Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.


