From our Yearly Meeting at York, the 10th. of the 5th. Month, 1690. To all our
Women Friends in their Monthly Meetings, in and throughout the County of York,
or else where, Greeting.
we being met together in the fear of the Lord to wait upon him, for his
Ancient power; to order and guide us in his Work and Service; Relating to our
Church affairs: He has been pleased in his wonted Kindness, to break in upon
Us, and has opened the fountain of his Love unto us, and the streams thereof
has freely run from Vessel to Vessel, praises be given to him for ever. And
many living Testimonies by our Brethren and Sisters have been born amongst us:
Also, we have received many good and comfortable Epistles in writing from
several Monthly meetings within our County, to our great satisfaction, of the
care and concern of Friends in their respective places for the honor of God
and prosperity of his Truth; for great and large has been the love of God unto
us and amongst us, to our great encouragement, that we can do no less but
Invite you our dear Friends and Sisters, who profess the Honorable Name of God
and his blessed Truth, unto whom this is the Salutation of our endeared Love to
you all, who have passed through many slanderous reproaches for your liveing
obedience to it: Oh! Friends let it be as wieghty on your hearts and minds as
ever it was, and let your care and circumspection be as great as ever, (in
every respect;) for the way is the same, the Lord is the same, and his Truth is
the same; And all that abides in it finds as great necessity as ever to keep to
the daily Cross, that thereby they may be Crucified to the World, and the World
unto them, that so they may stand clear and unspotted or defiled by the evil
of it, or the vain Customs, Fashions and Traditions therein, and more
particularly that you have a diligent care in respect to Truths honor, and the
unity and Fellowship with those many wholesome Exhortations and Admonitions
which from time to time have been recommended to you and us, by our Brethren
and Sisters, whose Labors and Exercise is in the Word and Doctrine of our Lord
Jesus Christ: So that in order thereto, we who are of the Female Sex, answer
our places; and ye that are Mothers of Children, and have the Ordering and
Governing of them (it may be more then Fathers, because they may be more
absent) we do advise and exhort you all, to be very dilligent to answer your
places to your Children in a Holy care and watchfullness over them* and that
you Restrain them while they are young, from all foolish and unnecessary
things; Either in Apparel which lies more particularly upon Mothers to put a
stop to, as also the new Changable unnecessary Fashons of high dressed Heads,
which is so extremely run into by the People of the World, and too many
professing truth, a Fashon not becoming modesty, much less Women professing
Godlyness; Therefore we desire that yon Restrain your Children from the
practice of it; as also from needless Dresses about your Meat, which Youth in
our day is too prone unto in some places: These with any other that may be
unnecessesary, we lay it as a conscern upon you elder Women. That as the Holy
Women in Ancient times ye may be good patterns, and train up the Young-ones in
the days of their Youth, in the way which they should walk: And then if they
come to maturity of Years, and understanding, they will not forget, but as
truth is Planted in them, and they growing in it, will bless God on your
behalf: That you restrained them from the Vanities of this World, and will be a
blessing unto you in your Old age, even as faithful Plants about your Tables,
and you may be as Mothers in Israel; Nursing up the Young Women in that which
is good, that so when you grow in Years they may be willing and fit to bear
part with you, not only in your outward concerns and business, but also in
relation to truth and the concerns of it, in your Monthly and Women's meetings,
that they may be in readiness to put to their Shoulders to bear, and their
Hands to Labor in their Day and time, and not to bring them up as strangers
and unaquainted with the way of truth, as if you never intended them to be of
the number amongst you, and they willing to be unconcerned and at liberty, not
comeing into the sense of the service, and great necessity there is of it, by
your not answering your places and putting them on therein; such in process of
time may be ready to judge others and say, that they know no need of Women's
meetings, nor they know no service in them ^ yea it may be (which would be
cause of sadness) the Children of such Parents as have borne a Living Testimony
for the same: And therefore we do advise and warn all such in the fear of the
Lord God: Keep low out of all exal^edness of mind, and do not think because ye
are Children of believing Parents, you are well enough; but come learn to tread
in the Path of true self denial, and to bear the Yoke in the days of your
Youth, that so it may become natural to you to follow the footsteps of your
faithful Parents, and in true subjection to the Elders, having them in
estimation as worthy of double Honor for their Faithfulness to the Truth, and
as those that have borne the burden and heat of the day, and yet are willing
to labor with you, that have come in as at the Eleventh hour; that so you may
receive your Penny, and reap of the fruits of their Labors, and walk in the
path which they have trodden out with much hardship, difficulty and great
exercise, that so you may know your places and service in this latter time of
the day, which according to its season the Lord calls for, for there is still
work to be done in his Vineyard, tho it be planted and hedged about in a good
measure; yet there must be a d^^ligent care that the Hedge be not broken down
and that the little Foxes or the wild Boars, do not get in to spoil or lay
waste the Lords Vinyard, and also that care be taken to pluck up any noysom
Weeds, which man be seen to spring up again that may hinder the grouth of the
Righteous Plant of Renown, so dear Friends and Sisters, both Old and Young, it
is our advice unto you, be willing to labor; And be diligent in keeping your
Women's Meetings, and where any neglect has been, that for the time to come you
may be more diligent, and tho some that are of a quareling and seperating
spirit, and cannot abide to come under reproof or judgment of the Men or Women's
Meetings, and is ready to say there is no business not need for Women to be
concerned in the Church: We say, that Women ought to have a care, and concern
as well as the Men, being members of the Church^s and every Member has its
Office in the Body, he who promised to power out his Spirit on Daughters as on
Sons: Surely has concerned us in the Church, yea we have a Garden to weed, a
House to keep clean, inward as well as outward, which is a work necessary to be
done, in this latter time or day, which calls for Fruits to be brought forth to
the praise of him who has bestowed much Labor on us, and given us many
fruitful seasons: So recommending you dear ^isters unto the Lord, and the
guidance of his good Spirit in all your concerns, Referring you for a further
account of the good Service of this Meeting, to such Friends as were here
present, where the Lords Love and goodness was plentifully manifested amongst
us, Blessed be his glorious Name* and power for Ever, and Ever,

Amen. Signed on the Behalf of the Meeting. Deborah Winn. Sarah English. Sarah
Fletcher. Judith Boulbie. Katherin Winn. Frances Tailor. Mary White. Margares
Breckon.



