A FULL and TRUE RELATION OF THE GLORIOUS VICTORY OF THE CHRISTIANS over the
TVRKS.
THe Amazing Progresses of the Imperial Arms, being the Present Entertainment
of the World, and having as yet had no good Account of their Source, which was
the late Great Victory over the Turks, We presumed it would not be amiss if we
touched it over anew; and the rather for that a most particular Relation being
come from one of the Principal Officers that was present in that Action, it
will not only rectify several Mistakes that have been committed in most of the
other Accounts that have been Published, but give a perfect Idea of that
Glorious Battle.

THe Hardships suffered by the Imperialists, as well in going to the Enemies,
when they were Encamped under Esseck, as in returning thence, having as it were
spent all their Forces, the Duke of Lorrain had no sooner passed the Drove
again, but that he prevailed with the Duke of Bavaria to draw near the Danube,
where Provisions could not be so scarce as in the Parts whence they came. This
was a Course so necessary for the Army, that there was no other way to rescue
it from absolute Ruin; the Cavalry, more especially, had been in want of
Forage for above a Month, for having been almost continually in the Moerasses,
it had had no other subsistence than what they afforded.

The Turks knowing it is Distress, and being also encouraged by what had
befallen them near Esseck, they marched after it. In the mean while, the
Imperialists got to Mohatz, where they staid eight whole days to recover
themselves of their Fatigues. There the Danube furnished them with abundance of
Provisions, and their Army being in some wise recovered, a Council of War was
held to consult on what undertaking it should be employed. Herein it was
resolved that Alba-Regalis should be Besieged, and that they should immediately
begin their March to execute this Design. During these Transactions, some
Parties of Tartars advanced under favor of the Woods, and snapt up our
Forragers. The next day they did the same again, and our Spies brought back
word that the whole Turkish Army was at hand, and was moving onward with
Intention of Beleaguering Ziclos. A Deserter and a Prisoner, taken by a Party,
Confirmed this Report; whereupon a new Council of War was held, the Result of
which was to demolish Ziclos and Five-Churches, take the Garrisons thence, and
all that was within them, and then to march on to Alba-Regalis, where we were
in hopes of making good Lines before the Turks could come up to us. On the 8th
of August we left Mohatz to put this Design in Execution, but we had no sooner
began our March, but that there appeared a Body of full three thousand Horse,
that advanced very near us, which compelled us to halt. It Skirmish'd in good
Order, insomuch as to hinder the Army from getting that day to the place where
the D. of Lorrain had designed to Encamp. Thus it stopped within half a League
above Mohatz, where the Spies not only Confirmed the News they had brought the
day before, but further that the Grand-Vizier had so efficaciously represented
to the Grand Signior, that he was in a Condition to fight the Christians, that
he had received Orders to give Battle. The Duke of Lorrain imparted these News
to the Elector of Bavariae and the General Officers, who did not Question the
Truth of the Information, seeing with what Boldness the three thousand Horse
had stopped them the day before. Nevertheless they persisted in the Design they
had projected, and Orders were given for the continuing the March on the
morrow. In the mean while, part of the Night was spent in sending out Parties,
and in Clearing our Arms. The Parties gave not any Account on which any
Reliance could be had, but a Spy that had been in the Turks very Camp, brought
back word, that the Grand-Vizier had caused the Orders he had received from
Constantinople to be proclaimed throughout the whole Camp, with a promise of
rewarding all those that should behave themselves as became them in the Battle.
The Imperial Army having renewed it is March at break of day, it was again
disturbed by a Body of Horse, that did not discontinue Skirting it, and ever
and anon coming up to try it is temper. The Duke of Lorrain drew up Forces to
receive them, but they made so very Orderly a Retreat, that there was no way to
get them to an Engagement. This passed on the 9th of the Month, and the Enemies
Conduct was still the same on the 10th and 11th, still following the Army that
was marching toward Ziclos. At last the Imperialists being come that day near
the Hill of Hersan, at the foot of which was formerly a fine Village bearing
the same name, but which War has totally ruined, the Duke of Lorrain had notice
that the Grand-Vizier after having marched Day and Night, had made such
expedition that he was but a League distant from him, nay that he had possessed
himself of a Wood that was on his way, and wherein he had put some Troops,
hoping to fall upon his in the Flank. As nothing was to be neglected with such
an Enemy, that since the beginning of the Campaign had exerted such great Skill
and Experience as was not to have been expected in the Turks, it was thought
expedient to call a Council of War anew: It was the Elector of Bavaria's turn
to Command the Vanguard the next day; but as it was dangerous to make such a
Movement, it was resolved, contrary to what is commonly practiced in a March,
that every one should remain at the Post where he was the day before. We again
sent out several Parties, but of few men only, to know exactly whether what was
said of the Enemy was true; but the Enemy on his side being not willing to lie
still, sent two or three thousand Horse that very Evening, which gave an
Allarum to the Camp. As the whole Army stood at their Arms, it was impossible
for them to do any thing, on the contrary they were drove back to the very
Thickets, and we durst not push them further, as fearing there might be some
considerable Succors behind the Bushes. The Duke of Lorrain to be ascertained
of this, caused Men to climb up to the Hill of Hersan, and they bringing him
word that there appeared a great Body beyond the Thickets; some Volunteers
advanced to fire their Pistols at them; but not being so advantageously mounted
as many of the Turks they went to attacque, they were immediately Surrounded,
and their Heads hewn off in the presence of the whole Army. This was done with
such fearful howlings, that it daunted all those that had not yet been Engaged
with those Barbarians. In the mean while, each Man withdrew into his Camp, and
as it was not questioned but that there would be a considerable Brush the next
day, the Greater part of the Generals spent the Night on Horseback, and toward
break of day the Enemies came to Surprise and take away the main Guard. Some
Blows were given in this Occasion, but the Imperialists being in a due Posture,
they killed 5 or 6 Turks for as many of theirs which sell upon the Place. One
of those Barbarians who was not yet Dead, having been questioned, said that the
Grand-Vizier was there hard by with his Army, consisting of Seaventy thousand
Men, that he had been Retrenching himself all the Night, that he had also lined
the Wood, above mentioned, with more Men, that he pretended he was so
advantageously Encamped, that he bragged he should defeat the Christian Army,
without being compelled to give Battle. Hereupon a Council of War was held
anew, and as the falling back would have been the abandoning of Zyclos and the
other Places on the Drove, they agreed to pursue their march toward the former
of those Places. The Orders having accordingly been given, the Duke of Lorrain
put himself at the head of the Vanguard, which was composed of the Right Wing,
and that he might be under Cover from the Enemies that were in the Wood, he
left some Dragoons and Battaillons to cover the flank of the Horse. The Enemies
lying at watch to take their Advantages, made then a Movement which perplexed
the Duke of Lorrain; He perceived that they were going to fall upon the Duke of
Bavaria; wherefore he Detached Picolomini with his Brigade to go give him
Succors. And indeed they began to Skirmish with that Duke, who advancing to
encourage his Men by his Presence, a Turk slipped along under savor of the
Bushes, and seeing the Elector have a Red-Embroidered Coat on, with a white
feather in his Hat, and thence presuming him to be a Person of Quality, he
fancied it would be a Brave Exploit in him to kill him. Whereupon he fired his
Fusil at him, but instead of hitting him in the Body, he hit him in the left
hand, and this made so much noise that all those that were not far from his
Person believed him to be dangerously wounded. Without farther Enquiry this
same rumor was immediately spread about his Troops, and this might have been
of ill Consequence, had he not shown himself immediately to them all.

In the mean while, the Army being on its march, and the Vanguard having passed
a Bottom, it moved up along a furrow, at the Upper End of which there was a
Hedge that covered a Plain; Beyond this Hedge were some Turkish Horse, which
were to amuse the Duke of Lorrain, while the main Body fell upon the Duke of
Bavaria, made a show as if they meant to come to Blows with him; but having
avoided the Battle at the same time they seemed to offer it: the whole stress
fell upon the Duke of Bavaria, who having orders not to Engage, contented
himself with standing upon the Defensive. This did still the more Embolden the
Infidels, and coming up very close and every other moment to try his Temper, he
sent to acquaint the Duke of Lorrain with the Posture of his Affairs, and to
ask his leave to fight. The Duke of Lorrain sent him back word to follow the
Orders they had agreed on in the Morning, but his Electoral Highness seeing
himself still more and more pressed, sent back to tell the Duke of Lorrain,
that when they were in a Council of War, they might argue as they pleased, but
that when the Enemies were pouring upon them the case was very Different; that
every other minute there fell-upon him new Battaillons and new Squadrons, which
it was impossible for him to stand the Brunt of, by merely keeping upon the
Defensive, that his Men being thereby Exposed, began to murmur at so much
prudence; that it was to be feared that after their having suffered much, they
might take the Course of avoiding the Danger by flight, since possibly they
would imagine they might honorably do so, since we led 'em not on to fight.

During these Occurrences the Number of the Infidels did visibly multiply, and
having slipped along a Wood, they wholly faced it, insomuch that when the
Imperialists came to pass, they made a Discharge upon them, which laid some of
them upon the spot, and compelled the Rest to halt. To perplex them the more,
they appeared at the same time at the Vanguard, but their Design being to make
their utmost Onsets on the side of the Elector of Bavaria; They proceeded no
further then to Skirmish, which hindered the Duke of Lorrain from being able to
send other Snccours than that beforementioned to the Rear. In the mean while,
as every thing till then had promised them the Victory, a Body that had not as
yet fallen on, advanced the Duke of Bavaria, with dismal screams and howlings,
insomuch that he saw himself thereby forced, without staying for the Permission
he had to demand to fight, to use his utmost Endeavors to free himself from so
great a danger. He made head against them with such Troops as in whom he most
Confided, and having caused small Fieldpieces to be placed at the head of the
Battaillons, they were put to so good a use that they kept the Enemies in great
Respect. In the mean while, Picolomini, who, as has been said, was sent to the
Duke of Bavaria's Succors, thinking him in great Danger, ran to him with his
Men, and the Duke seeing him come, Commanded him to drive the Turks from a
Bottom, which he had newly passed himself. Picolomini executed this Order with
great Courage, and being seconded by good Fortune, he not only remained Master
of the Bottom, but also pursued the Enemies to the very Wood, which they still
possessed, and which was the place of their Retreat. There they perceived that
they had unaccountably given way, since he had none to back him; Insomuch that
being ashamed of what they had done, they returned to the Charge, and made such
havoc of the Regiment of Commerci, which was of that Brigade, that in a trice
they killed two hundred of it is men. The rest seeing this, betook themselves to
flight, and the sooner for that they were all terrified to see these
Barbarians, who had cut off the heads of the greater part, which they carried
before them, howling at such a rate as was capable of daunting the most
Resolute. In this Occasion was it that the Prince of Commerci was wounded with
a Lance, and that the Count de Ligneville, the Major of his Regiment was
killed, whose Head they cut off as well as the rest. The rest of the Turkish
Cavalry, having this advantage on it is side, fell then anew with extraordinary
fury upon the Duke of Bavaria, who was not a little put to it to stand this
first Onset; Nevertheless having of his own Person performed Wonders, and
thereby given an Example to others, they all stood firm; Insomuch that after a
long and very obstinate fight the Turks began to Buckle; but in such good
order, that in turning their backs they seemed less to Fly then make a Retreat.
This induced the Elector to consider whether he ought to pursue them or not;
but that held him not long in suspense, they of themselves returned to the
Charge, and that too with so much Resolution and Fury, that had not the Elector
commanded Cannon to be brought, they had been Capable of routing him. But
having caused it to be charged with Cartridges, he dispersed the most daring.
An infinite number of Volleys were fired in a trice, and this with so much
Success, that we heard the Cries of those that were wounded by them, which did
so very much intimidate the rest, that they betook themselves to flight. They
retired aside the Wood, which put a stop for some time, apprehending it might
be lined, and that instead of prosecuting a Victory, we might hazard the
receiving an Affront. In the mean while, the Duke of Bavaria having caused it
to be viewed, and none of them being there found, we pursued them, but the
Pursuit was not long. After we had marched a very little time we perceived they
had entered into Retrenchments, which we could not believe though we saw it with
our Eyes. These Retrenchments had indeed been made in have, and we saw they had
not had time to complete them: But as their situation was advantageous (for
they were between a Moerass and a Wood) it was not judged convenient to advance
further, without first using mature consideration. We perceived it to be the
Grand-Viziers Camp, which was confirmed to us by some Prisoners, who informed
us that there were still several fresh forces that had not as yet stirred out
of it. This occasioned new thoughts, as also for that the head of this Camp was
defended by a Battery of twelve Pieces of Ordinance, which began to speak to us
in Thunder. It was still further augmented in a Moment, and the Turks fearing
that the Imperialists would undertake to force them, notwithstanding so many
difficulties, fell to work in our very sight to stop up some Passages that were
as yet quite open. Nay, and we perceived a Man with a Turbant all beset with
Jewels, and a stately Vestment give his Orders without seeming to be under the
least Concern. We judged as well by this Character as from the Richness of the
things newly mentioned, that if it was not the Grand-Vizier, it was at least a
Person of very great Eminency among them. This augmented the Greediness of the
Soldiery, who being vexed that they had fought so long without having got any
thing, asked why they stopped at such small Impediments. The Elector was
altogether of the same Opinion, but the General Officers about him having given
him to understand that the undertaking to force those Retrenchments without
Cannon, would be too great a venture, several Pieces were brought up, which
were placed Battery-wise with wonderful Expedition. The greater part of the
Retrenchment being only of Dirt and Mud, having been hereby Levelled in a
trice, all of a Sudden we saw the Cavalry march, without staying for Orders,
telling each other that if they could but pass, they were enriched for Ever.
That of the Turks seeing it coming with so much Resolution grew daunted, and
without staying for its coming up, fled cowardly away, abandoning the Infantry
to the Discretion of the Conquerors. The Janissaries were startled at the
Desertion of their Horse, nevertheless they marched up to the Breach, which
they defended with such Courage as was near akin to despair. But the Cavalry
having opened it self a passage through other Places, they were quickly
Surrounded and put to the Sword. The Rest of the Infantry suffered very much,
and none Escaped but the most ready at their heels. All the Tents were found in
the Camp, which the Elector having entered made directly up to that of the
Grand-Vizier, which was observable for its Extraordinary wealth, and for
several marks which are peculiar to the Generals of those Barbarians. He found
no body in it, nor about it, though it was well worth the pains of looking to, as
well in regard of its self, as of what it contained.

In the mean while, the Duke of Lorrain advanced, and Complemented his
Electoral Highness upon the happy Success of that Day; but having not leisure
to enlarge much upon that, he gave Dunewaldt Order to pursue the Runaways, and
detached Ten thousand Horse for that Expedition. This Genesis found some of the
Fugitives on the way, but making directly to the Bridge which the Turks had
over the Drove, he found the main Body had passed it, and had broke the Bridge
after them. But the shore was all strewn with Clothes, and Bodies lay all
floating over the River. Two Bassa's, and several of the Principal Officers
were taken Prisoners, with about Eight hundred Common Soldiers, and the Dead
ten times as many. The Conquerors got all the Cannon, consisting in Ninety
pieces of Ordinance, and twelve Mortar-pieces, with Tents, Camels, Wagons, and
Elephants in Abundance, with all other sorts of Booty almost beyond
Imagination. This Victory cost the Imperialists not above six Hundred Men, as
they themselves say, and as others Eighteen hundred. And thus ended that
Glorious Day, for which Te Deum was sung in the Camp, at Vienna, Rome, and
Venice.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Modern History, Or the Monthly Accounts of all Considerable Occurrences,
Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military. Sold by R. Tailor


