A full ACCOUNT of the Late Dreadful Earthquake At PORT ROYAL in JAMAICA;
Written in two Letters from the Minister of that Place.
From a Board the Granada in Port Royal Harbor, June 22, 1692.
Licensed Sept. 9, 1692.
Dear Friend,
I Doubt not but you will both from Gazetts, and Letters hear of the gerat
Calamity that has befallen this Island by a Terrible Earthquake, on the 7th
Instant, which has thrown down almost all the Houses, Churches, Sugar-Works,
Mills, and Bridges through the whole Country. It tore the Rocks and Mountains,
and destroyed some whole Plantations, and threw them into the Sea, but
Port-Royall had much the greatest share in this terrible Judgment of God; I
will therefore be more particular in giving you an Account of its Proceedings
in the Place, that you may know what my danger was, and how unexpected my
Preservation. On Wednesday the 7th of June I had been at Church Reading
Prayers, which I did every day since I was Rector of Port Royal, to keep up
some show of Religion among a most Ungodly Debauched People, and was gone to a
Place hard by the Church, where the Merchants used to meet, and where the
President of the Council was, who acts now in Chief 'till we have a new
Governor; who came into my Company, and engaged me to take a Glass of wormwood
Wine with him as a whet before Dinner, he being my very great Friend, I staid
with him, upon which, he lighted a Pipe of Tobacco, which he was pretty long a
taking; and not being willing to leave him before it was out, this detained me
from going to Dinner to one Captain Ruden's, where I was to Dine; whose House
upon the first Concussion sunk first into the Earth, and then into the Sea,
with his Wife, and Family, and some that were come to Dine with him; had I been
there I had been lost. But to Return to the President, and his Pipe of Tobacco;
before that was out, I found the ground rolling and moving under my feet, upon
which I said to him, Lord, Sir, what is this? he replied very composedly, being
a very Grave Man, It is an Earthquake, be not afraid, it will soon be over, but
it increased, and we heard the Church and Tower fall, upon which, we ran to
save our selves; I quickly lost him, and made toward Morgan's- Fort, which
being a wide open place, I thought to be there securest from the falling
Houses; But as I made toward it, I saw the Earth open and swallow up a
multitude of People, and the Sea mounting in upon us over the Fortifications. I
then laid aside all thoughts of escaping, and resolved to make toward my own
Lodging, and there to meet Death in as good a Posture as I could: From the
Place where I was, I was forced to cross and run through two or three very
narrow Streets, the Houses and Walls fell on each side of me, some Bricks came
rolling over my shoes, but none hurt me; when I came to my Lodging I found
there all things in the same order I left them, not a Picture, of which there
were several fair ones in my Chamber, being out of its place, I went to my
Balconey to view the Street in which our House stood, and saw never a House
down there, nor the ground so much as cracked; the People seeing me there,
cried out to me to come and Pray with them; when I came into the Street every
one laid hold on my Clothes and embraced me, that with their fear and kindness
I was almost stifled; I persuaded them at last to kneel down and make a large
Ring, which they did, I prayed with them near an hour, when I was almost spent
with the heat of the Sun, and the exercise, they then brought me a Chair, the
Earth working all the while with new motions, and tremblings, like the rowlings
of the Sea; insomuch that sometimes when I was at Prayer I could hardly keep my
self upon my knees. By that time I had been half an hour longer with them, in
setting before them their Sins and heinous Provocations, and in seriously
exhorting them to Repentance, there came some Mercahants to me of the place,
who desired me to go aboard some Ship in the Harbor, and refresh my self,
telling me that they had gotten a Boat to carry me off; so coming to the Sea,
which had entirely swallowed up the Wharf, with all those goodly Brick Houses
upon it, most of them as fine as those in Cheapside, and two Entire Streets
beyond that: I upon the tops of some Houses which lay levelled with the surface
of the water, got first into a Canoe, and then into a Longboat, which put me
aboard a Ship called the S^am-Merchant, where I found the President safe, who
was overjoyed to see me; there I continued that night, but could not sleep for
the returns of the Earthquake almost every hour, which made all the Guns in the
Ship to jarr and rattle: The next day I went from Ship to Ship to Visit those
that were bruised, and a dying, and to Pray with them, and likewise to do the
last Office at the sinking of several Corpse that came floating from the Point,
which indeed has been my sorrowful Employment ever since I came aboard this
Ship with design to come for England, we having nothing but shakings of the
Earth, and Thunder^ and Lightning, and foul weather ever since; and the People
being so desperately wicked it makes me afraid to stay in the Place; for that
very day this terrible Earthquaqe was, as soon as night came on, a Company of
lewd Rogues whom they call Privateers, fell to breaking open Warehouses, and
Houses deserted, to Rob and Rifle their Neighbors whilst the Earth trembled
under them, and some of the Houses fell on them in the Act: And those audacious
Whores that remain still upon the Place, are as Impudent, and Drunken as ever.
I have been twice on Shore to Pray with the Bruised and Dying People, and to
Christen Children, where I met too many Drunk and Swearing, I did not spare
them, nor the Magistrates neither, who have suffered Wickedness to grow to so
great a height; I have I bless God, to the best of my skill and power
discharged my Duty in this place, which you will hear from most Persons that
come from hence; I have Preached so seasonably to them, and so plain in the
last Sermon I Preached to them in the Church; I set before them what would be
the issue of their impenitence, and Wickedness, that they have since confessed,
that it was more like a Prophecy than a Sermon; I had, I confess, an impulse
on me to do it: And many times I have preached in this Pulpit, things that I
never premeditated at home, and could not, methought, do otherwise. The day
when all this befell us was very clear, afforded not the suspicion of the least
evil; but in the space of three Minutes, about half an hour after Eleven in the
Morning, Port Royal, the fairest Town of all the English Plantations, the best
Emporium and Mart of the this part of the World, exceeding in its Riches,
plentiful of all good things, was shaken and shattered to pieces, and sunk
into, and covered for the greatest part, by the Sea, and will in a short time
be wholly eaten up by it; for few of those Houses that yet stand, are left
whole, and every day we hear them fall, and the Sea daily incroaches upon it;
we guess, that by the falling of the Houses, and the opening of the Earth, and
the Inundation of the Waters, there are lost Fifteen hundred persons, and many
of good note, of whom my good Friend Attorney General Musgrove, Provost Marshal
Reves another, my Lord Secretary Reves another. Will. Turner, Thomas Turner's
Brother is lost, Mr. Swymer escaped, but his House-mate, Mr. Watts, is lost.

I came, I told you, on board this Ship in order to come home, but the People
are so importunate with me to stay, I know not what to say to them; I must
undergo great hardships if I continue here, the Country being broken all to
pieces and dissetled, I must live now in a Hutt, eat Yams and Plantans for
Bread, which I could never endure; drink Rumm-Punch and Water, which were never
pleasing to me. I have writ to send a younger person, who may better endure the
Fatigue of it than I can; but if I should leave them now, it would look very
unnatural to leave them in their distress; and therefore whatever I suffer, I
would not have such a blame lie at my door; and I am resolved, That by reason
of the present distress, to continue with them a Year longer: They are going
all in haste to build a new Town near the Rock in Linnavea, the Guardian of
this Island. The French from Pituguaveis did attack this Island on the North
side, but were all defeated and destroyed it being about the time of the
Earthquake.

June 28, 1692.
EVer since that fatal day, the most terrible that ever I saw in my life, I
have lived on Board a Ship, for the shakings of the Earth return every now and
then; Yesterday we had a very great one, but it seems less terrible on
Shipboard than on Shore, yet I have ventured to Port Royal no less than three
times since its desolation, among the shattered Houses to Bury the dead, and
Pray with the Sick, and Christen the Children. Sunday last I preached among
them in a Tent, the Houses that remain being so shattered, that I durst not
venture to Preach in them; the People are overjoyed to see me among them, and
wept bitterly when I preached to them: I hope by this terrible Judgment, God
will make them reform their lives, for there was not a more ungodly People on
the Face of the Earth. It is a sad sight to see all this Harbor, one of the
fairest and goodliest I ever saw covered with the dead Bodies of People of all
conditions floating up and down without burial, for our great and famous
Burial-place, called the Pallisadoes was destroyed by the Earthquake, and the
Sea washed the Carcakasses of those that were buried out of their Graves, their
Tombs being dashed to pieces by the Earthquake, of which there were hundreds in
that place: Multitudes of Rich Men are utterly ruined, whilst many that were
poor, by watching opportunities, and searching the wracked and sunk Houses,
even almost while the Earthquake lasted, and terror and amazement were upon all
the considerable People, have gotten great Riches. We have had Accounts from
several parts of these Islands of the Mischiefs done by the Earthquake; from
St. Anns we hear of above 1000 Acres of Woodland changed into the Sea, and
carried with it whole Plantations, but no place suffered like Port Royal; where
whole Streets were swallowed up by the opening Earth, and the Houses and
Inhabitants went down together, some of them were driven up again by the Sea,
which arose in those breaches, and wonderfully escaped; some were swallowed up
to the Neck, and then the Earth shut upon them, and squeezed them to death; and
in that manner several are left buried with their Heads above ground, only some
Heads the Dogs have eaten, others are covered with Dust and Earth by the People
which yet remain in the place, to avoid the stench. Thus, I have told you a
long and a sad Story, and God knows what worse may happen yet: the People tell
me, that they hear great bellowings and noises in the Mountains, which makes
some very apprehensive of an eruption of Fire; if so, it will, I fear, be more
destructive than the Earthquake. I am afraid to say, and yet I know not how, in
point of Conscience, at such a juncture as this, to quit my Station.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, and Sold by R. Baldwyn. 1692.


