A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the LANDING of the Late King James II. IN IRELAND.
WITH A particular Relation of his Voyage, And Manner of RECEPTION, AND OF The
SHIPS, MEN, MONEY, and ARMS, Which he has brought along with him from France.
March 22. 1688/9.
Imprimatur.

James Fraser.

THat the World may be assured, that the late King James it now landed in
Ireland, I shall not only give a particular Account of his Arrival there, but
also of his Journey from the Court of France, to the Port of Breast, and
like^ise of his Voyage thence to Ireland, and of the Ships, Men, Money, and
Arms, which the French King has sent along with him for his Assistance.

The 25th of the last Month, New Style, the late King James went from St.
Germains to Peris, and there heard Mass in the Metropolitan Church of that
City, where he was received by the Archbishop at the head of the Chapter, and
received the Sacrament at the hands of the Abbe Perfait, Canon of the said
Church. He afterward dined with the Count de Lauz^^, on whom that Morning
before he went to Mass, he conferred the Honor of the Order of the Ga^e^.
After Dinner he went to the Palace of Orleans, ^o visit and take leave of
Mademoiselle of Orleans, Madam the Great Duchess of Tuscany, and Madam of
Guise. In the Eve^ing he went to the Court at Versailles, to take leave of the
French King, and returned that Night to his late Queen at St. Germains en Lay.

The 27th the French King went to St. G^^mains, to take leave of the late King
of England.

The 28th. early in the Morning, all things being ready for the late King's
Journey to Breast, he took leave of his late Queen and the Child, all present
being in Tears at his departure, the late King not excepted. ^e traveled in a
Calash, accompanied by the Marshal Duke de Luxembourg, and Count de M^^lly, as
also by the Count de Aveux, the last French Ambassador in Holland, and now
appointed to go along with the late King of England, in Quality of Ambassador
Extraordinary from the French King. He wen^ guarded by some French Horse, and
preceded and accompanied by diverse English, Scotch and Irish O^^^cers. The same
day the late King got to Orleans, where he was lodged in the House of the Sieur
de Creit, Intendant of the Province, who met him a League and a half with his
Coaches; the Citizens were in Arms, and complimen^^^ him in a Body. The
Intendant entertained him magnif^cently at Supper; And the next Morning, b^ing
the First of March, after having heard Mass, he continued his Journey, and
arrived that Night at Tours, where ^e was received and entertain^d in like
manner, by the Marquess Rasilly, Lieutenant General.

The 2d, after having heard Mass, he went and lodged that Night at Angers, and
afterward continued his way toward Nantes and Roch-Bernard, where he was
magnificently received and treated by the Duke de Chau^^^, Govern^ur of ^ritany.

O^ ^he 5th of M^^^h ^nstant, ^^w St^^^, the late King arriv^^ in the Even^^g
at Breast, accompanied by the Persons aforesaid, as also by the Marshal d'
Estrees, who met and received him at Lanveoc, three Leagues off of Breast, with
a Frigate and a Galiot, and most of the Boa^^ ^^longing to the Ships. He ^as
saluted as ^e p^ssed ^long by ^ll ^h^ Gu^ of the Castle and Ships. The Coun^ d^
Beth^ne, Chief of the Squadron, and the Sieur de C^^seau, Intendant of the Sea,
received him at his landing; where he was also received by the Bish^^ of ^on,
clo^^ed Po^^^^ically at the head of ^^e C^^^gy; he pa^^^^ through (...) double
Fi^^ of C^^^zens, (...) were ranged (...) Arms on b^th s^^es the S^^^ets, to
^he Lo^gings prepared for him. He supped in Public, having at his Table the
Duke of Berwick, the Marshal d' Estrees, and the General Sea-Officers, with
those General Land-Officers which the French King sent to accompany him to
Ireland.

The 6th he went to se^ the Ship^, and went on board the St. Michael, commanded
by the Sieur Gabaret, Chief of the Squadron, as also on board another Man of
War, commanded by the Sieur ^^^an^ ^^so Chief of a Sq^adron, and in the Evening
he visited the Magazins of the Sea-Anchal. There (...) ready in that Port
Fourteen French Men of War, Three Fireships, and Seven Frigates, to Convoy the
late King, as also a sufficient number of Tenders, and Vessels of Burden; to
transport Landforces, Arms and Ammunition.

On the 7th, the Wind coming fair, the late King ^^barque (...) board the Str
Michael, where he no^ done entered the Cabin but the Wind turned Northerly, he
lay on board all (...) and the Wind continuing contrary, he (...) the 8th (...)
^our, land th^re remained till ^he (...); the Wind presenting fair al second
(...), about Noon that day, he went on board (...) same Ship, and about 4
weighed Anchor, and (...) for fall. About 12 at Night, being just got out of
the Bay of Breast, the Wind ^^opped about Southerly, and obliged them to come to
(...) Anchor, where they remained till (...) next (...), and t^^^ re^^^h'd into
the Harbor.

On the 14th the Wind presented fair a third time, but being Easterly, and
hearing some English and D^tch Men of War were approaching, they deferred
putting to Sea. That Night they ^^ceived advice, that there were neither
English nor Dutch near them, and that the Coa^^ was clear; nevertheless they
deferred setting sail till Thursday, being the 17, New Style, when the Wind
being turned South-West, fair for Ireland, and against the approach of any
Ships from the Do^^^, they put to Sea a third time, the Wind proved wavering,
and so retarded their passage, that it was the (...) of this Month before they
made sight of Ireland.

Being that day come near the Bay of Kingsale, the Wind chopp'd contrary, and
opposed their Approach or Entrance for above thirty hours, so that they were
all that time forced to keep out at Sea, during which time they put forth
English Colors; then the Wind turned favorable, and they advanced within the
Bay, havin^ taken dow^ the English and put fo^th the F^ench Colour^ and sent a
^oat on ^cre to give the Town of Kingsale notice that it was the late King that
was coming. Whereupon the Magistrates, Inhabitants, Officers and Soldiers in
the Tow^ gathered together and put themselves in ^ ^eadiness to receive t^^
late King; which wa^ perfo^m'^, by all tha^ were (...) o^ Papi^^s, with great
^lacrity, who flocked to the Waterside and Huzza'd his Landding, whilst the
Governor of the Royal Fort or Citadel saluted his Arrival with a treble
disch^^ge of the C^^non, as a^^o b^^^e Muskete^^, as also Rin^ing of B^^^, a^^
Bonfire^ when Healths we^^ drank u^^^ ^nees, (...) the C^^fusion of all
Heretick^ and ^nemies (...) their True Catholic King James. Notice of whose
Arrival being forthwith given to the Earl of Tyrconnel at Dublin, a sufficient
Guard was quickly ordered on the Road betwixt Kingsale and that City.

The next day the la^^ King having heard Mass, and Te Deum being sung for joy
of his Arrival in that Kingdom, and having received the Sacrament at the hands
of an Irish Jesuit, he was by the Tow^ entertained at Dinner. That Night he
went to a Person of Qu^^^y's House an I^ish man, attended by four French
General Officers, and about Two hundred subaltern Officers stayed behind in the
Town, with most of the English, Scotch, and Irish Forces; and the Soldiers
(who it is thought are about Twelve hundred, with Arms for as many more, and
about Four hundred thousand Crowns in Money remained on board, it not being
then re^^^ved whether they should sail forward for D^^lin, or land them there.

On Thursday the 14/^^ Instant, the late King being recovered of the
Indisposition caused by the Sea, set forward for Dublin, where he arrived on
Saturday following being the (...) of this Month, being met and received by the
Earl of Tyrconnel ten miles from Dublin, who conducted him thither, having
caused all the Forces there to be drawn up at the entrance into the Town, who
saluted the late King's Arrival with three Vollies of Shot The Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Comm^ Council also met Him in their Formalitie^ The Streets were
lined with the Irish Li^ Guard even to the Castle-gate, where the la^ King was
conducted and lodged. The P^pists Inhabitants shouting, the Souldie^ Muskets
discharging, the Bells ringing, an^ at Night Bonfires in all parts of the Town.

The next day being Sunday, there wa^ singing of Te Deum, and Processions for
joy and a multitude of Masses said for the Advancement of the Catholic Cause;
to t^^ great Terror of all the Disarmed Protestan^ there and thereabouts.

London: Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey. 1689.


