A FULL and TRUE ACCOUNT Of all the Remarkable Actions and Things That have
happened in the NORTH of IRELAND, Since the 15th of November, to the 7th
Instant.
And particularly of the Actions at SLIGO, the NEWRY, and CHARLEMONT; as also
the Petition of the Chief Inhabitants of VLSTER to the Duke SCHONBERG. His
Grace's Answer thereunto. The present State of the Army and Affairs there; and
of the Seizing of Commissary SHALES.
In a LETTER from Lisbourn, of December the 7th. 1689.
LICENSED,

December 19. 1689. J. F.



HAving now so fair an opportunity of Writing to you, I think it not amiss to
entertain you with a full and distinct Account of the most material occurrences
here since the Twenty fifth of the last; and that I may do it the more clearly,
I will set down what has passed in the order of Time, every thing happened.

November. 25. Captain Richard Smith, who was one of the 300 Detatch'd from the
Camp at Dundalk, and went with Colonel Theodore Russel toward the relief of
Sligo, came to this place, and gave the following Account of the Action there:
That on the 15th of the former Month, Colonel Russel got into Sligo late at
Night, the rest being much fatigued with the inconveniency of their March,
could not reach the place, but were following after, with what haste they
could. The same night, about midnight, the Garrison was A'a m'd with the
approach of the Enemy, being discovered by the out Sentinels and Scouts to have
possessed themselves of some of the out Passes; whereupon Coll. Russel,
according to his Instructions, advised with Coll. Lloyd, who commanded in the
place, and it was concluded upon, That the whole Garrison should March out next
Morning about five a Clock, and fall upon the Enemy, which they did at a
considerable Pass, and forced them to retire; but they being reinforced played
briskly on our Men, though with very little loss, whilst the rest of the Enemies
Horse Marching round a Hill, came behind, and surrounded Coll. Lloyd at the
Pass, so that he had no way of saving himself and his Men, but by breaking
clear through the Enemies, which he performed with that resolution, as to get
off with little or no Ioss; and to facilitate it the more, Coll. Russel
entertained them warmly in another place: being thus got off, they Fought in
Retreating to the Town; but being overpowered by the great numbers of the
Enemies, they could not keep their ground long, which gave an opportunity to
the Horse to get over the Bridge; and the Enemy fearing lest they should Rally
again, thought sit to pull down an Arch of the Bridge to prevent it. In the
mean time our Foot got into the Castle, and the Enemies Foot drew up in the
Marketplace, and Ten of their Officers standing in a knot together, to consult
what to do next; one of our Men from the Castle, discharged a Field-piece
laden with Small-shot, and killed eight of the Ten dead on the place. The
Enemy then drew up a Piece of Cannon so near the Castle, that when once
Discharged; they could not for our Musketeers Charge it again; but in the
attempt lost six Gunners. The Castle being crasie, and not thought tenable, our
Men quitted it and got into the Fort, which they held five days, which was so
long as they had any Ammunition lest: and in the mean time, refused so much as
to hearken to a Treaty, till at last they had Conditions, That all in the Fort
should march out with Bag and Baggage, Drums beating, and Colors flying, etc.
And that what they could not carry, should be sent them when sent for; which
was accordingly performed, and were safely conveyed beyond all danger. One
remarkable Stratagem made use of by the Irish for the Storming the Fort, was,
They built a Box of Timber as high as the Wall, with Stairs, through which they
might ascend to the top of the Wall without Danger; and having planted it, they
within tumbled out a parcel of Shavings, and sent one down in a Basket, who
having therewith set sire to the Engine, would not return up again, until he
had stripped one of the Irish that had been killed at the foot of it, which
having done, and being in his Basket as^ending the Wall, the Enemy playing
wholly at him, with one of their Bullets cut his Rope, and let the poor
Adventurer fall, and while they were renewing the Rope, he stripped the second,
and with that Booty mounted the Wall safe again. The Enemy were 5000 Horse,
Foot, and Dragoons; and our Men exceeding not the number of 250 in all, and
lost about 26 Men; whereas of the Enemy, there was killed near. 300: The Fight
began about five in the Morning, and continued till five at Night. Coll.
Sarsfield Commanding the Irish, observed very punctually all the Articles
agreed upon, and treated the Officer; the day they were signed. No Men ever
behaved themselves better than our handful of Men did; tho in the whole
Garrison, when the Fight began, there was but one Barrel of Powder, and yet
maintained the Fight twelve hours, with full twenty times their own number, and
killed about equal their own number of the Enemy. A few French that were
detatch'd in that Party behaved themselves to admiration, under the Command of
that Brave Captain Monsieur de Saint Sauveur.

On Thursday last a Party of our Men being sent to view the ground about
Charlemont, the Enemy fally'd out upon them; but, after a smart resistance,
were forced to retire into a Trench they had provided for that purpose; which
our Dragoons seeing, quitted their Horses, fell in amongst them under the
shelter of their Cannon, killed several, and brought a considerable Booty of
Cattle.

On Saturday last there was another Action, which happened as follows: Early
that morning a strong Party of the Irish came down the Mountains, and having
surprised the Out-Centinel beyond the Newry-Bridge, with great violence rushed
suddenly into the Town, where we had not above 50 well Men, and of them not
above 14 upon Guard. Upon their approach, the second Sentinel fired, and
retreated firing toward the Main-Guard kept in the Castle; who receiving the
Alarm, issued out, and met the Enemy, and held them in play, until the rest of
the Garrison, the Townsmen, and some few Countrey-people by chance, got to
their assistance; and then having discharged; never stood to charge again; but,
notwithstanding the Irish were 25 to 1 of ours, they fell in with them with the
Butt-end of their Muskets, and thereby forced them to quit the Town, with the
loss of several Men: On our side were lost two Captains, one Lieutenant, and
five or six private Soldiers. Two Prisoners, which were behind in the Town,
say, The Irish were 1700 Horse, Foot, and Dragoons; That they could not be got
forward, but that the Officers forced them on, and assured them, That if they
got but into the Town, and set up a Huzza, all in the Garrison, without firing a
Shot, would submit; and accordingly they did set up a most terrible Huzza; but,
to their cost, found it failed their promised expectation.

Some days age, there was a Petition presented to His Grace the Duke of
Schonberg, by the principal Gentlemen of these Counties; which is as follows:

To His Grace Frederick Duke of Schonberg, General of all Their Majesty's
Forces, etc.
The humble Petition of several of the Protestant Inhabitants of the Province
of Ulster, in behalf of Themselves, and the rest of the Protestant Nobility,
Clergy, and Commonalty of the said Province,
Humbly shows,
THat Your Petitioners, with all imaginable Gratitude, are highly sensible of,
and truly thankful for Your Grace's indefatigable Labor, Hazard, Toil, and
Trouble, in Restoring, Securing, and Protecting the Protestant Interest of this
Province; And presuming, That the Protestant Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and
Commonalty, (as in Gratitude and Interest obliged) are, and will be ready to
contribute their utmost Advice and Assistance for securing the said Province,
and carrying on this War.

Your Petitioners humbly pray Your Grace, That they may Meet, Consult, and
Consider fitting Expedients to be offered Your Grace for securing, this
Province, and Your Gaace's further successful Management of this War against
the Common Enemy.

And they, as in duty bound, shall ever pray. Blaney. Ja. Hamilton of Tallymor.
Daniel Mac-Neal, Esquire Mac-Neal, Dean of Down. Sir John Magill. Randall Brice,
Esquire J. Wilkins, Dean of Clogher. Francis Hill, Esquire John Hawkins, Esquire Charles
Stewart, Esquire Robert Donnelson, Esquire etc.


The General having taken this Petition into his consid^^ation, and heard all
that was said in pursuance of it, did, after great deliberation, come to the
following Resolution:

November 30. 1689.
HIS Grace readily consents to what is desired by the Petitioners, and is
willing to receive any Advice that they shall be pleased to offer for the
Security of this Province, and the further successful Management of the War
against the Common Enemy. Signed by Order.

Robert Gorge, Secretary.

On Friday last that brave Officer Coll. Langston was buried here. The day
before, the General received Examinations taken at Ardmagh, from a Wom in that
lately escaped from the Irish, who deposes, That her Husband was on the 19th
past taken by the Irish, and kept Prisoner at Dundalk in the House of one
Hanagan, a P^^est, who (with others) is returned thither since we left it; That
she going thither to visit her Husband, heard it concluded by the said Hanagan,
and several others, That 15000 Men should be sent into the County of Down, and
20000 toward the Counties of Monaghan and Ardmagh, to heat up our Quarters:
Whereupon the General has ordered the whole Body of the Army to be faithfully
mustered, and a true Account thereof to be speedily returned him of the number
of the Well, Sick, and Dead, and of the present state of the whole Forces and
Train of Artillery: and particular Orders are sent to all the Colonels, and
other Officers in Chief, to make a true Return to the Muster-Masters (now gon^
at road to muster the whole Army, Train, Waggo^ and Carriages) of the just
numbers of the Well, Sick, Serviceable and Unserviceable Men and Horses, upon
pain of losing their Places, and farther prosecuted at a Council of War, as
Betrayers of their Trust, and King's Interest.

On Tuesday the 3d instant, about Ten a Clock at night, Commissary Shales was
by a strong Guard taken into Custody of a Messenger sent from England; and
Orders are given, That a Commission-Officer always attend him, until he come to
London, to answer for the King's Provisions, keeping back of Horses, Carriages,
and other Necessaries, which by his Place he was obliged to. His Place is at
present supplied by Mr. Robinson; late Surveyer of all the King's Forts and
Fortifications in Ireland, and Mr. Vanhumary, a Dutch Merchant.

Lieutenant General Douglas's return is expected daily from the Frontier-Towns
and Garrisons, which he has been to view, and secure so as to prevent the
sending of any Relief to Charlemont, or any other prejudice to our Quarters by
the Enemies. Irruptions upon them, The General has sent Orders to all the Chief
Officers in Frontier and other Garrisons round Charlemont, to make public
Proclamation, That none presume to give the least Succor to that Place, either
of Salt, Tobacco, Brandy, or other Provisions, upon pain of Death. Our Men do
daily visit and fleece them, so that they cannot leave a Beast without their
narrow Walls. Last week 15 or 16 Derry-men came down, and took from them a
consid^^^ble number of Cattle that were grasing close und^^ their Walls,
without the hurting of one Man, tho in reach of Musket Shot. We have pulled
down part of Newry-Bridge, and built a Battery at the foot of it, to secure a
Ford close by it; and made several other Fortifications for the Defense o^ that
burnt Town, where there is not one whole House standing, nor above five or six
rescued our of the flame^ as it was burning when we first entered it going
toward Dundalk.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Bailey, 1689.


