A Full ANSWER Paragraph by Paragraph, TO Sir JOHN FENWICK's PAPER Given to the
Sheriffs, January the 28 th, 1696/7. at the Place of Execution on Tower Hill.

By a true Son of the Church of England, as Established by Law.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin nigh the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1697.

REMARKS UPON Sir John Fenwick's Paper, etc*
SPeaking nor Writing was never my Talent, I sh(...) therefore give a very
Short but Faithful Accou(...) First, of my Religion; and next, what I Suff(...)
most Innocently for, to avoid the Calumnies I may Reas(...)ably expect my
Enemies will cast upon me when De(...) since they have most falsely and
maliciously aspersed (...) whilst under my Misfortunes.

This First Paragraph contains the Heads of (...) whole following Paper. He
first modestly owns (...) (...) (...)all all Talent of Speaking or Writing; but
in the (...)lowing Discourse, he assumes a Boldness as Ex(...)avagant: Whilst
in endeavoring to assert his own (...)nocence, he Arraigns the whole
Foundation of the (...) Government, by fixing not only his own (...)yalty (as
he so calls it) but that of the whole (...)tion, as wholly and solely in all
Justice and Duty (...)und to no other Sovereign Head than King James. (...)ow
far his Innocence may stand upon that Basis, (...)ll be farther examined, etc.

In the next part, he seems to groan under the (...)iction of a blemished
Reputation, a sensible part (...) a Man of Honor, received from the Calumnies
(...) his Enemies; with whom, and the whole World, (...) endeavors to set
himself right again, upon his (...)lowing Declaration.

As for my Religion, I was brought up in the Church (...) England, as it is
Established by Law, and have ever (...)fess'd it, though I confess I have been
an Unworthy (...)mber of it, in not living up to the strict and excel(...)
Rules thereof, for which I take shame to my self, (...) humbly ask forgiveness
of God. I come now to Die (...)hat Communion; trusting, as an humble and hearty
(...)itent, to be received, by the Mercy of God, through (...) Merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior.

This Declaration of his Education in the Church of England, we are very well
satisfied in, and even his worst Enemies have that Charity, as to hope he is
received into that Mercy, through those Merits, etc. But that he has ever
professed that Religion, and truly professed it, will admit of a very unhappy
Reflection, especially, as he has stated the Basis of that Church, viz. As it
is Estabished by Law. That Church of England, I am afraid he forgets, has
asserted the Title of our gracious Sovereign King William as the Rightful
Monarch of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and that the whole present
Allegiance and Duty of the Members of that Church is wholly owing to no other
Crowned Head but King William; and that consequently by his following
Assertions of no other Right but K. James's, even to denouncing no less than an
Impending Judgment (as he says afterward) upon the whole Nation, and no Hopes
of its Welfare or Prosperity, 'till his Restoration; I am afraid this poor
Gentleman is either no Member of that Communion, or, at least, a very Unworthy
one, in a quite different sense than that in his Paper. And 'twere heartily to
be desired, that he had either opened his own dying Eyes, or his Spiritual
Confessors would have so opened them for him, as that he might have taken this
shame to himself, and asked God forgiveness for it, as well as for those other
Errors of his Life, that have deserved that dying Blush, and implored that
Mercy: It being much to be feared, there wanted this additional Reformation, to
complete the true Penitent.

My Religion taught me my Loyalty, which, I bless God, is Untainted: And I have
ever endeavored in the Station wherein I have been placed, to the atmost of my
power, to support the Crown of England in the true and Lineal course of
Descent, without Interruption.

Here he very frankly Confesses his whole Principles, and makes his Religion
the School-Mistress that taught him them; viz. That he has ever endeavored to
support the Crown of England in its Lineal Course of Descent, without
interruption. Which, as his farther Declaration intimates, he endeavors to
prove, is the Universal Duty, whilst in thus Vindicating his own Loyalty to be
untainted, he insinuates, that of the whole Kingdom besides, to be wholly
Corrupted and Poisoned. A very hard Charge against a whole Nation, that at one
stroke, clears his own whole Attainder, and turns it all back upon his Judges.
The Criminals belike, were not Si(...) John Fenwick at the Bar, but the King,
Lords, and Commons, upon the Tribunal.

The many great Arguments relating to the Succession of Crowned Heads, and the
various Dispensations of God's Providence, by whom Kings Reign so often, in all
Ages, and all Kingdoms, in breaking that Lineal Course of Descent, he speaks
of, sometimes in Divine Writ, even with the special and immediate Command of
God himself, are those grea(...) Themes too long to be handled in this narrow
Paper, and already more learnedly discust by abler Pens. I shall only say in
short, if no Incapacities whatever can break that Lineal Chain; the whole State
of Humanity is of all Creatures most miserable; and whatever Redemption we may
have for our Souls in the other World, we have very little Titles to that of
our Bodies in this: For Chains Slavery, Oppression, and whatever the unlimited
power or Pleasure of Tyranny can lay upon us, are our Inheritance. If Sir
John's Church of England Religion (as he blesses God for it) has taught him
this, the other Members of her Communion bless God, tha(...) she has given them
quite another Lesson, and taught them to submit to the present Establishment,
as the Ordinance of God, without any Frights of those threatened Judgments
hanging over our Heads, from the Administration of our present Gracious
Sovereign.

As for what I am now to die for, I call God to witness, I went not to that
Meeting in Leaden-Hall-street, with any such intention as to Invite King James
to Invade this Nation, nor was I my self provided with either Horse or Arms, or
engaged for any Number of Men, or gave particular Consent for any such
Invasion, as is most falsely Sworn against me.

Here he acknowledges his going to the meeting in Leaden-hall-street, but not
with an intention of Inviting King James to Invade this Nation, viz. by Force.
Was King James to be Invited over any other way than by Force? As little as he
acknowledges his Talent in Speaking, and Writing, he must own it much less in
Thinking, if his Experience and Knowledge of the English aversion to King James
could be so clouded, as but to flatter himself with the least dream of King
James his Return but by Force. This Zealous Gentleman for his Old Master, must
be quite of a different Opinion from all the other Friends of that Unhappy
Prince, especially those on the other side of the Water; his good Friend Lewis
would otherwise have never given himself the unnecessary Trouble and Charge of
those Forces drawn down for King James his Descent upon England, if he had had
any such entire confidence, either in the Justice of his Cause, or the Smiles
of Providence, to have introduced him with a bloodless Revolution.

But perhaps the Interpretation of this Paragraph will bear a fairer Sense. Sir
John did not go to this meeting, Himself to Invite King James over by Force.
No, perhaps there was no occasion for it, that Invitation was already made, and
so Sir John only came to Visit and Complement the Inviter, not to make the
Invitation. And if the Invitation to a forcible Invasion was made by any other
Members of that Leaden-hall-street Meeting, however Sir John was so Courteous
as to come and kiss of the Cup, and dip in the Dish with them, undoubtedly not
overmuch disrelisht either with his Company, or their Business before them,
especially when (as he told you before) his Religion had taught him, in his
Station, to the utmost of his Power to support the Crown in its Lineal descent;
and consequently such a Forcible Invasion on that very account, should have a
hearty Well-wisher of Sir John, if not as Vigorous a Champion; though the last
of these seems most agreeable, both to Sir John's Martial Education, and his
Religious Loyalty, when as he tells you, the utmost of his Power was never
wanting in his Station on so good an occasion; and it is very unlikely that he
would want a station in such important Service; and though he tells you, he
gave no particular Consent for any such Invasion, at least, he Confesses his
general Consent; and though he Charges the Evidence as For-sworn, upon the nice
Distinction between particular and general Consent; it is very much to be
presumed, that that Evidence that has hitherto had the Confirmation of dying
Acknowledgments and Confessions, should not stretch harder upon Sir John
Fenwick than upon any other of the Criminals that dyed in the same bad Cause
before him.

I also declare in the presence of God, that I knew nothing of King James his
Coming to Callis, nor of any Invasion intended from thence, 'till it was
publicly known; and the only Notion I had, that something might be attempted,
was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

This Paragraph looks but with an Indifferent Face, for where it lays the
greatest stress of Sir John's Innocence, and consequently the greatest
Fa(...)ty upon the Evidence against him; the Penmen of this Paragraph (for in
Charity I would not willingly believe it his own) were mightily mistaken in
their point of Time; for what he declares in this, utterly contradicts, or at
least clashes with the former. For here in no less presence than Almighty God,
it is declared that Sir John knew nothing of King James's coming to Callis, nor
any Invasion intended from thence 'till publicly known; which upon our
Calculation of public knowledge, was about February, 1695/6. An(...) next,
that the whole Notion he had that somethin(...) of that kind might be
attempted, was from the Tho(...)lon Fleet's coming to Breast, which was in the
Sprin(...) following, 1696.

Now here is an unhappy Dilemma starts up again him. The foregoing Meeting, at
Leaden-hall-stre(...) unluckily fell out to be in June 1695. was a (...) before
the Thoulon Fleets return to Breast, and almost (...) much before King James his
coming to Callis, as (...) proved at large in the Trial of Sir John Friend. p. 1

Capt. Porter, My Lord, about the latter en(...) (...) May last, [viz. 1695.]
or the beginning of (...) we had two Meetings, one was at the King's-(...)
(...)n Leaden-hall-street, the other at Mrs. Mountjoys in St. James's -street.
At the first Meeting there were present, my Lord of Aylsbury, my Lord
Montgomery, Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkyns, Sir John Fenwick, Mr. Cook,
Captain Chernock and my self, after Dinner Mr. Goodman came in. Now at both
those Meetings, it was Consulted of, and agreed, to send Captain Chernock into
France to King James, (...)o desire him to borrow of the French-King 10000 Men
to come over hither, 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons. Captain Chernock
(...)aid he did not care to go upon a Foolish Message, (...)nd therefore
desired to know what they would (...)ave him to acquaint King James with, and
assure (...)im of. They all agreed to meet the King, when(...)ver they had
notice of his Landing, with a Body (...)f 2000 Horse, of which every one in
particular as to bring his Quota, wherever he would (...)point.

The Result of this Meeting, viz. Chernock's going (...) to France, so
Commissioned, and to invite King (...) to an Invasion, was likewise confessed by
Cher(...) at his Execution; and his knowledge of this In(...)n was likewise
confessed by Sir John Friend at his (...); and whether Sir John Fenwick's was a
particular or general consent to the Invasion, in concert with the whole Club
at the Leaden-Hall-street meeting, it matters not; it is sufficient we have the
very Dying Confessions of the Criminals themselves to own the Measures taken
toward an Invasion, at which Sir John Fenwick by his own Confession was
present, and consequently how far more or less consenting, could be no stranger
to an intended Invasion; yet here is no less than God himself called to witness
he knew nothing of an Invasion intended, 'till publicly known; nay, that the
only notion he had that any such thing was upon the Anvil, or like to be
attempted, was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

Nay suppose it in the largest sense, viz. the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast,
which was in the Spring Ninety Six, to be meant their very setting out in order
to come hither, viz. their first setting Sail that way. Yet, as it is
notoriously known, the Thoulon Fleet stirred not out 'till ours was upon Sail
homewards, many a long Month after June 95; so still the unhappy Contradiction
is the same, viz. That he knew nothing of the matter before February. 95-96,
and yet was privy and consenting to it the June before. Nay, it is yet farther
to be wondered what unaccountable pretended Ignorance this must be of Sir
John's knowing nothing of an Invasion, 'till publicly known, (an Invasion
which carries the Face of a kind of honorable Hostility) when the sequel of
the Paper tells you, that he was made privy to no less than a base Design
formed against the King's Life, the very April before ( viz. 95.) which he
tells you he prevented; as if the sculking Assassinates durst trust the Keys of
their Cabinet, their Edge Tools with him, and the more generous Invaders durst
not trust him with theirs.

Good Heaven! who were the Managers of this dying Gentleman's Conscience, that
could suffer him to leave such Living Records of Disingenuity behind him.

And here I cannot but look back to the unhappy Reflections made by Sir John
upon the Credit and Truth of the Evidence against him, where he utterly denies
his being provided with Horse and Arms, or Engaged for any number of Men, or
that he gave any particular Consent to the Invasion, as fasly Sworn against
him, etc. And must say this in their behalfs, That the Penmen of this Speech
are not so altogether to be credited in their Veracity of the Charge of Perjury
against the Witnesses, when they are so very loose in that point even upon Sir
John himself; and have had the Misfortune so shamefully to prevaricate, even
with Contradictions themselves in the very Declaration of his Innocence.

I also call God to Witness, That I received the Knowledge of what is contained
in those Papers, that I gave to a great Man that came to me in the Tower, both
from Letters and Messages that came from France; and he told me when I read
them to him, that the Prince of Orange had been acquainted with most of those
things before.

I cannot so well penetrate into the full depth of this Paragraph, by reason it
seems to stand in a Darker Light, being somewhat obscurer then the other part
of his Paper. Yet thus far it appears that the matters contained in those
Papers, we may suppose to be some part of a Confession, in order to lay hold of
the Royal Mercy, made to the Noble Peer sent to the Tower to Examine him, and
given him in Writing, to be transmitted to the King; the Authority of which he
declares he received from France. Whether this was any trifling Discovery, I
will not determine; though it looks like such, by reason the Noble Peer made
answer, it was no more than the King knew before.

Here I shall make one Remark, viz, That Sir John keeps up to his high
Professions for King James, when he dares not so much as give King William the
Title of King, though in the Words from another Man's Mouth, when he tells you,
that this great Man should answer him, that the Prince of Orange had been
acquainted with those things before.

What other Confessions Sir John pretended to make afterward, viz. Such, as
that of accusing so many of the Firmest and most Eminent Friends of the Crown,
as ntended more for an Amuzement to the whole Government, than an Ingenuous
Discovery: Possibly all that Knowledge might likewise come from a French Mint
too; for nothing hardly of an English Face would have a Front hard enough for
such a Forgery; however we dare not suppose that to be the Contents of those
Papers in the Tower; for then the Great Man would not have answered, That the
King was acquainted with them before. For that Confession looked more like a
Gorgon then a Discovery; fo far from any former Acquaintance of the Kings, that
I suppose it never saw Light, before Sir John and his Prompters thrust its
Dowdy Face into the World.

I might have expected Mercy from that Prince, because I was Instrumental in
saving his Life. For when about April Ninety five, an Attempt against him came
to my Knowledge, I did partly by Disswasions, and partly by Delays, prevent that
Design, which I suppose was the Reason that the last Villainous Project was
concealed from me.

In this Paragraph he makes a kind of Mordecai's Plea for receiving of mercy
from King William; for here he confesses himself entrusted with a Design formed
against King William, of no less Villainy than some Clandestine Attempts upon
the King's Life, which he partly by disswasions, and partly by delays
prevented, and thereby (as he tells you) saved the King's Life. We must here
observe, that a Person even of that great Honor and Character as Sir John
Fenwick, was nevertheless judged that proper Confident and Counsel-keeper to
the Ruffian Party, as to be made privy to so Black a Design as Assassination it
self. Nay it further appears, that he tacitly confesses himself to be an Actor
and a Leader in it; for otherwise without his privity, how could he dissuade,
or without his own actual Leading Hand, or at least Commanding Power in it, how
could he delay it.

What Truth or what Merits soever there may be in this Narrative of his secret
Service to the King I will not judge; but if any such good Service were really
done, it is a sign that he has had that Tenderness for the Actors in it, (as
much Remorse as he says he has had for the Act it self, viz. in preventing it)
that from that day to this he has wholly concealed the Plotters, though at last
he has declared the Plot. And this Aversion of his to a base Design, he
supposes, was the Reason why the late Villaous Project was concealed from him.
Very likely, for that, or other Reasons, it might be concealed from him; for I
hear not of any thing of the last Assassination laid to his Charge. But all
this clears not his Innocence from the Invasion; for that by the whole Party in
general, even by the tenderest Scrupler of Honor amongst them, was reputed a
more Manly, more Heroic, and more Warrantable Undertaking.

If there be any Persons whom I have injured in Word or Deed, I heartily pray
their Pardon, and beg of God to pardon those who have injured me, particularly
those who with great Zeal have sought my Life, and brought the Guilt of my
Innocent Blood upon the Nation, no Treason being proved upon me.

His hearty begging Pardon of all whom he had injured in Word or Deed, and his
begging God to pardon those who had any wise injured him, is a very good
Christian Acknowledgment, and would be infinitely both to his own Glory, and
his Ghostly Guides, if his whole Paper had been all of a piece with it. It Is
true, when he more particularly mentions those who, as he says, with great Zeal
sought his Life, there perhaps he might be somewhat mistaken, for that Zeal
might possibly savor more of a Loyal Warmth for the King's Preservation, and
public Justice against his Enemies, than any great Heat or Animosity against
the Person of Sir John Fenwick; and his Judges are so well satisfied in the
Equity of their Judgment, that the Cry of Innocent Blood hanging over the
Nation is the least part of their Fears.

I return my most hearty Thanks to those noble and worthy Persons who gave me
their Assistance, by opposing this Bill of Attainder, without which it had been
impossible I could have fallen under the Sentence of Death. God bless them and
their Posterity, though I am fully satisfied they pleaded their own Cause while
they defended mine.

His Expressions of Gratitude to those Members, whose peculiar Tenderness
inclined them to Mercy toward him, is very worthy from him; but where he comes
to tell them, that it had been impossible for him to have fallen under the
Sentence of Death without a Bill of Attainder; he would have done well to have
told the World, that he stood so much upon his own Innocence, that his trifling
Motions toward a Confession were no false Mask of Candor and Ingenuity, only
to protract Time till Goodman could be bribed off and spirited away to France.
And where he tells them, that whilst they defended his Cause they pleaded their
own; there, I am afraid, he has quite dashed his first grateful Acknowledgment;
for God forbid that so many worthy Gentlemen, and Men of Honor and Loyalty,
should fall under Sir John's Dilemma's, or be tinctured with his Blemishes, to
stand in want either of a Plea or Defense.

I pray God to bless my true and lawful Sovereign King James, the Queen, and
Prince of Wales, and restore him and his Posterity to this Throne again, for
the Peace and Prosperity of this Nation, which is impossible to prosper till
the Government is settled upon a right Foot.

The Transport and Zeal of this last Prayer sums all. His Death only wanted
this conclusive Protestation to seal it a Martyrdom.

The Glory and Merit of the Cause in which he dies so supersedes all the Guilt
of the Fact charged against him, that without any other Declaration, this
Innocence alone wipes off all Attainder. There can be no Blot in that Scucheon
where every private Conscience is the Herald.

It Is true, Sir John before told you, That his Religion taught him his Loyalty
to King James, his Church of England Persuasion: -- Methinks it is a mad Church
that can be so much felo de se, as to be so strangely active in Restoring of
that Prince, that would bring over Daggers to cut its' own Throat.

Methinks the whole Malecontent Party, especially the Church of England Members
amongst them, should not have forgotten the more particular Ungrateful
Treatment from that Prince, to that very Church that mounted him into his
Throne, and consequently what slender Hopes they must have of his future
Civility to it, for keeping him thus long out of it. And therefore, if after
all this Dreadful Prospect before them, (upon Supposition of his Return) their
over-scrupulous straight-lac'd Consciences cannot come up to acquiesce to the
Present Establishment, in acknowledging KING WILLIAM, that Prince's Title, not
only supported by the National Assent, the best Foundation of Allegiance; but
likewise by the Recognition of almost all the Princes of Europe, though even of
a contrary Church, the very Romanists themselves. Certainly, I say, if there
can be any such Depraved Senses left in that Communion, they are undoubtedly
resolved to let the whole World know, that their Religion has either divested
them of their Humanity or Reason, ( viz.) either in wishing such a Scourge both
to them and their Posterity, or otherwise fancying such Golden Dreams (or
rather Airy ones) from such a Restoration.

As Sacred, and as Darling as an Uninterrupted Succession may be esteemed, and
as much upon a Right Foot as King James's Title stood, nevertheless we are but
too sensible, that he began to warp into that Unfortunate Left Handed
Administration, that his Restoration ought to be no part of any Sober or
Rational Man's Prayers, except his Letany.

And now, O God, I do with all humble Devotion commend my Soul into Thy Hands,
the Great Maker and Preserver of Men, and Lover of Souls; beseeching Thee, that
it may be always dear and precious in Thy Sight, through the Merits of my
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen. JOHN FENWICKE.
Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

