A Brief DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE MOTHER of the PRETENDED PRINCE of Wales, etc.

A Brief DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE MOTHER Of the PRETENDED Prince of Wales Known by
the NAME of Mary Gray.

To which is added, A further DISCOVERY of the late Conspiracy against His
Majesty's Sacred Person, and Government, etc.

As laid before the KING, etc. and Deposed to a Committee of Parliament.

By WILLIAM FVLLER, Gent. sometime Page of Honor to the late Queen in France.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR, Anno Dom. 1696.

TO HIS HIGHNESS THE Duke of Gloucester
SIR,
FOR this Tender of my Duty to Your Highness, in a Public Dedication, I can
only make this Plea for my Presumption; viz. by telling You, That the Royal
Blood that fills Your Rich Veins, and the whole concentring Hopes of Three
Kingdoms that wait Your Illustrious Birth, gave You a Court even in Your
Cradle; whilst Addressers and Petitioners were Your Highness's earliest Train
of Homagers.

The Restless Endeavors of Rome's too great, and consequently England's too
little Friends, have not been wanting (for Religious Frenzy shrinks at nothing)
in the most unaccountable Measures for carrying on their sinister Ambition, in
the following Unnatural Imposture. But, as hideous as such a vile Conspiracy
may appear, it is but too reasonable to believe, that the same infatuated Zeal
of Popish Bigottry, that can so poorly descend to Commission Ruffians and
Cutthroats, with Daggers and Musquetoons; might as easily with the same stretch
of Romish Conscience, stoop to as vile. Artifices for a Heretic Exclusion, as
a Heretic Assassination; of the Two, the more Important Service to their
Cause, and consequently their warmest Temptation.

And here, to join the Parallel of both those Romish Machinations; the World
must look upon Your Highness, as beset round with Enemies, in (nay before) Your
very Cradle: You had so far the start of Great William's Danger and
Deliverance, as to be that forward Aim of Romish Conspiracies, so early a Mark
of their Indignation and Vengeance, as to be struck at even Unborn; a Blow
levelled at the Cedar Root before the Royal Syen sprung.

And now give me leave to join in the Universal Veneration, and Survey You in
all the Perfections of a most Active and most Promising Youth, the Morning
Luster of the Great Soul, those Paternal Sparks of GLORY, Born with You, and so
early Shining from You, whilst Your Highness's young Martial Inclinations even
point You out, as formed by Nature, and designed by Heaven, for no less than
the HERO. With a Mind so amply furnished for all the Noblest Impressions of
true Honor; may the continued Smiles of Providence, so build upon that fair
Foundation so lengthen out Your happy Years, to Your completing the great work
of Your Creation, in all the Accomplishments of our Young British Alcides: And
as You have already performed the First Herculean, though Infant Labor, in
strangling the Conspiring Snakes against You; so may You succeed our Great
Nassau, till You arrive at the Last Labor too viz. the supplying our Albion
Atlas; which is the Prayer of

Your HIGHNESS's Most Dutiful Servant W. Fuller.

THE True MOTHER OF THE Pretended PRINCE of Wales, DISCOVERED.
IN May, Anno Dom. 1688. the Countess of Tyrconnel, (whose Zeal for the late
King James's Cause and Service, is not unknown to the World) came from Ireland,
to England, in the Monmouth Yatch, Capt. Wright, Commander; who, besides her
own Daughters and Servants that attended her hither, brought over Two
Gentlewomen, both big with Child: The First of which, was about Thirty Years of
Age, a lusty and healthful Countenanced Woman: The Second was a tall and
slender Woman, darkish Hair'd, and something above Twenty: The First of these
Women was brought to Bed at St. Albans, in her way to London: The Second,
(whose Name was Mrs. Gray) was conveyed to St. James's Palace, and was Lodged
in two private Rooms, over or within the Lady Strickland*s Lodgings, in the
Narrow Gallery, between the Queens's Appartment, and the great Chapel. In
these Lodgings, this Young Gentlewoman was Delivered on Sunday-Morning, the
Tenth of June, the same day* and but a little time before the late Queen
pretended to be Delivered of a Prince of Wales. About the latter end of June.
this Young Gentlewoman was removed from those Lodgings to the Marchioness of
Powis's Appartment, which was in the same Gallery; she being then Governess to
the pretended Prince of Wales, and to whose Charge and Care this Lady was
particularly Committed.

At that very time, was I in the Marchioness Family; and, by her special
Commands, daily and almost hourly attended the said Young Gentlewoman; being
ordered to supply her with all Necessaries, and do all other Offices of
Service, during her Continuance at St. James's; her present Indisposition
requiring a more than ordinary Assiduity and Attendance upon her.

During her said continuance at St. James's, she was very little Visited by any
Person, but the Marchioness herself, excepting some of her Women in proper
Occasions of Female Nursery and Service; appearing by this, to be some more
than ordinary Charge of the Marchioness's: She seemed very well contented with
her Entertainment, and the Marchioness's Care and Adoption of her: and was
hardly ever, or (at least) very seldom desirous to stir over the Threshold of
her own Lodgings; excepting sometimes, that she expressed a desire, and that (as
I observed) with a particular Zeal and Delight to go and Visit the Young
Prince, which was sometimes granted her; and whither I attended her by the
Marchioness's Command, and waited on her back again. Amongst the general
Devoirs that were then publicly paid to that young Infant, I remarkt, that
nothing appeared so warmly fond as her self; and when (as a peculiar Favor)
she was permitted to take him in her Arms, her Kisses and Embraces seemed more
than usually Tender and Passionate.

About the middle of July following, when her Health and Strength were visibly
improved, it was thought fit, by some Authority from Above, that she should be
Transported into France; and accordingly one Father Sabran, and one Mrs. Jones,
and my self, by Command, attended her to Dover, in order to her Voyage.

Before her Departure, I observed, that she seemed mightily concerned at her
leaving England; and in my hearing, both before, and all the way to Dover,
expressed a great deal of Trouble on that account, as compelled to visit France
much against her Inclination; which I the more wondered at, as believing she was
a Native of Ireland, and had not been two Months in this Kingdom. And before
she took her leave of the Court, she desired to Pay her last Duty to the Queen;
and here taking her farewell of the Young Prince, she betrayed that
extraordinary Effeminate Weakness, that she melted into down right Tears.

When she arrived at Dover, she was met by one Father Gray, (her supposed
Brother, or such he pretended himself) a Secular Priest, and an Irishman, with
whom she Embarked for Calais, in order to be conveyed to the Convent of
Benedictine Nuns in Paris; she having been in a Nunnery in Ireland, sometime
before she came for England.

After the new Happy Revolution, the Winter following, and King James`s
Abdication, I being at that time Servant to her Majesty in France, commended
and prefer`d to her Majesty`s Service, by my kind Patroness the Marchioness of
Powis; and the late Queen reposing a peculiar Trust and Confidence in my
Fidelity, from the Character she had received of me from the Marchioness; I
proceed to let you know, That in February 1689, I being at St. Germains, (the
late Queens Court in France) was one Sunday-Night ordered to attend the Queen
immediately, Her Majesty being, as was reported, Indisposed, (it seems with a
Fright, which made Her keep her Chamber) where I attending Her Commands, Her
Majesty told me, I must immediately prepare to go to England, with some Letters
to the Lord Montgemery and Others, about extraord^^arry Business. Her Majesty
gave me her Letters; and that my Journey might no. be in Vain, was pleased to
tell me; It was a matter that nearly concern^d the late King and her Self: And
lest in my Voyage to England, or at my Landing, I might meet with so strict a
Search, as might oblige me to fling my Letters into the Sea, or some other way
dispose them to conceal them from being taken; her Majesty thought fit to give
me a Ring, which I was to deliver to the Lord Montgomery in England, by way of
Credentials for what I had to say to him by Word of Mouth, upon any unfortunate
forementioned Miscarriage of my Letter; and by that to tell him, That the same
Woman which came from Ireland, with the Lady Tyrconnel, in May, 1688, was
stolen out of the Nunnery in Paris, where she was kept, (there having been a
Breach in the Garden-Walls) and that it was the Opinion of the French Court,
that she had been assisted by some of the Prince of Orange`s Friends in Paris,
to make her said Escape from thence, in order to come for England. The late
Queen farther Commanded me to tell him, That the French King had taken all
possible care to prevent her going off; but least his Endeavors might prove
Ineffectual, it was her desire, that immediately after my Arrival in England,
the Lord Montgomery and Others, should take care to place People on the Coast
of England, that might inform them when she Landed; vnd then they were
positively commanded to use all Endeavors to get her Dispatched, to prevent
whatever Design she might Pretend to.

[Here the Reader may Observe, That the Queen was infinitely Zealous both for
her Apprehension and Dispatch; and that must be some very threatening Fears they
Convinced from this poor Woman's Escape, that could pull down all this Mortal
Vengeance upon her Head. Nay, the Queen was so very solicitous for Executing
the said Vengeance, that for fear of Failure, or Miscarriage of her Commands in
Black and White, she trusted me with some part of the bloody Commission on that
Account. `Tis true, her Furious Zeal in this Case, did nor directly tell me the
very particular Crime this Offending Lady had committed, deserving Death; that
part of my Intelligence into this Secret History, was my own Observation and
Discovery.]

This was the Contents of the Queens Letters, and what I had Orders to inform
the Lord Montgomery, and Others of his Party, which the Ring, as a Token was to
Confirm. The late Queen gave me also another Letter to carry to Father Petre,
who by the French King`s Order was constrained to live privately at Albeville,
a City between Paris and Callais: Accordingly I took Post, and came to
Albeville, where I was forced to tarry six Hours before I could meet with
Father Petre, to give him the Queens Letter, which was to require him To go to
St. Omers, to observe whether or no the Woman might come that Way, in order to
her Embarking for England. Just as I came to my Inn, and was going to take
Horse, there arrived one Mr. Crane, Gentleman Usher to the Queen, from the
Queens Court, to order me to return with him to St. Germains again, were we
arrived the next Night; and then waiting on the Queen, she told me, The lost
Sheep was found at a private House in Paris; and as I afterward soon
understood, was then in the same Nunnery again, under the care of the Countess
of Sussex and others. But the next day following Father Sabran was to go in one
of her Majesty's Coaches to Paris, in order to bring the Countess of Sussex
with the Woman to St. Germains; and the Queen ordered me to accompany the said
Father Sabran, which I did in the Coach the next day; and coming to the
Nunnery, they continued there about an Hour and a half; and then the Countess
of Sussex, with Sabran and my self, returned with the Woman to St. Germains,
where she was conveyed privately to the Queens Back-Stairs, by Father Sabran;
whilst I attended the Lady Sussex, who went in to acquaint the Queen, That the
Woman was come; after which, by the Queens Command, I went to the Back Stairs
to convey the Woman to the Queen in her Bed Chamber, where she continued with
the Queen, the Lady Powis, the Countess of Sussex, and several others, above an
Hour; and was afterward conveyed down the Back Stairs, and cross the Gallery
under the Prince of Wales's Lodgings, to a private Appartment belonging to the
Lady Powis, where the said Woman continued a day or two. After which, the late
Queen, with the whole Court, going to visit the French King at his Court at
Marli, Three Miles from St. Germains; in the same Evening, the said Woman, with
the Countess of Sussex, Father Sabran, and my self, went in the Princes Coach
with Six Horses, to the same Place; and were there conveyed to a Chamber or
Room belonging to the Archbishop of Paris; where the Woman, Sabran, and my
self, continued about half an Hour; whilst the Countess of Sussex went
publicly to wait upon the French King, and the late Queen: Then the Womam,
Sabran, and my self, were conducted by a Priest, a Chaplain of the
Archbishops, privately to the French King's Back Stairs: The Woman lamenting
her Fate, which she said was occasioned by her last being in England; she
grieved to that excess, that she Fainted several times, before they could get
her up the Stairs to the French King's Apartment, whither she was conducted by
a Jesuit, and continued about half an Hour, with the French King, and the late
Queen. During which time, I waited with Father Sabran at the bottom of the
Stairs, till she came down with the Jesuit that conveyed her up; at which time
she wept bitterly, and told Father Sabran and me, That now she must take her
Everlasting Farewell of us: and so was carried away by the Jesuit, and never
more seen or heard of, notwithstanding my most diligent Inquiry after her at
all the English, Scotch and Irish Nunneries in Paris, and other Places, where I
had great Acquaintance and where, led by my extraordinary Curiosity in this
Affair, I was not a little inquisitive to learn, if possible, the Catastrophe
of this unfortunate Gentlewoman; as indeed, I had been all along little other
than a Spy upon her, and her concerns, relating to that Young Child. I confess,
I had but small occasion of given my self this needless trouble of making the
aforesaid Inquiry. For Father Sabran, who (I forgot to tell my Reader) was
Chaplain to the Young Prince, and is now his Tutour, did frankly own to me the
same Evening they left her, That he believed she would not be alive the Day
following, nor was it fit she should live. I might have rested satisfied with
what Sabran told me, it being undoubtedly too much of Truth: However, as it
could not enter into my heart, to think it possible there should be such
Inhuman Barbarity in the World, as to Murder a poor Woman in cold Blood, and
that too by the Commands of Crowned Heads; my own good Nature in Tenderness for
the poor Creature, inclined me to the said inquiry about her.

Besides my own knowledge in this Affair, there have been several Letters and
Papars found in Mrs. Labodies Fathers's Trunk, now still to be produced,
Relating to this Gentlewoman; besides several corroborative Proffs from diverse
Persons of Quality of Ireland, and others, as also Capt. Wright, that brought
her over from Ireland, and the other Capt. that carried her over into France,
that are able to give a great Light into the Discovery of this Grand Imposture:
Nor were the Managers of this Affair any ways wanting in providing of Two
Big-Bellied Women together, that if One String failed the other might hit.

As for the Child, he is a very Brisk and Airy, no ways Deformed in his Limbs,
but a Ruddy Complexion, fair Hair, and Dark colored brisk Eyes. He, when but
Two Years Old, was a great lover of Music* and could distinguish several
particular Tunes when Played; he is a notable Fighter, and does not only beat
his young Play-Fellows on the least Distaste; But the Dauphin of France, going
one Day to Kiss his Highness, and his Welsh or Irish Blood being up, he gave
the Dauphin a Blow on the Face with his Hand with all his Might. None dare
cross him, for he is so Refractory, that upon the least Occasion, he will hold
his Breath to that degree, that the Queen and all about him, have thought him
really Dead.

As to my first Introduction to this Trust and Knowledge into the Affairs of
the late Court. I must inform my Reader, (that by Sir John Burrows, a Zealous
Roman Catholic, and my particular Patron, and the Marquess of Powis, (to whom
by the Mother side, I had the Honor to be a little Related) I was prefered to
be a Page to the Countess of Melford: From her Service, I was introduced into
the Marquess`s Family, and from thence, as before mentioned, I was advanced to
the late Queens Service. And here to begin with my first Trust and Commands
received from her said late Majesty.

The Sunday before Christmas, in the Year 1688. I Embarked with the late King
James' Queen her pretended Son the Prince of Wales, the Marchioness of Powis,
the Lady Strickland, Mrs. Labody, and Count De Lazon, with several Others, in a
Barge from White Hall. And the next Day following, arrived at Calais in a
Yatch, where the said Queen was received by the Governor and Garrison in Arms;
and continued there Three Days ^^takin^ her Journey from thence to Bulloign,
where she had, an Express with the News of King James's being taken at
Feversham, in Kent. On which occasion, I was immediately Dispatched for England
with Letters to him* and came to his Majesty on a Sunday Morning, just as he
was ready to take Coach for Whiee-Hall, from whence I was sent with Letters
back to France again the same Night and overtook the Queen Four Days before her
Arrival at St. Germains, and continued there until King James's Arrival;
immediately after which, I was sent to England again with Letters from King
James, to his Friends here; and arriving safely, I was soon ordered back to
France, with the Answer in the like manner: And was likewise sent betwixt
France and England several other times, bringing Letters not only to several
Lords in England, but also for such of King James`s Friends as were in
Scotland, particularly the Lord Viscount Dundee; and Commissions for several in
Rebellion with him; and for Others, that promised to Join against the Prince of
Orange on the first Opportunity. I also brought several Bills of Exchange, for
Money to be Remitted to the said Lord Dundee, which was performed by the care
of Mr. Ashton, the late King James`s- Queens Privy-Purse. And during my
continuance in London, I used daily to visit the Lords, and Others in the
Tower; and being young passed freely to them unsuspected, carrying Letters to
and from them, on all occasions, relating to King James`s Affairs; and brought
several Bills from them which was to be employed, by their appointment, for
Listing of Men in England, for King James`s Service, against a Descent from
France, which was resolved on at the Court of France; and much Solicited for
from England, it being the chief Subject of the Letteas I carried to King James
and the Frence King to entreat the Landing of Men in England in several places,
particularly in the North; and that Five Thousand Men, some good Officers, with
a Hundred Thousand Pound, and Thirty or Forty Thousand spare Arms would be
sufficient to be sent` and to secure the Kingdom of Scotland with the
assistance of those in Arms against the Prince of Orange. For this the French
Court was almost daily Solicited by Letters and great Promises from England;
a^e all possible Provision was made on each side; the French having provided a
great Fleet, and Men ready to make a Descent; whilst King, James's Friends in
England had according to the account they sent to France, Listed above Twenty
Thousand Men in and about London, (January 1690. for this cause the Popes
Nuncio's Chairman was Executed) and had provided great numbers of Horse and
Foot Accountrements, and Arms; and the like was done according to their utmost
endeavors in most Counties and Shires in this Kingdom. Here I shall omit
troubling you or my self with the manner of my coming to serve King William,
since it is known to most intelligible Men: I propose to acquaint you that
having privately Discovered all I knew to His Majesty, the now Duke of
Shreswsbury, then Secretary of State, and the Earl of Rumney, then Lord Sidney,
and the Earl of Portland; I continued to go to France, as before, with Letters
for King James his Queen* and the French Court, which Letters I always showed
to King William before I went, or to one of the Lords before mentioned; as I
did also the Answers at my Return. The last time of my coming from France was
with Mr. Crone, at the beginning of Summer, in the year 1690. The French Fleet
been then very numerous and ready to Sail, and all things in England and
Scotland seemed in a posture to receive them, and a French Army on the other
side, King William was almost ready to take his Journey for the Reducing of
Ireland. The said Mr. Crone, with my self, was sent to England now with several
Commissions from King James by the way of France, from Ireland: The chief
Commissions we brought, was for Levying a War against the Prince and Princess
of Orange, and all such as resisted the Power and Authority of King James, and
to Empower Persons to Seize and Imprison the Persons of the said Prince and
Princess of Orange. By a Commission under the Great Seal, dated at Dublin, King
James Authorized several Lords to Act as his Deputies, during his Absence. We
likewise brought over several Commissions to constitute Commissioners of the
Treasury, Impowering them to Raise, and Collect Moneys on King James's Account;
as also several Commissions for Colonels of Regiments of Foot, and Horse.

By the way, permit me to inform my Reader, That in the abovementioned
Commission for Levying of War, King James did Command and Authorize his loving
Subjects by force of Arms, to seize the Persons of the present King, and his
Royal Consort, Queen Mary the Second, Alive, or Dead: And Three Months before I
came last from France, Colonel Parker had undertaken to Shoot King William; for
which Intent he came to England, and went into Lancashire, there to continue
until the King came that way on his Journey for Ireland, that being the place
proposed to Murder King William at: And to Advise it, there was many Letters
sent to the Court of France, desiring that the French Fleet might Sail at, or
near the time King William set out for Ireland.

At this last time, Mr. Crone and my self, brought over many Letters,
containing full Instructions for the intended Designs, of Killing and
Imprisoning their Majesty's, King William, and Queen Mary; and for the Raising
of great Numbers of Men in several Places against them, for King James and the
French Interest.

I will first give you a short Narrative of the Contents of a few of the
Letters I carried to France, and so proceed to the Design before mentioned.

Several Letters I carried to, and brought from France, were made up as the
Mould of a Button. and so worked over with Silk, or Silver, and worn on my
Clothes: Others I brought over in the Pipes of Keys, and some writ Obscurely;
which Writing was discovered by the Steem of a Compound of several Spirits,
Metals and Sulphur boiled together, and made Liquid; the Writing was seen no
longer than the said Steem was near the Paper on which it was Writ. Many of the
Letters I carried to King James, his Queen, and the French Court, were from the
chief of their Friends in England, and were full of great Promises and large
Encouragements to the French King: But his Gallick Majesty well observed, That
whilst they were daily promising great Assistance to his Army, when they Landed
in England, they were for the most part unwilling to part with any Money, but
continually desired Supplies from France: Some in England, to my certain
Knowledge, Writ to King James, to assure him, that they had taken the Oaths to
King William, on purpose to make themselves more able to serve King James`s
Interest, by delaying King William`s Affairs in the Houses of Parliament; Of
this, and part of which I had discovered to His Sacred Majesty King William, he
was pleased to acquaint his Parliament in his Gracious Speech to both Houses a
short time before he went for Ireland; Adding in his Speech at the same time*
That he spoke it, to let them, and his Enemies know, that he was not
unacquainted with their Designs. Now to return to my last Coming from France
with Mr. Crone, I having informed His Majesty of all I knew, Mr. Crone was
seized, and sent Prisoner to the Tower, the rest of the Conspirators and their
Designs being known, and narrowly observed, His Majesty went for Ireland,
committing the Management to the Queen, and the Ministers of State: Yet,
although the Jacobites, and the French Court were, Blessed be Almighty God,
disappointed of the Kings being Killed on his Journey to Ireland, they
continued to go on with their other Designs; Colonel Parker being also ordered
for Ireland, to Kill His Majesty there; But the Government knowing their
Intriegues, took care to secure this Kingdom, by Raising the Militia, and
securing of Conspirators, before the French Fleet came on our Coast, as they
did, and lay some time expecting to hear of their Friends in England, being in
Arms to receive them. At this time several Lords, and others, were sent to the
Tower, and others whose Intriegues were discovered, fled from Justice, which
occasioned several Proclamations to be Published for apprehending them; and the
Tower, and all the Goals in London, and several others were filled with
Conspirators. They finding their whole Design unravelled, and that I had
discovered all I knew, and Mr. Crone was safe, and to be suddenly Tried, which
might make him Confess, they instantly got me poisoned, in hopes to have
prevented Crone's Trial; but it pleasing Almighty God to restore me to my
Health again, after Ten Weeks Sickness, I was able to come to the Old Bailey,
where Mr. Crone was Tried, and Condemned for High - Treason: He had several
Reprieves from time to time, on his Promise of making a full Confession; but as
he was lingering it out, about Six Months after his Conviction, I Received a
Letter at my Lodgings in the Pall Mall from the Earl of Melford, King James's
Secretary, in which I was promised King James's Pardon, and all the Favor I
could desire from him, and the Court of France, and Five Hundred Pounds down,
if I would return to France, and Recant from what I had done: I carried this
Letter to the King, who sent me to the Lord Chief Justice Holt, for his Advice,
how far I might proceed by Law, thinking thereby to discover something more;
but his Lordship and several others were of Opinion, that it was a Trick,
purely to invalidate my Evidence; They still being apprehensive of Mr. Crone's
Confession, which they knew must be so agreeable to my Informations, that the
Heads of King James's Friends had been entirely at King William's Mercy: And
this Matter highly concerned the French Court; for, had Crone been just to Him
that gave him his Life, there might have been but small Encouragement from
England to the French long since; and consequently, no Plotting now. They of
King James's. Party (as well has appeared to the Court) made it their Endeavor
to have Crone Hanged, to stop his Mouth; and that as I am well informed,
occasioned his making almost a full Discovery: Though he went for France as
soon as he was let out of Newgate, being invited back with great Promises, as I
before had been. I must thank him for his Justice to me, in his last, and most
Authentic Confession: He affirms on Oath, That all my Information was true;
for the Confirmation of this, I can appeal to any Member of Parliament that
heard Mr. Crone's, or the Lord Preston's Confessions Read, before the
Honorable House of Commons. After this, it may seem strange to some, how the
House came to be so angry with me: I beg leave to inform such, That the
Jacobites, by Mr. Crone's going off, knew they had partly secured themselves
from the just Power of the Law; but were yet concerned, if possible to make the
World believe, that they never had any Design against the Government: And who
can blame them for being ashamed of such a Horrid, and Bloody Design, as they
had then contrived against the Government and their own Country, to Ruin both
Church and State? To cover their Shame as much as may be, they had no way but
to Invalidate me; which they set about with all the Malice that the Devil, or
Popish Principles could incite them with; though for some time my faithful
Service, and the King's large Promises of lasting Favors to me, was my
Support; and had continued so, but that the Immaturity of my Judgment was so
easily imposed upon, by Two Instruments sent by the French Court, to accomplish
my Ruin, viz. Colonel Tho. Dellaval, and Mr. George Hayes: They were formerly
my most intimate Acquaintance both in England and at the Court at St. Germains,
and were employed constantly' twixt England and France on King James's Account,
as I was: The First of these came to me at my Lodgings in White Hall, and told
me, He desired to come and Serve the Government, as I had done, provided I
would intercede with the Queen for his Pardon, and make some Conditions for his
coming over Honorably. I acquainted the Queen of it immediately, the King
being then in Flanders; and Her Majesty, (whose Bounty extended to all,) did
most Graciously promise to Write to the King about it; and, in the mean time,
committed the Management of this Affair to the Care of His Grace, John Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, (my very good Friend) But before the King's Answer
came from Flanders, Dalleval received a Letter from the Earl of Melfort,
requiring his Return immediately to St. Germains; which Letter he showed me,
and I carried it to the Queen, who knowing Melfort's Hand, gave Orders, That
Colonel Dalleval might go for France again, provided, that he engaged to Return
when Her Majesty required him: All which he Swore, and promimised most Solemnly
to do, and then went for France accordingly: Soon after his Arrival there, he
sent me several Letters writ in Characters, promising to come to King William
in Flanders, and desired me to meet him there. The Archbishop and my self from
time to time, acquainted Her Majesty of every Particular; and I was Commanded
to go for Flanders, where I continued with the King Three Months on this
Occasion, and Received Letters from Colonel Dellaval at St. Germains Twice
every Week, during the time I was there; the Contents of which Letters proved
very true, and of some Use at that time to the King's Affairs; but this was
only a Snare, the more securely to Ruin me to the Purpose: For, as soon as the
King came to England, and the Parliament was Sitting, Dellaval writ to me, and
Mr. Hayes likewise, to have me get their Pardon, and Protection from the King
and Parliament, promising they would make great Discoveries, (which His Majesty
knew they might, this being the Winter before the Second intended Invasion,
when the Forces with the late King James lay at La Hogue, ready to Embark the
latter end of April following) the Parliament having Addressed the King, to
cause the Lord Preston's, and Mr. Crone's Confessions to be laid before them;
and theirs agreeing with mine, the Parliament made an humble Address to the
King, to add to his Bounty to me; this did more inflame Mine, and the Nations
Enemies; and Colonel Dellaval and Mr. Hayes sent me abundance of Letters, and
great Promises of performing considerable Services for Their Najesties, and
this Kingdom's Safety. At length I did Address the House of Commons in their
Behalf, Desiring a Pardon and Passport to be given me Blank, for Two Gentlemen
to come from beyond the Seas, and to Return if desired: The Honorable Honse
granted my Request, on Condition I would engage for their Appearance, and
performing what they promised at this time: Only their Majesty's, and some of
Their Most Honorable Privy Council knew these Men's Names that I engaged for,
lest the French Court should prevent their Coming, (as my Credulity caused me
to believe) I had the Protection of the Parliament for them, and a Pardon and
Passport Signaed by the King, and under the Great Seal; it was left blank for
me to fill up; and this I sent for Flanders, by a Messenger of my own,
Recommended by some Members of Parliament: It proving very cold hard Weather in
those Parts, Dellaval and Hayes came to Antwerp some time before my Messenger
could get there; so they went to Ostend, and came from thence to England,
having heard their Pardon had passed the Seals. The Messenger heard of them at
Antwerp, and other Places; and hearing they were come for England, he returned:
As soon as Dellaval and the other arrived, they sent one Jones to me with a
Letter, assuring me, they were coming to Town, and intended to Attend on the
House of Commons the Monday following. I was extreme joyful to hear of their
Arrival, and immediately sent their Letter to the House, where the Speaker Read
it; and Monday was appointed for Hearing them. At this Unhappy Time I was very
dangerously Sick, and when Monday came, the Gentlemen were seen by many in the
Lobby, whilst the House was at Prayers: But Prayers being ended, and they
called for, they were vanished of a sudden, which occasioned the House to
appoint a Committee to come to me, which they did, taking all my Papers, and
Informations on Oath; Anthony Bowyer, Esquire, being Chairman of the said
Committee I gave them an Account where Mr. Hayes had lodged formerly at a
Papists in Holborn, but they were not to be sound; which occasioned on
Wedn'sday the Twenty Fourth of February to pass a Vote against me, and to
address the King to order the Attorney General to prosecute me for engaging for
these Men, and that they did not appear: Now King James's Friends had their
Desire, and Dellaval, with the Other, having accomplished their Villainous
Designs, returned for France: I was brought to my Trial, at my own Request, at
the King's Bench, at Westminster; and even then these Gentlemen, Dellaval, and
Hayes, sent me several Letters to excuse themselves, and promised to come and
Vindicate me: And it is most certain, That even to this time, they have
continued to come frequently to England about King James's Business: When I was
on my Trial, the Attorney General, now Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and one
of the Lords Justices of England, told the Judges and Jury, That I had
performed very considerable Services to the Advantage and Security of the
Present Government, and had discharged my Duty honestly; but having Engaged for
those Men, and they not Appearing, occasioned my Trial; on which I produced a
Certificate, under the Hand of His Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury, that by the
King's Order, and his Encouragement, I was sent to France for the Service and
Security of the Present Government, as before mentioned.

I also desired the Lord Chief Justice Holt to acquaint the Jury, (who were all
Gentlemen of good Account) of what he knew, being one of His Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council. And, as to the Matter relating to the Letters I had,
and the Pardons, and Money which was offered me to go back for France, all
which his Lordship most justly and honorably declared: There was likewise a
considerable number of Members of Parliament called; but the Men I engaged for,
not appearing before the House, to certify them, I was found Guilty of a
Misdemeanour against them.

Having thus showed how far their Malice extended to me, I beg you will take
Notice, how Confidently King James's Friends can oppose any Truth that is
against their Interest, as now their denying that the French Court, or King
James's knew, of the Design of Murdering King William; when the World cannot
but remember that Chevalier Granval was Executed in Flanders, for Endeavoring
to Shoot the KING; and that, at his Death, he Confessed the Fact: And it was
sufficiently proved, That Colonel Parker was engaged with him; and that Parker
had Received Instructions from the Late King; and that both of Them, with
Others, were Encouraged from Time to Time, by the French Ministers of State: Of
This I first acquainted his Majesty, but it was further Discovered at one of
the Confederate Prince's Courts; who earnestly pressed his Majesty to Examine
the Matter; and, being done, this Granval was found Guilty, and Executed; though
Colonel Parker made his Escape: Which may convince any thinking Man, that from
the First Intended Invasion from France, that Court has studied Ways to Kill
King William, and his late Royal Consort, of ever Blessed Memory.

As for the Intolerable Injuries that I have undergone, Time, and their own
Devices have at last Demonstrated, tho they spared for no Means, that might
make me Obnoxious to all Good Men: I bless God, and must acknowledge the
abundant Goodness of my Sovereign, for my Deliverance from their treacherous
and base Villainies; and earnestly pray, that Almighty God will forgive them, as
I most freely do.

Whoever shall peruse these Lines, and is not satisfied with the Truth of any
Particular, I shall be ready to give any Demonstration, that is not too
impertinent. And as I have mentioned the Names of several Great and Good Men, I
dare refer any Person to them, for the Confirmation of the Truth of this
Narrative.

POSTSCRIPT.
THough the Jacobites and Malcontents of the Kingdom (those that either
blindly, or those that wilfully think too well of their bad Cause) will be apt,
no doubt, to quarrel, and revile at what I have here declared concerning the
Birth of their Darling, though weak Hopes, the pre^^nded Prince of Wales:
however, more strongly to confirm what I have here delivered, introductory to
the more ample Detection of that shameful Imposture; The undoubted spurious
Fountain, the obscure Original of this Supposititious Birth from good
testimony, and the Papers of Mrs. Labody's Father, etc. will in due time be
plainly made out, to the full Satisfaction of all Europe, and the eternal Shame
of all the Jacobite Confederates in that wretched Contrivance.

And to the foregoing General and Succinct Account of my Correspondence and
Interest in the late Court, and their Affairs, together with the hard Measures
I received, in Return for my well-meaning honest Endeavors to serve the King
and the Nation: I shall only add a few Remarks on the farther Subtilties and
Artifices of the Jacobites, That certainly never was there a more cunning Reach
of Policy, nor a Popish Misrepresentation more Artfully managed, to the
rendering of Truth Suspected, Innocence Exposed, and Integrity Ridiculed, than
by those Hypocrite false Friends of mine, the forementioned Delaval and Hayes;
who, by a Masterpiece of Villainy against me, could work with me, only to blow
me up, viz. When their fore -- mentioned Letters and Correspondence with me,
together with their many fair Promises of Serving the King and Queen, in
joining in my Discovery; as also their Public Appearance in the Lobby, and
other Places, to strengthen my too easy Credulity, etc. were all but a Popish
Juggle and Trick, to give them Opportunity to vanish off Invisible; and, by the
stink of their own Cloven-Feet they left behind them, utterly to blast the
whole Credit of all I had said, or could say; so to expose the King to their
own Impious Conspiracies, by stifling whatever Truth should pretend to speak,
for his Preservation and Deliverance.

And, as to the 'Veracity of my Informations and Depositions, though rendered
by the aforesaid Misrepresentations so discredited by the Government, the happy
Detection of the late horrid Plot has fully and amply cleared the unjust
Aspersions and false Imputations against me, when their Designs are so
manifestly proved to be built upon the same Bottom, and managed by the very
same Persons; the same Conspiring hands I then Discovered, etc.

For a clear Demonstration of the unquestioned Truth of my Discovery, I shall
only instance one Particular, viz. in the Matter of Granval's and Parker's
Assassination: It Is known to Mr. William Killigrew, and (if required) will be
attested by him, That he saw my Papers drawn up, concerning Chevalier Granval's
Assassination, etc. and was by, when I delivered them to the King's own hand,
and heard me tell his Majesty part of the Contents; and which Papers, I desire
my Reader to observe, were ^^ven to his Majesty in the Winter before (...) then
setting out for Flanders, before the intended Execution of the said Horrid
Design; his Majesty's timely Warning and ^au^^^ being received from my
Information and Intelligence.

I must confess, with Sorrow unspeakable, that the unkind Usage I met with
exposed me to some little Shifts (which my Soul (...)) as the running in Debt
for necessary Sub^istence, being sometimes hardly allowed ^^ead when I was
about his Majesty's Ser^^^^. Therefore, whoever shall presume to C^^^^^^ the
Government with keeping me in con^^^^t Pay, for a Spy or Witness, as was
practiced in the former Reigns, does them much Injury.

But my Wrongs being now plainly Demonstrated, I hope none will reflect on the
Justice of the Government, in providing for me, that I may have a poor
Maintenance, and be able to render to every one their just Due; which is my
hearty Desire.

Lastly, As to my no earlier Publication of these Papers; I have only this to
say, That the Disreputation I so long groaned under till now, deterred me from
appearing in Print, as having the Prejudice of a Nation against me; and which,
I well knew, would have rendered the whole Truth I had to speak, but so much
Breath against the Wind. It Is true, I might have published these Papers some
few Months sooner, had I not then been Commanded to Sea in his Majesty's
Service, in order to my Apprehending several suspected Persons concerned in
this present Plot; which gave me neither that Leisure nor Opportunity.

FINIS.
THE Author's Advertisement.
WHEREAS I am informed, That there is a Design of Publishing a Surreptitious
Copy of this Narrative (of the True Mother of the Pretended Prince of Wales) by
way of Abridgement: -- These are therefore to Certify, That the only TRUE COPY,
as Delivered to the KING, and Ministers of State, is contained in this BOOK,
[Price stitcht, Six Pence:] as Witness my Hand, this Fourth Day of July, 1696.

W. FULLER.

A true Copy of his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury's Certificate.
I Do hereby certify, That in November, 1689. Mr. William Fuller came to me,
and did make several considerable Discoveries of the Intreagues of the Enemies
of the present Government; and He was by my Encouragement sent into France; and
at his Return, did perform very great Service, for the Preservation of Their
Majesty's Sacred Persons, and the Peace and Security of their Government: And
that it was by his Endeavors, that Mr. Matthew Crone was detected and
convicted of High Treason.

Given under my Hand, this 15th of April, 1692. Shrewsbury.


