MISSALE ROMANVM VINDICATVM. OR, The MASS Vindicated from D. Daniel Brevents
calumnious and Scandalous Tract.

S. Augustine lib. 2. contra Julianum Pelagium. cap. 10. The Catholic Fathers
and Doctors have held what they found in the Church, have taught what they
learned, and delivered to their Sons what they received from their Fathers: as
yet we did not deal with you before these Judges; and our cause is judged by
them: neither we, nor you, were known to them, yet we recite their sentences,
or Judgments made against you.

Printed in the Year, 1674

TO THE Right Worshipful, Grave, and Reverend Doctors of the Famous University
of OXFORD, Health and Salvation.
THe whole Universe worthily admires the Oxonian Academie for its Antiquity,
and Learning, for the great multitude of famous Doctors, which have flourished
in its bosom, Structures in its Colleges, rare Library, completely stored
with books of all sorts; but principally Manuscripts, which if not diminished
by the destiny of Funus Scoti et Scotistarum, would have far exceeded most of
Christendom; and now may contend for equality, except only the Vatican: Its
present glory is in no mean way augmented, by that magnificent Theater; which
the late Archbishop of Canterbury, to his eternal Glory has erected; wherein
all may depredicate his Munificence, and other Universities envy Oxfords Glory.
This indeed is Sheldons Trophy, and Triumph.

Upon reflection of this unparaleld Theater, I cannot but deplore, that such an
excellent, and so magnificent a structure should be abused, and defiled by such
an unseemly Imp, as the late Doctor Daniel Brevent has hatched under its roof;
I mean his Missale Romanum Printed in that Theater without any license or
approbation, wherein there is very little appears which may beseem a Doctor of
Oxford.

He begins indeed very briskly, acknowledging the Roman Church to have been a
true Church, in the first five hundred years after Christ; but afterward to
have decayed; principally, for that from that time, the Church allowed and
approved the holy sacrifice of the Mass, which he chiefly labors to reject,
by Railleries, scoffs and jeerings; amongst others he grounds himself on two
manifestly false impositions: the first is, that Roman Priests do sacrifice
their God, imitating the primitive Infidels, who imputed it to the Christians,
that they did eat their God, whereas our faith teaches us, that Christ's body
and blood is sacrificed to God: The second is, that the Priests at the Altar,
do work all the Miracles which are wrought in the Eucharist; which Miracles by
Catholics are attributed to Christ himself who instituted the holy Sacrament.
To make his raillery more complete, he spares not to call all Roman Catholics,
Adulterers, Adorers of vile creatures, Idol-worshipers, invaders of sacred
offices, sacrilegiously reproaching them of untruths, impieties, fearful and
barbarous cruelty; Priesthood a most sacrilegious function; which in plain
terms he admits for almost twelve hundred years, the whole Christian world were
no better then Idolaters; nay, as he says worse then all Pagans and Infidels.

So that the whole Church, all Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, all
Christian Empires, Kingdoms, Nations, and Provinces were enslaved to Idolatry,
all Popes, Primats, Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergymen; were liable to his
censures. No Church either universal or particular, truly Christian, no
Conversion of any Nation, in particular England, to the true faith of Christ,
for those, who were converted in those times, were most unhappy, for they were
always taught, believed and exercised the sacrifice of the Mass. All the
Modern Churches, as besides the Latin, the Grecian, Oriental, Affrican and
Indians; in all places of the world (except only some of our pretended
Reformers, in a little Corner thereof,) have the same: and the schoolmen whom
he so frequently cites, were all Idolaters, for they all held, maintained and
defended the sacrifice of the Mass, against all Infidels and heretics, and
for the most part were sacrificing Priests.

Moreover, the Glory of your famous University, is much impeached, by this his
Calumny; for your Doctors and Professors, your Churches, Chapels, and
Schools; your Colleges and Chairs were all infected with this pretended
Idolatry; for within their walls no other doctrine was taught, heard, or used,
until these last times, the several Comments, made on the Master of the
sentences, on S. Thomas Scotus and other Schoolmen, testifies the same; nothing
can excuse them, but gross ignorance: but what shall we say of those famous
Doctors, who have so learnedly written against Wickliff, even on the same
score; and what of those Reverend and learned Bishops, who in Oxford condemned
him, as an heretic, and who were so careful (as is manifest in Provinciali
veteri reprinted at Oxford in the year 1669.) of the Celebration of Mass. The
Doctor bespatters them all with Idolatry, sacrilege, and blindness, ignorance
and blasphemy.

But he might have considered, if malice or Ignorance had not blinded him; that
under the name of the Roman Church, for so many hundred of years, he impugns
Christ's Church within the five hundred years after Christ; even as it was
established by Christ and his Apostels; for the Catholic Church was never
without Mass, in that time; and what Masses or Liturgies were used in
succeeding times, were delivered from those times; as the Roman or Latin Church
challenges that of S. Peter, as it was declared by S. Clement; those of
Jerusalem, and some other parts that of S. James; those of Affirica, that of
S. Mark or S. Philip: The Grecians that of S. Basil who as S. Proclus
testifies, did not add to any other precedent, but contract and abreviate what
was formerly used. S. Chrysostom did the same to that of S. Basil; yet both
these liturgies or Masses, are in use to this day, in all the Grecian Churches:
if then the Mass be Idolatry, and so fond a thing as this Doctor pretends;
Christ never had a true Church upon earth: far as I shall show in this short
Tract, the Catholic Church was never without the sacrifice of the Mass, if we
may believe Tradition, practice, and custom of all Christian Churches,
Ecclesiastical or civil histories; Councils both General and of several
Provinces in the whole world; and the unanimous consent of all the holy Fathers
and Doctors.

I dare challenge Doctor Brevent, or any of his associates, to produce any one
Nation, that ever roceived the Christian Faith without this sacrifice, or
public Divine Service but that which we call Mass or liturgy, under the notion
of a sacrifice: The Grecians, as I said before, and all those who belong to
that Church, as Iberians, Sclavonians, Russians, Muscovits, and in many parts
of Asia, and Afric, agree in the sacrifice of the Mass with some difference
of Ceremonies. The Meridional parts, which contain the Nubians, the Abissins,
and greatest parts in Egypt, Arabia, and Chaldea, under the Patriarkate of
Alexandria: The Nestorians dispersed in Tartary, Persia, and the Oriental
parts, and kingdoms of India: the Armenians, and Scithians: I do not say, that
all these agree with the Latins in the manner or form of Mass, or in their
opinions; but in the substance of a Sacrifice according to the Evangelical law,
they all agree; deriving their form, rites, and ceremonies from the primitive
times, that is, from the Patriarchal, Churches, founded by the Apostles, and
their immediate successors: In sine, all the patriarchal Sees of Rome,
Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, together with that that of Constantinople
have used, maintained, and approved the sacrifice of the Mass. It would be
little less then Blasphemy, to make them all Mistresses and fomenters of
Idolatry: and consequently, that the Church which Christ and his Apostles had
erected, founded, and established, was Idolatrous, and the true Christian
Church never appeared in any Nation of the Universe.

But what do I insist in this manner; when I speak to learned and understanding
men, who well know the truth of what I say, and to whose judgments I humbly
remit what I write; trusting they will not condemn my boldness, but attribute
it to the Zeal I have of the honor of that reverend University, which I so
much reverence and esteem; and for whose true glory and happy progress, I offer
up my continual prayers, remaining always

Your hearty well-wisher and Beads-man. R.F.

Missale Romanum Vindicatum.
CHAP. 1. Mass proved out of the Sacred Scripture.
THe ancient and most learned Interpreter of the sacred text, S. Hierom teaches
us, that the Gospel is not in the word, but in the sense; not in the bark, but
in the sapp, not in the leaves of the words, but in the root of the meaning;
whence the 6. Council of Constantinople, can. 19. tells us, If any Controversy
pertaining to the Scripture be raised, let not the preachers otherwise
interpret it, then as the lights and Doctors of the Church in their writings
have expounded it. Conformable to this is that Decree of the Meldelsen Council,
In the expounding or preaching of holy Scriptures, let every one follow the
sense of the holy Catholic and most approved Fathers, in whom, as S. Hierom
says, verity of faith never fails or wavers.

I shall not therefore follow humane sense, judgment or opinion; neither will I
for the present, make use of Schoolmen, nor of the Doctors or learned men for
almost twelve hundred years, which without doubt, may counterpoise whatsoever
exposition, our pretended Reformers can any way claim, in a 150. years at the
most; let us now wave all these, and search out the truth from the first five
hundred years.

It was a bold saying of this Doctor in his 12. Chapter, that Roman Priests,
nor Roman sacrifice, have not so much as any probable ground in Scripture, this
he has in the text of his Chapter, but in the body, of the proof is most weak,
for he confesses, that Catholics do allege Scripture for both, the question
then is, which side does best understand the true sense of the sacred text; I
might allege innumerable places which the holy Fathers of that time did
understand or apply to the sacrifice of the Mass; in particular that of Dan.
12. of the continual sacrifice, which S. Irenaeus, S. Hierom, and Theodoretus
affirm to be no other then the sacrifice of the Mass; which shall cease to be
publicly celebrated; as also S. Hippolitus teaches in the time of Antichrist:
but I shall only insist on those places which the Doctor impugns, to wit, on
the figures of it, as that of Melchisedech, of the prophesy of Malachy, and of
the Institution of it, made by Christ himself which I shall divide into three
Paragraphs.

. 1. Mass proved to be a Sacrifice, according to the Order of Melchisedech.
THe holy Council of Trent, Sess. 22. c. 1. first grounds it self on the figure
of Melchisedech, Genesis 14. God by the mouth of the Prophet David Psalm. 109. did
declare, that Christ was a priest for ever, according to the Order of
Melchisedech, which also S. Paul alleages, Heb. 7. and thence proves, a
translation of the Law from the translation of the Priesthood: let us now hear
what the holy Fathers of those primitive times do understand by this; I might
well produce Cassiodorus, Remigius and Euthemius in Psalm. 109. who were not
long after the fifth century, and expound it of the sacrifice of the Mass; but
let us make a step higher, within that time and begin with Theodoret 430. on
the same Psalm, who affirms, that Christ began his priesthood according to the
order of Melchisedech, in his last supper, when the consecrated bread and wine.

420. S. Augustine Epist. 95. ad samos: Melchisedech did prefigurate the
Sacrament of our Lord's supper with bread and wine, that is, the sacrifice of
Melchisedech, being brought forth did know to prefigurate his eternal
priesthood, and lib. 16. de civit. Dei, cap. 22. alleging. Melchisedech out of
S. Paul to the Hebrews, he says, There the sacrifice which the whole Church
offers now unto God did first appear, and that prefigured which was long after
fulfilled in Christ, of whom the prophet said before he came to the flesh, Thou
art a priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedech, lib. 17. c. 17. he
repeats the same, giving the reason: because Aarons Priesthood and Sacrifice
are abolished, and now in all the world under Christ the Priest, we offer that
which Melchisedech brought forth, when he blessed Abraham, and cap. 20. God has
prepared the table with bread and wine, that is, the Sacrifice of Melchisedech;
a little lower, The participation of that table is the beginning of life. for
in Ecclesiastes, where he says: It is good for man to eat and drink, we cannot
understand it better, than of the participation of that table, which our
Melchisedechian Prlest instituted for us in the New testament; the text in
lattin is, quam Sacerdos ipse mediator novi testamenti, exhibit secundum
ordinem Melchisedech de corpore and sanguine suo; for that Sacrifice succeeded
all the old testament Sacrifices, which were but shadows of the future, for his
body is offered and sacrificed now instead of all other offering and Sacrifice:
and in Psalm. 32. he says, Christ of his body and blood instituted a Sacrifice
according to the order of Melchisedech: the same he has in Psalm. 32. in psalm.
100. and in Psalm. 109. and in many other places.

390. S. Hierom. Epist. 17. ad Marcell. Have recourse to Genesis, and thou
shall find Melchisedech King of Salem, and prince of that City, who even then
in the type of Christ, offered bread and wine and dedicated the Christian
Mystery in the blood and body of our Savior. The same Father Epist. 126. ad
Evagrium, so Melchisedech for that he was not a Cananite nor of the race of the
Jews did go before us, as a Type of the Priest the Son of God, of whom it is
said psalm. 109. Thou art a priest, etc. and a little after he tells us what
sacrifice he dedicated, to wit, the Sacrament of Christ in bread and wine, in a
sincere and pure Sacrifice: Again in Genesis 14. Our mystery is signified in the
word of Order by no means in Aaron by immolating unreasonable creatures, but in
offered bread and wine that is the body and blood of our Lord Jesus: Again
Aarons priesthood had an end, but Melchisedechs, that is, Christ's and the
Churches, is perpetual, both for the time past, and to come. To omit other
places I will conclude with his words on Mat. 26. After Christ had fullfilled
the typical pasche, and eaten the flesh of the Lamb with his Apostles, he took
bread which comforts man and passing to the true Sacrament of the Pasche, that
even as it was in the Prefiguration of him in Melchisedech, as a Priest of the
most high God, had done, offering bread and wine; he also presented the verity
of his body and blood.

373. S. Ambrose in his Mass, Our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son has instituted the
rite of Sacrificing in the New testament to be celebrated when bread and wine
(which Melchisedech Priest had offered in prefiguration of the future Mystery)
he transformed into the Sacrament of his body and blood: and lib. 3. de Sacram.
cap. 1. we know that the figure of those Sacraments, did go before in the times
of Abraham, when the holy Melchisedech did offer Sacrifice.

370. Epiphanius her. 55. Then Melchisedech met him ( that is Abraham) and set
before him bread and wine prefiguring the enigma's and exemplars of the
Mystery, when our Lord said, I am the living bread, and of his blood which did
flow from his side.

326. Eusebius l. 5. de Demonst: cap. 3. The issue of that Oracle is admirable
to him, who contemplates in what manner our Savior Jesus, who is anointed of
God according to the rite of Melchisedech, does perform by his Ministers, these
things which belong to fulfill the priesthood among men: for as he who was a
priest of the gentiles was never seen exercising any corporal Sacrifices, but
only bread and wine, when he blessed Abraham, so truly first our Savior and
Lord himself, then those who come from him as priests, in all nations, do
represent in performing their function according to Ecclesiastical functions
the Spiritual office of priesthood, in the wine and bread the mysteries of his
body and Salutary blood.

290. Lactantius l. 14. Instit. Christ must needs have in this Church his
external Priesthood, according to the order of Melchisedech; and before him his
Master Arnobius in psalm. 109. by the mysteries of Bread and Wine he was made a
priest for ever.

250. S. Cyprian l. 2. Epist. 3. ad Caecilium. Who is more a priest then our
Lord Jesus Christ who offered a sacrifice to the Father, and offered the very
same that Melchisedech did offer, that is bread and wine to wit his body and
blood.

In fine, I challenge all our Adversaries to produce any holy Fathers teaching
the contrary Doctrine or that ever questioned any of these Fathers cited, and
desire that all good Christians will note that the Fathers here cited do speak
positively according as they believed and taught, and as the Church ever since
received.

. 2. The Sacrifice of the Mass proved out of the Prophet Malachy.
The Prophet Malachy cap. 1. said, In every place there is sacrificing, and
there is offered to my name a clean Oblation; because my name is great among
the Gentiles. Which place the holy Council of Trent, Sess. 22. cap. 1. cites for
the holy Sacrifice of ths Mass. Let us see now what the holy Fathers of those
Primitive times said of it.

420. Let us begin with S. Augustine, who, l. 10. de civit. Dei, cap. 35. Now
Malachy prophesying of the Church (which we see so happily propagated by our
Savior Christ) has these plain words to the Jews, in the person of God: I
have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand, for
from the rising of the Sun unto the setting, my name it great among the
Gentiles; and in every place shall be Incense offered unto me, and a pure
offering unto my name, for my name is great among the Gentiles; says the Lord.
This we see offered in every place by Christ's priesthood after the order of
Melchisedech: since in every place from the rising of the Sun, unto its setting,
we do see it offered unto God. These last words are omitted by our English
translatours, although they be in the Latin text, lib. 19. cap. 23. it is his
City whose mystery we celebrate in such oblations, as the faithful do well
understand, for the ceasing of all the typical Sacrifices that were exhibited
by the Jews, and the ordaining of one Sacrifice to be offered through the whole
world from East to West (as now we see it is) was prophesied long before from
God, by the Mouths of holy Hebrews.

326. Eusebius de Demonst lib. 10. cap. ult. From the rising of the Sun, etc.
we sacrifice to the most High, a sacrifice of praise, we sacrifice a full
Sacrifice to God, yielding sweet odor and holy: we sacrifice after a new
manner, a Clean host according to the new Testament. S. Cyrill of Alexandria,
S. Hierome, Theodoret, and all other ancient Expositors of this place do
expound and apply it to the Sacrifice of the Mass.

398. S. Chysostom in Psalm. 91. citing the words of Malachie, says, See how
plainly and clearly he interprets the mystical table, which is the Incruentall
host, but the pure Incense he calls holy prayers, which are offered with the
Sacrifice, for this Incense is pleasing to God, not that which is taken from
earthly roots, but what proceeds from a pure heart: thou see that in all
places, that Angelical Sacrifice is granted to be famous; ye see neither Altar
nor canticle circumscribed with any bounds. In every place Incense is offered
to my name, therefore the pure host, the chief indeed mistical table is the
caelestial and above all things honored Sacrifice. A little after, reciting
many other sacrifices of the New testament, he infers, we have the first
sacrifice, that salutary gift. 2. of Martyrs; 3. of prayers. 4. of Jubilation.
5. of Righteousness; 6. of Alms. 7. of Praise. 8. of Compunction. 9. of
humility. 10. of preaching or fructification.

108. S. Jrenaeus lib. 4. cap. 32. alleging the words of Malachy, infers
manifestly signifying by those that indeed the former people have ceased to
offer to God, and this is a pure one, so that the name of God is glorified
among the Gentiles: and chap. 33. In every place incense is offered to my name
and a pure sacrifice but the Incense S. John in the Apocalipse says to be the
prayers of Saints.

150. S. Justin Martyr in Dial. Triphon: God himself is witness, who says
Mal. In every place among the Gentiles acceptable and pleasing sacrifices are
offered, but God receives not sacrifices from any one but from Priests.
Therefore Christ Jesus has left all sacrifices which are to be offered to his
Name, in the Eucharist of the bread and Cup, which is made in all places by
Christians. God using by anticipation, witnesses to be acceptable to him, those
which are done by you and by your priests he reproves. Again Malachy did then
speak of our sacrifices which are offered in every place, that is of the bread
of the Eucharist; in like manner of the Eucharistical Cup.

Many of our adversaries turn this pure or clean Oblation as if it were nothing
but a Sacrifice of praise, but first that cannot be said properly a sacrifice
of the New testament, since it was as proper to the law of Nature, and the
written law. 2. the Prophet distinguishes between a sacrifice acceptable and
unacceptable: now it is certain that a sacrifice of praise was and is always
acceptable. 3. he opposes a new sacrifice to the sacrifice of the Jews, as they
were external. 4. The holy Fathers very frequently do either clearly
distinguish between them or make the holy Eucharist to be a sacrifice of
praise, finally they plainly say that the pure sacrifice was of bread and wine
and so called Eucharistical.

. 3. The Sacrifice of the Mass Ordained and Instituted by Christ.
THe Roman Church as is expressed in the Council of Trent, sess. 22. cap. 1.
Derives her Authority of celebrating Mass from the Command of Christ Jesus in
his last supper, when he said, Do this in my Commemoration, as the Catholic
Church has always understood and taught, and such I think is the opinion of the
Church of England in as much as concerns the Ministry of the Eucharist; for a
man might ask, by what Authority the Ministers alone do celebrate the
Communion, with exclusion of the laypeople from that office, but leaving this,
let us see what the holy Fathers of those primitive times did teach in this
point.

420. I shall begin with S. Augustine, in his Manual, chap. 11. where he makes
this prayer: Give me I beseech thee O Christ Jesu Contrition of heart, etc.
whilst I unworthy do stand at thy Altar, desiring to offer up to thee that
admirable and heavenly sacrifice, becoming all reverence and devotion, which
thou my Lord God Immaculate, did institute and command to be offered for a
commemoration or remembrance of thy charity, that is of thy death and passion,
for our Salvation, and for the daily repairing of our infirmity. Again, Ser.
14. de Innocent. what more reverent, what more honorable, can be said, then to
rest under that Altar in which sacrifice is celebrated to God; in which hosts
are offered; in which our Lord is the priest, as it is written, Thou art a
Priest for ever according to the Order of Melchisedech: with good reason the
Souls of the just do rest under the Altar, because the body of our Lord is
offered upon the Altar, the blood of the just does not undeservedly there ask
for revenge, where also the blood of Christ is shed for sinners, Conveniently
therefore and as it were for a certain society, the Sepulcher of Martyrs is
there ordained, where the death of our Lord is daily celebrated, as he himself
said, As often as ye shall do these things ye shall show my death, until I
come, to wit, that those who dyed for his death, should rest under the Mystery
of his Sacrament.

398. S. Chrysostom him. 83. in Math. For this cause with desire I have
desired, says our Lord, to eat this pasche with you: that is, to deliver to
you new things and pasche whereby I may make you spiritual; he also drank of it,
lest hearing these words, they should say, what do we drink blood and eat
flesh? and so should be troubled: for when formerly he had made some words of
those things, many only for the words were scandilized, lest then also that
should happen, he first did this, that he might enduce them with a quiet mind,
to the communication of the Mysteries; you will say what then must we make the
old Pasche? by no means, for therefore he said, do this; that he might withdraw
them from the other, besides if this do work remission of sins as certainly it
does, that is altogether needless. But as in the old, so in the same manner he
left for a benefit, and gathered together a memory of mysteries even thence
bridling the mouths of Heretics, for when they say, whence does it appear that
Christ was Immolated, besides many other things producing also these Mysteries:
we shut their mouths, for if Jesus be not dead: whose symbol or sign is this
sacrifice? thou see how great care he had that we should keep in memory that
he died for us; for because Marcion, Valentine, Manicheus, and their followers
were went to deny this dispensation, by this Mystery, he always so reduces us
into the memory of his passion. Again, Hom. 17. in Epist ad Hebraeos. He is our
Bishop who offered an host cleansing us, the same we offer also now, what was
then offered indeed cannot be consumed, but that which we do, is done only in
commemoration of that which was done, for says he, Do this in my commemoration,
Not another Sacrifice, but as the Bishop we always do the same but we rather
work the remembrance of the Sacrifice.

380. S. Gregory of Nice Orat. 1. de Resurrect. He who disposes all things by
his power, does not expect the violence of the Jews as robbers, nor the wicked
sentence of Pilate, that their malice might be the beginning and cause of the
common Salvation of men, but he prevented by his counsel and by a secret kind
of sacrifice which could not be seen by men; he offers himself an host for us
and being together priest and lamb of God, immolats a victim, he that takes
away the sin of the World: when did he do this? when he gave to his Disciples
assembled his body to be eaten and his blood to be drunk, then he openly
declared the sacrifice of the Lamb to be now perfect; wherefore when he
exhibited to his Disciples his body to be eaten; and his blood to be drunk, now
by a secret and invisible Mystery his body was Immolated as it pleased the
power of him, who performed the Mystery.

326. Eusebius l. 1. de Demonst: cap. 10. After all things working the
salvation of us all, he offered a certain wonderful victim and a most
excellent Sacrifice to his Father, and ordained that in memory thereof, we
should offer the same to God for a sacrifice: After, when we have received the
memory of this Sacrifice, to be celebrated by certain signs in the table and
also of his body and salutarie blood as an institute of the New testament.

230. S. Cyprian Epist. 6. ad Cacilium. Know that we are admonished that in
offering the Chalice the dominicall Tradition is to be observed, neither are we
to do any thing, but what our Lord has first done, that the Chalice which is
offered in commmemoration of him, may be offered mixed with wine, and water, for
when Christ said, I am the true vine, the vine verily is not the blood of
Christ but the wine, neither can his blood by which we are redeemed and
vivificated, be seen to be in the Chalice, when wine is wanting to the Chalice,
whereby Christ's blood is declared, which is openly published by the sacrament
and testimony of all the scriptures; which the Saint proves there at large.
Again in the same place he says, If Jesus Christ our lord and God, he the high
priest of God the Father, first offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and
commanded this to be done in his commemoration: verily the priest executes in
the stead of Christ, who imitates that which Christ did do and offers a true
and full sacrifice in the Church to God the Father, if he goes about to offer
according to that which he has seen Christ himself to have offered. Lastly in
Ser. de coena Domini, which is commonly attributed to him: since our lord has
said. Do ye this in my commemoration, this is my flesh, and this is my blood;
as often as it is done with these words and this faith, that substantial bread
and chalice consecrated by solemn benediction is profitable to the life, and
Salvation of the whole man, being also a medicine and holocaust to heal our
infirmities and purge our iniquities.

203. Tertullian l. 5. advers. Marcionem, after having declared what Christ did
in his last supper, he concludes fieri semper quod postea Jussit: he commanded
the same to be done always afterward.

180. S. Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 32. He took bread and gave thinks, saying, this
is my body: and in like manner the chalice, which he declares to be his blood,
and taught the new oblation of the New testament, Which the Church receiving
from the Apostles Offers to God in the whole world, and cap. 34. The oblation
of the Church, which our Lord has taught to be offered in the world; is reputed
before God, a pure sacrifice: and a little after, The kind of Oblation is not
reproved: for Oblations were there and Oblations here, Sacrifices in the people
sacrifices also in the Church: and beneath, he makes an argument against the
Heretics of his time: How is it manifest to them, that bread in which thanks
are given, to be the body of our Lord and the Chalice his blood, if they say
not him to be the Son of the maker of the world; that is his World.

130. S. Justin Martyr Apol. 2. ad Antonium. The Apostles in their Commentaries
which are called Gospells, have so declared that Christ commanded them, taking
bread and giving thanks, he said, do this in memory of me: This is my Body; and
also taking the Cup, and giving thanks, he said; this is my Blood, and gave to
them only.

S. Martial Epist. ad Burdigal. He (that is Christ) having a body, both
immaculate and without sin, for he was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, permitted himself to be immolated on the Altar of the Cross* but
what the Jews through envy did immolate, hoping to abolish his name from the
Earth; we for our Salvations sake, do set upon the sanctified Altar, knowing
that by this only remedy life is to be given us and death avoided, for he our
Lord commanded us to do this in his commemoration.

100. S. Dionise Eccless Hist. cap. 3. wherefore (the venerable Bishop)
reverently and according to his pontifical office, by holy praises of the
divine works, excuses himself that he sacrifices the salutarie host (which is
above him) first in a decent manner exclaming to him, Thou have said, do this
in my commemoration, next he asks that he may be made worthy of so great a
Ministry, ordained in the imitation of God, and to become according to his
forces like to Christ, and that he may devoutly consecrate the Sacraments, and
purely distribute them.

99. S. Clement l. 5. Apostol. constit. cap. 18. Our Lord being risen from
death: make ye your sacrifice which by us he has Constituted, saying do this in
my commemoration: and l. 6. cap. 23. for one sacerdotal tribe, he has
commanded, to choose some of the best of every Nation, to the Priesthood, not
regarding the defects of body, but their religion and life; for cruental
sacrifice a rational and incruental; and that mystical sacrifice of the body
and blood of our Lord, which is celebrated in symbol of his death, for worship
determined by circumscription of place: he has commanded to celebrate the same
with praises, from the East to the West in every place of his Dominion.

These might suffice to show the Authority of the Catholic Church in
celebrating the holy sacrifice of the Mass, and therefore I omit several other
places of the holy Scripture, and I will therefore make it more clear by the
continual Tradition of the Church in those first 500. years.

CHAP. II. The sacrifice of the Mass proved by Tradition and practice of the
Church, within the five hundred years after Christ.
SAint Augustine Epist. 118. ad Januarium. cap. 5. affirms, that whatsoever the
Church in all the world uses, carries with it full authority: insomuch that to
dispute whether it might be done; is most insolent madness: and lib. 1. contra
Cresconium c. 33. to do that, which the whole Church approves; cannot be
questioned, for as the holy Scripture cannot deceive us; so he who fears to be
deceived, by the obscurity of any question, let him consult of it, the Church,
which without any ambiguity, the Scripture demonstrates or makes manifest.

Let us therefore now see what has been the Doctrine of the Church within these
500. years after Christ, whereto as I said before the Doctor appeals.

This cannot be made more manifest then by the Tradition and practice of the
Church, in her Liturgies or Masses, for what the Grecians call liturgies, that
the Latin calls Missa, and we in English Mass. Now these Liturgies do come from
S. Peter, S. James, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose and others of those
times, and within the times from five hundred years, we hardly find any forms
of Masses; but what are deduced from them: I will not say but that there have
been some difference in their rites or ceremonies, some diminutions and some
additions, yet none of them differ in the substance or nature of a sacrifice,
all agree in their forms, in as much as concerns the due celebration of the
Mass. Now because the Doctor alleges the Liturgies of S. James, S. Basil, and
S. Chrysostom, I shall take a brief view of these in particular.

. 1. of S. James Liturgy.
SAint Proclus Bishop of Constantinople, l. de Traditione divina Liturgiae,
about the year 430. assures us, that amongst the Apostles, S. James did set
forth a form of liturgy or Mass; which Baronius ad an. 63. confirms, out of S.
Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, Catechist. 6. an. 365. who Catch. 5. explicates the
most part of S. James Liturgy, as of the pax or, kiss of peace, the sursum
corda; and Preface; the cherubical hymn, sanctus sanctus sanctus, prayers
before the consecration; In which, says he, we pray our most benign God, that
he would send his spirit on what is set before us, that he indeed would make
this bread, Christ's body, and the wine Christ's blood: for what the holy Ghost
teaches is altogether sanctified, and transmuted; but then when that spiritual
sacrifice is made, we pray for the living and dead, etc. all which is found in
S. James liturgy. S. Dionise and S. Clement have made the description of S.
Peter's Mass, where are many things also like to those of S. James, and what now
are in use in the Latin Church, S. Epiphanius an. 370. Haeres. 79. calls S.
James the Principal leader of the Mysteries and sacrifice. For the satifaction
of the Reader I shall make a brief observation of what I find in his liturgy,
as I find it in Claudius de sanctis, printed 111. years past.

The glorious Apostle S. James composed for his people of Jerusalem his
liturgy or Mass, wherein he frequently calls it a divine and supercelestial
mystery; a sacred and dreadful Mystery, made at the holy Altar; a dreadful
and incruental or unbloudy sacrifice, In which commemoration is made of the
most holy Immaculate, our most glorious lady Mother of God and always Virgin
Mary, with all the saints and Just; in another place, he has the same,
concluding that by their prayers and intercession we may obtain Mercy. In
another place the Priest prays; that he would grant that this our Oblation may
be grateful acceptable, sanctified by the holy Ghost; for the propitiation of
our sins, and for the Rest of our friends who have slept before us.

Before; we ask of our Lord, the Angel of peace our faithful guide keeper of
our souls and bodies; the Catechumens and others are dismissed: then the
priest, uses Incense, saying, Receive, O Lord from our hands who are sinners
this Incense as thou did receive those things which Abel, Noe, Aaron and
Samuel, and all thy saints have offered.

Let all humane and mortal flesh be silent, and stand with fear and trembling,
and contemplate with it self no terrene thing, for the King of kings, and Lord
of lords, Christ our God comes forth to be Immolated: and given for food to the
faithful.

The consecration is the same with some little difference with that of the
Roman Mass, and in the prayer following, We offer to thee, O Lord, this
venerable and incruental sacrifice; and a little after, let his descending,
holy and good and glorious presence, sanctify and make this bread, the holy
body of thy Christ and this Chalice the precious blood of thy Christ, and when
he breaks the bread he puts part into the Chalice, saying, The union of the
most holy body and precious blood of our Lord and God and our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Before Communion he has this prayer, O Lord our God, celestial bread, life of
the Universe, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am not worthy
to be made partaker of thy immaculate mysteries, but thou as a merciful God,
make me worthy by thy grace, that without damnation I may be partaker of thy
holy body and precious blood, unto remission of sins and life everlasting: and
after; We give thee thanks O Christ our God for that thou have vouchsafed us,
to be made partakers of thy body and blond in remission of sins, and to eternal
life.

Moreover, he that peruses this Mass of S. James, may find most things which
are in use in the Roman Church, as Incensing the Altar, Salutation of the
people with Pax vobis, or peace be with you, at least 7. times, the oracles of
the Old Testament and doctrine of the new, for which now is Epistle and Gospel,
Domine miserere, or, kirye eleison, at least 15. times; the Gloria in excelsis,
Creed, and our Lords prayer: Inelination at the prayers, often signing the
gifts with the sign of the Cross, and dismission of the people with
benediction. I cannot omit that in the Consecration of the Chalice, the Apostle
particularly declares that the wine should be mingled with water: from these we
may fee what the Mass was in those Apostolical times.

2. Of the Liturgy of S. Basil.
SAint Proclus aforesaid says, that many more divine Pastors who succeeded the
Apostles and Doctors of the Church, explicating the reason of the holy
Mysteries, of that divine Liturgy or Mass, have delivered and committed it in
writing, and then naming S. Clement and S. James: but Great S. Basil seeing the
sloth and negligence of men, and that they thought of nothing but terrene, and
abject things, and that therefore they were weary of long Mass, not that he
thought it to contain any superfluous thing, or overlong, but to prescind the
dullness and slackness of the Prayers, and hearers: for that they spent much
time therein, he gave a shorter to be recited; for after that our Savior was
assumpted into heaven, the Apostles before they were dispersed through the
whole earth, assembling with conspiring minds, were converted to prayer, the
whole day, and when they found much conso lation to be placed in the Mystical
sacrifice of our Lords body, they did sing the liturgy or Mass, abundantly and
long prayer: Since they esteemed these divine sacred things joined together was
to be preferred before all other things; and they were inflamed with a greater
study and desire of divine things, and the holy sacrifice, and earnestly
embraced it, which they always had in memory, the word of our Lord, saying,
This is my body, and do ye this in my commemoration: and he who eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him: wherefore also with a contrite
heart they did sing many prayers, vehemently imploring the divine Majesty, etc.
by these prayers they expected the coming of the holy Ghost, that by his
divine presence he would make the bread and wine mixed with water, ordained for
the sacrifice, the very body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ; which
religious rite verily is observed to this very time, and shall flourish even to
the end of the world. I have the more willingly rehearsed the words of this holy
Bishop, highly commended by St. Cyril a Grecian, and teaching purposely of the
divine liturgy or Mass, and explicating it in each particular, according to
the two liturgies or Mass of S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, not much more then
30. years, after S. Chrysostom had composed his form of Mass.

In this Mass of S. Basil, we find most of those things mentioned before, in
that of S. James, and frequent memory of our blessed Lady, of the most holy our
undesiled Lady, Mother of God, and always Virgin Mary, with all the saints;
And in a prayer before the hymn, Sanctify our souls and bodies, and give us
grace to serve thee in sanctity all our days, by the intercession of the holy
Mother of God, and all saints, who have glorified thee from the beginning of
the world.

The Bishop in secret, prays, Reeceive us, approaching to thy holy Altar,
according to the multitude of thy mercyes, that we may be worthy to offer to
thee, that rational and unbloudy sacrifice for our sins, and ignorance of the
People.

The Consecration is some what different, but by the action and words of our
Savior; after which, the Bishop prays in secret, Therefore O most holy Lord
we also sinners and they unworthy servants, who are ordained to minister at thy
Altat; not for our righteousness; for we have not done any thing good on
earth; but for thy mercies and miserations, which thou have abundantly poured
on us, we confiding draw near to thy holy Altar; propounding the things
consigurating the holy body and blood of thy Christ: we beseech thee, and ask
thee, O holy of holies, that by thy wel-plensing benignity, thy holy spirit
may comt upon us, and on these gifts which are set before us, to bless and
sanctify them, and declare this bread to be the honor able body of our Lord
God and Suvicur jesu Christ, and that which is in the Chalice, the very blood
of our Lord God and our Saviout Jesu Christ, which is shed for the life of the
world.

Again, Make us all, partaking of one bread and Chalice to be united together,
in the Communion of one holy Spirit, and receive the holy body and blood of thy
Christ, etc.

Before Communion, the Bishop said, O Lord Jesu Christ our God, behold from thy
holy tabernacle, and come to sanctify us, who sit above with the Father,
and here invisibly art joined to us, vouchsafe with thy pawerful hand, to give
us thy holy and undesiled body, and precious blood, and by us sinners to thy
people.

Prayer for the dead; Be mindful of all who sleep in the hope of Resurrection
to eternal life: and as for Altars, Vestments, Incense, some prayers in secret;
Kyrie eleison, very frequently. In like manner Pax vobis: the Epistle and
Gospel; signing the bread and wine, and the people, with the sign of the
Cross; turning to the people; washing of hands, elevation of the bread, to show
it to the people; dismission of the people, with many other things which we now
use in the Roman Mass; the like I may say of S. Chrysostomes Mass of which in
the next Paragraph;

. 3. Of S. Chrysostom's Liturgy or Mass.
NOt long after S. Basil, S. John Chrysostom on the same reasons did
abbreviate the form of Mass, which the Grecians do observe to this day, and
besides the practice, many Expositors, as Proclus Bishop of Constantinople
within 30. years after. S. German Bishop of the same place, in his Theorie of
holy things, wherein he explicates all the ceremonies and substance of the
Mass. Nicolas Cabasilus Archbishop of Thessalonia, in his explication of the
liturgy. The holy Martyr Maximus, in his book de Ecclesiastica Mystagogia, of
the Ecclesiastical Mysteries and ceremonies: Bessarion Bishop of Nice, and
afterward Cardinal; and others all agreeing in the same Mysteries, and others
all agreeing in the same Mysteries, with S. Chrysostom in his Liturgy. Add to
this, that we may find the self same dispersed in his several works, as
Clandius de sanctis, has pithily collected in the end of his book de Liturgils;
Let us briesly set down what S. Chrysostom has in his.

We find all the Ceremonies now used in the Lattin Church, as all along are
noted in the second part of the liturgical Discourse, particularly of Altars,
Vestments, signing the bread and wine, the book of the Gospel, Incense, and
Peoples Inclinations, adorations, some prayers in silence, prayer for the Pope,
partition of the host, whereof one piece is put into the Chalice; Elevation of
the holy Sacrament; Pax, benediction at the end; of offering at the Altar.

Mention is made of the Ineruental host, and the Priest prays; We give thee
thanks, O Lord God of virtues, who have thought us worthy to assist now at thy
holy Altar, and to prostrate to thy mercies, for our sins, and ignorance of the
people; O Lord God receive our supplication, and make us worthy in offering
prayer, and the Incruental host, to thee for all thy people. And again in
another prayer, Make me anointed with the grace of Priesthood, to assist at
this holy table, and consecrate thy holy body, and precious blood: A little
after, Grant that these Sacraments may be offered by me a sinner, and thy
unworthy servant, for thou art he that offers and is offered, the receiver, and
distributer, Christ our Lord: The words of consecration are a little different
from those of the former Liturgies: After the Priest says, We offer to thee
this rational and Incruental duty, and we pray and supplicate and ask, that
thou would send thy holy Spirit upon us, and on these thy gifts, and make
this bread indeed the precious body of thy Christ; and what is in the Chalice,
the Preci-bloud of thy Christ: The Deacon saying, Amen, the Priest adds,
Changing, by thy holy spirit.

And after, Look down O Lord Jesu Christ our God, from thy holy Tabernacle, and
from the seat of Glory of thy kingdom; and come to sanctify us, thou who
sit above with the Father, and assists us invisibly, here beneath:
vouchsafe to give us by thy powerful hand, thy Immaculate body and precious
blood, and by us, to all the People.

Besides in this Liturgy, the priest frequently calls upon our Blessed Lady,
craving her Intercessiion, as also of the Angels and Saints, and for the living
and Dead: In sine, there is nothing in the now Roman Mass but Order and Decorum
that was not in the former Mass in the primitive times: so that we may say, if
the Mass was good in those times, the Roman Mass is now good; and if this the
now Roman Mass be Idolatrous and sacrilegious, the Liturgies, Mass, or public
prayer of the Church of those times, were so also; so that there never was a
true Christian Church.

CHAP. III. The Sacrifice of the Mass proved out of the testimony of Popes and
Councels in the first 500. years.
NExt to this, of the practice of the Church, the authority of the holy Popes,
who have been within those 500. years, ought to have a great weight and credit,
wherefore I shall begin with S. Leo; 440. under whom was celebrated that famous
Council of Chalcedon, admitted by the now English Church; and for his great
acts, was surnamed the Great: he I say Epist. 81. to Dioscorus, Ordained, that
for the necessity of the people a priest might say more then one Mass in solemn
feasts: and Epist. 88. to the Bishops of Germany and France he gives a command
that Coriepiscopes or Priests should not reconcile any penitent publicly in
Mass.

367. Pope Damascus Epist. 4. made the same Decree, and in his Pontifical
speaking of Alexander Pope and Martyr; he says; that he did mingle our Lords
Passion in the priests prayers, when Masses were celebrated; and that Sixtus
Pope and Martyr ordained that the priest beginning the action of Mass, the
people should sing the hymn, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

297. S. Marcelline Pope and Martyr. Epist. 1. The sacrifice which is used by
Christians, on the holy Altars; is not only offered to God the Father, but also
with common devotion to the Son.

239. S. Fabian Pope and Martyr, declared that the sacrifice is not to be
admitted from the hands of a Priest, who cannot perform the prayers or actions,
or other observances of the Mass according to the rites of the Church.

175. S. Soter Pope and martyr, determined, that when the Priests consecrated
the holy Mysteries in the time of the Masses, if it happened by any accident of
sickness that the Mystery began, could not be accomplished, it should be
supplied by some other Priest: Again, he ordained that none should presume to
celebrate Mass after meat or drink, how little soever it were, as also that
none of the Priests should presume to celebrate the solemnity of Masses,
without two being present to answer him.

273. Foelix Pope and Martyr, Epist. 2. ad Episcop. Galliae. declared, that in
a synod, he had commanded them, and all Churches, that Masses should be
celebrated on the memory of Martyrs.

145. S. Higgine Pope and Martyr, ordained, that all Churches should always be
consecrated with Mass: Evaristus also Pope and Martyr, witness Ivo and
Burchard had ordained the same.

142. S. Telesphore Pope and Martyr, in his Epistle to all Bishops, Cap. 2.
ordained three Masses to be said on Chrismass day, one at midnight.

121. Alexander Pope and Martyr, Epist. 1. ad omnes orthod. says, Verity it
self, has instructed us to offer the Chalice and bread in the Sacrament, when
he said, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and gave to his Disciples, saying, take
ye and eat, for this is my body, which is delivered for you; In like manner the
Chalice, etc. for by these sacrifices offered to our Lord crimes and sins are
blotted out; and therefore his Passion is to be remembered whereby we are
redeemed, and often recited, and these offered to our Lord; our Lord is
delighted and pleased with such hosts and great sins are demitted; for can
there be in sacrifices a greater thing, then the body and blood of Christ?
Neither can there be any Oblation better then this, for this excells all, which
is to be offered to our Lord, with a pure conscience, and to be taken with a
pure mind, and to be honored by all,; and as it is better then all other; so
it ought rather to be honored and worshipped. The same Saint says, In the
Oblation of the Sacraments which are offered within the solemnity of Masses,
the Passion of our Lord is to be added, that the Passion of him whose body and
blood is made may be celebrated; so that setting aside all superstitious
opinions, Bread only and wine, mixed with water are to be offered in the
sacrifice, for (as we have received from our Fathers and reason it self
teaches) wine alone or water alone is not to be offered in the Chalice of our
Lord but both mixed, because we read, that both did flow from his side in his
Passion.

To omit others, I shall conclude with S. Clement Pope and Martyr, l. 6.
constit. Apostat. 23. for a bloody sacrifice, Christ gave a rational and
Incruental and that Mystical sacrifice of the body and blood of our Lord, which
is celebrated as a symbol of his death.

I know some of our adversaries will call in question some of these Decrees,
but setting aside all other disputes, the practice of the Church from thence,
even to our times; and the use of most of them in the liturgies, before
mentioned, will sufficiently convince the truth of them, let us now see whether
the holy Counsels of those times will manifest the same.

Councels.
505. I Shall begin with the Agathen Council, within the fifth hundred year,
which can. 14. ordains that the Altars are to be consecrated, not only with the
unction of Chrism, but also by the sacerdotal benediction. Can. 21. allows
Masses in private Oratories, but commands that in principal feasts, all should
hear Mass in the Parochial Churches and can. 47. commands all seculars to hear
Mass on Sundays.

482. The first Council at Tours, Can. 2. forbids married or luxurious priests,
to offer sacrifice to God or to minister to the people.

420. The last Council of Carthage cap. 3. declares that it is not lawful for a
priest to reconcile any one in the public Mass.

416. The second Melevitan Council cap. 12. ordains that none should celebrate
prayers, or Orisons, or Masses, or Praefations, or commendations, or Imposition
of hands, which were not approved in Councels.

398. The fourth Council of Carthage in the first 6. Canons, plainly shows the
holy Orders to have reference to the due celebration of Mass; Can. 33. Bishops
or Priests, if on cause of visiting the Church, they come to the Church of
another Bishop, they are to be received according to their degree, and invited
to preach the Word, and consecrate the oblation, that is, the Mass. Can. 79.
Penitents who have diligently performed the laws of Penance, if accidentally
they die in their journey, or on the Sea, where they could not be assisted, let
the memory of them be commended both in prayers and oblations, Can. 89. it is
ordained, that the Bishop should prohibit none whether Gentile or Heretic, or
Jew, to enter into the Church, or to hear the Word, during the Mass of the
Catechumens. All such were not to stay in the Mass of the faithful.

397. The third Council of Carthage, Can. 23. When one is at the Altar, the
prayer is always to be directed to the Father: and Can. 24. Nothing more is to
be offered in the Sacraments of the body and blood, but what our Lord himself
has delivered, that is, bread and wine mixed with water, nor nothing more
offered in the sacrifices, than of grapes and wheat.

393. The Council held at Hippon has the same Decrees, and ordains that the
Sacraments of the Altar, should be celebrated by those who are fasting.

352. In a Roman Council: Athanasius was accused for having consecrated a
Church built by the Emperor without his knowledge, and was so bold as to
celebrate the synaxis therein: S. Athanasius denies the first, but grants the
second, wherein he prayed for the Emperor, and was drawn to do it by the
Multitude.

324. The Gangrane Council, cap. 24. declares Anathema to those who through
pride, esteeming themselves perfect, did condemn the Assemblies made in the
places and Churches of the Saints, or believed the oblations which are there
celebrated to be despised, and the memory of the Saints to be contemned.

320. The ancient Council of Laodicen, cap. 58. Bishops are not to make the
oblations in private houses, without Priests.

But what makes more to our purpose, the same is gathered out of three of the
first General Councels, which the present Church of England admits, now in
their Articles. In the 4. General Council of Calcedon, Act. 3. Blessed
Ischirion Martyr accused Dioscorus Bishop of Constantinople (251.) that amongst
other things, he had taken away the wheat that was sent by the Emperor to the
Church of Libia; for to make the Eucharist, that by that occasion the Incruent
al sacrifice of the Mass, was not for long time offered: he adds moreover, that
those goods which Perisopia a most noble woman, had bequeathed by Testament to
Monasteries, and to the poor, to the end that the sacrifice might be offered
for the health of her soul, he had given to profane persons; sure these
actions were then esteemed great Crimes; or else, he durst not to have presumed
to propound them in the face of so great a Council.

431. In the great Council of Ephesus, the Epist. of Cyrill, Patriarck of
Alexandria, and synod of that place to Nestorius; was read cap. 3. and highly
approved, and commended, as agreeable to the Council of Nice, or containing
nothing ambiguous, nothing dissentaneous, but agreeing to our settled faith,
without any noveltie. Now this Epistle was a profession of the Catholic faith,
and to our purpose in these terms; Announcing the death of the only born Son of
God, that of Jesus Christ, according to the flesh, and his Resurrection, and in
like manner, confessing his ascension into the heavens; we celebrate in the
Churches; the incruental verity of sacrifice; so also we come to the Mystical
Benedictions, and are sanctified and made partakers of the holy body, and
precious blood of Christ, redeemer of all of us; not receiving as common flesh
(far be it) nor as of a sanctified man, and as of one joined to the word,
according to the unity of dignity or of one possessing the divine habitation,
but as truly life-giving and made proper to the word it self, being life
naturally as God, for he is united to proper flesh, and has declared that to be
life-giving, and therefore as he said to us, Amen, Amen, I say to you, unless
you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood; yet we ought not to
think that to be as a man one of us (for how can the flesh of man according to
his nature be life-giving?) but truly made proper to him, who for us, both is
and is called the son of man; I cannot conceive but that this was then the
common belief of the whole Church, when from this Mystery of the Mass they
proved the Godhead of Christ.

325. I shall conclude with the 18. Canon of the first General Council held at
Nice, where it is said, That there was brought to the holy and great Council,
that in some places and Cities, the Deacons did give the Grace of holy
Communion to Priests; which neither Rule, nor custom, has delivered, that
those who offer Christ's body, should receive from them who have no power to
offer, also it was declared that some Deacons did touch the holy thing offered,
(that is the Eucharist) before the bishops.

These might suffice to any rational man, for a clear attestation of the holy
sacrifice of the Mass, even in those primitive times; nevertheless I shall by
way of addition produce the testimony and judgment of the holy Fathers and
Doctors of those times.

CHAP. IV. The testimony and judgment of the holy Fathers and Doctors, for the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and that within five hundred years after Christ.
430. I Shall begin with the foresaid S. Cyril, even in the first Council of
Ephesus, in his Declaration of the 11. Anathematicisme. We celebrate in the
Church, the life-giving and incruental sacrifice, beleiving that which is set
before us, to be the body, and in like manner precious blood, not of some
man-like and common, but rather we receive it, as the proper body and blood of
the life-giving Word, for common flesh cannot vivificate, and our Savior
testified this, saying, the flesh, profits nothing, it is the spirit that
quickens, but because it is made proper to the word, therefore it is
understood, as is life-giving: as our Savior said, As the living father sent
me, and I live by the Father; and he who eats me, the same also shall live by
me.

430. Theodoret about the same time cap. 20. of the History of the holy
Fathers, In the life of holy Maris, says, When divine Maris had a long time
desired to sea the spiritual and mystical sacrifice to be offered, he asked,
that the oblation of the divine gift might be made, I willingly yielded to him,
and commanded the holy vessels to be brought, when the village was not far
distant, and for an Altar used the Deacons hands, and offered the mystical
divine and salutarie sacrifice.

420. S. Augustine Epist. 23. ad Benifacium, Was not Christ once immolated in
himself, and yet in the sacrifice not only through all the Paschall
solemnities, but every day, for the people. l. 20. oont. Faustum. c. 21. Who of
the Bishops assisting, at the Altar in the place of the holy bodies, at any
time said? I offer to thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian, but what is offered is
offered to God, who crowned the Martyrs. Afterward, We most frequently
sacrifice to God, in the Memory of Martyrs, only with that Rite, with which in
the manifestation of the New testament, he has commanded to be sacrificed to
him, which pertains to that worship which is called Latria, and is due only to
God. And a little after, The flesh and blood of this sacrifice, before the
coming of Christ was promised by victims of similitudes; In the Passion was
given by truth it self; and after Christ's Ascension, is celebrated by a
Sacrament of memory. Ser. 91. de temp. he makes mention of some lessons which
were read in the Mass, Ser. 32. cap. 1. It is not to be doubted, but that the
dead receive help by the prayers of the Church; and by the Salutarie Sacrifice,
and alms, which are given for their souls; that God may deal more mercifully
with them; then their sins have deserved, for this is delivered to us by our
Fathers. The whole Church observes when she prays for those who are dead in
the communion of Christ's body and blood, when in their place they are remembered
at the Sacrifice; Ser. 251. On Sunday let none absent themselves from the
celebration of Masses; where he also complains, that some do force the Priest
to abreviate their Masses, lib. 10. di civitate Dei, cap. 20. The man Christ
Jesus, was made Mediator between God and man, when in form of God he takes
sacrifice with the Father, with whom also he is true God, yet in form of a
servant he had rather be, then take Sacrifice, by this he is both a Priest
himself, the Offerer, and he himself the Oblation, the Sacrament of which he
would have to be the daily sacrifice of the Church; which being the body of
that head, learns to offer her self by him. The ancient sacrifices of the
Saints, were manifold and various signs of this true sacrifice, when this one
was figured by many, and to this high and true sacrifice all counterfeit
Sacrifices did give place: and lib. 22. cap. 8. A house being haunted by evil
spirits, the man of the house entreated one of our Priests to go thither, and
expel them by prayer, one went and offered there the Sacrifice of Christ's
body, and by Gods mercy the devils did leave the place. lib. 9. confess. cap.
12. the Saint tells us, that he was present, when the Sacrifice was offered for
his Mothers Soul.

398. S. Chrysostom in 2. ad Tit. 1. hom. 2. That holy oblation which Peter or
Paul or a Priest of whatsoever merit he be, who does offer, is the same which
Christ gave to his Disciples, which now also Priests do make; this has no less
then that: hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10. God has prepared here a much more admirable
and more magnificent Sacrifice, and when he had changed the Saccrifice, for the
slaughter of bruit beasts; he commanded himself to be offered: hom. 69. ad
Populum Antioch. It was not unadvisedly ordained, by the Apostles, that
commemoration of the dead, should be made, in the dreadful mysteries, for they
know that from thence much gain and profit, comes to them; for when the whole
people with hands stretched forth, the sacerdotall plenitude, and the dreadful
Mystery is propounded, how praying for them, shall we not be heard of God? To
these we may admit what the same Saint has left to posterity, in his liturgy,
of which we have spoken already, cap. 1.. 3. and remit the Reader to Claud. de
Sanctis, at the end of his book of the Liturgy who has made a Collection out
of S. Chrysostoms works, not only in general, but also in every particular of
the Mass.

390. S. Jerome Epist. ad Theophilum applauding his book says, In thy work we
have beheld the verity of the Churches that those who are ignorant may learn
and be taught, by the testimony of the Scriptures, with what veneration, they
ought to receive holy things, and serve in the Ministry of Christ's Altar, and
to have the holy Chalice and holy veils, and other things which belong to the
worship of our Lords passion, from the participation of our Lords body and
blood. Again in cap. 1. ad Tit. If laymen be commanded to abstain from their
wives for prayer, what shall we think of a Bishop, who must daily offer
immaculate sacrifices unto God, for his own sins and for the sins of the people.

380. S. Gregory of Nice, orat. de Resurrect. Our Lord preventing the violence
of the Jews, offered himself a sacrifice; being himself both priest and Lamb;
but thou will say to me, when was this done? even then when he gave to his
familiar friends, his body to eat, and his blood to drink, and what he himself
did, the same he commanded his Ministers to do.

374. S. Ambrose in his prayer before Mass, which the Church to this day uses,
exclaims, O with how great confusion of heart, and fountain of tears, with how
great reverence and trembling, with how great chastity of body and purity of
mind; is that divine and celestial sacrifice to be celebrated, where thy flesh
in verity is taken, where thy blood in verity is drunken, where lowest things
are joined to highest things, earthly things to Divine: where is the presence
of the holy Angels, where thou art wonderfully and ineffably Sacrifice and
Priest? Again, I, O Lord, mindful of thy venerable Passion, do come to thy
Altar, although a sinner, that I may offer to thee the sacrifice, which thou
have instituted, and commanded to be offered in remembrance of thee, for our
Salvation. And in his Mass, he has this prayer, How can we despair of thy
mercy, who receive so great a gift; that we should deserve to offer such an
host to thee, to wit, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
delivered himself, for the redemption of the world, to that pious and venerable
passion; who instituting the form of everlasting sacrifice of Salvations, first
offered himself a sacrifice, and first taught it to be offered? And again, Our
Lord Jesus Christ thy son has ordained the Rite of sacrificing in the New
testament, when he transformed bread and wine, which Melchisedech Priest had
offered in prefiguration of the mystery to come; into the sacrament of his body
and blood. and l. de officits cap. 48. Now Christ is offered as man, as
receiving his passion, and he offers himself as Priest, that he may forgive our
sins: And in Psalm. 38. We have seen the high Priest, coming unto us, we have
seen and heard him offering his blood for us; let us Priests follow him as much
as we can, that we, though weak in merit, yet honorable by the Sacrifice, may
offer sacrifice for the people; for although Christ is not now seen to offer,
yet he is offered on earth, when the body of Christ is offered, yea, he is
manifestly offered in us, his word sanctifies the sacrifice which is offered.

370. S. Gregory Nariazene, orat. 4. makes mention of Altars, having their name
from the most pure and incruental sacrifice.

340. S. Athanasius, Ser. de Defunct. The Oblation of the unbloudy sacrifice is
our propitiation.

328. Eusebius l. 1. de demonst. cap. 10. After all things Christ working our
salvation offered to his Father a certain wonderful victim, and excellent
sacrifice for the salvation of us all, and ordained in memory thereof, that we
our selves should offer it to God for a sacrifice.

318. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, Catech. 5. explicates the most parts of the
Mass, I will only note his words on the Consecration: We pray (says he) the
most benign God, that he would send his holy spirit on the things set before
us, that he may indeed make the bread, the body of Christ, and the wine the
blood of Christ, for that on which the holy spirit comes upon, is altogether
sanctified and transmutated, or changed from one thing to another.

350. S. Cyprian, Epist. 63. ad Clerum. The Bishops our predecessors
religiously considering, and wholsomely providing, that no brother departing
this life, shall name a Clergyman to be tutour or guardian over pupils; If he
does, no offering is to be made for him, nor sacrifice celebrated for his rest;
because he deserves not to be named at the Altar, in the prayer of the Priests,
who would withdraw Priests and Ministers from the Altar: for which he alleges
the authority of Pope Victor, and Sermon de coena Domini. This sacrifice is a
perpetual, and always a permanent holocaust, no multitude consumes this bread;
it becomes not old by antiquity.

180. S. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 34. the Churches oblation, which our Lord taught
to be offered in the whole world, is reputed before God, a sacrifice pure, and
acceptable to him. And again, The kind of Oblation is not reproved, for
oblations were there, and also oblations are here: sacrifice in the people, and
sacrifices in the Church: And after, he makes an argument against the heretics
of those times: Now will it be manifest that the Bread whereon thanksgivings
are made, is the body of our Lord, and Chalice his blood, if they say, Christ
is not the word of the Father; see him cap. 32. above cited.

220. S. Hyppolitus Bishop and Martyr, Orat: de cansummatione Mundi: brings in
Christ speaking thus, Come ye Bishops and Priests, who have daily offered my
precious body and blood, and speaking of the time of antichrist, he says, The
holy houses of the Churches, shall be like Cottages; and the precious body and
blood of Christ shall not be extant, in those days, the liturgy or Mass,
shall be abolished; the singing of psalms shall not be heard, that is,
publicly: With him agrees S. Chrysostom, hom. 49. operis imperfecti,
according to that of Dan. cap. 9. and 12.

203. Tertulliam lib. de Oratione, cap. 14. speaking of the stations, very many
do think that they are not to be present at the prayers of the sacrifices,
because the station is to end, by taking the body of our Lord, therefore the
Eucharist does finish the devout service to God: were not thy station more
solemn, if thou did also stand at Gods Altar? the Body of our Lord being taken
and reserved, both are safe, both participation of the sacrifice, and execution
of Offices. And l. ad scapulum: We sacrifice for the health of the Emperor,
but to our God, and his, but by pure prayer, as God has commanded.

S. Martialis, Epist. ad Burdegal: cap. 3. Sacrifice is offered to God, the
Creator on the Altar, not to men, nor to Angels, not only on a sanctified
Altar; but every where a clean ablation is offered to God, as he has testified,
whose body and blood we offer unto life everlasting, saying, Joan. 4. God is a
spirit, and they that adore him must adore in verity, for he having been both
immaculate aend without sin, because he was conceived of the holy Ghost, and
born of the Virgin Mary, permitted himself to be immolated on the Altar of the
Cross: but what the Jews through malice did immolate, thinking themselves to
abolish his name from the earth; we propound in a sanctified Altar for the
cause of our salvation, knowing by this only remedy, life to be given us, and
death avoided, for our Lord himself has commanded us to do it in Commemoration
of him.

171. S. Ignatius, Martyr, Epist. ad Smirnenses. It is not lawful to baptize,
nor offer, nor immolate sacrifice, or celebrate Masses without the Bishop: And
Epist. ad Ephesios, he condemns those who separate themselves, and come not to
the the Congregation of sacrifices.

Thus we see, that the Roman Mass used for almost twelve hundred years did not
there take its beginning, but was always observed in Christ's Church even from
the beginning, from Christ himself and his Apostles.

CHAP. V. Sacrifice necessary to the being of a Church.
THere can be no visible Church without visible Religion, nor no visible
Religion, without a visible Sacrifice: for as the Church is nothing but a
visible congregation of all the faithful, so it is necessary that in this
Assembly or Congregation, there be something, that may manifest the ir murual
desire and concord to worship God. Now it is certain that there never could be
any agreement to any internal action, neither could there be any public act of
Communion in the worship of God, unless they assembled did agree, or follow
some external sign, voice, or action, such as Sacraments and sacrifices are.

S. Chrysostom well notes, hom. 60. ad Pop. Antioch. If we had been
incorporeal, God would have given us plain and incorporeal gifts; but because
the soul is conjoined to the body, he has given us intelligible things, in
sensible; and this conformable to humane nature which depends of the senses in
her operations; even in the worship of God, whereto the virtue of Religion
conduces us.

Now Religion includes four Acts: The first is, a consideration of Gods
infinite Majesty, on whom all things depend. 2. A reflection on our nothing, for
of our selves we are nothing have nothing, and can do nothing; but whatsoever
we have or can do, comes all from God; These two acts are not elicited by the
virtue of Religion, but as supposed grounds or motives, to the worship of God:
the other two proper acts of Religion are interior or exterior: the first as
pure, is proper only to the Angels, and Blessed souls, now separated from
their bodies, or elevated by some supernatural grace; but as it is found in Men
of this world, has dependence on the senses, but may be purified in its
operation, and is a profound submission of heart or internal Inclination of the
mind to serve and worship God: The external act of Religion, is an external
profession of that interior will, made by voice, gesture, or external sign;
such are public prayer, adorations, and such like, but none like to the
sacrifice; which carries with it that true worship, which S. Augustine, l: 10.
de civitate Dci, cap. 1: calls Latria, or, honor due to God: A little after,
Religion signifies nothing so distinctly as the worship of God, by which cap.
4. we owe sacrifioe to God, and thence inferrs, There is none dare say, a
sacrifice is due, but to God alone, and who ever sacrificed but to him, whom he
knew, or imagined or feigned to be God: whence I infer, That since from the
first creation of Man, God had a Church, wherein there was true Religion, it
necessarily follows, that according to our humane constitution, in the same
Church there was and is an external sacrifice, wherein God, was and is
worshipped with Latria, which is the perfect act of Religion and worship of God.

Moreover, sacrifices seem to follow the instinct of Nature, for as Plutark,
adversus Colos says, A man may find Cities without walls, houses, Kings, Laws,
Coins, schools, and Theaters; but a Town without Temples, and Gods, to whom
sacrifices are offered, you shall never find. Plato, before him, de leg. Dial.
We can never find any Nation so barbarous, any people at all so rude, and
savage, who with vows, victins, and outward sacrifices, have not acknowledged
the Soveraeignty of some God or other. All Hysteries do testify, that from the
beginning of the world sacrifices were in use amongst all Nations and Religion:
whence S. Augustine, Epist. 49. ad Deograt, 9.34. That, it is not to be blamed
in the rites of Pagans, that they builded Temples, ordained Priests, offered
sacrifices (for he supposed these to be according to the law of nature) but
that these were exhibited to Idols, and devils, that was to be condemned, for
that they gave which was only due to God, to false Gods.

But what makes more to our purpose, is, the continual practice of Gods Church
even from the beginning of using sacrifices, which S. Augustine lib. 10. de
civit. Dei. cap. 4. How ancient apart of Gods worship, a sacrifice is, Cain and
Abel do show full proof; and all along in the law of Nature the Examples of
Noe, Abraham, Melchisedech and Jacob* now the written Law had sacrifices
ordained by God himself, which continued to our Savior, to say then, that the
law of Grace should have no sacrifice, is to deprive Christ's Church of the most
noble act of Religion; and so make it more imperfect, then the law of Nature or
Written law.

I know some will object that of S. John Chap. 4. God is a spirit, and they
that adore him; must adore in spirit and verity; whereto I answer, that this
place manifests, that our sacrifices are spiritual, and true, in which they
differ from all precedent sacrifices, which were carnal, and rather in figure
or shadow of the sacrifice of the new law: It is certain therefore, that Christ
did not reject all external worship of God, but would have them done in spirit
and truth; otherwise take away all sacrifices, Sacraments, prayers, Churches,
and society of men in his service. The sacrifice of the new law requires to be
done in spirit (that is) in says, hope, charity, and interior devotion; and
in verity according to the institution of Christ. The Apostle S. Paul, Ephesians.
6. invites us to pray at all times in spirit, that is, in mind, affection and
desire, or as Vatablus terms it, In spirit, that is, with servour of spirit,
that is, with an Intimate and fervent spirit, otherwise it works no true act of
Religion, whose external act requires also the internal: as has been said
already.

Our Advarsaries have sought all means possible to take away the belief of the
sacrifice of the Mass, notwithstanding that Christ's Church, as I have formerly
manifested, has always taught and believed it as proper to the Evangelical
law. This Doctor Breven^ has two or three Inventions to this purpose, which I
shall endeavor to refute in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Doctors Invention to exclude the Sacrifice of the Mass.
SOme of our advarsaries have said, That the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, is the peculiar and perpetual host, in which our Priesthood, law, and
Religion is constituted: and so in the new law, there is no other sacrifice
remaining, the Doctor in proof of this, lays hold on the Apostles words; Heb.
7. Christ did once offer himself, cap. 9. once in the consummation of the
world; and again Christ was offered once: It is needless then to frame another
sacrifice. I answer by granting the Antecedent; and denying the consequence,
for the sacrifice of the Cross, was both full and sufficient; nothing was
wanting to the value, and sufficiency of the price; for Christ, by his passion,
has purchased the sufficient price for to redeem the whole world: yea for all
the sins ever committed, either before or after, for it was an expiatorie,
Redeeming, and satisfactorie Sacrifice; for the whole world, by which the
Sacrifice of the Mass is not excluded; for the Mass is only applicatorie of the
Redemption, and satisfaction, which Christ did work on the Cross; so that in
the Mass, we do not offer a new price for our sins, but we apply the former
price of the Cross, to our selves; even as we apply the same to us, by baptism,
and other Sacraments.

Moreover, the sacrifice of the Mass, may be said to be the same with that of
the Cross; in as much as it is a continual representation of the passion;
whence S. Cyprian, Epist. 63. says, Our sacrifice is correspondent to the
passion of Christ: and S. Augustine de fid. ad Pet. Cap. 19. Those carnal
sacrifices did prefigurate the flesh of Christ which he was to offer for sins;
and the blood which he was to shed; But this sacrifice, is the commemoration of
the flesh of Christ which he has now given: and of the blood which he has
shedd: In them he was showed as to be killed, in this he is showed as killed.
Again, S. Cyprian in the place before cited, says, we make mention of the
Passion, in all our sacrifices (for the passion of our Lord is the sacrifice
which we offer) we ought to do no other thing, but what he did, for the
Scripture says; as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this Chalice,
you shall show the death of our Lord until he comes; as often therefore, as we
offer the Chalice in remembrance of our Lord and of his passion, we do that
which manifestly our Lord did; In fine, the sacrifice of the Mass is the same
with the sacrifice of the Cross; for that in the Mass, as well as on the Cross,
the same principal priest, and the same offerer, to wit, Christ, is both the
same victime, and host, different only in the manner, Incruentall in the Mass,
Cruentall on the Cross; but the Incruentall in the Mass signifies and
represents in a mysteriall manner; the cruental on the Cross.

Christ therefore once dyed for all, with all sufficiency imaginable: but all
do not receive the benefit thereof, only those who by grace of God, are made
partakers thereof, receive the fruit of Christ's passion; and we are made
participant of this all-sufficient sacrifice; by such means as Christ has lest
in his Church, amongst which the chiefest are the Sacraments and sacrifice of
the Eucharist, as the principal means to apply the merit of Christ's passion
unto us, which Christ instituted in his last supper, according to the faith,
belief, and doctrine of Christ's Church; even within these five hundred years
after Christ, as is formerly declared.

Others will admit of some sacrifices: but they must be purely spiritual, such
as are the sacrifices of praise, of contrition, humility, and such like, as if
they were all spiritual and celestial; but our omnipotent God, condescending
to our humane nature, and for the general conservation of his worship in the
hearts of men, has always ordained certain visible signs, sacraments, and
rites, for to move our interior mind to such pious duties, as is manifest in
all states of Gods Church.

Moreover, this is besides our question, for we require a sacrifice which is
proper and peculiar to the new testament, or Law, which was ordained by Christ:
such as are mentioned, are common to all laws; if you take them purely
spiritual; to no law: for such belong only to celestial spirits, but if we
take them as united to visible signs; then such sacrifices were found in the
law of nature, as in the written laws, nay there were several sacrifices in
all. The primary Intention, was to exhibit due worship to God, and in
particular some were for expiation of sin, some with thanksgiving, other in
praise of God; in like manner in the law of Grace there are such sacrifices,
but the only true and proper sacrifice of the Evangelical law* is the sacrifice
of the Eucharist; which as it succeeded all the sacrifices of the old law, so
it has in a more excellent manner their effect.

Contrary to this, Doctor Brevent cites S. Augustine, lib. 10. de civit. Dei,
cap. 6. Every work tending to effect our beatitude by a sincere inherence with
God is a true sacrifice. To which I say, that in a general sense it is true,
especially if it be taken in metaphorical sense, as 8. Augustine plainly here
takes it; as it appears in the examples here alleged. A sacrifice, (says he)
though offered by a man, is a divine thing, whereupon, a man consecrated wholly
to Gods name, to live to him, and die to the world, is a sacrifice. 2. when we
chastise our body, by abstinence, it is a sacrifice. 3. works of mercy being
referred to God, are true sacrifices: We Catholics do confess and acknowledge
those, and such, to be metaphorical, improperly, in a general sense, true
sacrifices; but Protestants will not only deny them to be proper sacrifices,
but also will not believe them, to be sacrifices at all, for they will not
allow the two first, to be acts of virtue, and the best word they will give
them is, that they are effects, and fruits of Popery.

Moreover, the Saint in the same place, insinnuates another sacrifice, by which
the whole and holy society of the redeemed, and sanctified City is offered to
God; by that great Priest, who gave up his life for us to become members of so
great a head, in so mean a form, this form he offered, and herein he was
offered, in this, he is our Priest, our Mediator, and our sacrifice, all in
this; and after, concludes, This is the Christians sacrifice, we are one body
with Christ, as the Church celebrateth, in the Sacrament of the Altar, so well
known to the faithful. This alone is the proper and peculiar sacrifice, which
Christ has instituted, and left in his Church; as formerly has been declared.

But our Doctor, to prove his conceit; cap. 11. toward the end; cites
Durandus, l. 2. de sacerd. fol. 29. which is cap. 10. In fine, The Doctors
words are; Durand himself is full of this (that is, to prove the only
sacrifices of the Cross) for Christ, (says he) performed excellently the
office of a priest; when he offered himself on the Cross, for the sins of
Mankind, and performs it yet more gloriously now, when sitting at the right
hand of his Father, he intercedes continually for us. We acknowledge this as
Catholic doctrine, for this is true: but no way excluding the sacrifice of the
Mass; but with the same Durandus in the precedent words, this Office (to wit of
priest) Christ did exercise, when after supper he converted the bread and wine,
into his body and blood, saying to the Apostles, Take ye, and eat this is my
body. The Doctor omitted this either ignorantly or maliciously. It hardly can
be believed, but that he did read the place, except he took it from others
notes, and so little cared for the truth; if he did, little credit is to be
given to what he says; God defend us from such Doctors.

It is strange how the Doctor in the beginning of his 3. chapter. should
acknowledge that the Mass; according to the primary Notion, as it was anciently
taken, for that part of divine worship, where the elements of bread and wine
were by the priest, both consecrated to God, and distributed to the People
which is, the supper of our Lord in S. Paul 1 Cor. 11.20. for this he cites,
Ordo Romanus made by Gelasius; and reprinted in Rome, 1591. or thereabouts;
whereby is manifest, the Conformity of the Present Romans, with the Church in
those primitive times for this sacrifice for which we contend, to wit, that we
take it even in this Notion he assigns, and accordingly imitating the
primitive Church, not inventing any new Mass, but continuing still the same. I
could not but smile when for this he alleges Durandus for legitima Missa, lib.
4. cap. 1. n. 39. and interprets it the only due and lawful administration of
the holy Sacrament in the old latin Church: whereas Durand interprets that to
be a legitimate Mass, in which are Priest and respondent, offerer and
communicant, as the composition of the prayers demonstrates, this by evident
reason; perhaps he means the order and manner of celebrating the Mass: which
Durand does learnedly and solidly declare, in every particular particle of the
Mass, which if the Doctor beleives, as he does his legitima Missa, he labors
in vain against the Roman Church.

The Question in that place propounded, was, whether a Priest might celebrate
Mass, when less then two were present; and after disputing pro and con, he
concludes, That is a lawful Mass, which has one present, besides the Priest at
Mass, O how much is this to the Doctors purpose.

Now the Doctor will solve all, by putting instead of the sucrifice of the
Mass, Christian duties, as evidently true Evangelical Oblations, and
sacrifices; which in order to public worship, were made before Communion, and
which the holy Fathers commend as the general Christian sacrifice, that
succeeded Jewish offerings, which he confirms by a prayer which he finds in the
Roman Missal, Dom. 5. post Pentecosten. It cannot be denied, but that such
Oblations were made in the time of Mass; at the offertory; as is declared in
the Liturgical discourse, p. 2. sect. 2. cap. 2. which also is declared, in the
4. Canon of the Apostles; in these words, It it not lawful to offer at the
Altar, besides new corn and grapes and oil for the lamps, and perfumes, that
is, Incense, in the time, wherein the holy oblation is celebrated; many ancient
Canons have been made, concerning these oblations; in all which we may see that
these oblations were of things, which belonged to the Sacrifice, or to the
things which belonged to the Altar, or to the poor, and sometimes to the
Priests, by way of Alms, the present Church of England takes it in the fence of
Alms, and only prays for the givers; but never thought it as an essential
point of Communion, which may be distributed without alms, as alms may be given
without Communion. Add to this, that such Oblations are common to the old law,
and yet were never reckoned amongst the sacrifices; Deuteronomy. 16. a law is made,
There shall not appear before our Lord, any empty, but every one shall offer,
according to that he has; but this was not by way of sacrificing which only
did belong to Priests. In the new law S. Paul 1 Cor. 16. calls them
Collections, S. Clement l. 4. constit. Apostol. cap. 7. supposes this when he
advises the Priest to refuse at the Altar the Oblations which come from an ill
conscience: Pope Fabian an. 239. Decreed, that on Sundays men and women should
make offerings of bread and wine. S. Cyprian blames the rich misers of his time
who brought nothing to this offering: saying, Do thou who art wealthy and
rich think to have part of the Mass, without vouchsafing to put any thing into
the basin? Tertullian calls such Oblations pledges of piety.

Moreover, taking the prayer of the Missal in that sense which the Doctor takes
it; the most that can be gathered thence, is, that such oblations, were made in
the time of Mass, for that prayer immediately follows the offertory: but it may
be better expounded of the oblations, which the people do make of the sacrifice
of the Mass, together with the Priest, as it is said in the first Memento of
the Mass, in which, the Priest prays for all who are present, saying, for whom
we offer to thee, or, who do offer to thee this sacrifice.

CHAP. VII. Of the Doctors deceitful proceeding in his citations.
THe Doctor to show his great Reading, in every page almost, cites schoolmen,
Fathers, Liturgies, and Councils; not remembering that all those schoolmen, were
members and professors of the Roman Church; all of them taught the Roman Mass;
I cannot concieve any reason, why he should allege Bellarmine, and other
Schoolmen for his foolish conceits; unless he had dreamt that no man would take
the pains to read their works; for if they did, they should easily see his
legerdemain, nay, I can scarcely believe, that the Doctor himself ever read
them, in the Authors themselves, but perhaps trusted to some others notes;
verily a man need not go any further, to answer all his impertinencies; then to
read the places he cites; for either they were of his opinion or no; if they
were not, as it is certain they were not, who can excuse his most perverse
malice, who with neglect of their grounds, for the sacrifice of the Mass; and
answers to all his objections: If they were not, strange madness possessed
them, that they all of them should so amply, and so copiously write, preach,
and teach this catholic Doctrine: Alcuinus, Ordo Romanus, Durandus, Walfridus,
Honorius, Gabriel, Ceremonialt, and Pontificale Romanum, Vega, etc. whom the
Doctor cites, have written whole books, believing and proving not only the
substance of the Roman Mass, but also every particular circumstance, manner,
and rite and ceremony thereof; all these Schoolmen were Priests or Bishops
ordained in the Roman Church; yea many were Cardinals.

But it is strange, that the Doctor should quote such men when he confesses
that the Roman Church, had almost twelve hundred years been possessed of the
Mass; and professed as she now does; the most that we may expect, from his
innumerable citations is, that he has scraped and culled some half sentences,
some slips of words, wherein I will not excuse all, neither are we bound to
defend or believe all they say, we much honor them as true Children of the
Church, and as faithful Expositours of the Mysteries of our faith, with
submission to their lawful Prelates.

But I freely accuse the fraudulent dealing of taking words and sentences
contrary to their own judgment; and mind; yea their own words, and absolutely
contrary to their manifest and known doctrine, merely to deceive the Christian
Readers: I dare say; that if the Doctor himself; or any other, would stand to
their judgments, the Doctor would loose his cause; for they were constant,
Champions, and defenders of the Roman faith; even in this sacrifice of the Mass.

Now because it is not my task here; to defend or reprove what has been said,
or taught in the Church, from the first five hundred years; I will let the
Doctor alone in his career, and enquire, what others will say of his great
impertinencies: But because he has the boldness to quote the Liturgies or
Masses of S. James, S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, which were within those five
hundred years; I must say, that it is an unwonted way, to take testimony of
Masses, against the Mass; especially when all he has said, in every respect, is
as much against the Mass, of S. James, of S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, as
against the Roman Mass; for in substance of a sacrifice of the new law, they
are all one: as I have formerly declared.

Yet, I cannot but note, that the Doctor page 20. produces a prayer used in the
Liturgies; That according to our Saviors merciful institution, God would be
pleased to send down on these Sacraments, the Holy Ghost, and so sanctify them;
that they may be the precious body, and the precious blood of his Son, to them
who should receive worthily, etc. In the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom, I find
these words in Latin, Adone offerrimus tibi rationabile ac incruentum hoc
obsequium and precamur, and supplicamus, and deposcimus ut mittas spiritum
sanctum tuum super nos and super hoc apposita munera (the rubric is, Et
orige^s se, and torrio consignans sancta munera dicit) Et fac panem istum
quidem pretiosum Corpus Christi tui; and quod est in calice isto, pretiosum
sanguinem Christi tui, permutans sancto spiritu tuo. These words I have put in
English, before cap. 2.. 3. of S. Chrysostomes liturgy; and here in latin, that
all may see how little conscience this Doctor shows in citing those Liturgies,
which are so contrary to his drift in this his book, and how little care he has
of his words; for if we should stand to the words, as he sets them down, we may
gather, that the bread and wine are sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and made the
body and blood of Christ: his addition which none of the Liturgies have; To
them who? should receive worthily, is only a necessary condition required on
our pa^^^, but makes nothing to the being of our Saviors body* and blood in
the Sacrament, and are not found there.

As for the holy Fathers, he frequently quotes them, but seldom their words, at
least any way contradicting the Catholic doctrine of the Mass: how much they
are for it, is manifest, from what has been said before; the greatest advantage
that I conceive he makes of them, is that they sometimes call the Eucharist,
even after the consecration, Bread, which cannot be denied, for the Roman
Church in the Mass does the same, imitating our Savior, who affirmed that he
was the bread of life, the bread which I will give is my flesh: and things are
named according to the outward form, and lest any one should be mistaken, the
holy Fathers, must commonly and, an explication thereto, so S. Cyprian, l. 2.
Epist. 3. says, Christ offered the (...), which Melchisedech offered, to wit,
bread and wine, that is his body and blood. S. Hierome in cap. 1. Malac. We
pollute the bread, that is Christ's body: when we come unworthily to the Altar;
and in cap. 5. ad Hebreos, Our mystery is signified in offering bread and wine,
that is, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is offered: so in the
Roman Mass it is bread of life everlasting.

CHAP. VIII. Of two gross Mistakes committed by the Doctor.
THe Doctor either out of Ignorance or perverse malice in his third chap. as
also so in other places, attributes to the Roman Church the sacrificing of
their God; which if he believes, he shows his ignorance in a high degree, if
not, what may excuse him? for he cannot but know, that the sacrifice of the
Mass is no other, than that of the body and blood of Christ Jesus; and that it
is offered as well to God the Son, as to God the Father, and to God the Holy
Ghost: and by his raillery all alone, he seems to understand it, but in this he
imitated the ancient heathens, who upbraided the Christians for that they did
eat their God.

But it is as foolish sport, that he goes about to vilify the sacrifice of the
Mass, out of the Roman Missall, which, (as he ignorantly conceives) wholly
destroys the essence and nature of this sacrifice: for it shows, that there may
be many defects, and abuses committed in the use of the Holy Eucharist,
Imagining that Christ may fall on the earth, be torn in pieces, eaten by catts
and dogs, devoured by beasts, corrupted and burnt, and that he lies there as a
dead man, or as one on a dunghill, with innumerable such like, frequently
reiterated. It is true the Roman Missal mentions some such abuser, but by way
of prevention, and to give the Doctor more scope, we will admit, that some such
abuses have happened, either through casuality, or negligence of those whom it
might concern, or by the perversity of men, or instigation of the devil.

I must also tell the Doctor, that he needs not talk so much of Christ's being
in so base and vile places; for I can tell him that there is no place, more
vile, and base, nor more abominable and odious, none more loathsome and
stinking, then the mouth or stomach of a sinner: yet such is the immense
goodness of Christ Jesus, that he left this holy Sacrament to us, and permitted
it to be taken by sinners, otherwise the Apostle S. Paul would never have said,
1. Cor. 11. He that eats this bread, or drinks the Chalice of our Lord
unworthily; eats and drinks judgment to himself: S. Crysostome on that
place, says, such an one is guilty of our Lords death, as if he had killed our
Lord, on shed his blood. and in cap. 10. by this sin the body of our Lord is
trodden under foot, S. Cyprian ser. de coena Dom. Violence is offered to our
Lords body, and by their mouth and hand our Lord is offended: The Doctor need
not talk of Jakes or sinks, for one shall hardly find, a more loathsome place
then the stomach or belly of man. S. Crysostome in Opere imperfect. in Mat.
said well, If thou comparest an ill man to beasts thou shall sind him worse,
yea, a wicked man is worse then the devil.

With all this, or whatsoever can be said of this kind, none can be so foolish
as to think, that Christ's body or blood suffers at all; in any such abuses or
defects, for all such happens, only in the species; for Christ's body and blood
in the Eucharist, is as a spirit by an indivisible and secret manner; and so no
more defiled then the soul of man is hurt, defiled or sullied, by whatsoever
filth, ordure or excrement the body is insected; Christ's body being now
glorified is impassible, immutable, and unalterable, suffers no more,
proportionably then the Deity, replenishing all places of what nature soever,
or how loathsome soever, whence one said not amiss, God who according to nature
is no less, in the sink, then in the heavens, cannot be hurt nor defiled. The
body of Christ in heaven is impassible, notwithstanding that he remains there
with all his natural dimensions; but in the Eucharist it is in a sacramental
and spiritual manner; without any quantitative or corporal dimension, or
situation, or sensitive motion; I believe the Doctor never understood these
circumstances, or if he did he makes himself a pratler, and contrary to his
knowledge wilfully seeks to gull the people, who for the most part are ignorant
of such mysteries.

Moreover, if such scurrile arguments, may have place in divine things, may not
the Infidel and Jews use the same against Christ himself, nay, some have done
it already; saying, Can any Imagine Joseph's Son to be a God? was he not subject
to all mankind Miseries? he lay nine months as a prisoner in his Mothers womb,
in all uncleanness, was born in a loathsome stable, and as a child might have
been devoured by the wild beasts; as he might have been torn out of his
mothers womb, some sow or Swine might have eaten him, some ravenous Wolf or
other cruel beast might have torn him to pieces, He might have fallen into the
saw-pit, ditch or pond, and so be made food for toads, frogs, or snakes, or
other venomous beasts; if drowned at Sea meat for fishes, they made difficulty
also in that he was subject to the devil, who earried him too and fro at his
pleasure, with a thousand such like. If God then did permit his only son in
person to be thus subject to so many casualties, abuses, and defects, what
shall we wonder, that such may or have followed him in the Eucharist; Christ's
body then was possible, and capable, yea, susceptible of all imaginable abuses,
pains and cruelties of humane malice, or diabolical inventions; what wonder is
it that God should leave Christ's body to such accidental and extrinsecal
abuses, by which it receives no damage at all.

To conclude, the Doctor in alleging the Rubric of the Roman Missal, does
little consider; that he gives no light argument against himself; for in all
times since Christ, there have been such rules merely to prevent such abuses
and defects, as manifestly appears in the ancient penitential Canons; also in
the several Decrees of Popes, and Councils besides the great care, that no
Infidels, Jews, or Heretics should be present at the Mass: the continual care
that the Church has always had, that the holy blood should not fall on the
Altar or ground, according to the constitution, which Pope Pius the 1. an. 158.
set down in the Roman Missal, de defectibus, according to which S. Chrysostom
hom. 21. Operis impers: in Mat. tells us, that it is not to be given to beasts,
or Infidels; and S. Augustine l. 50. Hom. 26. We observe with great care when
the Body of Christ is administered to us, that nothing of it do fall out of our
hands to the ground. Origin hom. 13. in Exodus Ye that are accustomed to be
present at the divine Mystery, do know how when ye receive our Lords body, ye
observe with great carefulness and veneration, lest any thing of the
consecrated gift should fall down; for ye believe, and that rightly that ye are
guilty, if any thing do fall, through your negligence. Surely all this care and
folicitude could not be, but on some motives more then natural: for if there
were only pure bread and wine, they would have no more care of it, then the
Protestants have in the Communion of bread and wine, but because, as I have
proved before, the Church always believed, that the true body and blood of
Christ Jesus was in the Eucharist, they labored by all convenient means to
avoid such abuses.

CHAP. IX. The Doctors Raillery concerning Miracles wrought in the Sacrifice of
the Mass.
THe Doctor very frequently scoffs and jears at the many Miracles which are
wrought in the sacrifice of the Mass, thinking thereby to diminish the credit
and belief of it: whereas if they be Miracles, the multitude makes them not
less to be Miracles: nay, if we will contemplate the works of God, and confider
every particular, in one Miracle, we may find many Miracles, which exceed all
created power. For the satisfaction of the Reader, I shall illustrate it by
examples. Exodus the 4. God converted Moses his rod into a serpent, which
without all doubt, was a great Miracle, which also carries with it many
Miracles included therein; 1. the Rod was reduced to nothing, and 2. To the
serpent then created, God gave motion, proportion, figure, and other qualities
of a serpent; and in like manner turning this new created serpent, into a rod:
the serpent was reduced to nothing, and the serpent was converted into a rod;
which received a new being, not by any created power, but by God himself, who
also gave it color, proportion, figure, and dimension, with other properties,
agreeable to the nature of a rod; so that there was a double transubstantiation
or conversion from one substance to another substance; and transmutations or
conversions of accidents to other accidents, independently of any natural cause
or action: and here we may note, that our wonderful God afterward gave to Moses
power to do the same, not by his humane virtue, or power, but by the power and
gift of God, whereby alone Moses as Gods Ministers, and instrument did the same.

In like manner, God did miraculously give to the Children of Israel, Manna,
Exodus 16. and in it are contained many Miracles. 1. That it was in such plenty
that every day it was sufficient for three Millions. 2. That every one how
much, or how little, they gathered, had as much and no more then theother. 3.
Every one received nourishment thereby, equally to their condition, savor, and
appetite; The holy text says, according to that which they were able to eat,
4. The Manna putrified the next day, excepting only the sabbath day, when it
did not putrify. 5. On the sixth day the Manna was doubled, and was not to be
found on the sabbath day. 6. Solomon sap. 16. tells us, that God gave bread
from heaven, without labor, having in it all delectation, and the sweetness of
all tastes, serving every man's will, and was turned to what every one would. 7.
God continued this Manna for 40. years and no more, 8. God preserved this Manna
in the Tabernacle for many ages.

If this Manna which as our Savior himself John. 6. teaches, was but a figure
or sign of the bread, which he was to give, to wit, his body and blood, has so
many maricles accompanied it, why should any reasonable man wonder that so many
Miracles should accompany the celestial and divine Manna, especially if they be
necessarily annexed, to the nature of so great and so miraculous a Sacrament,
wherein the body and blood of our Savior Christ is contained. The royal
Peophet Psalm. 110. cries out, God has made a memory of his miraculous works, a
merciful and pitiful Lord, he has given meat to them that fear him: which
according to all Catholic Interpreters, is as much as to say, God has left
one most special and most beneficial memory of all other benefits, to wit, his
body and blood, in a miraculous manner; as a memory of his Passion, and our
Redemption, as the spiritual food, and substance of all souls, who rightly fear
him: The greatest Miracle is the Transubstantiation or conversion of the bread,
and wine into the body, and blood of Christ (of which I shall speak in place
convenient) which with it carries necessarily many other Miracles, as in the
next Chapter I shall fully declare.

There remain two difficulties which manifest the Doctors Ignorance or malice:
the first is, that the Doctor attributes all these Miracles to the Priests; as
if it all were done by their power, according to our belief, wherein he
grievously errs; as hereafter I shall declare: for with S. Augustine, l. 10. de
civit. Dei, cap. 12. All Catholics believe all Miracles done by Angels or men,
truly to be done by Gods power, working in them: If then there be any Miracles,
as no Christian can deny in the Eucharist; it is God alone, who works them by
the Ministry of the Priests: even as I said before, he did work miracles by
his servant Moses, so S. Peter, Act. 3. cured the lame man at the doors of the
temple, but advises the people, that they should not think, that he did it by
his own power, or holiness, but in the name or power of Jesus: so, the priests
do not any of those miraculous things, in the sacrifice of the Mass by any
humane power; but by his ministerial power received in his Ordination, Christ
himself does effect them: so that the Doctors babbling so often of Miracles
wrought by the Romish priests, is but mere raillery or most base ignorance.

The other as ignorant folly, is his canting, with reiteration, touching the
Roman priest, bringing down Christ's body from heaven, at his pleasure; as
though Christ in coming to the Eucharist, did leave the right hand of his
Father in heaven; which is a gross error, for Christ is no less in heaven
after the Consecration then he was before the Consecration: he is sitting still
at the right hand of his Father, according to the Article of our Creed; yet
nevertheless he is in the Sacrament; this indeed is a Miracle wrought only by
Gods omnipotent power; this made S. Chrysostom, l. 3. de sacerdot. to exclame,
O Miracle: O benignity of God; he who sitts above with the Father, in the same
article of time, is often handled in the hands of all, and he delivers himself
to those who are desirous to receive and embrace him. hom. 3. ad Ephesios, and
hom. 61. ad populum Antioch; Also he says, As many of us, who communicate of
the body of Christ, and taste his blood, let us consider, that we taste the
body, and taste the blood of him, who sits in the celestials, and is adored by
the Angels.

Their great Master Calvin, lib. 4. Instit. cap. 17. says, In his supper he
commands me to take eat and drink, under the symbols of bread and wine, his
body and blood; for although it may seem incredible, that in so great a
distance of places (as heaven and earth) the flesh of Christ, should penetrate
to us, that it may be meat for us, we must yet remember how much above our
senses, the secret power of the holy Ghost can show it self; that which our
mind comprehends not, our faith conceives, the spirit truly joins together,
things locally separated, sect. 24. Nothing mooe incredible, that things so far
distant and remote within the whole space of heaven and earth, in the whole
distances of places, are not only conjoined, but also united.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Miracles which follow in the hody Sacrament of the
Eucharist.
THe Doctor much troubles himself about the Miracles which occur in the
Eucharist, whereas any one who believes the real presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament; must needs know, that those Miracles do necessarily
follow thereto: If he could disprove that one, the rest will fall; but if he
cannot, all the rest he says makes nothing; for we only believe those miracles,
because we believe the real presence; true it is we should believe, nay know,
that they are possible to God; and so more easily believe them to be so,
because God has said the word, This is my body and This is my blood: I am
confident, that if the Doctor did believe this, he would make no difficulty of
the others, wherefore before I speak of those miracles, it seems to me
expedient, to show what was the belief of the Church for those first five
hundred years.

440. I shall begin with S. Leo l. de Jejunio, 7. men's. ser. 6. You ought so to
communicate at the holy table, as to doubt nothing at all of the verity of the
body and blood of Christ; for that is received by the mouth, which is believed
in the heart.

420. S. Augustine in psalm. 98. Christ took earth from earth, for flesh is from
the earth; and he took flesh from the flesh of Mary and did walk in flesh it
self, and gave that flesh, to be eaten by us for our salvation. lib. 12. cont.
Faust. cap. 10. he says, That the faithful do receive with their mouth, the
blood wherewith they were redeemed; and drink that now, which came from the
side of Christ. And. lib. 2. contra advers. leg. and Prophet. cap. 9. We
receive with a faithful heart, and mouth, the Mediator between God and men, the
man Christ Jesus, giving to us his flesh to be eaten, and blood to be drunken.

398. S. Crysostome, hom. 83. in Mat. Because our Lord said. This is my body,
let us not be entangled with any doubtfulness; but let us believe, and see it
with the eyes of our understanding.

394. S. Ambrose, l. 4. de sacram. c. 5. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself gives
testimony unto us, that we take his body and blood; can we any way doubt of his
fidelity, and testimony? and lib. 5. cap 4. Before the consecration, that which
is offered may be called bread, when the words are pronounced, now it is not
called bread, but the body: whereas before l. 4. c. 4. he said, This bread is
bread before the sacramental words, yet when the consecration shall be
adjoined, of bread it is made the flesh of Christ.

390. S. Hierome in Comment: Matt. c. 26. After that the Typical pasch was
fulfilled, and he had eaten the flesh of the Lamb with his Apostles; he took
bread which strengthens man's heart, and so proceeded unto the true sacrament of
the Pasch; that even as in his prefiguration, Melchisedech the priest of the
high God had done, offering bread and wine, he also might represent the truth
of his body and flesh: And Epist. ad Hedib. quaest. 2. The bread which our Lord
brake, and gave to his Disciples, was the body of our Lord and savior: And
beneath, Neither did Moses give us the true bread, but our Lord Jesus; he is
the true guest, Master, and the banquet, he eats, and is eaten. Gaudentius
about the same time, Tract: de Exodus The Creator himself and Lord of all
creatures and natures, who produces bread from the earth, because he both can,
and has promised it, does from the bread again, make his own body; and he that
made wine of water, has also made his blood of wine. And a little after.
Believe that which has been taught us, that which thou receivest is the body of
that heavenly bread, and the blood of that sacred Vine; for when he delivered
the consecrated bread and wine to his Disciples, he said, This is my body, this
is my blood, let us believe him whom we have believed, truth cannot lie.

380. S. Gregory Nissen, Orat. Catechist. cap. 36. A little leaven makes a
whole lump of dough, like unto it self; so also that body which is made
immortal by God, entering into our body, transposes and changes it wholly into
it self; And a little after, It is conjoined with the bodies of the faithful,
that by this conjunction with that which is immortal, man also may be made
partaker of Immortality.

370. S. Gregory Nazian. orat. 2. de Pasch. Without anxiety and doubt, eat the
body and drinkche blood of Christ. if indeed thou be desirous of life; neither
do thou doubt of the truth of these speeches, which are uttered concerning the
flesh, neither be thou offended at the Rassion; be constant and firm and
stable, not doubting of anything, whatsoever the advarsaries say: good council
against Doctor Brevent.

About the same time, or not long before S. Ephrem. lib. de natura Dei minine
scrutanda, c. 15. gives us as good counsel, saying; Why do thou search
things unscrutable, if thou examine those things curiously, thou shall not then
be accounted a man faithful and innocent, be partaker of the immaculate body of
thy Lord, with fullness of faith, assuring thy self, that thou catest the whole
Lamb himself. The Mysteries of Christ are an immortal fire, do not thou rashly
search them out, least thou be consumed in the search thereof: And beneath he
says, This indeed exceeds all admiration, all understanding, and all speeches,
which Christ the only begotten son our Savior, has done for us, he has given
us fire and spirit to be eaten and drunk, that is (as he himself explicates)
his body and blood.

365. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechist. 4. Forasmuch as Christ himself thus
affirms, and speaks, concerning the bread, This is my body, who dares hereafter
doubt of it? forasmuch also, as himself confirms it, and says, This is my
blood, who I say can doubt of it, and say, it is not his blood? And again, so
shall we be Christopheri, that is, bearers of Christ, when we have received his
body and blood into our members; and we shall be made as S. Peter says,
partakers of the divine nature. Thou must not consider it, as bare bread and
wine, for it is the body and blood of Christ, according to our Lords own words.
And again, With all assurance, let us receive the body and blood of Christ, for
under the form of bread, his body is given thee; and under the form of wine,
his blood is given to thee.

355. S. Hilary, l. 8. de Tria. Whatsoever we say of the natural verity of
Christ in us, we speak foolishly and impiously, unless we learn of him, for he
says, my flesh is true food, and my blood is truly drink, he who eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him; there is no place of doubting
left, of the verity of flesh and blood, for now both by the Profession of our
Lord himself and our faith it is truly flesh and truly blood, and these being
taken and drunk, do work that we are in Christ, and Christ in us; is not this
the truth? It seems not to be true to them, that deny Christ to be true God.

226. Origin hom. 5. in diversa loca Evangel. When thou receivest the holy food
and incorruptible banquet, when thou do enjoy the bread and cup of life;
thou do eat and drink the body and blood of our Lord; then our Lord enters
under thy roof, thou therefore then humbling thy self, imitate the Centurion,
say, Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof.

203. Tertullian, lib. 4. contra Marcionem. The bread which he took in his
hand, he made his body, saying, This is my body: And lib. de Resurrectione
carnis. The flesh feeds on the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be
replenished and filled with God.

186. S. Jrenaus lib. 4. cap. 35. How shall it be manifest to them, that the
bread, on which thanks are given, is the body of the Lord, and the Chalice of
his blood; if they say, be is not the son of the Creator of the wrrld; the
saint makes an argument of Christ being the Son of God, from the holy Mysteries
of the Mass and Eucharist.

150. S. Justin Martyr, in Apolog. ad Antomin. We do not take it as common
bread, nor this as common drink, but as by the word of God, our Savior Jesus
Christ was incarnate, and took both flesh and blood for our Salvation, so also
by the prayers of the word of God, we are taught, that the Eucharist (being
made our food by him, whereby our blood and flesh may be nourished by mutation)
is the flesh and blood of the same Jesus incarnate.

71. S. Ignatius Martyr, as Theodoretus Dial. 3. in his epist. ad Sawnon. They
do n t admit Eucharists and Oblations, because they do not confess the
Eucharist* to be the flesh of our Savior, which suffered for our sins, which
the Father through his bounty raised again.

S. Dionise about the same time I. de Eccl. Hierarch. par. 3. c. 3. O most
divine and holy sacrament, vouchsafe to open the coverings of those significant
signs, which overshadow thee, and appear plain, to us, and fill our spiritual
eyes, with the singular and clear shining of thy Light.

By these authorities of the holy Fathers the faith of the Church in those
first five hundred years, is made manifest, so that none with reason, can doubt
of the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist; unless he will
altogether dissent from Christ's Church, in those primitive times; and say, that
Christ never had a true Church upon earth; in which number Doctor Brevent is
not to be reckoned, for he ingeniously admits a true Church for five hundred
years after Christ, which admitted the real presence, whereto the miracles,
which he scoffingly rehearses, do necessarily follow, (as I said before) to the
being of Christ Jesus in the Sacrament.

To begin therefore with his first miracle, which is, that the bread is
distroyed in a moment, pray cannot he who gives it a being, take it away when
he pleases? did not the same God turning Lot's wife into a pillar of salt, take
away, or destroy, or bring to nothing, her humane form, and nature, in a
moment? was not the form of Moses ^^d nature and substance destroyed in a
moment? was not the water when Christ turned it into wine, wholly destroyed?
moreover this destruction follows the nature of all conversions, either partial
or total; no new form is introduced, but as the former is destroyed; no total
substance is produced, but when the total substance precedent is also
destroyed. If then the body of Christ be by the power of the omnipotent God,
introduced or produced in the place of bread (as the holy Catholic Church
always taught us, according to the testimonies now alleged and this shall be
more manifested in the Chapter of transubstantiation) it necessarily follows
that the precedent substance be destroyed or brought to nothing: so that this
decision, or not being of bread and wine; proceeds ex necessitate miraculi,
from the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Blessed Sacrament, and
so is no new miracle but the same with the former.

The second miracle, which he jeers at, is, the being of the accidents of bread
and wine without a subject; which is not only possible, but also is actually in
the Eucharist, as is sufficiently declared in the Liturgical discourse, part.
2. sect. 3. cap. 9. whereto I may add the Authority of great S. Basil, hom. 6.
Hexam. S. Gregory orat. in Diem Dominic. and Theodoret; when they affirm that
the quality of light in its Creation, was without a subject, until the Sun was
created; and certain it is, that accidents by the power of God may be preserved
without a subject, for he that gives a being in such or such manner, can give
them another, as actually he has done in the Eucharist; where quantity alone is
preserved without a subject, in which all other accidents as qualities, etc.
are immediately (although by the same omnipotent power, they also may be
conserved without quantity) and that it is so, in the Eucharist, has always
been believed in the Catholic Church, as in the precedent testimonies plainly
appears: when the holy Fathers affirm that the body and blood of Christ is
contained, in the species of bread and wine: whence the Council of Constance,
sess. 8. condemned that proposition of Wickliff, who held, that the Accidents
of the Bread did not remain, without a subject, as heretical.

Moreover, this miracle, necessarily follows the Mystery of the real presence,
inasmuch as it is a sacrament, for it would not be a sacrament, if there were
not, in a visible form, the essence of a sacrament consisting in a visible
sign, of some invisible thing. The Eucharist therefore being a sacrament, and
containing the invisible body of Christ, necessarily requires a visible sign.
S. Chrysostom, hom. 60. ad Populum Antioch. and Hom. 83. in Mat. says, If thou
were incorporeal God would have given thee plain, and incorporeal gifts,
themselves; but because the soul is joined to the body, he has given thee
intelligible things in sensible things: and a little before, since the word
said, This is my body, we do assent and believe, and with our intellectual eyes
behold him; for Christ has given (...) nothing sensible, but all intelligible
things in^^^^ in sensible things.

It was therefore most congruous to the divine providence, most agreeable to
the nature of this mystical sacrament: and most proper to our humane nature,
that Christ instituted this sacrament under the form of bread, for as Christ is
the true bread of life; so he gave us his body and blood under the form of
bread and wine: whence S. Cyprean, Ser. de Coena Domin. The bread which he gave
to his Disciples changed not in Essigies, or resemblance; but in nature is made
flesh by the Omnipotency of the word; as in the person of Christ, the humane
nature was seen, and the Divinity lay hid, so in the visible sacrament the
divine essence diffused it self: Give me leave, (good Reader) to set down the
words of Theophilact Archbishop of Bulgary, and no mean interpreter of the
sacred Text: who in Mark. cap. 14. This is my body, this I say, which ye take,
for the bread is not a figure or example of Christ's body, but is converted into
the same body of Christ, for our Lord said, The bread which I will give, is my
flesh; he said not, is the sign of my flesh, but is my flesh; And again, Unless
ye eat the flesh of the son of man. And do thou say, flesh is not seen: O
man! that is done for our infirmity, because Bread and wine, are of those
things, with which we are accustomed, we do not abhor them, but we should not
bear, but abhor, seeing flesh and blood, set before us: Wherefore our merciful
God condescending to our infirmities, conserves the species and forms of bread
and wine, but transelementates them into the virtue of flesh and blood, from
whence I conclude, that as it is possible to God to conserve the accident or
species without any substantial subject, for to him nothing is impossible, to
the constant belief of the holy Catholic Church, in all times has been, that
those species are conserved, as necessarily following that great Mystery.

The 3. Miracle to be baited at by the Doctor; is, that the body of Christ
should be contained in so little a place, or room as the Host, nay, in every
parcel or part thereof. Although this be miraculous, yet it follows from the
very being of our Savior in the Eucharist; for Christ's body is not there, with
his natural dimension or Circumscription of place, for so we could not eat him,
nor receive him in our Mouths; nor the bread cover him; unless we should say,
that of Mat. 19. a Camel might pass though the eye of a needle, which
nevertheless is possible, according to what our Savior there says, with men,
this is impossible, but with God al things are possible, besides God is not
tied to natures laws, as may be seen 4. Reg. 6. Iron did forget its natural
weight, and swom on the water. Exodus 14. water lost its fluxibility, and stood
up as a wall; In like manner the flowing of Jordan, Josue 3. did stand and
become like a mountain, 3. Reg. 17. the pot of meal failed not, and the vessel
of Oil diminished not, Dan. 3. the fire lost its natural activity, Luc. 23. the
Sun lost its light. It was not according to nature that a body should walk on
the sea, as our Savior did, Mat. 14. of which S. Justin Martyr in Respons. ad
quaest. a gentibus; As our Lord did walk on the Sea, without a change of his
body into a spirit, but by divine power, he made the Sea which cannot be passed
over walking, to be passable: not only to his own body but also to that of
Peter, so by his divine power be also came out of the monument, when a great
Stone was put on it; and entered in to his disciples, the doors being shut. All
these things are above the law of nature; and shall we deny the possibility of
such like, to the God of nature.

But to come nearer to our present purpose: Christ's body is now glorious, and
is in the Eucharist in a sacramental and spiritual manner, not different from
the being of a soul: which is as well in every part and parcel of the body, as
in the whole body: and shall we deny that to Gods power, which he wrought in
our souls, which are indivisibly, and without any commensuration of place; This
is confirmed by S. Epiphanius, Haeres, 64. Even as our Lord did rise from the
dead, not taking another body; but the same that was, and no other from that
which was; but changing that which was into a spiritual subtillity, and making
the whole spiritual: he entered in by the doors shut, that which could not be
done here in our bodies, for grossness, and for that as yet they are not joined
in a spiritual subtillity. S. Cyril speaking of the same miracle of entering the
doors being shut, on that place gives the reason, for since he is true God, he
is not subject to the law of nature. S. Ambrose in c. 24. luc. Not by corporeal
nature, but by a quality of a corporeal resurrection; that it was not by
natures law but by a subtillity of a glorified body which has no commensuration
of place: but is as the Angels in great or little place. No wonder then that
the body of our Savior, according to his Nature, and for our benefit and
commodity, should be as well in the whole host as in every part thereof.

But some will cavil, on what is said, that Christ's Body is indivisibly, as
the soul is in the whole Body, and in every part thereof, how little soever;
but we see by experience, that if any part be separated from the whole, the
soul remains no more in it; admitting therefore that the Body of Christ, is in
the whole Host, yet if any part be separated from the whole, Christ's body also
shall not be in that part so separated.

I answer, there is no proportion between the works of nature, so constituted
by God, and the works of God, in his omnipotent power: whence to argue against
Gods works by the ordinary course of Nature, is to limitate Gods power, to what
he has actually done; whereas no act ad extra, can be equal to his power, no
effect can fully correspond to his power. God made the world, and yet can make
millions of worlds: God ordained such and such effects in nature, and can as
well ordain many other, yea, different and contrary, or exceeding in the same
kind. It is mere folly to think that God can do nothing but what we can
conceive or under and; as if the infinite wisdom and power of God did not
exceed our finite, weak, and in comparison, no faculty at all, Gods power is
immense and without Limit. Ipse dixit and fact a sunt: whatsoever he says is
done, and can do more things then any creature can conceive or Imagine.

Secondly, There is no comparison in these two subjects, for the part so
separated from the whole, is now no more capable to retain the vital form,
either vegetive or sensitive, and consequently according to Natures law, is
incapable of any rational form; to wit, the soul which gives no longer life to
it, being limited by the Author of nature. In our Case there is still the same
disposition and capacity in every part as in the whole, and consequently there
arises no mutation, but only a numerical difference, which nothing alters the
nature of the accidents, which joint or separate, retain the species of bread
or wine, which are sensible signs required in this Sacrament; as long therefore
as this sensible sign or species remains, so long the thing signed or
signified remains. The body of Christ has no union with the Accidents nor any
reference to them but in as much as they are sacramental signs of his body and
blood, so made by divine Institution; in this their is no regard to the
greatness or littleness of the species or accidents, but to the Institution of
Christ Jesus, who made those species to be the sacramental signs of his body
and blood wheresoever we find these species after due consecration, either
little or great; according to our Faith, we believe the true body and blood of
Christ Jesus to be.

We may exemplify this in a looking-Glass, where the same face is represented,
in the whole Glass, and in every proportionable part thereof, because the same
effect of representation is as well in every part, as in the whole: So as is
said before, the species of bread and wine, either in whole or in part in great
or in little, have annexed to them the nature of a sign, and no other then what
Christ himself has instituted, and consequently do represent that whereof they
are a sign, that is, the body and blood of Christ.

Now whereas the Doctor makes difficulty, concerning Christ's Body being in
several places, he may know that to be in a place or in many places or in no
place, makes no difference of the essence or nature of any thing. The highest
heavens have there essence, although they have no place; and the being in a
place is a mere accidental and extrinsecal thing to the substance, which of it
self occupies no place at all; but by quantitative dimension, is correspondent
to place, otherwise it is indifferent to this or that place, to one, and to
many; he therefore that limited and determined created things, to such or such
a place, can he not alter, or make it illimitated, or indetermined to place or
places? even by nature one thing may have different extensions to place as is
to be seen in rarefaction and condensation: and cannot God make the same thing
to have extension to several places? of this we have many experiences out of
the Scripture: for we read that our Savior appeared to S. Paul Act. 9. he that
appeared to them in the way; which also S. Paul relates, Act. 22. and according
to the text Act. 26. Christ himself says that he appeared to him, Act. 23. S.
Luke affirms, that our Lord was standing by S. Paul, if we will believe S. Paul
himself, 1 Cor. 9. He had seen Christ Jesus our Lord, which also he affirms; 1
Cor. 15. Christ was seen of more then five hundred brethren together, he was
seen of James, and then of all the Apostles, he was seen also by me; so that we
cannot doubt but Christ appeared unto him, and yet according to our Faith, he
sits still at the right hand of the Father in heaven, as it is declared, Act.
3. whence it is manifest, that he was in two places, and why not in heaven and
in the Eucharist; and why not as well in many places? and why not by
participation of a divine being, may the effects of the divine power to be in
many places: One voice fills many places, and one sound fills many parts,
without any division of it self.

Besides this difficulty is less in regard that Christ's body is not here, in
any quantitative Dimension or commensuration to place, but in a mysterial and
Sacramental manner, still united to the Divinity; which is in all places with
Power, to limitate the body to as many places as it pleases: as God may limit
his universal presence in such manner, as his presence may be in some
particular places or things, by showing his power, more in one place then in
another: even as he has done in the Eucharist making his Body substantialy
present in all places of the world; wherein he has manifested his Immense power
and will; according as the holy Catholic Church has always believed and taught
from its beginning; as it is sufficiently declared in the precedent testimonies
of the holy Fathers.

The 4th. Miracle is; that the body of Christ being but one, is communicated to
many, yea thousands, yea Millions. This follows the institution of this holy
Sacrament, for it was not instituted for one alone, but for many, without any
limitation of time, place, or persons; it is a Sacrament that is common to all,
in all ages, during this life, and therefore if the true body and blood of
Christ be contained therein; as the holy Church has alwais believed, and that
as a Sacrament it is communicable to all; and all are commanded to take and
eat, this necessarily follows Christ's Institution; The holy Fathers who lived
within five hundred years after Christ, believed and taught the very same which
the present Church believes; Eusebius Emissenus hom. 5. de Pasch. The holy
receiving of the Eucharist, consists not in the quantity, but in the virtue,
that body which the Priest distributes is as great in a little host, as in a
great, which when the Church of the faithful takes, as it is complete in all,
so it is manifest to be entire in every one, for as he says, a little after,
when they take of this bread, every one has nothing less then all; one
perceives the whole, two have the whole, and many the whole, without any
diminution; for the benediction, of this sacrament may be distributed, but not
consumed by distribution, S. Augustine, ser. de verbis Evangelii. Christ is
eaten, and eaten lives, because being slain he rose again, neither when he is
eaten, do we make parts of God, as truly in the Sacrament it is done, as the
faithful know, for even as every one who eats Christ's flesh, takes his part,
for hence it is called parts, he is eaten by parts, and remains entire and
whole in heaven; he also remains entire and whole in thy heart.

S. Hierome ser. in Dom. 5. post Epiph. Each one receives Christ our Lord
whole, and in every one particular he is whole, neither is he diminished by
many singulars, but gives himself entire to every one.

S. Chrysostom hom. 17. in Epist. ad Hebraeos; This host is one, and not many;
how one and not many? because it was once offered, it was offered in the holy
of holies: but this sacrifice is the exemplar of that; we always offer, the
self same, and therefore this sacrifice is one; for otherwise because it is
offered in many places, there are many Christ's: by no means but in every place,
there is one Christ; here being perfect, and there parfect one body; for even
as he is in every place offered, he is one body and not many bodies; so also
one sacrifice. S. Gregory of Nice in Orat. Catech. c. 37. We may consider how
this is done, that when this one body is continually imparted through the whole
world, to thousands, of the faithful, the whole does pass by parts to every
one, and in it self remains whole. S. Andrew's words cited by the Achaian
Priest, Whose flesh after all the believing people have eaten, and drunk his
blood, the lamb which is sacrificed remains whole and alive.

What has been said here, may satisfy his four other miracles, which make no
distinct Difficulties; for the same reasons serve for the species of wine, as
for the species of bread, or for the body and blood of Christ: whence he might
have omitted his duplicate ralleries and scoffs, and have attributed all those
miracles to the power of God, and not played the buffoon in attributing them,
to the power of Roman Priests; his scoffs and scorns and Jeers will never bear
any argument, with understanding men, much less with Catholics: who have
learned of S. Augustine, Epist. 49. ad Deograt. quaest. 6. If Christian faith
did fear the scorns of pagans, we should not believe in Christ himself.

CHAP. XI. The Doctors Chief ground of his raillery.
I Am so weary with the Doctors vain raillery, that I am willing to go no
further; but that I reflected on two main grounds of his rallying, and scoffing
spirit: the one is the insisting so much on humane reason and sense; and the
great bugbear Transubstantiation. Of the first I shall treat in the two
following Chapters, and after of the second.

In the first place, it is a general Doctrine in Gods Church, that faith has
for its Object God revealing; Its formal object is the divine revelation, the
material only those things which are revealed; so that we know nothing by
faith, but by revelation, not by reason, much less by sense: true it is that
humane reason and sense concur to the receiving of faith, but not to the
procuring a divine and saving faith: nevertheless reason and sense may engender
a humane faith, by hearing or reading things revealed, but never come to the
certainty of them; but relying only on revelation.

Whence the holy Fathers do commonly teach, that if reason or sense do
comprehend any thing, it is no more an object of faith. S. Augustine, tract.
27. and 40. in Johanem. Faith is to believe what thou see not, whose verity
and reward, is to see that thou do believe. Again, tract. 39. This is the
praise of faith, if that which is believed be not seen, for what great thing is
it, if that be believed which is seen. S. Gregory, hom. 26. in Evangelium.
Faith has not merit, where humane reason gives experience. Great S. Basil, ser.
de fid. confess. tells us, that Faith is an assenting approbation without any
hesitation; without any parswasion of the mind, as in the truth of those
things, which by Gods gift are preached, and declared in the Church. And in
Psalm. 113. let faith be thy guide, in the holy words which are from God; and
not demonstration: Faith (I say,) inviting thy soul, yea, and persuading above
all rational methods; for faith relies not, on grammatical proofs, but
insinnuats it self unto our minds, by the efficacious operation of the holy
Ghost. S. Athanasius, tract. de advent. affirms, that faith conceived of an
evident matter, cannot be called Faith.

But let us hear, what the holy Fathers, in those primitive times, did teach
and believe concerning our present subject, of the Eucharist: I shall begin
with S. Cyril of Alexandria, lib. 4. in Joan. cap. 17 This thing is hard, and
is to be received, rather by faith, then by any other means.

S. Hilary, l. 3. de Trin. We are not to speak of divine things, in a humane or
worldly sense, neither are we to extort or wrest, by violent and imprudent
report, the celestial words, to our wit or impious understanding; it is
perversity, let us read what is written; and understand what we read, then we
shall perform the office of faith: for what we say of the natural body of
Christ in us, we speak foolishly and impiously unless we learn of him.

Great S. Leo, ser, 6. de Jejunio. 7. men's. Doubt ye not at all of the verity
of Christ's body, and blood, for that which is taken by the mouth, is believed
by faith.

S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Since Christ himself, so affirms and says, of the
bread, This is my body; who henceforward dares to deny it? and the same
confirming, This is my blood who can doubt and say, that it is not his blood?
he changed water into wine which is near blood, in Cana Gallilen: only by his
will, and is not he worthy, that we should believe him, that he transmutates or
changes, wine into blood: Beneath, let us with all certitude, take the body and
blood of Christ, for under the species of bread the body is given thee, and
under the species of wine blood is given thee. A little after, Do not therefore
consider it, as bare bread, or bare wine, for according to the words of our
Lord, it is the body and blood of our Lord, for although sense suggest it
otherwise, yet faith confirms thee, do not judge the thing from the taste, but
take it from faith, for most certain: so that no doubt may take place, but that
the body and blood of Christ are given thee. And a little after, knowing and
most certainly holding, this bread which is seen by us, not to be bread:
although the taste take it for bread, but is the body of Christ: and the wine
that we see, although to the sense or taste, it seems to be wine; yet it is not
wine, but the blood of Christ.

S. Crysostome, hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch. and 83. in Mat. Let us alwais believe
in God, and not resist him; although what he says, may seem absurd, or against
reason, to our senses and Imaginations; his word exceeds our sense and reason,
this we ought to do in things, and especially in mysteries, not only beholding
those things which are before us, but also holding his words; for we cannot be
deceived by his words, but our senses are most easily deceived: those (...) be
false, but this is deceived very oftentimes: since therefore he said, This is
my body, let us not be detained with any ambiguity, but believe and perceive it
by the eyes of our understanding.

S. Cyprian ser. de coena Dominica, on the word of our Savior, John 6. The
flesh profits nothing, gives the reason, because our Master himself expounds
these words are spirit and life, carnal sense does not penetrate to the
understanding of so great profundity unless faith be joined.

The Doctors great Master, Calvin lib. 4. Instit. cap. 17. ser. 10. will teach
him this lesson, In his supper he commanded me to take, eat, and drink, under
the symbols of bread and wine, his body and blood: for although it may seem
incredible, that in so great a distance of places (as heaven and earth) the
flesh of Christ should penetrate to us, that it may be meat for us, we must yet
remember how much above all our senses the secret power of the holy Ghost can
show it self; that which our minds comprehends, our faith conceives the Spirit
does truly join together things locally separated; whence he says, sect. 7.
Nothing remains, but that I should burst forth into admiration in this Mystery,
to which neither the mind in thinking, or tongue in speaking, can be equal;
and apud Hospin. in hist. Sacram. part. 2. he says, We therefore acknowledge a
Miracle in the holy Supper, which exceeds or goes beyond both the grounds of
nature, and the measure of our senses.

From what has been said, we plainly gather, that in matters of faith, we
stand not to humane reason, much less to our senses; we may add, No sense or
humane reason could tell us, that Christ, on earth, was God. The wise men who
came from the East; according to their senses imagination, yea, or humane
understanding; could conceive nothing but a little Child; yet inspired by the
holy Ghost, in Faith only, they adored the little Child, not as such, but as
being God and man, which no sense or humane reason could dictate to them: The
Disciples Mat. 24. did not adore Christ by the rule of their senses or humane
reason, but when by faith they believed him to be the Son of God, even after
the Resurrection they did see Christ, some believed, others did not; many who
lived, conversed, and were in his company, both simple and wise, could never be
convinced by their sense or reason, that he was the Son of God; and those who
were of the simple sort, sooner believed, and were we not assured by divine
revelation, and testimony, we could not believe either this or any other
mystery of our Faith.

Where even according to reason, it follows that we have a more sure ground to
believe Gods word, then our senses; who perceive not the substance of the
bread, which is not perceptible by any of our senses; whose objects are only
accidents, or sensible qualities; which they have as well in the consecrated
host, or unconsecrated, without any reflection on the substance: as, being out
of the sphere of their objects: so that they discern not any thing of the
substance, or whether they be without any substance, it is only the
understanding, which gathers by such or such accidents, such or such a
substance or subject and by natures ordinary course, judges it to be bread;
but enlightened by faith and believing that nothing is impossible to God; and
that God in most express terms declared his body and blood to be in the
Eucharist; the words are so clear, that without wresting the terms, none so
simple but they may understand them, as clearly as Peter is a man: and those
who contradict it on the ground of their senses, are as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 2. sensual men, not perceiving those things of the spirit of God, it is
foolishness to them, and they cannot, or rather will not understand, for they
are sensual, measuring these heavenly mysteries, by natural reason; humane
prudence, and external senses, which destroy Faith.

I know some object, that of S. John 1. Epist. cap. 1. where he attributes much
to hearing, seeing, and touching, matters of faith: but they do not consider,
that the Apostles did hear, and see many things, which we believe from their
testimonies; but if we had only what they saw by their senses or humane
wisdom, our faith had been vain, and of no importance, for no visible thing or
sensible as such, can be the object of our faith: what therefore they saw,
heard, or touched, was not believed as by faith, but by experience: see Scotus
in 3. quaest. 23. the Prophets and Apostles had a science which was not faith.
Faith taught them that the word was incarnate, and that Christ who died, rose
again and ascended into heaven, was the true Son of God; now to us who have not
seen them they are objects of faith, as being only revealed unto us, whereof we
have testimony from Scripture and Tradition S. Thomas indeed, believed, because
he had seen Christ after his resurrection, Joan. 20. but as S. Augustine says,
tract. 121. in Joan. He did see, and touch man, and confessed God whom he did
not see, nor touch; but by this which he did see and touch, that he believed
now, all doubt being removed, and therefore he cried out, My Lord and my God;
and Jesus said unto him, because thou have seen me, by sight, and touch, and
certain knowledge that I am risen, and believed that I am true God: but blessed
are those that have not touched me, and have believed.

Moreover S. John in this place opposes two diverse heresies, to wit, those who
denied Christ's divinity, and those who denied his humanity, and therefore
begins his Epistle, That which was from the beginning, which he had declared in
the beginning of his Gospel, and for the other which we have heard by a voice
from heaven, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled, we testify unto you; weereby he manifestly testifies
that Christ in humane nature had true flesh and blood, God and man; now because
he was inspired by the holy Ghost and one of Christ's Apostles, according to the
testimony of the Scriptures, we believe what he saw and heard, to be true; and
receive it as a matter of faith.

CHAP. XII. An addition to the former Chapter of the same Subject out of S.
Augustine.
OUr adversaries who stand so much, in matters of faith, on their senses, and
private judgments; should do well, to consider, that they imitate the heathens,
and Infidells, who had no stronger arguments against the true Catholic
doctrine, then their senses and humane reason; as we find in all the holy
Fathers, who have labored to convince them; and in particular this is to be
seen, in blessed S. Augustine, especially in his books de civitate Dei; from
whence I shall make choice of two articles of our Faith, which are holy
repugnant to humane sense, and reason; to wit, the everlasting torments of Hell
fire, and the Resurrection of the flesh. Of the first he treats, in the first
8. Chapters of his 21. Book, and thus he begins the second Chapter: What then
shall I say unto the unbeleevers; to prove that a body Carnal, and living, may
endure undissolved, both against death, and the force of eternal fire: they
will not allow us, to ascribe this unto the power of God, but urge us to prove
it to them by some example, saying; There is no body, that can suffer
eternally, but he must perish at length; no flesh can suffer always, and never
die: The Saint replys* Cap. 3. What is this, but to ground an assertion upon
mere sense, and appearance, which he esteems absurd in matters of Faith, for
(says he) These men know no flesh but mortal, and what they have not known and
seen, they hold impossible. A little after, Through our flesh as now, be such;
that it can not suffer all pain without dying yet then shall it become of
another nature: Whence in Cap. 4. he says, That God who endowed nature, with so
many several and admirable qualities, shall as then, give the flesh a quality,
whereby it shall endure pains, and burning for ever. Cap. 5. But the infidells
hearing of Miracles, and such things as we cannot make apparent to their
senses, do ask the reason of them; which because it surpasses our humane powers
to give, they deride them as false and ridiculous: but let them give us reason,
for all the wondrous things, that we have seen or may casily see hereafter
(where we may note, that S. Augustine in those chapters brings instances of
many several things in nature, far surpassing our humane reason) which if they
cannot do, then let them not say, that there is not, nor can be, any thing,
without a reason, why it should be. Beneath, O rare Disputers, you that can
give reason for all miraculous things, give me the reason of those strange
effects of nature before-named, of those few only, which if you know not, to be
now visible; and not future, but present, to the view of those that will make
trial; you would be more incredulous in them, then in this, which we say shall
come to pass hereafter. A little after, If we had said these things shall be
in the world to come, and the Infidels had bidden us give the reason why, we
could freely confess we could not: the power of God in his works surpassing
the weakness of human reason: and yet we know, that God did not without reason,
in putting mortal men by these, past his reason: we know not his reason in many
things, yet we know that what he wills, is no way impossible, who has told us,
to whom we must never impute falsness, nor imperfection. The lattin words are,
Nos non posse confiteremur, eo quod istis, and similibus Dei miris operibas,
infirma mortalium ratiocinatio vinceretur: fixam apud nos esse rationem, non
sine ratione Omnipotentem facere, unde animus humanus infirmus, rationem non
possit reddere: and in mult is quidem rebus incertum nobis esse, quid velit;
illud tamen esse certissimum, nihil little illi esse impossible, quaecunque
voluerit, eique nos credere praedicenti, quem neque impotentem neque mentientem
possumus credere. Hi tamen fidei reprehensores exactoresque rationis; quid ad
ista respondent de quibus ratio reddi ab homine non potest, and ipsi rationi
naturae videtur esse contraria. Quae si futura esse diceremus, similiter ae
nobis sicut eorum quae futura esse dicimus, ab infidelibus ratio posceretur: ac
hoc cum in talibus operibus Dei, deficiat ratio Cordis and sermonis humani,
sicut ista non ideo sunt, non ideo enim illa non erunt, quoniam ratio de
utrisque ab homine non potest reddi. We confess that we cannot (to wit give a
reason for it) for that in those and the like wonderful works of God the infirm
raticionation of Mortals would be overcome, but we firmly believe, that the
omnipotent, does nothing without reason: whereof the infirm mind of man cannot
give a reason, and in many things indeed it is uncertain to us what he will;
but that is most certain nothing of them which he will are imposible to him,
and we believe him foretelling, whom we cannot believe either impotent or
lying: yet the Reprehenders of faith, and exactours of reason: what will they
answer in those things, which no reason can be given by man, and yet are?
although they seem contrary to reason of nature which if we did say from our
selves, that they were to come, as we say of those things which are to come,
reason should be required by infidells, and by this, since in such works of God,
reason of humane heart and speech fails; even as therefore such things are not:
so therefore also they shall not be; because no reason can be given by men for
both of them: the Translatour adds because beyond humane capacity and
apprehension. In the sixth Chapter, having proposed many wonderful things, as
also in the precedent, he concludes, If all these be possible to those, how
much more, God is powerful to do those things, which are incredible to
Infidells; but easily to his power: since he has created that virtue in stones,
and other things, and wits of men, which the use in wonderful (...) Angelical
natures more powerful and invincible power, both of working and commanding, and
wisdom of permiting and using all things as wonderfully as he created them:
Our English Translatour, although he omits some words both in this place and
the precedent, yet he sufficiently expresses them in order to our purpose.

In the 7. Chapter we find the Infidels to satisfy for all the wonderful
effects of nature, and give this only reason: It is the force of Nature, the
nature of such things is such: It is the proper efficacy of their natures.
Beneath the Saint, When God is the author of all natures, why will they force
us to give a stronger reason, when they will not believe that seems impossible,
and to them who ask a reason to be given, we answer, this to be the will of the
Omnipotent God, who truly for no other thing is called Omnipotent, but that he
can or is able to do what he will. And in the end he adds, They will not give
credence to us, when we say, that God Almighty will do any thing, that exceeds
their capacity to conceive: The words in Latin are, quod little experientiam
sensumque transgreditur, what goes beyond their experience and sense: What
better or stronger reason can be given for any thing, then to say, God Almighty
will do this which he has promised in those books (to wit the Scripture)
wherein he promises as strange things, as these, which he has performed he
will do it, because he has said he will; even he who has made the incredulous
heathens believe things, which they held mere Impossibilities.

Cap. 8. They believe not the Scriptures, if they did we should not need to
stand long with them on this The^m, so that we must make demonstration, how it
is possible that there may be a full alteration of nature, in any one object,
from the kind of being, that it had before, and yet the law of nature be kept
inviolated: for how can that be against nature, which is effected by the will
of God, the Lord and maker of all nature? a portent or miraculous thing
therefore is not against nature, but against the most common order of Nature;
Let not the faithless therefore blind themselves in the knowledge of Nature as
though Gods power could not alter the nature of any thing, from what it was
before, unto man's knowledge. And beneath; I think it may suffice to Convince,
that God is not to be bound, to any Conditions, in the allotting of a
particular being, to any thing; as though he could not make an absolute
alteration hereof, into an unknown quality of essence: his Latin Text, Non se
inde Deo debere praeseribere, quasieam (rem) non possit in long aliud, quam
cis cognita est vertere and mutare; we ought not to prescribe or limit God, as
if he could not turn and change it into some far other thing, then as it is
known to us; so that as God can create what he will, so can he change the
nature of what he has created at his good pleasure.

The same S. Augustine, l. 22. de civitate Dei, cap. 11. Disputing with the
Infidels, who according to the laws of Nature, did argue, that there could not
be any Resurrection of the body, because it is, earthly and so could not be
contained in heaven; every Element having his particular poise, and tending
naturally to its proper place: his answer besides persuasive reason is, Cannot
God almighty give the body of Man such a form, likewise that it may ascend and
support it self in heaven? Cannot then the Almighty, maker of the whole world,
take away the Ponderosity of earth, and give the quickened body, and hability to
dwell in the same place, that the quickened spirit shall elect? why then may we
not believe that the nature of a corruptible body may be made incorruptible,
and fit for heaven? so that arguments drawn from the situation and qualities
of the clements, can no way diminish the power that God Almighty has, to make
man's body of a quality fit and able to inhabit the heavens.

Cap. 25. If they would show me a thing which God cannot do, I will tell them,
he cannot lie; let us therefore believe only what he can do, and not believe
what he cannot I If they do not thus believe that he can lie, let them believe
that he will do what he promised: and let them believe as the world believes,
which he promisea should believe, and whose belief he both produced and praised.

Cap. 26. Why do they now cry out, that this is impossible which God has
promised, which the world has believed, and which was promised it should
believe, seeing that Plato himself is of our mind, and says, that God can
work Impossibilities, that is, such things which we conceive to be impossible.

If any one would ponder and seriously examine the arguments and reasons, which
our pretended Reformers, do oppose, against the Real Presence of Christ's Body
in the Eucharist, he shall easily perceive, that they ground themselves on such
humane Inventions, proceeding more on their senses, in opposition to Gods
Omnipotency: for the Heretics of our times, with their vain, weak, and
weightless arguments; do contradict the Catholic Church in the wonderful
effects, which God has wrought in the Eucharist; principally because we cannot
make them apparent to their senses, nor give them a natural reason for them,
which we freely confess we cannot, yet we know that God does do nothing without
reason in putting moral men by them past reason: we know not his will, in many
things, yet we know that what he will is no way impossible, and we believe what
he has declared to be his will in this subject; far be it from us to deny or,
question it, which were no less then to impute falsehood or imperfection unto
him. God can and will do, according to his promise; no apparent difficulty
whatsoever, no law of nature, can any way impede it: Plato, as S. Augustine
notes, lib. 13. de civit. Dei, said well; Gods will is beyond all other
assurance. God is not bound or limited to any condition, in alotting of any
particular being to any thing; as though he could not make an absolute
alteration thereof, into an unknown quality of Essence: God then, as he can
create what he will, so can he change or alter the nature he has created, at
his good pleasure, for his wonderful power exceeds all wonders: his wisdom
permits and effects all and every particular or marvelous things; and can make
the most wonderful use of all the parts of the world, which he only created.
Cannot the power of God exceed them in working such things as are incredible to
Infidells or heretics, but easy to his Omnipotency? God being the Author of
Nature, why do they ask a stronger reason of us, when in proving what they hold
to be impossible, we affirm, that it is thus by the will of Almighty God, who
is therefore called Almighty because he can do whatsoever he will.

Our Adversaries will not give credence to the Church, affirming, teaching and
believing in all times the verity of such miracles, with a proud supposition,
as if God Almighty could do nothing that exceeds their capacities to conceive:
we know no better or stronger Reason can be given for any thing, then to say,
God Almighty can, or will do this; which he has promised in the sacred Text,
wherein he has declared as strange things as these which also he has
performed: surely he will do these; because he has said he will, as he has
made the incredulous Heathens to believe things which they held to be
impossible.

Let not the faithful hoodwink themselves in the knowledge of Nature, as though
Gods power could not alter the nature of any thing, from what it was before,
unto man's knowledge, let them not think these things to be contrary to nature;
since they are effected by the will of God, the Lord and maker of Nature; they
are not in themselves against Nature, but at most, against the common Order of
Nature.

These words of S. Augustine in regard of other such wonderful things, may be
applied as properly to our present subject; for Catholics do confess that they
cannot give any humane or naturally known reason for the Mysteries which follow
the Eucharist, the most that we can ever pretend to, is, to show that there is
nothing in them against the essence of natures being: our whole belief in these
Mysteries depends on Gods word, wherein he has manifested his will which
carries with it an omnipotent power, whereto all created things are in
obedientiall subjection as well in their essential as accidental being; all
mutable, and alterable; according to the will of God especially in all
accidental qualities or dispositions, which also he may add to natures being,
yea, and also give another nature: So he made Iron swim, Fire not burn, water
to mount, and become passible, solid things to walk upon it: Humane bodies to
ascend, to be also not consumed by perpetual fire, Things of no weight at all,
as Angels called spirits, to descend even within the bowels of the earth: God
by his will so disposing, yea, to be burnt with fire, I might alledg many more
examples of this kind, but these may suffice; to manifest that Gods power is
not to be limited to man's humane reason, much less to his senses; yea, not to
any created Intelligence: what he can do, is known only and solely to himself;
what he has done according to the ordinary course of Nature is latent to all
humane understanding, for there are many things whose natures and qualities the
wisest men are ignorant of: what he has done beyond the ordinary course of
nature, we know by his revelation, which moves us to believe, not know: we
trust in Gods word, no way doubting of his omnipotency: and therefore we little
esteem, of what the wit of man can think, imagine, or conceive to the contrary.
The Church grounded on Gods word and Tradition attested by the holy Fathers and
Doctors, has always so taught us, as partly will be more manifest, in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Transubstantiation proved in all the ages of the Church.
THis terrible word Transubstantiation, is much baited at by this learned
Doctor, even as the word homousion, declared and determined by two General
Councils, was impugned by the Arians, because it was new, and not found in the
Scripture; even so this word approved by two general Councils, was rayled at by
heretics, when they could not disprove, what was specified thereby. I will not
contend for the word, but for what is signified thereby, the Councils of Trent
indeed approves the word, sess. 13. cap. 4. and explicates it to be: the
Conversion of the whole substance of the bread and wine into the substance of
the body and blood of Christ, so also defines it, can. 2. In this sense I shall
produce Fathers and Doctors of all ages and times since Christ, and so confirm
what the Doctor jeeringly, yet most ignorantly affirms, when he says, that the
Mass began with Transubstantiation, as indeed it did, for the Mass was never
without it, when the conversion of bread and wine is the essential part of the
Mass, as it has been fully declared.

I let pass his plain contradiction, when forgetful of what he had said
before, admitting the Mass to have been in the Roman Church for near 1200.
years past, he now says, that it began with Transubstantiation; which he will
have to have been begun, from the Lateran Council held in the year 1215. where
this matter was declared to be of Faith; not as if it was then newly invented,
but as the common Faith of the Church wherein the whole Christian world agreed;
for there were present besides the Pope Innocent the 3d 412 Bishops, the two
Patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem, the Legates of Antioch and
Alexandria, Archbishops, Primates, and Metropolitans 75. Abbots and Priors 800.
Legates and Procurators of Bishops, and others without number. The Ambassadors
of both the Emperors, Roman and Grecian, of the King of France, England,
Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus, Aragon, and many other Princes, who all consented
to this declaration in opposition to some heresies of those times.

Now that such was the doctrine of the Roman Church before that Council, is
manifest by the opposition that was made against Berengarius, who for the
contrary opinion was condemned, in three several provincial Councils: several
learned men of those times, did write against him, as Lanfransus Archbishop of
Canterbury, I. de sacram. Eucharist. The Church spread in the whole world,
acknowledges bread and wine set on the Altar, to be consecrated, and in the
consecration to be changed incomprehensibly, and ineffably, into the substance
of the flesh and blood of Christ. In like manner Algerus, Guitmans and Petrus
Cluniacen, who lib. 1. Epist. 2. Let them see what foolish incredulity, what
blind doubting it is, either not to see, or doubt, that bread is changed into
the flesh of Christ and wine into his blood, by divine power: when by the same,
many things are changed into another, even in the nature of things, which he
proves, by many examples, and concludes, It is far more (as the holy Fathers of
the Church say) to create things that have no being, than to form other, and
other things of those things, which have a being; all these above a 100. years
before that Council.

But nothing more clearly convinces it, then the Recantation, which Berengarius
made in a Roman synod, held, anno 1079. above a 130. years before the same
Council, in this form: I Berengarius, do from my heart, believe, and by mouth
profess; the bread and wine placed on the Altar, by the Mystery of prayers,
and words of our Redeemer, to be substantially converted into the true, and
proper, and life-giving flesh and blood of Jesus Christ our Lord; and to be the
true Body which was born of the Virgin, which offered for the worlds salvation,
did hang on the Cross, which sits at the right hand of the Father, and Christ's
true blood which did flow from his side not only by sign and virtue of the
sacrament, but in propriety of Nature, and verity of substance. In this faith
and belief he died.

A little before this time lived Theophilact Archbishop of Bulgary a Grecian,
in Joan. 6. Bread by the sacred words and Mystical benediction, with the
coming of the holy Ghost, is transformed into our Lords flesh: He has the
same, in Marc. 14. adding, Our merciful God, condescending to our infirmity,
did keep the species of bread and wine, but trans-elementated it into the
virtue of flesh and blood: And in cap. 26. Mat. He said not, This is a figure,
but, This is my body, for it is by an ineffable operation transformed; as bread
in appearance but in very deed flesh. Of the Latins about the year 730.
Venerable Bede in 6. Joan. Christ daily washes us from our sins in his blood,
when the memory of his Passion is represented on the Altar, when the Creatures
of bread and wine, are by the sanctification of the ineffable spirit,
transformed into the sacred Meat of his flesh and blood: and about the same
time the famous Grecian Father, S. John Damascene l. 4. de fide Orthod. c. 24.
As the holy Ghost, working all things, whatsoever were made, so what then shall
hinder, but that, of bread, he may make his body, and of wine and water, his
blood: and even as whatsoever God did make, that he did by the work of the holy
Ghost, in the same manner now also the operation of the holy Ghost, does that
which exceeds nature, and which tannot be taken or understood, unless it be by
faith only; And a little after, Verily the body is truly united to the
divinity; that body which came from the holy Virgin; not that the body assumed,
descends from heaven; but because the bread and wine it self, is changed into
Christ's body and blood. If thou ask, how is this done? it is enough for thee,
to hear, that it is done by the holy Ghost: even as from the holy Mother of
God, our Lord, by the holy Ghost did make to himself, and in himself flesh:
there is nothing more manifest, or perceptible to us, then that the word of God
is truly efficacious and omnipotent; for the manner of it is such, that it
cannot be searched or found out by any reason: A little after, Bread and wine
are not figures of Christ's body (far be it) but the very body of our Lord,
joined to the Divinity, for since our Lord himself said, this is not a sign of
body, but body, nor the sign of blood, but blood: And again, If some have
called the bread and wine, the figure of our Lords body and blood, they did not
say it, after the Consecration; but usurped this word before the oblation was
consecrated: to be brief, In that place the Saint uses these phrases, Christ
made his body of bread and wine; he made these things his body and blood, the
bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of God: Bread and wine and
water are turned into the body and blood of Christ.

I cannot omit the holy Abbot Paschasius who lib. de corp. and sang. Dom. cap.
2. says, Although the figure or form of bread and wine be here, yet no other
thing at all then the flesh of Christ, and the blood of Christ are to be
believed after the consecration. And lib de Instit. Sacra. Christ did not say,
that in this mystery there is a certain virtue or sign of my body, but plainly
says, This is my body, and therefore this is what he says, and not what any one
fancies: This Author lived about the year 850. well nigh four hundred years
before the Lateran Council.

Isichius in the year 601. in Levit. cap. 9. The Dispensation of Mystery,
principally subsists in our Lords word, transferring these things, which
appear, into some other thing greater and intelligible.

445. Let us now see, what the holy Fathers in the first five hundred years did
teach of this subject; Prosper in lib. sentent. In the species of bread and
wine, which we see; we honor invisible things, that is, flesh and blood, we do
not consider these two species as we did before the Consecration, since we
faithfully acknowledge, that before consecration the bread and wine to be what
nature has framed, but after the consecration to be the flesh and blood of
Christ, which benediction has consecrated.

430. S. Cyrill of Alexandria, Epist. ad Coelest. God condescending to our
frailty, breaths the force of life in the things which are offered, concerning
them into the verity of his own flesh.

Eusebius Emissenus about the same time Hom. 5. de Pasch. The invisible Priest,
by his word and sacred Power, converts the visible creatures, into the
substance of his body and blood.

420. S. Augustine, ser. 28. de verb. Dom. I say unto you, that before the
words of Christ, that which is offered is called bread, when the words of
Christ are pronounced, it is not called bread but corpus a body.

398. S. Chrysostom hom. 83. in Mat. 11. hom. 60. ad populum Antioch. Those
works which he did in the supper are not from humane power; he now also works,
he performs it, we hold the order of Ministers, but he sanctifies and
transmutates these things.

S. Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. This bread is bread, before the
Sacramental words; when the consecration comes, of bread is made the flesh of
Christ: After, The word of Christ makes the Sacrament, what word of Christ? to
wit, that in which all things were created, etc. and infers, I answer thee, the
body of Christ was not before consecration, but after the consecration, I say
to thee, that now it is the body of Christ: take therefore, as the word of
Christ is wont to change all creatures, and changes the state of nature when he
will; which he proves by many examples, as that, Christ was born of a Virgin;
and the standing of the waters when the Israelites passed the sea, water coming
out of a rock, and such like: lib. 4. de fid. cap. 5. As often as we take the
Sacrament, which by the Mystery of holy prayer is transfigured into flesh and
blood, we declare the death of our Lord: and lib. de iis qui initiantur, cap.
9. How many examples do we use, that we may prove this not to be what nature
has framed, but what benediction has consecrated, and the force of
benediction, to be greater then that of nature, for by benediction nature it
self is changed.

369. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. 1. The bread and wine of the Eucharist,
before the Invocation of the adorable Trinity, was mere bread and wine; but the
Invocation being done, the bread indeed is made the body of Christ, and wine
the blood of Christ. Catech. 3. The Eucharistical bread, after the Invocation
of the holy Ghost, is no more humane bread, but the body of Christ. And Catech.
4. He sometimes changed water into wine, and shall not he be worthy to be
believed, that transmutates or changes wine into blood.

250. S. Cyp. Ser. de coena Dom. This bread which our Lord gave to his
Disciples, changed not in form, but nature, by the Omnipotency of the word, is
made flesh.

203. Tertullian lib. 4. adversus Marci. Christ made the bread receive his
body, saying, This is my body.

226. Origin, lib. 8. contra Celsum, We eat the offered bread, now made by
prayer a holy and sanctifying body.

183. S. Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. 2. When the mixed chalice and the broken bread,
receive the word of God, the Eucharist of the blood and body of Christ is made;
And cap. 34. The bread which of earth, taking the invocation of God, is now not
common bread, but the Eucharist of Christ's body and blood.

150. S. Justine Martyr, Apol. 2. ad Antonium. We take not common or usual
bread, and usual drink, but even as by Gods word Jesus Christ our conserver,
made man, had flesh and blood for our Salvation, so for food, which by power of
the word which we have received, he is consecrated; wherewith our blood and
flesh by communion, are nourished, and we taken to be the flesh and blood of
Jesus Christ, of him who made man. Sure S. Dionise was of that mind, when he
calls the Eucharist, the sacred and most majesticall Mysteries.

In a book dedicated to the renowned Prince Henry, Prince of Wales, under the
Title of Catholic Tradition made by a french Hugonot, I have these Testimonies
following.

The Ethiopian Liturgy, has this prayer; We pray thee, O Lord, that thou
would show thy face on this bread, on this Altar, bless, sanctify, cleanse,
and transport this bread, into thy spottless flesh; and this wine into thy
precious blood: and it may be made an ardent and acceptable sacrifice; and
health of our soul and body. And again, The Priest prays. That God would change
the bread and wine of the Sacrament, as he changed water into wine in Cana. In
another place, the same Author says, that the Abyssens in their Liturgy (which
probably is the same with the former) frequently make mention of Transmutation,
and it is to be noted, that these Nations do pretend to have the form of
Liturgy or Mass from the Apostles.

I cannot omit the words of the Constaminopolitan Patriark Jeremias, in answer
to the German Protestants, quoted by the same Author. Touching those things, we
(that is, the Grecian Church) see that you in no way agree with us. The
Catholic Church holds, that the bread after the sanctification, is changed
into the body of Christ: and the wine into into blood by the holy Ghost: A
little after, The bread is converted and changed into the body of our Lord and
the wine into his blood; and again, he affirms, that there are not two things
in the Sacrament, to wit, Bread and Christ's Body, but one sole, to wit, Christ's
body.

CHAP. XIV. Who are the Ministers of this Sacrifice of the Mass.
IT may seem superfluous, to speak any more then what has been said already;
for from thence it is manifest, that Christ has assumed unto himself sacred
Priesthood, according to the order of Melchisedech, beginning it in his last
supper; when he instituted the perpetual sacrifice of the Eucharist; wherein,
he as Prince and chief Minister daily and hourly, by his Ministers offers
himself to God the Father: whence S. Gregory of Nice, Orat. 1. in Resur. Christ
by a secret kind of sacrifice, which could not be seen by men, offers himself
an host, for us; and immolates a victim; he being both priest and Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world; when did he this? when he gave to his
Disciples assembled, his body to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken; then he
declared openly that the sacrifice of the Lamb was now perfect.

S. Augustine, l. 10. de civitate Dei, cap. 20. in the precedent Chapter,
having declared, that visible sacrifices are to be offered only to God, in this
Chapter, infers, Whence he is the true Mediator, as taking the form of a
Servant, the Man Christ Jesus is made Mediator of God and men, whereas in the
form of God, he takes sacrifices with his Father; with whom also he is one God:
yet in the form of a Servant he chose rather to be, then to take sacrifice. By
this he is a Priest, be offering and he the Oblation, the sacrament of which
thing, he would have to be the duily sacrifice of the Church, in Psalm. 33. can.
2. Christ ordained according to the order of Melchisedech a sacrifice of his
body and blood. S. Ambrose, lib. 1. offic. cap. 48. Now Christ is offered, but
he is offered as man, as receiving his Passion, and he as Priest offers
himself. S. Crysostome, hom. de Proditione Judae. Christ is now present, who
adorns this table, he himself consecrates; for it is not man, who makes the
body and blood of our Lord by consecration, in the table set before us; but he
who was crucified for us, Christ. The words are said by the priests mouth, and
by Gods power and grace are consecrated, with these words, This is my body; the
things proposed are consecrated, these once said, in all the tables (so he
calls the Altars) even to this present day, and until his coming give firmness
to the sacrifice.

Whence it is that in the consecration, the Priest as Christ's Minister uses
Christ's own words, as having efficacy and virtue to produce the work intended
from the power of Christ, thereby acknowledging him to be the chief and
sovereign Priest, and themselves only his Ministers and Instruments: But of
this more amply spoken in the Liturgical Discourse, par. 2. sect. 3. cap. 11.
to which place I refer my Readers; the same is also confirmed by what follows.

Eusebius l. 1. de Demonst. c. 10. After all Christ offered for us a certain
wonderful victim and excellent sacrifice, working salvation of us all to his
Father, and ordained that we our selves should offer for a sacrifice to God the
memory thereof.

S. Ambrose in Psalm 138. We have seen the high Priest coming unto us, and we
have heard him offering his blood, let us Priests follow, inasmuch as we can,
that we may offer sacrifice; although we are infirm in merits, yet by the
sacrifice we are honorable; for although Christ is not now seen to offer, yet
he is offered on earth, when the body of Christ is offered, nay he is
manifestly offered for us, whose word sanctifies the sacrifice, which is
offered. And lib. 4. de sacram. cap. 4. When we come to make the venerable
sacrament, the Priest now uses not his own words, but the words of Christ; it
is therefore Christ's words, which makes this Sacrament.

S. Hierome in cap. 1. Epist. ad Titum. What shall we think of a Bishop, who
daily offers unspotted victims to God for his and the peoples sins? this he
does as priest, and not properly as Bishop.

S. Crysostome in his Liturgy or Mass, in one of his prayers, has, Thou art
become man, and our high Priest, thou as Lord of all have instituted the rite
of sacrifices, and delivered unto us the celebration of this solemn and
immaculate sacrifice; behold me a sinner, that I may assist at this thy holy
table, and consecrate thy holy and Immaculate body and precious blood; for thou
art he who offers, and art offered: both the receiver, and giver Christ our
God, hom. 83. in Mat. We hold the place of Ministers, it is he (that is Christ)
himself who sanctifies and changes them. And a little after. Thou (O layman)
when thou see the Priest offering, do not think, that the Priest is he who
does it, but the hand of Christ invisibly extended. And hom. 2. in 2. ad
Timoth. Truly this oblation, which Peter or Paul, or any other Priest, of what
merit soever, does offer; it is the same, which Christ gave to his Disciples,
and which now also the Priests do consecrate: This has no less then that, why
so? because man does not sanctify this, but Christ who before did consecrate
it; for even as the words, which Christ spoke, are the same which the Priest do
now also pronounce; so that is the same oblation.

S. Cyprian, Epist. 63. ad Caecilium, Know that we are admonished, that
Tradition be observed, in offering the Chalice; for we are to do no other
thing, then what our Lord has done before us, that the Chalice which is offered
in his remembrance may be offered with water; And again, If Jesus Christ our
Lord, and our God, the high Priest of God the Father, did first offer himself a
sacrifice to the Father, and command this to be done in his remembrance, verily
that Priest truly undergoes the place of Christ, who imitates that which Christ
did, and then offers a true and full sacrifice in his Church, if he undertakes
to offer that which he has seen Christ himself to have offered.

Moreover the holy Fathers assign the Priests principal office, to be the
offering of sacrifice; according to that of S. Paul, Heb. 5. Every high Priest,
taken from men, in those things that pertain to God, that he may offer gifts
and sacrifices for sins. See the Annotations of the Rhemish Testament, as also
the Interpreters of this place, when they largely declare the office of Priests
in order to a Sacrifice; whence S. Hierom Epist. 1. ad Heliodorum, cap. 7.
says, that Priests seated in the Apostolical dignity, do consecrate with their
mouths Christ's body; and Epist. 85. ad Evagrium, that by their prayers the body
and blood of Christ is made; And in cap. 1. Epist. ad Titum, he tells us, that,
the Bishops according to their office are to offer daily unspotted victims for
his and the peoples sins. S. Isidore about the year 600. made a Collection in
form of Common-places out of the Fathers and Councils of the precedent ages,
lib. 2. de officiis, c. 7. says, Priests rule in Christ's Churches, and are
conforts with Bishops in the divine operation of Christ's bedy and blood. And c.
8. putting a distinction between Priest and Deacon, he says, The one
consecrates, and the other disposes or distributes; the one sanctifies, the
things offered, the other distributes the things sanctified.

S. Cyprian Epist. 54. ad Cornel. says, Priests do daily celebrate sacrifices
to God; And Epist. 66. ad Furnesses, Each one honored with divine Priesthood,
and constituted in Clerical Ministry, ought only to serve the Altar and
sacrifices, and attend to prayers. S. Hierome Dialogo cum Lucifer. c. 8.
Hilarious a Deacon only, could not make the Eucharist, not having Bishops nor
Priests, for it is not a Church which has no Priests.

This is more manifest in the Priests ordination, as it is expressly declared in
the Florentine Council; the form whereof is, Receive the Power of offering
sacrifice to God, for the living and dead: whence we may note, this is no new
constitution, but a declaration to the Armenians of the Roman use, and manner
of Ordination; for which the Roman Pontifical is alleged, which was long
before this Council, and was in use in all the Western parts: and Ordo Romanus,
made by Pope Gelasius in the year 496. which as Alcuinus notes in 2. par. de
divinis officiis, has the same form: which also S. Ambrose insinuates in 1
Epist. ad Tim. c. 4. where he speaks of himself; saying, when I was ordained
Priest, whereby I was designed for the work, and received Authority, that I
durst in our Lords stead to offer sacrifice to God.

S. Clement lib. constit. Apost. cap. 24. Look down upon thy servant elected,
and fill him, with the holy Ghost, that he may perform the immaculate,
sacrifice for thy people; but what is more, our Savior himself in his last
Supper, ordained his Disciples in the same form, Do this in my remembrance,
whereby our Savior gave power to his Disciples to do, that is, to make or
offer the same sacrifice as he had done; as I have declared in the first
chapter,. 3.

Our Reformers have mainly endeavored to take away the true and proper
sacrifice of the Mass, and consequently to take away the Evangelicall
Priesthood, which by continual succession, even from the Apostles times, yea,
from Christ himself, has always continued in the Catholic Church; and to this
end the Parliament of England in the nonage of King Edward the 6. invented a
new form or ordination, and commanded that none should give any Orders, but in
the form prescribed; which was repealed by Queen Mary; and again renewed by
Queen Elizabeth, in the 8. year of her Reign: To speak only of Priesthood,
which principally makes to our present purpose, our Catholic Doctors and
Controvertists did oppose against their Ordination of Priesthood; by several
reasons: and first, that they had no lawful Ministers of their order, that is,
no proper and true Bishops, and consequently no true ordination, which is
clearly proved by Erastus senior in his Scholasticall Demonstration, printed in
the year 1662. which I wave and go to the second Reason.

Which is, that the form of Ordination newly invented, is no true form, nor
ever used in the Church, nor no essential part, necessarily required in the
act of giving or ministering holy orders: to make this more clear, we may note,
that in the Sacrament of Orders, there is required a sensible sign; which
Divines call, the material part; and the application of this sensible sign, to
the signification of what is signed, which is the formal part. To our purpose
the Imposition of hands by the Bishop, may well be said to be the material
part of the Sacrament; for of it self it is indifferent to Episcopacy,
Priesthood, or Deacon-ship; nay, to other spiritual effects, as of
Confirmation, yea, of remission and absolution, and is necessarily determined,
and appropriated to this or that effect, by certain words, expressing the power
and nature of this or that Order: In this all Catholics do agree, and some of
your Learned Protestants acknowledge: M. Mason one who has written purposely
of this Subject, lib. 2. cap. 16. Impositionem manuum ut signum ordinis
sensibile amplectimur, forma sensibilis sita est in verbis, quae preferuntur
dum signum sensibile exhibetur: We embrace Imposition of hands, as the sensible
sign of order: The essential form consists in words, which are spoken whilst
the sensible sign is used; in which also those who reformed the Roman
Ordination, did agree, when retaining the imposition of hands, they invented a
new form, never used before in Gods Church, nor yet coming home to the purpose;
for no words can be said to be the true form of any Sacrament which does not
determine the sensible sign to its proper effect or office: In the Ordination
of Priesthood, it must signify the grace and power which is given to him that
receives the Order of Priesthood: so the foresaid Mr Mason, Istius modo verba
quatenus de notant datam potestatem, sunt illius forma essentialis. The learned
Bishop of Derry in Ireland, in his book of the Consecration and succession of
Protestant Bishops; page 226. comes more home, saying; The form or words,
whereby men are made Priests; must express power to consecrate or make present:
Christ's body and blood, etc. for we have no difference with the Romanists, in
this particular. They who are ordained priests ought to have power to
consecrate the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood, that is, to make it
present. Doctor Sparrow is of the same opinion as is noted in the said
Liturgicall Discourse, part 1. cap. 26. and Doctor Thorndike in his book of
Just weights and measures, cap. 21. All Ordination tends to the celebration and
communion of the Eucharist, as well that of Bishops, to the end that they may
ordain the other Orders, and that of Deacons that they may wait upon the
celebration of it; As that of Priests, that receiving the power of the keys,
to warrant the effect of it, they may therefore have power to celebrate it.

Surely the present English Church must be of the same judgment, when only
those who are ordained Priests have authority to consecrate the Eucharist,
which is their peculiar proper and principal office, belonging to none other:
the Power and authority to them in this cannot be from any humane authority but
divine, which comes unto us by the work of the Holy Ghost in the Sacrament.

Now in the Form of Ordination invented by order of Parliament in the time of
King Edward the 6. and used since in Queen Elizabeth's time, no such power is
expressed; for all the words savor more of jurisdiction or execution of what
follows the nature of the order of Priesthood: without which the rest is of no
Force, for without the power ex vi ordinis, no actions ex vi officii are
authentical, or valuable: for as Mr Mason well says, l. 2. c. 16. Non verba
quaelibet huic instituto inserviunt, sed quae ad ordinis conferendi potestatem
exprimendam sunt accommodata; dum per Apostolum Tit. 1. mandavit Christus, ut
crearentur Ministri; mandavit implicit, ut inter ordinandum verba adhiberentur
Idonea quae dati tam ordinis potestatem complecterentur: istius modi autem
verba, quatenus Datam potestatem denotant; sunt illius ordinis forma
essentialis.

If there be no form expressing or determining the power, the most essential
part is wanting, and consequently no true Ordination. Doctor Bramhal well
considered this defect in all the following words of their form in Ordination,
and therefore he attributes the giving of this power, to the words: Accipite
spiritum sanctum, receive ye the holy Ghost. In which is contained the power to
consecrate; but first, these words, receive ye the holy Ghost, are as
indeterminate, as the imposition of hands; And Act. 8. in order to Confirmation
and no ways to Ordination, v. 17. It is said, they imposed their hands upon
them; and they received the holy Ghost. Secondly the Apostles were made
priests, in the last supper; without these words, and when our Savior did use
these words he specifies and determines the power which was given thereby,
whose sins ye forgive shall be forgiven, etc.

But Doctor Bramhal will still insist, that in saying, Receive ye the holy
Ghost, is understood, Receive the grace of the holy Ghost, to exercise the
office of Priesthood, to which thou have been now presented. If this had been
expressed, the difficulty would soon cease, but this is a mere invention of
this learned Doctor, who tells rather what it ought to be, then what it is;
for during well nigh a hundred years the English Bishops never made such
expression.

Some perhaps will say; the Bishops always by those words did intend, and so
understand those words: It is very probable that Bishop of Bramhal did so
understand it; but neither the meaning nor Intention of the Ordainer, can add
any force or virtue to the sacrament, or be sufficient to produce sacramental
effects, without words determining and specifying the Ordination, which is, the
most essential part or form of the sacrament.

No wonder then, that we make difficulty in their Form of Ordination; when in
the late Act of Uniformity, The Clergy of the Kingdom, as supposing the
precedent form of Ordination insufficient, and not satisfactory, have
determined, that the true form of Ordaining Priests is, Receive the holy Ghost
in the office of a Priest: which in a manner is the same with what the Grecian
Church uses; which is, The divine grace which always cures the infirm, and
supplys what is wanting, promote N. this venerable Deacon, to be a Priest:
whose office, even according to the whole Grecian Church, is to offer
sacrifice; which also in the following prayers they expressly mention. Simon
Bishop of Thessalonia, in Tract. de Ordinat. affirms, that the Priests and
Deacons are ordained before the Altar, where the Chalice is present: whence in
the Latin Church their Ordination is admitted, because although they use not
the same words, yet they have words, which in a general way express the
determination of the material, fignifying also the quality and nature and
office of the order of Priesthood, and distinction from other Orders.

Now admitting this Form, after so long time, made choice of, not to condemn it
for a not-sufficient form, or reproving it, but only that it is different from
the use of the Western Church; which always had other words in their Ordination
of Priests; from whence those who were under the Patriark of the West, ought
not to differ, according to the Decree of the second Milevitan Council, cap.
12. that no ordination should be used, but what was approved by the Council;
but omitting this I have two things, to say, the first, that from the first
Ordination made in the time of King Edward 6. there was no true ordination of
Priesthood, until this late Ordinance in the Act of Uniformity, by reason that
their was no essential form used, and by consequence there was not true
Priesthood; from whence also it follows, there were no true Bishops: For as Mr
Mason well infers, in his Preface Cum Episcopum esse nequeatqui non fuerit
Presbyter, si nos presbiteros non esse probatum dederint, De Ministerio Anglico
actum est.

The second thing is, that the now Church of England does plainly reject, and
renounce the Function or Office of Priesthood, insomuch that they have rejected
the very name of Priest even in the holy Scripture, translating Elder for
Presbyter, a name signifying antiquity of years, and appropriated as well to
secular, as Ecclesiastical persons, in their several callings, never used by
the Church, in the Dignity of Priesthood: others retain the name, but not the
Office, whence Mr Mason l. 5. cap. 1. sticks not to say, If by the name of
Priest, you had meant nothing else but a Minister of the Gospel, to whom is
committed the dispensing of the Word and Sacraments, we would profess our
selves Priests: whence they more commonly are called Ministers: Catholics deny
not the name Ministers, in regard of the exercise of those functions; for
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other inferior Orders, may be called Ministers;
so S. Paul, Act. 4. calls the office of Apparitor, which were sent to visit the
Prisons, Ministers: and Romans 15. Christ himself is called Minister of
Circumcision: And again, v. 16. S. Paul styles himself Minister of Christ Jesus
in the Gentiles; which rather signifies a particular office and vocation for
the conversion of the Gentiles; whence he is called Doctor Gentium, then
Priesthood; which by office is indifferent to Jew or Gentile, 1 Cor. 3. S. Paul
calls himself and Apollo Ministers, that is, instruments of Christ Jesus; and
therefore in the next Chapter he says, so let a man esteem us, as the
Ministers of Christ and the Dispensers of the Mysteries of God; that is, in the
exercise or use of our function or office, which we have received by our
vocation or ordination: whereby we receive power and authority to exercise our
Ministry, and dispensation, in which principally consists the nature and
reason of Ordination; by which, as the same Apostle says, they are made mere
Ministers of the New Testament; so that all Priests are Ministers, but all
Ministers are not Priests: and the word Priest, plainly signifies, him that
has power to ministrate, and may be called Minister in the time of his
Ministration: The Prophet Jeremy cap. 32. v. 21. calls Gods Priests and
Levites, his Ministers, Phil. 2.25. S. Paul calls Epaphroditus his brother and
coadjutor, and fellowsoldier, and the Apostle and Minister of his necessities.

M. Mason must give me leave to ask of him a question, whether he believes that
Priests, have no other power then what he specifies, to wit, a Minister of the
Gospel, to whom is committed the dispensing of the word and Sacraments? if he
does not, his words are vain; if he does, how will this stand with what he
says in other places? as lib. 5. cap. 1. As often as we celebrate the
Eucharist, so often we offer Christ in mystery, and do immolate or slay him in
sacrificing, by way of commemoration or representation: if this be so, I pray
let him tell me who does do this, but the Priest? for none but such, even
amongst them, have authority or power to do it: yet this is not included either
in dispensing the word or the Sacraments; for to offer Christ in Mystery or
immolate him, requires other authority, and that from his Ordination, or not at
all.

In the same book cap. 3. If by an unbloudy manner, you mean a mystical and
Sacramental manner, I am not against it, because the shedding of Christ's blood
on the Cross, was real; in the last supper only mystical and Sacrament all.

And again, cap. 5. The holy supper may be called a sacrifice Eucharisticall or
mystical, in which the sacrifice of the Cross is both represented, and offered
in a mystery, that is Sacramentally: who does this but a Priest? who offers
this sacrifice Sacramentally; or by whom is the sheding of Christ's blood in a
mystical and Sacramental manner? most of your learned men, as is said
already, attribute to Ordination, or the power given to consecrate; which is
more then M. Mason allows to his Priesthood.

I know not how M. Mason will reconcile himself, lib. 4. cap. 14. where he in
the name of the Protestant Church, declares: We acknowledge no proper external
sacrifice of the new Testament, besides that which Christ himself in his own
person, once Immolated on the Cross. Insomuch (says he) that if a Romish
Priest become a Protestant, he must renounce the power of sacrificing,
redeuntes (sacerdotes) sacrificandi potestatem nostra opinione impiam and
sacrilegam deponere and repudiare debere decernimus. We judge or hold that such
Priests, as return from the Roman to the English Church, ought to depose and
repudiate the power of sacrificing in our opinion impious and sacrilegious:
What Sr, is it impious or sacrilegious to celebrate the Lords supper? to offer
or immolate in sacrifice? this, if you may be believed, you often say; if the
holy supper be a sacrifice, sure it is external; if Christ's blood be shed in a
sacramental way, sure it is externally; for all sacraments are external signs:
if all this be impious and sacrilegious; all your Ministers are impious and
sacrilegious, for that they without power, do attempt to consecrate, and offer,
and immolate Christ.

Doctor Sparrow, worthily bearing the title of Bishop of Exeter: in his
Rationale, page 309. admits this saying; According to the usual acception of
the word Priest, it signifies him that offers up a Sacrifice; and proves it,
because the Ministers of the Gospel have a sacrifice to offer, viz the unbloudy
sacrifice, as it was anciently called, the Commemorative sacrifice of the Death
of Christ: which does as really and truly show forth the death of Christ, as
those sacrifices under the law did foreshew it, and in respect of the sacrifice
of the Eucharist, the Ancients have usually called those that, did offer it up,
Priests: who (as he says) afterward, are to offer that holy Bread and Wine, the
Body and Blood of Christ. he confirms this by the Prophesies of Esaias, cap. 66.
v. 21. I will take of them to be Priests and Levites, says our Lord, that is,
of the Gentills; and Jeremie, cap. 33. v. 18. And of Priests and Levites there
shall not fail from before my face a man to offer Holocausts, where, says the
Doctor, they prophesy of the times of the Gospel, as will appear by the
context and ancient exposition, to wit, of the Interpreters on those places.

From what has been said it is manifest from the Texts of the whole Fathers
abovealledged, that the proper office of a Priest, is to offer sacrifice; the
present Church of England has put in the name Priest in their form of
Ordination, and consequently must admit a sacrifice which he is to offer,
otherwise they should take the word Priest equivocally, not properly in its
right signification or sense of the Catholic Church: and consequently it
follows; that they have no true Pry thood amongst them: for it is manifest,
that neither he that ordains, nor he that is ordained, do intend to consecrate,
or to be consecrated a sacrificing Priest: for their Intentions are directly
contrary: insomuch as Mr Mason, as is said before, tells us, that such priests
as return from the Roman to the English Church ought to depose and repudiate
the power of sacrificing; whereas the Council of Trent Sess. 23. Can. 1. puts
an Anathema on any one who should say, that in the new Testament there is no
visible or extern Priesthood, or not some power of consecrating and offering
the true Body and blood of our Lord, and of remitting and retaining sins, but
only an office and bare Ministry of the Gospel, or those who do not preach not
to be Priests at all: And Cap. 1. of the same session, sacrifice and Priesthood
are so conjoined by Gods ordination, that both have been in every law: when
therefore the Catholic Church has received from the first Institution in the
new Testament, the holy visible sacrifice of the Eucharist, we must acknowledge
to be in it a new visible and extern priesthood, into which the old Priesthood
is translated, which the sacred letter does also show, and the Tradition of the
Catholic Church has always taught, this to have been instituted by the same
Lord our Savior, and to the Apostles and their successors in Priesthood: power
given to consecrate offer and minister his Body and blood, and also of
remitting and retaining fins.

The same Council Sess. 7. Can. 11. If any shall say that in the Ministers,
when they make or confer the Sacraments, Intention is not required, at least,
of doing what the Church does, be he Anathema. The Council of Florence, Decreto
Eugenij, says, Sacraments are performed by three things, to wit, by some thing
as matter, by words, as form, and by the person of a Minister conferring the
Sacrament, with intention of doing what the Church does; if any of these be
wanting, the Sacrament is not perfect: Even natural reason teaching this; for
as S. Thomas. 3. quaest. 64. Artic. 8. ad 1. The Minister because he is a
living Instrument, ought to apply himself by Intention, whereby he intends to
do, what Christ and his Church does. It is also certain, that an ill intention
vitiates a good work, and a perverse Intention alters the nature of humane
actions, which also is true in Sacramental actions: for example, he that
pretends to Baptize, If his intention be not to baptize, or, takes the word,
baptize, only as it signifies a lotion, or washing from corporal filth; does
not rightly baptize; nor do (...) Church does. In like manner he that says the
words absolvo te a peccatis, If he intends not to absolve him: or for sins,
understands, temporal debts, absolves not: The Protestants who intend not to
consecrate Christ's Body by the words, This is my Body, by the word Body, which
they believe in another sense, do not consecrate. Matrimony, with the same
words and matter, If by the word, Wife, they both or either of them understand,
Concubine, is no Matrimony.

When then the Bishop intends not to ordain as a sacrificing priest, but
intends the the contrary, his act is ineffectual; for according to the Doctrine
of Christ's Church, the power of consecrating, and offering the true Body and
Blood of Christ, and the remitting and retaining of sins, is so annexed to the
order of Priesthood, that Priesthood cannot be without it; and therefore he
that intends to give Priesthood without, gives nothing at all,

To conclude, the Church of England has excluded Ordination out of the number
of Sacraments, and withal rejected the Papal power; one may question then,
what power or authority they have to give Orders, but principally, from whence
they have any authority or power to give them power to execute any offices,
belonging to Priesthood: It cannot be said to be from the words which are not
Sacramental, and consequently being no Sacrament, have no Institution from
Christ, for that end. Moreover it cannot be said to be from the Church, for the
Church can give no such authority but by the Sacraments; and the Reformed
Ministers have no authority from the visible Catholic Church, or Pope, or
Metropolitan, which they professedly reject, and disclaim: for Ordination is a
spiritual power which tends to spiritual effects. Doctor Heylin Eccles. Restit.
in his Preface, Queen Elizabeth looked upon her self as the sole sountain of
both Jurisdictions; and the Act. 1. Eliz. 1. declares, the Kings supremacy, to
use and exercise all such Jurisdictions, spiritual, and ecclesinstical; as by
any spiritual and ecclesiastical power, or authority, has heretofore been, or
may lawfully be used, over the Ecclesiastical state of this Realm: yet as
Doctor Bramhall well says, page 63. The power of the Keys was evidently given
by Christ in Scripture to his Apostles, and their Successors, not to Sovereign
Princes.

Many of our Protestant Divines and learned Doctors did well consider this
Difficulty, and therefore most of them do admit, that Ordination is a
Sacrament, and consequently they ground their Ordination on the authority of
the former Catholic Bishops, who in a Sacramental power did ordain them; who
according to Dr Brevent were all Idolaters, and unlawful Ministers of the
Sacraments, except only Baptism in extreme necessity: so that they have no
right to any Ordination but by virtue of the Sacrament, which cannot take
effect, unless it be dnely administered by lawful power, and in due form.

From which; I infer that our Reformers in taking away, and rejecting the
sacrifice of the Mass: have also rejected the Priesthood, whose principal
office is to offer sacrifice; and consequently they have no true Ordination.

In fine, no Sacrifice, no Priest; no Priest, no Sacrifice; wherefore call the
Ministers Priests or what you will; if they have not the office and power to
consecrate and offer sacrifice, they are no Priests properly taking the word
priest, or according to the common sense and use of the Catholic Church in all
ages and times; yea, among Heathens and Infidels: whence it follows, that as
our Reformers have framed a new Religion, so they have invented a new
priesthood never heard of before; giving no other power then to preach and
dispense the Sacraments; which may be committed or done by Deacons or Laymen,
as all Ecclesiastical histories do testify: on this ground and other defects
in their Ordination, the present Catholic Church makes no scriple
(notwithstanding their pretanded Ordination) to ordain or give Orders to those
who being converted and reconciled to the said Catholic Church shall humbly
defire it.

I know some will say, that this cannot be done without Sacrilege, for even in
the Doctrine of the Universal Church, Re-ordinations, as also Re-baptizations,
are esteemed sacrilegious; whence frequently those who were baptized or
ordained by heretical priests or Bishops, were not rebaptized nor re-ordained:
In consideration hereof, the now Church of England does not re-baptize nor
re-ordain priests, coming to their communion, but permits them to remain in the
Order received, and approves of them in all their function and power: as if
they had been ordained by Protestant Bishops.

This Subject would require a longer Discourse then my brevity will permit: I
will therefore briefly conclude this Chapter, The Catholic Church has always
detested both Rebaptization and Reordination but never made difficulty to
Baptize or Ordain some who falsely pretended to have been Baptized or Ordained,
when really they were not: We have a plain Declaration of this in the Council
of Nice, Can. 19. where those who were baptized by the Paulianists were
absolutely to be Baptized, because they were not Baptized in the right Form of
Baptism, to wit, by the Invocation of the holy Trinity.

The Decree of the Apostles Can. 68. declares; that baptized or ordained by
Heretics, were neither Baptized, nor ordained: which as Caranzen notes, is to
be understood of such Heretics, who did not observe the right Form in
ministering the Sacraments.

The Church whenever it was manifest, that the Ordainers had not lawful
power, or did corrupt or alter the form of Ordination, judged, that what they
had done was Null, and of no force, and did simply and plainly ordain them: But
if upon due examination it were found that the heretical Bishops were formerly
ordained by Catholic Bishops, who observed the true form of the sacrament,
those who received orders from them, and were otherwise fitting for it, were
received, without any new Ordination; only new power was given unto them for
the execution of such and such Orers: for as the learned Doctor Morinus, de
sacris Ordinat: par. 3. Eccercit. 5. and 6. well notes, It may be admitted that
such do receive a Character even those who are ordained against the Canons; but
so that the virtue of the Character is dulled or blunted, not capable, or not
fit for action: the Ancients did esteem Ordination Canonically given, could
never be blotted out; but that its force or virtue by deposition might be
repressed or dulled, that it could not produce any other Ordination: which may
be confirmed by the common Doctrine of the Church, which teaches, that a Priest
notwithstanding his Character received, in some causes, cannot give either
lawfully or validly absolution.

As for that which is added, concerning the use of the now English Church, whch
re-ordains not priests coming to it, all men know, that according to their
Opinion, it would be very Sacrilegious; for no true Protestant will deny, but
that Catholic Ordination is valid, and of Real force, giving all power and
virtue belonging to a Priest; which to deny, would be destructive to their
pretended Hierarchy, which has no other Foundation for its succession, then
that their Priests and Biships were so ordained: The true state of the Case is,
the Catholic Church in such case Ordains those who were never truly ordained:
if the English Church should attempt to ordain Priests, they should ordain
those who were formerly, rightly, and fully ordained.

CHAP. XV. Whether the Sacrifice of the Mass be Idolatry.
THat the Mass has been held and esteemed in all times a divine and holy
Sacrifice, is sufficiently proved, so that to question whether it be Idolatry,
is in a manner to condemn the whole Christian Church, of which that prudent and
gave D. Thorndike in his book of Just weights and measures, chap. 1. They who
profess the only true Christ, and therefore the only true God, do necessarily
profess to detest all Idolatry which the profession of Christianity
effectually rooted out of the world wheresoever it prevailed, and so does the
Church of Rome still as seriously profess; and therefore cannot easily be
convinced to profess Idolatry: for without expressly renouncing this
profession, they cannot expressly be Idolaters, without renouncing it by such
consequence, as may convince common reason, that they contradict themselves,
and renounce all of them that which all of them profess, they cannot be
Idolaters by consequence. And therefore it is not easy to make it appear to
common reason that they are Idolaters, because then it must appear to common
reason, that so great a part of Christendom does by their profession contradict
that which themselves profess. In the margent he says, They that separate from
the Church of Rome as Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics before God. The
reason is clear, for the pretense of Idolatry in the Roman Church, is no
sufficient ground for any one to separate himself from it. And that which Dr.
Brevent attributes to Idolatry in the Mass, is merely framed in his own fancy,
and it is purely a conceit, or blind ignorance or malice, that imputes
Idolatry to that which all Christians have believed to have been the greatest
honor that humane nature can give to God.

If Mass be a sacrifice, as is fully proved before, it cannot be called
Idolatry; for either the act or object, must make it so; sure not the act,
which is approved by Gods word; and to give to God all supreme honor cannot be
reproved, much less the object, which is only the true God. S. Augustine said
well, that the act of sacrifice, is given only to the true God, or to an
imagined, or to a feigned God. So that according to the sense of the whole
world, sacrifice is only given to God; the sole object of this sacrifice, is
the only true God, not to any imagined or false God; both which were true
Idolatry; but the sacrifice to the true God, cannot be said to be Idolatry,
which according to Its Etymologies, is to give Latria or supreme and sovereign
honor to an Idol, which as Saint Paul says, is nothing but only in the esteem
of the Idolater. I think that there is none, who have understanding and reason,
can or dare say, that the papists in their sacrifice, do give any honor or
worship, that is, Latria, or supreme honor to any false Imagined God, for they
cannot but know that their constant belief is, that there is but one true God,
as an absolute article of their faith: their forms of Liturgies or Masses, both
in their prayers, rites, ceremonies, and public belief, are testimonies of the
same; and do plainly manifest, that the whole sacrifice is directed and
intended only and soly to the true God.

The Mass, liturgy, or divine service; consisting principally in the oblation
made to the true God, cannot be said Idolatrous: whence I have often admired,
that men of understanding, learning, or judgment, should so imprudently call it
Idolatry; when the Church of England in imitation of the Roman Church, has
framed a form of Communion, which some of them have termed, with the name of
Divine service, Liturgy, or sacrifice, and oblation, and has the best part of
its Prayers, Prefaces, and such like.

But some will say, that this sacrifice was not instituted by Christ, at least,
has no ground in the Scripture. I answer, first, that this may be retorted
against their form of Communion, which is but of late Invention; and has no
more ground in Scripture. Secondly, admitting this to be true, yet the Mass
cannot be said to be Idolatry, for the Church intends not thereby to give any
honor to any feigned or imagined God: but only to the true God: the worst that
can be said is, that the Church erred in exercising that power that she has
not, or was deceived in her decrees, but this will never reach to Idolatry.
Thirdly, the Church has always believed, that Christ himself instituted this
sacrifice in his last supper, as it has been clearly proved before, as also
that it is grounded in the old and new Testament.

Others object, that the Mass admits of the Adoration of the Host: which is
plain Idolatry, for such Adoration cannot be said to be exhibited to God, who
is not in the Eucharist; whence M. Thorndike in his book above cited, cap. 19.
makes this Demonstration. They who give the honor proper to God to his
creature, are Idolaters: They that worship the Host give the honor due to God
to his creature, the conclusion follows, ergo, they that worship the host are
Idolaters: I answer, M. Thorndike calls it a Demonstration as it seemed to
others, but not to himself: and therefore says, But will any Papist acknowledge,
that he honors the Elements of the Eucharist, or, as he thinks the Accident of
them, for God? will common reason charge him, to honor that which he believes
not to be there? A little after, He that worships the Host believes our Lord
Christ, to be the only true God hypostatically united to our flesh and blood,
which beiag present in the Eucharist, in such a manner, as it is not present
every where, there is due occasion to give it that worship in the Eucharist
which the Godhead in our Manhood, is to be worshipped upon all occasions. They
who know that the Godhead of Christ is the reason, for which his flesh and
blood is worshipped in the Eucharist, cannot take that worship for Idolatry,
because his flesh and blood is not present in the Eucharist; as they who
worship it there think it is, for they know that the flesh and blood of Christ
is no Idol to Christians, wheresoever it is worshipped,

If Jews, Mahometans, Infidells; and Ethnicks, and those who deny the
Incarnation, should take Christians for Idolaters in wirshiping Christ in the
Eucharist, I should not wonder; for they excluding the true object of such
adoration, consequently do reject such adoration; for if Christ be not God,
Adoration or Latria is not due to him: But Christians who believe Christ Jesus
to be God and man, cannot, with any reason deny, but that he is adorable, and
to be adored in the highest manner, So that all Adoration to him is not only
free from Idolatry, but also is the general duty of all Christians; and
therefore it is a strange madness to accuse Catholics of Idolatry, when in the
Eucharist they only adore with Latria, the flesh and blood of Christ Jesus: for
whatsoever our late Advarsaries have foolishly enough invented; Catholics do
not so adore the Elements of Bread or wine, or species of them, presence, or
circumstances, but only and soly Christ Jesus, believing firmly and without the
least hesitation that he is really there present: from which belief, as a
necessary sequel follows all true Adoration.

Our pretended Reformers will not stick at this: for the first and chief
beginner of this Reformation Luther, not only approved it, but also left it in
practice to all his followers; for generally all Lutherans do use it in their
daily practice. the Tiguran Calvinists do affirm, That if the true and natural
body of Christ be in the Eucharist, why should not our Lord be adored there, if
we should teach that the Natural body of Christ were truly there, with the
Papists we should also truly and faithfully adore* It is certain the same
errors do follow from Consubstantiation as from Transubstantiation, to wit,
Adoration, circumgestation, inclusion, and oblation.

Os^ander in Cont. 16. par. 12. alleges the Divines of Wittenberg, saying, If
Bread in the Lords supper be the substantial body of Christ, the sacrifice of
the Mass and Adoration of the sacrament may be defended. The Divines of Geneva
say to the Lutherans, that, Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation being
admitted, Adoration necessarily follows. Eusebius Alckercherus affirms, That
from this foundation (of the corporal and real presence and eating) we must
necessarily grant, that as well Adoration, as oblation, do follow in the
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood.

Chemnitius in his Examine Con. Trident. par. 12. plainly says, If we believe
Christ God and man to be present in a peculiar manner of presence and grace in
the action of the supper, so that he does there exhibit to them who cat truly
and substantially his body and blood, etc. It cannot or ought not to be done,
but that faith should worship and adore Christ present in that action so Jacob,
Genesis 28. Moses Exodus 23. Elias 3. Reg. 19. Truly had no command that they
should adore in those places, but because they had a general command, that they
should adore God every where; and God was truly present under those extern and
visible symbols, etc. Truly they adore that God whom they believed to be there
present, etc. but they did not adore God as far from them, in the Imperial
heaven; as remote and absent from them, etc. rightly therefore S. Augustine in
Psalm. 98. S. Ambrose Nazianzene in the Epitaph of his sister, from the sentence
of Eusebius Emissenus, and Luther cont. Lovanienses ar. 6. call the Eucharist a
venerable Sacrament: whence he makes this Adoration out of all Controversies
between him and the Tridentine Council.

From these learned men of the pretended Reformation we may note, that although
they opposed the Catholic Doctrine of the Church, yet they were far from
condemning this Adoration, or making it Idolatry, that they plainly confess,
that those who believe the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, do
constantly affirm, that it is our duty to do it; since the real and only object
of such adoration is the body and blood of Christ Jesus: whence I make this
Syllogism.

1. They who give the honor due to God, to any creatures, are Idolaters, But
Catholics give no honor due to God, to any creatures, Ergo, Catholics in
this are not Idolaters.
2. To adore or worship Christ Jesus in the Eucharist, is not Idolatry. But
Catholics only adore Christ Jesus in the Eucharist, Ergo, Catholics in this
are not Idolaters.
3. He that believes Christ Jesus in the Eucharist, may lawfully there adore
him, But Catholics believe that Christ Jesus is in the Eucharist, Ergo, they
may lawfully adore him there.
The sequel of Adoration to our belief, is no way to be reprehended, and is
admitted by most of our Reformers, and only those who deny the Real Presence,
can with any reason deny it. Those who admit Consubstantiation (whereof many
were of our first pretended Reformers) cannot, nor do any way exclude it; and I
see not how those who believe the Real presence in what manner they please, can
any more; for if Christ be there, sure he is an Object adorable.

Our present Church of England plainly admits the Real presence, as is
manifested in its Catechism before Confirmation; where it is declared, that,
The outward part or sign is bread and wine, the inward part is the body and
blood of Christ, which are verily and truly taken and received by the faithful
in the Lords Supper; the benefits are the strengthening and refreshing of our
souls, by the body and blood of Christ; and so all ancient protestants in
England did believe, and accordingly did with kneeling and adoration devoutly
receive it. The additional note at the end of the form of Communion expounds
it, That the kneeling is but a signification of our humble and grateful
acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ given to all worthy receivers; pray,
what is this but adoration? when the Minister kneels at the Lords table, sure
he adores not the table, but the Eucharist which is to be offered and taken
thereon.

Nay the peculiar form ordained peculiarly for the Communion: argues some
special honor to the Eucharist, and in words can signify no less, for therein,
it is called the sacrament of Christ's body and blood. The spiritual food and
sustenance of our Lord, the Communion of the body and blood of our savior.
Grant us gracious Lord so to eat the flesh of thy son, and to drink his blood,
that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and washed through his
most precious blood. Again, make us partakers of his body and blood. In the
Communion, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve
thy body and soul unto everlasting life; and the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto life everlasting: and
after it is called, The spiritual food of the most precious body and blood of
thy son our Savior Jesus Christ.

These words and many such like, according to vulgar understanding import a
Real Presence, and signify no less; and moves the hearers to a devout
expression of the honor they bear to the holy Sacrament; yea, to adore it,
which I speak not to condemn them in it, no more then I would condemn Jacob,
Genesis 28. who seeing nothing of God but by the effects, which he felt in
himself, he gathered, that God in a special manner had been in that place; he
adored and worshipped God. The Israelites Exodus 35. beholding the pillar of the
cloud, which was but a sign of Gods presence, adored God: and 2. Par. 6. the
people seeing fire descending, and the glory of our Lord on the temple, falling
flat on the earth upon the pavement paved with stone, they adored and praised
our Lord: they adored not what they saw, nor any circumstance or apparitions of
Majesty and glory; which were but external signs of some peculiar presence of
God in the temple, but him who was thereby presented, and this without any show
of Idolatry: and in like manner, if we adore Christ as present in the
Sacramental signs, presented unto us, we cannot be said to be Idolaters; when
the object of our Adoration is not the sign, or any created thing, but only
Christ Jesus God and man: whence learned Erasmus lib. 9. Epist. ad Pelicanum
well said, Hitherto with all Christians, I have adored Christ in the Eucharist,
neither do I yet see any cause, why I ought to depart from that opinion; I can
by no humane reason be withdrawn from the agreeable judgment of the whole
world, which is also in the Liturgical discourse, par. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 12. and
cap. 13. in the general consent of the primitive times, as is manifest in all
the holy Liturgies of Gods Church in those times: and proved out of S.
Augustine: there also cited concludes, That not only we do not sin in adoring,
but we should sin in not adoring, S. Ambrose will have us to adore Christ on
the Altar in the Mysteries, that is, in the Mass. S. Prosper lib. sent. We do
truly honor in the forms of Bread and wine, which we see; things invisible,
that is to say, Flesh and blood. S. Augustine Epist. 120. ad Honoratum, c. 27.
says, The Rich come to our Lords table, and receive of his Body and Blood, but
they adore only, and are not filled, as the poor are, yet notwithstanding they
have adored, Theodoret Dial. 2. The Mystical Symbols are adored, as being the
same things which they are believed to be. S. Cyril Catech. 2. showing the
manner how we ought to communicate, concludes, that bowing down in manner of
Adoration and Veneration, saying, Amen. Admirable was the devotion and
reverence of S. Gregory Nazianzen his Sister, to the Blessed Sacrament, as that
great Saint and Doctor relates, orat. 1. and how miraculously she was cured
thereby from a disease humanely incurable.

The Jews and Infidels give sufficient testimony of the Christian practice of
adoring Christ Jesus in the Eucharist; as is to be seen in all Ecclesiastical
Histories. Averroes acknowledges it in his time; when he said: I have traveled
over the world and have found diverse Sects, but none so foolish as the sects of
Christians; for they devour with their teeth their God whom they adore. S.
Augustine, lib. 22. contr. Faust. c. 13. says, that the Heathens did esteem
Christians to worship Ceres and Liber, for the Bread and Chalice, and
answering, says, we are far different from Ceres and Bacchus the Pagan Gods,
although in our Rite we honor the Sacrament of the Bread and Chalice, Maximus
manducensis a heathen writer, in his Epistle to S. Augustine, which is extant
in 43. Epist. of S. Augustine, demands of him, who is that God which Christians
do challenge as proper to them, and fain to see him in secret places?

In the Liturgical Discourse, in the place above cited, this is more fully
declared: It might suffice, that such has been the continual practice of Gods
Church, as is manifest in all the Liturgies or Masses, which have been since
Christ's time; so that I may infer, that of all the calumnies that our
Adversaries have imposed on Catholics, none more impertinent and more vain,
then this of Idolatry; in regard of the Adoration to the Body and Blood of
Christ Jesus in the Eucharist, unless they could prove Christ Jesus to be an
Idol, or not to be adored; for as is fully declared, we in the Eucharist adore
nothing but Christ Jesus.

Conclusion.
IN suits of Law when men come to a final trial, before the Kings Judges, the
lawyers or Barresters on both sides plead their Causes, with long and learned
speeches, delectable to their hearers, and principally to move the Judges, to
be favorable on their sides. The Judge having with attentive ear listened to
their long harangues, rises up and declares his mind; that the whole
difficulty depends on the lawful witnesses on either side, which being heard,
he would according to law give his sentence.

Innumerable Authors on both sides have written on this subject, concerning the
Mass, but as yet little an agreement is made: wherefore omitting long
discourses in this short Treatise, I seek to come to the Test, and stand to the
testimony of authentical and approved witnesses, according to which I am
content to have my cause stand or fall.

Doctor Brevent has produced his witnesses against the Mass 2.1. many of the
learned Schoolmen. 2. many Expositers of the Mass. 3. the Liturgies or Masses
themselves. 4. the Holy Fathers of the primitive times, that is, within five
hundred years after Christ. 5. the mainest point wherein he chiefly grounds
himself is reason and Sense. 6ly. he pretends some Text of Scripture: I have no
exception against any of these witnesses alleged, only I must say, that it
savours of great Ignorance or no less Impudence, to take any of them as
witnesses against the Mass: For first, there never was schoolman yet that
wrote against it, or ever contradicted it, but such as have fallen from the
Church. There books even from the Master of the sentences are extant in every
Library* and are all expressly and positively against this Doctor; as every
School boy knows. It is strange that he should make any use of them for his
purpose, when he knows that all of them were members of the Roman Church; were
taught, educated, and did teach, write and expound the Mass, according to the
Doctrine of the same Church: most of them were Priests, or Bishops or
Cardinals in the same, and daily celebrated the sacrifice of the Mass in the
same belief and Faith with the Roman Church, which by the Confession of this
Doctor was in full possession of the Mass for almost twelve hundred years.

2. No man of Judgment would allege Expositors of the Mass against the whole
scope and intent of those who have written whole Volumes thereon, for to
declare the true sense and meaning of every point, Article and cirenmstance of
the Mass; as it is practiced in the Roman Church, knowing well that if they
had taught any other Doctrine contrary to the said Church; they should be
liable to the censures thereof, and be noted by all the faithful Christians*
besides, their works were approved and licensed by their lawful Superiors,
and embraced and sollowed by all Roman Catholics, and followed by all
scholars in the same Church.

3. There cannot be greater insolency, then to produce Liturgies against
Liturgies, or Masses against Masses: for the controversy is wholly concerning
Liturgy or Mass, as they are and have been practiced by the Christian Church
in all times of Christianity; without any variation in Substance, in such
manner as the Roman Church how at this present uses. If then in any of those
Liturgies, there may be found any thing contrary to the Mass, it will condemn
themselves, which cannot be imagined, unless we will lay a great blemish upon
the whole Church, especially the supreme Governors thereof; with all the
Bishops, and Pastors, Councels, and Doctors, and holy Fathers, of gross
Ignorance, in using such forms; as should contradict the substance of what they
unanimously commended to the faithful.

4ly It is no less strange, that the Doctor should pretend the holy Fathers
and Doctors of the Church, when not only for almost twelve hundred years,
even by his town confession, they all approved the Mass, but also defended it
against all Contradictors and heretics; and therefore he rejecte their
authorities, and pretends to stand to the judgment only of the primitive times,
to wit, within five hundred years after Christ: In this Treatise, I have gone
with him to those times; and have produced their testimonies from Age to Age,
and dare say, that in those times he can produce no one holy Father or Doctor,
that has taught any Doctrine in any opposition or contradiction to any thing
of the Roman Mased; where as I have produced most of them in opposition to
whatsoever the Doctor has pretended against it: whereunto I have added the
Councils, both general and Provincial, the practice of the whole Church, in
those times, with the consent of all Christian Nations.

5ly. Whereas the Doctor pretends, some Texts of the holy Scriptures for his
cause, we may consider, that he follows therein his own fancy or private
spirit; without any Expositour or Interpreter of those times, imitating the
Heretics of all Ages, who grounded all their errors on the Scriptures,
misconstrued, and by a counterfeit sense of them, did delude the Ignorant
Christians: Of this we have manifest experience, in these our times, for the
innumerable Sectaries now extant do ground themselves on the Texts of
Scripture; which they pretend for their multiplied sects. Each one affirming
their sense and meaning of the holy Text, with condemnation of other judgments,
and so wrest the Scriptures to their several senses, making their fancies the
Rule of the sacred Text; whereas Catholics take the Scripture for the Rule of
their Faith, follow the judgment and sense of the one holy Catholic Church, as
on this present subject, I have followed the common Doctrine of the holy
Church, even in those five hundred years after Christ, which the Doctor allows.

Finally, the Doctors mainest argument is, from humane Reason or sense, which
I have proved, no way capable to comprehend the mysteries of our Faith, which
transcends above all Reason or sense; otherwise there would be no necessity of
such a supernatural gift, without which there is no salvation. It is true that
reason is necessary for the reception of Faith, for if we were not reasonable
or rational creatures, we should not be capable to receive Faith; but, that
reason should guide us in supernatural things, is preposterous, we know nothing
but by our senses which can have no sensation or act of senses in spiritual or
supernatural objects; such as all Faiths objects are, for the receiving
thereof, only the sense of hearing, may concur, from whence the understanding
frames intellectual species, representing the things which are revealed and
declared unto us by the holy Church, which teaches in all times according to
the holy word of God.

In confirmation of this, S. Paul, Hebr. 11. defines Faith, The substance of
things to be hoped, the argument of things not appearing to our senses, or
humane reason, but of it self is an Blench Demonstration or convincing Reason:
for by Faith alone, we are convinced to believe those things which are
revealed; for faith only shows and demonstrates them as clearly, as if we did
see them in midday: faith so works in us that we as more doubt of future or
most obscure mysteries revealed, then if they were comprehended by the sight of
our eyes; and are more certain in them, then by any sense, reason or
Demonstration, which may deceive or be deceived; but in matters known by faith,
we cannot be deceived, for God cannot deceive us. It behooves as therefore, as
S. Paul 2. Cor. 10. says, to bring into captivity all understanding (much more
senses) unto the Obedience of Christ. If we be true Christians, by faith we
must captivate and humbly submit our will, understanding, all our reason, and
all our senses, to the word of God revealed.

S. Basil in psalm. 113. said, All the Articles of our faith are principles
grounded only on God revealing, and therefore we need no Inquisition or
disputation by any weak reason, but firmly believe them as principles of our
Faith, without any examination or Question: it suffices to all true believers,
that, Dominus ipse dixit.

The Objects of our faith are supernatural, and the subject which we treat of,
is, of the Real and substantial Body and Blood of Christ Jesus being in the
Eucharist, which only the understanding by Faith comprehends. I will therefore
submit all I have said, to the judgment of all understanding persons, and
earnestly desire them to ponder what has been pleaded fouthe equity of my
cause, which is grounded on the positive Texts of holy Scripture attested and
expounded by the holy Fathers and Doctors of those primitive times, and
seconded by the General Practice of Gods Church, as well in those times, as in
all succeeding Ages, without any notable question until our later times. God
out of his infinite mercy open the Eyes of those who go astray, and grant them
the Light of Faith; such is the continual prayers of him who earnestly wishes
them all health and salvation in Christ Jesus.

FINIS.

