Gamalil Palpsnchos OR Seasonable Advice IN Trying Times: DELIVERED In a Sermon
Preached at Little-Wakering in Essex, Wednesday the 22th. of December, Being
the Fast appointed for the farther discovery of the Popish-PLOT.

By JOHN FVLLER M. A.

Discite Justitiam moniti, nec temnite Divos. LONDON, Printed for the Author,
By John Gain, Living in Merchant-Taylers Rents, at the Lower End of Moor-Lane,
1681.

TO HIS Deservedly Honored Friend, GEORGE ASSER, of BARLING in ESSEX,
Gentleman.
Dear Sir,
SOme Men admire what Jacob meant by so small a Present to so great a Person as
Joseph was then in Egypt, a little Balm and a little Honey, Nuts and Almonds,
etc. But the Text clears all, Genesis 43.11. They were the Best Fruits of the
Land. I shall likewise be condemned for making so mean a Return to so mighty
Obligations I lie under; My Excuse is, It is the best my present Condition is
capable of. Here I freely confess, it was not the Importunity of any, wrested
this small Treatise from me; Nor was it an Itch to be in Print. I understand
well enough the Humors of a Censorious Age, that every Innocent Discourse must
run the Gantelope therein, and receive a Lash from all Dissenting Parties: But
I hoped it might do good to some, for whom I ought to have a Real kindness:
However, hereby I shall take occasion to declare to the World my resentment of
your great Civilities. And he that has an Hand to receive, and not a Tongue to
return Thanks, deserves for the future to be both Lame and Dumb; which
Punishment, that it may not light on me, Accept this acknowledgment of your
many Favors bestowed on,

Your devoted Friend and Servant, JOHN FULLER.

ACTS 5. V. 38. For if this Council, or this Work be of Men, it will come to
naught.
IN this Chapter we have the Speech of a learned Jew, his Name Gamaliel, his
Profession a Pharisee, his Degree a Doctor of Law, his Dignity had in
Reputation amongst all the People. We have him pleading freely without a Fee
for poor Clyents, the persecuted Disciples. The Drift and Purport of his Speech
is to persuade that the Disciples might not be so suddenly and severely
proceeded against, but for a time respited and reprieved, to see what would
become of their persons and Preaching. This he enforces by a double Instance
of Theudas and Judas, two famous Impostors, who in former times, like rolling
Snowballs, had gathered much People together; but melting at last, brought both
themselves and Followers to confusion. Hence he rationally infers, That if
this Doctrine of the Disciples were only of humane invention, it would sink of
it self, and save them the pains to oppose it; if it were of Men it were
needless, if of God, impossible to resist it.

Oh! It is excellent to be familiarly acquainted with the memorable Accidents
of former Ages. You that desire to be wise, keep a Court of Records in your own
Bosoms: file up all remarkable Passages in your Breasts, that remembering things
past, and comparing them with things present, you may probably conjecture of
things to come. Then shall the Destructions of others prove Instructions to
you: the Shipwracks of others shall be Sea-marks to you, and the purchase of
Wit, which others have dearly bought with their Woe, you shall both get gratis
and peaceably possess. For thus Gamaliel by quoting of former Presidents, and
observing ancient Accidents in Theudas and Judas, does judicially collect, and
difinitively conclude, That all wicked projects, though like Comets they blaze
for a season, will fade of themselves. For if this Council, or this Work be of
Men, etc. Observe in the Text 1. a Supposition. If this Council or Work be of
Men, 2. a Position. It will come to naught.



But before we go further, methinks I hear some hacking and hewing at the Root
of my Text with this sharp Objection.

Objection. I.

Why (may some say) What was Gamaliel to us? are we bund to believe him, or
does his Advices and Instructions concern and conclude us? Gamaliel at the
best, he was but a learned Jew, having but a twilight of Knowledge, and if we
cast up the total Sum of his Religion, it can amount to no more than Agrippa's
half a Christian. Besides, by Profession, he was a Pharisee, and this may
justly render his Council suspected. What Christian had not rather fast, than
feed on the Bread of the Pharisees, for sear some of their Leaven should be in
it? We therefore are not bound to hear what is spoken, or to believe what we
hear from the mouth of Gamaliel.

Answer.

I answer, if the Doctrine of Gamaliel did any way border, entrench, or confine
on Pharisaical Principles, we might justly be jealous thereof: But seeing no
such matter, let us not refuse to receive a precious Pearl, though from the
hand of the blackest Negro. Yea, let none think scorn to be taught by
Gamaliel's mouth, at whose Feet St. Paul was brought up: and if any will not
believe my Text for Gamaliel's, let them believe it for God's Sake. The
Lacedaemonians had a Law, that if a wicked man in the Senate chanced to give
good Counsel, he was presently to stand by, and a good Senator was to rise up
and speak the same words, that so the Counsel might be the better relished,
coming from a grateful Person. Grant Gamaliel to be as bad a man as Malice can
suppose him, yet seeing Gods Spirit has been pleased to record his Speech,
with which Reason and Religion do concur, take it now as coming from God, and
hearken to him, that he may hearken to you.

Objection II.

But it may be further objected, That he that reads the justness of a Cause, by
the joyfulness of the Event, holds the wrong end of the Book upwards. Careat
Successibus opto, quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat. Have we not often
seen Piety and Prosperity at such terms of distance, that they could not
harbor under the same Roof. Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem,
fortunam ex aliis. Wherefore this Doctrine, to measure the goodness of a Cause
by the Success, is often falfe, always uncertain, at the best but dangerous,
good only to puff up the hearts of prosperous Sinners with pride, and to break
the Souls of sorrowful Saints with drooping despair.

Solution.

We must spend some time in clearing the Text from the Ambushment of this
Objection, for the better effecting whereof we will lay down these three
Propositions.

Prop. 1. Wicked men may, and often do thrive in their wicked Designs for a
time. Hereof the reason in nature is this, because, though they bring a bad
Cause, they are the best Sollicitors, sparing neither care nor cost, nor price
nor pains to accomplish their wicked desires. Their cract Title they will
sodder up with their own Industry: and to their lame Cause which lacks Legs,
they will give Wings by their daily diligence. They watch for all tides, and
wait for all times, and work by all means, and sail by all winds; each golden
opportunity they cunningly court, and greedily catch, and carefully keep, and
thriftyly use: In a word, they are wiser in their generation than the Children
of Light, Luke 16.8. And the reason in Religion why wicked men often prosper in
bad projects, is, because God in his Justice suffers them to battle therein,
that they may be the fatter Sacrifice for his divine vengeance, lifting them up
to cast them down, swelling so great with their good success, they break with
the Tympany of their own pride and presumption.

Prop. 2. Gods Servants in good designs have sometimes for a time been
unsuccessful, witness the Israelites, Judges 20.21. Who asking Council of God,
and going to War by his Command, were notwithstanding twice grievously beaten
by the Benjamttes. And the true reason hereof is this, because, though the
Cause may be good, yet the best of men who seek to advance that Cause are
sinful, and God justly may, and often does punish their Sins with ill success.
Besides, hereby he does try and prove the patience of his Servants, whether
under hope, above hope, they will rely on his protection in the midst of all
extremities.

Prop. 3. Though slowly, yet surely, though late, yet at last good designs
shall be blessed, and bad designs finally confounded. The true reason hereof is
founded in Gods justice, to whom it is essential to reward piety, and punish
profanness. So then though bad designs may bait at success, they shall lodge at
consusion. But if any man ask me when this shall be done, I answer with our
Savior to his Disciples, Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or
seasons which the Father has put in his own power. And you may observe
Gamaliels words in my Text to be without date, shall come to naught, without
specifying or noting any set time. Let this serve to give to the sober
satisfaction, and to the curious a surfeit, though not without some waiting,
yet without any failing, wicked projects shall perish: but how long it shall be
before they perish, I cannot tell you, because my Text has not told me; that
it shall be, we know, when it shall be, God knows, For if this Counsel or this
work be of Men, it will, etc.

Doctrine. The staple Doctrine is this, What is naught in the beginning, will
be certainly naught in the end. And it is worth our observing the variety of
ways whereby the Plots of wicked men come to confusion: sometimes out of
ficleness and inconstancy they desert their own designs, or else out of despair
to succeed, they desist from their intentions. Sometimes they start so many
Plots at once, that they hunt none at all: but the plenty of their projects
supplant and confound one another. Sometimes the means that they rely on
fails, and then down tumbles the stately structure of their designs, burying
the Builders under the ruins thereof. Sometimes the principal Plotter is cut
off, and then he losing his head, the rest lose their hearts, and are utterly
discomfited: as in the Rebellion of Sheba. Sometimes a causeless qualm of
Cowardice comes over their Soul (as over the Aramites Army, 2 Kings 7.7.)
fancying Fears to themselves, and then fearing their own Fancies, they fly when
none pursues, and are afraid to overtake themselves. Sometimes they are split
on Rocks by the tempest of their own fury, grasp all and hold nothing, and run
themselves out of breath with their own violence. Sometimes they fall out among
themselves, crumbling into Fration and Factions, and to save others the pains,
sheath their Swords in themselves, as the Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites
did, 2 Chronicles. 20.23. Sometimes they come to destruction, because they come to
destruction: no visible reason can be rendered thereof, we see it done, but
cannot see who does it. Sometimes God puts his hand miraculously out of Heaven,
and with the least joint of his little finger; crusheth these moths to nothing,
as in 88, and the Powder Treason.

And as by sundry ways, so also at several times, evil Counsels are confounded,
some sooner, some later, as it pleases Divine Providence. As the dainty Dames
of Israel were threatened to eat their own Children when but a span long, so
some are forced to eat not only their own words, but their own deeds when
scarce begun, their wicked designs setting in the rising, and being damb'd up
in the Fountain. Others come to the birth, but then there is no strength to
bring forth, or else, they are still born without life or motion, so that a
Coffin is the first Cradle they are put into. Such as survive the birth, are
with the babes of Bethlehem made away at two years old and under. And if the
wicked Project chance to be of so strong a constitution, as that passing
through Childhood and Youth, it comes to man's Estate, then the Plague denounced
against the house of Eli, falls upon it, 1 Samuel 2.32. There shall not be an old
man in the house for ever. It shall never hold out to gray hairs. For if this
Counsel or this work be of men, it shall come to naught.

Objection.

Yea, (may some say) some wicked designs have arrived at a wondrous age. What
say you of the Opinions of Popery? verily I say unto you that Methuselah with
all his years was not so old as some of them, twelve hundred years and upwards
many of them have lasted. And at this very day the maintainers thereof flourish
in all prosperity. Begin at Spain, then go by France, pass over Germany,
compass Poland, return through Hungary, and end at Italy, and you shall find
scores of Countries, hundred of Cities, thousands of Towns, millions of men,
all zealous of the Popish Profession. Seeing therefore that Popery has
sprouted so soon, spread so fast, and so far, lasts so long, stands so strong,
either allow Popery true, or confess the Text false, For if their Counsel or
work had been of men, it would ere this time have been brought to naught.

Answer.

When I look on the corrupted lungs of the Romish Religion, I conclude it must
needs have dyed in its Childhood, had not God foretold there should be a man of
Sin, 2 These. 2.23.

I answer then that all these things are (have) come to pass according to what
God in Scripture has foretold unto us, the early rising of Antichrist, whose
mystery of Iniquity wrought in the Apostles time, his coming with Power, and
Signs, and lying Wonders, his bewitching the Nations with the Cup of
Fornication, his fighting with the Saints and prevailing against them, are all
punctually prophesyed of in the Bible: as also the general declination of the
Church from piety in Doctrine, and purity in Manner, the flying of the woman
into the Wilderness: the safe, but secret keeping Gods secret ones from
Superstition, are all accurately foretold in the Revelations. What were
Mysteries once, are Histories now, then prophesied, now performed. The Romish
Church has done us this courtesy to reveal the Revelation unto us. Her
Corruptions are the best Comment on the Apocalypse.

And though we must not deny, but that Popery flourishes even at this day, yet
in abating the strength thereof, God has done great things, yea, he has done
great things already, whereof we rejoice. Was it not a wonder that Luther a
poor Friar should give the Man of Sin such a foil (if not a fall) that since he
could never recover himself. This is the work of the Lord, and it will seem
marvelous in our Eyes: hereby Antichrist has his wings cut, his train clipped,
his talons pared, his strength and wealth abated. So that the Pope has just
cause to make more Fasts, and fewer Festivals in his Calander, many Countries
are fallen from him; others fastened to him, rather by Cruelty than Conscience.
So that in despite of all the Perfumes they burn in their Churches, their
rotten Superstition stinks in the nostrils of discreet Christians. What said
Zeresh to Haman her Husband, Esther 6.13. If Mordecay be of the Seed of the
Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him,
but surely fall before him. And so seeing Antichrist has begun to reel, he
will come to ruin: it remains then that we patiently expect the time when the
Lordshall consume him with the Spirit of his mouth (as welcome to us as woeful
to him) and shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming. For their
Religion, I mean the dominative points wherein they differ from us, is a
Religion of men. Of men devised, ^ound on Traditions, without footing in
Scripture by men propogated, I mean driven in the strength of humane (not to
say) divelish policy: their very Prayers to men directed (though glorified
Saints in Heaven) and all these things for men intended, for the advancing of
the pride and profit of the Pope and his Adherents: and therefore seeing their
Counsel and work is of men, it will, it shall, it must in Gods due time come to
naught.

Use. Do any then desire to have their designs blessed with Success, let them
truly entitle God to the Cause, let them lay the Foundation Stone in Grace,
and then they shall lay the Top Stone in Glory. Now one may assure his Cause to
be of God, and not of Men, if he observe these Rules.

1. At the entrance into it, beg Gods Blessing and Assistance. When David 1. K.
36. had appointed Solomon to be King over Israel, Benaiah the Son of Jehoiada
answered David and said Amen, and the Lord God of my Lord say so too. Let us in
the first place beg Gods Amen, to our Councels and Works; our Amen is but a
Petition, Gods Amen is a Charter; ours is Optative, begging what we would have,
Gods is Imparative, commanding what shall be.

2. Besure the thing thou take in hand be lawful and warrantable in it self;
otherwise to desire Gods Blessing to a wicked Design, is mockingly to ask God
leave to dishonor him, or with Judas to cry Hail-Master, and then betray him.

3. Be careful to manage the matter in hand by the Rule of Gods Will in his
Word. See (says God to Moses) that thou make all things according to the
Pattern in the Mount. So, be thou sure not to differ the least dash, or
willingly to vary the least tittle from Gods revealed Will in his Word.
Remember what St. James says Chap. 1.29. The wrath of man works not the
Righteousness of God, and therefore beware of mingling thy carnal Interest, of
mixing thy partial ends, of blending thy private Respects with Gods Cause,
least it fare the worse for so unfitting a Conjunction.

4. Aim and level all thy Actions principally at the Glory of God. Thy own
honor may in a refracted degree subsist with Gods Glory: if neither preferred
before it, nor contrariant to it, but subordinate unto it. At the Coronation of
the Kings of England, when the Noblemen have first seen the Crown Imperial
solely set upon his Majesty's head, then the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and
Viscounts claim by prescription to put on their own Coronets. First advance the
Honor of God, see him crowned, promote his Glory, and then in the second place
it will be no Sacriledg to seek the promotion of thy own private Good and
particular Commodity. If these Rules be warily observed, then whatsoever thy
Design be, good luck have thou with thine Honor, ride on, go up and prosper,
we wish you good Success in the name of the Lord, the Lord prosper the work of
thy hands, the Lord prosper thy handy work. If God be with you, who shall be
against you.

But be not disheartened and dismayed, be: not discouraged and discomfited if God
at the first, and for a time humble thee with bad success; know (as I said
before) that then God punishes thee for thy Sins, and take up for thy Motto
the words of the Prophet ( Mic. 7.9.) I will bear the Indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, until he plead my Cause, and execute
Judgment for me. Let not the badness of the Success at the first put thee out
of Love with a good Cause, but rather pray to God, It is thou Lord that
inflicts it, it is I that deserve it, it comes from thy Justice, it lights on
my Sins. Oh! Afflictions are bitter to the taste, but wholesome to eat, wherefore
beat Lord, and thy Servant shall bow, strike Lord, and thy Servant shall stoop.
But Oh! spill the man, but spare the Cause, punish the one, but perish not the
other; the Sins are mine, but the Cause is thine. Let not thy Glory suffer in
my Sufferings, but in due time give thy Cause good suceess: far be it from
presumptious dust and ashes to prescribe to the Lord of Heaven time or place,
or means, or manner. Do it Lord when thou will, where thou will, how thou will, and by whom thou will, but do it Lord in thy due time for thy Namesake,
for thy Promise-sake, for thy Sons sake, for thy self-sake, wherefore should
the Wicked say, Where is now their God. All that is required of thee, is
patiently to expect the good time when God will accomplish his Promise.
Seventimes did Elias send his Servant to the Sea, 1 Kin. 18.43. to bring some
tidings of the probability of Rain, and at the seventh time, behold there arose
out of the Sea a little Cloud like a man's hand; what shall I say seven times
yea, seventy seven times, send and see for good success; stand on the tiptoes
of thy Soul, heighten thy expectation, watch and wait, and long and look, and
pry and pray, to day and to morrow, and dext day, next week, next month, next
year, next seven years, next seven seven years, if thy life lasts so long, and
at last, if it be for Gods Glory, and thy good, the success that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry.

And yet I cannot confidently assure any that he in his own Person shall live
to see good success on every good Cause he shall undertake. Great was the
favor afforded to good old Simeon, that he should sing his Nunc dimittis after
his Eyes had seen Gods Salvation: but it is not granted to all Saints of God:
some are taken out of this World before they see pious Councels crowned with
happiness. And indeed the infidelity and carnal distrust, whereof the best in
some degree are guilty, may justly move God not to honor us with so welcome a
Spectacle: but suffer Death to prevent us, or else with that unbelieving Prince
who dyed in the Gates of Samaria, our Eyes may see the plenty that our Mouths
shall never taste. However let us imitate the Example of the godly Patriarchs,
of whom it is said, Heb. 11.13. These all dyed in the Faith, not having
received the Promises, but having seen them afar off.

Besides, let that Cordial comfort us, that, That Honor God vonchfaseth not to
us, our Posterity shall certainly possess.

Come then ye little Children, come ye that can of your selves, or else your be
led by the hands of Maids, or brought in the Arms of your Nurses; nay, come ye
Babes unborn, that are carried in the Wombs (Bodies) of your Mothers. If the
design we seek to advance be good, there is good Success due unto us by the
Promise of God: and yet it is uncertain whether we our selves shall ever live
to enjoy it: wherefore here, in the Name of God Amen, we make you our Heirs, we
appoint you our Executors, and bequeath this Legacy unto you; or rather before
hand by deed of Gift we Sign and Seal unto you all Joy, Comfort, Contentment,
Solace, Felicity and Happiness, to you and to your Heirs, which shall amount
from the good Success of a good Cause, when you behold it: count it not amongst
desperate Debts, for you shall infallibly enjoy it. We perchance shall first be
gathered to our Fathers, and fall asleep in our Graves, and be clothed with
Clay, and be turned to dust, whilst our Souls we hope shall be in Heaven;
blessed the day, happy the hour, welcome the moment! But you shall survive, and
what Moses never did, that Joshnah shall behold. You shall see that that Cause
which is grounded on Gods Word, managed by his Will, and levelled at his
Honor, shall at last be Crowned with Success: for Truth has spoken it, and
Faith believes it, God has said it, we have heard it, and you shall see it.
The Holy Cause will have happy Success: what is gracious in the beginning,
though crossed in the middle, will be crowned in the ending. For if this Council
or Work be of men, it will come to naught.

Soli DEO Gloria.
