A Full RELATION Of A Barbarous Murder, Committed upon the Body of Esquire
Beddingfield, On Sunday the 20 th. day of July, 1684. BY Mr. Barney: As Also
The further Account of the Trial and Conviction of the said Mr. Barney, who is
to be Executed for the same, at the Market-Cross IN NORWICH, On Friday the
First day of August, 1684.
IF we look abroad in the World, and take a survey of the Actions and
Transgressions of Mankind, we may observe that God very rarely suffers Sin to
go Unpunished even in this World: and more especially his Justice takes notice
of the Sin of Murder, making good his own Word therein; that he that sheddeth
Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed: yet so it is, that even this Sin is
grown so Common amongst us, that scarce a Week passes over our Heads, but we
meet with one or other Instance of this Kind, it being looked upon as one of
the first Principles of Honor amongst the Sparks of the Age, to Vindicate the
least Affront, (or what they shall please to term such) with a Stab or Thrust.

An Instance of this kind the following Relation will Furnish us with. The
Judges of Assize, Assigned to hold Pleas for the City and County of Norwich,
having opened their Commision on Monday the 14 th. Day of July Instant, Mr.
Justice Windham happening to be taken Violently Ill; the Business on the
Nisiprius and Crown-side, both was Managed by the Right Honorable the Lord
Chief Baron Montague, which occasioned the dispatch thereof to be of longer
Continuance than otherwise it would have been; so that the Grand Jury could not
be Discharged on the Saturday Succeeding; but their Attendance was Adjurned
till the Monday following: the Gentlemen of the County attending the same.
Amongst which Number Mr. Barney the Prisoner, and Esquire Beddingfield, being
Drinking together on the Saturday Night, continued together till about two of
the Clock the next Morning: at which time, happening upon a Discourse that
raised some Dispute and Difference between them: Mr. Barney being a Person very
Quarrelsome, Words arose between them, and increased to such a height, that Mr.
Barney Drew upon the Esquire and by 8 several Wounds in his Body: Four of which
were found in his Back. the Esquire was Slain in the Place, and Mr. Barney
endeavored his Escape, but the Noise thereof raising the House, the Gates were
Immediately shut; and the Pursuit was such that Mr. Barney was forthwith Taken:
and being for that Night Secured, the next Morning he was Committed to the
Common-Goal: and the Monday following a Bill was peferred against him; the
Grand Jury not being then Discharged, as aforesaid; upon which they immediately
brought in the same Billa vera. And coming the same Morning to be Arraigned
thereupon, the Evidence against him was very plain that he both raised and
continued the Quarrel; that he Dishonourably Killed him, and that he was a very
Contentious Person, and had before that time Wounded several Persons, upon very
slight Occasions; it being very familiar with him when he wanted Moneys, if he
asked any Person to accommodate him with a Supply, in case of a refusal, he
would threaten them with his Sword; and had Wounded several upon the like
Quarrel.

The Prisoner had very little to say for himself, only that he was in Drink:
thinking by one, to Excuse another Crime; and that the Words that had passed
between them, had provoked him into an Extraordinary Passion: in the Heat
whereof, he had rashly perpetrated a Crime for which he was extreemly sorry:
and for which he was not only ready to beg Pardon of God Almighty, but of the
Relations of the Gentleman he had Slain. But this was not looked on as any
thing of a Defense, but rather an aggravation of the Fact. So that the Petty
Jury without stiring from the Bar, brought him in Guilty of the Indictment and
Murder aforesaid; whereupon he immediately received his Sentence: and a Rule
was forthwith Issued forth for his Execution on Friday the first Day of August
next ensuing, at the public Market-Cross in the City of Norwich. In
expectation of which Sentence, he was remanded back to Gaol, where he now
continues. Whence it may be observed as a Warning to others how they fall into
the like Crimes: how justly the Judgment of God pursues the Criminal: and more
especially for those Crimes which are Committed upon his own Day, which he has
set apart for himself, and for his Worship. Under a due consideration whereof,
it is hoped the Prisoner will consider his Condition, and prepare for the
Sentence against him. Esquire Beddingfield, was a Gentleman of great Worth and
Loyalty, and well beloved by all the Gentlemen: it being attested in his behalf
by diverse Persons of great Eminency upon the Trial, that he was free from the
Vices of the Age, and never given to Quarrels or Contentions; insomuch that he
is extreemly Lamented by all the County, and none but acquiesse in the Sentence
as just upon the Prisoner: tho he be likewise one of a very Good Family, being
the second Son of an Ancient Baronet in that Country, and a Person of known
Worth, Loyalty and Integrity. But the best of Men may often meet with
unhappiness in their Relations Grace, seldom running in the Veins of
Generation: whence this may likewise be as a caveat to others how they bring
Grief on the gray Hairs of their Parents, and put all Men upon remembering and
serving their Creator in the days of their Youth, before the Evil days come,
and the Years draw on wherein there is no Pleasure: to hasten which days upon
our selves is doubly a Sin: and that Person who is guilty thereof, especially
by the Crime of Murder may be looked on not only as Murderer of another but of
himself, and at one stroke hazards his own Soul and Body at the expense of
another Blood. From which Crime may the Grace of God be so prevalent upon us
that we may not fall therein: nor ought the best of us be secure since, if we
give way to our Passions and leave the conduct of Gods Grace and Spirit, the
Devil takes Advantage: and having the Rule and Sway over us, many times leads
us into the paths of Destruction; and then leaves us Miserably to expect his
just Judgment upon us, and the Terro^s of an evil Conscience to Rack and
Torment the Criminal.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball, over against Baynard 's
Castle, in Thames Street, 1684.


