PERFECTION AND PEACE:

Delivered in a SERMON By THO. FVLLER B. D.

LONDON Printed by Roger Norton for John Williams at the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

TO The Honoble and truly Religious GEORGE BERKELEY Sole Son and Heir to the
Right Honorable GEORGE Lord BERKELEY, etc.
SIR,
WHen I look on the Crest of your ancient Arms, (A Mitre powdered With Crosses)
I read therein an abridgment of the Devotion of those darker days: the Mitre
showing your Ancestors actions in Peace; the Cross, their achievements in the
Holy War: the Mitre, their doings at home; the Cross, their darings abroad.

Yea I fancy to my self each ancient Lord Berkly, like one of the Israelites
at the walling of Jerusalem, Neh. 4. 17. With a Trowel in one hand, and a Sword
in the other. We always find him either fighting or founding, either in a
Battle or at the building of some Religious Fabric, as (besides others) the
entire Abbey at Bristol, (afterward converted into a Cathedral) was solely
founded by one of that Family.

This was the Devotion of those days, wherein the world knew no better, and
scarce any other. Since the Reformation, your Noble House has not had less
heat for having more light. Your Charity has not been extinguished, but
regulated, not drained dry, but derived in righter channels; and flowing with a
clearer stream free from the mud of superstition.

As for your particular, that your ancient Crest is worthily born by you, the
Mitre speaking you a Patron of Learning; the Crosses, a Practicer of Religion.
Qualities which encouraged me to present this small Treatise unto you.

Acceptance is more then it can expect, pardon being as much as it does
deserve, being so long in coming, so short when come. But because it had its
first Being by your Command, it hopes to have its wellbeing by your Countenance.

Should I desire so many Lords of your Family hereafter, as heretofore have
flourished in a direct line, by desiring a particular Happiness to your House,
I should wish a general mischief to mankind; that men should live so many years
in sin and sorrow before the coming of the necessary and comfortable day of
Judgment. My prayer therefore shall be, That the luster of your House may
continue with the lasting of the World, (so long as God will permit the badness
thereof) in that honorable Equipage of your Ancestors: May Perfection here,
and Peace hereafter light on you, your virtuous Lady, and hopeful issue; which
is the daily desire of

Your Honors most bounden Servant THO. FULLER.

PERFECTION AND PEACE.
PSALM. 37. 37. Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright; for the end of that man is
Peace.
THIS and the 73. Psalm are of the same subject, wherein David endeavors to
cure an Epidemical disease, with which the best Saints and servants of God are
often distempered: Observe in this Disease, the nature, danger, cause and cure
thereof.

The Nature, namely fretting fits of the soul, at the consideration of the
constant peace, plenty and prosperity of wicked men.

The Danger thereof, It causes the Consumption of the spirit, and is
destructive to the health of the soul. Yea, when this disease comes to the
Paroxism, the height and heat thereof, it becomes dishonorable to God;
aspersing and be-libelling him, as if he wanted Goodness, and would not; or
Power, and could not; or Justice, and does not order matters better then they
are.

The Cause thereof it proceeds from a double defect in men: 1 Want of Faith
to trust in God. 2 Want of Patience to wait on God.


This is the reason why the practice of these two graces is so often inculcated
by David in this Psalm.

The Cure thereof: David applies many Cordials, (for less then Cordials will
not do the deed) seeing by his own confession, Ps. 73. 21. His heart was
grieved with his fretting fits. We will only instance on the two last.

One is a serious consideration, ver. 35 of the short pleasure and certain pain
of the wicked. It was a good prayer of a good man, Lord keep me from a temporal
heaven here, and an eternal hell hereafter. True it is, Psalm 73. 4. that to
the wicked, there are no bands in their death: and no wonder, when they have
all bands after death.

The second is a studious observation of the perfect Man's condition, who though
meeting with many intermediate broils and brunts, and bickerings in this life:
yet all at last winds up with him in a comfortable close, and happy conclusion,
Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright, for the end of that man is peace.

Observe in the words two general parts: 1 The description of the Dead. 2 The
direction to the Living.


In the description of the Dead, we have two particulars: 1 What he was. A
practicer of Perfection and Uprightness. 2 What he is. A possessour of a
peaceable end.


In the direction to the Living we have an invitation, or rather an injunction
to mark and behold.

1 What was done by the man, when living: his Holiness. 2 What was done to the
man, when dead: his Happiness.
This our Sermon being now preached in the juncture of the old and new Year:
What better subject to end the old, then to speak of the description of the
dead? What fitter matter to begin the new, then to treat of the direction to
the living? Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright: for the end of that man is
peace.

Before we enter on the words, it will be a charitable work to reconcile the
seeming variance betwixt the two Translations: I mean that which is commonly
prefixed at the beginning, and what is constantly inserted in the middle of our
Bibles.

The Old Translation. Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is
right, for that shall bring a man peace at the last.

The New Translation. Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for the end
of that man is peace.

See here a vast difference betwixt the diverse rendering of the words: If the
Trumpet, 1 Cor. 14. 8. give an uncertain sound, who shall be prepared for the
battle? But where shall the unlearned, though honest hearted Reader dispose of
his belief and practice, when there be such irreconcilable differences in the
Translation of Gods Word.

I answer, the seeming difference arises from the latitude of the Hebrew
words, so extensive in their signification: for Shemor which in my text is
translated, Mark, according to the first and most frequent acception thereof:
signifies also in a secondary sense, to Keep, seeing those things which we
mark, we also keep, at the least for some short time in our memory. The same
may be said, that the word Behold, in my Text, is rendered in the Old
Translation, take heed, seeing the Hebrew will bear both: Tham and Iaschar, most
commonly and constantly denote the Concrete, Perfect, Upright, Righteous, and
Innocent: But sometimes signifies the abstract also, Perfection, Uprightness,
Innocence Let not therefore the two Translations fall out, for they are
Brethren, and both the sons of the same Parent, the Original: Though give me
leave to say the youngest child is most like the father, and the newest
Translation herein, most naturally expresses the sense of the Hebrew.

Let none cavil that such laxity in the Hebrew words occasions uncertainty in
the meaning of the Scripture: For God on purpose uses such words importing
several senses; not to distract our heads, but dilate our hearts, and to make
us Rechoboh, Room for our practice in the full extent thereof, Psalm. 119. 92.
Thy commandment is exceeding broad, and is penned in words and phrases,
acceptive of several senses, but all excellent for us to practice: So that both
Translations may be happily compounded in our endeavors, Mark the perfect,
keep innocence, and behold the upright, and take heed to the thing that is
right; for the end of that man is peace: and that shall bring a man peace at
the last.

Begin we with the description of the dead, Perfect, and what is a good Comment
thereon. Upright.

Object. It is impossible this world should afford a perfect man. What says
David, Psalm. 14. 2. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men*
to see if there were any that did understand and seek after God. They are all
gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that does good, no
not one. But what says Solomon, Eccles. 2. 12. For what can the man do, who
comes after the King, even that which has been done already. But what shall
he do that comes after the King of Heaven? can Subjects hope that their
discoveries will be clearer then their Sovereigns? shall man living on earth
see more then God looking from heaven? he could not meet with one good, where
then shall we mark a perfect man?

Answ. David in the place alleged, describes the general corruption ad prae
varicationem of all mankind by nature; in the latitude whereof we confess the
perfect man in my Text was involved. As all Metals when they are first taken
out of the earth, have much dross and oar, but by art and industry may
afterward be refined: so the man in my text was equally evil with all others
by nature, till defecated by grace, and by Gods goodness refined to such a
height of purity as in some degree will endure the touch, and become perfect.

In a four fold respect may a servant of God be pronounced Perfect in this life.

1 Comparatively, in reference to wicked men, who have not the least degree or
desire of goodness in them. Measure a servant of God by such a dwarf, and he
will seem a proper person, yea, comparatively perfect.

2 Intentionally: The drift, scope, and purpose of such a man's life, is to
desire perfection, which his desires are seconded with all the strength of his
weak endeavors: He draws his bow with all his might, and Perfection is the
mark he aims at, though too often his hand shakes, his bow starts, and his
arrow misses.

3 Inchoatively: We have here the beginning and the earnest as of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 1. 22. So of all spiritual graces, expecting the full (not payment,
because a mere gift, but) receipt of the rest hereafter. In this world we are a
perfecting, and in the next, Heb. 12. 23. we shall come to the spirits of just
men made perfect.

But blame me not, Beloved, if I be brief in these three kinds of Perfections,
rather touching then landing at them, in our discourse; seeing I am partly
afraid, partly ashamed to lay too much stress and weight on such slight and
slender foundations. I hasten with all convenient speed to the fourth, which
one is worth all the rest. A servant of God in this life is perfect.

4 Imputatively: Christ's perfections through Gods mercy being impu^ed unto him.
If I be worsted in my front, and beaten in my main Battle, I am sure I can
safely retreat to this my invincible Ree^: In the agony of temptation we must
quit comparative perfection.

Alas, Relation is rather a shadow then a substance: quit intentional
perfection, being conscious to our selves how often our actions cross our
intentions. Quit inchoative perfection; for whilst a servant of God compares
the little goodness he has with that great proportion which by Gods law he
ought to have, he conceives thereof as the pious Jews did of the Foundation of
the second Temple, Haggai 2. 3. Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as
nothing? But stick we may and must to imputative perfection, which indeed is
Gods act, clothing us with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

This is the reason the Saints are unwilling to own any other perfection: for
though God Job 1. 1. is pleased to style Job a perfect man, yet see what he
says of himself, Job 9. 20. If I say that I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse. God might say it, Job durst not for fear of pride and presumption.
Indeed Noah is the first person, who is pronounced perfect in Scripture, Genesis
6. 9. But mark I pray what went in the verse before: But Noah found grace in
the eyes of the Lord. Not that his finding grace is to be confined to his
particular preservation from the Deluge, (which was but one branch or sprig of
Gods grace unto him.) But his whole person was by Gods goodness accepted of,
Noah's perfection more consisting in that acceptance then his own amiableness,
approved not so much because God found goodness in Noah, but because Noah found
grace in God.

Come we now in the description of the Dead, to what he is, The end of that man
is peace.

Object. Some will object that daily experience confutes the truth of this
Doctrine, what more usual then to see Gods servants tossed, tumbled, tortured,
tormented, often ending their painful lives with shameful deaths. Cushi being
demanded by David to give an account of Absaloms condition, 2 Samuel 18. 32. made
this mannerly and politic return: The enemies of my Lord the King, and all
that rise up against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

But some will say, if this be a peaceable end, to lead an afflicted life, and
have an ignominious death, may the enemies of God and all goodness, the
infringers of our Laws and Liberties, the haters of Learning and Religion, the
destroyers of Unity and order, have their souls surfeit of such a peaceable end.

Resp. In answer hereunto we must make use of our Saviors distinction, the
same for substance and effect, though in words there be variation thereof.
Being taxed by Pilate for treason against Caesar; he pleaded for himself, Ioh.
18. 36. My kingdom is not of this world: So say we, to salve all objections,
our peace, that is the peace in our Text, (and God make it ours, not only to
treat and hear, but partake thereof,) is not of this world, consists not in
temporal or corporal prosperity; but is of a more high and heavenly nature.
Indeed this peace is in this world, but not of this world; begun here in the
calm of a clear and quiet conscience, and finished hereafter in the Haven of
endless happiness. When the man in my Text, becomes perfectly perfect, he shall
then become perfectly peaceable.

However we may see that sometimes (I say not always) God sets a signal
character of his favor on some of his servants, enjoying at their end a
general calm, and universal tranquillity toward all to whom they are related.
Amongst the many privileges of Saints reckoned up Job 5. none more remarkable
then that verse 23. For the Stones of the field shall be at league with thee,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Have we here a
Dichotomy of all wicked men, or a sorting of them all into two sides.

Some are Stones, like Nabal 1 Samuel 25. 37. stupid, sottish, senseless; no
Rhetoric with its expanded hand, no Logic with its contracted fist, no
Scripture, no reason, no practice, no precedent can make any impression upon
them, so that the best of men may even despair to get their good will. Well the
way to do it, and procure a perfect peace with them, is to please God.

Others are beasts like the Cretians, Tit. 1. 12. (...), so fierce, so furious,
so crafty, so cruel, no meddling with them without danger. As the former could
not conceive, so these will not abide any rational debate with them. The former
were too low and silly, too much beneath: these high and haughty, too much
above persuasion to peace; mention but the name thereof, and they psalm. 112.
prepare themselves to battle.

The art then to make these friends with a man, is only this, to endeavor to
please the high God of heaven; and then Solomon's words will come to pass, Prove.
16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at
peace with him.

It once came to pass in England (and but once it came to pass in England)
namely, when See his life lately printed.
Sir Thomas Moor was Lord Chancellor, that the Crier in Chancery being
commanded to call the next cause, returned this answer, there were no more
causes to be heard. Not that there was no more on the file for that day (which
is ordinary and usual) but, which is strange, that then there was no more suits
depending in the whole Court of Chancery, but that all ripened for Trial, were
decided. Then was Ianus his Temple shut clean throughout England, in Cases
betwixt Plaintiff and Defendant, relating to equity and conscience. Whether
this proceeded from the peaceableness of people in that age, not so quarrelsome
and litigious as in ours: or from the goodness of the Judge, either, happy,
privately to compound differences without any suit; or dextrous, publicly to
decide them with all expedition.

But when some good man has lain on his death bed, though having many suits in
his life, all then are ended and composed. Call the suit betwixt this man and
his God, long since it is attoned, and both made friends in Christ. Call the
suit betwixt this man and his conscience, it is compremised, and both of them
fully agreed. Call the suit betwixt this man and his enemies, Stones, and
Beasts, it is compounded, and they at peace with him. Call the suit betwixt
this man and all other Creatures, it is taken up, and he and they fully
reconciled. Thus I say sometimes, not always, God graceth some of his servants
that they depart in an universal peace, a personal favor indulged to some
select Saints. But generally and universally all the true servants of God,
whatever their outward condition be, go from peace to peace; from the first
fruits of peace in their conscience, to the full fruition thereof in heaven.
Mark the perfect, behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.

Come we now to the direction of the Living: Mark the Perfect, behold the
Upright.

It is not said, Gaze on the Perfect, Stare on the Upright, this men of
themselves are too prone to do without any bidding: nay, contrary to Gods
positive command, Heb. 10. 33. Whilst ye were made a gazing stock by
reproaches and afflictions. And David in the person of Christ complains, Psalm.
22. 17. they look and stare upon me: partly with eyes of wonder, as on so many
Monsters and Prodigies, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run
not with them to the same excess of Riot: partly with the eyes of scorn, as on
so many miserable wretches. Indeed God and wicked men agree in this point, that
good men are not worthy to live here. But upon different, yea, contrary
accounts, God esteems them too good to live here, Heb. 11. 38. Of whom the
world was not worthy. Wicked men conceive them too bad to live here, Act. 22.
22. Away with such a fellow from off the earth, for it is not fit that he
should live. Which makes them to behold the perfect and upright, with scorn and
contempt.

However mark the Just, behold the Upright, do it solemnly, do it seriously,
not with a cursory look, fix thy sight, and for some time; let it dwell on so
eminent an Object. Mark the perfect, as a Scholar marks his copy to write
after it. Then will it come to pass with thee as with Moses, Exodus 34. 29. He
so long had seen the back-parts or Suburbs of Gods glory, that the skin of his
face shone, gilded with the reflection thereof. So those who mark the Perfect
and behold the Upright, not only with a forecast, but chiefly with a reflexed
look, cannot but be gainers thereby. For the godly, who, as S. Paul says,
Phil. 2. 15. shine as lights among a crooked and perverse Nation in the world,
will make such as effectually mark them, become like unto them, and shine
accordingly. We see that such who look on Bleer-eyes, have their own sight
infected therewith; and those who diligently mark, and steadfastly fasten the
eyes of their souls, on the perfect and upright man, will in process of time,
partake of their perfection.

Use. 1. It serves to confute such, who, though living long in this world, and
conversing with variety of persons, yet mark and observe nothing at all. If a
privy inspection might be made into the Diaries and Journals of such men's
lives, how would they be found filled with empty ciphers, whose total sum
amounts to just nothing. When Messengers and Trumpeters come into the Castles
and Garrisons of their enemies, commonly they are brought blindfolded, that
they may make no dangerous discoveries to report to their Party at their
return. What out of Policy is done to them, that many out of idleness and
ignorance do to themselves, mask and hood-wink their souls, do take notice of
nothing in their passage through this world.

Others mark but only such things which are not remarkable. Dina marks, but
what? Genesis 34. 1. The fancie-ful fashions of the daughters of Canaan: and we
may generally observe, that all observations follow the humor of the
Observers, so that what vice or virtue in him is predominant, plainly appears
in their discoveries. The Covetous man marks, but whom? those who are rich and
wealthy. The ambitious man, but whom? those that are high and honorable. The
lascivious man marks, but whom? such as are beautiful and wanton: few there be
of David's devout disposition, who mark the Perfect, behold the Upright; for the
end of that man is peace.

2 Use. Let all who desire this peaceable end, labor whilst living to list
themselves in the number of those who are perfect and upright.

King Ahaaz coming to Damascus, was so highly affected with an Idolatrous Altar
which he there beheld, that he needs would have that Original Copyed out, 2
King. 16. 10. And the like made at Jerusalem, according to the fashion of it,
and all the workmanship thereof. Fool, to prefer the pattern of the infernal
pit, before the pattern in the Mount. But this his profane action will afford
us a pious application.

You that have marked the Just and beheld the Upright, ought to be affected
with the piety of his life, cannot but be contented with the peaceableness of
his end. This therefore do; Such who are pleased with the pattern of his
perfection and uprightness, go home, and raise the like fabric, erect the like
structure for all considerable particulars in your own soul.

Vain and wicked was the wish of Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Let me dye the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his. He would commence per saltum,
take the Degree of Happiness, without that of Holiness; like those who will
live Papists, that they may sin the more freely; and dye Protestants, that they
may be saved the more certainly. But know that it is an impossibility to graft
a peaceable death upon any other stock, but that of a pious life.

3. Use. Let it retrenoh our censuring of the final estate of those whom we
know led godly lives, and we see had shameful deaths. Let us expound what seems
doubtful at their death, by what was clear in their life. A true conclusion may
sometimes be inferred from false premises: but from true premises the
conclusion must ever be true. Possibly a good life in the next world, may
follow a bad one in this; namely, where (though late) sincere repentance
interposeth. But most certain and necessary it is* that a good life here must
be crowned with a good condition hereafter. What then though John Baptist lost
his head by Herod's cruelty, he still held his head in the Apostles phrase, Col.
2. 19. By a lively faith continuing his dependence on, and deriving life and
comfort from Jesus Christ, in which respect he may be said to have dyed in
peace.

There is a sharp and bitter passage in Scripture, Luke 9. 23. And yet if the
same be sweetened with a word or two in my Text, it may not only easily be
swallowed, but also will certainly be digested into wholesome nourishment: the
words are these, and let him take up his Cross daily and follow me. His Cross;
some will say, I could comfortably comport my self to carry such a man's Cross,
his is a slight* a light, and easy; mine a high, a huge and heavy Cross. Oh
but children must not be choosers of that rod wherewith they are to be
corrected; that is to be let alone unto the discretion of their father. Men may
fit clothes, but God does fit Crosses for our backs: no Cross will please him
for thee to take up, but thy Cross, only that which his providence has made
thee the proprietarie thereof. Well take it up, on this assurance, that the end
thereof shall be peace.

Take up thy Cross. Is it not enough that I be passive, and patiently carry it
when it is laid upon me? What a Tyranny is this for me to cross my self by
taking up my own cross? But God will have it so, thou must take it up: that is,
First thou must freely confess that nothing has befaln thee by chance or
fortune, but by Gods all-ordering Providence. Secondly, Thou must acknowledge
that all afflictions imposed upon thee* are the just punishment of thy sins
deserved by thee; if inflicted more heavily, seeing all things is mercy which
is on this side of hell fire. This it is to take up thy cross do it willingly,
for it will be peace at the last.

The last is the worst word, Daily. Not that God every day sends us a new
affliction, but he requires that every day we should put on a habit of
patience, to undergo whatsoever cross is laid upon us. This I conceive to be
David's meaning, Psalm. 73. 14. and chastened every morning. Daily, superstitious
Friars never esteem themselves ready till they have put on their Crucifix, and
religious Protestants must never account themselves ready till they have put on
their cross.

The Papists have besprinkled their Calendar with many festivals, having no
foundation in Scripture, or ancient Church History. One day they call the
Exaltation of the Cross, which is May 3. another the Invention of the Cross,
which is September 14. But we must know there is one day of the Cross more, Day
which continues from the beginning to the end of the year, namely, the
Assumption of the Cross; every one must take it up daily, do it, and do it
willingly, for the end thereof will be peace.

And yet there is a fourth thing remaining in the Text, when we have took up
our Cross we must follow Christ it is not enough to take it up, and then stand
still, as if suffering gave us a supersedeas for doing; but God at the same
time will have our hands, back, and feet of our soul exercised; hands to take
up, back to bear our Cross, and feet to follow him; and happy it is for us,
though we cannot go the same pace, if we go the same path with our Savior; for
the end thereof will be peace.

O the amiableness of the word Peace! oh the extensiveness of the word End!
Peace? what can be finer ware? End? what can be larger measure?

The amiableness of Peace, especially to us, who so long have prayed for it,
and paid for it, and sought for it, and fought for it, and yet as yet in
England have not attained it. For the Tragoedy of our war is not ended, but the
scene thereof removed, and the Element only altered from earth unto water.
Surely had we practiced David's precept, Psalm. 34. 14. Eschew evil and do good*
seek peace and ensue it, before this time we had obtained our desire. It is to
be feared we have been too earnest prosecutors of the last, and too slow
performers of the first part of the verse: great have been our desires, but
small our deeds for peace. Had we eschewed evil and done good, God ere this
time, would have crowned our wishes with the fruition of peace.

The Mariners Act. 27. 30. (men skilful to shift for themselves at Sea) had a
private project for their own safety, namely, to quit their crazie ship, (with
the soldiers and passengers therein,) and secretly to convey themselves into
the boat. But their design miscarried being discovered by S. Paul to the
soldiers, who cut the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.

All men ought to have a public spirit for the general good of our Nation, the
success where of we leave to the al-managing providence of the God of heaven
and earth. But I hope it will be no treason against our State, and I am sure it
will be safe for us, who are but private persons to provide for the securing of
our souls, and to build a little Cock-boat, or small Vessel of a quiet
conscience in our own hearts* thereby to escape to the Haven of our own
Happiness? We wish well to the great Ship of our whole Nation, and will never
desert it so, but that our best prayers and desires shall go with it. But
however providence shall dispose thereof we will stick to the petty Pinnace of
Peace in our own consciences. Sure I am, no soldiers shall be able to cut the
Cables, I mean no forcible impression from without, shall disturb or discompose
the peace which is within us.

O the extensiveness of the word End! It is like the widows oil, 2 King. 4. 6.
Which multiplied to fill the number and bigness of all Vessels brought unto it,
so here bring days weeks, months, years, myriads, millions of years end will
fill them all, yet it self is never filled, as being the endless end of
eternity.

We will conclude all with a passage of Columbus, when he first went to make
discovery of the new world. Long time had he sailed and seen nothing but Sea,
insomuch as the men and Mariners with him begun to mutiny resolving to go no
further, but return home again. Here Columbus with good words and fair language
pacified them for the present, persuading them to sail forward for one month
more. That month elapsed, he overintreated them to hold out but 3 weeks longer:
that three weeks expired, he humbly and heartily sued unto them, that for his
sake they would sail on but 3 days more, promising to comply with the
Resolutions of returning, in case that within those 3 days, no encouragement
to their contrary was discovered. Before the ending whereof they descryed fire,
which was to them a demonstration that it was not subjected on water, and w^^
invited them for the finding out of those Islands, whereby others afterward
discovered the whole Continent.

Whilst we live here below in our bodies, and sail toward another world in
our souls and desires, we must expect to meet with much disturbance in our
distempered passions: yea, such as sometimes in the hour of temptation will
amount to a mutiny; and much dishearten us when tossed with the tempest of
afflictions we can make no land, discover no hope of happiness. It must then be
our work to still and calm our passions, persuading them to persevere* and
patiently to proceed though little hope appear for the present. Not tha^ with
Columbus we should indent with our souls to expect any set-time of years,
months or days, (this were unlawful, and with the wicked, Psalm. 78. 41. To
limit the Holy One of Israel) but indefinitely without any notation of time:
Let us till on our souls by degrees, a while, a little while, yet a very little
while to depend on God, and go on in goodness. Then at last a pillar of fire, a
comfortable light of a conscience cleared through the blood an^ merits of
Christ will appear unto us, not only contenting us for the present, but
directing us for the future to that bliss and happiness enjoyed by the Subject
of my Text, Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright; for the end of that man is
Peace. AMEN.

FINIS.
Page 7. l. 4. for (...) r. and prevarication, p. 12. l. 5. for (...), r. (...).


