A Further CONFIRMATION, THAT Mary Gray WAS THE TRUE MOTHER Of the Pretended
PRINCE of Wales.

Together, With an ACCOUNT of the Private Messages and Letters sent by the
French King, King James, the late Queen, and other Persons of Quality, to their
Agents in England.

Published by WILLIAM FULLER, who was Privy to the whole Management.

To which is added, The AUTHOR's Vindication of Himself, from the Malcontents
of this Kingdom.

LONDON. Printed for the AUTHOR, 1696

Advertisement.
THere is lately published, A brief Discovery of the True Mother of the
Pretended Prince of WALES, known by the Name of Mary Gray. By William Fuller,
Gent. Page of Honor to the late Queen.

A Further CONFIRMATION, That MARYGREY was the True Mother of the Pretended
Prince of Wales, etc.
SIR,
COming this Day out of the Country, I found Yours left for me; and ^hink it a
Duty to my Coun^ry, to give you this short An^wer to your several Inquiries,
^iz.

First, You tell me, That you ^dmire, I did not Publish this Narrative sooner:
To which I Answer, That my Misfortunes before the House of Commons, occasioned
by my Engageing for Col. Dalleval, and Mr. Hayes, had not only rendered me
obnoxious; but groaning under the Intolerable burden of my unjust Usage, I was
denied leave to Publish my own Defense, by the Lord N. notwithstanding the
whole Narrative, as is now Published, Entitled, The Discovery of the True
Mother of the Pretended Prince of Wales, wa^ laid before the present King, and
His late Royal Consort of Blessed Memory, in the Year 1690 at the last time of
my coming from France: And it is well known to most Great men, that several
Persons of Quality of Ireland, and many more in England, have been Examined
concerning this matter; whose Depositions agreed with my Narrative; besides
Mrs. Labodies Letters, to her Father, concerning the whole Intriegue, being
taken and remitted to Their Majesty's, did plainly Demonstrate the Management
of this Supposititious Birth: And it is well known, that the Queen Commanded
the Copies of Madam Labodies Letters to be Printed, which the Lord N.
prevented, by pretending they were mislaid.

In your Second Inquiry, you say, You cannot Imagine, that the Late King James'
s Queen, being so discreet a Woman, should trust me, a mere boy, at that time,
with matters that so nearly concerned their Intrest: To which I answer, that
many knows, that I not only went off with the late Queen, at her first going
for France, but I was the first by her sent back into England, after her
Arrival there, with Letters to King James, when he was taken at Feversham: I
overtook his Majesty at Rochester, and delivered the Queens Letters to his own
Hand, and waited on him to London, and back to Rochester again; from whence I
was Dispatched with his Majesty's Letters back to the late Queen in France
again: How much I was favored, and trusted by the late King and Queen at St.
Germains, is generally known to most Intelligible Persons; for whilst I was
there, it was matter of Admiration to most about the Court, that I had such
frequent Admittance to their Majesty's daily in Private,

Thirdly, You say, You admire, that having been under the Censure of the
Honorable House of Commons, and Convicted of a Misdemeanor, I should assume so
much as the least hopes of being Credited: In answer therefore, permit me to
tell you, and all the World, That my Misfortunes before the House of Commons,
was not the Effects of my Informations; for when those were laid before the
House, it was on the same Day that the Lord Preston's and Mr. Crones's
Confessions on Oath, were read, and Corroborated mine; insomuch, that the House
made an humble Address to His Majesty, to advance my Pension; which was
accordingly done: My Misfortunes were occasioned through the Immaturity of my
Judgment, which was too easily Imposed upon by the perfidiousness of my false
Friends, viz. Dalleval and Hayes beforementioned; of which you have a
particular Relation in my Narrative Therefore, I now only touch on this point,
flinging my self entirely on the Justice of any Judicious Member of Parliament,
(for the Confirmation of what I relate,) that was present in the House, when my
Informations, and the others Confessions were read: And furthermore, it is
evident, that the late horrid Conspiracy against His Majesty's Sacred Person,
and the Kingdom in general, is just the same, and managed by the very same
Persons, which I so long since Discovered: Therefore, though Truth be Oppressed,
and suffer for a while, the World (I hope) will not be so Unjust, as to deny me
this Oppertunity of Vindicating my Integrity; which Just Heaven has at Last
afforded me; as I shall shortly undeniably prove to the World: It Is true, I was
convicted, and suffered for a Misdemeanor: But it was only for those Gentlemen,
viz. Dallevall and Hayes not appearing; in which Case I was most Barbarously
used; for there where several Oppertunities of taking them at their Coming to
England afterward; but I was in Prison, and the Lord N. who knew of their
being in Town, instead of Detecting them, allowed them Leave to go beyond Sea;
and afterward, pretended his Hand and Seal was Counterfeited* This is also
known to many, and I hope, will Satisfy any Impartial Judge.

Fourthly, You Charge me with Having published my Narrative purely to get money
for Bread, which you apprehend I want, being lately come out of the
King's Bench: But in that, as in Other matters, you suspect me basely, For, I
Declare to the World (and the Printer, with whom I am concerned, will Depose on
Oath, if required) that I gave him the Copy gratis, and never received, nor am
I to receive one Penny for it tho, I must confess, in the like Case, those that
have less occasion for Money, have sold their Copies: And for your other
Charge, I have been freed from the King's Bench near Twenty Months.

Fifthly, You likewise Charge me, That, when I was in Flanders, I borrowed
money, by pretending to be Son in-Law to his Grace the late Archbishop of
Canterbury: To this I answer, that the latter part is false; Tho* I cannot
deny, that I charged a Bill of fifty Pounds on his Grace; which sum I borrowed
of one Mr. Brand, a Scotchman, at Brussels, which was by the Bishops
Permittance; for the matter I went then about, was only known to the Queen, and
his Grace; who, at my departure from England, told me, I might draw a Bill on
him, in Case my Occasions required it: and the said Bill was paid out of the
Privy Purse. My business was matter of consequence, and required Secrecy; and
therefore, when I met with Impertinent Questions, I was constrained to divert
them by Answers* that might give no Suspicion of the matter I was Engaged in.

Your last Objection against, me, is, The many Pranks, you say I have played in
the World, to get Money, as was Published in a Libel, some Years since: It was
Published at a time, when I could have no Justice otherwise, I had answered it,
and proved it most Scandalous, False, and a mere bundle of Untruths, Composs'd
by the Instigation of the Devil, and the malice of the Jacobites; such as their
pretending to make the World believe, that I passed sometimes for a Lord, and
sometimes for a Knight, and such like most Ridiculous and Unreasonable Stories;
for, where they falsely affirm I did this, as at the Hague, and Brussels, there
were (at the same time when I was there) several Hundreds of English Gentlemen
and others, that knew me, as the Kings Envoy and Resident, with whom I had
business on His Majesty's Account, These Stories (though never so false, and most
unreasonable to be Credited) have been received by many for Truth: I will only
now instance one at present; which is, I am charged in that Libel with
borrowing Two Hundred Pounds of Major General Kirk: And that I was coming from
Holland to England, without paying him, with several other ridiculous
Circumstances: In answer to which, I refer my Reader to Major General Kirk's
Relations, now living, who will Certify them, that he owned before his Death
at Brussels, that I never had any Money of him, nor did I ever so much as ask a
Penny of him: This is known to the Honorable Mr. Polly, who was then going His
Majesty's Envoy to the Duke of Savoy: and was continually with Major General
Kirk, during the short Correspondence we had: But these Falsities I little
regard, being ready to prove them generally false: And though I must confess, the
hard usage I have met with, and my Disappointments, have obliged me to contract
some Debts, even when I was employed in the Nations Service; yet, I don't
question, but the Justice of the Government will afford me wherewithal to
render every one their due; which God knows, is my greatest desire.

If these Answers be not sufficient to solve your Doubts, I am ready and
willing to prove every part of my Narrative, when required:

YOURS, W. Fuller.

I proceed now to give you a short Narrative of my Life; and introduction into
the late King and Queen's Service.

WITH AN ACCOUNT Of the Private Messages and Letters Sent by the French King,
King James, the late Queen, and other Persons of Quality, etc.

I Was born at Milton, near Sittingborne, in Kent, in the Year 1671. My
Father's Name was Robert Fuller, and my Mothers was Catherine Herbert, Daughter
to the Honorable Charles Herbert, Esquire of Montgomery-shire, in Wales: I was
Educated some time at Maidstone and Canterbury, by my Father-in-Law; And was
afterward brought to London to School, at the Charge of one Cornelius Harflet,
Gent. But I was, by the Instigation of one Sir John Burrows, Knight, and a
Zealous Roman Catholic, persuaded to embrace that Faith; and to that purpose
the Knight brought me acquainted with many Priests, particularly one Father
Emanuel, belonging to his Excellency the Spanish Ambassador, and Father Lewis
Sabran, a Jesuit, Chaplain to the Marquess of Powis, under whose Tuition I
continued for the space of one whole year; about the end of which, Father
Sabran had prepared me for making my Confession, which I did; and soon after
Received the Sacrament; but Sabran not thinking it safe to let me continue
amongst Heretics, spoke to the Marchioness of Powis to receive me into her
Family, which her Ladyship did most willingly, she having formerly been well
acquainted with my Mother: I continued some time at the Marquess of Powis's
House, where indeed I was entertained like a Gentleman; and from thence was
Recommended to the Earl of Melfort, where I was Page to the Countess, and
kindly used, during my Continuance there, which was till about the time the
Prince of Orange, (who is now our Gracious King) Landed in England in the year
1688. At that time the Lord Powis, the Earl of Melfort, and others, Recommended
me to the Late Queen, and was one of those which attended her late Majesty to
Callais; where I continued two days with her, and from thence attended her to
Bullion; where her Majesty stayed Eleven days, waiting for the French King's
Coaches and Guards, for to Conduct her to St. Germains: at which time I was
Dispatched with Letters for the late King; and being young, passed freely,
without any Interruption; and coming to England, found the late King at
Rochester, where I delivered my Letters to him, and in a day or two, Returned
for France again; and followed her Majesty to Saint Germains. And four days
after, coming to Saint Germains, the late King Arrived there with three
Gentlemen only, from England; but was received in great Splendour by the French
King: Soon after this I was Commanded by King James to come for England again,
which I accordingly did, and brought with me several Letters from the late King
and Queen, some for the Lord D --, and for the Earl of D --, and several
others; I also brought with me many Letters from the Marquess of Powis, and his
Lady, and from several other Persons of Quality, then at Saint Germains, to
their Friends and Correspondence here in England, And at my Arrival at London,
I sheltered my self by Lodging privately, and in disguise, where no notice was
taken of me by the present Government; and during my Continuance, I seldom
failed to wait daily on the Lords, and others in the Tower; and particularly on
the Earl of P. -- the Earl of S. -- the Earl of Castlemaine, the Lord
Montgomery, the Lord Preston, and the Lord F. Sir John F. -- Sir Robert H. --
and others; from each of which I often received Letters and Papers, which I
carried to Father Emanuel, then in the Spanish Ambassador's Family; which said
Letters the zealous Father sent to France, for the late King and Queen, as
directed, and I very often carried Letters to the said Lords, and others, which
came from France; for being young, the Warders which tended me on the Lords,
never questioned me so much as once, when I went to the late Lord Chancellor
Jefferies, and to Sir Edward Hales, who where kept more strictly; and I often
carried Letters from these Lords to others abroad of the Cabal, as is very well
known, to the Earl of F. the Earl of L. the Earl of A. the late Bishop of Ely
and others: And the May following I was dispatched for France with their
Letters, and an account of what they had been doing, in order to prepare Men
and Horses to meet Dundee in Scotland; as also to give the late King a full
Account of what Men they were assured of for that purpose; with these Accounts
I took my Voyage from Deal in an open Boat, with which I was furnished by one
Bowls, Son to Bowls a Quaker of that place; and the said young Bowls, with
the Master of the Boat, whose Name was Mr. Man, Conveyed me to Callais; from
whence I went Post to Saint Germains, where the late Queen continued, by whom I
was kindly received; and upon my Arrival the late Queen sent an Express
immediately for Ireland, with the late Kings Letters; so I continued there, and
at Paris, until the Queen received the late Kings Answer to the Letters, which
I brought from England: And during my Continuance there, I had the Honor to
attend the French King, with the Lord W -- to give him an account of some
particular Passages in England, for which I received a Bountiful Reward: No
sooner was the Express above mentioned come from Ireland, but I was ordered to
England again with above thirty of the late King and Queens Letters; with
which, by the help of a French Privateer, I arrived safely near Foulston in
Kent, and so came for London, and immediately went to the Lords and Gentlemen
in the Tower, and else where to deliver my Letters and Messages. And afterward
continued about the Town, to serve them as formerly I had done: But it having
pleased the Almighty God to disappoint that Party and to make void their wicked
Counsels and bloody Designs, by the Death of the Viscount Dundee, they
immediately resolved on one Mons. Messuers; which was to address the French
King, to send such a Number of Forces into Scotland, and the North of England,
as might be able, with those they had engaged and provided to join them; and so
to meet and oppose King William and his Army, even amongst whom they promised
themselves many Friends; having made it their business to employ many, to
persuade and engage several in their Majesty's Army and Fleet, to desert them;
or to go over to King James, and the French, when ever they had an opportunity;
and they did solemnly affirm to the French King, that they had provided some
Persons to Assassinate their present Majesty's, and to destroy such Noble Men
and others of their Majesty's King William, and Queen Mary's Friends, as they
thought would most oppose the late King, and the French Interest; In order to
the Accomplishing this their bloody design, many Contributed large sums of
Money, and more Men were continually privately Raised and Listed for King
James; and Horses were bought, and Arms provided, with all things necessary,
and a pretended Declaration of the late Kings was Printed and spread abroad, to
try how the People stood affected: it was composed at Tatnam, and spread abroad
by Mr. Adam Blare, Dr. Gray, and others; but the Summer being spent, and no
Forces from France were Landed, either in Scotland or England, the Lords and
Gentlemen began to be uneasy; so that I was dispatched to France again, amongst
the rest, to carry more Letters for the late King and Queen.

I arrived at Saint Germains again, and delivered my Letters as formerly; but
the Gentlemen in England being zealous for a French Government, furnished the
late Queen, and the French King every day, for a Month together, with Letters
by Expresses from England; by which means I was sent back to England again with
Letters, and the French King's Final Resolution of endeavoring to do all that
in him lay to answer their requests the next Summer following; and at that time
the Jesuits, and Priests of other Orders, contributed great Sums of money, for K
James's use; and for their so doing, he gave them assurances under his Hand and
Broad Seal, dated in Ireland, for several great Estates in England, which were
formerly belonging to their several Orders; which said Estates the Priests were
to Possess at the late King's being Established on his Throne again. Thus was
much Money raised, and the French King at that time caused five thousand Pistols
to be paid to Colonel Parker, who undertook to provide persons to assist him
in the Assassinating his most Sacred Majesty K. William, before he went for
Ireland; the French King having given great Assurances to K. James's friends in
England, both the Papists and pretended Protestants of that party, resolved to
mix their Hands equally in the effusion of their Country Men's Blood; and they
made solemn Covenants amongst themselves to lose their Lives, Estates, Laws and
Liberties, rather than continue under the Present Government; the Priests and
others in England provided for this purpose, did daily by their Instigations,
draw men of desperate fortunes to their party; and for want of Priests, and
other Fellows to engage more Fools to them, they were forced to make use of the
Common Whores of this Town, who added daily also to their number: And it was
affirmed to the late King and Queen, that they were his best Agents in London.

But, to return: I being unwilling thus to see my Country ruined with the
Effusion of so much English Blood, as was most treacherously and barbarously to
be spilt, I resolved to frustrate their Designs to the uttermost of my Power;
and to this end I had long been persuaded by some Gentlemen of note, by whom I
was conducted to the Right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Lord
Sydney; by whom I was kindly received, after they had seen my Letters and
Papers, which I had from the Chief of the late King's Party. In a word, I gave
the King, by those worthy Lords beforementioned, a full and very plain Account
of all the Designs of his Enemies; and soon after, I yet continuing my
Correspondence with the Jacobites as formerly, was desired by them to go for
France again with their Letters; of which I acquainted the King, and was
encouraged by His Majesty to go; and accordingly had a Pass from the Earl of
Shrewsbury privately; and then, in order to my Journey, I received Letters from
the Earl of S --, the Earl of P --, the Earl of L --, the Earl of H --, the
Earl of F --, the Earl of C --, the Lord D --, the Lord M --, the Earl of A --,
the Earl of D --, the Lord P --, the Lord G --, and from several other Lords
and Gentlemen, for the late King and Queen, with a List of the Men that were
listed in England for their Service: All which I showed to the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and the Lord Sydney, before I went for France; and then I set forth
for St. Germain's, to the late Queen: I was as kindly received as formerly, and
continued there near four Months; during which, I gave the Lord Sydney an
account Weekly of what was doing in France and Ireland. And this I did by
directing my Letters to a Gentleman in London, who lived under the notion of a
great and zealous Friend of the late King's, to whom I directed my Letters, by
the late Queen's Permission.

About the beginning of February, Mr. Crone arrived at that place, and being a
Stranger at that Court, was conducted to the Queen by myself; and Crone being
then come from Ireland, came to France through England, from whence he brought
many Letters from Persons of Note, to whom he carried Letters from King James
in Ireland; but the matter then in dispute was to be decided by the French
King; which was the chief occasion of Crone's coming to that Court. The late
Queen ordered me to assist him in getting him good Lodging, and I lodged him
within my own Lodgings, by which means we grew intimately acquainted; and at
this time I was more entrusted by the late Queen than ever, and was often with
her two or three hours together in private about Business; and I often waited
on the French King, and Monsieur Louie, from the late Queen; which, by reason
of my Youth, raised a great Admiration amongst most about the Queen, that so
young a Head should be trusted in matters of so high a concern. I received many
and large Gratifications from both the French-King, and the late Queen; and at
the end of February, 169 0 / 1, upon a Sunday, the Queen ordered me to attend
her, after her Supper, and Mr. Crone was to do the same; which we did, and as
soon as the Company was gone from Court, I was sent for into her Majesty's
Closet, where she told me, I must go with Crone the next Morning for England;
and in order thereunto, the Queen gave me many Letters for her Friends in
England, and other Papers made up in the Pipe of Keys; and many others written
by strange Devises: The Queen gave me Commissions to bring with me Colonels of
Horse, and Foot Regiments, which were all ready, and to be privately raised in
England. Crone was sent for into her Majesty's Closet, and received many Papers
and Letters to bring also; and the Queen gave him a Commission under King
James's Broad Seal, which was to empower some Lords in England to act in all
cases for him, as if he were here present. We continued with the Queen until
Four a Clock in the Morning, receiving her Majesty's Directions how to order
our Affairs, and how to encourage the late King's Friends in England, by giving
them a particular Account of what Ships the French King would have at Sea the
Summer following, and at what time he intended to land his Forces in England;
as also the number of them.

As soon as the Day appeared, we began our Journey to Paris, from whence we
took Post, and came to Calais, where the Governor furnished us with a
Privateer, which landed us in Romney-Marsh, near Lid in Kent; from which place
we began our Journey to London. Crone came by Tenterden, and I by Canterbury,
we appointing a place of meeting, which was at Madam Clifford's, a zealous
Roman Catholic, in Golden Square. I made haste to London; and, at my arrival,
went to wait on the Lord Sydney, and was conducted to the King, and delivered
all the late King and Queen's Letters and Papers to His Majesty, with a full
Account of all his Enemies Designs; which happened accordingly; for, at the
time I then informed King William of the French Fleet's coming on the Coast of
England, and they did come; and the number of their Ships was according to my
Information, and all the rest of their Designs; which, as is known, I
acquainted His Majesty first of, five months before these bloody Designs were
to be accomplished.

But, to return: As soon as I had given the King the afore-mentioned Letters,
Papers, and Informations, Resolutions were taken for the apprehending Crone,
which I managed and accomplished thus: I went to meet Crone at his Lodging, and
finding him in Bed, we most lovingly saluted one-another; I desiring Crone to
meet me that Night, with some Gentlemen, he consented, and the Place appointed
for our meeting was the Bull-head Tavern in Wood-street, at Six a Clock; at
which time I, with Major Kitchill, and Mr. C. Harflet, went to the said Tavern,
where Crone came to us. I had provided a Messenger in the House, with a
Constable, and had the Earl of Shrewsbury's Warrant against Crone; but the
Messenger was not to execute his Office until Crone had discovered his Business
fully to Major Kitchill and Mr. Harflet; which he did, I having told him, That
they were great Friends of King James's, and would disburse Money for his
Service. However, Crone thought himself not safe enough in that House;
therefore we concluded to go to the Ship Tavern in Gracechurch-street, whither
we went in a Coach, I taking an Opportunity to speak to the Messenger to follow
us thither; which was performed; and coming to the Ship-Tavern, I and Crone,
with the other two Gentlemen, went up two pair of Stairs, into a large Room,
where Crone thought himself safe, and then began to discourse freely, and to
drink King James's, and the late Queen's, and Prince of Wales's Health, telling
them all his Business. After two hours, or more, I went down Stairs, under
pretense of some urgent business, and there ordered the Messenger, and
Constable, and others, to follow me up Stairs at a small distance of time; and
One of them was only to enter the Room, under pretense of speaking to Mr.
Harflet, and was to take an Opportunity of seizing Crone; and then the rest
were to enter, pretendingly to seize me also; which was done, and we were put
into Coaches, and carried to Whitehall severally: Crone was that Night kept
under a strict Guard, and the next Day committed to the Tower. But a few days
after this, Crone's Friends fearing him and themselves to be in Danger, hired
one Mr. W --, an Acquaintance of mine, to poison me; which he did; and the
Poison working, put me into a most deplorable Condition; upon which several.
Physicians were sent for, and great Care was taken of me: But notwithstanding I
had such a violent Fever for a whole month, that I was given over for a Dead
Man, my Hair came off, and my Nails turned black, and came off also; and for
Eight Weeks after, I was not able to walk cross the Room; during which time the
Jacobites firmly reported, That I was dead, declaring, That my Death had saved
many of their Friends Lives. But I being recovered, Crone was Tried at the
Old Bailey; and as plainly convicted of High Treason, and was condemned for the
same; but was reprieved from time to time, by Their Majesty's; and at last
making a plain Confession, he had Their Majesty's Pardon. But, during the time
that he lay in Newgate under the Sentence of Death, I, by the King's Command,
went for Ireland, presently after the Fight of the Boyn, and waited first on
the King there at Chapel Lizard, near Dublin; and from thence I waited on His
Majesty to the Siege of Limerick and afterward to Waterford, where His Majesty
embarked for England; after which I waited on the Lord Sydney to Dublin.

But the Jacobites seeing me thus neglected, and fearing that Crone should make
a full Confession, he being still in Newgate, resolved, if possible, to
persuade me to go into France; and to that purpose they procured King James's
Pardon and Letter for me, to assure me, that if I would return to France, I
should be there kindly received, notwithstanding all I had done against them,
and have Five hundred Pounds to carry me over, if I would Sign a Note to that
purpose. This Pardon and Letter was brought to me by a Gentleman, with whom I
was formerly well acquainted; but I did not accept them at first, until I had
informed the King of it: Upon which, I was ordered not to have any more
Converse with them, since it plainly appeared to His Majesty, that their Design
was to get me into France, or to ensnare me here, that my Evidence might be of
no Effect, in case Crone should confess, and be a Witness against such as I and
he had brought Letters to, from the late King, and carried Letters from them to
him.

The Papists finding they could not persuade me to go to France, began a new
Strategem, which was, by sending Dallevall and Hayes; the latter of which was
the Person that brought over the late King's Letters to the Convention at
Westminster.

And thus I have given you a brief Account of the manner of my Introduction
into the Late Queens Service, and how I was employed in their most Secret
Intrigues; only I have, for Brevity sake, omitted troubling my Reader with
every particular Time of my going to France, since the late Happy Revolution,
which was in all Eleven times: Which, I hope, will convince the World (or, at
least, all Rational People) how Capable I was to give Evidence concerning the
Pretended Prince of Wales, and of the other Intrigues against the Interest and
Security of these Kingdoms.

And, to render this matter yet the more Incontestible, I purpose suddenly to
publish the True Copies of the LETTERS sent by the French King, King James, the
Late Queen, and their Ministers of State, to their Adherents in England; being
the Originals that I brought from France; as also the Copies of all I carried
to France, with Mr. Crone's Confession, not hitherto made public.

FINIS.

