A Full Answer to Dr. Tenisons Conferences, concerning the EUCHARIST.
I Could not but wonder, whilst I perused the Drs. Conferences, why he was
pleased to term himself, rather the Publisher, than Author of the Book. Some
assured me the Dr. was too wise, to think his Reader so foolish, as not to
perceive he had borrowed matter from his Brethren, to swell his Pamphlet into
fifteen sheets; and indeed I my self was soon convinced, that if any thing
appeared new, it (page 26.) arose from a certain Air of Novelty, which might be
in the manner of proposing it; but then, why the Dr. should engage himself in a
new Conference, seeing that of Michaelmas proved so unsuccessful; I understood
not. But a friend very lucky in guessing told me, that the Dr. being in the
last meeting, too weak to grapple with Five Jesuits, Armed with Yellow
Peruques, and little Bands, he was resolved to venture the second cast, with N.
alone, a Papist of his own Coining; yet some are of opinion, that the Dr.
turned Dialoger, to show the World he could Complement a Papist, though the loss
of his Fathers Benefice gave him no Heart to use such Ceremonies with a Jesuit:
now whether these Men have hit the Nail on the head, I know not, so that I will
Appeal to the Dr. if he says, no, let him be assured, I shall not call him to
the Bar.

I come to his Conclusions and Proofs. First, then he affirms, (page 5.) that
Transubstantiation absolutely destroys the certainty of our Senses, which is the
Foundation of the strongest proofs of Christianity.

After some Complements with N. he comes to some Postulatas, of which some are
false, others doubtful, and then proceeds to three grand Conclusions as he
terms them: The first is, that if (page 19.) Transubstantiation were one of the
Doctrins of Christianity, Christian Religion would be opposed with greater
strength, than Mr. Huet (or any one else) could bring forth to maintain it; in
effect, did Transubstantiation make a part of Christian Religion, one might
oppose against it, whatever is offered against Transubstantiation, which are
Physical Evidences, whereas the Evidences for Christian Religion are only Moral
ones.

I Confess poor N. is at a Nonplus, and therefore I think my self obliged to
help him. For my part, I am of opinion, the Drs. Argument even in his
principles wounds as deep Christianity, as in ours: I suppose he believes
Abraham saw an Angel, and I am sure the Dr. must grant his Senses were all
deceived, for had any person then present bid him: Ask your Eyes, ask your
Nose, ask your Hands, ask them Ten Thousand times, the same question; they will
ever Answer you, what they have ever Answered those, who have consulted them in
this matter, it is a Man you see: Now I argue thus, if the belief of the Holy
Scriptures (page 19.) be one of the Doctrins of Christianity, Christian
Religion would be opposed with greater strength, than the Dr. (or any one else)
(ibid.) could bring forth to maintain it, because did the belief of Holy
Scriptures make a part of Christian Religion, one might oppose against it,
whatever is offered against the belief of the Holy Scriptures; but more can be
brought against the belief of Holy Scriptures, than the Dr. can bring to
maintain Christianity: Ergo. The Dr. cannot deny the Major without undermining
his own Foundation: I prove therefore the Minor. No Insidel can give assent to
the Scripture, without believing all Abraham's Senses were deceived; this he
cannot do, unless he believes his own may be mistaken; this in the Drs.
Language is impossible: For the Arguments the Dr. can propose to an Insidel to
convince him of the truths of Christianity (page 19.) are only grounded on a
Moral Evidence, which is never half so great as that of Sense: The Evidence
which assures an Insidel Abraham's Senses (and by consequence his own) could not
be deceived, is grounded on Sense, and he is (page 17.) more assured of what he
does not know but by the Revelation of his Senses, than of that which has the
highest degree of Moral Evidence: (page 19.) Therefore if two be more than one
it is clear, that granting the belief of Scripture, to be one of the Christian
Doctrins, Christianity is attacked with greater strength, than the Dr. can
defend it with: Hence it is clear the Dart shot at Papists has rebounded on St.
Martins Church, and hit the Minister. If he please to Answer my Reply, he will
see his first Objection fall to the ground as well as his other two, which
therefore I shall not mention.

The Subject of the second Conference is, that, (pa. 27.) Transubstantiation
discrediting the Testimony of our Senses, does absolutely overthrow the
principal Reasons, which confirm the truth of Christian Religion.

The proposition he proves thus. (pa. 29.) 1. If Transubstantiation takes
place, our Senses are deceived in taking for Bread and Wine, what is not so. 2.
If our Senses may be mistaken in the Eucharist, they may be as well mistaken in
any thing else. 3. If our Senses may be mistaken in the discovery of their
Objects, (be they what they will,) the proofs of Christian Religion are of no
value: I Answer as before. If the deceptio visus of Abraham takes place, his
Senses were deceived in taking for a Man, him who was not so; if his Senses
might be mistaken in the Angel, they might be as well mistaken in every thing
else; if his Senses might be mistaken in the discovery of their Objects (be
they what they will) the proofs of Christianity are of no value, because as I
told you before, an Infidel in the Drs. principles cannot believe Abraham's
Senses were deceived, without granting his own may be mistaken; the Drs.
Argument then proves too much, and therefore, according to good Philosophy,
nothing. The third Conference being but a repetition of the former, I pass it
by; but because the second proposition is the chief ground of the fourth and
fifth Conference (and indeed of all the Book) in which the Dr. pretends to
prove, that Transubstantiation (pa. 60.) opens a gate to skepticism, in its
full perfection, and especially destroys the certainty of demonstration; I will
give it a full Answer, and then shall suppose I have performed my promise: The
proposition runs thus, (pa. 45.) if our Senses deceive us in the report which
they make of the Eucharist, they may as well deceive us in every thing else. By
the Drs. leave he is grossly mistaken in the first Rudiments of Logic, and
therefore I will take the pains to teach him, how he should have framed his
Argument, if he intended to conclude any thing: If our Senses deceive us in the
report, which they make of the Eucharist, they may as well deceive us in every
thing else, in the same circumstances: This without doubt his adversary N.
would have granted, and not thought, he had either banished the proofs of
Christianity out of the World, on brought Skepticism into it: but for a Dr. to
argue from a particular to an universal, is to declare his own ignorance in
Print. We Papists then say; when ever our Senses represent us an Object as
such, unless there intervene a proof more prevalent, we may believe them; as
also whenever our reason sticks to a principle, as true, and is drawn away by
a no more forcible Argument, we ought to conclude, it is so: but because we
have Divine Revelation, which is of a far greater force than either Sense, or
Reason, though my Sense tells me, when I see a Consecrated Host, it is Bread; I
must say, it is the Body of Christ: although my Reason assures me this principle
is evident, that those things which are the same with a mean, are the same with
themselves; I must Answer it is not so, because God has told me there is a
Trinity, which contradicts it. But now I conceive it is my duty to show, that
the Divine Revelation we have for Transubstantiation is more prevalent, than
the Evidence of Sense, which opposes it. Let us come to our Infidel, before I
persuade him to embrace Christianity, we must agree there is one God; that this
God is Infinite in every perfection, therefore that he sees truths which we
cannot understand; otherwise he would not be Infinite in Knowledge; that he can
reveal those truths; otherwise his Power would be limited; that he can oblige
his Creatures to believe them; otherwise his Authority would not be Infinite:
This a Heathen must grant because it is as evident as that there is a God: then
I would ask him, what evidence he required, to rest convinced, that God
revealed him the Mystery of Transubstantiation; he would without doubt require
such a one, as no Man could prudently call in Question, such as is all Moral
Evidence, which added to the forementioned principles, is stronger than that of
our Senses, or Reason, which we know may be deceived: Now that this does not
bring in Skepticism, nor destroy all demonstration, is evident, because I am to
follow the deposition of my Senses, the light of my Reason, where no Divine
Revelation, which is a more prevalent Argument does oppose them: So that in
other cases I am as sure I am not deceived, as that I have no Divine
Revelation; we therefore first prove Divine Revelation, and then the
possibility of the thing revealed, as for example, whatever God reveals is
true; but God has revealed Transubstantiation; Ergo it is true: The Dr. goes on
otherwise, Whatever (says he) is not true, God has not revealed; but the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not true, Ergo God has not revealed it:
according to this method, he must first convince his Infidel Converts of all
the strange truths in the Scripture, for example that the World was Created of
nothing, that God is one in Nature, three in persons; that all the Sodomites
Senses were deceived, when they took the Angels for Young Men, etc. believe me,
the Philosophers would not so easily assent to these truths, nor would they
ever Anathematize their Books upon the Drs. Authority or Reason.

I must desire those who assist at the Drs. Pulpit heats against Popery, and
Transubstantiation, to examine whether his passion against both be not greater
than his Reasons, and whether they may in Conscience tie their belief to the
Authority of a Man, who undermines his own Religion, so Popery may be involved
in the ruin; but God be thanked our Church is too strong to waver at the blasts
which flow from his mouth, and will Triumph, when perchance the Dr. may smart
for having attempted it is destruction.

London: Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.


