A Full NARRATIVE, Or, A DISCOVERY OF THE Priests and Jesuits; Together with
their Intrigues How to subvert Protestant PRINCES, AND To ruin the Protestant
Religion As it is now Established. In which is plainly Demonstrated The Effects
of their Political Operations Upon Us at this day, In respect of Religion and
matters of State: Together with The Necessity of their Banishment.

By a person of Quality.

HAEC TRIA PRO TRINO NVMINE TERRA COLIT printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year 1679.

A full NARRATIVE OR DISCOVERY OF THE PRIESTS and JESUITS.
THe Policy of the Church of Rome consists principally in dividing it self
into diverse and sundry Orders, which are provided to retain all Humors in
Mankind. By this She makes Her Interest strong and powerful, and preserves
Her self from ruin; without which She could not have continued to this Day, or
been able to act any thing to the hurt or detriment of the Reformed Churches.

First, as to the diversity of Orders amongst them; their only Policy to those
who despise the Wealth of the World, and that can content themselves with
Poverty, are the Mendicants; their Prelates abound in Riches; their Hermits and
Capuchins for severity of Life; their Cardinals for Pomp and Glory; their
Jesuits for Learning, and all manner of Sciences; their Popes and Prelates
exercising Sovereignty and Princely Command. They take especial care to engage
and ravish all manner of Humors. On the one side of a Street you shall have a
Nunnery, or Cloister of Virgins; on the other side, a Sty of Courtizans. One
day you shall have them all in Masks, with all manner of Obsceneness and Folly
that can be imagined, or the corrupt nature of man desire; the day following,
they will be all in Processions, whipping themselves until the blood comes. On
one Door you shall have Excommunications, throwing Souls and Bodies to Hell: on
another Door, a Jubilee, or full Discharge of all Villainies, Murders,
Fornications, Drunkenness, Swearing, Forswearing, Poisoning; in a word, all
manner of sin, Leudness, and Impiety. They were led to this Policy by the hand
of Confessions; by that means they come to discern the nature of Mankind in
general. They do not hold it safe to restrain any of these Humors, lest it
should cause Eruptions, and make their Subjects seek some other way for to vent
them in; so that these Orders are as Sinks to receive the Humors. They have not
the sword of the Spirit to destroy Vice, nor the Word of Truth to convince of
evil Doing; therefore they must trust to carnal Policy: For the more growth sin
has among them, the more the Church increases in Riches, for that all
Punishment, upon the matter, and Pardons, are Pecuniary. The ways they have to
ravish all sorts of affections, as is said before, are well-nigh infinite,
there being not any thing either Sacred or Profane, no Virtue or Vice almost,
nothing of how contrary condition soever, which the Church of Rome makes not
in some sort or other to serve Her turn, that each fancy may be satisfied, and
each appetite find what to feed on. Whatsoever their Wealth can sway with its
Lovers, or voluntary Poverty with the despisers of the World; what Honor with
the Ambitious; what obedience with the Humble; what great Employments with
stirring or Martial spirits; as the Orders of Knights, that of Rhodes, St. John
of Jerusalem, those now of Malta, that of the Knights of St. Morris, and St.
Lazare amongst the Savoyards, established by Pope Alexander the fourth, 1644.
the Knights of the Order of the Dog and Gock in France. The first were to wear
a Collar full of Stags heads, with the Image of a Dog to hang thereon, to
signify fidelity; these followed Philip the first, King of France, in his
Wars: Those of the Cock, signified watchfulness, and had a Cock for their
Blazon, for that the Ancients accounted it to be a Bird of Mars. The Order of
the Knights of the Ginit in France: The Order of the Knights of the Leli, in
the Realm of Navar: The Order of Knights of St. Mary in Jerusalem, of St. John
of Accon, and of St. Thomas, of St. Savior, in Arragon; Knights of Mountjoy in
Syria: The Order of Knights of the Glorious Virgin, in Italy: The Order of the
Knights of the Golden fleece, in the Houses of Burgundy and Austria; with above
200 more Orders of Knights, too large here to be mentioned. These Orders are
for their Metall'd and Active spirits. Also, they have their perpetual
provisions for their Heavy and restive Bodies, in their Cells. What content or
pleasure Nature can take in Pass-Times and Jollities; What contrary wise, the
Austere mind in Discipline and Rigor; What Love either Chastity can raise in
the pure, or Voluptuousness in the impure or dissolute: What allurements are in
knowledge, to draw the Contemplative; or in Actions of State, to employ the
Politician: What Miracles, with the Credulous: What Visions, with the
Fantastical: What Ceremonies can do with the Superstitious: What Prayers with
the Devout: What dispensing with breach of all Rules, with Men of Lawless
condition: In sum, whatsoever the Heart of man can desire, he is fitted with,
in the Storehouse of the Church of Romes Politics; for himself to pursue, or
at least to Adore or Reverence in another. This is the main Wheel on which the
Church moves, and keeps fast Members of all sorts; so that, by this means of
providing for the several Humors of the Members, it enjoys the more quiet in
it self, and becomes able to oppose and disturb the Reformed Churches. They
have other strings to their Bow, besides this aforementioned, which is indeed
the chief.

The one is their Miracles.

Another is, their keeping the Laiety in Ignorance.

For their Miracles: the numbers are infinite that they reckon upon, but they
are all of the same stamp and Impression with these, viz. the representation of
the Virgin Mary with the Babe, their Eyes to move at certain times: it is
performed by Engine-work, secretly contrived, to cheat the people into a belief
of their Fopperies: the lifting up the hand of the Image of the Virgin, in
imitation of blessing the People, and the like. Her Image giving Milk on the
Day of the Nativity, conveyed by small Tin-Pipes at a great distance, begot the
admiration in the people, and an Implicit faith of all these wonders. A subtle
Jesuit shall make his abode five or six years, more or less, being blind (at
least seem so to be) by Dying the inner skin of the Eye, by a water distilled
from a certain Herb, not fit to be mentioned here; or seem Lame, or Leprozed;
or otherwise by Guzmans Art of raising an artificial Leprosy, now used among
some Beggars, to move compassion in the Charitable. When he is well known, he
shall come and implore the aid of such a Saint: Immediately he shall be as
whole as a Fish, and his Sight shall be restored; then that Saint is repaired
unto far and near; offerings come plentifully. Thus they contrive to enrich the
Church: and if it chance that any Bath or Spring break forth of the Earth that
passes through any mineral, and is of Physical use (as all such are) it is
Dedicated to one Saint or other; and sometimes waters of no virtue at all
naturally, are cried up to be for such and such uses; as the Well or Water of
St. Winifrid, or the like. People repair to it, to use it: the which, together
with the opinion that they have of it, does effect some kind of cures. It is a
true saying, that the Patients good opinion of the Physician or means, is more
then half the cure. The Politicians of the Church of Rome know the truth of
that saying, therefore they use all means possible to increase the faith of
their Patients or Clyents; which makes their cure more certain and easy. It is
known to Physicians, that several Distempers are cured by the strength of
Imagination, as well as several Natures are subjected to several Distempers by
Imagination. As in time of Pestilence, many that would die of other diseases
than what was prepared by the Humors, or Disorders in nature. The Fear and
Imagination of the party distempered, is as a mould to cast the form of the
thing feared in: though others do die of it, being prepared, as tinder is apt
matter for fire; so they more aptly are subject to the Influences operating at
that time. God makes use of second means, although that of the Plague be an
immediate dispensation from Him, and is as it were a thing distinct from, and
other than, the ordinary workings of Nature.

The Church of Rome are very well acquainted, and do much study Natural Magic,
and are very good Proficients therein, as in many hundred cases they may be
traced in their Legends; as most of all which may be performed by the natural
Magical Art, though they ascribe unto them the honor of Miracles: As for
Example, that of St. Francis his great wonder of kindling a fire with Ice. We
must here let you to know, that it is easy for Artists to make such a
composition, that so soon as one drop of water touches it, it shall become a
violent flame; the which is effected by Antiperistasis; that is to say, the
strengthening and opposing any quality against its contrary, as of cold against
heat. It may be represented in a more familiar Example, as that of the firing
of Corn or Hay-stacks, when stackt too moist or wet; it does not fire, because
of heat and dryth, but it fireth because too moist or cold: which is able to
oppose, though not overcome the other; qualities being stirred, devour the
matter that retained them both. Also the Church of Rome is acquainted with
Sorcery, or Diabolical Magic; the which was practiced by Pope Alexander the
6th. Who, the Papists themselves cannot deny, but that he gave him self to the
Devil; who was not only the wickedest of Men, but also the wickedest of Popes:
He bestowed the Riches of the Church upon his Bastards; he made away the
Brother of Bajazet for a sum of money, though he fled to him for protection; he
used his own Daughter Lucretia, the Wife to three Princes. Innumerable examples
might be given of this nature, too large here to be insisted upon. So much as
to their Miracles, and the means by which they effect them.

Secondly, As to their other part or branch of their Policy, viz. Their
practice to divide the Reformed Churches: they do it by Instruments and
Emissaries of their own, who are sent to divide and infect them with Errors and
Contradictions. They, out of the Seminaries of the Order of Jesu, do send
usually great numbers to all Parts to do this work. This Order was wholly
Religious before Luther's time, they vowed the preaching of the Gospel to
Pagans, and the Instructing Christians in good Letters gratis. When Luther
began to oppose the power of the Church of Rome, they cast off their Religious
Vows, and betook themselves to defend the Supremacy of the Church of Rome to be
above general Councils and Princes, by Principles and Practices of policy, or
rather Devilish circumventing Cunning; for they value not the way or means by
which they attain to the accomplishing of what they undertake. When seeming
Piety shall make way for what they design, they have it at their fingers ends;
when the most impious and wicked act, that ever was on earth done, must
accomplish what they design, they there also are most ready: But they make
choice rather of seeming sanctity, than of wicked Violations; because the
Church has a better salve to cure the wounds made by the former, than it has
for the wounds made by the latter.

The manner of this Political Orders Practice, you shall find in Campanella's
Discourse, (one of that Order) touching the Spanish Monarchy, Chap. 25. He
advises the King of Spain, in the latter End of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
in these words: Now as concerning the weakening of the English, there can no
better way possibly be found out, than by causing division and dissension
amongst them, and by continual keeping up the same; which will quickly furnish
the Spanish Crown, or the Church, with more opportunities and advantages than
the power of great Armies can procure or produce. As for the Religion of that
people, it is that of Calvin, though very much moderated, and not so Rigid and
austere as it is at Geneva; which yet cannot be so easily extinguished or
rooted out there, unless there were some certain Schools set up in Flanders,
with which people the English have great dealing and commerce: by means of
which, there should be scattered abroad the Seeds of Schism and Division in the
natural Sciences; as namely, betwixt the Stoics, Peripateticks, and Telesians,
by which the Error of the Calvinists might be made manifest: For the truth is,
That Sect is diametrically contrary to the Rules of Policy; for they teach,
that Whether a man do well or ill, he does all by divine Impulsion; which Plato
demonstrates against Homer, to be opposite to all sounder Policy, which says,
That every man has free Liberty of Will, either to do well or ill; So that it
is in our power to do and observe whatever is commanded, and from hence we are
to expect our Reward or Punishment; according as I have taught in my Dialogue
touching Policy, where I have discoursed of this Point, though but briefly;
which they, since they have become Heretics, are grown somewhat subtle in; and
yet being of a Nature that is still desirous of Novelties and Change, they are
easily wrought over to any thing.

Here may be discerned what advantage they have over us in respect of Religion;
and the Reader may perceive the Order and Working of these Politicians, who lay
their Designs deep; they study Men, their Minds, Objects, Causes, and their
Effects, and the Effects of Effects, ad infini^^m^ They (and they only) have
lulled this Nation into so many severa^ ^^thargies and Sleeps; wherein, those
of this Persuasion dream they (...) are in the truth, and all others in Errors;
so those of another do the like of the former.

And thus the Jesuit has divided us, by his observing the several Humors of
the English Nation; those that are more Austere, as the Presbyterian; those
that are more pure, as the Independent, or separate Churches; the Anabaptists,
as holy and select, and as persons set apart from the World, by their
Submission to that Ordinance of Baptism at years of Discretion. The Difference
is not much material, yet the Jesuit makes use of these Distinctions, to
carry on his design, by promoting of every one of them, and by keeping them at
an even poyse; and sometimes again subdivide that thereby, whilst he divides
them that are most near to the Truth, he may work the better upon those that
are of a baser Mind and Humor, and that will receive more gross Principles,
more remote from the Truth: And those he practices upon such who have not a
spirit of discerning, but have some Affection to devotion, as on the Seeker and
the Quaker; more looser Principles on the Familists and Ranters; merrier and
pretty conceited Devotions amongst the Rosicrucians, and Psalterists, or
Hallilujaists, or Singers; so of many others: But he sometimes must make use of
Truth, and the ways of Truth, to gain advantages in his Design; as the Devils
in the possessed said, What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth, thou
Son of the most high God? The Devil acknowledged Christ to be Son of God, in
design; for the People seeing him to be acknowledged by the Devils, they drew
this Conclusion, That he did cast out Devils by the Power of Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils: the Devils would never have confessed that he was the Son of
God, but to produce that contrary Effect: so the Jesuit does not promote, or
cast himself under, those Forms that are true, or near the Truth, to any other
end than to produce those contrary Effects before premised, viz. to divide and
subdivide, to render the Churches less formidable or powerful in opposing the
Church of Rome, if not subvert them, and bring them back to the Obedience of
the Church of Rome. That this is certain, and not taken up upon conjecture, is
evident, by the practice of Thomas Ramsy, of the Order of Jesus, who joined
with a gathered Church at Hexam in the North of England, under this pretense,
that he was a Jew, and gave himself his name, Joseph Ben Israel; his particular
Instructions was to insinuate the Doctrine of Free Will, the which he did
accomplish, and carried on with a High hand, until he was discovered, detected,
and cast into Prison: One that got more than ordinary advantages of
Familiarity, obtained of him the Discovery of many secrets in the Policy of the
Jesuits practice, some of which are these; the ways that they practice in their
Seminaries, to bring up youth, and render them fit for the intended Employments
they put them upon, are; They First observe the Genius of the Party; and
observing the peculiar Gifts he is naturally endowed with, they fit him only
for that service: he learneth some Trade (to hide and blind his Order,) which
he practices; by this means he becomes Eminent amongst those of that
persuasion he casts himself into: and, to put him into such a condition, that
he may be freed from the stings of Conscience, they first teach him to swear,
curse, damn, and forswear; and immediately to implore the Throne of Grace, with
all pious Devotion imaginable: By this means they become flexible, and fit for
any design that lies before them to promote; and if Conscience still should
pursue them, their Pardons help at a dead lift.

And this they warrant from that Maxim, That no way is to be refused, whereby
the Felicity and Peace of the Church of Rome is to be promoted and secured; let
it be by any means whatsoever lawful or unlawful. These things considered, How
much does it behoove all that truly fear God, or have any true sincere Religion
in their breast, to detest and decline the thought of condemning this Form, or
that; in regard Religion does not lie in Forms, but in the powerful practice of
all Holiness, and godly Conversation; and therefore consent to some Natural
Harmony, or Form necessary to the Truth, that the union thereof may be such, as
it may be able to make head against the Church of Rome's designs, and the
Projects of the Devil; else we shall continually be divided and subdivided,
till at last we shall neither have form or substance left, and be hurried into
all manner of Confusion. The Truth of which is to be seen at this day amongst
us: How do the giddy and unstable, run out of one thing into another! The Devil
and Jesuit can scarcely invent that which has either seeming Form or Order in
it, fast enough, or so fast, as giddy People, that were never well principel'd
in Religion, are ready to be led away captive by poisonous Notions that are
daily distilled amongst them, to the ruin of their own Souls, and to the
dishonor of God: Who so soon as they are tainted by those delusions,
immediately think themselves illuminated by Divine Light, as we see by sad
Experience at this day amongst us, by people that yield Obedience, and submit
to all manner of Delusions, and conform to them as Impulses from on High; which
is nothing else but the Effects of depraved minds, agitated, illuminated, and
acted by the Evil One.

The Art of the Jesuits is manifest. Another way, which serves them to great
purpose, is, the loosening of people from Principles; and when effected, distill
Notions to pursue after the discovery of new Lights, and instead of meeting
with that which is Light, they close with what suiteth to their corrupt minds
or ends. The Inferior sort of every Persuasion, when the Jesuit has distilled
his poisons amongst them, receive the Notions and Principles as Truth; and many
of them worship under those Forms and Notions, as in Spirit and Truth. The
chief of most of them do join with them, out of corrupt ends, to be Head of the
Factions, to exercise a kind of Domination, which is delightful to Mankind: so
that the Jesuit does no more than first distill a poisonous Notion, and nurse
it, and defend it, till it be indifferent considerable; when accomplished, it
will subsist of it self, and put it self into form and order. Then when he has
done that by Error, if that should grow too fast, he allayeth it by
subdividing of it by some true Notion, or some other erroneous Notion, which
are equally alike to the Jesuit; for that the end of his design is Dividing.
When he has divided and cast a Nation into many and various Forms, he has
accomplished and arrived to his End: then, if he can procure, foment, or stir
up Dissatisfaction and Jealousies betwixt the Interests, there he keeps them
in continual ebbing and flowing; and naturally every Persuasion will incline
some to one Interest of State, some to another: As for Example, the Episcopal
does naturally incline to a Monarchy.

Campanella did give the King of Spain the best advice to practice this kind of
Policy; yea, he commends it before the opposing of England by Arms. The
reason why he chose the Doctrine of Free will to be first set on foot in
England, was, because that Opinion concludes Man to be a free Agent, which
looseneth and freeth the Disciples thereof from more firm and sounder
Principles, and prepares them to seek after new Lights; and when once arrived
to this degree, immediately they turn Enthusiasts, who pretend, or think, that
all they do, is done by the Spirit, and that they are attended by the Spirit of
Revelation. Our Quaker is much pestered with the Malignant Influence of this
Opinion.

The Jesuit, by this means, does not only divide people, as to Religion, and
thereby render them less formidable against the Church of Rome, but also
bringing an evil Report upon the Protestant Religion, disuniteth the affections
of the Professors thereof, and causes Jealousies, Heartburnings, and
Animosities, one against the other; and takes them off from the power of
Religion, to defend Forms and distinctions: and, that which is worst of all,
thereby increases so many dictinct and different Interests of State, as there
are considerable Persuasions in a Commonwealth. When a Persuasion is grown up
to be considerable, it gives occasion for Factions in State; Thereby, some
ambitious men will become the Heads of this or that Faction, and by the Power
of the Faction they Head, become Mighty.

Now, if a State be led by such Principles; What wickedness shall not it be led
into? What Villainies shall not they attempt? What so Sacred that they shall not
Violate? Or, what Interest or Right will not they invade? What shall limit
them, if they find opportunity to attempt the accomplishing or the attaining
to their desire? Miserable is that Nation that is subject to such
Inconveniences; that are poisoned with Opinions: The World is mistaken, when
they apprehend, that the Jesuit works immediately in Councels to produce
Turns and Charges of State; No, but he works by remote Causes, such as are
here before premised; that is to say, by infusing Notions destructive to
public safety, at first into the common people, then it is drunk in by great
Ones, then it Cleaves and Divides a Nation into so many Interests as there
are Persuasions; then he applies matter suitable to the Humor, and most apt to
be received by the several Persuasions which shall work naturally such Effects:
and as it is the Policy of the Church of Rome to preserve it self, by providing
suitable entertainment for each Humor within it self; so, it is to destroy other
Churches, by several Poisons for each Humor.

Therefore it behooveth all Christian States to endeavor to fortify
themselves with Union: When a State has arrived to consistency, its Form and
Order is a bar to the Jesuits Operations. Those States that are divided, have
no means to stay themselves from falling down the precipice of inevitable
Ruin. The Jesuit does not only operate by distilling Notions in Religion,
but also in affairs of State; as for Example, in the Case of our Controversies
between the late King and the Parliament; the Parliament made War with Him,
because that the discontents of the People did bear them up, and enabled them
so to do; the which discontents were heightened by the Jesuit. When the War
Ended, and the King overcome in the Field; it is evident that the Jesuit
stirred up those Sons of Belial to stain their Hands with his Sacred Blood; the
Jesuit also did practice and endeavor to incline the People to a Commonwealth:
but in its Infancy also he endeavored to stifle it, and prevent its arriving
to a consistencie, lest it should be too firm and heavy for him to move. Also
it is his design to endeavor the altering of a Common wealth again into a
Monarchy, and a Monarchy that is erected out of a Commonwealth into an
Oligarchy; not that any one of the forms of Government will be more Subservient
to his design than any other, but that he may always practice Changes: by which
means a Protestant State is exercised with struggling Interests with it self,
so that it shall be less formidable and dangerous to the Catholic States.

That these things are not Conjectures, or taken up by supposition only, or
that these and such other Rules and Practices they follow, is plainly
demonstrable by Adam Contzen the Jesuit, in his Politic, Chap. 16, 17, 18.

Chap. 16. Is to show that Princes must determine of nothing in Religion; as
having power to defend that which the Pope determines of, but no power to
appoint or change any thing themselves, or judge of Controversies. The Church
must judge and the Priest must Execute.

Take notice that one of their Maxims is, that the Magistrate has nothing to
do with matters of Religion. As that Maxim serves their purpose to strengthen
the Power of the Church, and weaken that of the Magistrate in Catholick-States.
So it serves their purpose in Protestant States to weaken the Magistrate, and
lay all in confusion in the Church.

Chap. 17. Is to show, That to preserve Religion, (that is Popery), no other
Religion should be permitted: But it is the Principle of the Church of Rome to
Cry up all Toleration, until they have by their Policy obtained the Power.
and that Riches tend much to strengthen the Clergy, and preserve Religion; and
the poverty of the Protestant Ministers (which must be by all means
endeavored).

As he here prescribes means to enrich the Popish Ministry, he advises the
impoverishing the Protestant, that they may become disabled and discouraged to
study and labor in the Work of the Ministry, as also that by poverty they may
become contemptible: Indeed the Protestant-Minister is an Eyesore to the
Catholic; and those that Cry out against Ministers maintenance, do nothing
else than the work of the Jesuit.

Chap. 18. To bring in Popery, and abolish the Protestants Religion, is, to
make use of the Protestants contentions. How easy is it (says he) in England
to bring the Puritans into Order, if they be forced to approve Bishops? or to
reduce the Puritans in the Low Countries, if the Prince adhere to the
Arminians? For the Variety of Opinions makes that doubtful, that before seemed
certain; so that when the Magistrate joyneth with one side, he easily overturns
the other, and leaves the whole obnoxious: As Paul did by the dissension
between the Pharisees and Saduces; joining to one side, he escaped. This (says
he) I would principally persuade an Orthodox Magistrate to (that is, a Papist.)
For he may have as much advantage to make use of the Protestants disagreements,
as of the Papists Concord, to extirpate Protestants. As in Wars, it is not
only the skill and strength of the General, but often also the Carelessness of
the Enemy, or his Mistake, that gives very great advantges for success. When
rigid Calvinism was assaulted by the Lutherans, in the heat of the Paroxysm, it
was exasperated, and the sudden restraint did much hurt: But now the Arminians
have of their own accord let go the hardest part of their rigor, and judge the
Calvinists to be impious, and persecute them in the very Universities, and in
other Towns they force them to banishment: and would venture to do more and
crueller things, if they were not afraid of the strength of the avderse Party.

That he here says of Contentions, is sufficiently practiced: First, To Create
them; And Secondly, To Foment them. That which Contzen principally takes
notice of, is, That Order in the Puritans or Prosessors of Religion in England,
is easy to be effected: But he advises, that the Magistrate, or Agent for the
Church of Rome do make use of the Protestants differences, and not permit them
to Unite; but rather pursue all Ways and Means of contriving Disunion,
fomenting of Breaches amongst the Professors of Religion of all sorts, and more
especially the Church and State of England, than any other; for that it is the
greatest State or Kingdom that is in Europe, that is freed from the Barbarous
and Intolerable Yoke of the Papal Sovereignty or Supremacy; it is a Place
whence the Church of Rome has been plentifully supplied with vast sums imposed
upon this Kingdom, and obtained from it: It is evident, that what is here
asserted, is no less than Truth; and it behooves all Interests and Persuasions
to reconcil to, conform and unite, and decline being Authors of Discord in the
Church: Certain it is, That that which must be able to stand like a Rock
against the violent and open Force of the Church of Rome, and its private
undermining Policies, must be something else than general Indulgence; He who
has any reason, and has observed any thing of the Practice and Policy of the
Church of Rome, must conclude, that it must be Union under a well-governed
Church, that must be managed by Council that must be careful of making good
their Ground, and be able to detect their Policies and new Contrivances.

I shall add one thing more of Campanella, Chap. 18. Advice to the King of
Spain.

Neither would I have this one thing to be omitted; namely, that He erect
certain Colleges through all the Provinces of his Dominions, in which should
be placed all the most ingenious Boys of the said Provinces; (and who are such,
may easily be known, by their first Masters, that taught them their Grammers,
and other the first Rudiments) and these, being thus culled out of all
Grammer-Schools, I would have to be brought up, and maintained at the Kings
Charge; and there should be a New Order set up of them, like that of St.
Dominick; which Order I would have called, The Austrian Order. And when any of
these were come to be 18 years old, they should then be commanded to Preach:
and these I would have to be called, The Kings Preachers; and they should then
be sent abroad, some into Germany, and others into England: where, if they have
managed their business rightly, and well; at their return they should have
Bishoprics conferred upon them by the King, of those that are in the Kings own
Gift: for, by so doing, he shall render himself secure, both from the Pope, and
also against all perfidious Preachers and Heretics; and by this means such
persons only shall be maintained at His Charge, as do him service for it, and
advance His affairs.

This is an evident Demonstration of the Practices of the Church of Rome; and
it would not be amiss, if that something of the like nature were undertaken for
the Church and State of England. Chelsey-Colledge erected, might be of use, and
become a good Expedient against the underminings of the Church of Rome: the
Hinderers of that Work, were no Friends to the Church of England. How far any
can be deemed a Friend to Church or State that is a Roman Catholic, is a great
Question, for that all Pretenses, Oaths, Abjurations (what not?) in their
Opinion may be absolved by the Pope: If so, what can a Protestant Prince or
State expect from them? they may be Friends to Him in a degree, less or more,
as their Interest shall lead them, and not otherwise.

FINIS.

