THE TESTIMONY OF ABRAHAM FULLER, CONCERNING The Death of his Son JOSEPH.

SHOWING His Blessed Condition in the time of his Sickness, and when he was
near his Departure: How wonderfully the Lord did appear by his Spirit and
Power, Revealing Himself in him (after Death had seized upon him) in a greater
measure then Ever before.

Blessed are the Dead which Die in the Lord, Rev: 14:13 Printed in the Year,
1687

The Testimony of Abraham Fuller, etc.
THis Testimony i^ to relate the dealings of the Lord. ^f his Love and tender
Mercy toward my youngest Son Joseph in the time of his Weakness; and some of
the remarkable Words he uttered a pretty time before, and near, his Death,
whereby it does appear that the Lord had lighted his Candle And now it is
before me, That it may be of service, to make known what the Lord has done for
this young Man's Soul, that so all who hear thereof both Young and Old, may
wait, longing and breathing to feel the Lords appearance in them; for which end
I desire that what is here set forth may be Read in the Meetings of Friends,
called Quakers, throughout all Ireland; and as Friends see meet they may spread
it where it may do service.

DUring the time of about eleven Weeks, while my said Son Joseph was taking
things to Cure him of his Distemper, the pre^ence of the Lord did often refresh
him.

About eighteen days before his Death, I being moved to supplicate the Lord by
his Bedside, the stream of Life did so flow in him, that just after he spoke
several Words tending to praise the Lord for his Merciful Appearance in his
Love unto his Soul.

About three days before his Death, upon a first day at night, I desired
Relations which were in the House to sit down in Joseph's Room to wait upon the
Lord; at which time of waiting (through the Lord's movings) some words were
spoken; after which time, I asked him how he did, and whether it was not
troublesome, or hard to him to have sat so long? His Answer was, I bless the
Lord for this opportunity.

One day before his Death in the Morning. his Brother Isaac's Wife, asked him,
How he did? He said, Sister Jane, I had a wearisome Night; but I have had Joy
in the presence of the Lord.

The next night following, between the second and third hour, his Sister Jane
watching with him, and finding him very weak; Sent one into the next room to
call me up, and while I was putting on my Clothes, he was in great extremity of
pain, Death seizing upon him: And then all of a sudden, the Power o^ the Lord
wrought so in him that the Bed did shake under him, and he said, (as if he
Sung) living Praises to the God of Heaven, and Heavenly Halelujahs to the Lord,
for thus breaking in upon me beyond Expectation; then he said to his Sister
Jane, never since I was born such words came from me, this is of the Lord; He
uttered more words, but she cannot plainly remember them.

When my Clothes were on, I came to his Bedside, not knowing any thing of what
was past just before, and after a while sitting near him, and speaking of the
Lords dealings toward Me in my great Distemper, at that instant, when I
thought I should have dyed, then he told Me, a little while a go, the Power of
the Lord did run through me, from the sole of my Foot to the Crown of my Head:
And further said, as follows, It was as Marrow to my Bones, praised be the
Lord for his Love and Mercy, which endures for ever and evermore. These were
his very Expressions, as near as can be remembered.

Afterward he said, Father, tell all my dear Brothers and Sisters to take
their Minds from the things of the World, and have their Minds fixed upon the
Lord.

His Brother Isaac being come near his Bedside, he turned his Head toward him,
and said, Dear Brother, that hears me there, set not thy Heart upon the things
of this World, but mind the Lord; Isaac's Heart, being tendered, was weeping
and mournign somewhat loud; he said to him, Do not take on too much, but mind
the Lord.

The foregoing Exhortations, Relating to his Brothers and Sisters, he spoke in
a fervent Zeal, as being constrained thereunto by the Power and Love of God in
his Heart.

About the fourth hour, his eldest Sister, and his C^usen Sarah Fuller, coming
to his Bed side, he kissed them a d bid them Farewell.

A little w^ile after he t^^k me by the hand very s^nsibly, and said Farewell,
Farewell.

And a pretty while after, he said to his Sister Jane Dear Sister I love thee
dearly well, I thought to have gone, when I bid you farewell (meaning her and
me) but I shall not go yet: But that little strength the Lord has given me, I
know not how soon he may take it away, and he signified by words that he was
ready.

Some time after he said, Sister Jane, long a dying, because I die upwards: And
at sundry times he signified by looking up and lifting up his hand, that he
felt the presence of the Lord: And once he said, Do not bury me soon: And
desired that Jane and I, should stay by him.

About a quarter of an hour before he drew his last breath, he said, Sister,
see what hour it is, she said it was seven, then he asked her, lies my head
right for dying, if it does not lie right do thee lay it right; She told him,
that it did lie right; And so he laid until he drew his last Breath, about a
quarter p^st seven by the Watch in the morning, the seventeenth of the twelfth
month (called) February, Anno 1686/7 being about 25 years of age.

And now Dear Friends; All you who are Parents of Children, let us Reason a
little; is there not sufficient Cause that we should be freely willing to let
the Lord take (if it be his heavenly will) that Child which he gave us? Can we
beget life, or keep Life by our own Power? Which we know we cannot, ought we
not then to submit, without murmuring, to the Will of that great and mighty
Creator of Heaven and Earth, and all that is therein, who gave us Life, and can
take it away according to his Will? Can we procure spiritual Food to feed the
Soul, or temporal food to feed the body by our own power? We know we cannot,
ought we not then to commit our Children, and our selves also into the hand of
the Lord, who can and does in his tender Love, both feed the Soul and Body?

It is plain to be understood by the words of this dying young man, that the
Lord from Heaven did feed his Soul with heavenly food, the bread of Life; so
that there is no need to send for a mortal Priest to come to those, to whom,
the immortal everlasting heavenly high Priest comes freely to nourish,
strengthen, comfort, and consolate the Soul with his Living Presence, which far
exceeds outward Bread and Wine, which the Earth produces, prepared by Man,
whatever Man may call it, whether the Real Presence, or the Communion; however
it is given and taken outwardly, and is visible to the outward Eye: But the
Presence of the Lord which this young man felt was inward and invisible, and we
need not doubt but what he felt was Real, and that for him the Heavenly Table
was spread, the Bread broken and reached forth to him, and that he did eat
thereof and that the Cup of Blessing (which we bless) was given him, and that
he d^^ Drink thereof, and that it was for this wonderful, invisible hand^ngs
forth that he praised the Lord.

The Psalmist says in Psalm. 104.15 that Wine makes glad the heart of Man, and
that bread strengthens Man's heart: (Mark) when Death had seized upon this
young Man, outward Bread and outward Wine could neither strengthen nor make
glad his Heart; but the Bread which the Lord from Heaven gave him, strengthened
his inward Man; and the Wine of the Kingdom made his Soul to rejoice, and
caused ^im^o sing Praises unto the Lord; And when he related unto me, how
wonderful the Lord had filled him with his Power, he said that it was as Marrow
to his Bones.

By this it does appear that the Lord does reveal himself now a days, as he did
in the days of old, though some through unbelief say, that Revelation is
ceased. But blessed be the Lord, it is otherwise; for Christ said, No Man
knows who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and
he to whom the Son will reveal him, Luk 10.22. And the Apostle Paul says. When
it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his
grace, to reveal his Son in me, etc. Gal 1.15.16. By these sayings, It is plain
to be understood that the Son reveals the Father, and that the Father reveals
the Son; so then if Revelation be ceased, none can know the Father nor the Son;
but we know better things, and so did this young Man, to whom the Lord did
appear, and made himself known, or revealed himself in a greater measure (after
Death had seized upon him) than he did before, beyond expectation breaking in
upon him (so that the Bed did shake under him) by his mighty power which he
felt within him, from the Sole of the Foot to the Crown of the Head, for which
he praised the Lord.

When the Glory of the Lord, filled the House of the Lord, at the Dedication of
the Temple, King Solomon praised the Lord, 1 King, 8.11.23.

When the Apostles waited at Jerusalem, for the promise of the Father; of a
sudden there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, which
filled all the House where they were sitting, and they were filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues of the wonderful works of
God, which was to the praise of the Lord.

(Mark) it is even so now, as it was then, the appearance of the Lord in us
works the same effect in measure. When this young Man was so filled with the
Power of God, there came such words from him (in praising the Lord openly) as
never came from him since he was born, as he told his Sister Jane, and said,
that it was of the Lord: It is to me, as if he would signify that he knew not
how to speak such words, but as the Lord put them into his Mouth.

Let none who reads this, think it strange that the Lord should fill our Bodies
with his Glory! for the Apostle Paul says, that our Bodies are the Temples of
God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16. which Temple ought not to be
defiled, that so we may not be unfit but sit Vessels for the Lords use, that
the Lord may delight to fill us with his glorious power, when he sees meet to
assure us that his Mercy, Love and Kindness, endures for ever to those that
love him, and waits in the Faith for his appearance in them.

Let it be considered by every one, if it be not for want of truly waiting to
receive from the hand of the Lord, that they do not receive, and for want of
waiting for his appearance in them, that he does not appear, and for want of
waiting for the revelation of God, that he does not reveal himself to them, the
door of their Hearts, (through unbelief) being shut, when he knocks they do not
open, but let him stand without. (Mark) when the Lord Jesus Christ did the
outward Miracles in healing of those who had infirmities, and did believe that
he could heal them, according to their Faith and Belief they were healed; and
sometimes he said, Thy Faith has made thee whole, and the infirmity was taken
away; Is not this enough to persuade all who profess Christianity to wait in
the Faith, to receive from the hand and by the power of God, all that they
stand in need of both Spiritual and Temporal, inward and outward in the time of
need, which is not hi^ from him, who sees all, hears all, and knows all, though
never so secret with man.

Now let us take notice what this wonderful appearance of the Power of God in
this dying young man brought forth, about an hour after he had openly sung
Praises to the Lord, he left with me an Exhortation to his Brothers and
Sisters, with such a fervent Zeal, that I am very sensible that he was
constrained thereunto by the power of God; the Lord filling him with an
overflowing stream of L^e and Love toward them, and in that he exhorted his
Brother, (that came to his Bedside) not to set his Heart upon the things of
the World, but to mind the Lord. (Mark) During the time of his Weakness, he did
not the like before, tho the Lords presence did often refresh him: But then,
after the Lord had fitted him for that work, he did it, and his Brother was
tendered, and both his Sister Jane, and my self were refreshed.

That which is ministered by the movings of the Spirit and Power of God, though
it might come from one younger than he, it does tender and refresh, and
therefore it is not to be slighted or undervalued, nor to be spoken against,
but ought to be wished for, that out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings the
Lord may have Praise: of such a Mind was that great Prophet the meek man Moses,
who when one brought word to him that Eldad and Medad did Prophecy in the
Camp, and one would have had him to forbid them; he said, enviest thou for my
sake? would God that all the Lords people were Prophets Numb. 11.29. This was
the free Spirit in Moses; that Spirit will not limit the Ministry of the Gospel
to the ordination of man. but leave that work to the Lords ordaining, as the
Apostle Paul says, the Gospel which was Preached of me, is not after Man, for
I neither received it of Man, neither was I taught it but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.11.12. And such do not Minister for any selfish by end,
nor for hire or reward, but for the Glory of the Lord, to draw Men from the
dark things of the World to God who is Light, which caused the Apostle Paul to
say, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.16. He was a true Minister
of Christ the word of God, and so are all those (according to their measures)
who are constrained to Minister by the Life and Power of God, who works
wonderfully according to his Will; and those who receive this virtue from his
free and liberal hand, they are stirred up by his Spirit and Power to give
freely that which they have freely received.

And now what this dying young Man laid upon me to tell his Brothers and
Sisters, I am not only willing to do that; but also give this forth in Print,
and bestow the same freely to those who are willing to read it, desiring that
all may lay to Heart that exhortation of this dying young man, and according to
his words, to take their minds from the things of the World and have their
minds fixed upon the Lord, that so when they die, they may die in the Lord, and
be blessed.

Though there are but few words in that exhortation, yet it contains so much as
the new Birth, without which (as Christ said unto Nicodemus) a man cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5.

Therefore in true Love, my advice and Counsel is to all Friends, Children, and
those who are newly convinced, and such as have been long convinced, and are
not come so far as to feel and find their hearts, minds, and spirits changed
and renewed by the spirit and power of God, which would cleanse, purify, and
sanctify them throughout body, soul, and spirit.

See that not one of you take up a Rest or Satisfaction in that you are the
Children of the Professors of the Truth, and have been Educated in the way of
Truth, and have all a-long come to Friends Meetings, or in that it is the very
Truth which you do profess; but press forward to run the race of the Righteous,
which is set before you, that you may obtain the Prize of the high calling of
God in Christ: And in the humility of your Hearts, Minds and Spirits wait upon
the Lord, earnestly desiring night and day that he may send into your
Possession the Spirit of Truth, to lead you into all Truth out of untruth, from
under the power of Satan unto the power of God; out of darkness into that
mavelous Light which shines in the dark Heart, that your Candle may be
lighted by the Lord, (according to David's Testimony, who said, thou will Light
my Candle, the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness, Psalm. 18.28.) that so
you may become the Children of Light, Sons and Daughters begotten of God, ( who
is Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1.5.) that you may be Holy
(according to that saying of the Lord, be you Holy for I am Holy, 1 Pet.
1.15.16.) That your Heavenly Father may feed you day by day with Bread from
Heaven to strengthen your inward Man, and give you the Wine of the Kingdom to
make your Souls to rejoice, that you may have full Assurance before you go
hence; that the Lord in his Love and tender Mercy will receive your Souls, when
the Soul returns to God from whom it came, and the Body returns to the Earth
from whence it was taken. So desiring that the Grace of God may abound over all
in you, and bring you into perfect Peace with the Prince of Peace, whose Love
is universal to all the Sons and Daughters of Men, in which Love I remain a
Friend to all Mankind.

The 24th Day of the first Month called March, 1686/7. Abraham Fuller.


