A Full True and Particular ACCOUNT Of the GHOST or Apparition of the late Duke
of Buckingham's Father, which several Times appeared in Armor to one of the
Duke's Servants; and for about half a Year before foretold the DUKE's Death.

man in bed, another man standing nearby

Printed by F. C. in the Old Bailey.

Extract a Monsieur d' Ablancour, le Vie le Grand Due de Buckingham.
THERE were many Stories scattered Abroad at that Time, of several Prophecies
and Predictions concerning the Duke's untimely and violent Death. Amongst the
rest there was one, which was upon a better Foundation of Credit, than usually
such Discourses are founded upon. There was an Officer in the King's Wardrobe
in Windsor-Castle, of a good Reputation for Honesty and Disc^etion, and then
about the Age of Fifty Years or more: This Man had in his Youth been Bred in a
School, in a Parish where Sr. George Villiers the Father of the Duke lived; and
had been much Cherished and Obliged in that Season of his Age by the said Sr.
George whom afterward he never saw. About Six Months before the Miserable End
of the Duke of Buckingham, about Midnight, this Man being in his Bed at Windsor
where his Office was, and in very good Health, there appeared to him on the
side of his Bed, a Man of a Venerable Aspect, who drew the Curtains of his Bed,
and fixing his Eyes upon him, asked him, if he knew him. The poor Man, half
dead with Fear and Apprehension, being asked the second time, whether he
remembered him? And having in that time called to his Memory the Presenc^ of
Sir George Villiers, and the very Clothes he used to wear in which at that time
he seemed to be habited* he ans^er'd him, that he thought him to be that
Person. He replied, he was in the Right, that he was the same, and that he
expected a 'Service from him: w^ic^ was, that he should go from him to his Son
the Duke of Buckingham, and tell him, if he did not somewhat to ingratiate
himself to the People, or, at least to abate the Extreme Malice they had a
against him, he would be suffered to live but a short Time'. After this
Discourse he disappeared; and the poor man, if he had been at all waking, slept
well till morning, when he believed all this to be a dream, and considered it
no otherwise.

The next night, or shortly after, the same Person appeared to him, again in
the same Place, and about the sam^ Tim^ of the N^ght, with an Aspect a little
more severe than before, and asked him, whether he had done as he required him?
And perceiving he had not, gave him very severe Reprehensions; and told him, he
expected more Compliance from him; and that if he did not perform his Commands,
he should enjoy no Peace of Mind, but should be always pursued by him: Upon
which he promised to obey him. But the next Morning wak^ng out of a good Sleep,
though he was exceedingly Perplexed with the Lively Representation of all
particulars to his Memory, he was willing still to perfwade himself that he had
only Dreamed: And considered that he was a Person at such a Distance from the
Duke, that he knew not how to find any Admission to his Presence; much less had
any hope to be believed in what he should say. So with great Trouble and
unquietness, he spent some Time in thinking wh^t he should do; and in the End
resolving to do nothing in the Matter.

The same Person appeared to him the Third Time with a Terrible Countenance and
bitterly reproaching him with not performing what he had promised to do. The
Poor Man took Courage to tell him; That in Truth he had deferred ^^e Execution
of his Commands upon considering how Difficult a Thing it would be for him to
get any access to the Duke, having Acquaintance with no Person about him; and
if he could attain Admission to him, he should never be able to persuade him,
that he was sent in such a manner: But he should at best be thought to be mad,
or set on and employed by his own or the M^^ice of other Men to abuse the Duke,
and so he should sure to be undone. The Person replied is hehad done before,
that he should never find Rest. 'till he should perform what he required and
therefore he were better to dispatch it. That the Access to his Son was known
to be very easy; and that few Men waited long for him; and for the gaining him
Credit, he would tell him Two or Three Particulars, which he charged him never
to mention to any Person living, but to the Duke himself, and he should no
sooner hear them but he would believe all the Rest he should say, and so
repeating his Threats, he left him.

In the morning the poor man more co^firm'd by the last Appearance, made his
Journey to London, where the Court then was. He was very well known to Sr.
Ralph Freeman, one of the Masters of Requests, who had married a lady that was
nearly a lied to the Duke, and was himself well received by him. To him this
man went, and, though he did not acquaint him with all Particulars, he said
enough to him to let him know there was something extraordinary in it, and the
knowledge he had of the Sobriety and Discretion of the man made the more
Impression in him. He desired that by his means he might be brought to the Duke
to such Place and ^n such a manner, as should be thought sit, affirming, that
he had much to say to him, and of such a nature as would require much privacy,
and some time and Patience in the hearing. Sr Ralph promis^ he would first
speak with the Duke of him and then he should understand his Pleasure: and
accordin^ly in the first O^portunity he did inform him of the Reputation and
Honesty of the man, and th^n what he desired, and of all h^ knew or the matter.
The Duke according to his wanted O^enness an^ Condescension told him 'That he
was the next day Early to hunt with the King^ that his Horses should attend Him
at Lambeth Bridge where h^ wou^d Land by five of the Clock in the Morning, and
if the man atten^ed him there at that Hour, he 'would walk and speak with him
as long as should be necess^ry. Sr. Ralph carried the man with him the next
Morning, and presented him to the Duke at hi^ Landing who received him
courtiously; and walk d^ali^e in conference near an Hou^, none but his own
Servan^s being that Hour in that Place and they and Sr Ralph at at such a
Distance that they could not hear a word, though the Duke at some times spoke,
and with great Emotion; which Sr Ralph the more easily observed and perceived
because he kept his eyes allways fixed upon the Duke having procured the
Conference, upon somewhat he knew there was Extraordinary: And the man told him
in his return over the water 'that when he mentioned 'those Particulars, which
were to gain him Credit the Substance where of 'he said he durst not impute to
him, the Duke's Color changed and he swore he could come to that knowledge
only by the Devil: For that those Particulars were known only to himself and to
one Person more, who, 'he was sure would never speak of it.

The Duke pursued his purpose of hunting, but was observed to look all the
morning with great pensiveness, and in deep thoughts, with out any Delight in
the Exercise he was upon: and before the Morning was spent left the field and
alighted at his Mo^hers Lodgings in White Hall, with whom he was shut up for
the space of Two or Three Hours: the noise of their discourse frequently
reaching the cars of those who attented in the next Rooms; And when the Duke
left her his Countenance appeared full of Troubles with a Mixture of Anger. A
Countenance that was never before observed in him, in any Conversation with
her, toward whom he had a profound Reverence, and the Countess herself (for
though she was married to a private Gentleman Sr. Thomas Compton, she had been
created Countess of Buckingham, shortly after her Son First assumed that Title)
was at the Duke's leaving her, found overwhelmed in Tears, and in the highest
Agony imaginable. Whatever there was of all this, it is a notorious Truth, that
when the News of the Duke's Murder (which happened within few months after)
was brought to his Mother, she seemed not in the least Degree surprised but
received it, as if she foreseen it; nor did afterward express such a Degree of
Sorrows, as was Expected from such a Mother, for the Loss of such a Son.

FINIS.
man visited by a ghost?

