A SERMON Preached at St. Clemens Danes, At the FUNERAL OF Mr. George Heycock.

By Thomas Fuller, B. D.

ECCLES. 7.2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the
house of feasting: for that is the end of (...) the living will lay it to heart.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. Anno Dom. 1657.

To the Friends of the party deceased.
IT grieved me when I was to perform the last office to our deceased Friend,
that I had scarce the stump of a voice left me, so that very few did distinctly
hear what I did deliver. This has made me the more willingly condescend to
your desire in Printing this Sermon, that your Eye may peruse what your Ear did
not receive. And as you have honored your dead Friend in attending his Corpse
in so sad and solemn an equipage, so you shall truly honor your selves, in
following his example, and imitating those virtues which were eminent in him.
This is the desire of

Your unfeigned friend, Thomas Fuller

ACTS 13.36. For David after he had served his own generation after the will of
God, fell asleep, etc.
Paul does demonstrate the Resurrection of our blessed Savior by three several
places of Scripture, foretold and now fulfilld. The Law says, in the mouth of
two or three witnesses the truth shall be established. Two may, Three must do
the deed; Two make full measure, Three make measure pressed down and running
over. And such does the Apostle give us in the proof of this point.

Psalm 2.7. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: The second, Isaiah
55.3. I will give you the sure mercies of David: The last, Psalm 16.11. Thou
shall not suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

Acts 2.31. is also alleged, expounded, applied and pressed by Saint Paul to
prove the Resurrection of Christ's body uncorrupted. See here the holy Harmony
betwixt the two Apostles. Though Peter and Paul had a short and sharp contest
at Antioch, Galat. 2.11. where Paul withstood him to his face; yet here their
hearts, and hands, and tongues, meet lovingly together in the improving of the
same portion of Scripture: Both of them show first negatively, how it could not
literally be meant of David, (whose body was corrupted and his Sepulcher
remained amongst them unto that day) and therefore positively must be meant
mystically and prophetically of Christ.

numero rotundo, though currente stilo they commonly be called and counted
three days. These do ponere non causam pro causa; for the time was long enough
in that hot Country, to cause putrefaction, considering that our Saviors body
was much bruised and broken with the whips, nails, and spears, (besides the
effusion of much blood) which would the sooner have invited corruption.

Myrrh and Aloes (about an hundred pound weight) and other precious spices,
wherewith Joseph and Nicodemus, John 19.39. imbalmed it. This also is an
unsound opinion; for all the spices of Arabia cannot secure a corpse from
putrefying, though they may preserve it that such putrefaction shall not be
noysom to others in the ill savor thereof, not keeping it from corrupting, but
from offending.

David as it is in the Text, after he had served his own generation by the will
of God, he fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw corruption.

1. What a generation is. 2. What it is to serve ones generation. 3. How David
served his own generation. 4. How we after his example are to serve ours.


Of these in order, and first we will consider what a generation is.

A Generation is a company of men and women, born, living and dying much about
the same time: I say, much about the same time; for seven years, under or over,
sooner or later, breaks no squares herein, but that the said persons are
reducible to the same generation. Thus, Mat. 1.17. All the Generations from
Abraham to David, are fourteen Generations: and from David* until the carrying
away into Babylon, are fourteen Generations: and from the carrying away into
Babylon unto Christ, are fourteen Generations. Now all generations are not of
equal extent; so admirable the Longevitie of those before the Flood, compared
to our short lives, since God for our sins has contracted the cloth of our
life to three score and ten years, and all is but a course List which is more
then that measure, Psalm 90.10. And if by reason of strength they be fourscore
years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow, for it is soon cut off, and we
fly away.

1. The Generation rising. 2. The Generation shining. 3. The Generation setting.


For should God clear the earth of all men at once, mankind could not be
recruted but by miracle; besides, neither humane Arts nor Sciences; nor could
the Scripture hansomly be handed and delivered from one Generation to another.
God therefore of his goodness does so order it, that rather then any empty
Interval should happen betwixt them, one Generation should fold and lap over
another. These three degrees were most visibly conspicuous in the Levites,
which till five and twenty years of age, were learning Levites, thence till
fifty, acting Levites, (as being then in the strength of their age) employed in
the portage of the Tabernacle, and after fifty, had a Writ of ease from bodily
labor, though they may be presumed to be busied in the teaching of others.

in our generation. And the more eminent the person is in Church and State, the
more are his references multiplied, and the more public and ponderous the
service is which he is to perform. Nor must it be forgotten, that David was a
King, in which respect it was proper for him to rule and command his own
Generation; and yet it is said, he served the same. Princes are not privileged
by their greatness, only to tyranize over others, but are accountable to God,
how well they discharge their duty to all such to whom they are respected.

David served his generation, which he did in an eight-fold capacity. First as
a dutiful son to his Father and Mother. 1 Samuel 22.3. And David went thence to
Mizpeh of Moab, and he said unto the King of Moab, Let my Father and Mother, I
pray thee come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me. And
he brought them before the King of Moab, and they dwelt with him all the while
that David was in the hold. The case was thus, David foresaw that the tempest
of Saul's fury would fall full heavy on his Fathers family; he soresaw also that
though he himself might be always on the wing, hunted from place to place as a
Patridge on the Mountain, yet his aged P^rents could not keep pace with his
sudden, uncertain, unseasonable, late and long removeance, and therefore as a
dutiful son he provided for them a private place of peaceable repose.

Goliath was in the field) victualling them with all necessary provision, on the
same token that he received nothing for his pains save a jeer from Eliab his
eldest brother. 1 Samuel 17.28. Why came thou down hither? and with whom have
thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the
naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down, that thou might see the
battle.

David cannot be charged with want of love amongst his store of wives. Once I
confess he made a tart and sharp return to Michal, 2 Samuel 6.21. mocking him for
dancing before the Ark. But was there not a cause, when through the sides of
David she struck at all true devotion? and smartness on such occasion is zeal,
and no trespass against Marital affection.

in the excess, being over-indulgent to Absalom and Adonjah, whom he never took
to task nor called to account, (1 Kings 1.6.) Why have you done so? (and seeing
he would not use the rod on them, God therefore used them as a rod on him) such
cockering we confess is a catching disease amongst us parents; but to give
David his due, for the main, he behaved himself no doubt as a discreet and
tender Father to his numerous issue.

Jonathan: yea David made a tripartite expression of his affection. 1. He loved
Jonathan in his life, 2. Lamented him at, 3. Showed mercy to him, after his
death, 2 Samuel 9.3. in restoring Mephiboseth to all his lands, and making him
Fellow-Commoner at his own Table; So that we may truly say and justify the
expression, There was two men, Jonathan and David; and it will be made good by
the Rules of Amity, if any question the phrase in the Rule of Grammar.

Saul in the Cave, 1 Samuel 24.5. and his heart smot him for being over-bold with
Gods anointed, though he did but cut off a skirt of his Garment. Again, 1 Samuel
26.12. when he found Saul asleeping, and (if so disposed) might have left him a
sleeping, till the sound of the last Trumpet should summon him to awake. A
surly General walking the Round, and finding one of his Sentinels asleep,
nailed him with his spear to the earth, and excused his act with this jest,
(whether witty or cruel, let others judge) Dormientem inveni, Dormientem
reliqui; Sleeping I found him, and sleeping I left him. David might have done
the like, especially seeing Abisha (not to say Providence) impelled him
thereunto, but would not (as having a principle of piety within him, which
remonstrated against such proceedings.)

Israel, whom he ruled prudently with all his might. I confess his son Absalom
taxed him with neglect of the affairs of State, 2 Samuel 15.3. that no man was
deputed by him to hear the causes and redress the grievances of his oppressed
subjects. But what says our plain proverb, Ill will never speaks well. And
therefore I listen to Absoloms words as to a loud Libell; and we should be no
less injurious to our own judgments then to David's innocence, in giving credit
to a proud ambitious son, against an holy and humble Father.

David served his generation as a gracious Saint; this was the Diamond of the
Ring, and I have kept the best wine for the last, to close and conclude David's
character therewith. He is termed in this Chapter, ver. 22. a man after Gods
own heart, being the best transcript or copy of the best Original.

Objection. But you wittingly, and willingly, and wilfully, will some say, have
suppressed and concealed a necessary truth, because tending to David's
disparagement. Saint Paul says, Titus 3.3. that some men serve diverse lusts
and pleasures, and so did David himself. He did not serve his generation, but
his own wicked wantonness, when he imbroydered his Adultery with Bathsheba with
the Murder of Uriah.

Answer, O not a word, not a syllable, not a letter, not a tittle hereof. God
has forgotten it, why should man remember it? God has cast it behind his
back, why should we cast it in the teeth of David's memory; let us never mention
it to his disgrace, but for our own direction; Partly to teach us not to trust
in our selves, lest we fall into sin; partly to comfort us, that after sin
committed, pardon is obtainable on our unfeigned repentance.



Lot (notwithstanding the soul fact of Incest committed by him) is called a
righteous man, 2 Pet. 2.8. Men opprobriously taint and term people by the
obliquity of one irregular act, which with uncharitable tongues is enough to
eclipse yea extinguish the credit of all other graces in him; but God does
Denominate and Epithet persons from the rectitude of the general habit of
their lives; yea by him such shall be reputed, accepted, received to serve our
generation.

David's Sepulcher; Here lies interred the Corpse of him who when living, was a
dutiful Son, a loving Brother, a kind Husband, a tender Father, a faithful
Friend, a loyal Subjct, a provident Sovereign, a gracious Saint; in a word,
one who served his own Generation after the will of God.

David's deserts. Be it known that besides the serving his own Generation, David
did and does serve all Generations in the world as long as time shall last, as
being the isntrumental Author of the Psalms. Far be it from me to make odious
comparisons betwixt either persons or things that are eminent, or to set
difference betwixt Gods Word (as once the Disciples fell out amongst themselves
which should be the greatest) which is the most heavenly part thereof; but
surely the Psalms are inferior to no part of the Old Testament.

Rabins have a fond conceit, that Manna did relish in the mouths of men as the
Eaters thereof did fancy to themselves, having the Gust of flesh, fish or fowl,
roast, boiled, or baked, as the eater thereof did wish or desire: I call this a
fond conceit, as contrary to an express in Scripture, Exodus 16.31. wherein the
taste thereof is confined to wafers made with honey. But this I will boldly say
and maintain, that the Psalms of David shall relish to an hungry soul, as he
shall (not out of humor and causeless fancy, but) judiciously desire it.
Would thou have it taste bitter? it shall taste bitter and reprove thee;
taste sweet? it shall taste sweet and comfort thee; taste betwixt both,
bitter-sweet? it shall bitter-sweet counsel and advise thee.





Lib. none Ep. 70.
Symmachus says, Author est bonorum sequentium qui bonum relinquit exemplum;
By the same proportion, he that leaves an ill Precedent, is the Father and
Founder of all the evil which may ensue thereupon; like Jeroboam seldom
mentioned in Scripture but with his train sweeping after him, the son of Nebat
which made Israel to sin.

Abel, Heb. 11.4. He being dead yet speaks: so is it sadly true of many who
are dead and rotten, that they still lie, curse, swear, here on earth,
occasioning the same in others by their wicked patterns and practices they have
left behind them.

Objection. But some will plead themselves privileged and exempted from
serving their Generation, because of the badness thereof. David (say they) had
some comforr in, and credit by serving his Generation, having for his
Time-fellows so many Worthies in all professions. Worthy Priests, Abimelech,
Abiathar, Zadock; worthy Captains, Ioab, Abishar, Benaia, the son of Iehejedah;
worthy Statesmen, Husha, Adoniram; worthy Prophets, Nathan, Gad, etc. Whereas
I live in such a Generation, that all the bad Epethite, in the Old and New
Testament may truly be applied thereunto. A stubborn generation, a froward
generation, Psalm 78.8. A rebellious generation, a generation that set not
their heart aright, and whose spirit is not steadfast with God. A generation of
vipers, Mat. 3.7. A faithless generation, Mat. 17.17. Whether you take it in
Divinity for lack of belief toward God, or in Morality for want of truth and
trust toward man; and who can find in his heart to serve so wicked a
generation?

Mary, that so my threescore and ten years, the age of man, might have run
parallel with the prosperous times of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles; and have determined and expired some years before the beginning of our
late civil wars: Had my nativity been fixed in that peaceable position, O then
I would willingly, and readily, and cheerfully, and joyfully, and thankfully
have served my own generation; whereas now I have no list, and less comfort to
do it, being condemned to live in so wicked an age, made up of the dregs of
time, the badness whereof is more dangerous then difficult to describe, and may
with more safety be confessed by the hearers, then expressed by the Preacher in his
place.

Ans. I have three things to return in answer hereunto.

First, grant the Objector speaks very much of truth herein, yet if the times
be so bad as he complains, their badness will serve for a foyl to set off his
goodness, and render it the more conspicuous, making him, Philip. 2.15. to
shine the brighter as a light in the world in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Nation. Alas, thy little Faith would have made no show, had thou
lived in the age of Abraham; thy Patience would have seemed but a dwarf to the
Giant patience of Job, had thou been his contemporary; thy meekness had
appeared as nothing, if measured with the meekness of Moses, had you been
partners in the same generation. Whereas now a little Faith, Patience,
Meekness, and so of other graces, will make a very good presence in the
public, if the Age thou live in be so bad as thou do complain, and others
perchance do believe. Mat. 23.30. If we (say they) had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have been partakers with the blood of the Prophets. Yet
these pretended pitiful persons were indeed more cruel then their Ancestors.
Their Fathers killed the Men, they the Master; their Fathers the Servant they
the Son; their Fathers murdered the Prophets of God, they the God of those
Prophets, so far forth as he was murderable in his humane nature; and it is
vehemently to be suspected, that if thou be bad now, thou would not have
been good, had the time of thy Nativity answered thine own desire. It is a
shrewd presumption, that he who behaved himself as a Woolf in his own
generation, would not have been a Lamb in what Age soever he had lived. Beggars
must be no choosers; thou art not to serve the generation before thee, nor the
generation after thee, nor any other of thy own election, but thy own
generation, wherein Divine Providence has been pleased to place thee: Saint
Paul says, Ephesians 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands.
Some will say, had I such an one to my husband, I could willingly obey him, he
is of so meek, mild and sweet a disposition, but mine is of so morose and
froward a nature, it goes against my nature to be dutiful unto him. However,
though she has not the same comfort, she has the same cause of submission,
obliging in conscience to Gods command; husbands must love their own wives,
wives obey their own husbands; husbands and wives with David, must serve their
own generation.
in perilous times. Amos 5.13. It is an evil time, therefore the wise shall
hold their peace. And I confess that a prudential compliance in Religion in
things indifferent, is justifiable, as also in all civil concernments, wherein
the conscience is not violated: but wherein the will of the times crosses the
will of God, our Indentures are cancelled from serving them, and God only is to
be obeyed.

Romans 12.11. occasioned from the similitude of the words in the original,
(though utterly unlike in our English tongue) some reading it serving the Lord,
others serving the time. I will not dispute which in the Greek is the truer
Copy, but do observe that David's precedent in my Text, is a perfect expedient,
to demonstrate that both Lections may and ought to be reconciled in our
practice: He served his generation, there is serving the times; but what
follows? by the will of God, there is serving the Lord; this by him was, by
us must be performed.

Stephen, Acts 7.2. began his Sermon to the people with these words, Men,
Brethren, and Fathers; which words I thus expound and apply. By Men, he meant
young folk which had attained to the strength and stature of men, and were much
younger then himself. By Brethren, those of his own standing and seniority in
the world (probably forty years old or thereabouts) and therefore he saluted
such with a familiar Appellation as a badge of equality. Thirdly Fathers, being
aged people, more ancient then himself, as appears by his term of respect
addressed to persons distanced above him. This distinction will serve me first
perfectly to comprise, then methodically to distinguish all my Auditors in this
Congregation.

Generation rising, it being bootless for me to address my self to children not
arrived at their understanding, concerning whom I turn my preaching to them
into praying for them, and wish them good success in the name of the Lord.

Filius ante diem, O when will he die and his name perish! rather endeavor to
prolong the days of your Parents by your dutiful deportment unto them, stay
but a while, and they will willingly resign their room unto you, in earnest
whereof those superannated Bazzilbaes do contentedly surrender the lawful
pleasures of this life, 2 Samuel 20.37. to you their Chimchams, their sons and
successors, to be by you with sobriety and moderation peaceably possessed, and
comfortably enjoyed.

leave Gods house as tenantable as we found it, let it not be said, that we
willingly let the fair Fabric of Faith and good Life to run to ruin in our,
so that the next Age may justly sue us for Dilapidations.

Matthew. 26.21. Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me, they
were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord is
it I? yea Judas himself lagging at last with his Is it I Lord! and was returned
with Thou said it.

three within the last six-score years; if God should say unto them, One of you
have betrayed my truth, how would it put them all upon their particular
purgation! Is it I Lord? says the first generation in the reign of King Edward
the sixth; surely they shall be acquitted who in the Marian days sealed the
truth with their blood. Is it I Lord? says the second generation, lasting all
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to the middle of King James. That also will be
cleared as publicly preserving the purity of true Doctrine in the thirty nine
Articles.

Judas, is it I? we shall be returned, thou have said it. Yours is the Age that
has betrayed my Truth to Error, Unity to Faction, Piety to Profaneness; sad,
when such a Fact shall be so clear that it cannot be denied, and yet so foul
that it cannot be defended. However, this my too just fear may consist with
hope of better things of you, and such as accompany salvation.

Crown of your Age, especially if it be found in the way of truth. Give me
leave to tell you belong to that generation which is passed out of this world:
not only the Van or Front, and also the main body and battle of your Army are
marched to their graves (and their souls I hope to heaven) whilst Divine
Providence for reasons best known to himself, has reserved you to bring up (as
I may say) the very rear of the rear of your generation. O do not mistake this
Reprieve for a Pardon; and here give me leave to use a plain but expressive
Similitude.

sky of sparks? of which sparks some instantly expire, others continue a
pretty time and then go out, others last a little longer, whilst one or two
(as having a greater stock of soot to feed them) hold out a good while, but at
last are extinguished. Man is born to labor, as sparks do fly upward, some
presently go out wafted from the womb to the winding sheet; others live to ripe
men, others to be old men; some whose temper and temperance are more signal
then in others, to be countect wondrous old, but all at last die and fall to
the earth.

Revelat. 10.2. of an Angel who had his right foot on the Sea, and his left on
the earth. This may seem a strange stride, save that it abateth the wonder,
because Angels when pleased to assume bodies, may extend themselves to a vast
(though finite) proportion. But you, though meet men, and weak men, must stride
a greater distance; having your left foot already in the Grave, endeavor to
have your right foot in Heaven, and waving all love of this world, set your
minds and meditations alone on God and godliness. In a word, whatever our Age
be, rising, shining or setting, Men, Brethren or Fathers, let us endeavor with
David in my Text, according to the will of God to serve our own Generation.

David serve his Generation. He was a dutiful Son unto his aged Mother, as she
cannot but confess, and will I hope (as occasion is offered) remember and
reward it to his wife and children. A loving Brother, a kind Husband, and I
doubt not but his widow will discharge her mutual affection to him in his
relations.

Bathsheba thus describes a good wife, Proverbs 31.12. She will do her husband
good and not evil all the days of her life. It is not said, all the days of
his life, but of her life. What if he should chance to die, and she to survive
him, yea after to marry again, (as God forbid any should be debarred marrying
in the Lord, especially for their own and childrens advantage) yet still she
would do good unto him all the days of her life. To him, that is to his
memory, mentioning with respect: To him, that is to his children and friends,
careful over the one, and courteous over the other.

volunteer mourners, (an unusual proportion for a person of his quality) who
at their own charge have habited themselves, that the outward sadness of their
clothes might express the inward sorrow of their hearts: He was an excellent
Master, having bred many good workmen in his Vocation, and I hope they will
prove good husbands too. Let me add, he was an excellent subject; for according
to that which his conscience (with many others) conceived to be loyalty: he
lost much of, and hazarded all his estate.

his wit and pleasant expressions: But God now has made him his freeman, and
paid him his wages for so well serving his Generation.

FINIS.

