THE FULL EXAMINATION Of Six suspected Catholic Gentlemen, brought before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, who were Seized for Dispersing the late KING JAMES's
Declaration.
AS ALSO, A Relation of the Death of a Scotch Papist Gentleman, Named CHARLES
STUART, Lord of Castleton, who Murdered himself at Mr. Walter Davis House in
Amen-Corner, the 11th of this Instant June, 1689. who was suspected as a
Confederate with the Six aforesaid Gentlemen, in Dispersing the said
Declaration.
ON Monday being the 10 th Instant, between 11. and 12. at Night were
apprehended Six Gentlemen of good Fashion and Appearance, and of seeming
Quality, who were taken in manner following: These Gentlemen had been persued
by the Constable and Watch, and about the Hour of Eleven at Night were fixed at
the Ship-Tavern over against the Poultry-Compter; and upon enquiry made of the
Master of the House, he first owned them for his Relations and Friends; but
after many frivolous and contradictory Excuses, the Constable and Officers not
satisfied therewith, apprehended them, and found with them about 400 or 500
hundred of the late King James his Declaration, newly Wet from the Press,
covered over with a Purple Cloak; the Cloak as well as Papers were utterly
disowned, and the Persons committed to Jayle, and the next day being Examined
before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, were very obstinate, refusing to own the
Papers, or discover their true Names; for which they were Remanded to Prison,
and with them the Master of the said Tavern as their Confederate.

About Christmas last also, a Scotch Gentleman took a Lodging at Mr. Davis's a
Book-Binder, dwelling as Amen-Corner, near Paternoster Row; his Civil
Deportment and Behavior, gained much upon the Affections of his kind Landlord,
and his great Parts and Ingenuity made his Company very acceptable to all
persons. He was observed to be a very sober and moderate Man, and very
Complaisant to all persons; and in the late King James's time lived in that
Splendour, that he kept two Men to wait on him; but since, being reduced to a
meaner Station, was forced to part with both his Men.

This Gentleman was of a very Great Name, as Charles Stuart, and of some Figure
in the World, as a Lord in his own Country, and also living in some Credit,
was reasonably presumed by all that knew him to have been under some private
Trust in England; and the suddenness of so Fatal an Execution, by all
Conjecture, is imputed only to some Defeat and Unsuccess in the Affairs of his
Party in Scotland. The Protestant Cause, through the Providence of God, has so
succeeded in that Kingdom, as has not a little disheartened the Catholic Agents
of that Nation: And this unhappy Gentleman, being a known Romish Convert of the
last Reign, and undoubtedly rivetted in the Catholic Interest, being indeed
too ingenuous to disown his Persuasion, whatever Concealment he made of his
Affairs; so fatal and sudden a Despair is by all Circumstances, imagined to
flow from no other Cause. Whether the apprehension of the other Six Romish
Agents might occasion any part of so violent a Resolution, as perhaps some ways
concerned with them, is not yet known; or from whatever other defeated purposes
cannot justly be assigned. Only to the matter of his Death, he was so resolved
to dispatch himself, that he committed this Barbarity with his own Sword, and
was so hardy in the performance, that one Wound failing, he gave himself no
less than four or five Stabs to complete his bloody purpose. The Fact being
committed between Seven and Eight in the Morning this Instant 11th of June. His
said several Wounds have been viewed by diverse able Surgeons, and he is at
present left lying on his Face, being the posture in which he was found, till
the Coroners Inquest sits upon him.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for W. Downing. 1689.


