A SERMON OF Reformation.

Preached at the Church of the SAVOY, last Fast day, July 27, 1643.

By Thomas Fuller B. D. and Minister there.

LONDON, Printed in the year of our Lord. 1643.

A SERMON OF REFORMATION.
HEB. 9.10. Until the time of Reformation.

THose who live beyond the Polar circles, are called Periscii, because they
have shadows round Colos. 2.17. A shadow of things to come, but the body is of
Christ.

Yea, in some sense I may safely say, that the very Sanctum and Sanctum
Sanctorum, was still but the outward Atrium, as containing therein such Types,
as related to a higher and holier truth: To instance only in the Holy of
Holies, herein were seven sacred Utensils, all full fraught with Heavenly
Mysteries.

The Arc of the Covenant overlaid round about with gold; whilst Shittim wood
was in the midst thereof, to Typifie Christ's humanity decked and adorned with
his Godhead. Thirdly, the Pot of Manna, looking backwards in memorial of the
miraculous meat of the Israelites in the Wilderness: And forwards to set forth
Angels food in Heaven, which is neither to eat nor to drink, but to do Gods
will, and to see Gods glory. Fourthly, Aarons Rod which budded, and besides the
History contained therein, alluded to Christ's Resurrection, that Branch of
Iesse cut down and cast out amongst the dead: which yet afterward did revive,
flourish, and fructify. Fifthly, The Tables of the Covenant, wherein the
Commandments were written by Gods finger, to intimate, that only an infinite
power can effectually print Gods Laws in our hard and obdurate hearts.
Sixthly, the golden Cherubims overshadowing the Mercy-Seat with their wings,
and looking toward it; to show, that the mystery of Gods mercy is to be
covered from the curiosity of profane eyes, whilst the pious may with comfort
behold it. Seventhly, and lastly, the Mercy-Seat it self; the Emblem of that
Mercy-Seat in Heaven, to which poor penitents being cast at the Bar of Gods
justice have a free and open appeal.

Paul ( Gal. 4.9.) calls all legal ceremonies beggarly Elements, in
comparison of Christ the Truth, in whom these did determine and expire: As the
rude lines of Black-Lead wherewith the Picture is first drawn, vanish away when
the curious Limner lays on the lively colors; so that all these outward
Ordinances had an end at the coming of Christ, being only to last, Until the
time of Reformation.

The Text is so short, it needs not to be divided, only the A Through
Rectifying. However, sometimes the word Reformation is not opposed to things
bad in their own nature, but to things that are less perfect, and may be more
perfected, as in the Text. For the Ceremonial law of the Jews was complete in
its kind, as given of God, and every thing made by Him, must be like Him that
made it very good. Yet comparatively that law was imperfect, and needed a
Reformation, which was performed at Christ's coming. Besides, though the
Ceremonial Law was good in it self, yet it was bad as it was abused by the
ignorant Jews. For though the knowing Patriarks looked through, and beyond the
Types to the Messiah himself: yet the dull People mistaking the Shell for the
Kernel, and the Casket for the Jewel; lodged their souls where they should
only have bayted, and did dote on the shadows as on the substance it self; in
which respect the Peoples judgments, as well as those Ceremonies, needed a
Reformation.

The maine point we shall insist on, is this; That Christians which will
appear in several particulars: For besides Ceremonies removed according to
the principal intent of the Text; Manners are now reformed and Doctrine
refined: Poligamy connived at in the Patriarks, now generally condemned, the
Bill of Divorce cancelled by Christianity, which was permitted to the Jews,
not because that was good, but because they were bad, and by this Tolleration
were kept from being worse. The second Table abused by the restrictive Comments
of the Pharisees, confining those Laws (which were made to confine them) only
to the outward Act, are now according to our Savior interpretation extended to
their true demention. The mystery of the Trinity clouded in the old Testament,
is cleared in the New. The Doctrine of Gods righteousness by faith, of the
merit of Christ, of the spirit of Adoption, of the Resurrection of the Body,
darkly delivered under the Law are manifested in the Gospel, with many other
heavenly Revelations.

Use.
Our Twilight is cleerer then the Jewish Noonday: The men of China use to
brag, that they (because of their ingenious civility) have two Eyes, the
Europaeans one, and that all the World besides are stark blind; more truly
it may be said that the Christans had two Eyes, the Law and Gospel; the Jews
but one, the Law alone, and all people and Pagans besides sit in darkness and
the shadow of death. The Jews indeed saw Christ presented in a land-scept, and
beheld him through the Perspective of faith, seeing the promises a far off.
But at this day a Dwarfe-Christian is an overmatch for a giant Jew in
knowledge, as appears by our Saviors Riddle, Mat. 11.11. Among them that are
borne of women there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist:
Notwithstanding he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater then he.

John Baptist was the greatest amongst the Children of Women, because other
Prophets foresaw Christ, He saw him; others spoke of Christ, He spoke to him,
and had the high honor to baptize him with water, by whose spirit he himself
was baptized: Yet was he the least in the Kingdom of Heaven (which properly
began after Cerists Ascension) because though perchance acquainted with the
generals thereof, the particulars of the time, place, means and manner, were
as much concealed from him, as clearly revealed unto us. He never knew that
Judas should betray Christ; Caiphas accuse him, Peter deny him, Pilate condeme
him, Soldiers crucify him, Nicodemus embalme him, Joseph bury him. These, and
many more Circumstances of our Saviors passion, Resurrection and Ascension,
now Histories to our Children, were Mysteries to John Baptist; who, though
Christ's Harbinger to prepare his way, yet did not live to see his Master to
possess what he had provided for him: Wherefore if Alexander the Emperor did
count himself much indebted to the Gods, that he was borne a Grecian, and not
a Barbarian, how thankful ought we to be to God, who gave us to be borne
neither Jews, nor Pagans, but Christians, since the time of Reformation.

But this indeed were true, if all things in the Church continued at this time
in the same condition of Primative Object.
whereto Christ Reformed it. But long since, That falling away, foretold by the
Apostle, is come to pass, and that man of sin has played his part in the
Church, therein deforming Manners with Vice, Doctrine with Heresy, Discipline
with Superstition. As for any Reformation which since has happened in England,
it has been but partial and imperfect. King Henry the eight brake the Popes
neck, but bruised not the least finger of Popery; rejecting his Supremacy, but
retaining his superstition in the six Articles. The Reformation under Edward
the sixth, was like the Reformer, little better then a child, and he must
needs be a weak Defender of the Faith, who needed a Lord Protector for
himself: As Nurses to woe their Children to part from knives, do suffer them
to play with Rattles; so the State then permitted the People (infants in Piety)
to please themselves with some frivious points of Popery, on condition they
would forsake the dangerous opinions thereof. As for Queen Elizabeth, her
Character is given in that plain, but true expression, that she swept the
Church of England and left all the dust behind the door. Her Successors have
gone in the same path, and the same pace with little alteration, and less
Addition in matters of Moment, save that besides some old errors unamended;
many Innovations have broken in upon us, which might be instanced in, were it
as safe as it is easy to reckon them up. We therefore desire and expect a
Through Reformation, to see Christ mounted on his Throne, with his Scepter in
his hand, in the Purity of his Ordinances, and we shall grieve and groan
until such a Reformation.

Answ.
Some things therein are freely to be granted, and others flatly to be denied,
and others warily to be qualified. We freely confess the Deformation by
Popery, as also, that the Reforming was by Henry the eight and Edward the sixth
(good Prince, of whom I had said, that he dyed too soon, but because he dyed
when God would have him) were but partial and imperfect. Withal, we flatly
deny that Queen Elizabeth left the dust behind the Door, which she cast out
on the Dunghill; whence this uncivil expression was raked up. The Doctrine by
her established, and by her Successors maintained in the 39. Articles, if
declared, explained and asserted from false Glosses, have all gold, no dust or
dross in them.

in the Church then of the Church, as not chargeable on the Public Account,
but on private men's scores, who are old enough, let them answer for themselves.
Religion in England, is like the Clothes of the Isralites, Deuteronomie 29.5.
which for many years together waxed not old. Alas, in some places it is
threadbare, may it have a new nappe; in more it is spotted, may it be well
scowred; and in all places rent asunder, may it be well mended.

A Through Reformation, we, and all good men do Through Reformation, we mean
such a one, whereof we are capable, pro statu viatorum, made with all due and
Christian moderation: That Arrow is well drawn, that is drawn to the head,
but it may over-drawne clean through the Bow, and so do no good. There is in
like manner a possibility of out-doing, even in the point of Reforming: And
therefore how a true Through Reformation may be made, and managed long to
continue, by Gods assistance and your patience; I will take in hand to give the
true Characters of such who are to be true and proper Reformers.

First, they must have a lawful calling thereunto: Luke 12.14. Who made me a
Judge or Devider over you. Some good duties lie in common to all good men.
Whosoever is called a Christian has a just calling to perform them: It Is so
far from being a sin for any to do them, that it is a sin for any to
leave them undone. But there be other duties, which God has impaled in, for
some particular persons, so that it is a Riot or Trespass at least for any
other to force their Entrance into them: Amongst these Actions, Reformation of
Churches is a chief, as of highest Honor, and greatest concernment.

Judah in their Kingdom. Two sorts of Idolatry, the Jews therein were guilty
of: The one Gross, the other Refined. Gross Idolatry against the first
Commandment, in worshipping a false God, as Baal, and the like. Refined
Idolatry, against the second Commandment, in worshipping the true God after
false and forbidden manner, 2. Chronicles 33.17. Nevertheless the people did
sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the Lord their God only. Gross
Idolatry found many Reformers, Asa, Ioash, Amaziah, Vzziah, Iotham, Manasseh,
whilst only two Iehosaphat and Hezekiah, endeavored the Reforming of Refined
Idolatry, and Josiah alone perfected it. In both we may observe, that the Kings
were praised for doing so much, or dispraised for doing no more, which plainly
proves, that the Reforming of the Church did properly pertain unto them. God
neither mistakes, nor confounds the good Deeds, or Rewards of men; but set the
due praises on the true persons; the person that does well shall be praised:
the Prince shall not be commended for the good Deeds of the people, not the
people commended for the good Deeds of the Prince; indeed Gods threatens the
common people of Israel, Leviticus 26.23. with Beasts, Wars, and many other
Plagues, if they will not be reformed. But we never read that God reproved the
people, for not Reforming the Jewish Church from Idolatry, as a Task belonging
to the Supreme power placed over them.

Mean time mere private men must not be idle, but they are seriously to
reform themselves: He needs not to complain of too little work, who has a
little world in himself to amend: A good man in Scripture is never called Gods
Church (because that is a collective term belonging to many) but is often
termed Gods Temple, such a Temple it is lawful for every private man to
Reform: He must see that the foundation of faith be firm, the Pillars of
Patience be strong, the windows of Knowledge be clear, the roof of
Perseverance be perfected. Thirdly, he may Reform the Church in his house,
Philemon 2, carefully looking to his own Family, Joshua 24.15. that he and his
house may serve the Lord. But as for the public Reforming of the Church in
general, he must let it alone as belonging to the Supreme power, to whom it is
appropriated.

But seeing we have occasion to speak of lawful Callings, Object.
what Calling (may some say) have you to meddle

I am, or should be, most sensible of mine own weakness, being (...), Answ.
the least of those that dispense the Word and Sacraments. Yet have I a calling
as good as the England could give me: And if she be not ashamed of such a
Son, I count my self honored with such a Mother. And though mere private
Christians may not intermeddle with public Reforming of a Church, Gods
Prophets have in all Ages, challenged the privilege to tell necessary Truths
unto the greatest. The Tongue used to be cut out of the Roman Sacrifices, and
given unto their Heralds, to show that freedom of language was allowed them.
We are Christ's Ambassadors, 2 Corinthians 5.20. and claim the leave to speak
Truth with soberness: And though I cannot expect my words should be like
Nails fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies, Eccl. 12.11. Yet I hope they
may prove as Tacks, entered by him that desires to be faithful and peaceable in
Israel.

Snuffers in the Tabernacle were made of pure Gold, Exodus 37.23. They ought to
be good themselves, who are to amend others, least that reproof fall heavy on
them, Psalm 50.16. But unto the ungodly (says God) Why do thou preach my
laws, and take my Covenant in thy mouth? whereas thou hate to be
Reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. And though sometimes bad men may
Reform others, by virtue of their Office: Yet when it is done by the Office of
their Virtue, and efficacy of their goodness, it is more graceful in it
self, more acceptable to God, and more comfortable to the Doer.

Camdens Eliz. p. 367.
Dangerous was the mistake committed by Sir Francis Drake in Eighty Eight; when
neglecting to carry the Lantern, (as he was commanded) in the dark night,
chased five Hulkes of the Dutch Merchants, supposing them to have been his
Enemies of the Spaniards. Such and worse Errors may be committed in the
Reforming of a Church, good mistaken for bad, and bad mistaken for good, where
the light of knowledge is wanting for direction.

are to break through the front of bad customs long received. Such Customs,
as they are bad, are Usurpers, as they are Customs are Tyrants, and will
stickle stoutly to stand in their old place. Saint Matthew says, 27.15. At the
feast the Governor was wont to release unto the people a Prisoner. Saint Luke
says, 23.17. Of necessity he must release one unto them at the Feast. What was
but a Courtesy at the first, grew in process of time to be a custom, and at
last became a necessity. Such customs made necessary by continuance must
Reformers expect to encounter, and resolve to remove. O, Coward-lines in a
Magistrate is a great sin! Who would think to find the fearful marching in
the forefront? and yet in that forlorn hope which goes to Hell, Revelations
21.8. see them first named, but the fearful, the unbeleeving and abominable,
etc. so necessary is Christian courage, especially in a Reformer.

Fifthly and lastly, they must be endued with Christian discretion, a grace
that none ever speak against, but A good man will guide his affairs with
discretion, Psalm 112.5. I must confess there is a discretion (falsely so
called) both carnal in it self, and inconsistent with true Zeal, yea,
distructive of it. Christ had two Disciples of the same name, the one a true
man, the other a Traitor, both Iudasses. Wherefore to prevent mistakes, the
former is never cited in Scriptures, but with an addition, Judas says unto
him, not Iscariot, Lord, etc. John 14.22. Judas the servant of JESUS CHRIST,
and Brother of James, Jude 1. In like manner we, here mentioning Discretion,
call it Christian Discretion, for difference thereof, that all may know, we
mean not that which destroys Zeal, but that which directs it; not that which
quenches Zeal, but which keeps it in the Chimney, the proper place thereof;
not that which makes it less lively, but what makes it more lasting. This
Discretion, though last named, is not least needful in the Reformers of a
Church; and must principally appear in two things; First, the not sparing of
the Tares for the Wheats sake. Secondly, the not spoiling the Wheat for the
Tares sake.

Luke 13.17. was condemned, not for bearing deadly or dangerous fruit, but none
at all. Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? Gods Garden ought to be so
well dressed, as to have nothing superfluous, that does harm that does no good
therein. He that will not work, neither shall he eat, 2 Thessalonians 3.10.
If such Ceremonies are to be found in our Church, which will not labor,
neither needful in themselves, nor conducing to decency, let them no longer
have countenance in the Church, nor maintenance from it.

Luke 15.8. Instead of Everrit domum, she swept the house, It Is rendered,
Evertit domum, She overturnd the house. Such sweeping we must expect from such
Spirits, which under pretense to cleanse our Church, would destroy it. The best
is, they are so far from sitting at the Helm, that I hope they shall ever be
kept under Hatches.

Reformation, so also it appears in the manner thereof. First, it is to be
done with all reverence and respect to the ancient Fathers. These, though they
lived near the Fountain of Religion, yet lived in the Marches of Paganism; as
also in the time wherein the Mystery of iniquity began to work, which we hope
is now ready to receive the wages. If therefore there be found in their
practice any Ceremonies smacking of Paganism or Popery, and if the same can be
justly challenged to continue in our Church, I plead not for their longer life,

Secondly, with honorable reservation to the memories of our first Reformers.
Reverend Cranmer, Learned Ridley, Down right Lattimer, Zealous Bradford, Pious
Philpot, patient Hooper, men that had their failings, but worthy in their
Generations; These bare the heat of the day, indeed, which were burnt to ashes;
and though we may write a fairer hand then they, yet they affixed a firmer
Seal, that dyed for their Doctrine.

Lastly, with carfulness, not to give any just offense to the Papists. Say
not, we need not to fear to offend them, who would confound us. We have so
long waited for their conversion, we have almost seen our subversion. Indeed
we are forbidden to offend Gods little ones, but not inhibited to offend the
Devils great ones. And though S. Paul bids us to give no offense to those that
are without, that is meant of pure Pagans; and therefore the Papists being
neither well within nor well without, fall not under that precept. For all
these Expressions savor more of Humor then Holiness, of Stomach, then the
Spirit. Though Papists forget their duty to us, let us remember our duty to
them; to them, not as Papists, but as professors of Christianity, to their
persons, not erroneous opinions, not giving them any just offense. But if they
will be offended without cause, be their amends in their own hands. If Rebeckah
will come to Isaac, she shall be welcome. But in no case shall Isaac go back
to Rebeckah, Genesis 34.6. Beware that thou bring not my son thither again.

Mary, in the University of Cambridge, by the Delegates of Cardinal Poole.
Where nothing of worth was done, but many foolish ceremonies enforced, and the
Bones of Bucer and Phagius burnt. It passes for the expression of mad man, to
beat the air; and it is little better to beat the earth. To fight (as they
did) against dust and ashes, bodies of men long before buried: except they
thought by this similitude of burning dead bodies, to work in silly people a
belief of Purgatory fire, tormenting souls deceased. Now when it came into
question whether the Ordinances and Decisions of those Reformers should be
engrossed in Parchment, or in paper, Fox. Acts Monum. page 1064
Doctor Swinborne, Master of Clare Hall gave his opinion, that paper would do
the deed well enough, as being likely to last longer then those decrees should
stand in force; as afterward it came to pass, they being all rescinded in the
next year, being the first of Queen Elizabeth.

Paul outstript all men in the World. The Papists brag much of King Edgar,
who is said to have founded as many Monasteries, as there be weeks in the
year. Surely more Churches in Asia and Europe were built from the ground by
Saint Paul, who strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest
he should build upon another man's foundation, Romans 15.20. But reforming of
Churches is an easier work, as not giving a Church the life but the luster; not
the birth but the beauty; either repairing what is defective, or removing what
is redundant. Thus we acknowledge Solomon the sole founder of the Temple,
though Ioash repaired it, amending the breaches thereof. Iotham enlarged it,
adding the beautiful porch thereto; and Ezechiah adorned it, covering the
pillars with silver therein.

However, it is worth our observing, that Reformers Nebuchadnezzar boasted,
Daniel 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the
Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? Whereas
Babylon was built by Nimrod, or (as others say) Semyramis, many years before
Nebuchadnezzars cradle was made. Yet he, no doubt, did increase, strengthen,
and beautify it; on which title, see how he engrosseth all the glory unto
himself, as first, and sole founder! Is not this great Babylon that I have
built?

Let none in like manner brag, that they are now the England, built long since
therein, time out of mind. We deny and defile such Papists as say that
Augustine the Monk was the first Apostle of this Island, where the Gospel long
before had been preached, though not to the Saxons our Ancestors, yet to the
Britans our Predecessors. Yea, having cause to search who first brought
Christianity over into Britanny, my endeavors have been still at a loss and
left at uncertainty. Perchance as God, Deuteronomie 34.6. buried the body of
Moses, That no man knows the place of his Sepulcher unto this day, to cut off
from the Jews all occasion of Idolatry; So it seems his wisdom has suffered
the names of the first founders of Religion Here to be covered in obscurity, to
prevent posterity from being superstitious to their Memories. However, if
justly we be angry with the Papists for making the British Church (a tall
stripling grown,) to wear swaddling clothes again: more cause have we to
distaffe the pens and preachings of such who make their addresses unto us, as
unto pure Pagans where the word is newly to be planted. A In a book of
directions to travel.
Modern Author tells us a strange story, how the servants of Duke D. Alva,
seeking for a Hawke they had lost, found a new country in the Navell of Spain,
not known before, environed with Mountains, and peopled with naked Salvages; I
should wonder if such a Terra incognita could be found in England; which (what
betwixt the covetousness of Landlords and the carfulness of Tenants) is
almost measured to an Acre. But if such a place were discovered, I must allow
that the Preachers there were the first planters of the Gospel, which in all
others places of the kingdom are but the Continuers thereof. I hope Christ has
reaped much goodness long ago, where these, now, new pretend to plant it. And
if England has not had a true Church hitherto, I fear it will not have a true
Church hereafter.

Zenophons Cyrus be King in Plato's Commonwealth; and Batchelors wives breed
maids children in Mores Vtopia, whilst Roses grow in their Gardens without
prickles, as Saint Basil held they did before the fall of Adam. These phansies
are pleasing and plausible, but the performance thereof unfeisable; and so is
the perfect reformation of a Church in this world difficult to be described,
and impossible to be practiced. For besides that Satan will do his best, or
rather his worst to undo it; Man in this life is not capable of such
perfection. Look not to find that in man out of Paradise, which was not found
in man in Paradise, continuance in an holy estate. Martin Luther was wont to
say, he never knew good order in the Church last above fifteen years, in the
purity thereof; yea, the more perfect the Reformation is, the less time it is
likely to last. Man's mind being in constant motion, when it cannot ascend
higher, will not stand still, but it must decline. I speak not this to
dis-hearten men from endeavoring a perfect Reformation, but to keep them from
being dis-heartned, when they see the same cannot be exactly observed.

And yet there are some now adays that talk of a great light, manifested in
this age more then ever before. Indeed we Modernes have a mighty advantage of
the Ancients, whatsoever was theirs, by Industry, may be ours. The Christian
Philosophy of Justin Martyr; the constant Sanctity of Cyprian; the Catholic
faith of Athanasius; the Orthodox judgment of Nazianzen; the manifold Learning
of Jerome; the solid Comments of Chrysostom; the subtle Controversies of
Augustine; the excellent Morals of Gregory; the humble Devotions of Bernard:
All contribute themselves to the edification of us, who live in this later Age.
But as for any transcendent extraordinary miraculous light, peculiarly
conferred on our Times, the worst I wish the opinion is this, that it were
true. Sure I am that this light must not cross the Scripture, but clear the
Scripture. So that if it affirms any thing contrary to Gods written Word, or
enforces any thing (as necessary to salvation) not expressed in Gods Word; I
dare boldly say, That such a light is kindled from Hell.

Peter 2.12. Speaking evil of the things they understand not. Confessing my
self not to know the reasons of their opinions, who though citing for it much
Canonical Scripture, yet their interpretations thereof may be but Apocrypha.
Nor dare we receive it, not being safe to be familiar with strangers at the
first sight; and this Tenent is strange, as set commonly afoot with these few
last years. I am afraid rather on the contrary of a general defection. Seeing
the word is so slighted, and the guests begin to play with their meat, I fear
lest God the master of the feast, will call for the Voyder: that so when Christ
comes to judgment, he shall find no faith on the earth. But of things to
come, little and doubtfully. If this opinion of Christ's corporal coming very
shortly be true, I hope if we live, we shall have our share therein: if
otherwise, Moses has no cause to complain, if dying he comes not into the
earthly Canaan, but into the Heavenly.

the Lords Anointed. O the miserable condition of our Land at this time, God
has showed the whole World, that England has enough in it self to make it
self happy or unhappy, as it uses or abuses it. Her homebred wares enough to
maintain her, and her homebred wars enough to destroy her, though no
foreign Nation contribute to her Overthrow. Well, whilst others fight for
Peace, let us pray for Peace; for Peace on good terms, yea on Gods terms, and
in GODS time, when he shall be pleased to give it, and we fitted to receive it.
Let us wish both King and Parliament so well, as to wish neither of them
better, but both of them best. Even a happy Accommodation.

Only this I will add, that his Majesty in making Monuments, Arches, Obelisks,
Piramids, Theaters, Trophies, and Triumphs, have yielded to Time, and been
quite forgotten. Yea, it is probable, that the names of some short reigning
Emperors had been quite lost, if not found in their Impresses on their Moneys,
Coins, having this peculiar privilege to themselves; that after they had
been buried many years in the ground, when taken up again, they have life
enough to speak the names of those Princes that caused them and their
Impressions to be stamped, either to their eternal shame or lasting honor.

To conclude, let us all provide for that perfect Reformation Without spot,
coming from man's corruption, or wrincle, caused by times continuance. When we
shall have a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein shall dwell Righteousness.
With judgments reformed from error, wills reformed from wilfulness, affections
reformed from mistaking their object, or exceeding their measure; all powers
and parts of soul and body reformed from sin to sanctity. Let us wait all
the days of our appointed time till our change come. Until this time of
Reformation. Amen.

FINIS.

