A FULL NARRATIVE OF THE Pope's Death, Between the 12th and 13th of August,
1689.
Licensed, August 30. 1689. J. F.

ROME the 13th. of August, 1689.
UPon a Rumor that the Pope began to be in an Agony, of which the People began
more and more to be confirmed, for that in the Night the Prisoners were removed
into the Castle; and there was sent out of the Castle to Villa Pamphilla, by
Don Livo, Two Pieces of Cannon, and a Mortar; and all the Money that properly
belonged to the Pope and his Nephews, and Don Livo, and Monsieur Magiaschi,
went to the Vattican, where they took away all the Clothes out of the Chest,
and all the Pope's Horses out of his Stable, and the curious Image of our
Savior, presented him by the Queen of Sweden; and employed Carts the whole Day
to carry away the Movables.

The same Day the Pope felt a great pain in his Side, and used some Aqua Vitoe,
sent him by Cardinal Molini, and found his Ague diminish, and come Two Hours
later, and then sent for D' Terracorda; and Monsieur Magiaschi desired the
Pope, That he would be pleased to ease the People in some of their Imposts, and
so Die gloriously: The Pope answered, The Successor could do it with more
Honor.

About Three a Clock the Pope began to cry out, that he saw all the Signs of
Death on him, and therefore desired the last Unction, which was given him about
Four a Clock. He sent for several Generals of the Orders, and spent the Night
with them; and in the Morning desired Cardinal Colrado, chief Father Confessor,
and received from him the Benediction in Articlo Mortis; and then called for
the other Confessors, and Two Monks of each Order, to receive their
Benediction, and Absolution from all the Regulars, and then Recommended his
Soul.

About Eleven or Twelve, all went home, the Pope seeming something better, and
spoke hearty; but soon after the Ague returned more vehemently; and the Pain
that was in his Side shot up into his Back; and then called again for the
Cardinal to assist him in the Hour of his Death, and to acquaint the Sacred
College, how much troubled he was, that he was not in a state to call them all
together; and desired they would supply his Defects, declaring, that he had
never erred willingly, and always believed he did well; and desired they would
choose such a Successor as would rectify his Miscarriages; and the Money he had
left might be employed for the Ease of the Subject, and that he had thoughts in
the time of his Sickness, to take off the Tax of the Meal, but being now at the
end of his Days, he left that Glory to his Successor.

About the 22th. hour his Speech failed him, and fell into an Agony, but kept
his perfect Senses till the Tenth hour the next Morning, and moved one of his
Hands, and turned his Eyes.

The Treasurer and the Commissioners disposed of 120000 Scaddies for Alms. So
at last dyed Pope Innocent the XI.

The Captain of the Switzers Guards gave present Notice to the Chamberlain,
Cardinal Alteri, who with all the Officers of the Chamber went into the
Chamber, and to the side of the Bed where the Pope lay, where the Commoners,
according to usual Custom, cried out three times, Benedicto Odescalchi, and no
body answering, was a confirmation of his Death; upon which Cardinal Alteri
took off the Fishers Ring, and broke it in the presence of them all, and his
Eminency gave the Corpse to the Father-Confessors of St. Peter, and commanded
them to resign it up to the Cannons of the Chapel o^ Paolinesse, and then gave
Notice of all that passed, to the Conservators of the Roman People, and the
Bell of Campidoglio was rung out for the Summoning of the Council; and then the
Officers, with the Militia, went to the Prisons, and discharged all the
Prisoners, and the several Princes, Ministers, Ambassadors, and Cardinals, had
Armed Men for the Security of their Palaces, and in a short time all the
Cardinals and Prelates, according to Custom, were in their Mourning Garments.

Just upon the Departure of the Pope there fell down two Arches of Calisen, and
this Morning, upon the opening of his Body, fell a great Storm of Rain, which
continued with great Thunder. In each of his Kidneys was found a stone, one of
which weighed seven Ounces, and several small stones in his Bladder, and seven
in the Bladder of his Gall, which was thought to be occasioned by his so much
sitting and lying. Several dipped their Handkerchifs in his Blood, some out of
Discontent, others of Devotion.

The Pope has left behind him a Million and a half in Money, 300000 Scaddies
Revenue, 100000 Scaddies in vacant Benefices, and Ten Vacancies of Cardinals,
besides the Vacancies that will be made by the Promotions.

This Evening was the usual Pomp in the carrying of his Body to St. Peter's.

London: Printed for S. Crouch, at the corner of Popes-Head-Ally, overagainst
the Royal Exchang^ in Cornhill. 1689.


