The Full and Whole Proceedings of the New High-Court of Justice:
OR THE Non-such Commission of the Peace, and Oyer and Terminer, held at the
Capital City of the High and Mighty Prince the Eagle, near the Forest of
Eppingia, in the famed hollow Oak, being the Guild Hall of the said City,
performed to Morrow, being the 11th of the Greek Kalends of the next Month,
1691. and the First Year before His Majesty's Reign: Designed for the special
Preservation of the Peace of Aviarium, or the Kingdom of Birds: With the Trial
and Examination of the Two late Notorious Criminals,
The Magpie and Blackbird.
AT a Grand Match of the Royal Sport of Cock-Fighting in Ragland Fields, in
Aviarium, or the Kingdom of Birds, there lately happened a private Quarrel
between a Pragmatical, Ambitious, Superstitious Albanian Mag-Pye, and a
Phanatical, Covenanting, Seditious Scotian Blackbird: The Contest was for
Pre-eminence, but the Controversy being hot and increasing, and like to prove
dangerous Effects (the Eagle, King of Birds, not being in the way) it was
appointed that the Two Criminals should be Tried by a Non-such Commission, for
the safety of the Kingdom, in the hallow Oak formerly called Pretorium servile,
midway betwixt the Tripple-Tree, in the Dukedom of High-Holbourn, and the
Landgraviate of the Forest of Epingia, being the Eagles Capital City, which was
accordingly performed the 11th of the Greek Kalends. The Judges were L. Chief
Justice Hawk, Mr. Justice Cuckoo, and Mr. Justice Batt, Two Justices of the
Peace for the next Year. There was appointed a Party Jury, half Birds and half
Beasts, very fit for the purpose, and most of them having a natural Antipathy
against the Two Malefactors.

Their Names are,

Beast.
Mr. Weesel, an English Mr. Reynard Fox, a Scotch Mr. Woolf, a Roman Friend Yea
and Nay Racoon, a Pensilvanian Mine Here Water Rat, a Dutch Mr. Monkey, a French
Bird.
Mr. Raven, a Mungrel Protestant Mr. Peacock, a Canary Mr. Sparrow, a Hedge Mr.
Porcupine, a Goal Mr. Water-wag-tail, a Whore's Mr. Kite, a Rapa-Ree
The Court being thus orderly set, Silence Commanded, the Prisoners were
Arraigned, and their Indictments Read by Tom Tit, Clerk of the Crown: After
which, the Parrot, Attorney General, and chief Speaker for the King, opened
their Indictment thus:

May it please your Lordship, and this Honorable Court: The Two Prisoners at
Bar, Sir Roger Magpye, Knight and no Gentleman, and Robert Sterling, alias
Blackbird, Esquire stand Indicted as false Traitors and grievous Malefactors,
contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, have with their Idle
Chattering, set our Bills on edge, and made it their Business (in this
dangerous Time; wherein the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom hangs on so
slender a Bough) to Sow the Seeds of Sedition, shake the Root of the Royal Oak,
wherein the Eagle has built his Nest, and (by kindling a Spark of Animosity)
to set on fire the whole Kingdom of Birds: Therefore, in Name and Authority of
our Sovereign Lord the Royal Eagle, I require Justice to be executed on the
Prisoners according to utmost extremity of the Law.

On this the Lord Chief Justice Hawk began to look grim, and after some sharp
and noisome Words and Threats, asked the Prisoners, whether they were Guilty or
not.

The Magpye, being the Bird in Fashion, began to clear himself first, in
indirect terms; telling, That the Black Bird gave him the first Affront and
Provocation, by throwing Dirt at his white Feathers, in the Streets of
Troynovant, whilst he was taking care for nothing but the Feathering of his
Nest, as all Coffee-Polian Birds, could testify.

But the Blackbird replied thus: I do acknowledge and testify, That at the
time I threw this late Kennel Dirt (which I had wrapped up in a sheet of Paper)
at the Lazy Magpye, he and I were good Friends from the Bill out: But the
intolerable provocations of some Ambitious Magpyes our Tribe have met with
formerly, are still fresh in our Remembrance; and the Feud now is so great, and
become so natural, that it is as easy to reconcile Light with Darkness, as to
make us good Friends, till they throw by their white Feathers, and give over a
great many more of their affected Gestures. But since I gave them the last
Affront, they have accused us of Treason against the Line of our Royal King, as
being accessory to the twisting off the Head of the best of Eagles, whilst it
is known to the Right Honorable Judges, Hawk, Cuckoo, and Batt, that the
Actors of that dreadful Tragedy were Storks, D --, and Moles.

Mr. Magpye. Your Sect is never at quiet, you are still affronting our
Lordships, you are an inferior Crew of Seditious Scismaticks; you are all
Publicans, and cannot live in Peace under any King; you convene privately in
Flocks under Hedges, and at a dark and shady Grove, called Coffee-Polian
Boriale, where in several Clusters of Tub-Chanters, you Plot nothing but
Mischief, and Sow Sedition.


Blackbird. These are all Forgeries, the Bench knows the contrary, at least
those who know the History of the Times, and present State of the Kingdom. But
one of your overgrown Magpyes picked up a stately Lapwing with a Pyebald
Top-Knot near the Sea Coast, and carrying to the Belzebub-Tavern, near the
Rooks-Cloyster, by the Western-Gate, got her with Egg of a young Jacobite, but
as soon as she began to look big-bellied of a new Plot, he run away and left
the Society to look after the Chick: But had not the Egg been Birth-crush'd on
the Triple Tree, it might have been hatched to a Cockatrice, and brought the
whole Kingdom to Confusion.

The Magpye began here to Prattle, and clear his Cabal of the Accusation, but
the Evidence being a clear demonstration, Judge Cuckoo Commanded Silence;
telling, That he might be ashamed to speak in the behalf of so pernicious a
Patron; and that the Canonical Cock had turned his back upon the Bantling, and
fled to a Desert, and that the Kingdom would look after the young Mag.


Blackbird. There are many Magpyes in this Kingdom of Birds, who will not Pray
for the Eagle, their just and lawful King; but no Black-Birds are of that
Stamp: yet we would gladly smother the Infirmities of the Magpyes, because the
greater part of them are truly Honest, Just, and Well-meaning Birds, and were
always against joining with the Cormorant, that Bird of Prey, in ruining their
Brethren the Black-Birds.


Magpye. We should be beholding to your general Charity, were there any thing
in it but to wheedle the Court into a belief of your good Nature; whereas you
are nothing inferior to any Tribe, in your ill-natured, domineering, and
insulting Spirit, for you Stigmatize our Holy Ephod with the name of, The Whore
of Babel' s Smock; our Temple Music you term, Scotch Bag-Pipes, and Catholic
Whistles, etc. these Expressions savor of the Roman Woolf, and the Spirit of
Envy. And though I acknowledge, that the Black-Birds came over to this Kingdom
from Geneva and Heidleburgh, before our Community were well settled, yet the
Magpyes, ever since their firm Establishment in England, have been very Loyal,
for had the Italian Vulture continued King still, we had been obsequious to his
absolute Commands, rather than unfaithful to our Allegiance.


Blackbird. It Is enough, whoever be King, the Magpyes will still prove Loyal,
but in several Respects.


Attorney Genesis These Idle Reflections are not the end for which we came hither,
and I require, in the Kings Name, the Execution of Justice upon these Two
Malefactors, for striving to set the whole Kingdom of Birds by the Ears, and so
raise a Civil Dissension in the Bowels of the Nation.


Mr. Cuckoo. Mr. Attorney you shall.


L. Hawk. Have you any thing more to say in your own behalf, Mr. Blackbird?
and whether did you give the Lord Magpye the first affront?


Blackbird. My Lord I have received one hundred Affronts for one.


L. Hawk. But are you the Bird that lately Chatter'd against a Reverend Magpye.


Blackbird. I will not tell you, my Lord, you may find it out.


Mr. Batt. Give him his Oath upon it, he is an obstinate Fellow.


Blackbird. Beg your Pardon Mr. Batt, I am not bound to Swear, for Nemo
tenetur jurare in suam injuriam.


L. Hawk. What Country Bird are you?


Blackbird. A Scotch Bird.


L. Hawk. Few good of that Kind. Is there no Evidence here against him.


Attorney Genesis Very little.


L. Hawk. Call in the Tropick-Bird, he is an Adamite, he is Naked, he has but
one Feather, and that is in his Tail; he is an Innocent Bird, he will speak Truth.
You Tropick-Bird, Is the Blackbird Guilty or not? he is, I think.


Trop. Bird. By yea and by nay he is.


Mr. Batt. Show how he is Guilty.


Trop. Bird. How is that, Judge Hawk?


Mr. Cuckoo. How can you say, that he is Guilty or not Guilty, unless you know
the Crime for which he is Accused? and whether he has done such things as are
laid to his Charge?


Mr. Batt. Come, come, give him his Oath.


L. Hawk. He Is very Honest, he was brought up a Bird of Grace in Pensilvania,
at the Feet of Gamaliel.


Trop. Bird. I am not willing to Swear: but by Yea and by Nay the Black-Bird^s
Guilty: Hang him, hang him, as you did the Partridge, the other day.


L. Hawk. I told you he was a Bird of Grace, he has not Conscience enough to
Swear.


Mr. Batt. But, I believe, can Lie damnably.


L. Hawk. Come you Members of the Jury, the Blackbird is a very Seditious
Bird, go out and consult upon the Evidence, which I think is very plain,
therefore you can do no less than find him Guilty; for though the Evidence has
not Sworn, yet I think his plain, honest, well-meaning Word is better than the
Oaths of some hundreds that are unclean Birds


Mr. Cuckoo. I think they are both as Guilty as other: The Magpye is no less an
Offender than the Black Bird.


L. Hawk. The Magpye is an honest good Fellow, but the Blackbird is a sneaking
Seditious Son of a Commonwealth --, Hang him, Hang him.


Mr. Batt. I think they are both Guilty alike.


Mr. Attorney. Mutua Pugna, mutua poenae.


Enter Members of the Jury. L. Hawk. Who is Foreman of the Jury?


Mr. Rh. Fox. I am, and I think they are both equally Guilty.


L. Hawk. Go out again, for the Magpye is a very honest Bird.


Exeunt Members of the Jury* Mr. Attorney. I do not understand this when Feud
and Favor pervert and Eclipses the Statutes of the Law.


Cuckoo. No nor I either.


Enter Jurors. L. Hawk. Who Is Foreman now?


Mr. Woolf. I am, and they are both equally Guilty.


L. Hawk. So you told me before, go out again, the Black-Bird's a Scotch Knave
and great Loon; but Mr. Magpye is an honest downright jolly good Fellow.


Exeunt Jurors. Mr. Batt. There Is more Law than Justice here.


Mr. Cuckoo. Yea, by half.


Enter Jurors. L. Hawk. Who Is Foreman of the Jury now?


Ap Goat. I am, and the Magpye is sound Guilty.


L. Hawk. Go out again, and I will serve you as much another time, for the
Magpye is a very honest English Bird.


Exeunt Jurors. Mr. Batt. I wish I had not been upon the Bench to day.


Mr. Attor. What need is there to Plead, when the Judge is determined what to
do beforehand.


Enter Jurors. L. Hawk. Who Is Foreman of the Jury?


Mr. Weesel. I am, and the Blackbird is found Guilty.


L. Hawk. Thou art an Honest Fellow.


Mr. Batt. I think it strange to see a Jury bring in contrary Verdicts in one
and the same Information.


Mr. Cuckoo. My Lord, you have had your Will thrice, let me have my Will once.
You Members of the Jury, go out once more before Sentence be past, choose an
honest Foreman, and let him speak what he knows to be true and right.


Exeunt Jurors. L. Hawk. It shall be as I please, and I will pronounce what
Sentence I will.


Mr. Batt. My Lord, there is no need to trouble any more, when you are
sufficient to be Judge, Jury, Evidence, and the Devil and all.


L. Hawk. So I am.


Enter Jurors. Who Is Foreman now?

Mr. Monkey. I am; and to speak without Hypocrisy, both the Magpye and the
Blackbird are guilty of Dissimulation and Dis^^tion; and, to tell you the
Truth, Mr. Blackbird has stolen too many of my Tricks, and we will go out no
more, take this for our Verdict.


L. Hawk. Well Mr. Blackbird, you are insome measure beholding to Mr. Monkey,
for putting you in the same Series with my special Friend Mr. Magpye. But have
you any thing to say before I pass Sentence?


Bl. Bird. I beg the benefit of my Clergy


L. Hawk. Let him have it.


Here the Ordinary brings the Book of Com. Pray. Bl. Bird. O! it is an
unclean Book, I cannot read it; I had rather run the hazard of the hardest
Sentence.


L. Hawk. An Legit?


Mr. Ord. Vult potius perdi quam legere.


L. Hawk. It Is well enough, come, come Mr. Magpye, what have you to say before
Sentence be past?


Magpye. I beg for Transportation.


L. Hawk. Whither?


Magpye. To New Albion or Pensilvania, that I may be a means to reduce those
Stuborn Schismatics, and bring them into the Bosom of our Holy Mother the
Church.


L. Hawk. Silence, silence, Executioner, without delay, take this Reverend
Magpye, and let him be Transported with the first Flock that Soars to New
Albion, that old Albion may be no more plagued with the Chattering between him
and Mr. Blackbird. And as for the Seditious Blackbird, he is to be carried to
the Place from whence he was brought, and there to be tied to a tumbling Tree,
his Feathers pulled off from his back, and whipped with a Canonical Girdle
between the Triple-Tree and the Royal Oak.


This hard Sentence sounded harsh in the Ears of the poor Blackbird, and
seemed very unjust to all the Bench. But Sir Reynard the Fox began to grin and
be in a Passion, for being slighted in his first Verdict, and gave L. C J. Hawk
some short Language, whereat his Lordship Commanded him to be secured in the
Bail-Dock, but before the Bench was aware, he pulled his Lordship by the Neck,
and Bit off his Honorable Head. Mr. Owl the Hangman finding himself Cheated of
the Magpye's Clothes, carried away the Cuckoo in his Clutches; and Mr. Weesel
put an end to the poor Night- Bat: Mr. BlackBird making his escape to a
Malt-Barn. Then the famous Sanhedrim ended in Confusion, none regreting the
Death of the Honorable Judicatory but Magpies, Termacheus, and Lapwings; yet,
in obedience to the Law, Mr. Magpye went to New-Albion, where now you may find
him if you go in time. Et sic finitur fabula.

LONDON, Printed for Ed. Golding. 1691.


