A full and true RELATION, OF THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION, Of twelve Notorious
Highway-Men, Murderers, and Clippers of Money: AT THE ASSIZES Holden for the
COUNTY of DERBY, This present August 1679. (VIZ.) Mr. Bracy, Richard Piggen,
Roger Brookham, Mr. Gerrat, John Barker, Willam Lo, John Roobottom, Thomas
Ouldome, John Baker, Daniel Buck, Thomas Gillat, and one Smedley.
With the manner of their Behavior before Execution, And several other
Remarkable Circumstances.
IT has not been unknown to most persons Traveling the great Roads of
England, how they have been infested of late with Highway-Men or Robbers; who
have committed several strange Actions and Insolences in their Robberies: till
the Divine Justice and Law has now brought some of them to receive the Rewards
of their Crimes and Sins at the County Town of Derby, at the Assizes there held
on the 8th of this Instant August 1679. the particulars of their Actions and
Demeanors are here inserted.

This Bracy was a person of good repute, living in the County of York; but for
some time had deserted his own House and Dwelling, betaking himself to live
abroad at all places which gave him a safe Protection; being reputed as Captain
or Ringleader of the whole Gang, which consisted of Richard Piggin of Derby,
Roger Brook shaw of Heage, Mr. Gerrat, and one John Barker, William Lo, John
Roobottom, Thomas Ouldome John Baker, Daniel Buck, Thomas Gillat and one
Smedley; all of the same County, who assisted and followed Mr. Bracy in the
performing these following Murders and Robberies. About 8 Months ago, the said
persons taking the advantage of a dark night, and being prepared with
Instruments for their purpose, broke open the House of Captain John Monday
Esquire, near the Town of Derby, at a place called Morton; where they took away
to the value of 1200 pounds in Gold and Silver, besides a great quantity of
Plate, binding the Esquire and all his Family in their Beds, and using great
insolences by threats, to make them confess their Treasures, which they
obtained and secured at the present. Some two Months after the same Persons
meets a Wagon passing betwixt the Mart of Lenton, near Nottingham and the Town
of Newark in the same County; in which there were several small Barrels of
Money, and others of Gold Lace; which they seized, and securing the Waggoner,
with Hatchets and other Instruments, they broke up the Barrel-Heads, taking
away the value of eighteen hundred pounds; which they divided, and so dispersed,
only Piggen, Buck, and Ryley went straight to the Town of Octbrook near Derby,
where the Hue and Cry coming, Buck and Ryley were taken, but Piggen made his
escape, leaving much of the Lace behind him, Buck and Ryley was then carried
before a Justice, and after Examination, were committed to the Goal; and at the
Assizes received the reward of their Crimes by hanging. The rest of the Company
continuing their former practices, Broke open the House of the Lady Jane
Scroop, at the Town of Everston, four Miles from Nottingham, where they took
away in mone'ys six hundred pounds, missing of three or four thousands, by
being one day too forward in their Actions. Upon the dismissing of this Booty,
one of the Company and Bracy falling at difference) they had a small Combat
with their Swords, the other cutting the Throat of a Mare that Bracy rode upon;
which for swiftness and goodness was hardly to be compared in England, Bracy
alone committed two more small Robbeeies; but the next Designs was upon the
Houses of Squire Gilbert, at a place called Locka, some three miles from Derby,
and the House of Mr. Garland at the Town of Lenton, near Nottingham, but was
prevented by their being apprehended, and afterward Tried as follows; only
Bracy who dyed in his Bed: his Wife keeping an Inn of some Note, Northward from
Nettingham some twelve miles, he receives News of her Death, which obliges him
to go home to see his Children, and what Estate his House was left in, upon his
being there, one of his Servants betrays him, by informing the next Justice,
who raises the Country and besets the house, one of his Sons tells him he heard
a noise about the House, which made him look out, and having his Horse in the
house, he leads him into a back-yard, and offers to Leap him over a high Pail,
but he twice refusing, in the interim one of the Apprehenders shoots and kills
his Horse, which made Bracy still more desperate, as resolving not to be taken,
but being shot with another Bullet, he maintained a Fight with his Sword, till
he was mortally wounded, and then the Countrymen left him, he was carried to a
Bed in his own House and there dyed. Three more of the Company besets two
Gentlemen in Needwood-Forrest, bidding them stand and deliver their Money,
which they refusing and making resistance, they shot one of them but the other
with his Pistol and Sword made a brisk resistance, till one of the Thieves
coming behind him, with a Back Rapier Runs him through the Body which Action,
they since confessed, being Apprehended for Clipping of Moneys in Derby, and
now this last Assiizes tried and Executed. Their Confessions of which is as
follows. They had a House in Derby at the Sign of the Cock near St. Michaels
Church, kept by one Widow Massey, where they had their Instruments for
Clipping and Filing of Moneys, which they had used for many years, having
moneys giving six pounds in the hundred for two Months, of several Men of note
in the same Town, who constantly supplied them with Money, which they Clipped
and returned again. The Widow and her Son in Law, one John Baker, Confessed
they had in one Night Clipped and finished one hundred pounds; this Discovery
being thus brought forth, the beforementioned Piggen coming up to London, was
Arrested upon an Action of Debt, and being in hold, was accused as a Robber,
but upon the promise of his Pardon, he with one Gerrat before named, confessed
all the forementioned Robberies, with this Action of Clipping, upon which these
Men were Apprehended, and young Baker gives the Relation, that one Sammuel
Baker his Uncle, one Luke Ouldome, Benjaman Ouldam and one Nash, was concerned
with them as Workkers in Clipping and Filing returning their Clippings melted
into Bullion, to a Goldsmith in London, who upon the Discovery denied he ever
knew any of them. The Widow and her Son having a Boy about some fifteen years
of Age, which was a Servant, that knew many of their Actions, they Murdered him
and hid him in a Vault, and afterward made their escape with one Widow Rose
of Lenton, near Nottingham, who entertained them. Piggen and Baker received
their Pardons, the rest were Executed according to their Sentence. At the place
of Execution they seemed very penitent, confessing their Facts as is here
related, which is affirmed by several who heard both their Trials and
Confessions.

FINIS.

