A Full and True Relation Of Two very Remarkable Trials AT THE Quarter Sessions
OF THE PEACE For the CITY and LIBERTY of WESTMINSTER Held in the Great Hall, on
Monday the Third of October, and ending the Eleventh of the same. The one, for
Scandalous Words, by one Shippon: The other, of a Priest in the Gate House, for
Spoiling a Girl of Nine Years old. By Way of Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
IT is not long since you desired of me an account of our Justices and their
proceedings; which I should have sooner returned you, but that the shortness of
time, and a quiet peaceable Age gave me small opportunity to do it. For though
when Sr. W. was in Commission, and so extraordinary Active, we had some cause
to fear: yet now (thank God) we are very well at ease, every man enjoying his
own morsel, and not so much as having a fear left one of another. But we must
ever own our respects and love to him for his diligent care of us, and owe the
present ease and safety that we enjoy, to him as the original cause of it. For
since his time, the Papists amongst us, are either fled out of the Nation, or
their number so few, that we cannot see them; the Priests and Jesuits most or
all (we hope) secured; so that we have great cause to rejoice over our Enemies
now more than ever, being big with the expectation of a happy issue from these
Troubles, by the approaching Parliament, whom God direct for the good
prosperity of our King, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the general Welfare of
the Nation.

But Sir, I must acquaint you, that our Justices do upon all occasions show
themselves Men and Gentlemen; though we have not had so much cause of action as
formerly; however we are satisfied, they are men of unspotted Reputation and
Credit, such as will hazard their Lives and Fortunes for the maintenance and
preservation of their Prince, and Religion too; I mean the Church of England
established by Law. And I will give you a brief account of Two remarkable
Trials before them; the first on Monday last, the other on Saturday following.

An Indictment was brought against one Philip Shippon, a Servant to the Earl of
Shrewsbury, for very scandalous and opprobrious words spoke by him in February
last; which I Will repeat as I heard them sworn to in Court, That Dr. Oats and
Mr. Bedlow were great Rogues, and Perjured Rogues, that Dugdale was a great
Rogue, and had cheated his Lord and Master my Lord Ashton of a Thousand Pounds;
That there was no Plot; That he heard my Lord Shrewsbury say, that the King
told him, he did not believe there was any Plot against his Life and Government
by the Papists; That His Majesty did believe, the Jesuits and others that
suffered dyed wrongfully, which He suffered only to please some discontented
Lords of the Council, but was resolved no more should suffer for the Plot.
These words were sworn to by Mr. Boldron and Mr. Mowbray, though Mr. Boldron's
Mother and Wife added to the former part of them their Testimony, that the said
Shippon did often abuse the King's Evidence, and talk down the Plot. He pleaded
Not Guilty, and brought one or two Witnesses, who offered to prove it to be Mr.
Boldron's Malice and Design against him: But the Proof was plain, and Sr.
Francis Withens Steward of Westminster and Chairman to the Bench gave such
clear directions to the Jury, and withal such Content and Satisfaction to the
Court and Prisoner, that he has no cause to complain. The Jury found him
Guilty without going from the Bar: and the next day he was brought for his
Sentence, where they past a Fine of 500. Marks upon him, Imprisonment till it
be paid, and to find Sureties for his Behavior one Twelve Months.

Now Sir, I must observe the great Impudence this Fellow had at his Trial; who
was as bold and unconcerned, as if he had had 500 l. given him, scarcely
forbearing to laugh all the while. And also it is worth our while, to Note the
great subtilty these Rascals have to father such words upon our Prince, who is
most in danger by the Plot; which they do on purpose to create Jealousies and
Fears, and divide the hearts of his people from him. They that think it no Sin
to destroy him and us, no doubt think it none to abuse and separate us. But God
above we hope will settle and strengthen our Love and Duty to Him more and
more, that being well united, we may resolve to destroy the Devil and all his
Agents, the Papists from amongst us root and branch; and let every good
Protestant say Amen.

Now Sir, I must beg your pardon, being come to a very foul case; which because
of the president sake, though filthy; I will wrap up as clean as I can, not to
hide the material Circumstances and Truth from you.

On Wednesday last an Indictment was brought against one Dowdel alias Ireland,
alias Johnson, a Priest and Prisoner in the Gate House; for an assault upon the
body of one (...) Bishop, a Girl of Nine or Ten Years of age, with an intent to
have Ravished her, whose Mother was formerly Prisoner there, the Girl going
often to the Prisoner to carry such things as he had occasion for: But the
Court being ready to rise, and the Trial seeming long, they adjourned
themselves till Saturday: and on Saturday he was brought and the Girl in Court.
The Girl in Court swore against him; That in August last he used to kiss her,
to take her on his knee, and to give her Sugared Beer, sometimes to put his
Tongue in her Mouth, and his hands up her Coats; that he hurt her once with his
Finger, which made her cry; and then to please her, gave her Two Groats: and
that a Week after he took her in like manner upon his Knee, and after he had
kissed her a while, he threw her upon his Bed (having made his Door fast with a
Stick) fell upon her, pulled up her Coats; and hurt her with something,
insomuch that she cried out; but he stopped her mouth with the Bed-cloaths, and
hurt her the more, till she struggling got hold of his Laced Cuffs and tore
them, and also dirted his Silk Coat with her feet, at which he let her alone,
but kissed her and bidding her be quiet, etc. took a shilling and gave her; and
when she had done crying, sent her home. The Child being ashamed, and not
thinking of any harm, said nothing, till her Mother found out that the lower
parts of her Belly were in a Weeks time grown so sore, that she could not sit
down; and withal, she is perfectly Bursten: And then upon her Mothers enquiring
she confessed the matter, and had half a dozen Midwives to inspect the thing: who
all came and made Oath of the Truth of it, and the sad condition the Girl was
in (except one of Mrs. Celliers acquaintance) who said, That it was only a
swelling which might come from her going up and down stairs, etc. Moreover Mr.
Church did confess he had a stick to make fast his door: Another woman, that
she saw the Girl come down with a shilling or such a piece in her hand one day.
The Keeper also affirmed, he would not let the Girl go up so often, and the
said Dowdel desired it of him, saying he had business to do. It was also sworn,
that he sent two persons to bribe the Girls Parents to put it up: That her
Father being drunk, said he would do it for Forty Pound; but Dowdel said Ten
Pound was enough: That he sent others afterward to tell them he would give
nothing, that he did not value them of a farthing, etc. To this he pleaded Not
Guilty: Being asked if he would challenge of the Jury, he answered like an
Irish St. Omer, Me like them well, they be all honest men. Being asked, if ever
he used to kiss the Girl and set her upon his knee; he answered Yes my Lor the
chile be so pretty and do twenty pretty tings make me laugh a hundred times.
Being asked if ever he gave her money, he said, My Lord that be my Charitee,
when her Mother be in Prisson, I took her to eat half my dinner, and I say
this be pretty Shile, I had love for the Shile and gave her any ting I had:
she use to come often for my Charitee. But amongst the rest of his discourse he
owned the matter in effect in these words, which happened about entering her
body, he said, Me enter her dis far, pointing his finger to the Court. He
brought one or two to speak in his behalf, and would have laid it upon malice,
as his friend Shippon before did. But the Case though never so foul, was clear
enough that he did assault her body, for which he was Indicted, and by the Jury
immediately found Guilty.

Though Sir, you have here a President of a very strange and prodigious Crime
committed by a Popish Priest, yet he had not altogether so much Impudence to
deny it, as some others: For he was very well satisfied with his Legal Trial;
and accordingly thanked both the Bench and Jury that they had permitted him
such fairness and freedom to have cleared himself, if there had been cause for
it.

On Monday the 11th Instant he was brought again to receive the Judgment of
the Court, which was, To pay a Fine of 500. Marks, to continue in Prison till
it be paid, and to give good Security for his Behavior during Life: and
further, the Court ordered him to be turned over to the Old Bayley, there to be
Tried as a Priest.

I have nothing more to add Sir, but to desire your excuse for the length of
this; and to pray, that all the rest of these evil workers may be brought to
equal shame and condign punishment by the hands of Justice.

I am, etc.
Westminster, October. 11. 1680.
London, Printed for W. H. and T. F. 1680.


