THE Lord Fairfax's MEMORIALS.

SHORT MEMORIALS OF THOMAS Lord Fairfax.

Written by Himself.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and are to be Sold at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX.
MY LORD,
IT is with Your Lordship's leave, that this short Manuscript of my Lord
Fairfax, Your Noble Predecessor, is now Printed from the Original, written in
his own Hand, and left in Your Study at Denton in Yorkshire; for it was never
intended by him, to be Published, but to remain for the Satisfaction of his own
Relations.

But of late something has happened, which in the judgment of Your Lordship, and
many other Persons of Condition, makes it necessary that these Papers should be
sent to the Press; which is now done, without any Material Alterations from the
Original, but only by placing them in the natural order of Time.

Though no Copy was ever taken by Your Lordship's Consent, yet I know not how,
some imperfect Ones are got into other Hands. And this being an Age, wherein
every Man presumes to Print what he pleases, of his own, or other Men's, we are
plainly told, That my Lord Fairfax's Memorials are ready to be Published; and
by the very same Person, who has lately set forth some Memoirs, wherein his
Lordship is scarce ever named but with Reproach; not to be excused by what the
Editor himself confesses, That the Author was much out of humor when he writ
the Book.

My Lord Fairfax's True Character is better known to many Wise and Good Men,
than to be blemished by such envious Detractions. Nor can his Reputation
thereby suffer with any who were acquainted with his Person, and the true
Intentions of his Actions, and knew him in the latter part of his Life.

His great Misfortune, and so he accounted it, was to be engaged in the Unhappy
Wars, whereof he desired no other Memorial than the Act of Oblivion; which few
that ever needed, better deserved.

It cannot be denied, but as a Soldier, his Life would furnish as Noble a
Memoir as the Age has produced, from the time that he began with a Troop of
Horse, and a few undisciplined Forces in the North, to his being General of a
Victorious Army in the South; which he Governed, not as a Cipher, but with
great Prudence and Conduct, in Councils of War, as well as animated by his
Personal Courage in the Field, as long as they had any Enemy to oppose them.

But after that, they broke into Factions, and were overrun with Enthusiasm,
and became Vngovernable by their General, when they chose their own Agitators,
and were managed by Men of the deepest Dissimulation and Hypocrisy: by whose
fair but treacherous Promises, some Greater than Himself, were deceived to
their own Ruin.

That most Tragical and Deplorable part of the Civil War, the Death of the
King, he utterly from his Soul abhorred, and lamented to his dying day; and
never mentioned it but with Tears in his Eyes.

The retired part of his Life gave him greater Satisfaction than all his former
Victories, when he lived quietly at his own House at Nun-Appleton in Yorkshire;
always earnestly wishing and praying for the Restitution of the Royal Family,
and fully resolved to lay hold on the first good Opportunity to contribute his
part toward it; which made him always looked upon with a jealous eye by the
Usurpers of that time.

As soon as he was invited by General Monk to assist him against Lambert's
Army, he cheerfully embraced the Occasion, and appeared at the Head of a brave
Body of Gentlemen of Yorkshire; and upon the Reputation and Authority of his
Name, the Irish Brigade of Twelve Thousand Horse forsook Lambert's Army, and
joined with him; the Consequence was the immediate breaking of all Lambert's
Forces, which gave General Monk an easy March into England.

This was always acknowledged, not only by General Monk, but by the King
himself, as a signal Testimony of his Zeal to make amends for what was past,
and of the very considerable Assistance he gave toward the restoring the Royal
Family.

After he had waited on his Majesty in Holland, as one of the Commissioners
sent to invite him home, and had seen the King established on his Throne, he
retired again into his own Country, where he died in Peace, in the 60th Year of
his Age, Anno 1671. leaving behind him his only Daughter, the Lady Mary
Duchess of Buckingham.

I shall now say no more of him, but, That so long as Unfeigned Piety toward
God, Invincible Courage, joined with wonderful Modesty, and exceeding Good
Nature: Justice and Charity to all men in his private Life; and an Ingenuous
Acknowledgment of his Public Error, with hearty Endeavors to make Reparation,
as soon as he was convinced of it, shall be esteemed in the World: So long
shall the Name of my Lord Fairfax be honored by good Men, and be had in
perpetual Remembrance.

Your Lordship had the good fortune to be born after the Storms and Tempests of
that Age: But you have had the Honor to appear eminently in defense of our
Religion, and Civil Rights, in this last happy Revolution, as your Noble
Predecessor did at the Restoration.

My LORD, Apr. 22. 1699. I am Your most affectionate Uncle, and humble Servant,
Brian Fairfax.

A short MEMORIAL of the Northern Actions in which I was engaged, during the
War there, from the Year 1642, to the Year 1644.
IN Gratitude to God for his many Mercies and Deliverances, and not to deprive
my self of the Comfort of their Remembrance, I shall set down, as they come
into my Mind, those things wherein I have found the wonderful Assistance of God
to me in the Time of the War in the North; though not in that methodical and
polished Manner as might have been done, being intended only for my own
Satisfaction, and help of my Memory.

My Father was called forth by the Importunity of his Country to join with them
in their own Defense, which was confirmed by a Commission from the Parliament.

The first Action we had was at Bradford. Bradford.
We were about three hundred Men, the Enemy seven or eight hundred, and two
Pieces of Ordnance. They assaulted us; We drew out close to the Town to receive
them; They had the Advantage of the Ground, the Town being encompassed with
Hills, which exposed us more to their Cannon, from which we received some Hurt;
but our Men defended those Passages by which they were to descend, so well,
that they got no ground of us; and now the day being spent, they drew off, and
retired to Leeds.

A few days after, Captain Hotham with three Troops of Horse, and some
Dragoons, came to us: Then We marched to Leeds; but the Enemy having Notice of
it, quitted the Town, and in haste fled to York.

We advanced to Tadcaster, Tadcaster.
eight Miles from York, that we might have more room, and be less burdensome
to Our Friends; and being increased to one thousand Men, it was thought fit
that we should keep the Pass at Wetherby, for the securing of the West Riding,
or the greatest part of it, from whence our chief Supplies came.

I was sent to Wetherby with three hundred Foot, Wetherby.
and forty Horse; The Enemy's next design from York, was to fall upon my
Quarters there, being a Place very open, and easy for them to assault, there
being so many back-ways, and Friends enough to direct them, and give them
intelligence.

About six a clock one morning they fell upon us with eight hundred Horse and
Foot, the Woods thereabout favoring them so much, that Our Scouts had no
notice of them, and no Allarm was given till they were ready to enter the Town:
Which they might easily do, the Guards being all asleep in Houses; for in the
beginning of the War, Men were as impatient of Duty, as they were ignorant of
it.

I my self was only on Horseback, and going out of the other End of the Town to
Tadcaster, where my Father lay, when one came running after me, and told me the
Enemy was entering the Town; I presently galloped to the Court of Guard, where I
found not above four Men at their Arms, as I remember One of them had a Pension
for his Life till 1670.
, two Sergeants, and two Pikemen, who stood with me when Sir Thomas Glenham,
with about six or seven Commanders more, charged us; and after a short, but
sharp Encounter, they retired, in which one Major Carr was slain; and by this
time more of the Guards were got to their Arms. I must confess I knew no
Strength but the powerful Hand of God that gave them this Repulse.

After this they made another Attempt, in which Captain Atkinson (on our part)
was slain: And here again there fell out another remarkable Providence, during
this Conflict, our Magazine was blown up. This struck such a Terror into the
Enemy, believing we had Cannon, which they were before informed we had not,
that they instantly retreated; And though I had but a few Horse, we pursued the
Enemy some Miles, and took many Prisoners: We lost about eight or ten Men,
whereof seven were blown up with Powder; the Enemy lost many more.

At this time the Earl of Cumberland Commanded the Forces in Yorkshire for the
King; He being of a peaceable Nature, and affable Disposition, had but few
Enemies; or rather, because he was an Enemy to few, he did not suit with their
present Condition. Their Apprehensions and Fears caused them to send to the
Earl of Newcastle, who had an Army of six thousand Men, to desire his
Assistance, whereof he assured them by a speedy March to York.

Being now encouraged by this increase of Force, Tadcaster.
they resolved to fall upon Tadcaster. My Father drew all his Men thither; but,
in a Council of War the Town was judged untenable, and that we should draw out
to an advantageous piece of Ground, by the Town; But before we could all march
out, the Enemy advanced so fast, that we were necessitated to leave some Foot
in a slight Work above the Bridge, to secure our Retreat, but the Enemy
pressing on us, forced us to draw back, to maintain that Ground.

We had about nine hundred Men, the Enemy above four thousand, who in Brigades
drew up close to the Works, and stormed us. Our Men reserved their shot, till
they came near, which they did then dispose of to so good purpose, that the
Enemy was forced to retire, and shelter themselves behind the Hedges. And here
did the first Fight continue from Eleven a Clock at Noon, till Five at Night,
with Cannon and Musket, without intermission.

They had once possessed a House by the Bridge, which would have cut us from
our Reserves that were in the Town, but Major General Gifford with a Commanded
Party, beat them out again, where many of the Enemy were slain, and taken
Prisoners. They attempted an another Place, but were repulsed by Captain
Lister, who was there slain, a great Loss, being a Discreet Gentleman.

By this time it grew dark, and the Enemy drew off into the Fields hard by,
with intention to assault us again the next day.

They left that Night above two hundred dead and wounded upon the Place. But
our Ammunition being all spent in this day's Fight, we drew off that Night, and
marched to Selby, and the Enemy entered the next Morning into the Town.

Thus by the Mercy of God were a few delivered from an Army, who in their
thoughts had swallowed us up.

The Earl of Newcastle now lay betwixt us and our Friends in the West Riding;
but to assist and encourage them I was sent with about three hundred Foot, and
three Troops of Horse, and some Arms to Bradford: I was to go by Ferry-bridge,
Our Intelligence being that the Enemy was advanced no further than Sherburne,
but when I was within a mile of the Town, we took some Prisoners who told us,
my Lord of Newcastle lay at Pontefract, eight hundred Men in Ferry-bridge, and
the rest of the Army in all the Towns thereabout: So that our Advance or
Retreat seemed alike difficult. Little time being allowed us to consider, we
resolved to retreat to Selby: three or four hundred Horse of the Enemy showed
themselves in the Rear, without making any attempt upon us, so that, by the
Goodness of God, we got safe to Selby.

Three days after this, upon better Intelligence how the Enemy lay, with the
same Number as before, I marched in the Night by several Towns where they lay,
and came the next Day to Bradford, a Town very untenable, but for their good
affection to us, deserving all we could hazard for them.

Our first Work then was to Fortify Our selves, for we could not but expect an
Assault. There lay at Leeds fifteen hundred of the Enemy, and twelve hundred at
Wakefield, neither place above six or seven Miles distant from us. They visited
us every Day with their Horse, Ours not going far from the Town, being very
unequal in Number: yet the Enemy seldom returned without Loss, till at last our
few Men grew so bold, and theirs so disheartened, that they durst not stir a
Mile from their Garrisons.

Whilst these daily Skirmishes were among the Horse, I thought it necessary to
strengthen our selves with more Foot; I summoned the Country, who had by this
time more liberty to come to us. I presently Armed them with those Arms we
brought along with us; So that in all we were about eight hundred Foot.

Being too many to lie idle, and too few to be upon constant Duty, we resolved
through the assistance of God, to attempt them in their Garrisons.

We summoned the Country again, and made a Body of twelve or thirteen hundred
Men, with which we marched to Leeds, Leeds.
and drew them up within half Cannon-shot of their Works, in Battalia, and then
sent a Trumpet with a Summons to deliver up the Town to me, for the use of King
and Parliament. They presently returned this Answer, That it was not civilly
done to come so near before I sent the Summons, and that they would defend the
Town the best they could with their Lives.

I presently ordered the manner of the Storm, and we all fell on at the same
time: The business was hotly disputed for almost two Hours; but the Enemy being
beaten from their Works, and the Barricado's into the Streets forced open, the
Horse and Foot resolutely entered, and the Soldiers cast down their Arms, and
rendered themselves Prisoners. The Governor and some Chief Officers swam the
River and escaped, only Major Beaumont was drowned, about forty or fifty slain,
good store of Ammunition taken, of which we had great want.

The Consequence of this Action was yet of more importance; for those who fled
from Leeds to Wakefield, and quitting that Garrison also, gave my Lord of
Newcastle such an Allarm at Pontefract, that he drew all his Army again to
York, leaving once more a free intercourse, which he had so long time cut off,
betwixt my Father and us.

After a short time the Earl of Newcastle returned again to the same Quarters,
and we to our stricter Duties. But we quickly found our Men must have more
room, or more Action.

Captain Hotham and I took a resolution early one Morning (from Selby) to beat
up a Quarter of the Enemies that lay at Fenton; they being gone, we marched to
Sherburne, Sherburn.
intending there only to give them an Alarm; but they might see us a Mile or
more, over a plain Common, which lay by the Town, and they sent twenty or
thirty Horse, to Guard a Pass near the Town; I had the Van; for at this time we
commanded our Troops distinct one from another, both making five Troops of
Horse, and two of Dragoons. I told Captain Hotham, that if he would second me,
I would Charge those Horse, and if they fled, I would pursue them so close as
to get into the Town with them: He promised to second me; I went to the Head of
my Troops, and presently Charged them, they fled, and we pursued close to the
Barricado, but they got in, and shut it upon us: Here my Horse was shot in at
the Breast: We so filled the Lane, being strait, that we could not Retreat
without confusion, and danger of their falling in our Rear, so we stood to it,
and Stormed the Works with Pistol and Sword: At the end of the Barricado, there
was a narrow passage for a single Horse to go in, I entered there, others
following me, one by one; and close at one side of the Entrance stood a Troop
of Horse of the Enemy: So soon as eight or ten of us were got in, We Charged
them, and they fled; by this time the rest of our Men had beat them from their
Barricado, and entered the Town: We soon cleared the Streets, and pursued those
that fled: And now my Horse which was shot in the Lane, fell down dead under
me, but I was presently mounted again.

The Enemy in the Towns about having taken the Alarm, it made us think of
securing our Retreat, with the Prisoners we had got, some of them being
considerable, among whom was Major General Windham; Col. Prideaux escaped.
We scarce got into order before General Goring came with a good Body of Horse
up to us, and as we marched off, he followed us close in the Rear, without
doing us any hurt, only my Trumpet had his Horse shot close by me, and thus we
returned to Selby.

Though this did not free us wholly from a Potent Enemy, yet we lay more
quietly by them a good while after.

In this recess of Action, we had several Treaties about Prisoners; and this I
mention the rather, for that Captain Hotham here first began to discover his
intentions of leaving the Parliament's Service, in making Conditions for
himself, with the Earl of Newcastle, though it was not discovered till a good
while after, which had almost ruined my Father, and the Forces with him; for
being now denied help and succor from Hull, and the East Riding, he was forced
to forsake Selby, and retire to Leeds, and those Western Parts where I then lay.

To make good this Retreat, I was sent to, to bring what Men I could to join
with him at Sherburne, for my Lord of Newcastle's Army lay so as he might
easily intercept us in our way to Leeds, which he had determined to do, and to
that end lay with his Army on Clifford-Moore, having present Intelligence of
our March.

Whilst my Father, with fifteen hundred Men, Ordnance, and Ammunition,
continued his way from Selby to Leeds; I with those I brought to Sherburne,
marched a little aside, betwixt my Lord of Newcastle's Army and Ours. And to
amuse them the more, made an Attempt upon Tadcaster, where they had three or
four hundred Men, who presently quit the Town, and fled to York.

Here we stayed three or four hours slighting the Works, which put my Lord
Newcastle's Army to a stand, being on their March to meet us, thinking he was
deceived in his Intelligence, and that we had some other design upon York; He
presently sends back the Lord Goring with twenty Troops of Horse and Dragoons
to relieve Tadcaster.

We were newly drawn off when he came; my Lord Goring past over the River to
follow us, but seeing we were far unequal in Horse to him, (for I had not above
three Troops, and were to go over Bramham-Moore Plain) I gave direction to the
Foot to march away, whilst I stayed with the Horse to interrupt the Enemy's
passage in those narrow Lanes that lead up to the Moore. Here was much Firing
at one another; but in regard of their great Numbers, as they advanced, we were
forced to give way; yet had gained by it sufficient time for the Foot to have
been out of danger.

When we came up to the Moore again, I found them where I left them, which
troubled me much, the Enemy being close upon us, and a great Plain yet to go
over. So we marching the Foot in two Divisions, and the Horse in the Rear, the
Enemy followed about two Musket Shot from us, in three good Bodies, but made no
Attempt upon us: And thus we got well over this open Campagn, to some
Enclosures, beyond which was another Seacroft Moore.
Moore, less than the other. Here Our Men thinking themselves secure, were more
careless in keeping Order; and whilst their Officers were getting them out of
Houses where they sought for Drink, it being an extreme hot Day, the Enemy got
another Way as soon as we into the Moore; and when we had almost passed this
Plain also, they seeing Us in some Disorder, charged Us both in Flank and Rear:
The Countrymen presently cast down their Arms and fled; the Foot soon after,
which for want of Pikes was not able to withstand their Horse: Some were Slain,
many were taken Prisoners; Few of Our Horse stood the Charge. Some Officers
with me, made Our Retreat with much Difficulty; in which Sir Henry Fowlis had a
slight Hurt; my Cornet was taken Prisoner. We got well to Leeds, about an Hour
after my Father and the Men with him got safe thither.

This was one of the greatest Losses we ever received. Yet was it a Providence
it was a part, and not the whole Forces which received this Loss; it being the
Enemy's Intention to have fought us that Day with their whole Army, which was
at least Ten Thousand Men, had not Our Attempt upon Tadcaster put a Stand to
them; and so concluded that Day with this Storm, which fell on me only.

We being at Leeds, it was thought fit to possess some other Place; wherefore I
was sent to Bradford with seven or eight hundred Foot, and three Troops of
Horse. These two Towns were all the Garrisons we had; Wakefield.
and at Wakefield, six Miles off, lay three thousand of the Enemy; but they did
not much disturb us: And we were busied about releasing Prisoners that were
taken at Seacroft, most of them being Countrymen, whose Wives and Children were
still importunate for their Release, which was as earnestly endeavored by us,
but no Conditions would be accepted; so as their continual Cries, and Tears,
and Importunities, compelled us to think of some way to redeem these Men; and
we thought of attempting Wakefield.

Our Intelligence was, that the Enemy had not above eight or nine hundred Men
in the Town; I acquainted my Father with Our design, who approved of it, and
sent some Men from Leeds, so that we were able to draw out eleven hundred Horse
and Foot.

Upon Whitsunday, early in the Morning, we came before the Town, but they had
notice of Our coming, and had manned all their Works, and set about five
hundred Musketeers to line the Hedges without the Town, which made us now doubt
our Intelligence, but it was too late.

After a little Consultation we advanced, and soon beat them back into the
Town, which we stormed at three Places; and after an Hour's dispute, the Foot
forced open a Barricado, where I entered with my own Troop, Colonel Alured and
Captain Bright followed with theirs: The Street where we entered was full of
their Foot; We charged them through, and routed them, leaving them to the Foot
that followed close behind us: And presently we were charged again with Horse
led on by General Goring; where, after a hot Encounter, some were Slain, and
himself taken Prisoner by Colonel Alured.

I cannot but here acknowledge God's Goodness to me this day; for being
advanced a good way single before my Men, having a Colonel, and
Lieutenant Colonel, who had engaged themselves to be my Prisoners, only with
me, and many of the Enemy now betwixt me and my Men, I lighted upon a Regiment
of Foot standing in the Marketplace; being thus encompassed, and thinking what
to do, I spied a Lane which I thought would lead me back to my Men again: At
the end of this Lane there was a Corps-de-guard of the Enemy's, with fifteen or
sixteen Soldiers, who were just then quitting of it, with a Sergeant leading
them off; whom we met, and seeing their Officers, they came up to us, taking no
notice of me, and asked them what they would have them do, for they could keep
the work no longer, the Roundheads (as they called them) came so fast upon
them.

The Gentlemen who had passed their Words to me to be my true Prisoners, said
nothing; and looking one upon another, I thought it not fit now to own them as
Prisoners, much less to bid the rest to render themselves to me; but being well
mounted, and seeing a place in the Works where Men used to go over, I rushed
from them, and made my Horse leap over the Work, and by a good Providence got
to my Men again, who before I came had, by Direction of Major General Gifford,
brought up a Piece of Ordnance, and placed it in the Churchyard, against that
Body that stood in the Marketplace, which presently rendered themselves.

All our Men being got into the Town, the Streets were cleared, and many
Prisoners taken; but the Horse got off, almost entire.

This appeared the greater Mercy, when we saw Our mistake; for we found Three
thousand Men in the Town, and expected but half the number. We brought away
fourteen hundred Prisoners, Eighty Officers, Twenty eight Colors, and great
store of Ammunition.

But seeing this was more a Miracle, than a Victory; more the Effect of God's
Providence, than humane Force, or Prudence, let the Honor and Praise of all be
His only.

After this, we exchanged our Men that were Prisoners, and we were freed a good
while from any trouble or attempt of the Enemy.

Hitherto, through God's Mercy, we had held up near two Years against a potent
Army; but they finding us now almost tired with continual Service,
treacherously used by Friends, and wanting many things necessary for support
and defense, the Earl of Newcastle marched with an Army of Ten or Twelve
thousand Men to besiege Us, and resolved to sit down before Bradford, which was
a very untenable Place.

Hither my Father drew all the Forces he could spare out of the Garrisons; but
seeing it impossible to defend the Town otherwise than by Strength of Men, and
that we had not above ten or twelve days Provision for so many as were
necessary to keep it; Adderton-Moor.
We resolved the next Morning, very early, with a Body of three Thousand Men,
to attempt his whole Army, as they lay in their Quarters three Miles off.
Hoping by it to put him to some distraction, which could not be done any other
way, by reason of the unequal Numbers.

To this End my Father appointed Four of the Clock next morning to begin Our
March; but Major General Gifford, who had the Ordering of the Business, so
delayed the execution of it, that it was seven or eight before we began to
move, and not without much suspicion of Treachery; for when we came near the
Place we intended, the Enemy's whole Army was drawn up in Battalia.

We were to go up a Hill to them; That Our Forlorn Hope gained by beating
theirs into their main Body, which was drawn up half a Mile further upon a
Plain called Adderton-Moore. We being all got up the Hill, drew into Battalia
also. I Commanded the Right Wing, which was about One thousand Foot, and Five
Troops of Horse. Major General Gifford Commanded the left Wing, which was about
the same number. My Father Commanded in Chief.

We advanced through the enclosed Grounds, till we came to the Moore, beating
the Foot, that lay in them, to their main Body.

Ten or twelve Troops of Horse charged us in the Right Wing; We kept the
Enclosures, placing Our Musketeers in the Hedges next the Moore; which was a
good Advantage to us who had so few Horse.

There was a Gate, or open Place, to the Moore, where five or six might enter
abreast. Here they strive to enter, we to defend it; but after some dispute,
those that entered the Pass, found sharp Entertainment; and those who were not
yet entered, as hot Welcome from the Musketeers that flanked them in the Hedges.
They were all, in the end, forced to retreat, with the Loss of Colonel Howard,
who Commanded them.

Our Left Wing at the same time was engaged with the Enemy's Foot, and gained
Ground of them. The Horse came down again, and charged us, they being about
Thirteen or Fourteen Troops. We defended Our selves as before, but with much
more difficulty; many having got in among us, but were beaten off again with
some Loss. Colonel Herne, who Commanded that Party, was slain. We pursued them
to their Cannon. Here I cannot omit a remarkable Instance of Divine Justice.
Whilst we were engaged in the Fight with those Horse that entered the Gate, four
Soldiers had stripped Colonel Herne naked as he lay on the ground, Men still
Fighting round about him; and so dextrous were these Villains, that they had
done it, and mounted themselves again, before we had beaten the Enemy off: But
after we had beaten them to their Ordnance, as I said, and now returning to our
Ground again, the Enemy discharged a Piece of Cannon in our Rear, the Bullet
fell into Captain Copley's Troop, in which were these four Men; two of them
were killed, and some Hurt or Mark remained on the other, though dispersed into
several Ranks of the Troop, which made it more remarkable. We had not yet
Martial Law among us; this gave me a good Occasion to declare to the Soldiers
how God would punish, when Men wanted Power to do it.

This Charge, and the Resolution our Men showed in the Left Wing, made the
Enemy think of Retreating. Orders were given for it, and some marched off the
Field.

Whilst they were in this wavering condition, one Colonel Skirton desired his
General to let him Charge once with a Stand of Pikes, with which he broke in
upon our Men, and not being relieved by our Reserves, which were Commanded by
some ill-affected Officers, chiefly Major General Gifford, who did not his part
as he ought to do, Our Men lost Ground, which the Enemy seeing, pursued this
advantage, by bringing on fresh Troops; Ours being herewith discouraged, began
to fly, and were soon routed. The Horse also Charged us again, We not knowing
what was done in the Left Wing: Our Men maintained their Ground, till a Command
came for us to Retreat, having scarce any way now to do it, the Enemy being
almost round about us, and Our way to Bradford cut off. But there was a Lane in
the Field we were in, which led to Hallifax, which as a happy Providence,
brought us off, without any great Loss, save of Captain Talbot, and twelve more
that were slain in this last Encounter. Of those who fled, there were about
sixty killed, and three hundred taken Prisoners.

After this ill Success, we had small hopes of better, wanting all things
necessary in Bradford for defense of the Town, and no expectation of help from
any Place. The Earl of Newcastle presently Besieged the Town; but before he had
surrounded it, I got in with those Men I brought from Hallifax. I found my
Father much troubled, having neither a place of Strength to defend our selves
in, nor a Garrison in Yorkshire to Retreat to; for the Governor of Hull had
declared if we were forced to Retreat thither, he would shut the Gates on us.

Whilst he was musing on these sad thoughts, a Messenger was sent unto him from
Hull, to let him know the Townsmen had secured the Governor; that they were
sensible of the danger he was in, and if he had any occasion to make use of
that Place, he should be very readily and gladly received there. Which News was
joyfully received, and acknowledged as a great Mercy of God, yet it was not
made use of till a further necessity compelled.

My Father having Ordered me to stay here with eight hundred Foot, Bradford.
and sixty Horse, retired that Night to Leeds to secure it.

The Earl of Newcastle spent three or four days in laying his Quarters about
the Town of Bradford, and brought down his Cannon, but needed not to raise
Batteries, for the Hills within half Musket Shot commanded all the Town. Being
planted in two places, they shot furiously upon us, and made their Approaches,
which made us spend very much of our little Store, being not above twenty five
or twenty six Barrels of Powder, at the beginning of the Siege. Yet the Earl of
Newcastle sent a Trumpet to offer us Conditions, which I accepted, so they were
Honorable for us to take, and safe for the Inhabitants.

We sent two Captains to treat with him, and agreed to a Cessation during that
time; but he continued working still; whereupon I sent forth the Commissioners
again, suspecting a design of attempting something upon us. They returned not
till Eleven a Clock at Night, and then with a slight Answer.

Whilst they were delivering it to us, we heard great shooting of Cannon and
Muskets; all run presently to the Works, which the Enemy was storming. Here for
three quarters of an hour was very hot Service, but at length they retreated.

They made a Second attempt, but were also beaten off; after this, we had not
above one Barrel of Powder left, and no Match: I called the Officers together,
where it was advised and resolved to draw off presently, before it was day, and
to retreat to Leeds, by forcing a Way, which we must do, for they had
surrounded the Town.

Orders were dispatched, and speedily put in execution. The Foot Commanded by
Colonel Rogers was sent out, through some narrow Lanes, and they were to beat
up the Dragoons Quarters, and so go on to Leeds.

I my self with some other Officers went with the Horse, which were not above
fifty, in a more open Way.

I must not here forget my Wife, who ran the same hazard with us in this
Retreat, and with as little expression of Fear; not from any Zeal, or delight
in the War, but through a willing and patient Suffering of this undesirable
Condition.

I sent two or three Horsemen before, to discover what they could of the Enemy;
who presently returned and told us there was a Guard of Horse close by us.
Before I had gone forty Paces, the Day beginning to break, I saw them upon the
Hill above us, being about 300 Horse. I, with some 12 more, charged them, Sir
Hen. Fowls, Major General Gefford, my Self and 3 more brake through; Cap. Mudd
was slain, and the rest of our Horse being close by, the Enemy fell upon them,
and soon routed them, taking most of them Prisoners, among whom was my Wife,
the Officer Will. Hill, behind whom she rid, being taken.

I saw this Disaster, but could give no relief; for after I was got through, I
was in the Enemies Rear alone, those who had charged through with me, went on
to Leeds, thinking I had done so too: But I was unwilling to leave my Company,
and stayed till I saw there was no more in my Power to do, but to be taken
Prisoner with them. I then retired to Leeds.

The like Disaster fell among the Foot, that went the other way, by a mistake,
for after they had marched a little way, the Van fell into the Dragoons
Quarters, clearing their way; but through a cowardly fear, he that commanded
these Men, being in the Rear, made them face about, and march again into the
Town, where the next Day they were all taken Prisoners, only 80 or thereabout
of the Front that got through, came all to Leeds, mounted on Horses which they
had taken from the Enemy, where I found them when I came thither, which was
some joy to them all, concluding I was either slain, or taken Prisoner.

At Leeds I found all in great Distraction, the Council of War newly risen,
where it was resolved to quit the Town, and retreat to Hull, which was sixty
Miles off, many of the Enemies Garrisons being in the way. This, in two Hours
after, was accordingly done, least the Enemy should presently send Horse to
prevent us; for they had fifty or sixty Troops within three Miles: But we got
well to Selby, where there was a Ferry, and hard by a Garrison at Cawood.

My Father being a Mile before, Selby.
with a few Men, getting over the Ferry, word came to us that he was in danger
to be taken. I hasted to him with about forty Horse, the rest following in some
disorder. He was newly got into the Boat, when the Enemy with three Cornets of
Horse entered the Town.

I was drawn up in the Market place, directly before the Street they came down;
when they were almost half come into the Marketplace, they turned on the Right
Hand; with part of my Troop I charged them in the Flank, and divided them; we
had the Chase of them down the long Street that goes to Brayton.

It happened at the same time that those Men I left behind were coming up that
Street, but being in disorder, and discouraged with the Misfortunes of many
Days before, they turned about, and gave way, not knowing we were pursuing the
Enemy in their Rear.

At the end of this Street was a narrow Lane, which led to Cawood. The Enemy
strove to pass that way, but it being narrow, there was a sudden stop, where we
were mingled one among another.

Here I received a Shot in the Wrist of my Arm, which made the Bridle fall out
of my hand, and being among the Nerves and Veins, suddenly let out such a
quantity of Blood, that I was ready to fall from my Horse: But taking the Reins
in the other Hand in which I had my Sword, the Enemy minding nothing so much as
how to get away, I drew my self out of the Crowd, and came to our Men, who
turned about, and seeing me ready to fall from my Horse, they laid me on the
Ground; now when I was almost senseless, my Surgeon came seasonably, and bound
up the Wound, and stopped the bleeding.

After a quarter of an Hours rest, I got a Horseback again; the other part of
our Horse had beaten the Enemy back to Cawood, the same way they came first to
us.

Thus by the goodness of God, our passage was made clear; some went over the
Ferry after my Father, I my self with others went through the Levels to Hull,
but it proved a very troublesome and dangerous passage, being often interrupted
by the Enemy, sometimes in our Front, sometimes in our Rear.

I had been twenty Hours on Horseback, after I was shot, without any rest or
refreshment, and as many Hours before. And as a further Affliction, my Duck. of
Buck.
Daughter, not above five Years old, being carried before her Maid, endured all
this Retreat a Horseback; but Nature not being able to hold out any longer, she
fell into frequent Swoonings, and in appearance was ready to expire her last.

Having now past the Trent, and seeing a House not far off, I sent her with her
Maid only thither, with little hopes of seeing her any more alive, though I
intended the next Day to send a Ship from Hull for her.

I went on to Barton, having sent before to have a Ship ready against my coming
thither. Here I lay down to take a little rest, if it were possible to find any
in a Body so full of pain, and a Mind yet fuller of anxiety and trouble. Though
I must acknowledge it as the infinite goodness of God, that my Spirit was
nothing at all discouraged from doing still that which I thought to be my Duty.

I had not rested a quarter of an Hour, before the Enemy came close to the
Town. I had now not above a hundred Horse with me, we went to the Ship, where
under the Security of her Ordinance we got all our Men and Horse aboard; and
crossing Humber, we arrived at Hull, our Men faint and tired. I my self had
lost all, even to my Shirt, for my Clothes were made unfit to wear with Rents
and Blood. Presently after my coming to Hull, I sent a Ship for my Daughter,
who was brought the next Day to the Town, pretty well recovered of her long and
tedious Journey.

Not many Days after the Earl of Newcastle sent my Wife back again in his
Coach, with some Horse to guard her; which generous act of his gained him more
Reputation, than he could have got by detaining a Lady Prisoner, upon such
Terms.

Many of our Men, who were dispersed in this long Retreat, came hither again to
us. Our first Business was to raise new Forces, and in a short time we had
about 1500 Foot, and 700 Horse.

The Town being little, I was sent to Beverly, with the Horse, and 600 Foot,
but my Lord of Newcastle now looking upon us as inconsiderable, was marched
into Lincolnshire, with his whole Army, leaving some few Garrisons. He took in
Gainsbrough, and Lincoln, and intended Boston, which was the Key of the
Associated Counties; for his Orders, which I have seen, were to go into Essex,
and block up London on that side.

Having laid a great while still, and being now strong enough for those Forces
which remained in the Country, we sent out a good Party to make an Attempt upon
Stanford-Bridge, near York, but the Enemy upon the allarm fled thither, which
put them also in such a fear, that they sent earnestly to my Lord of Newcastle
to desire him to return, or the Country would again be lost. Upon this he
returned again into Yorkshire, and not long after came to besiege Hull.

I lay at Beverly in the way of his March, and finding we were not able to
defend such an open place against an Army, I desired Orders from my Father to
retire back to Hull: But the Committee there had more mind of raising Money,
than to take care of the Soldiers; and yet these Men had the greatest share in
Command at this time, and would not let any Orders be given for our Retreat;
nor was it fit for us to return without Order.

The Enemy marched with his whole Army toward us: Retreat we must not; keep
the Town we could not. So, to make our Retreat more honorable and useful, I
drew out all the Horse and Dragoons toward the Enemy; and stood drawn up by a
Wood side all that Night.

Next Morning by Day, our Scouts and theirs fired on one another. They marched
on with their whole Body, which was about 4000 Horse, and 12000 Foot. We stood
till they were come very near to us. I then drew off; having given direction
before for the Foot to March away toward Hull, and thinking to make good the
Retreat with the Horse.

The Enemy with a good Party came up in our Rear; the Lanes being narrow we
made good shift with them, till we got into Beverley, and shut the Gate, which
we had scarce time to do, they being so close to us.

In this business we lost Major Layton, and not above two more.

The Enemy not knowing what Forces we had in the Town, stayed till the rest of
the Army came up, which was about a Mile behind. This gave our Foot some
advantage in their Retreat, it being five Miles to Hull, and the way on narrow
Banks. I sent the Horse by Cottingham, a more open Road, who got well thither;
they overtook the Foot, and made good their Retreat, till we got to a little
Bridge two Miles from Hull, where we made a stand: The Enemy followed close:
Our Men gave them a good Volley of Shot, which made them draw back, and they
advanced no further.

So leaving a small Guard at the Bridge, we got safe to Hull.

Thus not only for want of Military Skill in the Gentlemen of the Committee,
but to say no more, for want of good Nature, we were exposed to this trouble
and danger.

My Lord of Newcastle now laid Siege to Hull, but at a great distance, for the
Sluices were let open and drowned the Land for two Miles about the Town.

Yet upon a Bank, which was the Highway, he approached so near as to shoot
Cannon Shot at random into the Town, and for the most part hot Bullets, but by
the Diligence and Care of the Governor, who caused every Inhabitant to watch
his own House, the Danger was prevented.

Our Horse was now useless, and many dyed every Day, having nothing but salt
Water about the Town. I was therefore sent over with the Horse into
Lincolnshire to join with the Earl of Manchester's Forces, which were then
Commanded by Major General Cromwell, who received us at our Landing with his
Troops.

Sir John Henderson lay within three or four Miles of this Place, with 5000
Men, to prevent our Conjunction, but durst not attempt it. He marched three or
four Days near unto us, but for want of good Intelligence, we did not know so
much. For I altogether trusted to the Care of our new Friends, being a Stranger
in those Parts.

At Horncastle one Morning he fell upon our out Guards, Winsby, or Horncastle.
who being but newly raised in that Country, fled toward Lincoln, without
giving any Allarm to our Quarters, that lay dispersed and secure.

Sir John Henderson marching slowly with his Army, gave the Allarm to some of
our out Quarters, which was soon taken in all the rest. Yet we were in some
disorder before we could get into any considerable Body. My Lord Willoughby
with his Horse, and my Dragoons, Commanded by Colonel Morgan, brought up the
Rear, and after some Skirmishes, we lodged that Night in the Field.

The next Day the Earl of Manchester came to us with his Foot, the Day
following we advanced toward the Enemy, and choosing a convenient Ground to
fight on, we drew up the Army there. The Enemy did so on the side of another
Hill close by, having a little Plain betwixt us. Lieutenant General Cromwell had
the Van, I the reserve of Horse, my Lord Manchester all the Foot.

After we had faced one another a good while, the Forlorn Hopes began the
Fight, presently the Bodies met on the Plain, where the Fight was hot for half
an Hour, but then they were forced to a Rout, 200 killed, and many taken
Prisoners.

This was the issue of Horncastle Fight, or as some call it, Winsby Fight.

At the same instant we heard great shooting of Ordinance toward Hull, which
was a Sally my Father made out of the Town upon my Lord of Newcastle's
Trenches, who drew out most part of his Army to relieve them: But our Men
charged so resolutely, that they possessed themselves of the Canon, and
pursuing their Advantage, put the Enemy to a total Rout, upon which he raised
the Siege, and returned again to York.

These two Defeats together, the one falling heavy upon the Horse, the other
upon the Foot, kept the Enemy all that Winter from attempting any thing; and
we, after the taking of Lincoln, settled our selves in Winter Quarters.

In the coldest Season of the Year I was commanded by the Parliament to go and
raise the Siege at Nantwich, which the Lord Byron, with the Irish Army, had
reduced to great Extremity. I was the most unfit of all their Forces, being
ever the worst Paid, my Men sickly and almost naked; I desired the Parliament
that they would be pleased to supply these Wants, not excusing my self, as some
did, who had no will to stir, though well enough accommodated.

The Parliament's answer was a positive direction to March, for it would admit
of no delay. But foreseeing I should have such a return to my Desires, and
considering the necessity of the Business, I had upon my own Credit got so much
Cloth as Clothed 1500 Men, and all were ready to March when these Orders came
to me.

The twenty ninth of December we set forward from Falkingham in Lincolnshire
with 1800 Horse, and 500 Drag^oons, and power to call the Regiments of Foot in
Lancashire and Cheshire, to make up the Body of the Army, which I found was not
a little trouble when I came to Manchester, for some were thirty, some forty
Miles distant, besides the dissatisfaction of some of their Colonels, who went
as their particular Safety or Interest swayed them.

But finding more readiness in the inferior Officers, and common Soldiers, I
got up in a few Days near 3000 Foot.

With this Army we marched to Nantwich, which was at the point of Surrendering.
When we came within a Days March, I had Intelligence the Lord Byron had drawn
off his Siege, and intended to meet us in the Field. I put my Men into the
Order in which I intended to Fight, and continued my March till we came within
three Miles of the Town.

There was a Pass kept with about 250 Men: I sent Colonel Morgan with his
Dragoons, who beat them off, in which his Brother was slain. The Major, who
commanded the other Party, with some others, was taken Prisoner.

We marched on till we came within Cannon shot of their Works, where half of
their Army was drawn up. And we were informed, that the River which runs
through the Town, being raised with the melting of the Snow, hindered those
that lay on the other side of the Town from joining with them.

We called a Council of War, wherein it was debated, whether we should attempt
those in their Works, being divided from the rest of the Army, or march into
the Town and relieve them, and by the increase of our Force be better able the
next day to encounter them.

This last was resolved on, and making way with Pioneers through the Hedges, we
marched to the Town; but after we had gone a little way, word came that the
Enemy was in the Rear. We faced about with two Regiments, and my own Regiment
of Horse, commanded by Major Rokeby, and relieved those that were engaged, and
so the Fight began on all sides.

These that fell on our Rear, were that part of their Army that lay on the
other side of the Town, who had past the River. Those who were drawn up under
their Works, fell upon our Van, which was marching to the Town. Thus was the
Battle divided, there being a quarter of a Mile betwixt us, in the Division
that first engaged. Our Foot at the beginning gave a little Ground, but our
Horse recovered this, by beating the Enemies Horse out of the Lanes that
flanked our Foot, which did so encourage our Men, that they regained their
Ground on the Enemy, and made them retreat from Hedge to Hedge, 'till at length
they were forced to fly to their Works.

Their Horse retreated in better Order, toward Chester, without much Loss. Our
other Wing being assisted from the Town, who sallied out with seven or eight
hundred Musketeers, beat the Enemy back into the same Works. We presently
surrounded them, and being in great Disorder and Confusion, they soon yielded
themselves Prisoners, with all their chief Officers, Arms, Colors and
Ammunition.

Thus, by the Mercy of God, was this Victory obtained, being the more signal,
in that we were not to deal with young Soldiers, but with Men of great
Experience, and an Army which had ever been victorious.

After this we took in several Garrisons in Cheshire; Latham only in Lancashire
held out, which was besieged by the Forces of that County, but afterward the
Siege was raised by Prince Rupert.

Having spent three or four Months in this Expedition, my Father commanded me
back into Yorkshire, that by the Conjunction of our Forces, he might be abler
to take the Field. We met about Ferry-bridge, he being come out of Hull
thither, with intent to fall upon the Enemies Garrison at Selby.

I received at this time another Command from the Parliament to march
immediately with my Horse and Dragoons into Northumberland, to join with the
Scots Army. The Earl of Newcastle, who was then at Durham being much stronger
in Horse than they, for want of which they could not advance: But it being
resolved within a Day or two to storm Selby, I stayed 'till that business was
over, which proved as effectual for the relief of the Scots Army.

The Governor of York, Coll. Bellasis, lay in Selby with 2000 Men. We drew our
Horse and Foot close to the Town, Sir John Meldrum led on the Foot, which had
their several Posts appointed them, where they should storm. I with the Horse
ready to second them. The Enemy within defended themselves stoutly a good
while. Our Men at length beat them from the Line, but could not advance further
because of the Horse within. I got a Barricado open, which let us in betwixt
the Houses and the River; here we had an encounter with their Horse: After one
Charge, they fled over a Bridge of Boats to York; their Horse came up, and
charged us again, where my Horse was overthrown, I being single a little before
my Men, who presently relieved me, and forced the Enemy back. They retreated
also to York. In this Charge we took Coll. Bellasis Governor of York. By this
time the Foot had entered the Town, and had taken many Prisoners. This good
Success of ours put them into great Distraction and Fear at York; so that they
speedily sent to the Earl of Newcastle to haste back thither, believing we
would presently attempt them.

This News suddenly called him back, leaving the Scots, who with Cold, and
often Allarms, were reduced to great Extremity, but now they advance after him.

The Earl of Newcastle gets into York; the Scots join with my Father at
Wetherby, altogether made 16000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. They march on to York.

For the Siege of York it was thought necessary to have more Men, the Town
being large in compass, and strongly manned. The Earl of Craford, Lindsey, and
my Self were sent to the Earl of Manchester, to desire him to join with us in
the Siege, to which he willingly consented, bringing an addition of 6000 Foot,
and 3000 Horse.

Now the Army had three Generals, Lesly, Manchester, and Fairfax, who lay apart
in three several Quarters before the Town, but the North side still remained
open.

Some time was spent here without any considerable Action, till in my Lord of
Manchester's Quarters, Approaches were made to St. Marry's Tower, and they soon
came to mine it. Coll. Crayford, a Scotchman, who commanded that Quarter,
sprung the Mine, being ambitious to have the Honor alone of it, without
acquainting the other two Generals, for their Advice, and Concurrence, which
proved very prejudicial, for having engaged his Party against the whole
Strength of the Town, without more Forces to second him, he was repulsed with
the loss of three hundred Men; for which he had surely been called to an
Account, but escaped the better by reason of this Triumviral Government.

Soon after Prince Rupert came to relieve the Town. We raised the Siege. Hessey
Moore was appointed the Randezvous. The whole Army drew thither. About a Mile
from thence lay the Prince, the River Ouse being betwixt us, which he that
night past over at Popleton. The next day he drew his Army into the same Moore,
which being now joined with my Lord of Newcastles Army, made about 23 or 24000
Men, We something more.

We were divided in our Opinions what to do. The English were for Fighting; the
Scots for Retreating, to gain (as they alleged) both Time, and Place of more
Advantage.

This being resolved on, we marched away to Tadcaster, which made the Enemy
advance the faster.

Lieutenant General Cromwell, Lesley, and my Self were appointed to bring up
the Rear. We sent word to the Generals of the necessity of making a stand, or
else the Enemy, having this Advantage, might put us in some disorder. But by
the advantage of the Ground we were on, we hoped to make it good till they came
back to us, which they did.

The Place was Marston Fields, which afterward gave the name to this Battle.

Here we drew up our Army. The Enemy was drawn up in Battalia on the Moore a
little below us.

The day being most part spent in Preparations, We now began to descend toward
them. Lieutenant General Cromwell commanded the left Wing of the Horse, and
seconded by Major General Lesley; I had the right Wing, with some Scots Horse,
and Lances for my Reserves. The three Generals were with the Foot.

Our left Wing first charged the Enemies right Wing, which was performed for a
while with much Resolution on both sides, but the Enemy at length was put to
the worst.

Our right Wing had not all so good success, by reason of the Furzes and
Ditches we were to pass over before we could get to the Enemy, which put us
into great disorder.

Notwithstanding I drew up a Body of 400 Horse. But because their Intervals of
Horse in this Wing only, were lined with Musketteers, who did us much hurt with
their Shot, I was necessitated to charge them. We were a long time engaged one
within another; but at last we routed that part of their Wing which we charged,
and pursued them a good way toward York. My self only returned presently, to
get to the Men I left behind me. But that part of the Enemy which stood,
perceiving the disorder they were in, had charged and routed them before I
could get to them: So that the good Success we had at the first was eclipsed by
this bad Conclusion.

Our other Wing and most of the Foot went on prosperously, 'till they had
cleared the Field.

I must ever remember with Thankfulness the Goodness of God to me this day; for
having charged through the Enemy, and my Men going after the Pursuit, and
returning back to go to my other Troops, I was got in among the Enemy, who
stood up and down the Field in several Bodies of Horse, so taking the Signal
out of my Hat, I past through them for one of their own Commanders, and got to
my Lord of Manchester's Horse, in the other Wing; only with a Cut in my Cheek,
which was given me in the first Charge, and a shot which my Horse received.

In this Charge many of my Officers and Soldiers were hurt and slain: The
Captain of my own Troop was shot in the Arm, my Cornet had both his Hands cut,
so as rendered him ever after unserviceable. Captain Micklethwait, an honest
stout Gentlemen, was slain: And scarce any Officer who was in this Charge but
received a Hurt. Coll. Lambert, who should have seconded me, but could not get
up to me, Charged in another place. Major Fairfax, who was Major to his
Regiment, had at least thirty Wounds, of which he dyed at York, after he had
been abroad again, and in good hopes of recovery.

But that which nearest of all concerned me, was the loss of my Charles Fairfax.
Brother, who being deserted of his Men, was sore wounded, of which in three or
four Days after he dyed. Buried at Marston. Aetat. 23.

In this Charge as many were hurt and killed as in the whole Army besides.

On the Enemy's part there were above 4000 slain, and many taken Prisoners.

Prince Rupert returned into the South, the Earl of Newcastle went beyond Sea,
with many of his Officers. York was presently surrendered, and the North now
was wholly reduced by the Parliament's Forces, except some Garrisons.

Soon after this I went to Helmesley, to take in the Castle there, where I
received a dangerous Shot in my Shoulder, and was brought back to York, all
being doubtful of my Recovery for some time.

At the same time the Parliament voted me to Command the Army in the South.

But my Intentions being only to keep in mind what I had been present in during
this Northern War, I shall put an end to this Discourse, where it pleased God
to determine my Service there.

Yet thus with some smart from his Rod, to let me see I was not mindful enough
of returning my humble Thanks and Acknowledgments for the Deliverances and
Mercies I received; and for which* (alas) I am not yet capable enough to Praise
him as I ought, that may say by Experience, Who is a God like unto Our God.

Therefore, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give we the
Praise.

But as for my self, and what I have done, I may say with Solomon, I looked on
all the Works that my Hands had wrought, and on the Labor that I had labored
to do, and behold all was Vanity and vexation of Spirit.

For there is no remembrance of the Wise more than the Fool for ever, seeing
that which now is, in the Days to come shall be forgotten.

T. Fairfax.

SHORT MEMORIALS OF Some things to be cleared during my Command in the Army.
BY the Grace and Assistance of God, I shall truly set down the Grounds of my
Actions during this unhappy War, and especially of those Actions which seemed
to the World most questionable.

My first engaging in the sad Calamities of the War, was about the Year 1641,
when the general Distemper of the three Kingdoms, I mean the Difference betwixt
the King and Parliament had kindled such a Flame even in the Heart of the
State, that before a Remedy could be found, the whole Body was almost consumed
to Ashes.

I must needs say, my Judgment was for the Parliament, as the King and Kingdoms
great and safest Council: As others were averse to Parliaments, because they
did not go high enough for Prerogative.

Upon this Division, different Powers were set up: The Commission of Array for
the King, and the Militia for the Parliament. But those of the Array exceeded
their Commission in oppressing many honest People, whom, by way of Reproach,
they called Roundheads, who for their Religion, Estates, and Interest, were a
very considerable part of the Country; which occasioned them to take up Arms in
their own defense, and it was afterward confirmed by Authority of Parliament.

My Father, being yet at his House at Denton, where I then waited on him, had
notice from his Friends, that it was intended he should be sent for as a
Prisoner to York: He resolved not to stir from his own House, not being
conscious to himself of any thing to deserve Imprisonment.

The Country suffering daily more and more, many came and entreated him to join
with them in defense of themselves and Country, which was extremely oppressed
by those of the Array (who after had the Name of Cavaliers) and he being also
much importuned by those about him, seeing his Neighbors in this Distress,
resolved to run the same Hazard with them.

Then did the Parliament grant a Commission to him to be General of the Forces
in the North; my self also having a Commission under him to be General of the
Horse.

It is not my intention in this place to relate the services done in this Cause
of the Parliament. For I am rather desirous to clear my Actions, than declare
them; and therefore I shall say no more of this three years War in the North*
there being nothing (I thank God) in all that time to be objected against me in
particular: But I shall say something how I came to be engaged in the South.

Some years had been spent in those Parts, in a lingering War betwixt the King
and Parliament, and several Battles so equally fought, that it could scarce be
known on which side the business in dispute would be determined: Though it must
be confessed that the Parliaments Army was under the Command of a very noble and
gallant Person, the Earl of Essex, yet they found that time and delay gained
more advantage against them, and their Affairs, than Force had done. They
therefore resolved to make a change in the Constitution of their Armies, hoping
by it to find a change also in their business, which was then something in a
declining condition. In this distemper of things, the Army was new-modell'd,
and a new General proposed to Command it: And by Votes of the two Houses of
Parliament I was nominated, though most unfit, and so far from desiring it,
that had not so great an Authority (which was then unseperated from the Royal
Interest) Commanded my Obedience, and had I not been urged by the Persuasion of
my nearest Friends, I should have refused so great a Charge: But whether it was
from a natural facility in me, that betrayed my Modesty, or the powerful hand
of God, which all things must obey, I was induced to receive the Command.

Then was I immediately voted by the Parliament to come to London, and take my
Charge, though not fully recovered of a dangerous Wound which I had received a
little before at Helmesley, and which I believe, without the miraculous hand of
God, had proved mortal.

But here (alas) when I bring to mind the sad consequences that crafty and
designing Men have brought to pass since those first innocent Undertakings, I
am ready to let go that confidence I once had with God, when I could say with
Job, Till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, nor shall my Heart
reproach me so long as I live: But I am now more fit to take up his complaint,
and say, Why did I not die? why did I not give up the Ghost when my Life was on
the confines of the Grave?

God having been pleased thus to give me my Life for a Prey, I took my Journey
Southward, hoping it might be some ways serviceable to the Public: But when I
came thither, had it not been in the simplicity of my Heart, I could not have
supported my self under the frowns and displeasures of those who were disgusted
with these alterations, in which many of them were much concerned: And
therefore they sought by all means to obstruct my proceedings in this new
Charge; though they could not prevent what the necessity of Affairs pressed most
to do, which was to march speedily out with the Army; yet were we by them made
so inconsiderable, for want of fit and necessary accommodations, as it rather
seemed that we were sent to be destroyed, than to do any service to the Kingdom.

Surely then if we had had no other end but Self-interest, this might have
discouraged us: But it wrought no such Effect on me, but rather gave me the
more hopes of future success, as happened to the Parliament's great advantage.
But if any ill Use has been made of such Mercies, let the Mercies be
acknowledged from God, but the abusers of them receive their due reward of
shame and punishment.

Being thus led on by good Success, and clear intention of public Good, some
of us could not discern the Serpent which was hid under the leaves of so good
Fortune, nor believe the fruits of our hopes would prove as Cockatrice Eggs,
from whence so mischievous a Brood should afterward spring.

But how ill deserving soever we were, it pleased God still to give the Army
such success in the Years of 1645 and 1646, that there remained in England
neither Army not Fortress to oppose the Parliament in settling the Peace of the
Kingdom.

This Mercy was soon clouded with abominable Hypocrisy and Deceit, even in
those Men who had been instrumental in bringing this War to a conclusion.

Here was the vertical Point on which the Army's Honor and Reputation turned
into Reproach and Scandal. Here the Power of the Army I once had, was usurped
by the Agitators, the forerunners of Confusion and Anarchy.

My Commission as General obliged me to act with Council; but the arbitrary and
unlimited Power of this Council would act without a General: And all I could do
was ineffectual to oppose them; especially when the Parliament it self became
divided.

At this time the Pay was withheld from the Army, which increased their
Distempers; then followed Free Quarter, and that wrought a general Discontent
through the whole Nation, which gave these factious Agitators occasion to carry
on their Design of raising their own Fortunes upon the Public ruin.

I was much troubled to see things in this Condition, and rather desired to be
a Sufferer than a Commander: But before I laid down my Commission, I thought
fit to consult some Friends, rather than gratify my private Reason and Desires,
especially having received it from a Public Authority, which might justly
expect to have notice before I laid it down.

This was the Cause of my continuing in the Army longer than I would have done,
which did indeed preserve the Parliament for some time from those Violences
that it afterward suffered from these Disturbers.

I shall now descend to some particulars of their Agitations.

The first time I took notice of them, was at Nottingham, by the Soldiers
meeting to frame a Petition to the Parliament about their Arrears: The thing
seemed just; but not liking the way, I spoke with some Officers, who were
principally engaged in it, and got it suppressed for that time. But this was
only as the cutting off a Hydra's Head; for they began again, not so near the
Headquarters, but in more remote Corners of the Army; so that before I could
prevent it, they presented it to the Parliament; At which they were highly
displeased.

They now fell into Differences, the consequence of which did not only prove
fatal to the King, but destructive to themselves: The one striving to uphold
their Authority; the other, who had a Spirit of Unsettlement, to preserve
themselves from the Ruin they feared.

This, with a natural Inclination to change, I believe created thoughts of new
Government, which in time attained the Name of a Commonwealth, but never
arrived to the Perfection of it, being sometimes Democratical, then
Oligarchical; lastly, Anarchical: And indeed all the ways of attaining to it,
seemed nothing but Confusion. For now the Officers of the Army were placed and
displaced at the will of the new Agitators; and Violence so prevailed, that it
was above my Power to restrain it. This made me have recourse to my Friends, to
get me a Discharge of my Command; and several Members of Parliament met and
consulted about it, but none would undertake to move it to the House, as
Affairs then stood, believing such a Motion would be unpleasing to them.

This was the Answer I received from them, and that I should satisfy my self,
for it would be the Parliament's care to compose all things for the Good and
Settlement of the Kingdom.

These hopes did a little support my Spirit, but could not Balance the Grief
and Trouble I had, that I could not get my Discharge: So that if you find me
carried on with this Stream, I can truly say, it was by the Violence of it,
rather than my own Consent.

The Army got this Power and Strength by Correspondence with some in
Parliament, who found it afterward to their own Trouble. The Army marched
nearer London; and at Windsor, after two days debate in a Council of War, it
was resolved to remove all out of the House, whom they conceived did obstruct
(as they called it) the Public Settlement.

I was pressed to use all Expedition in this March; but here I resolved to use a
restrictive Power, where I had not a Persuasive: And when the
Lieutenant General, and others, did urge me to sign Orders for marching, I
still delayed it, as ever dreading the Consequences of breaking Parliaments,
and at a time when the Kingdom was falling into a new War, which was so near,
that my delaying three or four days giving out Orders, diverted this Humor of
the Army, from being Statesmen, to their more proper Duty as Soldiers.

Then did Colonel Poyer declare in Wales; great Forces did rise with my Lord
Goring in Kent; and Duke Hamilton came into England, almost at the same time
with a Powerful Army of Scots; all which set out work enough that Summer.

This I write to show how by Providence a few days of delay secured the
Parliament above a Year from the Violence which soon after was offered them.

I might here mention those great and difficult Actions the Army performed that
Year, In Rent, etc.
which were designed for the Good of the Kingdom; but that Factious Party
growing more Insolent, as Success made them more powerful, I shall forbear to
relate them, which otherwise would have deserved a better remembrance than in
Modesty were fit for me to give.

I shall rather punish my self with the continuance of this Story of the
Irregularities of the Army. But I must not forget one thing of very great
Concernment in the after Changes, which should have been inserted before the
mentioning of this Second War; The King's removal from Holmby, the sad
Consequences whereof fill my Heart with Grief in the remembrance of them, as
they did then with Care how to prevent them.

Being at Saffron-Walden in Essex, I had notice that Cornet Joyce, an
Arch-Agitator, who Quartered about Oxford, had seized on the King's Person,
removed his Guards, and given such a Check to the Commissioners of Parliament,
who were ordered there to attend His Majesty, that they refused to act any
further on their Commission, being so unwarrantably interrupted.

So soon as I heard of it, I immediately sent away two Regiments of Horse,
Commanded by Colonel Whaley to remove this Force, and to set all things again
in their due Course and Order. But before he came to Holmby, the King was
advanced two or three Miles on his way to Cambridge, attended by Joyce, where
Colonel Whaley acquainted the King, he was sent by the General to let him know
how much he was troubled at those great Insolences that had been committed so
near his Person; and as he had not the least knowledge of them before they were
done, so he had omitted no time in seeking to remove that Force, which he had
Orders from me to see done: And therefore he desired His Majesty that he would
be pleased to return again to Holmby, where all things should be settled again
in as much Order and Quietness as they were before. And also he desired the
Commissioners to reassume their Charge, as the Parliament had directed them,
which he was also to desire them to do from the General. But the King refused
to return, and the Commissioners to Act; whereupon Colonel Whaley urged them to
it, saying, He had an express Command to see all things well settled again
about His Majesty, which could not be done, but by His returning again to
Holmby.

The King said positively, he would not do it; so the Colonel pressed him no more
to it, having indeed a special Direction from me to use all Tenderness and
Respect, as was due to His Majesty.

The King came that Night, or the next, to Sir John Cutts's House, near
Cambridge; and the next day I waited on His Majesty, it being also my business
to persuade his Return to Holmby, but he was otherwise resolved.

I pressed the Commissioners also to Act according to the Power given them by the
Parliament, which they also refused to do: So having spent the whole day about
this business, I returned to my Quarters; and as I took leave of the King, he
said to me, Sir, I have as good Interest in the Army as you; by which I plainly
saw the broken Reed he leaned on.

The Agitators could change into that Color which served next to their ends;
and had brought the King into an Opinion that the Army was for him.

That it might appear what a real trouble this Act was to me, though the Army
was almost wholly infected with this Humor of Agitation, I called for a
Council of War, to proceed against Joyce for this high Offense, and breach of
the Articles of War, but the Officers, whether for fear of the distempered
Soldiers, or rather (as I suspected) a secret allowance of what was done, made
all my endeavors in this ineffectual. And now no Punishment being able to
reach them; all Affairs were steered after this Compass* the King and his
Party, in Hopes; those of the Parliament, and others, who kept to their
Covenant Interest, in Fears; so as for many Months all Public Councils were
turned into private Junto's, which begot greater Emulations and Jealousies
among them. So that the Army would not trust the King any longer with the
Liberty he had, nor the Parliament suffer the Army to undertake that which was
more properly their own Work, to Settle the Kingdom in its just Rights and
Liberties; and the Army was as Jealous that the Parliament would not have care
enough of their Security.

All things growing worse and worse, made the King endeavor to escape, which
he did; but out of a larger Confinement at Hampton Court, to a straiter one in
the Isle of Wight.

Here the Parliament treated upon Propositions of Peace with the King; but,
alas, the envious one sowed Tares that could not be rooted out, but by plucking
up the Corn also.

The King was the Golden Ball cast before the two Parties, the Parliament and
the Army; and the Contest grew so great, that it must again have involved the
Kingdom in Blood; but the Army having the greater Power* got the King again
into their Hands, notwithstanding all endeavors to hinder it.

The Treaty was scarce ended before the King was seized on by the Hands of the
same Persons that took him from Holmby; soon after followed his Trial.

To prepare a way to this Work, this Agitating Council did first intend to
remove all out of the Parliament who were like to oppose them, and carried it
on with such Secrecy, as I had not the least Intimation of it till it was done,
as some of the Members of the House can witness, with whom I was at that very
time upon special Business, when that Attempt was made by Colonel Pride upon
the Parliament, which I protest I never had any knowledge of till it was done.
The Reason why it was so secretly carried, that I should have no notice of it,
was, because I always prevented those Designs when I knew them.

By this purging of the House, (as they called it) the Parliament was brought
into such a consumptive and languishing Condition, that it could never again
recover that healthful Constitution, which always kept the Kingdom in its
Strength, Life, and Vigor.

This Way being made by the Sword, the Trial of the King was easier for them to
accomplish.

My afflicted and troubled Mind for it, and my earnest Endeavors to prevent
it, will, I hope, sufficiently testify my dislike and abhorrence of the Fact:
And what will they not do to the Shrubs, having cut down the Cedar?

After this, Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, the Lord Capel, and others,
were condemned to Death.

It is fit for me in this Place to say something for my own Vindication about
my Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle, who were Prisoners at
Mercy upon the rendering of Colchester, seeing some have questioned the just
Performance of those Articles.

I laid Siege to the Town, and made several Assaults: But finding their Forces
within much more numerous than those I had without, I was forced to take
another course in blocking them up, and, by cutting off all supplies, to bring
them to a Surrender; which after four Months close Siege they were compelled
to, and that upon Mercy, being in Number three or four thousand Men; and
delivering upon Mercy, is to be understood that some are to Suffer, the rest to
go Free.

Immediately after our entrance into the Town, a Council of War was called, and
those forenamed Persons were Sentenced to Die, the rest to be Acquitted.

This being so resolved, I thought fit notwithstanding to transmit the Lord
Capel, the Lord Norwich, etc. over to the Parliament, being the Civil
Judicature of the Kingdom, consisting then both of Lords and Commons, and so
most proper Judges in their Case; who were considerable for Estates and
Families: But Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, being mere Soldiers of
Fortune, and falling into our hands by chance of War, were Executed; and in
this I did nothing but according to my Commission, and the Trust reposed in me.

But it may be objected I went into the Court during the Trial; to which I
answer, it was at the earnest request of my Lord Capel's Friends, who desired
me to explain there what was meant by surrendering to Mercy: Otherwise I had not
gone, being always unsatisfied with those Courts.

For this I need say no more, seeing I may as well be questioned for the
Articles of Bristol, Oxford, Exeter, or any other Action in the War, as this.

I have now related the most remarkable Things that might be alleged against
me, during the prosecution of the War.

One thing more requires I should say something to before I conclude; that is,
concerning Papers and Declarations of the Army that came out in my Name, and
the Council of Officers.

I say from the time they declared their usurped Authority at Triplow Heath, I
never gave my free Consent to any thing they did: But being yet undischarged of
my Place, they set my Name in way of course to all their Papers, whether I
consented or not: And to such failings are all Authorities subject. Under
Parliament Authority many injuries have been done; so here has a General's
Power been broken and crumbled into a Levelling Faction.

Yet even this I hope all impartial Judges will interpret as Force and
Ravishment of a good Name, rather than a voluntary Consent, which might make me
equally Criminal with that Faction. And if in a multitude of Words, much more
in a multitude of Actions, there must be some Transgressions; yet I can truly
say, they were never designedly, or wilfully committed by me.

All the Power being got into the Army, they cut up the root of Kingly
Government; after this were Engagements made to abolish that Title. Then was
War declared against Scotland for assisting the King, and several Leagues made
with Foreign Princes, to Confederate with their new Government, which was now a
Commonwealth, against the Kingly Power.

All this I saw with grief and sorrow, and though I had as much the Love of the
Army as ever, and was with great importunity solicited by that remaining
Parliament and Soldiers, to continue my Command; and though I might, so long as
I acted their Designs, have attained to what height of Power, and other
Advantages I pleased; yet by the mercies and goodness of God, I did, so long as
I continued in the Army, oppose all those Ways in their Councils, and when I
could do no more, I then declined their Actions: Though I did not resign my
Commission which I had from the Parliament, till the remaining part of it took
it from me.

Thus have I given you the Sum of the most considerable Things, for which the
World may Censure me, during this unhappy War; and I hope in all my Weakness
and Failings, there shall not be found Crimes of that Magnitude to make me be
numbered with those who have done these Things through Ambition and
Dissimulation.

FINIS.
THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX HIS EPITAPH Made by the Duke of BUCKINGHAM.
UNDER this Stone does lie
One born for Victory,
Fairfax the Valiant, and the only He
Who e're for that alone, a Conqueror would be.
Both Sexes Virtues were in him combined,
He had the fierceness of the Manliest mind,
And all the meekness too of Womankind.
He never knew what Envy was, nor Hate;
His Soul was filled with worth, and Honesty,
And with another thing besides quite out of date,
Called Modesty.
He never seemed Impudent but in the Field, a place
Where Impudence it self dares seldom show its face.
Had any stranger spied him in a room
With some of those whom he had overcome,
And had not heard their talk, but only seen
Their Gesture, and their Mien,
They would have sworn he had the Vanquished been:
For as they bragged, and dreadful would appear,
Whilst they their own ill luck repeated,
His Modesty still made him blush to hear
How often he had them defeated.
Through his whole life the part he bore
Was wonderful and great,
And yet it so appeared in nothing more
Than in his private last Retreat;
For it is a stranger thing to find
One Man of such a glorious mind
As can despise the Power he has got,
Than millions of the Poll's and Braves,
Those despicable Fools and Knaves,
Who such a pudder make,
Through dullness and mistake,
In seeking after Power, and get it not.
When all the Nation he had won,
And with expense of blood had bought
Store great enough, he thought,
Of Fame, and of Renown,
He then his Arms laid down
With full as little Pride
As if h' ad been oth' Conquered side,
Or one of them could do that were undone.
He neither Wealth nor Places sought;
For others, not himself, he fought.
He was content to know,
For he had found it so,
That when he pleased to Conquer, he was able,
And left the Spoil and Plunder to the Rabble.
He might have been a King,
But that he understood,
How much it is a meaner thing
To be unjustly Great, than honorably Good.
This from the World did admiration draw,
And from his Friends both love and awe,
Remembering what he did in Fight before.
Nay has Foes loved him too,
As they were bound to do,
Because he was resolved to Fight no more.
So blessed of all he di'd, but far more blessed were we,
If we were sure to live till we could see,
A Man as Great in War, as Just in Peace as He.
There is lately Published, PROPOSALS for the Subscriptions to a Book now Ready
for the Press, Entitled, The Fourth and Last Part of Mr. RUSHWORTH's
Historical Collections. Containing the Principal Matters which happened from
the Beginning of the Year 1645. (where the Third Part ended) to the Death of
King Charles the First, 1648. Impartially Related: Setting forth only Matter of
Fact* in Order of Time, without Observation or Reflection. Fitted for the Press
in his Lifetime. To which will be added, Exact Alphabetical Tables.

WHEREAS many Gentlemen are already provided with all the Parts of Mr.
Rushworth's Collections which are yet Printed, viz.

The FIRST PART in One Volume, which Began with the 16th Year of King James the
First, Anno 1618. and Ended the Fifth Year of King Charles the First, Anno 1629.

The SECOND PART in Two Volumes, Beginning Anno 1629. and Ending Anno 1640.

The THIRD PART in Two Volumes, Beginning at the Meeting of the Parliament,
November 3. 1640. and Ending 1644.

And being Desirous of Completing their Sets of that Laborious and Exact
Collection*

The UNDERTAKERS of this Fourth and Last Part (having Purchased the Copy at a
very Considerable Rate) do Propose to Print it by Subscriptions, upon the Terms
following:

I. It shall be Printed in Two Volumes, after the same Manner with those
already Published, and will Contain about Five Hundred Sheets. Which at the
usual Rate in Common Sale, could not be allowed for less than Forty Shillings
Unbound of the Small Paper; and Four Pounds of the Large Paper. Five and Twenty
only will be Printed on Large Paper, for Accommodation of such Gentlemen as
have the Former Volumes of the same Paper. II. That every Gentleman upon
Subscribing, shall Pay down in Part Twenty Shillings for One Book of the Small
Paper, and Thirty Shillings for One of the Large Paper; and at Delivery of a
Perfect Book in Quires Fifteen Shillings more for the Small, and Thirty
Shillings more for the Large Paper. III. That whoever Subscribes for Six Books
of the Small Paper, shall have a Seventh Gratis: (Which reduces the Price to
Thirty Shillings.) Note, No advantage can be allowed on the Large Paper Books.
IV. That no more Books will be Printed, than what shall be Subscribed for. And
if any Books shall happen to be left on our hands by any Subscribers, they
shall not be sold for less than Forty Shillings, Unbound. V. Subscriptions will
be taken till the 29th of June next, being the Last Day of Midsummer-Term, and
the Book shall be finished in Michaelmas-Term following.
And whereas there were Printed of the FIRST PART above Three Thousand; of the
SECOND PART Two Thousand, which are all Sold of; and of the THIRD PART near
Fifteen Hundred, of which some are yet unsold (Diverse Gentlemen suspending to
buy the THIRD PART till the WHOLE should be finished); so that there are abroad
several Sets Imperfect:

Now for the Encouragement of SUBSCRIBERS to this Fourth Part, and the
Accommodation of such Gentlemen, who are not yet furnished with the Third; The
Undertakers do Propose to all SUCH, and no others, The Third Part at Thirty
Shillings in Quires, of the Small Paper; and Three Pounds of the Large Paper.

These Papers of Proposals are to be had of the UNDERTAKERS,

Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard:

AND

Thomas Cockerill, in Amen-Corner, at the End of Paternoster Row.

And of most Booksellers in London and the Country.

BOOKS Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
WHarton's Anglia Sacra. In 2 Volumes. Folio. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primive
Fathers. In 2 Vol. Folio. Dr. John Lightfoot's Works. In 2 Vol. Folio. Dr. Pet.
Allix's Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
Piedmont and Albigences. In 2 Parts. Quarto. Bishop Burnet's Collection of
Tracts, relating both to Church and State, from 1678 to 1694. In 3 Vol. Quarto.
Dr. Wake's Eleven Treatises against Popery. In 2 Vol. Quarto. Dr. Tennison (now
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) his Account of the Conference with Pulton the
Jesuit. Quarto. -- His Nine Sermons upon Several Occasions. Quarto. A Discourse
of the Unreasonableness of Separation on account of the Oaths. By Bishop
Stilling fleet. Quarto. A Vindication of the said Discourse. By Dr. Williams.
Quarto. A Vindication of His Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of the
Deprived Bishops. By Bishop Stilling fleet. Quarto. Dr. William's Discourse of
the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the Common Prayer. Quarto. -- His
Representation of the absurd and mischievous Principles of the Muggletonians.
Quarto. The Secret Consults, Negotiations, and Intriegues of the Romish Party
in Ireland, from 1660 to 1689. Quarto. An Impartial History of the Wars in
Ireland. In Two Parts. With Copper Sculpturs. By Mr. Story, (now Dean of Down
and Connor) present in the same. The New Cambridge Dictionary. In Five
Alphabets. Quarto. England's Wants: Or, some Proposals to the Parliament,
probably beneficial to England. Quarto. Dr. Allix's Reflections on the Holy
Scripture. Octavo. Cole 's English and Latin Dictionary. Octavo. The Jesuits
Memorial for the intended Reformation of England, under a Popish Prince.
Octavo. [Found in King James's Closet.] The History of the Troubles and Trial
of Archbishop Laud; wrote by himself: Published by Henry Wharton. Folio.
Remarks on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers, against Bishop
Burnet. Animadversions on Mr. Hill's Vindication of the Primitive Fathers,
against Bishop Burnet. Dr. William's Vindication of Archbishop Tillotson's
Sermons against the Socinians; and of the Bishop of Worcester's Sermon of the
Mysteries of the Christian Religion. To which is annexed, a Letter from the
Bishop of Salisbury to the Author, in Vindication of his Discourse of the
Divinity of our Savior. Quarto.
Books written by Simon Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Ely.
-- The Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The Sixth Edition. Quarto.
1681. -- Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper: In which the Ends of the Institution are so manifest, our Addresses to
it so directed; our Behavior there and afterward, so composed, that we may not
lose the Profits which are to be received by it. With Prayers and Thanksgivings
inserted. To which is annexed, -- Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse concerning
Baptism: In which is inserted a Discourse to persuade to a Confirmation of the
Baptismal Vow. Octavo. -- Jeshish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the present
Generation. Wherein is shown both the false and true way to a Nations, or
Persons, complete Happiness, from the Sickness and Recovery of the Jewish
State. To which is added, A Discourse upon Micah 6. 8. belonging to the same
matter. Octavo. -- Divine Arithmetic: A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel
Jacomb, Minister of St. Mary Woollnoth Church in Lombard Street, London. With
an Account of his Life. Octavo. -- A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho.
Grigg, Rector of St. Andrew Undershaft, London, Quarto. -- An Exposition of the
Ten Commandments. Octavo. -- Hearts Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles.
With a Consolatory Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost
their Friends and Relations. To which is added, Two Papers, Printed in the time
of the late Plague. The Seventh Edition corrected. 12 mo. 1699. -- The Pillar
and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church falsely claims to
be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St. Paul, in 1 Timothy
3. 15. Quarto. -- An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz.
ANTIQUITY. Quarto. -- An Examination of the Texts which Papists cite out of the
Bible to prove the Supremacy of St. Peter, and of the Pope, over the whole
Church. In Two Parts. Quarto. -- A private Prayer to be used in difficult
Times. -- A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance. -- A Prayer for
Charity, Peace and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent. -- A Sermon preached upon
St. Peter's Day; printed with Enlargements. Quarto. -- A Sermon preached in St.
James's Chapel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan. 20. 1681. on Isaiah 11. 6.
-- A Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text.
Preached in Covent Garden. -- A Sermon preached before the Queen in March,
1688. on Colos. 3. 15. -- A Sermon against Murmuring, preached at Covent Garden
in Lent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 10. 10. -- A Sermon against Censuring, preached at
Covent Garden in Advent, 1688. on 1 Cor. 4. 10. -- A Fast-Sermon before the
King and Queen, April 16. 1690. on Prove. 14. 34. -- A Thanksgiving-Sermon
before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for the reducing of Ireland, and the King's
safe Return, on Deuteronomy. 4. 9. -- A Fast-Sermon before the Queen, April 8. 1692.
on Numb. 10. 9. -- Easter-Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1696. on 2 Timothy 2. 8.
-- A Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 5. 1696. on Dan. 4. 35. -- A Commentary on
Genesis. Quarto. 1695. -- A Commentary on Exodus. Quarto. 1697. -- A Commentary
on Leviticus. Quarto. School. -- A Commentary on Numbers. Quarto. 1699.
Of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith and Profession of the True Religion,
in several Sermons, by Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
Being the First Volume, Published from the Originals, by Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace. The Second Edition. Octavo. -- Sixteen Sermons preached
on several Occasions: By the Same Author. Being the Second Volume. Published by
Dr. Barker. Octavo. -- Sixteen Sermons preached on several Subjects; being the
Third Volume, by the Same Author. Published by Dr. Barker. Octavo. -- Several
Discourses, viz. Of the great Duties of Natural Religion. Instituted Religion
not intended to undermine Natural. Christianity not Destructive, but Perfective
of the Law of Moses. The Nature and Necessity of Regeneration. The Danger of
all known Sin. Knowledge and Practice necessary in Religion. The Sins of Men
not chargeable on God. Being the Fourth Volume, by the Same Author, Published
by Dr. Barker. Octavo. Reflections upon a Pamphlet, Entitled, [Some Discourses
upon Dr. Burnet, and Dr. Tillotson, occasioned by the late Funeral Sermon of
the former upon the latter.] By Dr. Gilbert Burnet Lord Bishop of Sarum.
Octavo. -- His Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal, on Christmas Day,
1696. Quarto. On Galat. 4. 4. -- His Sermon preached before the King at
Whitehal, on the third Sunday in Lent, being the Seventh of March, 1696. 1
Ephesians. 5. 2. -- His Essay on the Memory of the late Queen. The second Edition.
Octavo. Dr. Williams (now Lord Bishop of Chichester) his eight Sermons at Esquire
Boyle's Lecture for the Year 1695. Quarto. [Any of them may be had single, to
perfect Sets. -- His first, second, third, fourth Sermons at the same Lecture
for the year 1696. Quarto. -- His Sermon preached at St. Lawrence Jury before
the Lord Mayor, etc. on Saturday the 28th of September, 1695. at the Election
of the Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing. On Joshua 22. 31. Quarto -- His Sermon
preached before the Honorable House of Commons, on Wednesday, December, 11.
1695. Being a solemn Day of Fasting and Humiliation, appointed by his Majesty
for imploring the Blessing of Almighty God upon the Consultations of this
present Parliament. Quarto. On 1 Samuel 11. 30. -- His Sermon upon the
Resurrection, preached before Sir Edward Clark Lord Mayor, etc. on Easter
Monday, April 5. 1697. on Acts 10. 40, 41, 42. Reflections upon a Libel lately
Printed, Entitled, [The Charge of Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson,
Considered, 4to.] The Church History of Ethiopia; wherein, among other things,
the two great splendid Roman Missions into that Empire are placed in their true
Light; to which are added an Epitome of the Dominican History of that Church.
And an Account of the Practices and Conviction of Maria of the Annunciation,
the famous Nun of Lisbon. Composed by Michael Geddes, D. D. Chancellor of the
Cathedral Church of Sarum. Octavo. Fourteen Sermons preached in Lambeth
Chapel, before Dr. William Sancroft, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. In
the Years 1688, and 1689, by the Learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his
Grace; withan Account of the Author's Life. Octavo. Dr. William Owtram's twenty
Sermons. On several Occasions. The 2d Edition. Octavo. Sermons preached on
several Occasions. By John Conant D. D. The first and second Volumes. Published
by Dr. Williams, now Lord Bishop of Chichester. Octavo. The 2d Edition
Corrected. 1699. The Fathers vindicated: Or Animadversions on a late Socinian
Book, Entitled, [The Judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity, against Dr.
Bull's Defense of the Nicene Faith.] By a Presbyter of the Church of England.
Octavo.
A Fifth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discourses, published by his Chaplain
Dr. Barker, on these following Subjects, viz. Proving Jesus to be the Messiah.
The Prejudices against Jesus and his Religion considered. Jesus the Son of God,
proved by his Resurrection. The Danger of Apostasy from Christianity. Christ
the Author, and Obedience the Condition of Salvation. The Possibility and
Necessity of Gospel Obedience, and its consistence with Free Grace. The
Authority of Jesus Christ, with the Commission and Promise which he gave to his
Apostles. The Difficulties of a Christian Life considered. The Parable of a
Rich Man and Lazarus. Children of this World wiser than the Children of Light.
Octavo. School.

A second Volume of Sermons preached in Lambeth Chapel before Archbishop
Sancroft, 1690. By the Learned Mr. Henry Wharton, his Graces, Chaplain. Which
with the first Volume lately published, are all that he preached.

A New Account of India and Persia; being Nine Years Travel, began 1672. and
finished 1681. Containing Observations made of those Countries: Namely, Of
their Government, Religion, Laws, Customs: Of their Soil, Climates, Seasons,
Health, Diseases. Of their Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, Jewels. Of their
Housing, Clothing, Manufactures, Trades, Commodities. And of the Coins,
Weights and Measures used in the Principal Places of Trade in those Parts. By
John Friar M. D. Cantabrig. and Fellow of the Royal Society. Folio. School.

SCRIPTORUM ECCLESIASTIORUM Historia Literaria facili and perspicua methodo
digesta. Pars Altera. Qua plusquam DC. Scriptores novi, tam Editi quam
Manuscripti recensentur; Prioribus plurima adduntur; breviter aut obscure dicta
illustratur; recte asserta vindicantur. Accedit ad finem cujusvis Saeculi
CONCILORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particularium Hictorica Notitia. Ad Calcem
vero Operis Dissertationes tres, (1) De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis incertae
aetatis. (2) De Libris and Officiis Ecclesiasticis Graecorum. (3) De Eusebii
Caesariensis Arianismo adversus Joannem Clericum. Adjecti sunt Indices
utilissimi Scriptorum Alphabetico-Chronologici. Studio and labor Gulielmi
Cave, S. T. P. Canon. Windesoriensis. Folio.

Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity. The fifth Edition. School.

Bishop Wilkins of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion. The third
Edition.

A Sixth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discourses. Published by Dr. Barker.
Being upon the Divine Attributes and Perfections. 1699.

Mr. Evelyns Gardner's Almanac: Directing what he is to do Monthly through the
Year, and what Fruits and Flowers are in Prime. The ninth Edition. Octavo. 1699.

Pharmacopaeiae Collegii Regalis Londini Remedia omnia succincte descripta: Una
cum Catalogo simplicium Ordine Alphabetico digestorum: Quibus annexum est
Manuale ad Forum nec non Divax Porographicus. Editio Tertia, Prioribus
emendatior and auctior. Huic insuper adjioiuntur, Phramaca nonnulla in usu
hodierno apud Medicos Londinenses. Acessit in calce Prosodia Medica observatu
non indigna. Cura Ja. Shipton. 1699. Twelves.

Coals Latin and English Dictionary. Octavo.

A Discourse of the Government of the Thoughts, by George Tully Sub-Dean of
York. The third Edition in Twelves.

A Sixth Volume of Archbishop Tillotson's Discourses. Published by his
Chaplain, Dr. Barker. Being upon the Attributes of God, viz. Concerning the
Perfection of God. Concerning our Imitation of the Divine Perfections. The
Happiness of God. The Unchangeableness of God. The Knowledge of God. The
Wisdom, Glory, and Sovereignty of God. The Wisdom of God in the Creation of the
World. The Wisdom of God in his Providence. The Wisdom of God in the Redemption
of Mankind. The Justice of God, in the Distribution of Rewards and Punishments.
The Truth of God. The Holiness of God. To which is annexed a Spital Sermon. Of
doing Good.

The Life of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury. In which there is a
Particular Relation of many Remarkable Passages in the Reigns of Henry the V.
and VI. Kings of England. Written in Latin by Arthur. Duck, LLD. Chancellor of
the Diocese of London: And Advocate of the Court of Honor. Now made English.
And a Table of Contents annexed.

The Judgment of the Ancient Jewish Church, against the Unitarians, in the
Controversy upon the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of our Blessed Savior.
With a Table of Matters, and a Table of Texts of Scripture occasionally
Explained. By a Divine of the Church of England.

In the Press.
Dr. Wake of Preparation for Death, being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman
in France, in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. The Fourth Edition.
Twelves.

Archbishop Tillotson's Seventh Volume. Published by Dr. Barker, being the
remaining Discourses upon the Divine Attributes. Octavo.

The Bishop of Ely's Commentary on Deuteronomy. Quarto.


