LEGES ANGLIAE.

THE LAWFULNESS OF Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction IN THE CHURCH of ENGLAND,
Asserted and Vindicated In ANSWER to Mr HICKERINGILL's Late Pamphlet Styled
NAKED TRUTH, the 2d Part.

Genesis II. ult. Naked -- but not ashamed. By Fran. Fullwood, D. D. Archdeacon of
Totnes in Devon.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, at the Sign of the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1681.

TO THE READER
I MUST beg my Readers pardon, that I have not chastified so spiteful an
Adversary, according to his merits and provocations; for I verily want his
Talent, and dislike the Sport.

I confess that when a Divine of the Church of England, who has also a share
in her Government, when such a one shall be taken throwing dirt in the face of
his Mother, Fathers, Brethren, and his own Profession, he cannot but expect to
be lasht to purpose, and to be told roundly, that none but accursed Children
and very fools would speak such Naked Truth.

Some Censors, that observe his endeavors, to make not only the Canons of the
Church, but the very Canon of Scripture it self to vail to the Law of the Land,
would charge him with the profaneness of Hobbs: yea, others that find him
playing tricks, and sporting (according to his little wit) with the very names
of Canon, Clergy, Church and Churchmen; and scoffing at almost all that is
Sacred, will take him to be at Hugh Peters's game, and running his wretched
race.

But while he damns the Presbyterians, Independents, and the Fifth-Monarchy,
together with the Church of England, he tempts the Wits to produce thirty one
reasons to prove he is something, viz. a Papist; notwithstanding his drollery
and railery about Foppery and Popery.

Lastly, For Pride, Envy, Wrath, Malice, Spite and Revenge, some say he is a
very Angel of Light, and in somewhat more excellent; for the Scriptures witness
that the Devil himself spoke many words both of truth and soberness; and that
he seldom or never speaks like an Atheist.

For my part, I say nothing of him further than this, That if others can find
Truth in the man, I cannot: And though I am sure he lies open and naked enough,
yet I had never troubled my self to expose him, had it not been to secure the
Government, and to preserve the Simple from being betrayed to the danger of the
Laws by the insolent Rant of a pitiful Sophister.

THE PROEME
The Contents of it.
1. Power purely Spiritual of Divine Right. 2. Emperors confirmed
Bishops-Canons. 3. The force of our Canons not from Rome. 4. Officers of our
Courts. 5. Magna Charta. 6. The Authors Concessions.

1. DIscoursing in the following Treatise of the Forensic Jurisdiction of this
Church, as Established by the Law of the Land, we had no direct or necessary
occasion to speak of the Churches Power, as purely Spiritual, touching
Preaching, the Sacraments and Censures.

For this is certainly of Divine Right; and was given to the Church by Christ
himself, with the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and was accordingly exercised
in the Apostles times, and several hundred years after, without the allowance
of the Civil Magistrate; and was also supposed, allowed, and admitted as such
in our own Kingdom; and by all the world, even with their receiving
Christianity, without question or Alteration, as is evident in all our
Histories: and indeed our own Laws exclude this purely Spiritual Power of the
Keys from the Supremacy of our Kings, except it be to see that Spiritual men do
their duty therein.

2. Neither does it concern me to enquire what Power the Church had, and
exercised after the Empire became Christian: only it seems very clear, that
Constantine, and the other eminent Christian Emperors never made any
Ecclesiastical Laws without the Counsel of Bishops; but only in Confirmation,
or for the Execution of Ecclesiastical Canons: Yet it cannot be denied, but
they called Councils; they approved their Canons; and afterward entered them
into the body of their Laws; and still ratified the Sentences of Ecclesiastical
Judges with Civil penalties.

3. Nor yet is it my present Province to recollect what Influence Imperial
Christian Rome had upon the Tender Age, and immature State of the new born
Church of England: though we do not deny, but it might be considerable, both as
to the Form and Order of our External Jurisdiction in our inferior Ministers
and ancient Canons.

But how great soever it was, it was at first only by way of Example and
Direction: and when afterward it was by Command, it was such Command, as
according to the Rights and Constitution of this Church, had no Legal
obligation upon us, but by our own consent; and as it became part of our own
Establishment, either by Custom or express Law; upon such an occasion the
ancient State of England cry out, Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae. This Realm has
been and is free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as have
been devised -- within this Realm, or to such other as by sufferance of your
Grace and your Progenitors, the people of this Realm have taken at their free
liberty, by their own consent to be used amongst them; and have bound
themselves by long use and Custom to the observance thereof; not as to the
observance of the Laws of any foreign Prince, 25 Hen. 8. 21.

For (as Coke declares in Cawdries Case) as the Romans fetching diverse Laws
from Athens, yet being approved and allowed by the State there, called them Jus
Civil Romanorum; and as the Normans borrowing all or most of their Laws from
England, yet baptized them by the name of the Laws or Customs of Normandy; so
albeit, the Kings of England derived their Ecclesiastical Laws from others, yet
so many as be proved, approved and allowed here, by and with a general consent,
are aptly and rightly called, The Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of England.

4. As for the Inferior Ministers in the Ecclesiastical Courts, that seem to be
so offensive to weak people, that they are not Popish, or so slanderously to be
reported, there is this plain demonstration, that these Courts are the Kings
Courts, and the Laws thereof are the Kings Laws; and that notwithstanding all
the severe Statutes, especially since the Reformation, against all foreign
Jurisdiction, and all such as act under, or by virtue of any foreign Power
within this Realm; yet such Ministers are both permitted and required to
execute their places in the said Courts by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom.

But grave Mr. Hickeringill says, there is not the least Specimen of
Chancellors, Registers, Sumners, Officials, Commissaries, Advocates, Notaries,
Surrogates, etc. or any ejusdem farinae in holy Writ: and hence it is learnedly
inferred by some, that we have made so many new Officers in the Church of
Christ.

But how witless and Quaker-like is this? and how unlike Mr. Hickeringill? I
should suspect he would call for Scripture, for an Hourglass, and for Clerks
and Sextons, were it not that he is so palpably in the service of a vile
Hypothesis, that will stand upon no better grounds; for he knows, that these
are not so many new Officers of the Church, but only Assistants allowed by Law
under Bishops, and such other Spiritual men as have proper power of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: he knows there is no other Canon, but the Law of
the Land; and that the Civil Magistrate has power to tell us what is
Scripture: and that he has told us S. Paul' s Epistles are so, where we read
of helps in 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Government; and that Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials and Surrogates are
but such helps under different names, from the several ways and degrees of
their Delegation: That Registers are but to make and keep the Acts of Court,
etc. Advocates and Proctors to order and manage Causes; and Apparators to serve
Process, and execute Mandates: and that none but one in Orders meddles with
the Keys, either for Excommunication or Absolution; Mr. Hickeringill is a man
of great experience in Spiritual Jurisdiction, and need not be told of these
plain matters.

5. And seeing the Statist will not be quieted, but by Argument taken from Law;
I have written the following Treatise, wherein I hope I have sufficiently
demonstrated, that our Ecclesiastical Courts are Established in the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom. Our Magna Charta it self, or the great Charter of the
English Liberties does suppose and acknowledge the Legal exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the forementioned Ministers, as one of the
Ancient Rights and Liberties of this Church; and does also ratify, confirm and
establish it for ever; at least in the Judgment of my Lord Coke, in these words.

This Charter is Declaratory of the Ancient Law and Liberty of England. -- [Et
habeat omnia Jura sua integra] that is, that all Ecclesiastical persons shall
enjoy all their lawful Jurisdictions, and other their Rights, wholly without any
Diminution or Substraction whatsoever: and [Jura sua] show plainly, that no new
right was given unto them, but such as they had before, hereby are Confirmed.

Libertates suas illaesas] Libertates are here taken in two Senses; 1. For the
Laws of England. 2. For Privileges held by Parliament, Charter or Prescription
more than Ordinary. Coke Magna Charta. By all which Titles the Church of
England (Ecclesia non Moritur, but Moriuntur Ecclesiastici) holds her Ancient
Liberty of keeping Courts to this day.

6. Yet I do not say but the manner of proceedings in these Courts may be
justly and reasonably altered, as his gracious Majesty may be advised; and yet
the true Liberty of the Church be rather fortified than Violated.

Therefore, after some Overtures made lately, by a far greater Person, in a
larger Sphere, my Narrower subject may suffer me humbly to offer my thoughts
touching some Alterations, that perhaps might not prejudice our Ecclesiastical
Ministers, or their Courts; with all due submission to my Superiors.

These things following have been long in my thoughts.

1. That a speedier way might be appointed for the dispatch of Causes in the
Spiritual Courts than the present Legal Rules thereof will allow.

2. That trivial matters (such as small Tithes and Church-Rates) might be
summarily ended, without exposing the solemn Sentence of Excommunication, as is
generally complained. Especially considering that the Statute touching the Writ
de Excom. capi. ( as well as Vulgar apprehension) makes a difference in
Original Causes; though indeed the immediate cause of all Excommunication is
always the contempt of the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in not obeying,
either its Summons or Sentence; both these perhaps may be contrived by wise
men, without prejudice to the said Jurisdiction.

3. That there is reason to reascertain the Fees for Probates of Wills, and
granting Letters of Administration, with some moderate respect had to the
difference of the value of Money, when the former Act was made, and at this
time, so as the Officers in the Kings Spiritual Courts may live upon their
Employment.

4. And why Excommunication decreed in Court may not be sent to the Parochial
Minister, to be, not only declared, but Executed by him, as the Bishops
Surrogate; and convenient time allowed him to endeavor to reconcile the
offender, and to prevent the Sentence, if it may be, I see not, if that may
give any satisfaction.

Such kind of Alterations perhaps may be admitted without real prejudice to the
Church, or rather with advantage, as well as those made by the Conqueror, when
he divided the Ecclesiastical from the Civil Courts: The Law by which he made
that Division is famous, the clauses of it concerning this matter may be
desired by the Reader, therefore I shall take the pains to transcribe them;
they are these:

Willielmus Gratia Dei, Rex Anglorum, etc. William by the Grace of God, King of
England --
to all -- that have Land in the Bishopric of Lincoln;
know ye all, and all others my faithful People in England, that the Episcopal
Laws, that have [Non bene] not well been exercised, nor according to the
Precepts of holy Canons, even to me time in this Kingdom (Concilio Communi)
with Common Counsel, and with the Counsel of the Bishops and Abbots, and all
the chief men of my Kingdom, I judge (fit) to be amended. Moreover, I Command,
and by my Kingly Authority enjoin, That no Bishop or Archadeacon de Legibus
Episcopalibus, hold (Placita) Pleas any longer in Hundret, nor bring any
Ecclesiastical Cause to the Judgment of Secular men; but whosoever shall be
called or questioned for any Cause according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, he
shall come to the place which the Bishop shall choose, and there shall answer
for his Cause; and not secundum Hundret; and he shall do right to God and the
Bishop; not according to the Hundred, but according to the Canons and Episcopal
Laws.

-- But if any through pride will not appear [Venire ad Justiciam Episcopalem]
let him be called the first, second and third time, and if yet he will not
come, let him be Excommunicated, and if need be, let the Strength and Justice
of the King or Sheriff, ad hoc Vindicandum adhibeatur -- This also I defend,
and by my Authority interdict, that no Sheriff or other Minister of the King,
or any Layman do intermeddle with the Laws which belong to the Bishop.

Give me leave to subjoyn a few Notes upon this Law of the Conqueror and I have
done.

1. The substance and matters of Ecclesiastical Power and Connusance, was the
same long before this Law was made, and not Altered by it: 'twas a Law of King
Alured. Si quis Dei rectitudines aliquas deforciat, reddat lathlite cum Dacis,
witam cum Anglis: And the same is afterward confirmed and renewed by Canutus
and other Kings: whereby it appears, that long before the Conquest the
Authority and Jurisdiction of the Church was maintained by the settled Laws of
the Kingdom; and that Ecclesiastical Judges had power so anciently to
Excommunicate; and had the help of the King and the Sheriff to proceed against
the obstinate.

2. It Is yet very remarkable, that for the form and manner of their Spiritual
Courts and proceedings before the Conquest, it was not here in England as it
was at Rome; and therefore our most Ancient Church Government was not derived
or Received from Rome: This Law observes, that before the Conqueror, the
Precepts of holy Canons, as to distinct Jurisdictions, were not observed in
England; that is, the Canons of the Imperial Church, for six or seven Hundred
years before the Jurisdiction of that Church was divided from the Civil, even
by the Emperor Constantine himself; but for so many hundred years before the
Conquest, our Jurisdictions were exercised together in Hundret, as the Law
acknowledges, and is confessed.

3. We here see a plain Establishment of our Spiritual Courts, with power of
Excommunication, for nonappearance, in the letter of this Ancient Law, under
the Kings defense, and enforced with the Secular Arm; and it is observable, that
the distinction of the Ecclesiastical from the Civil Courts, was made in the
Kings own Name, and not the Pope's, by the Kings power and none other; with the
Counsel of his own Subjects only, and not of Rome that we read of; and only
with respect, and not in any obedience to the ancient Canons or foreign
methods: And thus the Jurisdiction in our Courts Ecclesiastical as distinct
from the Civil, is as far from being Popish in their Original, as it was when
they were conjoined; and therein so unlike to the distinct proceedings of the
Spiritual power beyond the Seas so many hundred years before: And thus our
Spiritual Courts, both before they were divided, and when they came to be
divided from our Civil Courts, stand firm in the Ancient Laws of this Land.

4. There are certain great Epoche's of the Legal Establishment of the Churches
power, which I shall but touch; 1. It was received with Christianity, and grew
and flourished by our Ancient Laws before the Conquest. 2. In the beginning of
our Norman Constitution, it was thus distinguished and established by the
Conqueror. So it was in Magna Charta, the first Statute. 3. Upon the
Reformation in Hen. 8. it was reestablish'd. 4. So it was upon the Return of
Reformation after Queen Mary by Queen Eliz. And 5. so likewise upon the Return
of our present gracious Sovereign King Charles II.

5. Further, I hence observe, that some Alterations in Ecclesiastical
proceedings may be made by Law, without any prejudice to the Churches power:
It Is observed out of Spelman before, that by this Law the Conqueror did not
lessen the Churches power: indeed some Inconveniences are usually consequent to
public changes; and it is thought by our Civilians, that the many prohibitions
which interrupt our Ecclesiastical Courts are occasioned by their being divided
from the Temporal: but may not that inconvenience be accidental to that
Division? Or if at any time there be just cause for the Church to complain in
that respect, is it not rather of the Judges than the Laws or the Constitution?

But to the matter before us; admit, for Instance, that after Summary hearing
and Sentence of the Judge, in Cases of small Tithes, Church rates, and such
trivial matters, a Justice of the Peace, or some other person being legally
certified, were empowered and obliged to grant Warrants of Distress: It seems
to me a greater inconvenience in exposing Excommunication in such light Causes
would be hereby removed, than any contracted by such an Alteration; and
methinks no one should disdain the new Office, seeing the Superior Judge has
been ever bound to issue out the Writ de Excom. Cap. and the Sheriff to
imprison the party, upon a Certificate from the Bishop.

But I must humbly leave such things to wiser Judges.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.
CHAP. I.
THE general Proposition. The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as now Exercised in
the Church of England, is Allowed and Established by the Laws of the Land.
Sect. 1. An Account of the Method. Page 1. Sect. 2. Mr. Hickeringill' s
Reasoning Noted and Resolved. p. 2. Sect. 3. The Propositions suggested by M.
Hickeringill are these following. p.4.
CHAP. II.
Our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England was not derived from the Pope, but
from the Crown before the Reformation by Henry the Eighth. p. 5. Proof against
this Popish principle. Sect. 1. From the root and branches of Ecclesiastical
Power, Donation, Investiture, Laws. p. 6. Sect. 2. Jurisdiction. p. 7. Sect. 3,
4, 5. p. 9, 11, 12.
CHAP. III.
King Hen. 8. did not by renouncing the Power pretended by the Pope, make void
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: neither was it void before it was restored by
Edw. 6. 2. p. 13. Sect. 2, 3. p. 16, 20.
CHAP. IV.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdictition is lawfully exercised, without the King's Name
or Style in Processes, etc. notwithstanding the 1 Edw. 6. 2. p. 22. Sect. 1, 2,
3. p. 23, 24, 26. Sect. 4. 1 Edw. 6. 2. Repealed, appears from practice. p. 28.
Sect. 5. 1 Edw. 6. 2. Repealed in the Judgment of all the Judges, the King and
Council. p. 31. Sect. 6. Mr. H. Cary' s Reason to the contrary considered. p.
36.
CHAP. V.
The Act of 1 Eliz. 1. Establishing the High Commission Court, was not the
foundation of Ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, against Mr.
Hickeringill. p. 41.
CHAP. VI.
How our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England came at first, and is at
present Established by Law. p. 46. Sect. 1. Jurisdiction of the Church in
Common Law. p. 51. Sect. 2. The Government Ecclesiastical is Established in the
Statutes of this Realm. p. 54.
CHAP. VII.
Of Canons and Convocations. p. 60. The Conclusion. p. 64. The Postscript. p.
67.
The Bookseller to the Reader.
THE absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned some small Errata's to escape the Press. The Printer thinks it the
best instance of pardon, if his Escapes be not laid upon the Author, and he
hopes they are no greater than an ordinary understanding may amend, and a
little charity may forgive.

R. Royston.

CHAP. I. The General Proposition.
THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, As now Exercised in the Church of England, is
Allowed and Established by the Laws of the Land.

SECT. 1. An Account of the Method.
AFTER so many hundred years confirmation, both by Law and Practice, it is a
mavelous thing this should be a question: yet, of late two worthy Gentlemen,
treading in the steps of some former Malcontents, have ventured to make it
one. Mr. Edmond Hickeringill, and Mr. H. Carry: the first, in his Book called
Naked Truth, the Second part: the other, in his, modestly styled, The Law of
England: And it is to be observed, they were both Printed very seasonably for
the settling our distractions through the fears and danger of Popery.

I shall note what they say, discover their gross and dangerous mistakes,
answer and remove their pitiful Objections, and then endeavor to satisfy
ordinary and honest enquirers both that, and how our Ecclesiastical
Jurisdication stands firm and unshaken upon the basis of our English Laws.

SECT. II. Mr. Hickeringill's Reasoning Noted and Resolved.
Mr. Hickeringill is pleased to say, that upon the Stat. 1 Eliz. 1. was built
the High Commission Court, and the Authority of all Canon-makers Synodical; but
down came the Fabric, when that Act was Repealed by 17 Car. 1. 11. and 13 Car.
2. 12.

Where provision was made by striking at the foundation 1 Eliz. 1. that no more
Commissions of that nature be granted any more; only the Spiritual Courts by 13
Car. 2. 12. were to be in Statu quo, wherein they were 1639. What state? no
great I Will warrant you, if the Basis, on which their Star Chamber and
High-Commission-Court were built, be taken away.

All Ecclesiastical Jurisdications till Hen. 8. were derived from the Pope, as
Supreme of the Church: this Head being beheaded, the Supremacy was invested in
the Crown.

But 1 Edw. 6. 2. Enacts, that all Process Ecclesiastical should be in the Name
and with the style of the King, etc. So that if there be any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in England distinct from his Majesty's Lay Courts, all their
Processes must be in the Kings Name, etc.

It Is true 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed by the 1 Mar. 2. but I care not for that,
for it is revived by the Act of repeal 1 Jac. 25.

The Clergy in Convocation acknowledged in their Petition, that their
Ecclesiastical power was at that time taken away.

So that their present Jurisdiction (being not from God; that is certain) it is
not from Man, because his Majesty has promised 13 Car. 2. 12. never to empower
them with any more Commissions to the worlds end.

But this I do not peremptorily assert.

I here protest, I know not by what Authority we do these things, considering
the premises, and the repealing of 1 Eliz. 1.

By the Statute of Hen. 8. all these Ordinary Jurisdictions were cut off, and
were revived by 1 Edw. 6. upon Conditions only.

This is the very Naked Truth, under his first Query, and in his Conclufion,
and up and down this worthy Book; that is, such a shabbly lawless Logic; such
a rude and shattered way of reasoning, as deserves to be reduced with a rod,
and lasht into method and sense, and better manners.

Especially if you single out his false and sturdy begging Propositions;
fraught with a wretched design of robbing his own Mother, in the Kings high
way, with which he challenges passage to cheat and abuse the Country.

My business is only to apprehend the Vagabonds, and commit them to the justice
of some more severe and smarter hand.

SECT. III.
The Propositions suggested by Mr. Hickeringill are these following.

I. That before Hen. 8. all Ecclesiastical Jurisdication in England was derived
from the Pope: as Mr. Carry, p. 6.

II. That Hen. 8. when he annexed the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown,
he took it wholly away from our Ecclesiastical Ministers.

III. That the Church had no Jurisdiction after Hen. 8. had annexed it to the
Crown, till 1 Edw. 6. 2.

IV. That if there be any Ecclesiastical Power in our Church, it cannot be
executed, but in the Name and with the Style, etc. of the King, according to 1
Edw. 6. 2.

V. That all our Ecclesiastical Power was lately founded in 1 Eliz. 1. as it
established the High-Commission-Court; and that Act being Repealed, all
Ecclesiastical Power was taken away with the Power of that High Commission.

On a Rock consisting of these Sands, stands our mighty Champion, triumphing
with his Naked Truth; but we come now to sift them.

CHAP. II.
Our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England was not derived from the Pope, but
from the Crown before the Reformation by Henry the Eighth.

DARE any Protestant stand to the contrary? had the Pope really Authority here
before Henry the Eighth? did our Bishops indeed receive all their power,
exercised so many hundred years together, originally from the Pope? was not
their Political Jurisdiction derived from and depending on the Crown Imperial?
and founded in our own Laws, the Customs and Statutes of the Realm? are these
the Popes Laws, and not the Kings? was there not Ecclesiastical power in
England, both for Legislation and Execution ab origin, before the Papal
Usurpation? was not Popery at first, and all along, till Hen. 8. an illegal
usurpation upon our more Ancient Government, never owned much less established
in the true and Ancient Laws of England, and under that very Notion rejected
and expelled by him?

How then did our Bishops, etc. derive all their power from the Pope before
Hen. 8. to say so, is not more like an Hobbist than a Papist. I thought I had
caught an Hobby, but War-Hawk.

Proof against this Popish principle.
SECT. 1.
From the root and branches of Ecclesiastical Power, Donation, Investiture,
Laws.

I. It was a known Law long before Hen. 8. that the Church of England was
founded 25 Edw. 3. 25 Edw. 1.
in Episcopacy by our Kings, etc. and not in the Papacy.

II. The Collation and Donation of Bishoprics, and Nomination of Bishops did
always belong to the King; yea all the Bishoprics in this Realm are of the
Kings Foundation: and the full Right of Investiture was ever in the Crown. Coke
1. Inst. 2. S. 648. to deny it may be a praemunire.

III. When once the Bishops are legally invested, their proper Jurisdiction
came into 35 Hen. 8. 20.
their hands, by the Laws, without any power derived from the Pope: Who says
otherwise, knows nothing, or means ill.

IV. It was acknowledged, That Convocations are, always have been, and ought to
be Assembled by the Kings Writ only: it is Law, 35 Hen. 8. 19.

V. As the power to make Laws for the Church was ever in the King, so the Laws
themselves must be his, and none other bind us. This Realm Recognizing no
Superior 35 Hen. 8. 21. As 16 Rich. 2. 5.
under God but the King, has been, and is free from any Laws, but such as have
been devised within this Realm, or at our Liberty, have been consented to, and
made custom by use, and not by any foreign power.

SECT. II. Jurisdiction.
THUS our Ancient Ecclesiastical Governors and Laws depended upon the Crown,
and not upon the Pope, by the Laws of England, and in the Judgment of all the
States of the Kingdom before Han. 8. and so did also the execution of those
Laws by those Governors in the same public Judgment: a little better than Mr.
Hickeringill's Popish opinion.

2. In fundry old Authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifest, that
this Realm is an Empire, having an Imperial Crown, to which belongs a body
Politic, compacted of Spiritualty and Temporalty: furnished thus, with --
Jurisdiction to yield Justice in all causes without restraint from any foreign
Prince.

The body Spiritual having power, when any Cause of Divine Law happened to come
in question, the English Church, called the Spiritualty, which always has been
reputed, and also found of that sort, for knowledge, etc. (without any
exterior person) to declare and determine all such doubts, and to administer
all such offices as appertain to them: for the due administration whereof the
Kings of this Realm have endowed the said Church both with honor and
possessions: both these Authorities and Jurisdictions do conjoyn in the due
Administration of Justice the one to help the other.

And whereas the King his most noble Progenitors, and the Nobility and Commons
of this Realm at diverse and sundry Parliaments, as well in the time of King
Edw. 1. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4. (all which were certainly before Hen. 8.) and
other noble Kings made sundry Ordinances, Laws, Statutes, and provisions for
the entire and sure preservation of the Prerogatives and Jurisdiction Spiritual
and Temporal of the said Imperial Crown, from the annoyance and Authority of
the Sea of Rome from time to time, as often as any such attempt might be known
or espied. Vid. 25 Hen. 8. 12.

These things plainly show, that the whole State in Hen. 8's. time was not of
Mr. Hickeringill's mind; but that before that time, the whole power of the
Church was independent on the Pope, and not derived from him, but originally
inherent in the Crown and Laws of England, whatever he blatters to the
contrary. Vid. 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 4. cap. 22. page 123. Sect. 3. 27 Edw. 3. cap.
1. and 38 Edw. 3. c. 4. and Stat. 2. c. 1. 2 Rich. 2. cap. 6. 3 Rich. 2. c. 3.
S. 2. 12 Rich. 2. c. 15. and 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. c. 2. 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. 2
Hen. 4. c. 3, and 4. 7 Hen. 4. c. 6. 9. Hen. 4. c. 8. 1 Hen. 5. 7. 3 Hen. 5.
Stat. 2. c. 4. Add to these Mr. Cawdries Case in my Lord Coke, and he must be
unreasonably ill affected to the Church of England, that is not more than
satisfied, that the chief and Supreme Governors thereof, were the Kings of
England, and not the Pope, before the Reign of Hen. 8.

3. Also it was the sense of the whole Kingdom, that the Pope's power and
Jurisdiction here, was usurped and illegal; contrary to Gods Laws, the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm; and in derogation of the IMperial Crown thereof: and
that it was timorously and ignorantly submitted unto, before Hen. 8. as the
words of that Statute are, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 16.

SECT. III.
BUT if our Gentleman be wiser than to believe their words; the matter is
evident in our ancient Laws, and constant practice accordingly, before Hen. 8.
his time: Indeed all the Statutes of provision against foreign powers, are to
own and defend the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction at home, under this Crown. Yea
all the Statutes made on purpose, to restrain and limit the Spiritual
Jurisdiction in certain cases, and respects, do allow and establish it in
others, exceptio confirmat Regulam in non exceptis.

2. Much plainer, all the Statutes that prohibit the Kings Civil Courts to
interrupt the Ecclesiastical proceedings, but in such cases, and the Statutes
granting consultations in such cases; and the Statutes directing appeals in the
Spiritual Courts, and appeals to the Chancery it self, and the Laws ratifying
and effectually binding their Sentence by the Writ de exc. cap. much more
plainly do these establish the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the laws of the
Land, before Hen. 8.

3. By this time it is vain to mention the Statutes which of old did specify
and allow particular matters to be tried only in the Ecclesiastical Courts:
such as Tithes, 18 Edw. 3. 7. the offenses of Ecclesiastical persons, 1 Hen. 7.
c. 4. causes Testamentary, 18 Edw. 3. 6. Synodals and procurations, and
pensions, etc. 15 Hen. 8. 19. Defamations, 9 Edw. 2. 3. 1 Edw. 3. c. 11, etc.
all which are clear evidences that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was
established by the Statutelaws of this Realm, and consequently, did not depend
upon, was not derived from any foreign power before the 20 of Hen. 8.

SECT. IV.
TO seek for the Original of our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Courts, in the
Statute-book, is more than ridiculous; seeing they both stood in a flourishing
estate long before the beginning of that book: and are among the number of the
great things, which were then, secundum consuetudinem and leges Angliae, and
are plainly established in the Common Law of the Land: by which they have stood
and been practiced, ever since (as we shall prove more fully anon.)

2. Magna Charta, which is found first in the book of Statutes, and is said by
Lawyers to be Common Law (i. e. shows us what is Common Law) in this Kingdom;
begins thus, We have granted and confirmed for us and our Heirs for ever, that
the Church of England shall be free; and shall have all her whole Rights and
Liberties Inviolable. Reserving to all Archbishops and Bishops, and all persons
as well Spiritual as Temporal all their Free Liberties and free Customs, which
they have had in times past, and which we have granted to be holden within this
Realm; and all men of this Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, shall observe
the same against all persons.

3. Now what can any man, that knows the practice of the Spiritual Courts,
before that time, at that time, and ever since, imagine what is meant by the
Liberties and Customs of the Church, ( i. e. in the sense of Mr. Hickeringill)
and the words of Magna Charta, Archbishops, Bishops, and all Spiritual men, but
the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the first and chief place? And these, by the
great Charter, are confirmed for ever; and the like confirmation has been made
by the many succeeding Kings and Parliaments, in their confirmation of Magna
Charta.

4. Therefore I cannot but conclude, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being
founded in the Common Law, Magna Charta, and the Statutes, by so long practice
beyond all Records, is in the very Constitution of the Kingdom: The great men
of the Church having always had authority in the very making of Laws as they
had before Magna Charta, and been reputed (as in the Statute of Eliz.) one of
the three States in Parliament; and the Execution also of the Ecclesiastical
Laws of the Church of England.

SECT. V.
LASTLY, All this is plainly confirmed by ancient Ecclesiastical Canons (which
seems to be an Argument of great weight with Mr. Hickeringill) as well as by
the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Land.

In the Apostles Canons it is ordained, that every National Church should have
its own chief or head, and thence derive all Power under the Crown: It Is
acknowledged, against the Papists, that we had our Archbishops and Bishops
before the Usurpation of the Pope: We were anciently a Patriarchate independent
upon Rome: The four first Councils confirmed the Apostles Canons; and
established our ancient Cyprian privilege: Let after- encroachments of the
Pope be accordingly renounced as lawless Usurpations: Let us quietly enjoy our
restored ancient privileges; and let ancient Custom prevail, according to the
Sentence of the ancient Councils, in spite of all Papists and Hobbists.

CHAP. III.
King Hen. 8. did not, by renouncing the Power pretended by the Pope, make void
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: neither was it void before it was restored by
1 Edw. 6. 2.

It Is somewhat difficult to make this Proposition than it is in its self more
plain: pray Mr. Wiseman, where and by what words did Hen. 8. cut off, as you
say, all those ordinary* Jurisdictions? Did that great Prince and his
Parliament intend by any Statute then made, to cut them off, or not? If they
did intend it, how came it to pass that they continued in their usual course of
power and proceedings all the rest of his Reign? which may be presumed to be
near ten years? Was that watchful Prince so asleep? was the whole Kingdom so
stupid, so long a time, to suffer such oppression, by invasion of the Crown and
the peoples Liberties, by a company of Churchmen, now deprived of the Pope's
assistance, and without any power at all? or were the Ecclesiastical Governors
so desperate or careless, as to lie under so much danger of praemunire, neither
desisting to act without power, nor to sue for it?

2. But perhaps, though the King and Parliament did not intend it, yet the
words of the Statute express enough to dissolve and cut off all those ordinary
Jurisdictions: and no body could see through this millstone, or tumble it upon
the Churches head, before Mr. Hickeringill was inspired to do it in a lucky
time. I will answer him with a story; There was a certain Lord laid claim to a
Manor that was in another Lord's possession: upon Trial it was found, that the
Plaintiff had the Right of it; and he that had had possession was thrown out,
and the other (the Right Owner) was, as he ought to be, put into the possession
of the said Manor; but it was observed, that, though the Lords were changed,
yet the Customs, and Courts, and Officers were not changed at all, but all
things proceeded as before.

3. Thus King Hen. 8. and his Parliament expressed themselves as if on purpose
to our present case; only that the Pope's power then was rather in a pretended
claim, than in possession; as is evident from that notable Statute 24 Hen. 8.
c. 12. where we have the Kings Supremacy first asserted, with a body Politic
of the Spiritualty and Temporalty, every way furnished with Authorities and
Jurisdictions, to administer Justice to the whole Realm. Thus the Imperial
Crown fully accomplished, throws off the pretense of the Pope, as King Edw.
Rich. and Hen. 4. had done before, yet as they also did, reserves as well the
Spiritualty and its Jurisdiction, as the Temporalty and its Jurisdiction.
Afterward

4. The King does by his Royal assent, and by the assents of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, Enact, Establish and Ordain, that all Causes Testamentary, Causes of
Matrimony and Divorces, rights of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions, the
knowledge whereof, by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws
and Customs of the same, appertains to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of this
Realm, shall be from henceforth heard, examined, discussed, clearly, finally
and definitively adjudged and determined in such Courts, Spiritual and
Temporal, as the natures of the controversy shall require.

5. It Is plain therefore, that though Hen. 8. did cut off the Pope's pretense,
which is the great intention of that excellent Law, yet the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was not dissolved, but annexed or declared to be annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, and to continue to exercise its power in the
Spiritual Courts, as before, according to the Laws and Customs of the Land.
Read the Statute, and you will not only see a continuance of the Spiritual
Courts supposed and allowed, but special directions touching proceedings and
Appeals therein.

SECT. II.
IF King Hen. 8. did take away the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Church of
England, he did either remove the Officers, or deny their power to make Canons,
or destroy their Courts, and the exercise of their Jurisdiction; but he did do
neither, but rather by Acts of Parliament established them all.

I. For the first, touching the Governors of the Church, consult Statute 31
Hen. 8. 3. that it may be Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
that all Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, may, by Authority of this
present Parliament, and not by any provision, or other foreign Authority, enjoy
and retain their Archbishopricks and Bishoprics in as large and ample manner,
as if they had been promoted, elected, confirmed and Consecrated according to
the due course of the Laws of this Realm: And that every Archbishop and Bishop
of this Realm may minister, use and exercise all and every thing and things
pertaining to the Office or Order of any Archbishop or Bishop, with all Tokens,
Ensigns and Ceremonies thereunto lawfully belonging.

Further, that all Ecclesiastical persons of the Kings Realm, all Archdeacons,
Deans, and other having Offices, may by Authority of this Act (and not etc.)
administer, use and exercise all things appertaining to their Dignities and
Offices, so it be not expressly against the Laws of God and this Realm.

II. Neither did King Hen. 8. take away the power of the Bishops and others, to
make Canons in Convocation, as appears by the Statute of the 25 of* Hen. 8. 19.
In that Statute, among other things, upon the Petition of the Clergy, two
things are granted to our purpose, touching Ecclesiastical Canons.

1. The old ones; it is provided that such Canons being already made, which be
not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Realm,
nor to the damage of the Kings prerogative Royal, shall now be used and
exercised as they were before the making of this Act, till such time as they be
viewed by the said Thirty two persons, according to the Tenor of this Act,
which was never done; therefore such old Canons are yet of force by this Act.
Vid. Sect. 6.

2. For the making of new Canons; the Convocation has power reserved by this
same Act, provided the Convocation be called by the Kings writ* and that they
have the Royal assent and license to make, promulgate, and execute such Canons:
as you may read Sect. 1. of the said Statute. Indeed the Convocation used a
larger power in making Canons before, as is there noted, which, they say, they
will not henceforth presume to do: but it therefore follows, that they may
still use their power, so limited and derived from the Crown; which is the
evident intention of the Act. For by restraining the Clergy thus to proceed in
making Canons, the Law allows them the power so to do; and by making the
exceptions and limitations confirms their Authority so far as it is not
excepted against.

III. Neither, lastly, did King Hen. 8. take away the ordinary Jurisdiction of
Ecclesiastical Governors as exercised in the Spiritual Courts, according to
the Laws and Canons of this Church: but indeed established them by Acts of
Parliament, as is plainly to be seen in the 37 Hen. 8. c. 16. Sect. 4. in these
words: May it therefore please your Highness, that it may be Enacted, that all
singular persons which shall be made -- deputed to be any Chancellor,
Vicar General, Commissary, Official, Scribe or Register, by your Majesty or any
of your Heirs or Successors, or by any Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon or other
person whatsoever, having Authority under your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors, to make any Chancellor, Vicargeneral, Commissary, Official or
Register, may lawfully execute all manner of Jurisdiction, commonly called
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and all Censures and Coercions appertaining unto
the same, etc.

2. It Is acknowledged, that in the Sect. 2. of this Statute, it seems as if the
Parliament concluded, that by the 25 of Hen. 8. 19. the ancient Canons were
abrogated, which I wonder Mr. Hickeringill his sagacity had not discovered: yet
it is plain enough, that wise Parliament did not thereby reflect upon or intend
all the Canons; but such Canons, as the present matter before them was
concerned in; that is, such Canons as forbad Ecclesiastical Officers to marry;
as the words Sect. 1. are, that no Lay or married man should or might exercise
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, etc. directly repugnant to your Majesty's as
Supreme Head, your Grace being a Layman: then it follows in the next words,
And albeit the said Decrees, viz. being contrary to the Royal prerogative as
supreme Head of the Church, be in the 25 year of your most Noble Reign utterly
abolished.

That this is the meaning of that clause is reasonable to believe, because they
take no further care to correct the matter, but only by enacting persons
lawfully deputed, though they be Lay persons, though married or unmarried,
shall have power, and may exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, notwithstanding
any Law or Constitution to the contrary, as the Statute is concluded.

3. Besides, we are assured, that all the ancient Canons, that were not
repugnant to the Kings Prerogative, or the Laws and Customs of this Realm were
not abrogated, but declared to be of force, i. e. to be executed in the
Spiritual Courts, as was noted in the very letter of that Statute 25 Hen. 8.
19. and that this clause, speaking only of such Canons as were abrogated by
that Statute, abrogates nothing that was not so, by the Act referred to.

4. And thus the Jurisdiction and Canons of the Church stood in force, at the
latter end of the Reign of Hen. 8. this Statute being made in the last year,
wherein any were made by that great Prince.

5. Thus we have found in the time of King Hen. 8. an Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction exercised in England, without any dependence on the Pope, and
other Authority for Canon-makers Synodical (as Mr. Hickeringill cants) besides
the Statute for the High Commission 1 Eliz. upon which Statute of Eliz. Mr.
Hickeringill very learnedly asserts the Authority of all Canon-makers Synodical
was built: qu. Naked Truth.

SECT. III.
NO more is needful under this Head, but to show my respect to Mr. Hickeringill
his doughty and only Argument, taken out of the Petition of the Clergy to Queen
Mary; whereby he would fain prove, that the extinguishing Act of Hen. 8. took
away all ordinary Jurisdiction from the Church of England, and that there was
no such thing till she revived it.

2. The words of the Petition, from whence he thus argues, you shall have in
his own Translation, in this manner: they pray that her Majesty would make such
provision, that those things which belong to our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and Liberties (without which we cannot duly discharge, etc.) and taken from us
lately by the Iniquity of the times, may be again restored; and that all Laws
which have taken away, or do any ways hinder our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and liberties, may be made null and void. Hence he concludes, that in the
judgment of the Convocation at that time, their Jurisdiction and Liberties were
taken away. Is this proof sufficient against all the laws and practice of the
Kingdom during the Reign of Hen. 8. after the extinguishing Act? or do they say
that Hen. 8. took away the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? how can Mr.
Hickeringill divine that it was not the renouncing the Pope as Head of their
Jurisdiction and Liberties, that was the very grievance that they complained of?

3. This is certain, that Queen Mary succeeded Edw. 6. that Edw. 6. did require
more express Testimonies of the Clergie's Recognition of the Crown, in the
exercise of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the Statute (of which we shall
take more notice presently) than Hen. 8. did; and it is past Mr. Hickeringill
his skill to prove, that the Convocation in their said Petition, did not
principally, if not only intend that severe Act of Edw. 6. However that pass,
Mr. Hickeringill his argument, deserves not the strength of a Convocation to
confute it.

4. I leave it to Mr. Hickeringill himself; for if he think, that that
Convocation spoke that which was not true, he has said nothing to the purpose:
but if he think they did speak truth, then he thinks, that the Jurisdiction of
the Church of England, as derived from the King, according to the Statute of
Edw. 6. or in Hen. 8's time, was no lawful Jurisdiction, that is, Mr.
Hickeringill thinks as the Papists think; War Hawk again Mr. Hickeringill, and
a praemunire too.

But this brings us to consider the Statute of Edw. 6.

CHAP. IV.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is lawfully exercised, without the Kings Name or
Style in Processes, etc. notwithstanding the 1 Edw. 6. 2.

THat all Ecclesiastical Processes should be in the Name and Style of the King,
etc. according to the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. is the great and old Objection,
not only of Mr. Hickeringill, but several others.

SECT. I.
Answ. But first, if this Statute were not repealed (as indeed it is) there are
several things in the body of it very considerable against Mr. Hickeringill,
and to our advantage.

1. The Statute observes in the very foundation of it, that it is justly
acknowledged by the Clergy of the Realm, that all Courts Ecclesiastical within
the Realms of England and Ireland, be kept by no other Power or Authority, but
by the Authority of the King; which, it seems, was then known without the
Testimonies thereof, then to be required; and indeed is so still by the Oaths
which all Ecclesiastical persons cheerfully take before their Instalment.

2. That there was such a thing in practice before the making this Act, as
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of England: for the Statute says,
that Archbishops, etc. do use to make and send out their Summons, etc. in their
own names at that time, who yet acknowledged all their Authority from the
Crown, Sect. 3.

3. The Statute allows the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction it self; and that the
Archbishops and Bishops shall make, admit, etc. their Chancellors, and other
Officers and Substitutes, which supposes the Constitution of the Spiritual
Courts, under their own names, and with their own Seals, Sect. 6.

4. This Statute also allows, that some things are limited by the Laws and
Customs of this Realm, and if such things are depending in the Kings Courts of
Record at Common Law, are to be remitted to the Spiritual Courts to try the
same, Sect. 7.

5. But what is the penalty if they do not use the Kings Name and Style, and
put the Kings Arms into their Seals of Office? This is considerable. It Is well
the Statute provided Sect. 4.
a better hand to punish the delinquents than Mr. Hickeringill, and a milder
punishment than he interprets the Law to do: the punishment is the Kings
displeasure, and imprisonment during his pleasure; not the voiding the
Jurisdiction, as Mr. Hickeringill would have it: And while the King knows the
Statute is repealed, as shall next appear, we fear not but his Majesty is
pleased with, and will defend our Jurisdictions, while we humbly acknowledge
their dependency on the Crown, and exercise the same, according to his Laws,
though we presume not to use his Name, and Style, and Arms, without the warrant
of Law.

SECT. II.
1. FOR that Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. was repealed by the first and second of
Philip and Mary, c. 8. wherein we have these plain words; The Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the Archbishops and Ordinaries (are declared) to be in the same
state for process of suits, punishment of crimes, and execution of the Censures
of the Church, with knowledge of causes belonging to the same; and as large in
these points, as the said Jurisdiction was the said twentieth year of Hen. 8.
whereby that Statute is also revived, as my L. Coke affirms.

Thus, by Act of Parliament, of which that Queen was the undoubted Head, (and
by the power of the Crown of England, and not the Pope) the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of this Realm was established by our own Law in the same state
wherein it stood before the twentieth of Hen. 8. and then, we find, that by our
ancient Laws and Customs, it was dependent on the Crown, whatever some
Churchmen thought to the contrary.

2. I have read, that this same Queen Mary wore the Title of Head of the Church
of England her self; though in other points too too zealous for Popery: and by
this very Statute it is Enacted, That nothing in this Act shall be construed to
diminish the Liberties, Prerogatives, or Jurisdictions, or any part thereof,
which were in the Imperial Crown of this Realm the twentieth year of Hen. 8. or
any other the Queens progenitors before: And we have found, that the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of this Kingdom was subject to, and dependent on
the Imperial Crown, secundum consuetudinem and legem Angliae in her Ancestors
time: We have found also, that this was the undoubted Judgment of the whole
Kingdom in the Statutes of Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Queen Eliz. King James, etc.

Now let it be shown, that this clause of the Statute of Queen Mary is
repealed, which is so agreeable to the ancient Customs and Rights of the Crown;
let this be shown, and you do something: This Statute of my Lord Coke's is not
repealed by the 1 of Eliz. or King James, though the 1 of Mary should be
granted to be so. Also the 25 Hen. 8. 20. being contrary to 1 Edw. 6. 2. is
revived by 1 Eliz. and never repealed. Rep. Coke 12. p. 9.

I. Mr. Hickeringill indeed is bold enough, but I find Mr. Carry timorous in the
point, though against the hair: for though he toll on his weak and prejudiced
readers, to their great hazard, in putting their whole case upon this one
point, whether the Court can show the broad Seal, etc. yet when he comes home
to the matter, he tells them, that the aforesaid Statute of Edw. 6. not being
mentioned by King James's Act of repeal, and expressly revived, is thought not
to be of force; so that a citation in the Bishops own name, may, at this day,
be good in Law. Law of Engl. c. 2. p. 12. Mr. Hickeringill should have taken
the advice of this his friend, a great Lawyer certainly, that entitles his
minute and thin piece, the Law of England.

SECT. III.
Mr. CARRY indeed mistakes the Statute; for it is the first of King James 25.
not the fourth: yet we have his learned opinion, that Citations in the Bishops
own name, may, at this day, be good in Law; and for ought I know, his reason
for it may be good too, viz. because the Statute of Queen Mary, especially that
of the first and second of Phil. and Mar. c. 8. is not in the said Act of
repeal expressly revived, according to the express words of the Act, vid. 1
Eliz. sect. 13. But, O Mr. Carry! though we have here your opinion and your
reason, where was your Conscience? where was your kindness to your beloved
dissenting Clients? when you dared to betray them to the Devil and the Jailer
(to speak in Mr. Hickeringill's language) (a far heavier sentence than Curse ye
Meroz) and that upon no other ground, that I can find, in your English Law, but
this Statute only; which yet for the reason aforesaid, you say, is thought not
to be of force; and though, you say, the Bishops may at this day send forth
Citations in their own names by Law; yet your grave advice to those friends is
this; When you are Cited, appear and demand, whether they have any Patent from
the King for the same, and under his great Seal or no; if they will not show
you by what Authority -- protest against their proceedings, and go your way, i.
e. the way of disobedience, contempt; the way to the Gaol and the Devil; but
that is no matter, he has showed his spite to Ecclesiastical Authority against
his own Law and Conscience: he was not to satisfy a doubt, but a lust; and his
confidence is as able to secure the deluded people from the danger of contempt
of the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts, as his wise Notion of Magna Charta, c. 14.
from paying their Tithes. See this point excellently and fully argued on both
sides, and the Judges, etc. Opinion and Reasons silencing this Objection in
King James's time, Coke Rep. 12. p. 7, 8, 9.

SECT. IV.
1 Edw. 6. 2. repealed appears from practice.

II. A further Argumeut, that the Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed is taken from
the uninterrupted practice, both of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the
Kings of England, and their own immediate Courts, contrary to it: and I think
it is a rule in Law, that in doubtful cases, Lex currit cum praxi.

1. The Ecclesiastical Judges have, ever since the Repealing Act of Queen Mary,
before and since the Statute of Queen Eliz. and King James, called Statutes of
repeal, uncontroulably proceeded in their own names, and not expressly in the
name or style of the King (let one instance be shown to the contrary) then who
can imagine without a fancy possessed, that the Crown and States of the Realm
should intend so great an alteration in the Ecclesiastical government; and that
in the behalf of the supremacy, and for the Rights of the Crown, as is
pretended, by reviving that Act of 1 Edw. 6. and yet, neither then, nor ever
since, expect a conformity to, and observance of it? Were Queen Eliz. and King
James so easy and careless of their Crowns as this would make them? were all
the Bishops, who were concerned in making those Acts of Repeal, and all
Ecclesiastical Judges ever since, so dull and stupid, as not to know the force
of those Acts; not to mind either their duty, or their safety, in so great and
hazardous a point, as some would have it of a praemunire? or so foolhardy, as
to bear against the Crown it self, on which alone they know they depend against
plain Acts of Parliament, in the midst of froward and watching enemies on every
side them? who can think it? I must conclude, that if it be possible that the
Act of Queen Mary should be repealed in this point, either by Queen Eliz. or
King James, it is more than ever the Lawmakers themselves thought of,
understood or intended.

2. For secondly, the practice of the Crown that was in the first place highly
concerned in that Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. has been ever since the Act of Queen Mary
that repealed it, directly contrary to it; and, in a very great point or flower
of the supremacy, managed it self ever since, just as it did before that Act of
Edw. 6. and, as I said, directly contrary to it: therefore it is past all doubt
but that the sense of the Queen and Kings of England, and the sense of those
great Lawyers and Statesmen, that direct the Crown in such great affairs, is
evident, that the Statute of Edw. 6. stands repealed, and is not revived; for
in that Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. it is expressly enacted, that whereas elections of
Bishops by Deans and Chapters upon a Writ of Congee d'eslire -- seeming
derogatory and prejudicial to the Kings prerogative Royal; for a due
reformation thereof, be it enacted, that from henceforth no such Congee
d'eslire be granted, nor election made, but, etc. yet ever since Congee
d'eslires have been granted, and such elections thereupon have been returned
and accepted.

3. The Kings immediate Courts, so far as they have been concerned with
Jurisdiction of the Church, and the Kings Civil Judges therein, have ever since
owned, and as occasion has required, ratified, fortified, and made effectual
all our Ecclesiastical proceedings ever since, though not acted in the Kings
name, contrary to the said Statute; though it is a great part of their places
and offices to secure the Prerogative against all Invasion, especially of the
Church: thus by their constant practice it appears, that they never understood
that Statute of Edw. 6. to be in force, since Queen Mary repealed it: Was the
whole Kingdom so long, and in so deep a sleep, to be awakened by such
impertinent and little barkings?

SECT. V.
1 Edw. 6. 2. Repealed in the Judgment of all the Judges, the King and Council.

THE objection from the 1 Edw. 6. is no new light of Mr. Hickeringill's, we
find it busy in the time of King Charles the first, Anno 1637. and by the
Kings Proclamation it seems it had troubled the Kingdom before, as indeed it
had in the Fourth of King James. In that year 1637. upon an order out of the
Star Chamber, the learned Judges were commanded to give their opinion in this
matter: and they all met together, and deliberately, and distinctly, and fully
declared, that the 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed, and is not in force; and that the
Ecclesiastical Judges did (in all the points called in question) act legally,
and as they ought to do; hereupon the King and Council being satisfied, issued
forth the said Proclamation to silence and prevent all such objections against
Ecclesiastical Judges, Courts and proceedings for the future; and the judgment
of the Judges under their hands, was enrolled in the Courts of Exchequer, Kings
Bench, Common Pleas, etc. as Law; where any one may find it that desires to be
further satisfied in the truth of it.

2. Hence I argue, that that Statute of 1 Edw. 6. is repealed in Law; at least
that the subjects ought so to esteem it, until they have the judgment of the
Judges declared otherwise; yea, though those Judges (which is profane to
imagine) did err in that their Declaration through ignorance or fear of the
High Commission, as Mr. Hickeringill meekly insinuates, p. ult.

For the Law is known to the subject, either by the letter or by the
Interpretation of it: and if the letter of the Law be not plain, or be
doubtful, we take the Interpretation of it from such as by law are of right to
make the Interpretation, to be the law; and this I think is the Common Law of
England, and believe that Mr. Carry himself thinks so too.

3. Now, who is or can be thought to be the most proper Interpreter of a
doubtful Law, but the King with his Council, by all the Judges of the Land?
especially if that law concern Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Crown, as the law in question plainly does. But
the King himself with his Council, by all the Judges of the Land, has solemnly
declared, that the 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed, and not of force; this is a legal
interpretation of the law; this is law, and ought so to be taken, rebus sic
stantibus, by all the subjects of England, whatever little men that talk of the
law in their own narrow and private sentiments presume to vent, to the scandal
of the people, the trouble of the Kingdom and slander of the Church, and
Ecclesiastical proceedings: and indeed it would be an insufferable sawciness,
to say no worse, for any Ecclesiastical Judge to act by a law that is none,
against the so solemn declaration of the King, the Council, and all the Judges
of the Land, and this is the case.

I shall therefore trouble, if not pleasure, my reader with the Declaration of
the Judges, and the sense of the King and Council of it.

Primo Julii 1637. The Judges Certificate concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Lordships Order made in his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber
the Twelfth of May last, we have taken consideration of the particulars,
wherein our Opinions are required by the said Order, and we have all agreed:

That Processes may issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts, and that a Patent
under the great Seal is not necessary for the keeping of the said
Ecclesiastical Courts, or for the enabling of Citations, Suspensions,
Excommunications, or other Censures of the Church; and that it is not necessary
that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the said Courts,
or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or Correction of Ecclesiastical
Offenses by Censure in those Courts, be in the Name or with the Style of the
King, or under the Kings Seal; or that their Seals of Office have in them the
Kings Arms. And that the Statute of primo Edvardi Sexti c. 2. which Enacted the
Contrary, is not now in force.

We are also of Opinion, that the Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons may keep their Visitations as usually they have done,
without Commission under the great Seal of England so to do.

John Brampstone, John Finch, Humph. Davenport, Will. Jones, Jo. Dinham, Ri.
Hutton, George Crook, Tho. Trevor, George Vernon, To. Berkley, Fr. Crawly, Ri.
Weston.


Enrolled in the Courts of Exchequer, Kings Bench, Common Pleas; and Register's
in the Courts of High Commission and Star Chamber.

Hereupon followed the Kings Proclamation, declaring that the proceedings of
his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers are according to the Law of
the Land; as are the words of the Title. I shall only transcribe the Conclusion
of the Proclamation, which you have faithfully in these words.

AND his Royal Majesty has thought fit, with the Advice of his Council, that a
public Declaration of these Opinions and Resolutions of his Reverend and
Learned Judges, being agreeable to the Judgment and Resolutions of former
times, should be made known to all his Subjects, as well to Vindicate the legal
proceedings of his Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers, from the unjust and
Scandalous imputation of invading or entrenching on his Royal Prerogative, as
to settle the minds, and stop the mouths of all unquiet Spirits; that for the
future they presume not to censure his Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers in
these their Just and Warranted proceedings: And hereof his Majesty admonishes
all his Subjects to take Darning, as they shall answer the Contrary at their
Perils: Given at the Court at Lindhurst, Aug. 18. in the Thirteenth Year of his
Majesty's Reign*

God save the King.
You may see the Cafe fully, the Reasons on both sides, and the Judges
determination the Fourth of King James, to which this Proclamation may refer,
Coke Rep. 12. p. 7, 8.

Now I could almost submit it to Mr. Carry or Mr. Hickeringill himself, whether
it be fitter or safer for Ecclesiastical Judges to proceed in their Courts as
they now do; or alter their proceedings, and presume upon the King, by using
his Royal Name, and Style, and Arms, contrary to all this Evidence, and Reason,
and Law.

SECT. VI.
Mr. H. Cary's Reason to the contrary considered.

BUT Mr. Carry says, He sees not a dram of Reason, why the Spiritual Courts
should not make their Process in the Kings name, as well as the Temporal
Courts, since those, as well as these, are the Kings Courts.

He seems to talk Pothecary, without so much as a dram of Reason; the usage
of the Courts, and the evidence aforesaid, is better Law than his pitiful
guesses. Neither is there color of Reason in what he says, if these two
things appear.

1. That the Ecclesiastical Ministers do sufficiently and openly acknowledge
the dependence of their Courts upon the Crown without using his Majesty's Name,
or Style, or Arms.

2. That there is not the same reason that the Spiritual Courts should use the
Kings Name, etc. that there is for the Temporal.

1. For the first, the Ecclesiastical Judges accept their places thankfully as
the Kings donation, and not the Popes: then they readily grant they depend upon
the Crown, even for the exercise of their Spiritual function; and that they
receive all coercive and external Jurisdiction immediately from the Crown and
the Laws of the Land, and not from the Pope. Again, they all take the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance before their Instalment, which are the fence of the
Crown against Popery. And then in all their public Prayers before their
Sermons, the Bishops and Archdeacons, etc. do Recognize the Kings Supremacy in
all Ecclesiastical things and causes as well as Civil. Again, they Take the
late Test and the same Oaths at the public Sessions. And lastly, Mr. Carry
himself confesses, that they acknowledge the said Supremacy in their public
Canons or Constitutions of the whole Church of England, as he notes p. 2. in
Can. 1, 2. 1603. And are all these less significant to testify their
dependence on and acknowledgement of their derivation from the Crown, than the
Kings Name, and Style, and Arms (which may be far enough from the Conscience)
in a Process?

2. For the second, that there is not the same reason to use the Kings name in
Ecclesiastical as in Civil Courts, is apparent from the true cause of using it
in the Civil Courts, which being not known or well heeded, may be the cause of
the exception: for Bishop Sanderson has well observed the true reason of using
the Kings name in any Court, is not thereby to acknowledge the Emanation of the
power or Jurisdiction of that Court from, or the subordination of that power
unto the Kings power or Authority, as the objector seems to suppose; but rather
to show the same Court to be one of the Kings own immediate Courts, wherein the
King himself is supposed (in the construction of the Law) either by his
personal or virtual power to be present: and the not using the Kings name in
other Courts does not signify, that they do not Act by the Kings Authority,
but only that the Judges in them are no immediate representatives of the Kings
person; nor have consequently, any allowance from him to use his Name in the
execution of them.

1. This difference is evident among the Common Law Courts of this Kingdom; for
though all the immediate Courts of the King do act expressly in his Name, yet
many other more distant Courts do not; as all Courts-Baron, Customary-Courts of
Copyholders, etc. and such Courts as are held by the Kings grant, by Charter to
Corporations, and the Universities: in all which Summons are issued out, and
Judgments given, and all Acts and proceedings made and done in the name of such
persons as have chief Authority in the said Courts, and not in the Name of the
King; thus their styles run; A. B. Major Civitatis Exon. N. M. Cancellarius
Vniversitatis Oxon. and the like, and not Carolus Dei gratia.

2. Once more a little nearer to our case; there are other Courts that are
guided by the Civil (as distinguished from the Common) Law; as the
Court-Marshal and the Court of Admiralty; the Kings Name in these is no more
used, than it is in the Courts Spiritual; but all Processes, Sentences, and
Acts in these Courts, are in the Name of the Constable, Head Marshal, or
Admiral, and not in the Kings Name.

3. I shall conclude this with those grave and weighty words of the same most
admirable Bishop Sanderson, in his excellent Treatise, showing, that Episcopacy
as Established by Law in England, is not prejudicial to Regal Power; worthy of
every Englishman's reading: his words to our purpose are these; Which manner of
proceeding, like that of the Spiritual Courts, constantly used in those several
Courts before mentioned; since no man has hitherto been found to interpret, as
any diminution at all or disacknowledgment of the Kings Sovereignty over the
said Courts: it were not possible the same manner of proceeding in the
Ecclesiastical Courts should be so confidently charged with so heinous a crime,
did not the intervention of some wicked lust or other prevail with men of
corrupt minds to become partial judges of evil thoughts, p. 68, 69.

Mr. Hickeringill is one of those whom the Bishop describes, i. e. that so
confidently charge the Ecclesiastical Courts with that heinous crime, and
foundeth that confidence in the Statute of the 1 Eliz. 1. In charity to him, I
shall give him such words out of that Statute, as do not only secure the Act of
Queen Mary that repealed the Act of 1 Edw. 6. 2. (requiring the use of the
Kings Name in our proceedings) from repeal in that particular; but directly and
expressly ratifies and confirms the same, and our contrary proceedings
accordingly. So that our proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts without using
the Kings Name, or Style, or Arms, according to 1 Edw. 6. 2. are allowed and
established by this very Act of Queen Eliz. thus; Further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that all other Laws and branches of any Act repealed by
the said Act of repeal of Mar. and not in this Act specially mentioned and
revived, shall stand and be repealed in such manner and form as they were
before the making of this Act; any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding, 1 Eliz. 1. 13. but the Act of 2 Phil. and Mar. was not
specially mentioned in this Act of Repeal, nor any other: And the Learned
Judges in 4 Jac. observe, that this Act of 1 Eliz. revives an Act of Hen. 8.
repealed by Queen Mary, and in both these Statutes 1 Edw. 6. 2. is made void;
and the present proceeding of Spiritual Courts without the Kings Name, etc.
plainly confirmed; but vid. Coke Rep. 12. p. 7.

CHAP. V.
The Act of 1 Eliz. 1. Establishing the High Commission Court, was not the
foundation of ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, against Mr.
Hickeringill.

THE worthy Gentleman, though he uses much Modesty, and will not peremptorily
assert; and has only fitted the matter for the consideration of wiser men (if
he can think there be any such) reasons wonderfully after this new and unheard
of manner, or to this purpose, if at all.

The Statute of Eliz. for the High Commission Court was the only Basis of all
Ecclesiastical power; this continued indeed during her time, and King James's;
but being repealed by 17 Car. 1. 11. and 13 Car. 2. 12. down came the Fabric;
their great foundation thus torn up, now they have neither power from God nor
man, nor ever shall; for his Majesty has by Statute Enacted never to empower
them with any more Commissions to the worlds end. Now their basis is taken
away, I cannot discern where their Authority lies, Nak. T. q. 1. p. 4, 5, 6.
This is the Spirit of his Reason, which he confesses is not infallible; for he
says as before, he does not peremptorily assert it.

But can a man have the face to write this first, and then to say he is not
peremptory? Would a man in his wits expose himself in this manner in Print, and
blunder out so much prejudice, envy, spite and wrath against Government? and
talk such pitiful unadvised stuff about Law? and think to shake the Fabric of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that has stood firm so long in the midst of all
its enemies, with shadows of straws? Had he advised with the learned Sage, his
Friend Mr. Carry, who is the Author of the Law of England, certainly he could
never have talked so idly and impertinently, but would have put some colors at
least upon his honest designs, as Mr. Carry himself has done.

But what if this wise Mr. Hickeringill err fundamentally all this while? and
the clause of 1 Eliz. and consequently the Stat. of Car. 1. and 2. touch not,
concern not the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Church at all? as certainly they
do not; and the only wonder is, so wise a man should not see it: A man of so
great, and long experience, and practice in the Jurisdiction and Laws of the
Church: So diligent and accurate in his writings, and especially of Naked
Truth; wherein he assures us, nothing is presented crude or immature, but well
digested; as a few of those things that his head and heart, that is, his
stomach have been long full of; as he says, if you will believe him, p. ult.

But does not that clause that establishes the High Commission affect our
ordinary Jurisdictions at all? what pity it is, that so excellent a Book as this
second part of Naked Truth is, should miscarry in its main project, and in the
very foundation too: the fundamental supposition, on which all its strength is
built; and in a maxim peculiar to the Authors invention, and singularly his
own, for ought I know; and wherein he seems to place his glory, especially
seeing, as he tells us, p. ult. he has no pique, private interest, or revenge
to gratify: and writes only to cure old Ulcers; and with such hearty wishes
that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which is his Interest as well as others, were
of force, strength and virtue, and not so disorderly uncertain and precarious;
as he proves it to be, without one Argument, if this beloved one, taken from
the High Commission, fail him.

And yet alas! it will fail him do what we can: for the clause in the Stat. 1
Eliz. 1. 18. granted a power to the Crown to establish the High Commission
Court, as a Court extraordinary; consisting of extraordinary and choice
Ministers, not restrained to ordinary Ecclesiastical Officers: and the ordinary
Jurisdiction did never derive from it, was never disturbed or altered by it;
but was ever from the beginning of it, consistent with and subordinate to it;
therefore was it called the High Commission. This is evident, as from the
concurrence of both Jurisdictions all a long; so from the letter of the Statute
it self, and clearly declared to be so by my Lord Coke.

This clause (says he) divides it self into two branches, the first
concerning the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical state and persons; this branch
was Enacted out of necessity, for that all Bishops and most of the Clergy of
England, being then Popish, it was Necessary to raise a Commission to deprive
them that would not deprive themselves: and in case of Restitution of Religion,
to have a more Summary proceeding than by the ordinary and prolix course of Law
is required. This branch concerns only Ecclesiastical persons: so that, as
Necessity did cause this Commission, so it should be exercised but upon
Necessity; for it was never intended that it should be a continual standing
Commission; for that should prejudice all the Bishops in their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions, and be grievous to the Subject, to be drawn up from all the
remote parts of the Realm, where before their own Diocesan they might receive
Justice at their own doors.

So that this power of the High Commission, neither granted any new power to
the ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor took away any of the old. Yea, it
plainly supposes the prae-existence and exercise of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in an ordinary way, and meddles no further with it than to take
its measures from it, which by consequence allows it in it self, as well as for
a Rule of its own proceedings, as my Lord Coke observes in these words.

That your Highness -- shall name -- to execute under your Highness -- all
manner of Jurisdiction, etc. and to visit and reform, etc. all errors, etc.
which by any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power -- can or may lawfully be
reformed, etc.

Now if the ordinary Jurisdiction by Bishops, etc. did not derive from, or
depend on that High Commission, the repealing the Statute (I mean the clause)
that empowered the High Commission can no wise affect, much less destroy that
ordinary Jurisdiction; and Mr. Hickeringill's foot is gone from his ground, and
the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Church of England stands fixed upon its
ancient Bottom, on which it stood before the High Commission, and ever since,
notwithstanding the High Commission is taken away, and should never be granted
more.

Now I cannot but observe, that Mr. Hickeringill has the ill luck to cut his
own fingers with every tool he meddles with. The Stat. of 13 Car. 2. 12. which
continues the repeal of the clause in 1 Eliz. for the High Commission by the 17
of Car. 1. which also took away our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; I say this
Stat. 13 Car. 2. 12. restores the ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
excludes the power of the High Commission.

Whence it is plain, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction does not Essentially
depend on, but may and does now stand by Act of Parliament without the
High Commission.

Again, whereas it is provided that the Jurisdiction so restored shall not
exceed in power, what it was in 1639. it is clear, that the Church had a lawful
Jurisdiction before the Wars, otherwise nothing is restored: yea, it is
nonsense, or a delusion unworthy of a Parliament, if they that made that Act
did not suppose and allow, that the ordinary exercise of Jurisdiction in the
Spiritual Courts in 1639. was according to Law; and I am sure that was just
such as is now exercised.

CHAP. VI.
How our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England came at first, and is at
present Established by Law.

TO show how the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction came at first to be Established by
Law, is a point not so difficult as much desired.

It Is agreed, I hope, that all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations owe their
Obedience to the Gospel, when and wheresoever it comes: and that England was
one of the first of the Nations that embraced it, and became a Church of
Christ; then we were a rude unpolished and Barbarous people, and knew little of
Civil Policy or order of Government; but by the gracious Ministry of Holy men
sent from God, our manners began to be softened, and our minds sweetened and
enlightened, and our Princes became early nourishers and honourers of Religion
and Religious persons; and good nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to the
Church then planting among us; and began to endow it with wealth and power.

Arviragus, Marius, Coilus (as the three Kings in Malmesh. are named by
Capgravius) entertained Christians exploded from all parts of the World, in
this Kingdom: and gave them peace, and provided them a Country to dwell in; and
first gave liberty to build and defend Churches in public Lucius the first
Christian King, built Churches at his own charge; first constituted Bishops
Seats, and built dwellings for Priests, and much enriched all things of that
nature: and that Religious men might with more safety enjoy what they had given
them, amplis munivit privilegiis, fortified them with large privileges.

Here was born also (as Baronius confesses) Constantine the Great, who brought
peace to the whole Church; who was the first Christian Emperor; and likewise
the first Christian Queen, his Mother Helen.

If we come to the Kings of the Ages following, quis non stupeat, as Spelman
says, who can choose but be astonished at the eximious Piety, incredible Zeal
(Ardorem) extraordinary ( Insignes) Alms, manifold works of mercy, munificence
toward Gods Ministers, and their magnificent and wonderful ( profusionem)
liberality and expense in building, adorning, enriching Churches, insomuch, as
one says, Mirum tunc fuerat Regem videre non sanctum: And as another, There
were more holy Kings found in England than in any one, though the most populous
Province in the World.

The day would fail (that worthy Antiquary adds in his most excellent Epistle
before his Councils, enough to inflame the coldest Age with zeal for Religion)
The day would fail me, says he, should I speak of Edwin, Ina, Offa, Ethered,
Edmund, Ethelstan, Canute, Edward the Confessor, and many others; seeing among
all the Illustrious Kings, who were West Saxons, the third is scarce found, qui
Ecclesiam Dei, in Aliquibus, non Ornaverit, Auxerit, Ditaverit, who did not
Adorn, Augment and Enrich the Church of God.

In these early times of Zeal and Piety among the Kings of England, the
Jurisdiction and Authority of the Church took root, and began and proceeded to
flourish; now, no doubt, but Religion sincerely managed by good and meek
Churchmen, was a great mean to move the Nation toward a better Order in the
Civil State, both in Government and Law. Now I say (to use Spelman's words)
when Os Sacerdotis Oraculum esset plehis, Os Episcopi, Oraculum Regis and
Reipublicae, The mouth of the Priest was an Oracle to the People, and the mouth
of the Bishop was an Oracle to the King and the Commonwealth. In the time of
Ethelbert, the first Christian King of the Saxons, we find a Convention at
Canterbury of Bishops and Lords, to settle the affairs of Church and State. In
the time of the Heptarchy Summons was, Ad Episcopos, Principes, etc. Decrees
were made afterward, Cum Concilio Episcoporum, thus during the time of the
Saxons, etc. and until the Pope got footing here by the Conqueror,
Ecclesiastical Authority went on apace: Yea it is evident, that it went on step
by step with the progress of the Civil, and was gradually owned, enlarged and
established in the very Essence and degrees, and together with the
Establishment of the Civil State.

Insomuch, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was so twisted and Interwoven, and,
as it were, wrapped in the very Bowels of the Civil; and the Ecclesiastical Law
so concerned and intimately wrought into the Temporal Law and Government, that
'twas hard to make the separation, or indeed clearly to assign the distinction
betwixt them; which has taken up the care, both of Lawyers and Statutes to do
it effectually and thoroughly; and perhaps may be in some measure a Reason of
many Prohibitions against Ecclesiastical Prohibitions to this day.

Hence also it was, that beyond all known time of Christianity in England, our
great Churchmen have had no small hand in making all our Laws, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil: and also sat many hundred years together with our
Temporal Judges in all places of public Judicature. Primi igitur sedebant in
omnibus Regni Comitiis and Tribunalibus Episcopi: In Regali quidem palatio cum
Regni magnatibus: in Comitatu una cum Comite and Justitiario Comitatus: in
Turno Vicecomitis cum Vicecomite: in Hundredro cum Domino Hundredi. So that in
promoting Justice every where the sword might aid the sword, and nihil
inconsulto Sacerdote (qui velut suburra in Navi fuit) ageretur, Sp. Epis. Conc.

Yet we must remember, and it is carefully minded in our Statutes before
mentioned, that our Kings were the true and acknowledged fountains of the
beginning and increase of that wealth, and honor, and power, which the Church
and Churchmen then enjoyed; and that the Kings of England were ever Supreme
over this Church, and all its Ministers; and not the Pope, or any foreign
power; the Pope's Collector or Minister (so say our ancient Books) had no
Jurisdiction in this Land, Lord Coke of Courts, p. 321.

In our Law before the Conquest, the King was the Vicar of the highest King,
ordained to this end, that he should above all govern the Church, Edw. Laws, c.
19. and this has been carefully maintained by our Laws ever since. See
Cawdries Case.

SECT. I.
Jurisdiction of the Church in Common Law.

THUS the power and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical grew up with and received much
perfection by and in Common Law.

By Common Law, I mean, long and general use in the whole Land; for as I take
it, my Lord Coke says, That time and use make a Custom: when that is general in
England, it is called Common Law; that is my meaning; whether my Notion be
right, I weigh not, if the matter and Argument prove and express the manner of
the Churches ancient Authority and Jurisdiction before the Statutes.

It Is most evident, William the Conqueror found the Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers in great power and with large Jurisdiction, which they
had long enjoyed, according to the Law and Custom of the Realm. Call that Law
what you will, by that they enjoyed their ancient Rights and government, and
that is enough.

It Is true indeed, William changed the ancient Custom we spoke of, and
distinguished the Tribunals one from the other: but says Spelman, Secrevit,
non diminuit Jurisdictionem Cleri, he did not lessen the Jurisdiction of the
Clergy: Yea, by swearing he confirmed the Laws of holy Church, Quoniam per eam
Rex and Regnum solidum subsistendi habent fundamentum. Prooemium ll. suarum, ut
Spel. Epis. because, by the Church both King and Kingdom have a solid
foundation of subsisting. Thus the Churches Rights, in being before, were
confirmed by the Conqueror.

My Lord Coke notes two excellent Rules of Common Law to our purpose.

1. The Law does appoint every thing to be done by those unto whose office it
properly appertains.

2. It Is a Maxim of the Common Law, that where the Right is Spiritual, and the
Remedy thereof only by the Ecclesiastical Law, the Connusance thereof does
belong to the Spiritual Court, Coke Instit. p. 1.

3. Hence it follows, that there being many Cases in which there is no remedy
Vid. Cawdries Case, Answ. to Object. 4.
any other way provided, by Common Law they belong to the Spiritual Courts, and
the Common Law both impowers and requires those Courts to give Remedy in those
Cases.

Thus stood Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England by Common Law before our
Statutes took so much notice of it; and our Statutes since, whenever they
mention it, do generally mention it, as a Government supposed, upon grounds
good and firm in Law to have existed before, and also then to be in use, and to
flourish in its present exercise, and proceedings in its proper course and
Courts.

It Is as idle a thing to look in the Statutebooks for the beginning of
Ecclesiastical Power and its Courts, as for the Beginning of Courts-Baron,
which are such by Common Law, as Coke says, or the Court of Marshalsea, which,
as Coke's words are, has its foundation in Common Law; or Courts of
Copyholders, which are such by Custom: And for the same reason to question the
lawfulness of these Courts, because, in their original, they were not
Established by Act of Parliament, as well as the legality of the Courts
Spiritual; these being equally founded in the Ancient usage, Custom and Law of
England; and all taken care for in Magna Charta, that ancient Authentic
account of our Common Law.

And why are Ecclesiastical Judges (I mean not Bishops only, whom Mr.
Hickeringill finds in Scripture, but) Archdeacons, Chancellors, Officials, etc.
as well Established in their proper power, as Coroners, High-Constables, etc.
that have the Origin of their Offices before Statutes? Have not Ecclesiastical
Officers, when lawfully invested, power, as well as they, to Act in their
proper Jurisdictions, by the same Common Law? by long, ancient and established
Custom; or as the usual word in our Statutes in this very Case is, secundum
Consuetudines and Leges Angliae?

My Lord Coke says, The Kings Prerogative is a principal part of the Common
Law, which also flourishes in this part of it, the Ecclesiastical Power and
Jurisdiction, as well as in the Civil State and Government. Thus we
acknowledge, the Ecclesiastical State, and External, and Coercive Jurisdiction
derives from and depends upon the Crown of England by Common Law: And I am bold
to add, that the former cannot easily be Abolished and destroyed (I do not say
altered) without threatening the latter, I mean the Crown (at least some
prejudice to it) on which it depends.

Thus Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction stands by Common Law, on which also most of
our Civil Rights depend; but we confess it is bounded (as my Lord Coke) by the
same Common Law; and in all reason it must be so, it being subordinate to the
King as Supreme, who is supposed to be personally or virtually present in his
great Courts of Common Law; and is so declared to be by Acts of Parliament.
Instit. p. 1. page 344. of my Lord Coke.

SECT. II.
The Government Ecclesiastical is Established in the Statutes of this Realm.

THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being thus found Established by Law before the
Statute-books were made, the Statutes do Establish it as much as any reasonable
unprejudiced man can expect or desire.

We shall begin with Magna Charta, which is Statute as well as Common Law, and
seems to unite and tie them together: This stands at the beginning of our
Statutebook; and the first thing in this, is a grant and establishment for ever
of the Rights and Liberties of the Church; that must be understood of the
Rights and Liberties then in being; and among the rest, sure the great Right
and Liberty of the Churches Power, and the free use of her Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

Magna Charta it self expounds what it means by holy Church, i. e. the Bishops
and Ministers of it, which King Hen. 8. in the Statute says is commonly called
the Spiritualty: and Mr. Hickeringill, for all his scoffing, knows that the
Church of England allows a larger sense of the word [ Church] viz. the
Congregation of all faithful men, etc. And when we call the Clergy, or the
Governing-part of the Church, the Church, we use it in a Law-sence, and as a
term of Law, as Acts of Parliament as well as the Civil or Canon Law do: But
this by the way.

2. When the subsequent Acts of Parliament do so frequently mention the
Spiritual Courts, and their Jurisdiction; this to me is a legal allowance of
them; and indeed a Tacit or implicit acknowledgment of their more ancient
antecedent Power and Common right and liberty, by the undoubted Custom, i. e.
the Common Laws of the Land. Yea those very Statutes that look at least
obliquely upon them; that say they are bounded by the Common Law; that do of
themselves limit and prohibit the Ecclesiastical Courts in some cases, seem
plainly to acknowledge them in other cases not excepted from their
Jurisdiction. But,

3. More plainly and directly, those Acts of Parliament that appear in the
behalf of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in times of its trial and danger, and
vindicate its Rights, and preserve and maintain its Liberties when most in
question: there have happened such occasions, wherein the Statutes have res^^ed
and replevied the Ecclesiastical Power; in all which the Statutes have been
thus favorable to it; three of late, not to mention many formerly.

1. Thus, when some might imagine, that by the alteration made by King Hen. 8.
the Bishops and their Power was shaken: the Statutes made in his time assure
us, that it was but to restore the ancient Jurisdiction, and not to destroy it;
that Bishops should be elected and act as formerly; especially as Coke notes,
by the 25 Hen. 8. c. 20. it is Enacted, That every person chosen, invested,
Consecrated, Archbishop or Bishop, according to this Act, shall do and execute
every thing and things as any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, without
offending of the Prerogative Royal of the Crown, and the Laws and Customs of
the Realm at any time heretofore have done.

Note, that this Statute, contrary to the 1 Edw. 6. 2. was revived by Queen
Eliz. 1. cap. 1. which the Judges thought and judged a full answer to all the
Objections against the Churches proceedings contrary to the 1 Edw. 6. 2. and by
this very Statute 1 Edw. 6. 2. stands clearly repealed, as my Lord Coke
observes Rep. 12. 8, 9. which caused me to make choice of it for my present
purpose.

2. The second is observed in the time of Phil. and Mar. when the manner of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction had been altered by the 1 Edw. 6. the Statute
establishes the same as it was before in these words: And the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions of the Archbishops, Bishops, and (other) Ordinaries, to be in the
same estate for Process of Suits, punishment of crimes, and execution of
Censures of the Church, and knowledge of causes belonging to the same; and as
large in those points, as the said Jurisdiction was the 20 Hen. 8. which
Statute of Phil. and Mar. repealed the 1 Edw. 6. 2. and was never repealed
since, as the Judges resolved in the foresaid Case 4 Jac. but evidently revived
by 1 Eliz. 1. Sect. 13.

3. When thirdly, the long Parl. 17 Car. 1. had disabled the Jurisdiction of
the Courts Ecclesiastical, it was very carefully restored and established by
the Stat. 13 Car. 2. in these words; Neither this Act -- shall take away any
ordinary Jurisdiction from the said Archbishops, etc. but that they, and every
of them, may proceed -- in all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and in
all Censures and Coercions belonging to the same, as they did and might
lawfully have done before the making of the said Act. Vid. 17 Car. 1.

4. It Is sufficient, yet I cannot but subjoyn one notable way more
Argumentative enough, alone by it self, to prove the Ecclesiastical Courts to
be allowed and confirmed by Statute, viz. when the Statutes direct such
particulars to be tried in these Courts; and require these Spiritual Courts to
use their power for the punishment of offenders, and the doing Justice: And I
think there cannot be a better medium or clearer evidence than we have in this
matter.

For if the Spiritual Courts have no power to try such matters, and pass
Judgment, and punish in such cases, why do the Statutes direct and remit such
matters to them? and why do the Statutes enjoin them to take Connusance and
proceed accordingly? that so they do, is plain.

In the 18 of Edw. 3. 6. it is said, that Process in Causes Testamentary
notoriously appertains to holy Church. We must not blemish the Franchize of
Holy Church: And in the 18 of Edw. 3. 6. parties are to be dismissed from
Secular Judges in Cause of Tithes, and left to the Church: Ordinaries have
power to punish Ministers and Priests; as in 1 Hen. 7. c. 4.

Synodals, Proxies, Pensions, etc. are to be recovered in the Spiritual Courts.
Vid. 15 Hen. 8. c. 7. Sect. 7.

The like is known touching Causes Matrimonial and Defamations, etc. I shall
only instance one more, viz. in the great Cause of Nonconformity; and that in
an Act that is nearer to us, and of unquestionable Authority, which both
directs what we should punish, and most solemnly requires by its own Authority
to exercise our Ecclesiastical Power, by the very rules and proper methods of
our Spiritual Courts; in these words, 1 Eliz. before the Common Prayer:
Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and singular Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have full power and Authority by virtue of
this Act, as well to enquire in their Visitations, Synods, and elsewhere,
within their Jurisdiction, at any other time or place, to take accusation and
informations of all and every the things above mentioned, done, committed or
perpetrated within the limits of their Jurisdictions and Authority, as to
punish the same, by Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation,
and other Censures and Process, in like form as heretofore has been used in
like cases, by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws. This doubtless is very plain.

And hereupon, it is solemnly required in these words a little before: For the
due execution hereof, they do in Gods name earnestly require and charge all
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor
themselves to the utmost of their knowledges, that the due and true execution
hereof may be had, throughout their Dioceses and Charges, as they will answer
before God for such evils and plagues, whereby Almighty God may justly punish
his people for neglecting this good and wholesome Law.

Now if in like cases it had not been lawful before this Act, for the Spiritual
Courts so to proceed, why are the former Laws and use to be followed by these
directions? Or if this Act cannot empower us, give us reason or Law against it.
Or if any thing be a greater grievance to you in the Spiritual Courts, than the
punishment provided for the crimes mentioned in this Act, say what it is, or
say nothing.

But if these cases be not sufficient, Mr. Carry can tell you of at least ten
particular matters, upon which the Law is, to grant the Writ de Excommunicato
capiendo: and according to a known Act of Parliament made after this, viz. 5
Eliz. 23. which sufficiently allows and confirms our Ecclesiastical proceedings
to the senses of too many, as some complain.

CHAP. VII.
Of Canons and Convocations.

WE see what Reason Mr. Hickeringill had to keep such a pother about the force
of Ecclesiastical Canons, and the Authority of Convocations. Especially,

1. Seeing the late mentioned Act of 1 Eliz. supposes the Ecclesiastical Laws,
i. e. the Canons to be her own Laws; and requires Ecclesiastical Judges so
severely to put them in execution.

2. Seeing, since the Reformation, most of the matters of Canons are expressed
and enjoined in Acts of Parliament; insomuch, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
might stand and proceed well enough, had we no other Canon but Acts of
Parliament, as Mr. Hickeringill insinuates: and it is worthy his observation,
that the greatest complaints of Dissenters, since the Kings happy return, have
been upon the execution of Acts of Parliament, and that not so much by
Ecclesiastical as Civil Ministers.

Indeed the Statute of Car. 2. that restored the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
has a Proviso, That by virtue of that Act, the Canons of 1640. shall not be of
force; and that no Canons are made of force by that Act that were not formerly
confirmed by Acts of Parliament, or by the established Laws of the Land, as
they stood in Ann. 1639.

But it is evident enough, that by the 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. the old Canons, not
against Law or Prerogative, are of force; and that the King with the
Convocation, may make new ones, with the same Conditions; and indeed, while the
Convocation is so limited by that Act, their power seems not very formidable.

My Lord Coke, who was not a Bigot for Spiritual Power, declares the Law in
both those Cases; and tells us, That it was resolved by the Judges at a
Committee of Lords, these restraints of the Convocation were grounded on that
Statute.

1. They cannot Assemble without the assent of the King.

2. They cannot Constitute any Canons without his license.

3. Nor execute them without his Royal assent.

4. Nor after his assent, but with these four limitations.

1. That they be not against the Kings Prerogative.

2. Nor against Common Law.

3. Nor against Statute Law.

4. Nor against any Custom of the Kingdom, Rep. 12. p. 720. And my Lord Coke
adds, That these restraints put upon the Convocation by the 25 Hen. 8. are but
an affirmance of what was before the Statute; and, as he says (in his book of
Courts) are but declaratory of the old Common Law: Page 323.
consequently the Courts of Common Law are to bound and overruled all
Ecclesiastical executions of Canons, and secure the Crown and the Laws against
them.

But what Acts of Parliament have abrogated the Authority of the Synod 1603.
and quite annihilated the very beings of Convocations, I am yet to learn;
though Mr. Hickeringill so boldly after his own way vents so wild a notion p.
3. and 12. or when that of 25 Hen. 8. 19. was repealed, or how they are made
less than nothing at this day, than they were before, since that Statute of
limitations, as he is pleased to insult?

He says, They are far from being the Representative Church of England; for
that the people have not the least Vote in their Election. Pray, when was it
otherwise than it is now? If the Law by Institution make the Clerk a guide to
his flock in Spirituals; if the people do expressly make choice of him for such,
or virtually consent in Law he should be so; and thereupon the Law allows this
Clerk to elect members for the Convocation, and also reckons the Convocation to
be the Representative Church of England; how comes it that Mr. Hickeringill who
is so great a stickler for a Legal Religion should be so much wiser than the
Law? and to scoff at its Constitutions?

I wish Mr. Hickeringill to beware of touching Foundations with his rude and
bold Fancies, and disturbing the frame of Government. I am sure he will not
abide by his own Rule, if he be well advised of the manner of Electing the
great Representative of the people of England: it is our duty to study to be
quiet, but some study to be otherwise. The wisest word in his Naked Truth is
this; If men once come to dispute Authority, and the wisdom of the Laws and
Lawmakers, the next step is Confusion and Rebellion, p. 11.

The Conclusion.
THUS you have a Taste of the Spirit and Sense that runs through the Book
called Naked Truth; his other little gross mistakes are not worthy observing,
much less insisting on: such as these:

1. First, That all Archdeaconries have Corpses annexed, which is certainly
otherwise, in most Archdeaconries in some Dioceses.

2. Then that Archdeacons require Procurations when they do not Visit; which is
not done in some, and I hope in no Diocese.

3. Lastly, That Procurations and Synodals are against Law, and not to be
recovered by Law or Conscience; when he himself confesses that they are due by
ancient Composition: That provision (notwithstanding his old Canons) in
Visitations is due; for which the money, paid for Procurations, is paid for
them by virtue of that Composition: and whereas, they are due by undoubted and
long possession and Custom, which is as Law in England: And to conclude, are
not only expressly allowed as due, but declared to be recoverable in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, by the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. 19.

I have, at this time, done with his Materials; and for the Manner of his
Writing, let the Sentence of every Reader reproach and shame him. I like not
the office of Raking Kennels or emptying Jakes; and all the harm I return him,
is to pray heartily for him, That God would give him Grace soberly to read over
his own Books, and with tears to wash these dirty sheets, wherein he has
played the wanton; and indeed defiled himself more than his own Nest (whatever
the unlucky Bird intended) and that with such a barbarous wit, and vile
Railery, as is justly offensive to God and Man: with such wild triumphs of
scorn and contempt of his own Order and Office, his Betters and Superiors; with
such a profligate neglect of Government and Peace; and of his own Conscience
and Law (against which, he confesses, he still acts) yea, against his own
Interest, Safety, and his very Reputation.

For all which Notorious and public Miscarriages, I wish he thought it fit to
do public Penance in another new and cleaner Sheet.

I have to do with two Adversaries, Mr. Hickeringill and Mr. Carry: the first
wishes the Church of England had more power than it now has; the other, that
it had less. I presume in the name of the true Sons of this Church, that we are
very thankful for the power we have, by the favor of our gracious King and his
good Laws.

And as we do, and always shall acknowledge the Dependence of our
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction upon the Imperial Crown of this Realm: So whether
it seem good to the King and his High Court of Parliament, to augment or lessen
it, or to continue it as it is, we shall still maintain our Loyalty, and
manifest our duty, and cheerfully submit our selves. But, Lord, forgive our
Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and turn their hearts.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
I Have reserved a few Authorities for the satisfaction of such as have no mind
or leisure to read the Book; which alone are sufficient to oppose and expose my
Adversaries Objections.

I.
Episcopal Government in the Church of England is as Ancient as the Church; and
at first was subordinate, under God, only to our Kings, without any relation to
or dependence on the Pope; and declared to be so, with the grounds and reasons
thereof, very early by Edw. 1. and Edw. and so Established by Acts of
Parliament.

Read 25 Edw. 3. the sum is thus.

Here we have a Recital of the first Statute against Provisors, to this effect;
Whereas the Holy Church of England was founded in the Estate of Prelacy by the
Grandfather of this King and his Progenitors, etc. and by them endowed with
great Possessions, etc. for them to inform the People in the Law of God; to
keep Hospitality, etc. And whereas the King and other founders of the said
Prelacies were the Rightful Adowers thereof; and upon Avoidance of such
Ecclesiastical Promotions, had power to advance thereunto their Kinsmen,
Friends, and other Learned men of the birth of this Realm; which being so
advanced, became able and worthy to serve the King in Council, and other places
in the Commonwealth: The Bishop of Rome Usurping the Seigniory of such
Possessions and Benefices, did give the same to Aliens, -- as if he were
Rightful Patron of those Benefices; whereas, by the Law of England, he never
had the Right Patronage thereof: whereby in short time all the Spiritual
Promotions in this Realm would be engrossed into the hands of strangers,
Canonical Elections of Prelates would be abolished, works of Charity would
cease, the Founders and true Patrons would be disinherited, the Kings Council
weakened, and the whole Kingdom impoverished, and the Laws and Rights of the
Realm destroyed.

Upon this complaint it was resolved in Parliament, That these Oppressions and
grievances should not be suffered in any manner; and therefore it was Enacted,
That the King and his Subjects should thenceforth enjoy their Rights of
Patronage: that free Elections of Archbishops and Bishops, and other Prelates
Elective should be made according to the Ancient Grants of the Kings
Progenitors and their Founders; and that No Provision from Rome should be put
in Execution; but that those Provisors should be Attached, Fined and Ransomed
at the Kings Will; and withal imprisoned, till they have renounced the benefit
of their Bulls, satisfied the Party grieved, and given sureties not to commit
the like offense again.

II.
Before this forementioned Act was made, the Spiritual Courts were in Being,
and had Power by the Law of the Land, to try such Causes as were not to be
tried by Common Law: so declared and Established by Acts of Parliament. Vid. in
the time of Edw. 1. and Edw. 2. near four Hundred years since.

Circumspecte agatis, 13 Edw. 1. An. 1285.

The King to his Judges sends greeting: Use your selves circumspectly, in all
matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy; not punishing them if
they hold Plea in things as be mere Spiritual, as Penance enjoined by Prelates,
Corporal or Pecuniary -- for Fornication, Adultery, or such like: for Tithes
and Oblations due and accustomed; Reparations of the Church and Churchyard;
Mortuaries, Pensions, laying violent hands upon a Clerk, Causes of Defamation,
Perjury: All such demands are to be made in the Spiritual Courts; and the
Spiritual Judge shall have power to take knowledge of them notwithstanding the
Kings Prohibition.

III.
Hereupon a Consultation was to be granted 24 Edw. 1. as follows.

Whereas Ecclesiastical Judges have often surceased to proceed by force of the
Kings Writ of Prohibition in Cases, whereas Remedy could not be had in the
Kings Courts -- our Lord the King Wills and Commands, That where
Ecclesiastical Judges do surcease in the aforesaid Cases, by the Kings
Prohibition, that the Chancellor or the Chief Justice, upon sight of the Libel,
at the instance of the Plaintiff (if they can see that the Case cannot be
redressed by Writ out of Chancery, but that the Spiritual Court ought to
determine the Matters) shall write to the Ecclesiastical Judge, that he proceed
therein, notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition.

More particularly, Those Cases reserved by Law and Statute, against which no
Prohibition can be legally granted, are enumerated in Articul. Cleri, 9 Edw. 2.

IV.
Thus the proceedings of the Spiritual Courts, and the Causes belonging to them
were supposed, directed, allowed, and Established by these Ancient Statutes.

And left those Causes have not been sufficiently specified, no Prohibition
shall be awarded out of Chancery, but in Case where we have the connusance, and
of Right ought to have; as it is in the 18 of Edw. 3. provided.

Whence it is a general Rule, both in Law and Statute, That such cases as have
no remedy provided in the other Law, belong to the Spiritual Courts: and
indeed, it hence appears they have ever done so; because we no where find in
our Laws, that the Common Law did ever provide for them: and because the
Kingdom of England is an entire Empire, where the King is furnished with a
Temporalty and Spiritualty, sufficient to administer Justice to all persons,
and in all Causes whatsoever: And consequently, what Causes are not in the
connusance of the Common Law, belong to the Spiritual Jurisdiction, which is
plainly implied in 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. and other Statutes.

Upon the same ground in Law depend three great truths. 1. The Antiquity of
Ecclesiastical Courts. 2. Their dependence upon the Crown. 3. The perfection of
the Government, to administer Justice in all cases to all persons, from the
Supreme Power exercised in the Temporal and Spiritual Courts; all which lie in
the Preamble of that Statute according to our Ancient Laws.

For, says my Lord Coke in the conclusion of Cawdries Case, it has appeared,
as well by the ancient Common Laws of this Realm, by the Resolution of the
Judges and Sages of the Laws of England in all succession of Ages, as by
Authority of many Acts of Parliament, ancient and of latter times, That the
Kingdom of England is an absolute Monarchy, and that the King is the only
Supreme Governor, as well over Ecclesiastical persons, and in Ecclesiastical
Causes, as Temporal: To the due observation, of which Laws, both the King and
the Subject are sworn.

V.
IF you desire a more full and particular account of such Cases, as being not
provided for at Common Law, are therefore, and have been ever under the
Spiritual power, take this excellent Enumeration of my Lord Cawdri^s Case.
Coke.

Observe (good Reader) seeing that the determination of Heresies, Schisms, and
Errors in Religion, Ordering, Examination, Admission, Institution and
Deprivation of men of the Church (which do concern God's true Religion and
Service) of right of Matrimony, Diverces, and general Bastardy, (whereupon
depend the strength of men's Descents and Inheritances) of Probate of
Testaments, and Letters of Administration (without which no debt or duty due to
any dead man can be recovered by the Common Law) Mortuaries, Pensions,
Procurations, Reparations of Churches, Simony, Incest, Adultery, Fornication
and Incontinency, and some others, does not belong to the Common Law, how
necessary it was for administration of Justice, that his Majesty's
Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, did by public Authority authorize
Ecclesiastical Courts under them, to determine those great and important Causes
Ecclesiastical ( exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Common Law) by the Kings
Laws Ecclesiastical, which was done originally for two causes. 1. That Justice
should be administered under the Kings of this Realm, within their own Kingdom,
to all their Subjects, and in all causes. 2. That the Kings of England should
be furnished upon all occasions, either foreign or domestical, with Learned
Professors, as well of the Ecclesiastical as Temporal Laws.

VI.
Ecclesiastical Laws are the Kings Laws, though Process be not in the Kings
Name.

Now, albeit the proceedings and Process Coke, Cawdr. Case, latter end.
of the Ecclesiastical Courts be in the Name of the Bishops, etc. it follows
not therefore, that either the Court is not the Kings, or the Law, whereby they
proceed, is not the King's Law. For taking one example for many, every Leet or
View of Frankpledge holden by a Subject is kept in the Lords Name, and yet it
is the Kings Court, and all the proceedings therein are directed by the Kings
Laws.

VII.
Spiritual Causes secured from Prohibitions, notwithstanding, by Acts of
Parliament. Lord Coke, Cawdries Case in Edw. 2.

Albeit, by the Ordinance of Circumspeete N. B.
agatis made in the 13 year of Edw. 1. and by general allowance and usage, the
Ecclesiastical Court held Plea of Tithes, Obventions, Oblations, Mortuaries,
Redemptions of Penance, laying of violent hands upon a Clerk, Defamations, etc.
yet did not the Clergy think themselves assured, nor quiet from Prohibitions
purchased by Subjects, until that King Edw. the Second by his Letters Patents,
under the Great Seal, in, and by consent of Parliament, upon the Petitions of
the Clergy, had granted unto them to have Jurisdiction in those Cases. The
King in a Parliament holden in the Ninth year of his Reign, after particular
Answers made to their Petitions concerning the matters abovesaid, does grant
and give his Royal assent in these words.

We desiring, as much of right as we may, to provide for the state of the
Church of England, and the tranquillity and quiet of the Prelates of the said
Clergy, to the honor of God, and the amendment of the state of the said
Church, and of the Prelates and Clergy; ratifying and approving all and
singular the said Answers which appear in the said Act; and all and singular
things in the said Answers contained, We do for Us and Our Heirs grant and
command, that the said be inviolably kept for ever: willing and granting for Us
and Our Heirs, that the said Prelates and Clergy, and their Successors for
ever, do exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Premises, according to the
tenor of the said Answer.

VIII.
The Ecclesiaestical Jurisdiction is a branch of the Kings Supremacy; and he
that denies it, denies the King to be a complete Monarch, Cawdries Case.
and Head of the whole entire body of the Realm, as my Lord Coke assures us,
both from the Common Law and many Statutes in all Ages -- made on purpose, from
time to time, to vindicate the Crown and secure our own Church and its
Jurisdiction under the Crown from the Pope, and his illegal Encroachments and
Usurpations before, and more especially by Hen. 8. and since the Reformation;
as is very amply proved by my Lord Coke, in his most excellent discourse on
Cawdrie's Case, and since very learnedly and fully by Sir John Davis, Atturny
General in Ireland, in his Case of Praemunire, called Labor's Case; both which
should be well read by all that desire satisfaction in this weighty point.

Thus the Jurisdiction of this Church, in subordination to the Supreme Head of
it, has proceeded through all time, in the Laws and Statutes of our own
Kingdom; and was never legally interrupted, till the 17 of Car. 1. but that Act
repealed by the 13 of our present gracious King, it stands firm again,
according to the letter of the said last Act, upon its ancient legal Basis.

IX.
The old Objection, that the Spiritual Courts do not Act in the Kings Name,
etc. is fully Answered in the Book; but, because it is only mentioned there,
that the Case was resolved by the Judges in L. Coke, Rep. 12. p. 7.
King James's time: I shall here set it down, as abridg'd (for brevity) out of
(...) Lord Coke by Manly.

Pasch. 4. Jac. Regis.

At this Parliament, it was strongly urged at a grand Committee of the Lords
and Commons in the Painted Chamber; that such Bishops as were made after the
first day of the Session, were not lawful Bishops.

1. Admitting them Bishops, yet the Manner and Form of their Seals, Styles,
Process and proceedings in their Ecclesiastical Courts, were not consonant to
Law; because, by the Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. it is provided, that thenceforth
Bishops should not be Elective, but Donative, by Letters Patents of the King;
and for that, at this day, all Bishops were made by Election, not Donation of
the King; therefore the said Bishops are not lawful.

2. By the same Act it is provided, that all Summons, etc. and Process in
Ecclesiastical Courts shall be made in the Kings Name and Style, and their
Seals engraven with the Kings Arms, and Certificates made in the Kings Name: it
was therefore concluded, that the said Statute being still in force, by
consequence all the Bishops made after the Act of 1 Jac. were not lawful
Bishops; and the proceedings being in the Name of the Bishop, makes them
unlawful, quia non observata forma infertur adnullatio Actus.

Upon consideration of these Objections, by the Kings Commandment, it was
Resolved by Popham Chief Justice of England, and Coke Atturny of the King, and
after affirmed by the Chief Baron, and the other Justices attendant to the
Parliament, that the said Act of 1 Edw. 6. 2. is not now in force; being
Repealed, Annulled and Annihilated by three several Acts of Parliament; any
whereof being in force, it makes that Act of 1 Edw. 6. that it cannot stand,
quia Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant: And by the Act of the 25
Hen. 8. c. 20. is set forth the manner of Election and Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops; and also for the making and Execution of all things
which belong to their Authority: with which words the Style and Seal of their
Courts, and the manner of their proceedings are included: which Act of 25 Hen.
8. is Revived by 1 Eliz. c. 1. and consequently, that of 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. is
Repealed.

I advise the Reader to see it, as more at large, expressed; and the repealing
Statutes particularly mentioned, and argued in my Lord Coke, 12 Rep. p. 7, 8,
9. and bid him farewell, and not be wiser than the Law.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for Richard Royston.
ROma Ruit: The Pillars of Rome broken: wherein all the several Pleas for the
Pope's Authority in England, with all the Material Defenses of them, as they
have been urged by Romanists from the beginning of our Reformation to this day,
are Revised and Answered. By Fr. Fullwood, D. D. Archdeacon of Totnes in Devon.

The New Distemper: Or the Dissenters Usual Pleas for Comprehension,
Toleration, and the Renouncing the Covenant, Considered and Discussed; with
some Reflections upon Mr. Baxter's and Mr. Alsop's late Pamphlets, published in
Answer to the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's Sermon concerning Separation.

The Lively Picture of Lewis du Moulin, drawn by an incomparable Hand. Together
with his Last Words: Being his Retractation of all the Personal Reflections he
had made on the Divines of the Church of England, (in several Books of his)
Signed by himself on the Fifth and the Seventeenth of October, 1680.

Christ's Counsel to his Church: In Two Sermons preached at the two last Fasts.
By S. Patrick, Dean of Peterburgh, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

THE END.

