Further REASONS for Enlarging the TRADE to Russia, Humbly offered by the
Merchants and Planters Trading to, and Interested in the Plantations of
Virginia and Maryland.
I. HIS Czarish Majesty Himself, and the Great Men of his Court do already take
Tobacco, and it is certain if the Trade were open, that they might have it upon
as easy Terms as our People in England, the Czar would grant a Liberty to
Import it into his Dominions, where the People would be very forward for the
Consumption of it, when besides their own strong Natural Inclinations to it,
they should be Influenced by the Example of the Court.

II. If the Trade be restrained to so few hands as at present it is, it is not
reasonable to expect that a Liberty will be granted by the Czar to Import
Tobacco into his Dominions; because He will see that His People cannot be
supplied but at such Rates as those Merchants please to set upon it, the
Monopoly being in so few hands, and He will be the more induced to enlarge or
restrain the Trade as He shall see the President set by the Parliament of
England, who are better acquainted with Trade.

III. If such a Liberty of Importation should be granted without the
Enlargement of the Trade, it would be of no advantage to any body, but those
few Merchants of the Company, who would not regard so much the Quantity
exported from England, as the Profit they could get by it to themselves, and
might always have Tobacco lying by them there, and yet not over-trade (as they
say) nor would the Consumption increase; As for Instance, If Spice were
cheaper, more would be spent, but the Dutch East India Company would not get
more Profit.

IV. In a Free Trade to the Czar's Dominions by a moderate Computation, there
might be consumed yearly 20000 Hogsheads of Tobacco, the advantage of which to
England would be as follows, viz. The first cost of the Negroes, to make it in
the Plantations, will bring in One hundred and sixty thousand Pounds Sterling;
those Negroes will consume yearly above Twenty thousand pounds sterling in
Goods carried from England; It will employ yearly 40 Sail of Ships (of Two
hundred Tuns each) to the Plantations, and ten or twelve more to Russia, which
Ships will employ 1500 Seamen; the Manufacturing this Tobacco in England before
it is Exported will Employ about Ten thousand poor People, besides all the
Charge of Importing and Exporting, which will Employ many more; All which will
be so much in Price to those that Buy it after the Exportation, and will add so
much to the Balance of the Trade of England.


