

ADVICE To a YOUNG LORD, Written by his FATHER, Under these following Heads:
Viz. Religion, Study and Exercises, Travel, Marriage, House Keeping, and
Hospitality. Of the Court, Of Friendship, Of Pleasure, and Idleness, Of
Conversation.


LONDON, Printed for, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms
Inn in Warwick Lane. 1691.

ADVICE TO A Young Lord.
INTRODVCTION.
My Dear Son,
I AM not ignorant that there are many Tracts of late years writ concerning
these very Subjects I now design to treat of; yet, I must confess, have most of
them been writ with a particular intention to their own Relations, and it is
therefore the most probable reason that they are not of such general use and
observation. Others I am apt to think are designed out of presumptuous ambition
of exceeding, by imitation, such rare Examples as went before them, in the
accessions of Wit, and Elegant Discourses, very often discolored with Urbane
and Facete Profaneness. I do acknowledge, it is a singular, and the right way
of transmitting a Man's Memory to Posterity, especially his own: The first of
which I disesteem, in Comparison of the latter, because I believe 'twill not be
by them observe d, so much as 'twill by the other be respected.

You are now to be separated for some time from me, and the greatest
Consolation I have in your absence left me, is the Confidence I have in the
Learning and Abilities of your Tutor, as also in your good nature in complying
to follow his Directions, which I am sure will be very reasonable.

It Is not my doubting of your Tutor (for if I did, I should never have
committed you, the thing I prize and value above any in the World, to his care)
But to show you how tender I am of, and what concern I take in your welfare,
has been the occasion, and reason which moved me to give you my particular
Advice in these several Subjects; thinking withal, that these my Admonitions
may be the more Sacred with, and esteemed by you, coming from one whom Nature,
and the Indulgence I have ever shown you, obliges to reverence and respect. And
I must confess, I have as yet no reason to think that you will be deficient in
your Duty, or frustrate the expectations that I, and all your Relations and
Friends have conceived of you.

The better to imprint in your Memory what I think fit at present to advertise
you of, I shall use a distinct Method, and divide my Discourse into several
Heads; and first of Religion.

Of RELIGION.
RELIGION, my dearest Child, is the greatest Concern we have upon us in this
World, our Eternal happiness in the next depending on it; and for that reason
ought to be the director of all our Actions. I cannot therefore use my Paternal
Authority to better purpose, than in adjuring, and straightly charging and
requiring you to be constant and zealous in the Religion Established in this
Kingdom. Not that I forbid you to make enquiry into it, to see if in all Points
it agrees with the revealed Will of God; but rather Exhort you to it, for I had
rather you would make it your choice, than to take it upon Credit. The best
Religion is a good Life, and the securest fence against Temptation. 'Twas the
Advice of a Great and Prudent Statesman to his Son, Sir. H. Sidney's Advice to
his Son Sir Phil.
That his first Action should be the lifting up his hands and mind to Almighty
God in Prayer, and feelingly to digest the words he uttered; with continual
Meditation, and thinking of him to whom he spoke; and to use this at an
ordinary hour, that the time it self might put him in remembrance to do that
thing he was accustomed to do at that time. This Advice I would you should
receive from me, and I desire no better return and obedience from you in this
Affair, than what was made by the Person it was first directed to. Let your
thoughts in the Morning be what you have to do that day, for which crave God's
Blessing and Protection; and at Night be sure you omit not to return thanks,
and recollect in your thoughts what you have done, for which you must implore
his Pardon. Use all your endeavors to suppress sinful thoughts and desires,
while they are weak and impotent, that if greater temptations present
themselves, you may be the better able to resist them, and by using your self,
and delighting in doing good, it will at length prove habitual. It Is an Old
Saying, Nemo repent fuit turpissimus, Juvenal.
and holds good in the contrary, for no Man is good on a sudden, but as he has
been inured to good works. Adeo in teneris assuescere multum est. Virgil.
Thus I Am confident you have been Educated, which with your Virtuous
Inclinations, puts me in comfort and assurance that you will never degenerate.

Let no advantage in the World tempt you to be wicked at any time; for you know
it is an Old Saying, He that will once be wicked for his advantage, will be
always so, if his Interest require it.

If any thing in Religion disturbs you, consult an able Physician of the
Gospel, and not depend too much on your own Reading; which yet I would have be
so much, as not to be imposed upon by any man. Diversity in any thing distracts
the mind, and leaves it wavering in a dubious perplexity; and then how easy
it is to sway the mind to either side, the most Elegant Comedian will inform
you. Dum indubio est, animus paulo momento huc and illuc impellitur: This is
most true in Religion; you must therefore obfirmate your Ears, and confirm your
Judgment, being once satisfied in the excellency of your Profession.

Neither would I have you only fixed and constant in your Religion, but also
very Devout (which is the chiefest thing) in the practice of it; and also
remember this, that he that is not truly Religious, will hardly be esteemed
such, since nothing is of less continuance than Hypocrisy and Dissimulation;
and if your Religion be such, such will your Honor be, (viz.) a feigned thing,
and a mere shadow. The Observance of Religion does become none more than Noble
and Illustrious Persons; other Glories have lifted them beyond the pitch and
reach of Men, but this is a Ray of the Divinity, which advances them near to
the Deity, and, like a Diamond, out-shines the luster of all other Jewels. A
Religious Heart, and a clear Conscience, will make you truly conspicuous; it is
as the Mother of all other Virtues.

What brave Effects of Obedience to Princes has it wrought in Subjects? Look
back to the Primitive Times, how Courageous were they in all Enterprises, hardy
and resolute in dangers, liberal to the Necessitous, ready and willing to do
their utmost endeavor in the distressed Affairs of the Empire! and all this from
one pious Principle, that in serving their Prince, they served God, whose
Lieutenant he is; nor was there any difficulty over which their Faith did not
triumph; and I charge you to make your duty to your Sovereign one of the chief
Points of your Religion, so far forth as may consist with your obedience to
God, and the Laws of your Nation, which ought to be served best, and in the
first place; yet there is such a reciprocation between both these Services,
that they commonly go together.

He that keeps himself strictly to the observation of the Divine Laws, cannot
err in the Humane; and he that is a good Servant of God, will never be an ill
Subject to his Prince.

It Is a Maxim of State, That where Princes and People are of a different
Religion, they will not very well agree; yet Modern Experience, since the
Reformation arrived to a settled constitution of Church Government, evinces the
contrary, as at present in Germany, and our own Kingdom of England. Cherish and
maintain the Ministers of the Gospel, especially Pious and Learned Preachers.
Nothing brings more contempt upon the Religion and service of God, in the eyes
of the Vulgar, than the necessities, wants, and miseries of Churchmen; what
esteem you reflect upon them, will redound and reflect upon your self again.
What the Heathen said of their Poets, That by their Means and Writings, Famous
Men were transmitted to Posterity, and Immortality, who otherwise would have
lain in perpetual Oblivion, is very true of Evangelical Doctors; their Prayers,
Instructions, and Recommendations of you, together with your own Holiness, is
the only Fame and Glory, will transmit and place you hereafter in Heaven, and
Establish you here living and dead, in the good will and praise of all good and
Charitable Persons. Let Charity be a chief Ingredient in your Religion, In all
things preserve a good Intention without which, no good Action can be
performed, vid. Sen. de Beneficis. c. 1.
both in Giving, and Forgiving; as you have Abilities, Indulge the Poor, and
let them in some measure partake with you in your outward Blessings and
Enjoyments.

For the other, as you are always liable to Offenses, to be always as apt and
prone to pardon and pass them by, which in the greatest Adversities you can
undergo, will never be out of your power to do.

Frequent your Chapel, and the Houses of God, let no Business invade or
intrude upon your Religious hours; what you have destined to the service of
God, is already Sacred to him, and cannot without great Profaneness be
alienated from him, and conferred upon others.

For other Duties necessary for a Christian's Practice, I refer you to the
Discipline and Instructions of the Church, thinking it needless to repeat them
here, which are so exactly laid down by her, which I esteem the purest Truth.

For search all Religions through the World, and you will find none that
ascribes so much honor to God, nor constitutes a more firm Love among Men, as
does the Established Doctrine of the Protestant Church amongst us. In whose Arms
I leave you and her to the everlasting protection of God Almighty.

Of Study and Exercises.
OF STVDY I shall be more brief and compendious, because I have wholly as to
this Affair committed you to the Conduct of your Tutor; but yet, hoping that my
Advice may be of some use to you after your leaving the University, I shall lay
before you these few directions.

1st. That you make it a great part of your care not to spend your time in
frivolous Niceties, such as the study of Criticisme may be, which is not
unfitly termed by one, difficiles Nugae, and stolidus labor Ineptiarum, but
always propose an end to your self in your Studies, according to that Old Rule
Respice finem. For it will be an instance of great Prudence in you, to study
things which may be of solid use; whereas now the whole Province of Learning is
infested with frivolous disputations, and nice and vain Impostures.

The best part of your study will be to read such Books as are most pleasing to
you, and you can study no Science better than what treats of the knowledge of
your self, and instructs you how to live and die well.

Therefore I say the usefulness ought in your Studies to be most observed or
respected, since it is a strong evidence of weak Judgment, when Men approve of
things for their being rare and new, or yet for the difficulty, where Virtue
and Usefulness are not conjoined to recommend them.

But though the studying only to pass away time, be a most inept Curiosity, and
mis-becoming active and generous Spirits, yet you must so order your Studies,
that you make them subservient to the Concerns of your Honor, Estate, and
Interest, and that they entrench upon no time which should be better employed,
either in the Service of God, or your Prince.

Your vacant and leisure hours you cannot better impend upon any thing than
Books and Meditation, nay, there is a necessity of making such leisure time, if
the multiplicity of business press too fast upon you, remembering that of a
Great Emperor, whose Affairs were not only urgent, but full of trouble in a
new attained Empire. Nulla dies sine linea, he would not let a day sl^p without
some improvement in Studies. Your own choice and Judgment will direct both what
Books to read, and what Science chiefly to apply your self to, though I think
it Pedantical, and unworthy a Person of Honor, to be Excellent in any one, it
seems as ridiculous as Nero's mad Ambition of being esteemed the chief Fiddler,
and best Songster in the World, whom Petronius Arbiter, a Roman Knight,
excellently describes in his Satyricon, under the Name of Eumolpus.

History, and the Mathematics, I think are the most proper and advantageous
Studies for Persons of your Quality, the other are fitter for Schoolmen, and
People that must live by their Learning, though a little insight and taste of
them will be no burden or inconvenience to you, especially Natural Philosophy;
which next to the two I mentioned above, I should give the pre-eminence to: As
to the Laws of the Kingdom, I reckon them not a particular Study, for they must
be your constant practice; your place as to Executory will instruct you, and as
to the pleading part of them it is below you. Keep always an able Scholar for
the Languages in your house, besides your Chaplain, who may be ready at hand to
read to you out of any Book your fancy or judgment shall for the present pitch
upon, him you will find to be of singular use and advantage to you, and you ought
therefore to give him Salary accordingly. Think no Cost too much in purchasing
rare Books, which I esteem next to acquiring good Friends; but buy them not to
lay by, or to grace your Library with the name of such a M. S. or such a
singular Piece, but read, revolve him, and lay him up in your memory, where he
will be far the better Ornament.

Read seriously what ever is before you, and reduce and digest it to Practice
and Observation, otherwise you will have Sysiphus his labor, to be always
revolving Sheets and Books at every new Occurence, which may require the Oracle
of your reading. Trust not to your Memory, but put all remarkable and notable
things that shall in your reading occur to you, sub salva Custodia of Pen and
Ink, but so alter the property by your own Scholia and Annotations on it, that
your memory may speedily recur to the place it was committed to. Review
frequently such Memorandums, which will inform you what progress and
proficiency you have made in whatever sort of Studies you have applied your
self to. After your Studies give your mind some relaxation, by generous
Exercises, but never use them after fullness, sleep, or oscitancy, for then they
abate much of the recreation and delight they afford after the intentness of
the mind on any business, otherwise it is but a continuation of the dream, in
the stirring slumbers of Sport, and Recreation.

In the choice of your Exercises, affect none that are over robust and violent,
that instead of remitting and unbending the Bow, will break it; but let them be
moderate, and withal Virile, and Masculine; such as Riding the Great Horse, and
Hunting, whose Encomiums are Celebrated by the most Famous of the Ancient, as
well as Modern Writers, as by Plato, Zenophon, Arrianus, and Julius Pollux; by
Homer; Diogenes Laertius Lib. 6. in his Life of Diogenes Sinopaeas, tells us,
he usually took his Scholars out with him to Hunt, and they that refused it, he
dismissed from him. It Is too tedious to number to you the Latin Authors who
have likewise wrote in praise of this Exercise, such as Livy, Cicero, Seneca,
Justin, Plinius, Virgil, Horace, and infinite more; but if you have a mind to
see a large commendation of it in a few words, I refer you to King James de
Officio Regis, Lib. 3 On foot you have Tennis, and Bowls, and other such
Exercises, but I would not advise you to make a toil of a Pleasure, by over
exercising your Body; play not to wearisomness, which may make you nauseate the
Recreation another time; as near as you can play with Companions your Equals,
but if they are not at hand, pleasure will dispense with any Play-fellow, nor
are you tied there to any strict rules of Honor.

Let your Exercises be designed to this end, to settle your mind, to beget a
stomach and appetite, and to fit you for other succeeding business.

Of TRAVEL.
TRAVEL in some Men is an Humor and Curiosity only, in others Wisdom, and
Design, and accordingly they make their different returns. It has been all
along the practice of our Nation, and I think with very good success. I esteem
it a very great accomplishment, for a Nobleman especially, but it must be such
an one as can stifle his Lusts, and bridle his Passions; for Travel, says the
Wise Seneca, Senec. Epist.
neither temperates Pleasures, nor refraenates desires, neither represses
wrath, or can it break the untamed force of Love; but if you would have Travel
pleasant to you, you must first cure your Companion.

Homer begins his Odysses in the praise of Ulysses, with this Title and
Character, (...), etc. That he had seen many Cities, and knew the Manners and
Customs of many Nations, as the most apparent demonstration of his Wisdom. It Is
a pleasure and felicity when the mind embraces but a glancing thought of the
beauteous Fabric of the Universe, and is with a kind of delight transported to
some peculiar part of it, whose felicity, pleasures, or wealth have run upon
its wandering fancy; if this be so in the imagination, what delight and fruition
is there in the corporal view and passage through the most remarkable Countries
of the Universe? One journey will show a Man more than twenty Descriptions, or
Maps; what a desolate life do Tortoises live, who cannot be rid of their
Houses? No man can endure confinement, and he that has been locked up in one
Kingdom, is but a degree beyond a Countryman, who never exceeded the bounds of
his own Parish. Nevertheless all Men are not fit for Travel; Wise Men by it are
made better, and Fools worse.

This enquires after nothing but Trifles, the Antic Fashions and Gestures of
other Lands, and becomes the shame of all Nations, by disgracing his own, in
carrying nothing of worth or esteem from them; and by bringing Censure and
Imputatation upon Foreign Places where he Converst, by importing nothing but
their vices.

If you would advantage your self by Travel, you ought to Note, and then
Comment upon your Observations, remembering as well the bad, that you may avoid
it, as the good, to put it in execution and practice, and without committing
these things to Pen, they will pass from your Memory, without leaving any
profitable results behind them. Let no have therefore hurry you through any
considerable remarkable place, but stay and view what is worthy in it, and be
sure to Register it in your Journal, which will very much fasten it in your
memory; the Charactering of your thoughts in Paper, will fit them ready for
your use; and he that does thus, may re-journey all his Travels at home.

Solid Persons are the best proficients by Travel, they are not so prone to be
inquinated by the dross and feces of Vice, and the taking Vanities of Foreign
Countries, being abler to compose themselves to such manners, which may more
readily facilitate their inquisition.

Pliance and outward freedom, and a seeming carelessness, is the readiest way to
get in favor with Strangers, and to learn any thing from them. Policy and
Negotiation for your use I recommend far before Book-Learning, though never so
deep and knowing: When you are abroad, the best way is to Converse with the
best Men, and not to choose by the eye, but by common Fame and Celebration. For
the Government, and things relating to the State, your Advice and Instruction
is to be had no where so well as at Court; among Merchants for the Trade,
Commerce, and Traffic; for their Religion among the Clergy, and Universities;
and so for their Laws, Customs, and Manners, among the Lawyers. And I advise
you, if you design fully to understand these several things, to make it your
business to discourse with Persons of these several Professions; you know the
Proverb, Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam. But chiefly, and above all, think no Travel
too far or discommodious to visit Eminent and Learned Men; there is no Monument
like a Virtuous and Learned Person, living by him we shall be something the
better, we shall find something in him to inflame and excite our minds to
strain to the like pitch, and to excel him in a brave imitation of his
Excellent qualities.

To such Men you must carry your self with all submissive reverence, befitting
the dignity of those Excellencies that are relucent in them and the awe you
seem to stand in, will soon invite his Candor to a free reception, and near
entertainment of you: for those Persons who are truly Learned, are very rarely
Proud, or Stately.

Judgment is the greatest thing necessary for a Traveller, and therefore I
approve not of your going abroad very young, in whom Judgment is rarely found;
but if when you are grown to a competency of discretion, you have a desire to
visit Foreign Places, I would have you seconded with the aid and assistance of
Tutor, who knows already the Customs of the Places to which you design to make
your Journey.

Of MARRIAGE.
NExt to Religion (wherein I include the Service to your Prince) Marriage
claims your greatest care, upon which the chiefest of our Earthly happiness
depends. It Is one of the chiefest ends of the Almighty's Creation of Women,
that they might be an help meet (that is necessary) for Men; and when he
brought Eve to Adam, he gave with her this Blessing, that they should be
fruitful, and multiply.

And therefore I esteem Marriage a Duty you owe to your self, as well as to
your Country. Besides, I question not but you will be by experience convinced,
that it ought to be placed among the Strongest, as well as the most Important
ways of Nature; as Martial says, Belliger in victis qued Mars tibi saevit in
armis,
Non satis est Caesar, saevit and ipsa Venus.
Nay, Interest in Great and Noble Families forbids perpetual Virginity; and
since the suppression of Nunneries, and such Monastic Privacies and
Renunciations to the World, we have not had many of Jephtha's Daughters.

Marriage without doubt was one of the greatest Favors Almighty God confered
upon Mankind; and when he bestows a Virtuous Wife, whose Humility, Chastity,
and Affection are eminently great, he does as it were renew his first
Intentions to us. 'Twas therefore well said by one, who discoursing of this
Subject, affirmed that God did oftentimes reward the good works, the Honesty
and piety of a Man, with the tender of a good and discreet Wife; for Parents
can only give Wealth and Riches, Lands and Possesions to their Children, but
God only can give them Prudent and Virtuous Women.

In the Contracting therefore of Marriage, Virtue is more to be considered than
Money; Beauty will Rival either of them, and oftentimes gets Possession of
both; but it quickly loses it again, because it wants those stays and supports
which each of the other have in themselves; and be sure of this, that you love
the Person with whom you Marry better than her Estate, for you know the Old
Proverb in this is commonly true, He that Marries where he does not Love, will
be sure to Love where he does not Marry, and Love without ends, has no end.

I acknowledge Virtue is the First to be Courted, and the Primitiae, the First
Fruits of our Love, ought to be offered up at her Shrine; but yet reserving the
stock to Sacrifice to the numerous Contingencies and Accidents which often
befall the Wedded state, by the additional helps of Wealth and Beauty; the
latter of which especially I would not have you over-blinded with, it is one of
the greatest deceits Nature is guilty of; not that it is so in those Persons to
whom she is so graciously and liberally pleased to bestow it (for it is the
most exact Copy of her Illustrious self) but in the fascination and witchery it
darts through the Eyes into the Minds of Men; you cannot but pay homage to it,
but let that Tribute redeem you from a Total Conquest.

You have heard the Comparison, How a Fair Wife is like a brave House without
Furniture, you may please your self with the Prospect, but there is nothing
within to keep you warm. Remember therefore that it is but Clay more refined,
and set off with a better varnish, and being all on the outside, lies more
open and obnoxious to weather, and consuming time, and very often to present
misfortunes; while that which is internal stands the shock, resists the
Battering Rams, and like a strong fortified Garrison endures all brunts, when
the other (like Darius his glittering Troops) is but a weak and gay Army, ready
to be vanquished at the first Onset, and Encounter.

Money is the sinew of Love, as well as War, without which you can do nothing
happy in Wedlock. The other are Court Cards, but are not of the trump suit, and
are foiled by every sneaking Misadventure; Virtue is suppressed, and cannot
emerge and dilate it self in the straights of a narrow Fortune, and Beauty is
constrained and betrayed to the necessity of keeping it so, it is otherwise in a
pinching Condition; leanness and dead paleness will usurp the place, where full
blown Roses sat with Love before.

Nor was it ever known, that a Beautiful Woman driven to want, escaped the
Offers and Importunities of Men, who, under pretense of pitying and suppressing
her distresses, by degrees have gained on her Honor and Chastity, while she
satisfies her self, that out of gratitude she could no less than to comply with
their desires and importunities.

I do much approve of Cross Marriages, I mean between Great Families that have
been at enmity together, believing it to be the best cement to glue and fasten
them to Love and Concord, for it is certain the Great Pompey and Caesar had not
kept so long Friends, had it not been for the requiting duty; though I would
not have them Marry in such Proximity as the House of Austria matches; by the
Race we guess of the Production. Sorts (says Horace) creantur fortibus and
bonis, and that adds a firm Monument to both Houses, being so incorporated into
one another. However Men reckon it for Glory in Heraldry, to bear almost the
whole Arms of the Kingdom in one Escutcheon. Methinks Honor there looks like a
River, which, branched into several Rivolets, loses it self in them; whereas
Streams that take in another large confluent, carry all before them, and run
directly into the Ocean, and disembogue themselves with a name.

If you are not affected that way, there is variety enough in England; but
whatever you do, consult with your honor first, do not embase your blood with
matching below you, it will soon breed distaste and dislike in your self, which
will cause Malice and Revenge in her, and entail contempt and scorn upon your
Issue and Posterity; such Embraces will be like the twining of the Ivy about
the Oak, suck up moisture from the Root, while the Branches are withered, and
the Stock falls to the ground, never like to re-flourish again: As you match
your Peer in Honor, let her be so in years, a difference in Age is a secret
fire raked up for a time, but will afterward break out and consume your quiet,
when either your desires and strength answers not the vigor of the younger.

The Sparkles will then fly with such violent colisions and clashings, that
will soon set your Family in combustion.

After your choice made and pitched upon, and a Vow past, keep your self
religiously to it, knowing there can be no dispensation from it, and nothing
but misery, joined with shame and repentance is the consequence.

In the State of Marriage carry your self affectionate and discreetly; and keep
strictly the Rites of it, that no jealousy, the Canker of Conjugal Love, fret
the Knot which fastened you together; owe nothing to one another in zeal and
fervency of affection, which will soon beget such a mutual confidence, that the
rest of your life will be but an advantageous repetition of your first joys,
and add number to your content and pleasures, as well as to your years.

As to the use of Marriage, you your self when you come to it will be the best
judge of your own performance; this let me tell you, ought to be a moderate and
conscionable delight. A Great Philosopher tells us, A Man ought to approach his
Wife in fear, lest too wantonly provoking her desires, the pleasure thereof
make her exceed the bounds of reason.

And too hot and too frequent an iteration of that pleasure hinders Generation;
and on the other side, you ought seasonably to offer your self, lest she become
languishing, Barren, and subject to other distempers commonly incident to that
Sex.

Let not the secrets of Marriage pass beyond the Bedchamber, for he little
regards his own Honor, or his Wives Chastity, who blazes or discovers what is
done there: And no slyer Debauchery is there to Women, than what by such
luxuriant freedom of their Husbands tongues is prompted to their warm desires,
and strong and wandering imaginations.

In this great Affair, all that I can do is this, to pray and wish for your
good success, and commend you to him who only is able to grant it you.

Of HOVSE-KEEPING, and HOSPITALITY.
THIS is a Generosity very requisite to all Gentlemen, especially to the
Nobility; and the most convincing Argument and Demonstration they are so. It is
as well respected for the Quality, as the Quantity, according to every Man's
Condition. You may be as free in a Moderate Entertainment, as in all the
Excesses and Superfluities of your Table, which then becomes a snare, when it
should be a kindness.

Hospitality has not only obtained the Eulogies of the most Eminent Divines, as
St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, and others, but of the most Famous Philosophers.
Plato de Legibus very largely discourses of the necessity of it, and withal,
informs us, that all unkindness shown to strangers, is done against God
himself, who will be sure to revenge their Cause. The Account that the Ancient
Romans made of this, may very well be discovered by the Name Xenius, which they
attributed to Jupiter, which without doubt they received from the Greeks, Hom.
Odys. (...). From hence the Saying of Fides Jovis hospitalis Cicero ad Quintum
fratrem. Non faciam ut illam offendam, ne Imploret fidem Jovis hospitalis. And
in the 6 Chap. of the 2 Macchab. verse 2. we read how Antiochus ordered them to
Pollute the Temple of Jerusalem, and to call it the Temple of Jupiter Olympius,
and that in Garizim the Temple of Jupiter (Hospitalis) the defense of Strangers.

And among the many qualifications St. Paul in his Epistle to Timothy, Cap. 3.
desires in a Bishop, is, that he be given to Hospitality.

I will not trouble you with any long Discourse upon this Subject, but briefly
deliver my Advice how I would have you behave your self in this affair. In
general, I would have you imitate your Ancestors, and love Hospitality; and to
this purpose keep constantly at home, except urgent and necessary Occasions
call you thence. The Entertainment your House will afford Strangers, though it
be never so ample and abundant, will want that Condiment, and Sauce of
Hospitality, your Company. Men usually affect the Company of their Landlord,
though they pay for it; much more will the honor of your presence commend the
frank and liberal Entertainment, to the gratitude of all Persons who shall
resort to your House and Table.

Be not only Courteous your self to Strangers, but take care that your Servants
be so too; kind reception and courteous admittance is as necessary before Meat,
as digestion after it; and he that will have thanks for his Entertainment when
it is past, must bespeak it before it begin at his Board, that his Victuals and
Cheer be but a rumination of his first kindness, and that his Porch be as free
as his Hall. Keep about you therefore no morose or ill natured Servants, and as
near as you can retain Men of a good Aspect, and of sair and Civil demeanor;
such will not only be an Ornament and an Honor to you, but of much advantage:
For as on the one side it will invite Persons of Quality and Civility to you,
so on the other it will shame and deter the ruder and more ungoverned sort of
People, who meeting with such distonaut Humors, will either wholly abstain
from you, or soon be Civilized.

When you once have procured and surnished your self with such Servants, tie
them to your Interests by Love, for since Slavery was banished Christendom, a
Servant is no other than one hired to such employment, and under such terms as
he thinks fit to oblige himself. The difference therefore betwixt the Master
and Servant is not so very great, for none can compel another to serve him
against his will; nor can I contract with him for his Service, but he at the
same time will bargain with me for his Sallary. I take him under my Roof, I
make Provision for his Sustenance, preserve him from hunger, cold, etc. and
what does he for this? he serves me, yes he does, and does not he serve himself
at the same time, nay, do not I serve him? The same labor he would undergo in
his own House to maintain himself, and perhaps with greater anxiety, what in
mine he does with ease and pleasure.

Therefore I can term this service nothing but a compact betwixt the Rich and
the Poor, for the mutual assistance and advantage. Therefore let your Commands
be according to reason and sweetness; not so imperiously, or with such
opprobrious language as may justly discontent and chase away a Servant; if he
obey with cheerfulness and affection, he may at length make your interest his
own.

But above all things, I conjure you (my dear Child) to avoid Intemperance in
drink. Luxury in feeding seldom carries men beyond their stomach and
discretion, though never so many provocations be used to lure them on; but in
the abundance of Wine Men are sottishly transported beyond themselves, and the
excess of it makes Men the more covetous and raging after it, especially where
they think or find they cannot be welcome, unless they comply with your humor,
and can requite your charges no other way than by the loss and deprivation of
their sense and modesty.

Drunkenness is Epistol. 83.
somewhere by Seneca said to be nothing else than a voluntary madness. I need
not give you Instances for Ancient as well as Modern History, and daily
experience testi^ie the Incommodities it often reduce Men to; we not only by
this lose the pleasure of Society, but ruin our bodily health as well as our
eternal welfare.

Cum vini vis penetrant,
Consequitur gravitas Membrorum, praepediuntur.
Crura vacillauti, tardescit linguae, incidet men's.
Nant oculi, Clamor, singultus, Jurgia gliscunt.
Lucretius lib. 3. It Is a vice which is so much the greater by reason it wants
the temptation that other sins commonly have to attenuate the Guilt. For I
believe there are but few in England that agree to the humor of a young
Fellow, who being in company with some of his Comrades, bid one of them drink
about, and swore that talking spoiled Company. This custom of drinking hard we
should the more despise, because we first received it from the thickest sculd
People in the World; (and thus says Seigneur Montaigue) Vices discompose the
Understanding; this totally overthrows it, and renders the Body stupid and
incapable of a Generous Performance. I would therefore have you detest that
barbarous German Mode of Drinking to Victory, by a beastly subduing of those
whom you have invited, and humanely wellcomed, and bid to your Table: It Is one
of the greatest Vices our Gentry has brought from thence, amidst all those
Trophies they deservedly gained there, and therefore the more caution is to be
used, lest it insinuate it self easily by their Conserse, whose Company you
shall do well always to esteem as an Honor, but yet use your own Discretion,
and my Experience, as an Antidote against that poisonous humor. Suffer no
Person to depart your House in discontent or anger, that shall not by rudeness,
or some other unhospitable way deserve your disrespect; and on the other side,
permit no tumultuous or disorderly Persons to remain within.

Every ordinary Man's House is his Castle, but a Nobleman's is that, and a
Palace both, where there is reverence due to you, as well as a bare Power and
Command: On public Anniversary Thanksgiving days you must expend above your
ordinary Provisions. The Solemnity due to those Festivals, takes its weight
from the observation of the Nobility, whose Magnificencies at those times are
the most forcible impressions to make the People remember and call to mind the
mercies and favors of such days. This will more especially concern you who are
to be an Example of Loyalty and Prudence to the People about you.

But be most sure that the Poor, whose Condition will not suffer them within
your doors, may not be out of your heart, but that a constant Care and
Provision be made for them; from whom I Am very sure you will find the greatest
returns and thanks, if not by them, yet for them.

Of the COURT.
THE Court is a place difficult of access, shut up with Rocks, Shallows, and
Sands, and not one Adventurer in twenty comes off a saver. Besides it is a place
of a most uncertain Air, full of Damps and Exhalations, spread with Clouds, and
over-cast, and sometimes again scorching hot in the sudden rise and depression
of Favorites. But if your Curiosity shall invite you to the Danger, and time
look with a favorable Aspect upon you, remember these Observations of mine,
who have both at distance and at close view well considered it. First then, as
to the favor of your Prince, which is the most desirable thing in the world,
it is rather an illustrious care than a contented possession; nor do wise men
ever busy themselves about it, because the tranquillity of Spirit which they
seek for, is not to be found amidst the confusions of the Court: And to guard a
Man's self from the misfortunes there, and the Envy, which the graces of
Princes, do contract upon their Favorites; there is no way better than Privacy
and Retiredness. Cornelius Nepos tells us in the Life of Datames, how that he
having by his celerity and dispatch, acquired the Grace and Favor of the King;
incurred no less Envy from the Courtiers, who took it ill to see him more made
of and cherisht than they were, and for this very reason agreed together to
oppress and ruin him.

You must know, that it is mere Humane Weakness, which causes Princes to raise
Favorites, to aid and support them in the weight and multitude of Affairs, and
sometimes in such Secrets, which are heavier upon the mind than all the rest;
the sad Effect whereof every Age has given an example. You must at your
entrance resolve to encounter the Accosts of Contempt, Scorn, Discontents and
Repulses, with a bold and well settled Resolution, and take no notice of
Slightings and Injuries done you by the great ones: A thing always judged
grievous to a generous mind, and yet these are ordinarily the steps to
Preferment. 'Twas a true Answer made by an Old Courtier, to one who asked him
this Question, Quomodo rarissimam rem in aula consecutus est Senectutem? How he
arrived to so great an Age at Court? Why says he, Injurias accipiendo, and
gratias agendo. By bearing Injuries and returning Thanks. If you find favor at
Court, beware your Covetousness after new Boons make you not forget the old
ones; and if you receive denial, guard your self, that the distaste be not more
prevalent, to run you into Actions of dangerous Consequence, than Reason can be
to keep you in Duty. Extraordinary Diligence, and affected Assiduity are to no
purpose, whereby Men think to further their Advancement: On the contrary, if
Men neglect and seem careless of promotion, attending when the merit of their
Actions shall offer it them; Time or Fortune seldom fail to conduct them to
true and permanent Honor. A Choleric Person is not fit to be a Courtier, for
if he should go about to revenge himself of the Indignities, and Tricks put
upon him, he shall suffer more in an hour than he shall be satisfied for in ten
Years.

You must do at Rome what others do there; be sure to sing no other Airs than
those which please the Prince. 'Twas Solons comparison of Courtiers, who
resembled them to Counters, with which Men use to cast Account; for as in
changing their Places, they stand some times for more, and sometimes less, so
Princes do the same with them, now advancing them in Honor and Dignity, and
presently debasing them at their Pleasure to the scorn and derision of all Men.
So that it is truly said, That Men have an opportunity of losing themselves at
Court, and finding themselves at home.

Old Courtiers are like old Ships, brought into Harbor and there laid up,
never to be put to Sea to any new Adventure.

'Twas a very Sarcastical saying of one at Court (says he) are Bishops and
Priests to Baptize and change Names; for there the Vainglorious and Ambitious
Man is called honorable; the Prodigal, Magnificent; the Coward, wise; the
Malicious, Subtle; the Adulterous, Amorous; the Covetous, Provident; and what
Confidence can any Man repose in Friends there, whose greatness renders them
the more intractable; and as it is very difficult to find Virtue there, so it
is much more so to keep it; he that sins and repents, and returns again to his
sin, sins more grossly than at first; so to leave the Court and return thither
again, is such an Error that is not excusable; save with this, that the return
was to sell Virtue, and gain Wealth, since it is a great kindness of Fortune or
a greatness of Virtue to escape that Gulf. Against the Envy of the Court, as
against the Plague, there is no better preservative, than a Retreat, a Remedy
often practiced but with different success; it being very dangerous for popular
Persons, and such as have had great Command to absent themselves without leave
or dismission, for it not only breeds suspicions and jealousies of their
disaffection, and consequently of a Rebellion, but likewise exposes them to the
unobstructed Designs and Malice of their Enemies, which seldom end but in
Ruin. This is generally the Complaint of Courts, wherein you must understand
there is not the least concurrence of the Prince to give any such cause for it,
but that by Tradition, the Grandees as by a Rule; and ever since Monarchy was
Court Arts have been, and can vye precedence with any Mystery.

I never knew any great Favorite, who practiced any new ways of his own: Some
have been nobler and more Magnificent than others, freer in access and more
affable, but yet still kept close to their Court Maxims, nor ever did their
private Virtues gain upon their public Concerns.

It is possible a Man may acquire an Estate at Court, but it is more probable
that he may lose one; that which is got there, through how many Curses and
Imprecations it passes? That which is lost, how many Tears and Deprecations
attend it?

While you can therefore pay your Devotion, and your Loyalty to your Prince at
home, and probably be better accepted; what need have you of a dangerous and
unnecessary Pilgrimage to the Shrine, to pay a Personal Adoration? Therefore my
advice is, that (unless your Prince command your Personal attendance) you would
live at home among your Neighbors, where your Thoughts may be at harmony, and
your quiet uninterrupted.

Of FRIENDSHIP.
IN Friendship, you are not to use a Ranging Liberty, suspicion on the one
hand, and reason of State on the other forbidding it. But yet what you want in
the Multitude of Friends, who like flies fasten on the sweets of Riches and
Honor, will be very well compensated, if you have the happiness to find but
one or two, whose affections are sincere and unfeigned; these far excel the
many Ciphers which commonly attend on Greatness. To make a right choice
therefore, you must first propose to your self the Inconstancy of Man, the most
changeable Creature in the World, every breath of Wind forms him to a various
shape; think not therefore of making a Friendship fixed and Eternal.

How ardently have Men loved some, even beyond the desire of dying for them,
when in a Moment as it were a hasty Ebullition of Choler, has rendered them
exceeding offensive, that has sunk them into our hate and execration. The
consideration of this will keep you from overwearying any Man, and from a total
trust and confidence in him, and beget in you a severest exercise, and
consequently a firmer relyance on your own Virtues and Abilities.

Nothing sooner corrupts or weakens Friendship, than an over hasty
entertainment of it, as praecoce Fruit, which soonest withers and decays.
Judgment is the only Cement that closes and binds the affections of Men, where
that is wanting, it is like building with untempered Mortar; the Structure like
to totter and fall on our own heads. I never knew any so good and virtuous, but
others have thought him vile and impious, and hated him; And contrariwise, none
so bad and dissolute, but others have esteemed him honest and loved him, either
the Ignorance, the Envy, or the partiality of those that judge, do constitute a
various Man: In some Report has anticipated Judgment, in some an accident is
the Cause and disposes us to love or hate. The Soul very often is led by secret
and uninvestigable ways and motions to Love, and knows not why. But it is time
alone and long trial and probation which seldom fails to give right
information, whereas Nature, Art, and Report, may deceive you: Of all Men a
Coward and a Drunkard are the worst to make Friends of, for the one upon the
least probability of danger, will desert you, the other will divulge the
Secrets you have disclosed to him. The little experience which you already have
will (I fancy) somewhat inform your judgment; but for your better direction and
guidance herein, I shall give you these properties of Friendship, which my
longer observation has found to be true Characters of it.

He who is really your Friend, will give you Counsel before you require it; and
that is the reason a Man cannot keep a Friend by constraint, nor oblige Secrecy
by coertion.

Most Men regard their profit, and therefore use their Friends as Men do their
Beasts, carefully attend and look after them, not out of Love to the Creature,
but for their own proper Advantages. But they who do so, in friendship abridge
themselves and want the most desirable fruition in the World, which is natural
and reciprocal Amity.

He that loves you extremely, will as extremely hate you; moderate therefore,
and sober Friendship is most preferable; and since Friends must be had, if your
Happiness be to find good ones, beware you incur not that unhappiness of
changing them; he certainly is in the best condition that is furnished with the
best Men for his Friends: Nevertheless, let no obligation to them, cause you to
dispense with your Conscience or Religion, and have always a care not to trust
any thing to your most intimate Friend, but what you cannot keep hid from time;
for a small distaste and a little time will discover those Faults, which many
years have concealed.

Never submit to your Friend if he require of you any thing unlawful, and what
you cannot with a safe Conscience grant; nor do you use Friends as we use
Flowers, smell to them as long as fresh, green and fragrant, and then lay 'em
aside; for so (commonly) Friendships conciliated by interest or fancy, usually
terminate: But especially beware of mercinary Love, which always leaves you
when your Money fails; whereas true affection is durable and eternal. Let your
Virtues procure and get you Friends throughout the World; for Love's Arms will
join the distant corners of the Universe; and in your good Actions you will not
only enjoy a Complacency and Satisfaction, but be a President and Example to
those about you.

Believe it, nothing will gain you so much Love and Respect, as your
Uprightness and sincerity; Greatness was always suspicious, without some
conspicuous proofs of a more than ordinary Integrity. Nor will true Glory
attend Deceit and Hypocrisy. You know how at Old Rome there was no passage to
the Temple of Honor, but through the Temple of Virtue: NON ITVR IN TEMPLVM
HONORIS, NISI PER TEMPLVM VIRTVTIS. Intimating, that Glory and Honor were not
to be attained, but by virtuous Achievements and Undertakings.

In a word, Let your Friends be also virtuous and honorable; for next to being
so your self, nothing can be more prejudicial to your Reputation, than to
associate your self with, and keep company with uncivil and scandalous Persons.

Of PLEASVRE and IDLENESS.
BY your recess from the Public Businesses of State, you will be the more apt
and prone to fall into some Supineness and Negligence, and indulge your self to
some inordinate Pleasures, to which Men especially of your Age, are naturally
very subject, except you keep a very strict guard over your Inclinations and
Affections.

Remember therefore that great and worthy Actions were never founded in vain
Delights, and that nothing is less generous than Pleasures, which mollifies and
effeminates Manhood and corrupts the Seeds of Virtue and Courage.

But of all Pleasures to which our Age is given, avoid and take heed of Gaming,
that vain and yet most bewitching Temptation, a Vice which has alienated many
fair Estates and Possessions from ancient Families; a Vice so extravagant,
where a Man casts a Die whether his Estate shall be his own or not, by its
extraction you may guess its Goodness, born (as I may say) in a dissolute Camp,
where its first stake was the price of Life. I have before hinted to you, what
Recreations and Sports most befit a Gentleman, and in this what misbecomes him.
I might say more against this abominable Vice, but I hope this will be
sufficient. I remember, That Dan. Souter from Guil. Stuckius, endeavors to
prove, That the playing at Dice contradicts and violates all the Ten
Commandments; I Am sure it does a great many: And our Countryman Joh.
Salisburiensis in his Polycraticon, says very well, Mendaciorum Matter est alea:
And St. Cyprian had writ a whole Discourse against this very thing. Tacitus
tells us, That the Germans were so given to this Play, that when they had lost
all their Money and Estates at it, they would stake their Bodies and Liberty; for
which, as Tully says, a good Man ought chiefly to contend.

In the next place, I would advise you to avoid all Drinking Clubbs, and that
which is now styled Good Fellowship; for these Bacchanalia are as bad again as
the former, if not worse. This will presently bestialize you, and take away the
Signature God has stamped upon you. A Drunkard! I cannot name it without
abhorrence and detestation; it will divest you of your nature, and not leave
you one spark of Honor, but that as well as your Estate will sink into that
Deluge of Ebriety. 'Twas observed by Cato, That none came to the Destruction
and overthrow of that State sober, but Caesar only: Most certain it is, That
none shall be called to the maintaining of a State, whose Debaucheries have
rendered him incapable of governing himself.

The Converse of ill Women is altogether to be shunned, lest you be fascinated
by their Beauty and Subtleties, to the ruin of your eternal Welfare hereafter,
as well as your Estate here. Several Men esteem it no little Felicity to enjoy
the Company of fine Women, but they consider not to what Dangers they oblige
themselves, and what Burdens they impose upon themselves, to the secret ruin
of their Fortunes; for nothing is so chargeable as an imperious Beauty.

Neither seek nor entertain Pleasures when they present themselves in their
gaudy Bravery, but with a Noble Constancy keep your mind fast shut against
their Charms and Allurements.

Field Recreations, as they more conduce to your Bodily Health, so they give
you but little time to indulge your Genius otherwise.

It has been disputed whether to do ill or to do nothing, male agere aut nihil
agere, be the worst. And Seneca tells us, Melius est aliud agere quam nihil,
that it is better to do things though to little purpose, than sit Idle. The life
of Man resembles Iron, which being wrought into Instruments, and used, becomes
bright and shining, but unwrought, is consumed and eaten by rust; or like a
field which being Tilled and Manured, rewards the pains of the covetous
Husbandman, but if neglected, produces naught but unwholesome Herbs, and
unprofitable Weeds. So it is with Noble Persons, if they stir themselves, and
employ their parts in the service of their Country, or in other honorable
Employments, they become conspicuously Glorious. Industry instead of impairing,
preserves a Man's health, when nothing is more detrimental to it, or more
dishonorable in it self than ignoble Ease. The Title or Character Horace
bestows upon an idle Person, I think is very pertinent and agreeable. Telluris
inutile pondus.

Nothing in the Universe stands still, the Heavens, and those Orbs of Light,
are in perpetual motion, and though the Earth perhaps moves not Spherically,
(as Copernicus fancied) yet there is a continual Motus in that too in her
Productions: An idle Man is a Mare mortuum, like standing Water which stagnates
and Corrupts.

I do not in the least admire to see Gentlemen given to the vicious Courses and
Debaucheries of Life, seeing they affect a lazy Greatness, without the props of
Employment to support it.

The Philosophers tell us how Virtue consists in Action, and there is an old
Motto acquiesces as much, in motu Melos. This we all find, that your active and
brisk Souls are the most agreeable to Society and Conversation, while your dull
and Phlegmatic Person is neither fit for other Peoples Company, nor his own.

If you grow not better by employing your self, yet this benefit will certainly
accrue to you, that 'twill keep you from being worse; by your not having
leisure to entertain suggestions of Evil from without. There is a kind of good
Angel waiting upon diligence, that ever carries a Laurel in his hand to Crown
her; and Fortune according to the Ancients, was not to be prayed to, but with
the hands in motion. And Plato says truly (...). That the Sluggard or idle
person is worthy of no reward or encouragement. How unworthy was that Man of
the World or the enjoyments of it, that never did ought but lived and dyed.

There Is a Story of Servilius Vacia an extraordinary rich Roman, who hating all
business or Employ, left the City, and spent his Life at a Villa of his own
near Cumae, and was known for nothing else but for his lazy Life, therefore
several People, when encumbered with Business, would very often cry out O Vacia,
you only know how to live. Seneca condemning the Supineness and Ignominious
Laziness of this Person, said, that he knew not how to live, but to lie hid;
and often passing by his Villa would jocosely say, Hic situs est Vacia,
intimating, that there was no difference in being dead and living after that
fashion.

It is therefore none of the ordinaryest happinesses to be endued with a Mind
that loves Noble and Virtuous Exercises.

Of CONVERSATION.
IN this affair I Am very sensible you will have no little need of my Advice and
Counsel, and in the first place, I shall treat about Civility, for want of
which, I have known many great Persons trusting too much to their Justice and
severe Virtues, have been utterly ruined and undone; and several Persons of
great Parts and Abilities, for want of civil Address and Compliance, have
become useless in their generation. And others, by their surly and uncomplyant
humor, render themselves distasteful to Society, and from thence fall into
contempt and hatred of all Men; and from thence, not only bring dishonor upon
themselves but their Family and Parents, upon their Country likewise, if they
happen amongst strangers, they will be apt to censure hardly of that Nation,
whose Gentry is so little Civilized. Therefore you are to take an extraordinary
care of your Carriage in Conversation, especially in our Cities and Courts,
where are Persons of greater and more piercing Spirits, and more curious
observers; and no Man in these Places can expect to live, except he sometimes
mortify his own Humor and Inclination.

You are to imitate in this Affair the Courtier, who for his Interest complys
with every one, is always gay, cheerful and Complaisant, and makes this his
humor to borrow the Companies. 'Twill be one great part of Civility, not to
resent every word or Action, which perhaps rationally may be interpreted to be
disesteem or undervaluing. And I like a story of a Gentleman, who when one told
him how such a one affronted him, answered, but he has not, for I will not be
affronted.

This perhaps some will esteem as pusillanimity, but what ever they look upon
it to be; I Am sure it is greater prudence, for revenge is but a poor
satisfaction, which makes me Extremely admire at the Extravagance of some of
our Nobility and Gentry, who think their honor engaged to require satisfaction
for the smallest Injury imaginable; and from thence proceed to the Sword, where
if it happens that one be mortally wounded (as it very often does) the other,
except the Mercy and Clemency of the Prince interpose, by becoming obnoxious to
the Laws, brings upon himself an Ignominious death, and a disgrace and infamy
to his Posterity.

I reckon not Civility, to consist in certain modish and particular Ceremonies
and fashions in Clothes, Gesture, Mien, Speech or punctuality of behavior; it
is not using such Discourses, Words, Phrases, Games, as are in fashion at Court
with Gallant Ladies, etc. This is a constrained formality, but Civility ought
to be built upon the Basis of Prudence, and Charity, which are to perpetuity
unchangeable.

I reckon Complements but a poor piece of Civility, because it proceeds from a
different Cause; Civility from Sincerity and Virtue, these from Duplicity and
Deceit. He that uses them most, believes not himself; and by thinking to make
them believe, they are directed to, exposes himself to their Derision. He is
always very ready to promise, not so to perform, asking pardon where there is
no Offense nor Necessity, etc. These are imaginary Services, notional and
impertinent Humiliations; a solemn Nonsense, an abusing of Language, a putting
together many good words to signify nothing. The use of this Traitorous
Discourse is only fit for Tradesmen, who love to keep you in talk lest you
should too narrowly examine the Wares they would put upon you.

Let this also in your Conversation be a great part of your care, to avoid all
manner of Affectation and Singularity; for whatever is according to nature is
best, and what contrary to it always distastful, and betrays Vanity and
Indiscretion: A seeming Negligence is very graceful, but a constrainedness or
seeming to do, with design or study undervalues an Action; and nothing is more
absurd and foolish than an affected Negligence.

Pride, Insolence, Stateliness and Imperiousness, are not Signs or
Qualifications of a Gentleman, but the Scandals of Conversation; when Civility
and Affability are the greatest Magnetisms in the World, a conforming ones self
to the innocent Humors and Infirmities sometimes of others, and readiness to
do Courtesies for all: Not only in Conversation, but in the whole management of
your Life, Prudence will be your best and greatest Assistant; this therefore
depending upon Experience, without which no Man of ever so great Capacity, can
any more arrive to be a wise Man than Fruit to Maturity, without time.
Experience is either of other Men, which we see read, or hear, or of our own
Affairs. This is the harsher Mistress, and happy is he that can arrive to
Perfection, tho in his Old Age. Conversing much makes a Man bold and confident,
and engaging in business fits for more.

There is a vast difference between Prudence and Cunning; The Prudent Man deals
so sincerely, that he neither dreads nor fears the Examination of his Actions
or Purposes, and is not afraid to have Witnesses, if it were possibly of his
Thoughts. The Cunning measures Justice by escaping Punishment, Wisdom by
Success, Reputation by Wealth or Power, and the satisfaction of others by his
own Interest: He uses Artifices, as taking advantage of the Person if in
necessity or in danger, if weak or ignorant; he watches the time if in drink,
if dejected, if inadvertant, if easy; he pretends great kindness and affection
in general Expressions, or particular ambiguous ones, or such as he will not be
obliged by; his great Engine is a smooth Tongue, and a competent stock of Wit.

It Is a great piece of Prudence to be jealous, and suspect our selves, lest we
run away too hastily with a Likelihood instead of Truth, and abound too much in
our own sense.

Many Vices, though contrary, yet are like to Virtues: The confines of both are
the same, and the exact Limits and Boundaries difficultly fixed; as of Pride and
Greatness of Spirit, Religion and Superstition, Quickness and Rashness,
Government and Tyranny, Liberty and Licentiousness, Subjection and Servitude,
Covetousness and Frugality, etc. And yet Prudence chiefly consists in this very
exactness of Judgment, to discern the one from the other, and give to every
Cause it is proper Actions and Effects.

It is therefore necessary for every one to observe his own Actions and the
Original of them, his Thoughts and Intentions with great care and
circumspection; he must otherwise despair of ever arriving to any tolerable
knowledge of what he does well or ill.

I have before advised you to abstain from the Society of debauched and
scandalous Persons, to these I shall add the Railers, whose chiefest pleasure
and delight consists in exposing others to contempt and derision, either by
imitating their Actions, or Imperfections, or by jeering and mocking them; him
I would have you avoid as you would the Heels of an Horse that kicks every one
he can reach; if you cannot, take the part of the abused; blame the Action,
spare the Person; or if the Person be known, excuse the Action; if neither can
be done, praise the Person for some other good Action or Quality; so you have
an Antidote against the Poison.

There is not in my opinion, a greater Enemy to Peace and Charity, than the
Railer; for as ordinary Claudius accusat Maechos, so one Jeer seldom but
returns with its equal, which together produce a Quarrel; besides, to abuse
Inferiors, argues a mean and contemptible Spirit; Superiors is dangerous. To
abuse a Friend is to lose him, a Stranger to lose your self in the Worlds
esteem. Near of Kin, to these are the Drolls who turn all to Ridiculousness,
but I think themselves most. There is nothing so sacred and prudent, which by
the petulancy of Wit, may not be made ridiculous, and consequently contemptible.

The Holy Scriptures I have heard to have been Burlesqu'd by those who spare
neither their Souls nor Reputation to prove themselves Buffoons, and show their
Abilities an ingenious Folly: And these whilst they think to fool others,
become themselves really what others are in their Imagination.

The most innocent, graceful and universal Discourse, is telling Stories, and
Modern rather than Ancient; some I have known so very excellent in this, as to
parallel any case by some piece of History. This if well done, is a very great
Perfection of Eloquence and Judgment, and will render your Company grateful and
desirable, by Persons of Sense and Learning.

I shall now end, only to the rest, whose Correspondence and Society I would
have you shun, add the Flatterer, who by observing the Actions and Discourses
of their pretended Patron, discover his Inclinations, as Hunters do the haunts
of wild Beasts, the more easily to entrap them. It is their interest he should
be vicious, careless, irregular, and extravagant, for by that means they can
more easily withdraw him from all virtuous Persons, and ingross him to
themselves, who have no other way to ingratiate themselves, but their ready
compliance with all his desires. This they endeavor should pass for Affection
to his Person; and they represent all other Advisers either as contemners of
him, or at best of morose ungentiel Humor: Therefore they pretend to Idolize
him, to observe his Counsels and Commands as Oracles, not to converse with
those he suspects, to inveigh against his Enemies; to make him their Mouth, and
themselves even in their own Affairs ruled by him; to take great content in
serving him; to praise him immoderately before those who will be sure to inform
him of it; to exaggerate every small Favor received from him, and to dissemble
the Injuries.

They are also careful to new-name all his Vices; Debauchery they call
Merriment; Jealousy Circumspection; Prodigality Generosity, etc. They feign
also in themselves, the like Inclinations, Sympathy, and Sentiments with their
Patron, and often undervalue themselves in respect to him. They are also apt to
praise him, for what he has not done, or extravagantly for what he has done,
glossing and putting a Varnish over all Miscarriages, etc. and few there are
who escape this Bait. For who is he who values not himself above his deserts,
and thinks not all is his due which is given? In reality, the refusing or
accepting of Praise rationally and discreetly, is as great a Trial of a Wise
Man, as the Cupel is of Silver. My Concern for the Miscarriage of a late young
Kinsman of ours, who was ruined merely by hearkening to the adulations of such
Parasites, and forsook the advises of his Friends and nearest Relations have
made me be more punctual in describing the craft and subtilty of these wicked
Men, whose Conversation is not only Ignominious in the sight of this World, but
will make you Eternally Miserable in the next.

I have here (my dear Son) sent you my Advice for the management and Conduct of
your self, in the most important Affairs of this World.

They are not in such a method as I could wish they were, and as I thought at
first to have reduced them, but my Employment in the Public Affairs of the
Nation would not permit me to place these my Admonitions in so accurate a
method as I intended, by diverting my Thoughts to look after my other Business.
Yet I believe I have omitted but little of what I should have said, and dare
promise my self that among these lines you may pick out what will be of use to
you in your most especial Concerns.

As to your Behavior in the University, I have altogether left you to the
Management of your Tutor, whose Advices and Admonitions if you follow, I Am sure
I need not despair of receiving such a return as all your Friends and my self
expect from you.

This I charge you upon my Blessing, not to neglect the Public Prayers in your
College, from which nothing but sickness ought to give you a dispensation. By
this you will be an Example to all the other Gentlemen of your Society, and
oblige all good Men to be your Friends; add joy to your Relations and be the
greatest Comfort in this World to

Your Affectionate and Loving FATHER.

A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS Worth the Perusing.
Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster.
1. ADvice to a Daughter under these following Heads, viz. Religion, etc. 2.
The Works of Edmund Spencer, Esquire; Containing his Fairy Queen, etc. 3. A Weeks
Exercise preparatory toward a worthy Reception of the Lords Supper, in
Meditations, Prayers and Ejaculations, before, at, and after the holy
Communion; also Rules and Exercises how to live well after it. The second
Edition. 4. Sophonisba or Hanibals overthrow. Written by Not. Lee. 5. The State
of Innocence, or the Fall of Man, an Opera. written by Mr. John Dryden, in
Heroic Verse. 6. Advice to a young Lord, written by his Father, under these
following Heads, viz. Religion, Study and Exercises, Travel, Marriage,
Housekeeping, and Hospitality, of the Court, of Friendship, of Pleasure and
Idleness, and of Conversation. 7. Milton's Paradise Lost, in Twelve Books, Fol.
with Cutts. 8. Love for Money, or the Boarding-School, showing the Folly of
those that put their Children therein, and also exposing the subtilty of Jilts
about London, etc. A Comedy, written by T. D. Gent. 9. The Visions of Don
Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Knight of the Order of St. James: Made English
by Sir R. L. 10. The Essays or Counsels, Civil and Moral, of Sir Francis Bacon,
Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban, with a Table of the Colors of Good and Evil,
whereunto is added the Wisdom of the Ancients. 11. Lively Oracles given to us,
or the Christians Birthright and Duty, in the Custody and Use of the Holy
Scripture, by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. 12. Ovid's Metamorphosis
Englished, by George Sandys. The Eighth Edition. 13. A Dialogue concerning
Women, being a Defense of the Sex. -- Written to Eugenia. 14. Plutarch's
Morals, Translated by several hands.
FINIS.

