Quakerism NO CHRISTIANITY.

Clearly and abundantly proved, out of the Writings of their Chief Leaders.

WITH A KEY, For the understanding their sense of their many Usurped, and
Unintelligible Words and Phrases, to most Readers.

In Three Parts.

By JOHN FALDO.

He feeds of ashes, a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his soul; nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Isa. 44. 20. If
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, hon great is that darkness!
Mat. 6. 23. London, Printed by Ben. Griffin and are to be sold by Jo. Robinson
at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Rob. Boulter at the Turks-head
in Cornhill. 1673.

THE PREFACE.
IF we had been born only for our selves, or all our concerns were entire
between God and our own Souls; to live ignorant of, and unknown to the World,
would make up a considerable share of our present negative happiness: and put a
bar betwixt us and those griefs, which enter so plentifully (beside other
passages) by the eyes, and ears. But above all men, he that is so hardy as to
peep out of the Press, does run the Gantelope; and exposes himself to the
scourge of tongues. And let his Work be ever so worthy, or unworthy; he is like
to taste both of the good, and bad report. Of which kind this undertaking of
mine is, or of what degree in either, is not so much mine, as yours (now) to
judge.

It Is rare to find a Work pretending to the service of Truth, and Souls, whose
Author does not warrant it with a Call from God: yea, though it be vain,
frivolous, or trite, or (which is worse) of a direct contradiction to its
pretendments; even the unhinging of the most important Truths, and perverting
so far as prevailing.

I am not very willing to trouble the Reader, with a History of the production
of this Discourse; it being little material how it came to pass, but much to
what purpose: which is all that is worthy of consideration to the Reader. Yet I
will venture the vindication of my self from the itch of writing, so far as to
tell my Reader; that besides a common view of the evils herein discovered, and
opposed; the attempts that have been made by the men of my present
Controversy, upon those Quarters to which the Providence of God has assigned
me, has given me some more than ordinary advantage in the knowledge of the
Cause.

I have with some regret observed, that the contempt, troublesomness, and
disorder of these kind of Adversaries; have been taken for a sufficient
indemnity, and excuse to the more able Pens, from stooping to such an
undertaking as this: except some few, who have well detected and smitten some
of the Heads of this monstrous Hydra. I have reason therefore to conclude, they
will excuse me from presumption, in attempting (what they have omitted) both
root, and branch at once.

Certainly all Souls are precious, and such a Harvest as becomes the utmost
diligence of the most excellently qualified of the Lords Laborers. Our dear
Redeemer came not to save only the wise, the prudent, the rich, and the
honorable; but their Souls also, whose Cabinets are covered with Rags, and
whose intellects cannot taste, and are much beneath School-niceties: of which
number are the far greater part of those to whom the Gospel is sent, and to
whose capacities the gracious God has vouchsafed to accommodate the more
material parts of it.

He is a great stranger in our Israel, who observes not the great shoals that
have been taken in the net of Quakerism, especially in the Country, where
Ministers in good earnest for promoting soundness in Faith, and holiness in
Life, are but thinly sown: yea, and in the great City of London also, where
means are not wanting, but as great Lights shining as the present World enjoys:
if persons were but humble, and industriously faithful, there would not be one
Quaker there.

But what if in Country, and City also; men slight their advantages? and will
rather follow an ignis fatuus that meets them in their wanderings, or some
dark-lanthorn-man that shall obsequiously impose his disservice; than to be at
the pains of opening their eyes, and walking by the Scripture light, and
directions, ministered by those, whom the Lord has gifted for, and called to
that worthy (yet painful and reproached) employment? shall they be so tetchy,
or so stately; as to leave them to the perdition of their own sloth, and
folly? our Lord and Master bids us to go out Luke 14. 23.
into the highways, and hedges, and compel them to come in. O let it never
be said, (and that deservedly) that Satan and his deluded, and deluding
Instruments, are more industrious, and skillful to destroy, than we are to save
the precious Souls of men! Sure I am, our work is more righteous, and our
reward will be more rich than theirs.

By how much the more trifling those devices are, by which they are ruined; so
much the more inexcusable are we, if we endeavor not their security. Our work
will not be valued by our Lord, altogether by the parts laid out therein; but
also (and much more) by the faithfulness, tendency, and blessed effects. I am
debtor (says Romans 1. 14.
the great Apostle) to the wise, and to the unwise. Our Lord Jesus, the great
High Priest of our Profession; has pity on the ignoranr, and those who are out
of the way. Many who need our help herein, desire (and it may be deserve) it
not; but God who needs it not, both deserves, and commands it.

If any shall say, that it is not fit we should write against the Principles of
any, who fall under the same condemnation, or stand by the same favor with our
selves: let such know, that Theft is not the more just or amiable, nor we to be
more reconciled to it; because two Thieves were crucified at the same time, and
on the same Cross with the just and holy One. Nor yet is a Dunghill the more to
be embraced because the Sun shines on it, at one and the same time, wherein the
Meadows, and Gardens are refreshed by its beams.

And it is far from our Duty, or Charity to be so cruelly friendly, as not at
all times to endeavor the Confirmation of those who stand free from the stains
of such Errors; and the Reformation of those who are fallen into them, by
Spiritual, and rational weapons: which will wound none, but those who love
their guilt, and darkness rather than light.

Moreover, were this Treatise an intermedler with differences of less than a
Fundamental import, there might be some room for the pleas of unity, and
forbearance; to supersede those of (mere) verity: but when it concerns the
Christian Religion as such; those Errors which will as certainly damn as
adhered to; which would render the Holy Scriptures unnecessary and dangerous;
the blood of Christ, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs to be Childishly lavished
away: and all the warm disputes of serious Christians about the more weighty
parts of the mind of God expressed in the Scriptures, to be but vain janglings
of men, contending who should hit that white; which, when done, would not be a
Prize of a halfpenny value: yea, when it concerns those prevailing Errors,
which would blot out, and strikes directly at Christianity, and would render
Heathenism (divested of its more noble and rational parts) the highest
perfection to be aimed at by mankind in this world; and the life to come, a
fancy dwindled away to a just nothing.

It must be more than justifiable in the eyes of all men, except theirs; whose
Sceptism, or indifferency in matters of a Religious concern, is arrived to that
perfection, as to have them all equally doubtful, or acceptable to them.

The Doctrines of Christianity common to men called Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Congregational, Anabaptists; are no farther here concerned, than vindicated.
And for Worship and Order, nothing is here agitated to the reproach, or
displeasure of any; who are not against all things called (by some
reproachfully, and as ignorantly) Forms.

To be contentious is an offense the Scripture condemns, with no little
keenness; whiles it exhorts to contend earnestly for the Faith, once delivered
to the Saints: from which I conclude, that though I contend against Quakerism
with some symptoms of zeal, I am not therefore contentious: neither can I
esteem it the part of a Neighbor, to look on the deplorable estate of those,
wounded both in head and heart with this disease; and like the Priest and
Levite in the Parable; pas; by on the other side, as unconcerned: nor yet to
stand gazing with a seeming amazement, and all the help I afford to them, to be
only to cry out Unclean! Unclean! whiles they who hear these clamors, and whose
soul-humours prepare them for the infection, are not thereby one whit the more
startled at their danger.

I have observed that of the sort last mentioned, are those Professors
especially; whose Judgments are very weak, and their Conceits very strong: who
have obstinately resolved into many sins, and especially those of omission; as,
attending conscientiously on the Ordinances of Christ, Family Worship, and
serious Instructions of those under their Charge; contrary to the plain mind of
God, revealed in his Word; the serious and importunate solicitings, and
entreaties of their Teachers; and the checks of their own Consciences: to salve
all have fallen into Quakerism; whereby their pride, conceit, idleness,
covetousness, and disrespect have been adopted into, and made a part of their
Religion it self; and thereby they have secured themselves from those
batteries, which were before somewhat wounding, and grievous to them.

And it is no less matter of lamentation, that the far greater number of men
and women, are so grossly ignorant in the things of God, and regardless of their
eternal concernments, that brutish sensuality, and the examples of a sottish
benighted world, are the only Compasses they steer the course of their lives
by. So that, when they are by any means prevailed with to be serious, and to
consider the things of their everlasting Peace; they know not which way to turn
themselves, the way of God is dark before them; in which they are so little
instructed, that they know not their right hand from their left. They are
easily convinced, that the way to Heaven lies not through drunkenness, swearing,
lying, uncleanness, injustice, and such plain and reproachful Vices. Religious
they must, and are willing to be: but, without the special, and almost
miraculous guidance of the good Spirit of the Lord, they are most likely to
fall in with the grossest delusions; and mend their conditions at no better
rate, than removing out of one quarter of the Devils Kingdom, into another far
more dangerous; and wherein they may more peaceably, and confidently go down to
the Chambers of death. And when this is done, Satan and they are agreed, all is
quiet again; and the poor betrayed vanquished Souls triumph, as the only
Victors.

And it is no wonder that those should have undisturbed present peace, who know
no God above that they call the Light in their Consciences; whiles they comply
with its dictates, how lewd and erroneous soever they be. Let such seriously
weigh these two Texts of Scripture: But if thine eye be Mat. 6. 23.
evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness; if therefore the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! I know nothing by my self, yet
1 Cor. 4. 4.
am I not thereby justified; but he that judges me is the Lord.

Those Histories that have derived to us the knowledge of those Errors, and
Heresies that sprang up among professed Christians in several places and ages,
have not been accounted superfluous, nor their respect worn out in many
hundreds of years continuance; how much more concerned should we be, to have
the knowledge of those born in our own age, and (which is more dolorous)
brought forth in our own bowels, the Land of our birth and abode? but worst of
all, one, such a Monster, which has devoured (almost) all the rest, and
digested them into one body with a vast addition: a Monster! whose description
must always be concluded with an and caetera, as Geographers leave a space for
the Terra incognita.

And, I believe, that this piece, is as full a compendium of the Quakers
Tenets, as any that have come forth with the like Proofs out of their own
Authors; which has cost me more pains to collect, and understand, and digest
into some order, than their confutation. Though, I suppose, who reads the Book
through, will find somewhat of advantage, more than merely concerns Quakerism.

I confess, the Book has exceeded in bulk my first intentions, and indeed, I
found, after I had launched a little into the work, that the way of Jer. 10. 23.
man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. I
was launched into such an Ocean for vastness, and saw so many Rocks in my
passage, that I could not satisfy my own Conscience to send this into the
world; without clearing the difficulties: which for all my honest Narrative,
and downright Confutation; might wrack the Faith of many a Soul. I should be
glad to see so public a Christian Spirit, as to be at the Charge of Printing
many thousand small Pieces of four or five sheets, fitted to the genius of the
meanest capacities, and distributed over the Nation gratis: which might
discover the Principles of the Quakers, to the securing of many: who being
entangled with their outward appearance, and profession (in words) of the great
and main Principles of Christianity, are soon ensnared past recovery; without
an extraordinary good hand of God. And I doubt not some will be found who are
well acquainted with their Tenets, and evasions; who will willingly undertake
(by Gods assistance) the writing of what might be serviceable that way. By this
course have the Quakers more increased in the Country, than by all others; for
where you shall find one sheet against them, you may find a hundred of their
Pamphlets, which are generally put into their hands by the Quakers, at the
cheap rate of accepting: though poison taken into the Body, and delusions into
the Soul, are ever dear and costly.

But to the unwillingly mistaken, among the people called Quakers; and such
whose inclinations are toward their Principles, and Practices, known by the
name of Quakerism, I do solemnly profess, That I have the witness of God, and
my own Conscience; that I heartily desire the welfare, and Salvation of all
sorts of men, whatever notions they fall under, and however disobliging in
their carriages toward me in particular. And although, I hope, I shall not
justify the Opinions called Quakerism till I dye; yet I am persuaded there are
many called Quakers, whom the Lord will turn from their way, (which is not
Christ's) and sanctify them by his Spirit, and justify them through his Grace,
by Jesus Christ: even that Christ, who, as God, is every where, and, as Man, is
ascended above the visible Heavens and Skies. If sincere protestations of my
righteousness, and sincerity in this matter; and the verity of what I have
written would prevail with you, my Spirit is clear, and I doubt not but my Pen
might be as serviceable to it; as some of those whose interest is too great in
you. Yea I know not that suffering I might embrace without sinning against God,
but for Christ sake and yours I should not long to be baptized with. I beg of
you in the bowels of a Christian, that you would not slight the Truth, and
Scripture-evidence here presented to your view. The Quakers have no Miracles to
bind you to their persuasion, and sure the Truths contained in the Scripture,
and right reason; may match all other visible demonstrations. You venture hard,
to Father all your Opinions on the immediate inspirations; and your affections
and practices on the motions of that Spirit, who is God: which if it prove to
be otherwise, (which will be as certainly as God is Truth) your early
repentance may be accepted; but your late repentance will make little for your
comfort: I would not then be in your condition for more Worlds than there are
Stars in the Firmament. I beseech you do not think that God has given you the
reason of men, to be serviceable to you only in the affairs of this world; and
not to be exercised at all in discerning truth from error, good from evil; of a
Spiritual and Religious nature. The new creature, is the creature renewed; that
is, Body, Soul, and Spirit so enlightened, as to know God in Christ; so
sanctified, as to be devoted to him, in whatever service he shall command, and
to make a Heaven of nothing on this side the full Vision, and enjoyment of his
favor, and glorious presence in the other world, or the world to come, and
what will necessarily result from thence.

If you think me too smart in some passages in the Book, be pleased to
consider; if against Persons, it is against those your misleaders, who are to
be blamed at a sharper rate than good Eli chid his Sons, and was therefore
rebuked by God to the breaking his heart, his neck, and the loss of a great
privilege besides: if against sayings or opinions, I have fully proved them
gross falsehoods, foolish and pernicious lusts and errors: and I know not how to
call gall and poison, by sweet and lovely names. I must alter my style
according to the matter and occasion, or they would agree like Harp and Harrow;
and I assure you it is neither my conscience, duty, nor design, to commend
their Opinions to the world. Do not say, I intend hereby your persecution, for
it is far from my principle, and natural temper also; and I know nothing that
men who are your Adversaries can do more to promote your Tenets, and Party:
though suffering without further evidences of truth as the cause, is a poor
foundation of Religion.

Your Souls Servant, JOHN FALDO.
November 23. 1672.
THE CONTENTS.
PART. I.
Chap. I. QVakerism affirmed to be no Christianity. The terms Quakerism,
Christianity, Quaker, Christian explained. What Christianity is, strictly
considered, and distinguished from Heathenism, Judaism, or any other character
of Religion. Chap. II. The beginning of Quakerism compared with the beginning
of Christianity, with respect to the manner, and with respect to the time of
its beginning; from both, Quakerism proved to be no Christianity, or not the
Christian administration. Chap. III. Proving the Quakers denying the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament to be the word of God, that the intent is more
than a mere verbal matter, that this is the gate and inlet of their other
errors, the grounds of their denying it to be the word of God, all of which are
examined and refuted, the definition of a word, and the Scriptures proved to be
the word of God (of that species contended about) more properly than Christ the
Son of God is the word of God, the Scripture proved to be the word of God by
its own undeniable evidence, where it cannot be understood of any other than
the written word, denying the Scripture to be the word of God, proved a denying
of the Scripture, the titles the Quakers give to the Scriptures examined, and
proved (though taken altogether) to come short of a fit and distinct character
of the Scriptures, the ends and necessity of the Quakers denying the Scripture
this title, for the support of their other fancies. The sense we take the
Scripture to be the word of God in, the written word proved to be the word of
God. Chap. IV. The Quakers equal their own writings and sayings with the word
of God, and prefer them before the word of God. So to do proved a denying the
Scripture, that they do so proved by their pretending them infallible, that
they speak and write by immediate inspiration, that the Spirit of God dwells in
them essentially and in all his divine properties, and Christ speaks out of
them as through a Trunk. Proved by the characters they give of their own
writings and sayings, beyond and excelling the characters afforded by them to
the holy Scriptures. Infallibility explained, the Quakers infallibility
confuted by diverse mediums, their immediate inspiration considered and
confuted, the woeful and absurd consequences of this error, the Papists
foundations of their orders and grossest absurdities; and the foundation of the
Quakers Religion proved to be the same thing, and instances given on both
sides. viz. contempt of the Scripture as insufficient, infallibility, and
immediate revelations, and divine inspirations; the Quakers proved to have the
blackest marks of Antichrist upon them. Chap. V. The Quakers deny the
Scriptures to be a rule of faith and life, or a Judge and determiner in
religious controversies. This charge proved to be a denying the Scriptures.
That charge it self proved. Herein they agree with the Jesuits. That whatever
is by the Lord affirmed in the Scripture ought to be believed. That what is
there in commanded (and not repealed) ought to be obeyed. That the holy
Scriptures do (in their kind) determine controversies of a Religious concern.
That the Teachings, motions, and determinations of the Spirit of God by the
Scripture, are more suitable to the nature and present condition of man, and
more certain to his knowledge, than any immediate teachings which any enjoy in
our days. The consequence of this error. Chap. VI. The Quakers take men off
from reading the Scriptures, and looking into them for instruction and comfort.
The charge proved, 1. directly, 2. by their affirming the light within every
man alsufficient as a Teacher, 3. by their affirming the Scripture to be
within, 4. by their affirming the Scriptures to have no light in them, each of
these confuted and explained in their order. Chap. VII. The Quakers affirm the
doctrines, commands, promises, holy examples expressed in the Scriptures, (as
such) not to be at all binding to us. That this is a denying of the Scripture,
proved. That they are guilty of the charge, proved; and their error confuted.
That we are to follow the good examples there expressed, proved; and the manner
how, that we may not sin on that hand. The ill consequences of the error
charged on the Quakers. Chap. VIII. That the Quakers deny the Scriptures to be
any means by which we may come to know God, Christ, or our selves, proved, and
confuted in their order. The wicked and absurd consequences of this error.
Chap. IX. The Quakers affirm the Scriptures to be no means whereby to resist
temptation, and that they are dangerous to be read. The charge proved, and that
it is a denying of the Scriptures. William Pen rebuked for asserting this
falsehood. Chap. X. The Quakers deny the Scriptures to be read to any profit,
farther than they are beforehand experienced by those that read them. Chap. XI.
They render the Spirit of God, and the letter of the Scriptures in direct
opposition each to other. Chap. XII. The Quakers hold it to be a sin, and the
sin of Idolatry, to believe and live according to the instructions and examples
expressed by the Letter of the Scriptures, except we have them by immediate
revelation or inspiration, and at first hand as the Apostles received them.
PART II.
Chap. XIII. The Quakers deny and subvert all the Ordinances of the Gospel. An
apology for, and account of Gospel Ordinances as such. The Quakers proved to
deny Gospel Ordinances in general. That they deny and subvert the Gospel
Ministry proved, the grounds of their denying the Ministry, because mediate,
preaching out of the Scriptures, taking maintenance, studying for their
Sermons, that none can speak the truth truly but from immediate revelation. All
these grounds overthrown in their order. They deny a Gospel Church, what Church
they own, and what Ministry, what a Gospel Church is, and to what ends. Chap.
XIV. The Quakers deny the Ordinance of hearing the Word preached. They disown
Gospel Prayer. In their Families and at Meals altogether. Pray in public not
ministerially. Deny premeditated Prayer. Own no Prayer, but what is by
immediate inspiration and motion. They pray not in the name of Christ or any
Mediator. All these proved, and refuted in their places. The Quakers deny
reading and meditating in the Scriptures. An apology for positive or
sacramental Ordinances. The Quakers deny all Water Baptism. What Baptism they
own. The grounds on which they deny Baptism considered and refuted. They deny
the Lords Supper to be now an Ordinance. The grounds of their denial. An
account of their ridiculous fancies, which they call the Lords Supper. Chap.
XV. The Quakers deny the transactions of Christ when manifested in the flesh
1600 years since, and what he does now at the right hand of God in Heaven, to
have any influence into our justification and salvation. The influence of
Christ's active and passive obedience considered, and objections answered. What
the righteousness is, that the Quakers are, as they say, justified by, and
ascribe salvation to. Chap. XVI. The Quakers disown and deny the Christ of God,
and set up a false Christ in his room and stead; and attribute all that to
their false Christ, which is due to the true Christ. These abundantly proved.
What Christ they own as God and as man. Those Texts of Scripture on which they
chiefly build their great delusion, opened largely, and discharged the Quakers
service. Chapter XVII. The Quakers are gross Idolaters, and Quakerism gross
Idolatry. Abundantly proved by their owning false Gods; viz. The Light in every
man, the Souls of men and the Spirits of men. These Charges abundantly proved,
and that these are no Gods proved plainly. The Quakers proved to worship (and
that according to their own professed principles) false Gods. Chap. XVIII. The
Quakers deny the resurrection of the dead. Their Evasions discovered. Their
Objections answered. The consequences of their error. Chap. XIX. The Quakers
do not profess a future reward after the dissolution of the frame of soul and
body: but are as to that, either deeply silent, or imply their contempt of such
a belief.
PART III.
An Examination of William Pen's Spirit of truth, etc. wherein his Arguments
for the Spirit of God's being in his people essentially, and so teaching them
immediately as is exclusive of all other teachings, their infallibility as the
result of such a Proposition, and teachings considered and confuted; and the
unparalled vanity and folly of William Pen discovered. The Doctrine of
immediate inspirations considered, more especially and largely the Characters
given of Apostolical persons, distinguishing them from all others since Christ's
administration. Characters distinguishing the inspiration of the Apostles,
which gave authority divine to the Scripture, from the highest illuminations of
the Saints (as such) in our days. A Key to the Quakers new coined Phrases, and
also to their meanings of such Scripture and religious phrases as are commonly
used by the Orthodox. The Conclusion, wherein is showed that the Quakers
contemn all rational demonstration, and make their experience and inward
sensation, the only demonstration to themselves of the principles they hold.
Scriptures opened in the First Part.
Book. Chapter Ver. Page Words. Deuteronomy. 5 32 17 The word is nigh thee etc. Job. 26
13, 14 74 By his Spirit he has etc. John. 4 23 64 Worship the Father in etc.
John. 14 6 97 I am the way etc. Acts. 24 16 71 Conscience void of offense etc.
1 Cor. 3 6 122 The Spirit of God dwells etc 2 These. 2 4 64 Sits in the
Temple of etc. 2 Timothy 3 15 103 And that from a Child etc. 1 John. 2 22 64
Antichrist that denies etc. 1 John. 2 27 62 But the anointing etc.

In the Second Part.
Job. 23 4 29 I would order my cause etc. Psalm. 85 9, 10, 11. 58 Mercy and
truth are not etc. Jer. 5 2 14 Lives, surely they swear etc. Mat. 6 11 24 Give
us this day our daily etc. JOHN 1 9 84 THAT WAS THE TRVE LIGHT etc. Romans 10 8
94 The word is nigh the etc. Romans 5 14 21 Nevertheless Death reigned etc Romans 4
8, 11 50 His faith was imputed, etc. Romans 10 15, 18 20 Have they not heard,
etc. 1 Cor. 1 17 39 Not to baptize, but to preach. 2 Cor. 5 16 108 We know no
man after the flesh. Romans 4 2, 5, 6 57 Faith accounted for etc. Coloss. 2 14 4
Hand writing of Ordinances. Coloss. 1 27 98 Christ in you the hope etc. 1 Pet.
3 19 22 Preached to the Spirits etc. 2 Pet. 1 19 98 More sure word -- day star
arise James. 2 14, 21, 24 55 And not by faith only etc.

In the Third Part.
Book. Chapter Ver. Page Words. Genesis 6 1 7 My Spirit shall not always strive. 2 Chr.
6 2 18 House of habitation for thee. Nehem. 3 19, 20 10 Thou ledst thy people.
Job 32 3 11 The inspiration, etc. Psalm. 139 7 13 Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit. Psalm. 25 14 28 The secret of the Lord is with. Joel 2 28 36 I will pour
out my Spirit on all flesh. Luke 2 46 55 Found him among the Doctors. Acts 1 24
40 Of these two thou have chosen. Acts 2 16, 17 49 I will pour out, etc. Acts
14 17 49 Not himself without witness. Acts 26 13 41 I saw in the way, a light.
Romans 1 19, 20 48 Seen by the things made. 1 Cor. 9 1 42 Have I not seen Jesus
Christ? 1 Cor. 7 6, 7, 12 54 Speak I, not the Lord. 1 Cor. 15 8 43 He was seen
of me also. 1 Timothy 3 2 54 In season and out of season. Heb. 5 12, 14 52 For the
time ye ought. 1 John 1 1 41 We have seen with our eyes.

Errata.
Part 1.
TItle Page l. 15. r is. 1 Part p. 3. l. 32 blot out as Julian Apostata. p. 2.
l 29. blot out not. p. 30. l. 3 read untrue. p. 34 read from, and let, to not
only as a Parenthesis and the Quakers words. p 41. l. 23 blot out sixthly. p.
43. l 4 read properties. p. 67. margin, read Beccani. p. 126. l. 26. read
though.

Part 3.
Page 21. l. 20. read mutantem. p. 5. l. 17. blot out and is. p. 46. l 3 read
will benefit. p 50. l. 31 read (...).

Scriptures or Scripture, which are used indifferently as expressing the
written Word, either in the singular or plural number, I desire you not to
charge a false concord on me, where the Relative may not be of the same number
with the Antecedent; I using the word often, writ it in my Copy short Scr.
leaving it to the Printers discretion.

Quakerism no Christianity.
PART. I.
CHAP. I. The Explanation of the Title.
SECT. I.
THat I may inform my Reader of the true. 1.
state of the Controversy agitated in the ensuing Treatise; I hold my self
bound as a rational man, and as a Christian, (the Controversy being of a
religious Concern) both to state the main question; to which I shall endeavor,
that all those which are subordinate, or by me pretended to be so, may be
plainly reducible; and also to open the terms, that I may neither write, nor my
Reader be led into a thicket of impertinencies: but as it may be clear and
conspicuous, whereof I affirm; so also, the Reader may be able to judge, how
much what is offered is to the purpose.

I need not trouble the Reader with any further account. 2.
of the question then the title; wherein I affirm, that Quakerism is no
Christianity, which if it be not only sufficiently proved, and clearly, but
also abundantly;

I shall not doubt but all honest hearts who shall peruse this discourse, will
be irreconcileably alienated from all appearances of so horrid an Imposture;
And I am not altogether out of hope, that many of those who have inclined, or
adhered to those woeful tenets, or persons here discovered, with a design to
elevate their Christianity to a higher Standard of Purity, will be convinced,
that instead thereof they have but plunged themselves into the ditch of the
grossest delusions, and made work for repentance.

SECT. II.
For the term Christianity, we are not to understand. 1.
by it all those matters of faith and practice; which Christianity does oblige
us unto, for Christianity is a large and noble thing, which is not only a
curious Garden, which has in it that which common Fields, yea, and common
enclosures are not furnished withal, but also does take in, (beside what is
peculiar to its self) all that is worthy in those Religions which it has
superleded and outstript; yea, whatever is good and commendable among the very
Heathen, according to that of the Apostle, Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.

Christianity (in a full sense) consists of those principles of faith and life;
that Worship, Order, and those Ordinances; which have not only a respect to
Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and man in his lapsed state: but also
that frame of them which is proper to the Gospel or New
Testament-Administration; which was constituted by Christ while he was manifest
in the flesh, and after he had actually finished the meritorious part of our
Reconciliation and salvation, and as God-Man united in one Person, was invested
with all Power both in Heaven and Earth, according to that Scripture, All Power
Mat. 28: 18
is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; and that full Text to this purpose,
and being found in fashion Phil. 2. 10, 11.
as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross: wherefore God also has highly exalted him; and given him a Name
which is above every Name, etc. A Christian in the narrowest sense, is one that
owns the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent to be the Lord and
Savior.

That this account of Christianity may be. 2.
understood aright, I shall spend a few lines (and as few as I can) to inform
of the difference, between Christianity as such, and those other things which
Christianity obliges to; which yet may be where there is not any the least
footsteps of Christianity.

To know and acknowledge (in some way) the one. 3.
and only true God, Creator of all things, or dependence on, and subjection to
him; the love of God, our Neighbor, and our selves; Justice, temperance, and
all other duties, which by the Light and Law of Nature we may be convinced of;
these a man may be exercised in, and yet be nothing of a Christian, and so were
some of the Heathens, who not only were altogether ignorant of Christ, but also
opposed him and the Christian name, as Julian Apostata.

To come yet nearer, the Church of Israel under. 4
Moses's Administration; who had not only the Moral Law, or Law of Nature,
given forth by God himself, but also the Promises, Descriptions, Types, and
Shadows of Christ the Redeemer; through the faith of whom all them that were
saved came by their salvation: yet their state was not (in a strict sense)
Christian, nor the Law and Administration under which they lived, and to which
they subjected Christianity: which I shall confirm by some essential exceptions.

Christianity necessarily includes the faith and belief. 4.
of Christ already come, a Christ crucified that died, rose again from the
dead, is ascended, etc. Without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness,
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, believed on in the
World, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16. This was Christian Godliness, But
we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stambling block; this Christ as come
and crucified, was the main basis of the Gospel and Christianity.

Christianity necessarily includes the belief of that. 5.
particular, and numerical man, Christ Jesus: who was born of the Virgin Mary,
and was of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, to be the Christ of God,
that was promised to come in due time. I said therefore unto you that you shall
die in your sins, for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your
sins, John 8. 24. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that
God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ. Acts
3. 6.

These were new Articles of their Creed, without ^. 6.
the belief of which they were such as had nothing to do with Christ, as their
Mediator.

Again, the whole frame of the Administration was ^red from Moses to Christ,
even the man Christ Jesus as well as God, has in these last days spoken to us
by his Son, Heb. 1. 1 And Moses verily was faithful in all his House, as a
servant, for a Testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but
Christ as a Son over his own House, Heb. 3. 5. We have now nothing to do with
Moses Law as such, and also the manner of Administration, which is not in a
multitude of carnal observances, types and resemblances, but in that way which
is more real and more purely spiritual: But the hour comes, and now is, when
the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, John 4.
23. They were to worship him in the spirit before; for where the heart was not
in the ceremonial and typical worship they were not accepted; and God never
indulged hypocrisy: the meaning must therefore be, That spirit must be taken
in opposition to those carnal Ordinances, and the material Temple, and Truth,
in opposition to those Types, which were not a Lie, but were only the shadows
of good things to come.

I might enlarge to the Officers, Offices, and restrained. 8.
Extent of the Mosaical Administration; and show that in all it is Alien to the
Administration of Christ come; and that wherein Christianity consists. For if
that [Ministration] which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 11.

Now to resume the intent of what I have said, observe,. 9.
that neither the natural light and practices of Heathen, nor the revealed
light, law, and practices Judaical were Christian (as such) though the latter,
(a great part of them) had a respect to Christ, and the medicinal and remedying
part of Religion.

And the Jews, who were immediately before, the Church of God; yet when the
Administration was they changed, they were cut off from the Church, though they
retained their Morals and those Ceremonial Respects to an expected Messiah, if
they did not admit into their Creed or faith the Articles aforesaid, viz. a
Christ come; That Jesus who was crucified was the Christ, and that he was the
Supreme Head and Administrator to the Church of God, and those who did so were
transmitted into the Christian Church, the other being dissolved.

SECT. II.
Having expressed with what brevity I could, what. 1.
Christianity (as such) is: I shall in a few lines give an Account what I
intend by the term Quakerism.

I do not mean thereby, that all that are called and reputed Quakers, are no
Christians; for my Charity is large enough to believe, That many of them would
abhor the principles of their Leaders, did they but well understand them: for
whose sakes in part I have undertaken this Discovery.

Quakerism is a Heap of Tenets, with the usurped Names of true Christian
Principles, which are yet really no such things, but subverting both Foundation
and Fabric of Christianity; and I call him a Quaker that professes the light
within every man to be the only Lord and Savior, and very God. So that when I
say, Quakerism is no Christianity, I do not say, that common Civility, Justice
among men, or whatever of their principles or practices which are morally good;
for these are generally owned as the principles of those Christians, whom they
separate from, and bitterly reproach as Antichristian; and it cannot be for
want of Instructions or Examples in such kind of goodness, that they withdraw
from the serious Professors, that are as far from their opinions as the East is
from the West.

CHAP. II. The Beginning of Quakerism different from, and opposite to
Christianity.
SECT. I.
THE first Argument which I shall begin my attempt. 1.
with shall be from the beginning of Quakerism; which I shall take notice of
under two Considerations.

First, the manner of the beginning of Quakerism.

Secondly, the time of its beginning.

Both of which I shall prove exceedingly to oppose, or differ from the
beginning of Christianity.

The Christian Religion or Christianity was first introduced. 2.
by the preaching of the promised Messiah to be come into the world; whose
humane Person was pointed at by John the Baptist, and visible to the bodily
eyes of a multitude of beholders. The next day John sees Jesus coming unto
him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the World:
This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man which is preferred before me,
for he was before me.

But Quakerism was introduced by preaching a Christ. 3.
within every man, born within every man, which was never seen with the bodily
eyes of any man; and this Testimony of John concerning the true Christ
perverted, for the maintaining of their feigned Christ.

And as you give up to that measure of light in your own Consciences, and wait
to be guided by it, and exercised Morning Watch ^^ 41.
in it, you will know Christ revealed within you: whom you are looking for
without you, and put his day far off from you; and so you live in want of him,
and know not how to come to him, nor the place where to find him; but live in
the dreamings, and night-visions, and have a talk of him, and what he has done
for you, and so spend your precious time in slumbring and dreaming, etc.

This Quakers Text will bear a large Comment, but I will take notice of that
only which is to the present purpose: here is preached a Christ within, in
opposition to, and contempt of a Christ without, which John preached, and that
faith and hope of the Saints, (which according to the Scripture are the
substance of things not seen, and the evidence of things hoped for) Heb. 1. 1.
reproached as a slumbring fancy, and a nocturnal dream. But if you would
infallibly be convinced of the gross darkness wherewith this sort of men are
benighted, or their palpable knavery and impudence in abusing the Holy
Scripture, weigh the following instance out of the preceding Author.

Then God sent him [John] to bear witness to the. 4. Morning Watch. p. 5
light, which in him was made manifest, that all in the light might believe:
and he called unto others to behold him, and said he was the Lamb of God, and
was to take away the sins of the world; and least you should mistake him, and
guess that a man that could but write his name should not have so little wit or
modesty, as to expound that text of Scripture after this sort: he quotes
chapter and verse, John 1. 9. and the next word is ( mark) in a parenthesis,
lest his folly should not appear to all men, who should have the hap to read
him; and moreover, at the close of the period, after he had made a further
blind comment on the text; he glories in his shame with a, Weigh this truth all
ye Priests and Professors, and powder it in your hearts: no words big enough to
express its madness.

SECT. II.
Christianity made its way not only by the truth. 1.
and purity of its doctrine; but also by such and so many signs and wonders
wrought before multitudes, as were convincing to its most malicious and
prejudiced adversaries, and that not only by Christ himself but also by his
disciples and servants, both before and after his death.

And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded
out of his mouth, Luke 22. 4. but men may speak many good words, and yet both
say and do at other times bad enough: but Christ appeals to the faces of his
worst Adversaries; If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, John 18. 23
But if forcible right words would not make way, Christ exhorts them to believe
for the very works sake; and these were not ordinary works or wonders, and
miracles neither: If I had not done among them the works which none other man
did, they had not had sin. And as himself, so his servants introduced
Christianity with the same holy pomp and state of the Mighty, and miraculous
works of the Power of God, bearing witness to the truth of their doctrine.

Long time therefore abode, they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave
Testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done
by their hands, Acts 1. 3.

But Quakerism made its way by, and began in blasphemies. 2.
against the Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom the Apostles preached: by
gratifying the pride, idleness and giddiness of both Professors and profane,
as will appear abundantly in the following discourse; and by decrying the
Scripture of the Old and New Testament, as a dead Letter, and altogether
useless, if not mischievous: Your imagined God beyond the Stars, a day of
calamity will come upon them Sword of the Lord drawn p. 5 Fox the younger Genesis
epist. p 4
who have worshipped and do worship an unknown God at a distance, and pretend
the worship of the true God. And if we will not believe the Quakers for their
words sake, (which swell big enough with vanity, folly, nonsense and error) we
are like to continue in the truth still for all them. There have been some of
them who have been sensible of this defect, and have attempted to supply it, to
the cracking of their credit, some to the loss of their lives: George Fox has
found a plaster for this sore, which I shall produce: that you may give your
judgment whether it smell more of the Fox or of the Goose.

Which many prayed by the Spirit, and spoke by the Fox.. 3. The great Mystery
of the great Whore. p. 3
Spirit; did not show miracles at the Tempters Command; though among Believers
there be miracles ^n the Spirit, which be signs and wonders to the world, as
Isaiah says; When I read this, I had much ado to keep my self from laughing;
but the weightiness of my thoughts on this imposture, soon helped me to reduce
it to a compassionate smile. Indeed, I think, him crafty like the Fox, not to
venture his carcass in attempting any miracles but in spirit, and yet more a
Goose to call them signs and wonders to the world, which the world never saw,
nor could have wondered at, if George Fox and such as he had not blabbed of
them. But I must not let pass his fathering his absurdity on the Prophet
Isaiah; the words he intends must be in Isa. 8. 18. Behold I, and the Children
whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel; I find
not the word [ Signes] any where in that Prophecy he has a strange spirit of
discerning, that can find in that Scripture any thing of Miracles wrought in
the spirit; for indeed they themselves were the wonders, that is, they were
wondered at: so may the Quakers well be, but in a far worse sense, or for a
worse cause. I may the less wonder at George's blodness with Isaiah, seeing a
great Rabbie of the Quakers has said that he is as good a Prophet as Isaiah.
Who would conceive that so blockish a person as this, should be the Foreman
and Chief in account among such a number of such singularly discerning spirits
as the Quakers? but as among wise men the wisest are most highly esteemed, so
among others the veriest. --

SECT. III.
Christianity entered into the world with ravishing. 1.
Songs, and Hallelujahs of the Angels, and heavenly Host, the Songs and
Thanksgivings of Mary, Elizabeth, Zechariah, Simeon and others: with the
healing of all sorts of diseases, casting out devils out of the possessed,
preaching the glad tidings of the Gospel of Peace, and what might express the
Sun of righteousness to be risen on the World, with healing in his wings. I
need not find you out the places of Scripture which speak these things.

But Quakerism entered the world as if Hell were 2.
broke loose, and possessions by Satan were to make way, and fit souls for the
Quakers spirit. Instead of that serious compunction, that seized gross and
black sinners upon their conviction; and the consolation that was let into
their souls by the joyful sound of remission and salvation, through a crucified
Jesus: O the Hell-dark expressions of the Quakers Preachers! the frightful and
amazing words, both for matter and manner, wherewith they first attempted poor
silly men and women; whom they frighted almost out of their wits with their
dismal noise, whose echo remained in their ears, when their words were
forgotten. What bitter Curses and Execrations did they pour forth against all
that made any opposition, (though most mildly and rationally) against their
unheard of innovation? what disturbing of Congregations, and reviling the most
serious and faithful Pastors? while those whose faults they have made use of to
bespatter the guiltless, might remain quiet enough, as not so dangerous and
adverse to Satan's interest and Kingdom. How generally were their Meetings,
either silent, or taken up with the sudden, and violent irruptions of dismal
howling and horrible roarings? persons suddenly taken as with the
falling sickness, shaking and foaming at the Mouth, and some lying flat on the
ground as stark dead? some such things as these I have seen and heard; and what
there are undeniable Testimonies of, are so numerous and notorious, that though
you have now almost, if not altogether left the latter sort of them, you dare
not deny that it was so; and if you dare to challenge this with untruth, I may
requite you with a good part of a Volume of them, to keep alive their
remembrance. I now proceed to my second consideration, of the beginnings of
Quakerism with respect to time.

SECT. IV.
What I have already said in the opening the term. 1.
Christianity, will save me much of the labor of proving (in this place) when
it began to take place. I know none that assert Heathenism, or the state of the
Saints before the flood, or of the Patriarchs after the flood, or the
Israelites under Moses's Administration to be (in a proper and strict sense)
Christian: except some of the Quakers, who date it from the reign of the light
within (their only Christ) and will needs have not only Jews, but Heathen,
(and especially Adam in innoceney to be) under that dispensation: yet I doubt
not to prove both from Scripture, and also from their own Writings by necessary
consequence, that Christianity is not so old as the forementioned, nor yet so
young as Quakerism.

Some (though but few) date Christianity from the. 2.
Birth of Christ: Others, with much more reason, from the Resurrection of
Christ, when he had finished his Transaction for the merit of our salvation in
the Person of God-Man; and from that Declaration he made of the possession of
the Power committed to him, Matthew. 28. 18. All Power is given unto me in Heaven
and in Earth.

But all agree (who make any distinction) that it began immediately upon the
abrogation and dissolution of the Mosaical Administration and Temple-Worship;
which was above sixteen hundred years since, although (as the Scripture speaks)
The Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch, Acts 11. 26. But the
thing Christianity might well be before the name Christian so short a space.
And that the Christian-Name had about that time its Beginning, appears by the
reply of Agrippa to Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian, Acts 28.
8. which then, it seems, was the common appellation of Believers and Professors
of the Faith of Christ; but if all this will not convince, I will add one Text
more to make down-weight.

Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed? 1 Pet. 4. 16.

Here Christianity is distinguished both from Heathenism and Judaism. Both the
Gentiles and the Jews were bitter enemies to the Christian Name; and that not
for the Name but the things sake; the Gentiles for their denying Idol-worship,
the Jews for their deserting the Mosaical Constitution; the Gentiles for their
only worshipping the only true God, the Jews for worshipping the true God, by,
and through Jesus Christ the Mediator. And I, brethren, if I yet preach
Circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offense of the Cross
ceased, Gal. 5. 11.

Having adjusted the entrance of Christianity into. 3.
the world in point of time; let us now compare Notes whether it agree with the
Birth of Quakerism. I know but of two Arguments (such as they be) upon which
they build their Antiquity, and by both of them they date their Christianity,
either from Adam or Eternity. The first is from Christ the Light who was in the
Beginning with God. But if they make the being of their Christianity
commensurate with the being of Christ as God: I confess, it is but folly for any
other to number days with it. But besides the notorious absurdity of this Fancy
at first view, to those that dream not waking: I have already proved, that
Christianity had a beginning, and that long since the Creation.

The other Argument is from Inspirations, and immediate. 4.
teaching; which next to the light within is the main principle of Quakerism.

To this I answer, by way of grant and concession; that there was immediate
teaching and revelation very early in the world: but that wherever and whenever
there was immediate teaching, then and there was Christianity: is a thing* that
men who have better skill in the Scriptures, and more use of their reason then
they, will be ashamed to attempt the proof of.

But if it were granted, That Inspirations divine and immediate, did constitute
Christianity; and that all who are, or were thereby conducted are to be
accounted Christians: it will be long enough ere the Quakers prove they are the
persons, and not long before I have proved that they are not; as will appear
when you come to that point handled at large in this Treatise.

But beside the notoriousness of the Quakers novelty,. 5.
I shall fully prove it from their own Assertions; and if they oppose one
another, let them look to that, and agree among themselves as well as they can.
It is now Mystery of the great Whore. epist. 1659.
about seven years since the Lord raised us up in the North of England, and
opened our Mouths in this his spirit. By the date of the Impression it should
be about 51 that Quakerism brake forth in this Nation, and England has this
unhappiness, that it was the first Breeder of this Sect, and the North of
England the part first infected I remember there is an old Proverb, (I suppose
grounded on manifold experiences) All evil comes out of the North. But against
this it may be objected, that although they were the first in England, and of
late generations, yet the Religion it self is ancient. Let us therefore follow
it to the root by their own direction.

After these things in the year 1648. God who had. 6
compassion on his people, did cause a branch to spring Jo. White head small
Treat. p 4.
forth of the root of David, which was filled with virtue: for the Covenant of
Life and Peace was with him, and he spread and shot forth many branches; which
did partake of the fatness of the Root, and the weary came to rest under his
branches: in him also was the Word of Reconciliation, which turned the hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient to the Wisdom of the just.

Observe the blasphemy of these expressions, many. 5.
of which are by the Scripture spoken of Christ, and agreeing to him only; but
applied by this Wretch to the first of their Sect brought forth in their Spirit
in the year 1648. who it should be except James Naylor; I cannot guess, and it
follows immediately,

And in the Year 1655. I being a branch of this Tree, ibid.
viz. the Branch aforesaid; the life of its Root caused me to blossom and bring
forth fruit; for the Spirit of the Lord came upon me, etc. So that whatever was
the Root, the first branch of this degenerate Vine sprung forth in 48

And if the words immediately foregoing those I. 8.
here quote, signify any thing, it must be a new Administration, for which the
Lord was agalnst them, (the public Pastors) and brought night upon them, that
their vision ceased. Then those Pastors had sometime the Vision and Presence of
God with them, who never preached the light within to be the only Rule, the
only Redeemer, nor pretended to minister from immediate Inspirations: but from
the Scriptures, by which they were directed, and which were the Treasury out of
which they brought forth whatever they handed (as from the Lord) to the people:
but about the year 48 or 50. that way of ministration was cried down, and those
principles called Quakerism by you inserted in their room and stead.

But let us hear another Witness, and he none of the. 9. Isaac Penington
concerning Unity. p 1,
meanest, Yea, my heart did truly unite with, and enjoy the Lord in what was
then [about the beginning of the late troubles] given forth, and I can never be
drawn to deny the truth and worth of that dispensation, though I know it was
swallowed up by a greater desolation, so in following after: and since, by the
breaking forth of a more lively dispensation. And a little after p. 2. and
remained, fixing their mind on that [former dispensation] which the Lord had
departed from.

It is hereby as plain and clear, as the Sun shining. 10.*
at noonday, that Quakerism is a late dispensation, taking its date since the
beginning of the late troubles; but to put all out of doubt in page 3. he
says, Is not this [Quakerism] the lowest of all dispensations? Is not this
common to all mankind? does not this fall short (in it self as I may say, and
as it has formerly bin dispensed) by young Countrey-Lads of no deep
understanding, or ready expression: but very fit to be despised every where by
the Wisdom of Man) of the dispensation of the Law of Moses to the Jews? much
more of the dispensation by Christ and his Apostles? who would have looked for
the Lord here? And yet this has the Lord chosen to gather his people by, and
to appear to the World in, and has gathered the life, virtue and substance of
all former dispensations into it, etc.

So that this new dispensation has swallowed up all. 11.
others, yea, that of Christ and his Apostles; and if so, it is not the
dispensation of Christ and his Apostles, but another accounted by the Quakers
more excellent and complete; and therefore is not Christianity, any more then
Christianity is Judaism by their own account.

To shut up the proof of this (as owned by themselves, according to the most
plain Construction of their own words, or consequence not to be disowned by a
rational man) I will give you James Naylor's doctrine: Love to the lost, p. 16.
But yours [Commands] in the Letter, and so of another Administration, for the
literal Ministration is done away in the spiritual.

Well then, if Christianity began in a manner so vastly differing from, and a
time so long before Quakerism, which is not that but another Administration,
Quakerism is no Christianity; but the former has been proved to be true,
therefore the latter.

CHAP. III. The Quakers deny the Scriptures.
SECT. I.
THAT the Quakers pretend to own the Scriptures,. 1.
I do not deny; but I shall prove it to be one of the most naked and
self-contradicted pretenses that ever peeped out into the World, with such a
noise and confidence, if mere pretenses were of sufficient Authority to command
our faith, that portion of Scripture It Is Satan's Masterpiece 10 bettray with a
^^iss.
might be well spared, 1 These 5. 21. Prove all things, etc. if they should deny
the Scriptures in so many words, they cannot but know, it would nip their
designs in the bud, and in stead of promoting their principles, render
themselves odious; but Satan is not so silly an Impostor, as to spoil his
Market, by appearing so unseasonably, and at first dash in so deformed a shape,
he is not ignorant of that Text. Surely in vain is the Net is spread in the
sight of any Bird.

I shall therefore wave pretenses on both sides, and bring my charge to a fair
trial, wherein their own Testimonies shall be their principal Judges.

I desire them not to accuse me of wounding their. 2.
reputation, seeing the stabs are given with their own daggers, and the Murder
is no better nor worse then felo de se, (as the Law phrases it) but in plain
English Self-murder; this I shall prove by sufficient Argument;

The Quakers deny the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Word of
God.

This Charge, none of them that ever I read, 3.
heard, or heard of will deny; and if you please to cast your eye on the
instances, you may take it on their own words; Blasphemy for any to say, the
Letter is the Word of God; It is the Devil To all that would know, p 4. Naylor,
^nswer to the ^s. p. 25 Cuffs Ro^uds, Lace, and such other like things inven^ed
by the devil. F. Howgill one ^f* Anchrists, etc. p. 2.
that contends for the Scriptures to be the Word of God. This error is by some
repu^ed merely verbal, and that in other words they allow the Scripture as much
as this comes to: I would it were true of this and all the rest of their
errors, which they trumpet out in the Scripture titles and dialect; upon that
condition I would be really content to Ye^ and Nay it, and Thee and Thou it;
and moreover, forbid Ribands, Lace and Cuffs, (though the most modest that were
ever worn) to pollute my Garments; and offend their unnecessary selfdenial from
that time forward* But they have another opinion of it, or they would not call
it blasphemy to be otherwise minded; and we shall find it ere I have done, to
be their forelorn Hope; by which they attempt to make a breach of the Authority
and esteem the Scripture has justly obtained in the hearts of all serious
Christians; and thereby with more ease and security to enter the whole Army and
gross of their delusions; and therefore I shall encounter it first and in good
earnest.

It will be necessary before I proceed, to let you. 4.
know what we intend by the phrase, that the Scriptures are the Word of God:
that you may know know what we hold and contend for, though they know not what
they contend against: except the vain fictions of their own begetting. Know
therefore that we do not assert them to be the Son of God, the Christ and
Savior, nor the Spirit of God; neither do we say, that they are so
self-sufficient and all-powerful as to sanctify and enlighten savingly,
without the coagency, efficiency or assistance of the good Spirit of the Lord,
to open our understandings, and write them in our hearts. These things are too
high for them.

On the other hand, we dare not call them a dead. 5.
letter, (who have felt them sharper then any two-edged sword, and tasted them
sweeter then the honey or the honeycomb) nor yet Ink and Paper-Divinity, or
merely the words and works of men: These are too low an opinion of them. But
positively,

First, we intend the sense and matter by them expressed; containing those
Histories, Prophesies, Promises,. 6.
Threatenings, Doctrines, Exhortations, etc. which God at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, revealed to, and spoke by his Son and servants, inspired by
God, or by inspiration of God.

Secondly, the sense and matter aforesaid, being. 7.
written or printed, we call the Word of God; so far as the print or writing
agrees (in its kind) with the Original Copies; which were written by, or by the
Direction of God himself, his son or servants inspired by him, so we call it
the Word of God, but with this distinction, the written Word.

SECT. II.
Now that the Scriptures are the Word of God in the. 1.
senses aforesaid, I shall vindicate from the violent contradictions of the
Quakers. They have these three Objections against this truth.

1. That it is improper so to call them, viz. The Word of God.

2. That many things or sayings contained in them were spoken by wicked men or
the devil.

3 That this Title is peculiar to Jesus Christ the Son of God.

First, they deny them to be the Word of God in the. 2.
singular number. I must therefore in dealing with this great Criticism,
reconcile the plural number to the singular.

I answer, it sounds methinks very harshly, that not one word in the Scripture
should be the Word of God, because there are in them more words then one.
Surely, if the first, 2, 3, 4, and so on, be the Word of God, then every word
in it is the Word of God: and never the less, but rather the more for being
united; for that there are few single words, which standing alone will signify
any thing, whereas diverse put together, have a sense and signification. And the
whole body of the Scripture considered together, does signify the mind of God
more completely, then if it were dismembered and considered apart.

But I know they aim at more then a mere. 3.
Grammar-nicety, at which kind of failings they use not much to quarrel, but
are rather affected with them, as if the Spirit of God delighted in real
nonsense, though I think the causes to be three especially; First, that their
first Authors could speak or write no better; and they take it to be apefection
to write false English and nonsense after such infallible persons; Secondly,
because they have so few of those they call their Ministry able to write true
sense and English; that those who can if they list will not, lest they should
disgrace their brethren; and rather then that it should be admitted, it shall
become the fashion, and obtain in time to be better English then sense. A third
reason may be their taking all, matter and form, to be infallibly from the
Spirit, and therefore dare not amend the sense of the Spirit.

But to what is the Question I return, after this so. 4.
long (yet not altogether inexcusable) digression, one of their zealous
Ministers (as they call them) thus exclaims; And what an improper speech were
this, to Fr. Howg^l one of Antichrist, Volunteers defeated. p. 26.
call twenty thousand Sentences one word! and it is called a Declaration; and
what a Declaration would that be which consisted but of one word! but where do
we say the Scriptures is but one word? there is a great deal of difference
between but one word, and the Word; and if the Scriptures be a Declaration in
the singular number, it must take many Declarations into one; for it contains
what was declared from Moses time to the Apostles; and why not the word in the
singular, as well as a Declaration in the singular, seeing the Scripture
contains many Declarations? but he gives one kick backward more at what he
pleads for; Pray have the patience to read this man, passing the sentence
against himself, A Rod for the fools back, Prove. 26. 3. And what a foolish man
is this, to assert his own imaginations, and then imagines the Scriptures will
prove it! what an improper speech is this, etc! I know not the person he brands
with folly; but I am sure the cause as laid down by Howgil himself deserves it
not; and I must give him a little correction more for his absurdity in this one
sentence; he says, and it is called a Declaration: here is the singular number
for the plural, which he is pleading against, yea, in the same instance: it,
what? it, the Scriptures; it the Relative, the Scriptures the antecedent. If I
should stop at and examine all such passages in point of sense or true Grammar:
I must not finish my intended task this seven years: but it is pity not to lash
a little, when such idiots will be playing the Critics. He says, What an
improper speech, etc! I am confident he understands not what improper means, if
he intend by improper that it is figurative; he need not wonder and say, what a
figurative speech is this? Alas, the Scriptures and all Writings abound with
figurative speeches, of which number this is; but if he mean by improper,
incongruous or unmeet, he offends greatly; for then the Scriptures are very
guilty herein, as will appear by and by; and I know not what else he should
mean by proper, unless not peculiar or a tall speech; as we call a tall man or
woman a proper, and by Naylor, Love to the lost p. 17.
improper a short speech. Let a Prophet of their own, and he none of the small
Prophets neither, decide this Controversy. Nay, who never yet came so far as
Balaam, who had the Word of the Lord from his own Mouth.

But to cast this Objection out of doors, we are to. 5.
take it in a collective sense, which is very frequent in the Scripture. For
instance; the Scriptures themselves are sometimes expressed by a plural,
sometimes by a singular word; Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.
23. Here it is plural, It is contained in the Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 6. Here it
is singular. A sentence is called a word, Where the word of a King is there is
Power. Eccles. 8. 3. They were astonished at his doctrine, for his word was
with Power. Either of these instances contain more then one single word. The
ten Commandments graven on the Table of Stone, are in the Hebr ten words (...),
which you have so rendered in the margin of some of your Bibles. It is too
frequent with them to call the holy Scriptures a dead Letter, and a letter is
somewhat I^s; then a word.
Deuteronomy. 10. 40. Now divide these Commandments into ten single ones, and then
each will have but one word come to its share to express it by; and some one,
viz. the fourth, has at least 60 single words in the Hebr. but many more in
the English, Romans 2. 9, 10. To the Jew [not Jewes] and also to the Gentile [not
Gentiles] can you suppose that one, and but one single Jew or Gentile is hereby
intended? read the sixth verse, and you shall have it explained; Who will
render to every man according to his deeds: so that under the single word Jew,
is expressed all the Jews from first to last, in every generation, and under
the word Gentile all the world of mankind besides.

Take one Text more to conclude with, Isa 8. 20.. 6. No Morring. (...) non ei
aurora. Mor^^nus*
To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word,
it is because there is no light in them; not so much as the dawning of the day.
Both Law and Testimony are here rendered by Word in the singular number; in
this one Text there is enough, (not only to silence this petty cavil, but) to
pluck up both root and branch; all the principles of Quakerism; if they who
profess them had any regard to the Authority and verity of the eternal and
Almighty God, and a few grains of understanding at liberty to consult it.

SECT. III.
2. Object. Many Passages in the Seriptures contain. 1.
the sayings of wicked me^ Yea, some have been so irreverent and irrational, as
to say, some part of it is the words of the devil; this expression has been
frequent with them, and uttered in contempt of the Scripture.

I answer, although the Scripture make frequent. 2.
mention of such Passages, it is to a good and holy end, and hereby Satan's
malice is discovered, whereby in a good measure we are not ignorant of his
devices; and hereby we understand his snares, in which our first Parents were
taken, and others both good and bad in after-Ages; and Satan is also rendered
the most wicked and hateful of all that God created. But to speak close to the
Objection. Those speeches of wicked persons, such as Jobs wife, the Pharisees,
Jews, and Rabshakeh, and the speeches of the Devil are not the Word of God, or
any part of holy Writ, (as they were uttered by them) but far from it. We are
to consider the Scripture, as partly Historical; and all those passages being
reported historically; there is not the least stain upon the Scriptures
thereby. What if I make a true report of the Powder Plot, the Massacres in
France, Ireland, etc. And that to good ends and purposes ^ yea, if I report the
blasphemous speeches by them uttered against God, his Saints, and the holy
Scriptures, am I therefore blameable, as if I my self had been their Author? I
know what has been said is convincing. Now by the Inspiration and Guidance of
the Holy Spirit these things were written; and there is not only a truth, but
also a divine truth of History in them.

Object. 3. That this title, the Word of God, is. 3.
peculiar to the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, whom they call the light
within, the Scriptures within: and here it is indeed that the shoe pinches,
and they would fain put off the honor, and put out the light of the
Scriptures, because they stand in the light of their fancy. (Pardon me the
expression, for it is a truth) I shall prove by the Lords assistance ere I have
done. But what have they to say that the Scriptures should not be the Word of
God, notwithstanding the Son of God is so called? I will give you the best that
ever I met with.

The first is, the Authority of their Leaders, who. 4.
say, It is so, and it must be so, James Parnel, Christ exalted, p. 4. He
[Christ] is the Word, the Scripture is not. Why should it be doubted after
such an evidence? it is unreasonable and superfluous to expect, that infallible
persons, (for so the Quakers believe all their Ministry to be) should give a
reason for what they affirm; especially considering they are constrained to be
infallible for want of reason. And now seeing be can carry it so easily, he
goes on like an empty Cloud carried with the wind, He [Christ] is the light,
the Scripture is not; he is the R^l^r, Guide, Teacher and Judge, and the
Scripture is not. What may not a man prove in one infallible breath? did he
not prudently to make haste, before that gale was spent? Well, but who can
stand before a whirlwind? one blast has torn from the Scripture no less then
six of those glorious Garments wherewith God has clothed it.

Let us hear G. F. if he do not amend the matter. 5.
by a thing like an Argument, He did not say John 1. 1. the Declaration was the
Word, but said in his Declaration the Word was God: and he who says the
Latter is the Word, is a Deceiver, and erres, -- for the Scripture says, That
in the beginning was the Word. Difference of Ministers p. 1.

If you could have found where John said in his 6.
Declaration (as you call it) that the Scriptures are not the Word of God, a
thousand to one but some or other of the Lords people would have found it out
long before Quakerism was in being, and have ceased to take that name in vain.

For the second Argument, he said the Word was God, what then? Why then the
Scriptures cannot be the Word unless they be God also. I am sure I have hit on
your Conclusion, and the best you can make of it: but let me tell you that the
Scripture may be the Word, and Christ the Word also, and yet though Christ be
the Word of God, the Scriptures the Word may be quite another thing.

Let me give you just such another place of Scripture,. 7*
1 Cor. 10. 4. They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ. Will you conclude from hence that there is no other Rock, but
every Rock in the World must needs be Christ? or, that it is sinful, yea,
Blasphemy, to call any thing a Rock but Christ? but it may be you will say,
it is a spiritual Rock in that place; And I say it was spiritual, only as it was
mystical or typical of Christ, but in other respects it was a Rock as others
are, hard and stony. So I say, of the Word that was God, it was the Word that
was in the beginning, that created all things: show me any such Word and I will
call it God too: yea, I will say it is blasphemy to deny it to be so: but the
Scriptures which we call the Word of God, were not in the beginning, nor did
they create any thing, much less all things.

Pray let me ask you that are so stiff in this point;. 9.
do you not take the light in John 1. 9. to be Christ and God? say nay, if you
dare. Yea, and will you not say, that John says so in his Declaration? I know
you will, and I will say so too; what then? Is there nothing called light, or
that is truly so, but Christ or God? the Sun, Moon, Day, are called Light also,
Gen 1. 5, 16. yea, the disciples are called by Christ himself, The Light of the
World, Mat. 5. 14.

And must they be God too? or Christ be too blame for calling them the light of
the World; a phrase so very near, that in Joh. 1. 9. Christ is called the
Way, the Truth and the Life; but if you should make every such expression to
be meant of Christ and God; I am sure we should have Lords many, and Gods many,
in a far lower sense then the Magistrates, and great men of the world; and
Christ would be little beholden to us. I beseech you therefore, who are not
stark blind, and steel-hard; either to abandon such principles, or at least do
not pretend to Scripture for them, and abuse it after this manner; for the
Scriptures are no friend to your crooked, unholy principles, and that your
Leaders know well enough.

SECT. II.
That I may blow the dust out of your eyes, I shall. 1.
take a little pains to show you your mistake, and also how to amend it in more
and weightier points (in themselves) then this under-present consideration. You
do not honestly distinguish betwixt proper and figurative words and phrases in
reading the Scriptures, but have gotten an Art to construe them backward, quite
cross to their true intent and meaning; you will take proper speeches for
figurative, and figurative for proper, not careing for the true sense, but as
they will serve your turn; and thereby you can prove quodlibet ex quolibet,
what you will, and any how; and so you seem in the eyes of silly and credulous
souls, to make your rope of sand to hang finely together; and you are no more
happy here, for Christ the Word is the Word, but in a less proper sense,
whereas the Scriptures are the Word of God in a much more proper sense; which
I shall plainly demonstrate: Only take one direction in the meanwhile.

That where any phrase or word may be taken in a, 2.
proper sense, it ought so to be taken: unless there be a necessity to do
otherwise, from the consideration of the Context. As in the point in hand, it is
said, The Word was God, in the beginning; here it cannot be understood of the
Word in a proper and ordinary acceptance; because such words or word cannot
be God, neither were in the beginning. Besides, what is afterward spoken of
the Word there, is plainly and only to be understood of Christ the Son of God;
but if you consider the Word expressed, Mark 4. 19 And the cares of this
World, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering
in, choke the Word, and it becomes unfruitful. Here you must take it for the
doctrinal Word, or Word of Instruction, which is a proper sense of the Word;
and if you should take it for Christ the Word, which is figurative: you must
read it Choke Christ: which how untrue and uncomely a phrase it is, I leave
your selves to judge.

Now I shall show you what is a word in a proper. 3.
s^nse: and that the Scriptures are such, and what in a figurative sense: and
that Christ or the Son of God (as the Word in ordinary acceptance) is such.

A word in a proper sense, is either an articulate syllabical sound, which the
ear is receptive of, and by which somewhat may understood as its
signification, in a commonly received acceptance.

Or else, a writing, impression or graving, which is such a disposing of
letters in their Order, as does express and signify to the eye, what the other
does to the ear.

Now Christ is not, cannot be the Word, in neither. 4.
of these senses; for he is not a sound thus disposed, nor yet an engraved,
printed or written thing: but the Scriptures are such, or consist of such
words. How the Scriptures are the word in the singular number, I have already
showed, and must refer you thither

A figurative word, or word in a figurative construction,. 5.
is somewhat so expressed, but is so only by Analogy, as having some proportion
with, and similitude or likeness to a word: but will by no means bear the
definition of a word, taking in all that is essential to its being a word.

For instance, God is called a Husbandman* John. 6.
10. 1. but he is not so in a proper fense, for he neither goes to plow, nor
sow, nor cart, and managing grounds and cattle as a Husbandman does; nay, he
is not a man (of any occupation whatsoever) but there is some analogy, and
similitude betwixt the Almighty and a Husbandman, in his dealings with his
people: for he takes care of them, he waters them, purges, prunes, plows, digs,
fences, feeds them in a spiritual sense.

Christ is called the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the. 7.
Vine, the door: yet he is none of these, but with respect to his relation, and
usefulness to his people, there is some similitude betwixt Christ, and these
Figures and Emblems of him: he is strong and courageous, fears none, overcomes
all he encounters with, he conveys sap, life and fruitfulness to his living
branches; he is the mean by which we may be reconciled to, and enjoy God; but
enough of this.

And Christ who is God, is the Word, but by Analogy,. 8.
not properly in ordinary acceptance.

1. He is a great part of the substance and scope of the Scriptures the Word of
God, they testify of him, and direct to him in their doctrine, types, etc. To
him give all the Prophets witness, Acts 10 12.

2. He does also manifest and signify to us all the glorious attributes of God
in a splendid manner, but more especially his love, mercy and pity: and that
not only as a Prophet and Teacher; by the Word of his mouth; but also in all
his concerns as Mediator.

3. As he is the Executioner of the good promised,. 7.
and evils threatened in the Scriptures. So Rev. 19. 13. he was employed in
bloody work, executing the vengeance of God against his Adversaries, threatened
in the Word; and he possesses his faithful ones of the happiness prepared for,
and promised to them. Thus I hope I have cleared my way hitherto. One thing
only remains to prove their error, which I have reserved as the last blow; and
that is to show that the Scriptures do callthe Threatenings, Promises, etc.
therein contained, the Word of God, and the written Word; and if I prove, that
in any place of Scripture the phrase cannot be taken in the sense the Quakers
would have it, that is, for Christ or God; and also, that it can be taken in no
other sense then for the matter contained in the Scripture; I have done enough,
whether they will be convinced or no; and they must dedeny the Scriptures to be
true, or own their doctrine to be false.

Verse 20. He that regarded not the Word of the. 10. Exodus 9. 19 20,
Lord, left his servants and cattle in the field, verse 19. He that feared the
Word of the Lord, made his eattel and servants to flee into houses. What color
is here to expound the Word of the Lord in these Texts of God or Christ? what
more plain, then that they feared the threatening, or regarded not the
threatening, or gracious Advice given from God for avoiding the blow, Luke 22.
61. And Peter remembered the Word of the Lord: what word? How he said unto him,
before the Cock crow, etc. and that it was the saying of Christ which Peter
remembered; you have Marks word for it, or rather Gods, Mark 14. 72. And Peter
called to mind the Word that Jesus said to him, Jer. 23. 30. I am against the
Prophets that steal my Word, every one from his Neighbor. Can Christ be
stolen? or would God be so much offended with them for obtaining Christ, as to
put the black brand of theft upon it, while he charges it as the highest crime
to reject Christ?

I Sam 9. 27. Stand thou still a while, that I may. 11.
show thee the Word of God. This Word was, that God had chosen him King, and
the Prophecy of what should befall him in his return: if you will needs have the
Word of God in this place to be understood of Christ, you must read it with
the Exposition thus, Stand thou still a while, and I will show thee the Christ.

There are two words in the Greek which are Translated,. 12.
and signify the word, (...) and (...), the first is sometimes used for
Christ, the personal Word, but the other never: Heb. 6. 5. And have tasted of
the good Word of God.

And also Ephesians. 6. 17. And the Sword of the Spirit, (...) Beza renders it.
Gladium spiritualem, the spiritual sword.
which is the Word of God.

A little skill in the Original would free you from this and many more
mistakes. What I have done here, will be to such as are willing to understand,
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over. As for those who
are of a perverse mind, until the Lord give them a better frame, I shall not
wonder if they wink out the Sun at noonday.

I shall next and briefly say somewhat of the written Word, which we are
greatly concerned to be satisfied. 13.
in, to be the Word of God, for that we have no other standing Word as our
Testimony of Gods revealed Will, but what is written or printed, which is all
to a like purpose; the one being by an impression of the Pen, the other of
Stamps: This the Quakers deny, with the addition of many absurdities, arising
from so calling and owning it.

Where, says one of them, (and a Chief) Read Ja Naylor Saul's Errnd 10
Damascus p. 33.
thou in the Scriptures of a written Word? it will be no hard matter to find
an Answer to this question, I have written to him the great things of my Law,
but they were accounted as a strange thing, a sharp rebuke to the Objectors,
Exodus 31. 18. The Ten Commands (or words according to the Hebr. as I have
already showed) were written by the Finger of God himself: and afterward by
Moses, the Law of Moses is called his Writings, John 5. 47. If ye believe not
his Writings; and if the matter and sense be the Word Thou have printed m^
words. ^^^ ^r.
of God before, surely when it is written (which any word that ever I heard may
be) it is a word written, or a written word, which you will.

SECT. V.
Some there are who have written against the Quakers. 1.
who judge, that although the Quakers will not admit of this Appellation of the
Scriptures, yet in other terms they allow them such titles as amount to as
much: and that the difference is rather verbal then real; but let me tell such,
that besides the imprudence and danger of removing the ancient Landmarks and
not holding fast the form of sound words, there is a wide difference and great
shortness in the best titles they will afford them, (yea, take them altogether)
from this Appellation; and therefore I shall examine them and discover their
defects herein.

First, they will allow them to be of God.

So they affirm their own Writings and Sayings to be also of God; (And let not
this seem small in your Morning-Watch. 52.
eyes, -- yet shall you all one day know that the Lord has spoken it) not only
in some sense, but in a higher then the Scriptures, at least with respect to
them, and the times wherein we live. But this phrase to be of God, is of so
large an import, that the silliest Worm, and the basest clod of Clay we tread
on, may claim a share in the Privilege: yea, nothing in the whole Creation but
will bear this expression (sin only excepted in its obliquiry) for of him are
all things, Romans 11. 36.

Secondly, the Scriptures of truth.. 2.


This is ground enough for us to deal with them by the Authority of the
Scriptures; but there are many other Writings that are true; and if you take
the Scriptures to be understood by way of Eminency, the Scriptures of truth; so
as no other Writings extant, are so absolutely and divinely true, they will
utterly disclaim such a sense.

Thirdly, They are the Experiences of the Saints,. 3.
and what they witnessed.

This is with them a very common phrase, though A true Testimony of what the
Saints were made witnesses of. Smith Prim. p. 10.
this be true of some part of the Scriptures, (especially the Book of Psalms)
it is too narrow a title by far for the whole Body of the Scriptures; and for
that part of the Scriptures, which expresses the Experiences of the Saints, it
has somewhat more as its end then a mere witnessing, or expressing how it was
with them. But I do not wonder that they so much delight in this phrase, when I
consider that they themselves restrain almost all the Concerns of Religion to
their Experiences; yea, things Historically related, that were done without
them long ago, and are never again to be acted on the stage of this world: and
things Prophetically related in the Scriptures, which shall not have a being
until the end of the world. They experience the Birth, Righteousness,
Sufferings, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Afcension and Exaltation of Christ.
They experience the downfall of Babylon, the Day of Judgment, Heaven, Hell,
and all within them: and not with respect to some effects, impressions and
similitudes of these things: but really, and almost (if not altogether)
exclusively, of any other meaning: all of which you will find proved in the
following Discourse; but this is far short and wide of owning the Scriptures to
be the Word of God. There are no Saints but have their Experiences, both good
and bad; but he that should write them, and affirm them to be the Word of God,
as they are the Experiences of the Saints, will fall with a witness under that
severe censure of that true and legitimate Word of God, Rev 22 18, 19. and
Deuteronomy. 4. 2.

Fifthly, they call them a Declaration of the Mind. 5.
of God. This (all things considered) is the highest expression of their esteem
of the Holy Scriptures and Word of God; (for so I will call them whether they
will or no) but so were some part of the Writings of the Heathen-Idolaters, who
knew not the true God. Yea, many things which they spoke of as the Duty of Man,
and against many immoral Vices: The Apostle says no less, when he quotes such
Passages out of such Heathen-Authors, Evil communication corrupt good manners,
1 Cor. 15. 33. This is found in the Comedy of Menander called Thadia, Act. 17.
28. For we are also his offspring, is a Declaration of God, Jovis omnia plena.
Virg. And some such things they have not only dictated for the matter, but have
also pressed them as the mind of God, according to those notions they had of
him.

And much more may the large and precious Sermons and VVritings of the Servants
and Ministers of Christ, (whose Discourses are grounded on the Holy
Scriptures;) yet he that should call them the Word of God in a strict sense,
deserves correction.

A man may declare his mind, (yea, or some things of the mind of God,) by
gestures, nods, becks, srowns, smiles; yet they are not to be equalled by the
expression of his mind by his Word, they being much more imperfect and
unintelligible then words; the holy conversations of the sound and godly do
eminently and effectually declare the mind of God; yet had we them in its
stead we should be great losers.

Not only the VVritings and Sayings of intelligent creatures, but also the
inanimate part of the Creation is a Declaration of God, and of his mind also
in many things, Psalm. 19 1, 2. And those Psalms wherein they are called upon,
and are said to praise the Lord, Romans 1. 19, 20. Acts 14. 17. the Heathen were
blamed for not learning the Lesson taught by them (after their kind) no better:
yet who will say, that the Declaration made by them is of equal value with the
Word of God, either for matter, style, manner or perspicuity?

Fourthly, they are a Declaration of the Word of God.

By the Word of God they mean Jesus Christ This is a true Character of a
considerable part of the Scriptures, but not of all; and they often restrain
them to this, as if it were all the use were to be made of them. So much of
them [the Scriptures] as was given forth by the Holy Men of God, through the
Inspiration of the Almighty, they testify of Christ, and that is only their
service in their place. Smith Cat. p. 14. You may observe what a skeleton they
make of the Scriptures, so much of them, as if all of them were not of the same
divine Abstract: They say, the Morning-Watch Fanwo^th Light out darkness.
Letter is it [the VVord] which does but declare of it; They do but testify of
me. They testify of him, and it is with a [ but] lest you should take them to
have any more hand in conveying Christ and his benefits to the souls, then a
mere witness of who is, or what is the Christ.

SECT. VII.
To clench the Nail I have been driving hitherto, I. 1.
must demonstrate that to deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is to
deny the Scriptures, which I shall do three ways in few words.

First, to deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is to deny them that
title by which they are commonly known, and distinguished from, and lifted up
above all other VVritings whatsoever.

I will ask any man who understands sense, and has but one grain of reason; if
to deny the Supreme Magistrate of Great Britain to be the King of England, were
notto deny the King? though he that does so should allow him to be entitled a
Man, a Gentleman, yea, a Nobleman or Duke, which are titles common to him, with
others, or below him? sure I am, we Christians are else under an old musty
mistake, and guilty of great slander, for affirming the Turks to deny Christ,
because they will not own him to be greater then their Prophet Mahomet, or to
be the Savior of men's souls, while they own him to be not only a man, but also
a great Prophet, and next to Mahomet himself; I suppose, a Quaker, whose Child
should own him to be a Man, and a good man too, and one that provides well for
him, and yet say, He is not his father, and stand to it in earnest, would say
that son denies him, and is a naughty wicked Child, Acts 13. 13. It Is laid of
the Jews, they denied him in the Presence of Pilate, v. 14 they denied the
Holy One and the just. Did they deny him to be a man, or some common thing?
No, they denied him to be Christ the Savior, and loaded him with reproaches in
stead of his glorious and peculiar titles: and this the Holy Ghost calls
denying him.

To deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God,. 2.
is to deny that Appellation on which their Authority is grounded, and which
puts an awe upon the Consciences of men. Though all truths as such (so far as
they are apprehended, carry with them the countenance of Authority; yet how
much more, when a Command, Promise, Doctrine, etc. comes with this written on
its forehead, the Word of God, the Word of the Lord! it is said, Where the
Word of a King is there is Power, and who shall say unto him, What do
thou? it is natural to men to despise the best, and most excellent things under
common and contemptible titles.

It is all one in a plain and true construction, as to. 3.
deny that the matter and sense expressed by them was over spoken by God.
Experience has sufficiently taught this, that no sooner this principle is
taken in, but the Scriptures become with such as weak as a burnt thread; and
whatever you may pretend to, we know and shall prove, that after this title is
put off, they become like Sampson when God was departed from him. The Papists,
who are the more subtle, will tell us, that in their Image Worship they
terminate their worship in God alone, but alas, the common people are for
downright language; and they, poor souls, being exhorted to worship the Images,
do it devoutly, and think not on God all the while; it is no otherwise in the
present case, people will understand after the common sense and aceeptation of
words.

I have sometimes been amazed, and not without good Company and consideration,
that men of such. 4.
dexterity in matters that concern not Religion, should be so prodigiously
blind and besotted, as to deny this truth hitherto vindicated; But since I have
been better acquainted with their principles, I find it to be the most
necessary to maintain and support their Great delusion, viz. The light within.

For that they do hereby rob the Scriptures of abundance. 5.
of places, wherein that phrase, The Word, and, The Word of the Lord is
found, and deck their idol with them; and indeed so many are the excellent
Characters given to the Scriptures under that notion, that if they wear them
and shine in their luster, the Quakers Glowworm must sparkle no where but in
the dark, and may still keep its Court and Confines in the Heathen-world.

CHAP. I. The Quakers equal their own VVritings and Sayings with the
Scriptures, and prefer them before the Scriptures.
I Need not spend time with those who are yet in their. 1.
wits, to prove that they who fall under the Charge expressed above, deny the
Scriptures. To take all rubs out of the way, I shall furnish you with a few
Demonstrations.

First, this is tounhallow them, and make them common things, (or worse) with
the conceits of any who shall be so presumptuous, as to pretend to Inspirations
and Revelations; and of this sort there are a crowd among the Men and Women
also of the Quakers. If they declare, if they write, yea, whatever religious
Action they move in, they pretend all to be from the immediate Guidance and
Impulse of the Spirit of God, and that in as ample a manner as ever the
Apostles and Prophets could pretend unto; so that this principle being as
universally entertained as the name of Christ, it might be said without an
Hyperbole, that the whole World could not contain the Pamphlets that would be
written, and called, The Word, or Words of the Lord; and of what value the
Holy Scriptures would be in such a crowd of its pretended betters, it is not
hard to conclude.

Hear what James Naylor says, The things following Naylor, Love to the lost.
Pref W. D. printed in the year 16^3.
which I have declared of, are not the things of man nor by man did I receive
them, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. The Word of the Lord to his
beloved City, etc. This is the title; He concludes, Through your Brother and
Companion in the Tribulation and Kingdom of Patience in the Lord Jesus,
imitating the words of John, in Rev. 1. 9. This I say in the Presence of the
living God, and by the Spirit of the living God. Parnel, Shield of the Truth,
p. 41.

Give a most undeniable Exposition of a Scripture against their way, the Answer
is, thy carnal mind discerns not the things of God; Thou put thy meanings
to the Scriptures; the Scriptures must be judged of by the light, or the Spirit
from whence they came, but thou art in neither. If we bring a plain text in so
many words against their Tenets and Practices; the Answer then is, Thou art in
the Letter.

And therefore Pennington prays seriously, My upright desire to the Lord for
you is, -- That he would Penington ^u. p 12.
strip you of your knowledge of the Scriptures according to the flesh; By Flesh
their sense is, the use of our understandings (though sanctified) as will
appear in the KEY at the end of this Book, to which I must Parnel, C^^ist
exalted. p. 3.
refer you for construing all such ambiguous and hard words.

Sixthly, Doting on the Scriptures with your dark minds.

SECT. II.
That the Quakers do thus equal their Writings and Sayings, etc. with the
Scripture, shall appear by four 2.
undeniable things.

First, they pretend to Infallibility.

This they assert to be necessary in all their Ministers, who ordinarily
declare or write, and that without it, it were impossible to be fitted for that
work. Hear what the chiefest of their Apostles says, How can ye be Ministers
of the Spirit, and not of the Letter, G. Fox great mist* etc p. 12.
if ye be not infallible? and how can they but delude people who are not
infallible; and George Whitehead in a Letter to me writes thus. Quest. Whether
Infallibility be attainable by any in these days? which we affirm is to true
believers: which if thou deniest, we question thy Call to the Ministry.

They pretend to speak and write by the immediate. 2.
Inspiration of God; and this is another part whereby they aspire to equality.

The Apostle Paul gives this Character of the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3 16. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, etc. And the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet.
1^21. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man, but holy Men
of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Let us now compare Notes,
and see how far in these respects the Quakers will give the Scriptures the
upper hand of their sayings or Writings; And how should he do otherwise, F H
one of Antichrists* Volunteers ^^feated. p. 18.
seeing he has denied the infallible spirit, from which all the Ministers
ministered, and all the Prophets prophesied, and spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. He was here pleading for their Men's and Women's prophesying: and
concludes, that to deny the Infaliible spirit to be, and speak in the Quakers,
was to deny the infallible spirit by which all the Prophets prophecicd, etc.

Therefore may I say, much more it is not in the Power of that little Book,
either to throw down self-will in Jo. Story more D^y in Answ to Christian
Queries.
any in whom it is not yet subd^ed, or to exalt the truth in general: because
its only. Queries gathered by the Author from the Letter ^f the Scriptures
without, and no Message of heavenly Prophecy, Doctrine or Exhortation received
by the Author from the Lord, through the divine Inspiration of his light and
spirit within; therefore I say it is a very vain and idolatrous Exhortation.
The Writings of the Quakers are full to this purpose; but my business in these
instances being to prove matter of Fact, only this may suffice.

Thirdly, they pretend the Spirit of God to be in. 3.
them in an essential consideration, and in all his divine Prophecies, and that
it is Gods indwelling in them thus considered, from which their sayings and
writings proceed.

In this they arrogate to themselves and their expressions more then any of the
Prophets and Apostles durst once imagine; all they believe and declare, they
say is from the light within; yea, it is the light within that reveals it, and
not they; and therefore they will not call them their sayings (ordinarily) but
such as pass through them; as if God spoke through them as one may speak
through a Trunk, which is only a passage for the voice, but no proper Organ of
speech, Through your Brother and Companion, ande. W. D. Conclusion. The Voice
of the Son of God was uttered Life of Ed. Borough.
forth through him, by which the dead was raised. And indeed this light within
they pretend to be both Father, Son and Spirit, for they make no distinction:
but this being matter of fact I shall prove it out of their writings; but you
must not suppose that I shall find any such words as essential, or properties
in their Authors, for such words are too proper for them, and expressive of the
truth to such who understand them: but I shall find the things, as very God
clothed with those Attributes which are peculiar to him, and whoever reads
what immediately follows, and considers the Evidences to be but the Quakers own
Confessions, and shall not be touched with horror and indignation against their
principles: let that man or woman know, that a Conscience seared with a hot
iron is too soft for their insensibleness

Every man has that which is one in union, and like G B. (...) faith of the
Gospel of Peace. p ^
the Spirit of Christ, even as good as the Spirit of Christ according to its
measure.

Child. I am sensible that there is something in my S^ith ^m. ^. 14.
Conscience that lets me see my secret Thoughts, and the Intents of my heart,
etc.

Father. That is the true light of Christ within, that lets thee see the
thoughts and the intents of the heart; and God has freely given it unto thee,
and requires thy obedience to it.

Chapter But if I should turn unto it, and obey it when it reproves me for sin, is
there Power in it to save me from my sin?

Answ. All Power in Heaven and Earth is in it.

To shut up this particular, hear one of their prime. 4.
Ministers, who speaks plainly his mind, and not in Parables, I will make you
know, that I the light which G Fox. jun P 53, P. 54 P. 55.
lights every man that comes into the World, (that all through me should
believe) am the true eternal God, which created all things; that by me the
light all things are uph^ld, and that there is not another besides me can save.
And I will purge out all your iniquities, and forgive all your trespasses, and
I will change your Natures, and I will make you new Creatures, if you will
hearken to me, and obey me the light in you. What I have here written is the
words which the Father, who is one with Christ the Son, gave me to write, in
which words the true Christ is renewed, and a Testimony given of him and no
other. But enough and too much of this Blasphemy. I need not take pains to
ravel into it, for its so plain, that none but those who shut their eyes, and
are wilfully blind, but may see it in an unexpressible deformity.

SECT. III.
I now proceed to the fourth proof of their equalling. 1.
their sayings, writings, and light within, and preferring them before the
Scriptures. I place them in this Order, that you may behold them at one view in
their not only disproportion, but opposition.

The CHARACTERS of the Scriptures given by the Quakers. CHARACTERS of their own
Teachers Writings and Sayings given by them. Feeding Death with Death. The
Letter which kills. [Declaration from the Ministers of the Word, p. 7. The
Voice of the Son of God was uttered forth by him, by which the dead was raised
[F. H. Life of E B. p. 20. Paper, Ink, and VVriting. [Declar from the Ministers
of the Word, p. 2. A Shield of the Truth [Title of James Parnels Book. A dead
letter. The old letter. Seeking the living among the dead. [Parnel, Shield to
the truth. Naylor, love to the lost] His words ministered grace to the Hearers.
[Fox jun. life of E B Forcible and very pleasant, as apples of gold in pictures
of silver. This in the freshness and quick sense of life. [Penington quest.
etc. 41. Leave men in the dark and confusion. [Frequent Passage. A clear
Discovery. (Title of Smiths Prim. O how certain a sound did his Trumpet give.
Life of E. B p. 2. Part of it the words of the Devil and wicked men. Wisdom of
words. Nayl. Love to the lost, etc. 21. Written from the Spirit of the Lord. (
title page. Parnel. shield of truth) The Voice of the Son of God. [Life of E.
B. 20. My upright desire to the Lord for you is, that he would strip you if all
your knowledge of the Scriptures according to the flesh. Pennington quest. p
12. And now Child hear* Instruction and be wise, -- Treasure it up in thy
heart, that thou may lay up for thy self a good foundation. Smith Prim. p
56. Shows you in a Glass your own fa^es, which the Scriptures cannot do.
Scorned Quakers Account. p. 20. A spiritual Glass opened. Title of Smiths Cat.
and part of the Title of his Morn-watch. Precept, and Traditions of men.
Morning-Watch p. 18. Truths Principles. Title of Crooks Book. That light is in
the ^criptures, prove that, or tell me what one Scripture has light in it. Lip
of truth, etc. p 7. Light risen out of darkness. Title of Farnworths Book.
Natural. Lawson Carnal Letter. Shield of the truth. 10. God is at liberty to
speak by them [the Scriptures] if he please, and where they are given by
Inspiration, he does so and so, he is at liberty to speak by any other created
thing as to Balaam by his Ass. James Naylor light of Christ etc. p 19. Earthly
Root. Morn. Watch. 22 Worship and obedience as to its direction, The Harlots
Child. Morn. watch p. 23 Hagar and Ismael, Mother and Child after the Letter.
Penington Mysteries of the Kingdom, Preface. He proclaimed liberty to the
Captives in the Power and Authority of God. F. H. of E. B. p. 15. Letter
without. Swine feeding on the husk The shadow. Parnel shield of Truth. p 10.
Let this be sent to be read in the fear of the Lord, in the Holy Assemblies of
the Church of the firstborn, where she is scattered to the ends of the Earth.
W. D. Doting on the Scriptures Parnel Christ exalted p 4. Betrayed into the
words. Smith prim. p. 30. Dangerous to feed on them. Sm Cat. 36.

SECT. IV.
I having sufficiently proved, that they equal their. 1.
writings and sayings with, and prefer them before the Scriptures; it is not
fit I should let them pass without contradiction, I shall therefore review
their Grounds for so doing, and discover them to be but swelling words of
vanity.

And I shall begin with their Infallibility; I am confident that G. Fox the
Ringleader of the Sect understands not what he says, nor whereof he affirms,
It is one thing not to fail, another to be infallible; for that is to be
without all possibility of failing or erring; Again, it is one thing to be
infallible, with a restriction to something, another to be universally
infallible, and without limitation.

If G. Fox understands so much, he is a non-such for. 2.
confidence, and being void of reason, that affirms as he does, let us
examine but that one passage before-cited, How can ye be Ministers of the
Spirit and not of the Letter, if ye be not infallible? Here he puts Ministry of
the Spirit, and of the letter in opposition, which Christ and his Apostles
joined hand in hand as loving companions and meet helps each to other, And
there was delivered unto him the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, and when he had
opened the Book, he found the place Luke 4. 17
where it was written, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. verse 21. And he
began to say unto them, this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, and
all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words, etc. was not Christ
then a Minister of the Spirit? it is by him said, this day this Scripture is
fulfilled in your ears, viz. the Spirit of the Lord is upon me; And was he not
also a Minister of the Letter? why he opened the Book, and found where it was
written; and no doubt read it out of the Book to his Auditors; or else it would
have been very impertinent to tell them, This Scripture is fulfilled; for they
must have divined, or not known what Scripture he intended: And I suppose none
will doubt whether that which is written in a Book be written in Letters. Well
then, either George Fox is fallible, yea, and has grossly failed, or Jesus
Christ was not a Minister of the Spirit; and which of these you who call your
selves infallible Ministers of the Spirit will admit of, I know not: but I am
sure every true Christian will abhor a Competition between Jesus Christ and G.
Fox; and what the Lord and Master did in this case, so did his servants the
Apostles, as I might instance abundantly. I will direct you only to Peter's
Sermons, Acts 2. I need not instance in any more. He that has read the
Scriptures may easily furnish himself. And who can doubt but they who made use
of the Letter of the Scriptures, for evidence of what in their Ministry they
preached or writ; were Ministers of the Letter as well as of the Spirit.

And moreover, if we consider the letter of the. 3.
Scripture to be the letter of the Spirit, written by its direction; and to
express (in its kind) the mind of the Spirit, This Querie of George Fox may be
turned upon himself thus; and how can ye be Ministers of the Spirit, if ye be
not Ministers of the Letter also.

The latter part of his Sentence is a higher Demonstration. 4.
of the fallibility of his Chair. And how can they but delude people who are
not infallible? True indeed, if they did persuade people, that they could not
in any thing be mistaken, or be ignorant: but seeing only the Quakers pretended
Ministry, and the Pope of Rome do assume this to themselves; they only are in a
necessity of deluding the people; for our parts, who live in all manner of
pride, (as the Quakers by their spirit of Infallibility do charge us) we are
not yet come up to their Perfection, for we freely acknowledge, that we may
err in doctrine, and do err in practice, which we bewail before God and men;
and also that the people may not be deluded by us, we desire them, and charge
them not to pin their faith on our sleeves; but repair to the Law and to the
Testimony, and search the Scriptures, try whether the things we affirm be so or
no: And if we speak contrary to the Mind of God there expressed, to reject our
doctrine; and also that they follow our Example no further then we follow
Christ, even that Man Christ Jesus who was for a time on Earth, but is now in
Heaven.

But what do you think of the Holy Apostles? were. 5.
they universally infallible? could not they err? if you say so, Paul will
convict you of error, in his charging Peter, (none of the least of the
Apostles) with erring, and in something deluding the people, Gal. 2. 12, 13,
14. Peter dissembled the truth in practicing the Mosaical distinction of Jews
and Gentiles, and separating from the believing Gentiles as unclean: And the
other Jews, yea, ( and Barnabas also) was carried away with his dissimulation.

But then you will say, how can we be sure that what they wrote and taught was
truth?

I answer, that although they might in some things be carried away by
temptation (as Peter was in tha^ case) yet their doctrine which they professed
to b^ from the Lord, and by the Inspiration of God could not admit of erring or
fallibility: and that not because they had an habitual infallibility in all
things; bu^ because of the love of God to his people, the regard of his honor,
and the firmness of his Promises which he made to them: those especially John
14. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, John 16. 13. Howbeit, when he the
Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak; and he will
show you things to come. Now these Promises being made to the Apostles for
furnishing them with ability for their work as Apostles, they may be concluded
to be infallibly guided by the Spirit; but in other things, though by their
eminent habitual grace they were not likely ^o fall as others, who were not
clothed with such a measure and degree as they: yet it was more then possible
that they should fail, but according to G. Fox's infallibility, and without
limitation; the Apostles themselves could not but delude the people.

But to conclude this particular of Infallibility,. 8.
take beside what has been said, one considerable proof of their
non-attainment of Infallibility, and that is the most grossly absurd
Exposition they give of the Scriptures. See what follows with the eyes of
Christian-men

We are accused that we judge people; It is written, the Saints shall judge the
world; an infallible proof, as if it were a Command or Prophecy of the Saints,
(i. e. the Quakers) calling men all ^o naught, how serious soever: who are not
professedly conducted and saved by the light within; but he goes on more and
more infallibly. And for Judgment am I come into the World, says Christ. As
if Christ's P^nel shield of the truth. p. 33.
coming into the World sixteen hundred years ago, were to the end that they
might pass their rash Censures freely. But he grows still. And where Christ
rules in his Saints, he judges the World, as Paul witnessed, It is no more I
but Christ in me. Where Paul witnessed this, such a Spirit of discerning as
they tell us of must find out for the Scripture has nothing like it; only in
two places, Romans 7. 17. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me. But I am sure, Sin and Christ are two things, Gal. 2. 20. Yet not I, but
Christ lives in me. But that was not to censure others, but to comfort Paul
under the hard censures and usages of others. But the passage of coming into
the World for Judgment, brings into H^mphrey Smith, the true and everlasting
ol^, ^c. P. 29 p. 2
my mind one remarkable Expositor -- It is a right and sound doctrine to
preach him, as he is the light of the World, and lights every man that comes
into the world. But what world is this? -- This is the great Prophet who is
come into the World, which is set in the heart, Eccles. 3. 11. which is in the
midst, out of which Moses says, the Lord world raise up a Prophet, Lev. 8. 15.
which Prophet being come, he says, I am come a Light into the World, John 1.
12. and 12. 35, 36, 46 The World being set in the heart, there is the light of
him, who says, I am the light. So that (with him) the World is the heart;
Christ's coming into the World is his comeing into the heart; and as he came
into the world [the heart] so he is also raised up out of the world [the heart]
but how like such a Prophet is to Moses I should too much suspect your
understandings if I should trouble you with my sense; he that is declined as
far as dotage may perceive it without a Guide, as also the gross darkness of
this Expositor in the rest.

Let us see what sound Exposition the great Lanthorn. 9.
of the Quakers gives; for I must not call him their Great Light, for that is
in the Lanthorn, 1 Cor. 14 34, 35. Let your women keep silence in the Churches,
for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under
obedience, as also says the Law: And if they will learn any thing, let them
ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame for Women to speak in the Church.

I have known some of them to break the Bonds of this inhibition; by expounding
the Woman to be weakness, she being called the weaker vessel; and so weakness
must not speak. But let us hear G. F's Exposition, it may be that may not be so
weak.

Now the woman here has a husband to ask at home: Mystery of (...) Great
Whore. p. 3^6.
this Note has some wit in it; but he proceeds, and not usurp authority over
the man; but Christ in the male as in the female, who redeems from under the
Law, and makes free from the Law, that man may speak. Now the knot is united,
and the woman's tongue loosed beyond all question. But would any man in his Wits
expound this after this fashion? the Woman may not speak, but the Man Christ in
the Woman may, and what must their home be then? that must be their Consciences
within, where they say the light Christ is. And they are directed to ask their
Husbands in the plural number, then according to this Exposition there must be
as many Christ's as there are women in the world (at least) for every one has a
husband at home. Also this home the Conscience must needs be (when the women
were there) in the Church.

Take but one more though I could fill a Volume. 10 Fishe^. velata quaedam
revelata.
with them, Ye have Moses and the Prophets within, viz. This written, spoken,
manifested in you, Quod tibi nervis fieri, alteri ne feceris, and (retro) --
Whatever you would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them This
(says Christ) is the Law, or Moses and the Prophets; but if ye will not be
admonished nor persuaded by Moses and the Prophets, neither will ye be
persuaded by such of us who were once dead in sin with you, but are now risen
to life by the Power of God, which is his light; and in the same, sent to speak
unto you from the dead.

SECT. VI.
I will conclude this Chapter with some Inferences and Conclusions that
naturally flow from this error (for one error never goes alone) viz. That
their writings and sayings are equal with the Scriptures, and to be preferred
before them.

First, it would follow that the Scriptures both are. 1.
and ever were superfluous; for the light within (as they pretend) was always
fitted to inspire every man and woman in the same manner, and to all intents
and purposes, as they were inspired and written.

Secondly, upon the same ground the tenets and assertions. 2.
of all the Heathen, are to be received as of equal Authority with the
Scriptures; for although they did not pretend them for divine Inspirations or
revelations yet they resulted from their light within, improved much more
orderly and to purpose then the Quakers do theirs, (whose ungrounded
Pretensions to Inspirations weigh nothing in the case) yea, the bitter scoffs
of Lucian and Julian the Apostate must be admitted into the same Orders; for,
if it be admitted they did not vilify and scorn, and deride Christ, the
Scripture, and Christianity, according to the dictates of their Consciences; it
cannot be denied, that they therein acted from the power within, which whether
it were the power of darkness or not, the Quakers having no rule to judge it by
but their own sentiments, it is left by them undetermined: And I know not
hardly any worse they said of Jesus of Nazareth, the Scripture and
Christianity; then the Quakers have done under other Names.

The Quakers reduce their sentiments and motions. 3
to the power within (of which I will give you one taste from a chief Author^)
but sink down from these [the reasonings about things] and wait to feel that
Penington concerning unity. p. ^.
which lies beneath in the free nature, virtue, life, power and motions,
whereof alone is your souls salvation) power and motion from within is all with
them; and if this be truly divine, and of equal Authority with the Scriptures,
or accounted so; the scornful and virulent invectives of some of late against
many worthy Ministers of Christ, and multitudes of serious Christians, are not
only not to be rebuked, but to be reverenced as divine emanations and verities:
for it could be nothing but a power within with a witness that had such
Productions.

It will absolve many of those from sin, whom the Scripture speaks of as gross
and heinous offenders

The Apostle Paul, when a persecuting Saul dealt. 4.
so hardly with the Cause and precious Saints of the Lord, from the Conduct of
what he took to be light, or the light in his Conscience.

Christ does also foretell us of such, who should think they did God good
service in killing his servants; and if mere think so ^, persuasions,
impressions; motions, without a demonstrable ground, may be taken for divine
dictates on the one part, why not on the other? and by consequence the Holy
Spirit must be Entitled. Dux omnium malorum, and every evil, which is the
fruit of ignorance and conceit fathered on it.

It will warrantize a great part of the Popish inventions. 5.
and orders, which had their erection on the pretended inspirations and
revelations of some among them; who were Monkish and cloystered Votaries, whose
humorous abstinence, moroseness and uncommanded sanctity, gained credit with
the people for any thing they would affirm, and the Politic Clergy made their
advantage of it.

I remember a passage of a Romanist, who comeing. 6.
into England, and observing the multitude of Sects here: he being asked which
of them came nearest to the Roman Church, he replied, The Quakers. And if the
fundamental principles of Sects (as such) agreeing together, do most exactly
express their agreement and likeness each to other; the Quakers and Papists
may claim Kindred upon more demonstrable terms then any other Sects whatever.

SECT. VII.
The three main principles and pillars of the Roman. 1.
Absurdities are, 1. A Contempt of the Scriptures, as insufficient to determine
in all Religious Concerns.

2. And therefore, a necessity of some other infallible Judge, which may supply
that defect.

3. Immediate Revelations, and divine Inspirations.

The first of these is so apparently and abundantly proved of both Papists and
Quakers, in the Parallel, in the close of the 12th. chapter of this Book, and
other places here and there, that I need not agitate it in this place. See chap
5.

The second, that the Romanists build their faith. 2.
on the pretense of Infallibility, is not doubted by any who are in any degree
acquainted with their Writings; yet I shall furnish you with a few proofs.

In doubtful Controversies (if they were not doubtful (at least to some) they
would be no Controversies Pighius. Controversia tertia.
at all) we must not go to the Scriptures for satisfaction, but to a lively
Judge, which (says he) as was Moses among the Israelites, the Roman Bishop is
among Christians. And Moses, whatever he determined and commanded, they ought
exactly to obey without further Enquiry. From whence he argues, that the Pope
is the Infallible and right Determiner of Controversies. Charranza is a little
beyond him: says he, the High Priest under the Law was a certain Rule in
things pertaining to God, but the Evangelical High Priest must much rather be
certain in such things; By the Evangelical High Priest he means the
Roman-Bishop.

Bellarmin (de verbo Dei lib 4) argues at large. 3.
for the Popes Infallibility; only restrains it a little with an ex Cathedra
docens to what he says out of the Chair, or as Pope, which does more then a
little suit with the Quakers, who if those persons among them, accounted by
them infallible, be manifestly proved to err in faith or practice, so as they
dare not deny it: their refuge then is, that they did not follow the light; but
if they had acted or believed according to the teachings and motions of the
light within, they had not erred. But, as it is a very hard matter, if the Pope
were allowed to be infallible (in what he determines ex Cathedra) to know what
he does as Pope, and what as a fallible man; so, it is no less difficult if the
Quakers light were such as they pretend, to know what comes from the light, and
what from the foolish, ignorant, dark, corrupt, and fancy-full man.

Isaac Peningtons salve will cure the sore, no more then the Papists; who say,
the Pope is infallible, notwithstanding the contradictions of one Pope to
another, and one and the same Pope to himself; the doing the same thing, the
thinking ehe same thing, the Penington concerning. unity. P. 13.
speaking the same thing, this does not unite here in this state, in this
nature: but the doing, or thinking, or speaking of it in the same life; yea,
though the doings, or thoughts, or words be diverse; yet if they proceed from
the same principle and nature, there is a true unity felt therein, where the
life alone is Judge; a strange reconciliation of certain and manifest
contradictions* and an ascribing that to the light within, which is impossible
to an Omnipotent God, who cannot deny or contradict himself, and yet be the
true God.

Carranza speaks boldly in the behalf of Papal Infallibility, The general
Ordinary and lawful Judge of In disputation R^t s^.
all Controversies whatsoever, which may arise in the business of Religion, is
the Roman Bishop, ( whether he define any thing alone, or with a General
Council; he is always an infallible Judge when he does it (ex Cathedra (or as
pope) as the chief Bishop liable to no error.

The Quakers out-go the Papists far, in this Fundamental. 4.
of Infallibility.

Now he that is not infallible in his counsel and Fox great my^. c. 34
judgment and advice, is not he in error? And are not the Ministers of Christ
the Ministers of the Spirit? --

And are they Ministers of Christ that are fallible?

The Papists are herein more modest then the Quakers; for they acknowledge only
the Pope, or Pope with his Council, or the Church Catholic to be infallible;
but the Quakers affirm it of every one of their Ministry, both men and women;
yet he stops not here, but extends it to every Quaker.

And you that have not that which is infallible to p 5.
judge in you, know not the Spirit of Christ; neither can you judge of persons
or things, that have not the infallible judgment; nor have the spiritual man,
neither have you the Word of God in your hearts, nor Christ which is eternal
and infallible; all which the Quakers have to judge persons and things.

Thus I have showed you; that the Papists and Quakers have pretended
Infallibility for their Foundation. But if the Quakers shall object, that they
differ, in that the Roman Bishop subjects all others to his sole Infallibility,
but the Quakers are each one infallible for themselves

I answer, the ground is the same, only every Quaker has a Pope in him, or her
self; and so there are among them more Pope John's and Pope Jean's then ever
were at Rome. And it is apparent, that G. Fox has arrived by this pretense, to
a more absolute power over the Quakers in twenty odd years, then the Bishops of
Rome in some hundreds over professed Christians.

SECT. VIII.
For the third Fundamental common to the Papists. 1.
and Quakers, viz. immediate revelations and divine Inspirations; Dr.
Stillingsteet in his Fanaticism of the Roman Church has abundance of
instances, to whom I am beholden for the most of what follows on this Head.

Revelations have been pleaded by them ( the Papists) p. 210.
in matters of doctrine; such I mean, which depend upon immediate impulses and
inspirations, since the Canon of Scripture and Apostolical Traditions. --

Anselm mentions a divine Apparition to an Abbot Luc, Wadding.
in a storm, whereby he was admonished to keep the Feast of the Conception of
the blessed Virgin. -- Which Revelation Wadding tells us, is publicly recited
in the Office for the day.

Another Revelation was made to Norbertus the Founder of the Praemonstratenses;
in which p 211
the Virgin Mary appeared, and commended her veneration to him, and gave him a
white Garment in token of her original innocence. Which Revelation is believed
by all of that Order, and taken as the reason of their habit.

S Brigit had not one or two, but many to this purpose, and the latest were of
Joanna a Cruce

But S. Katherine of Siena had it revealed to her, as 212
Antonius and Cajetan say, that she was conceived with original sin. How often
have visions and apparitions of souls been made use of to prove the 218 Bellar
d^ Purg.
doctrine of Purgatory? witness the famous testimonies to this purpose out of S
Gregory's Dialogues and Bid s Hist. which latter is recited in the late great
Legend of Mr Cressy, (a Popish Confessor) under the name of a Church History,
etc.

We need not go so far back as Gabriel Riel, to p 219 Riel in Canon.
show that the doctrine of Transubstantiation has been proved by the
appearance of a child in the Host.

Bellarmin very doughtily proves auricular Confession, by a certain vision of a
tall and terrible man, with Bell de Poe
his Book in his hand; which blotted out presently all the sins the humble
Thief confessed upon his knees to the Priest.

Upon this ground of Revelations and Inspirations 2.
most of their Popish Festivals which we call Holydays were erected.

The Religious Orders were instituted among 227.
them by Enthusiastic persons, upon the credit of their visions and
revelations; the most celebrated Bellar. de Po^^. Romans ^. 3. c. 18.
Orders at this day in the Roman Church, are the Benedictines, Carthusians,
Dominicans, Franciscans and Jesuits.

It is a very fair way toward the proof of it, that Bellarmin confesses
concerning the four first, and that of Romoaldus, that they were at first
instituted by St. Benedict, St. Romoaldus, S. Bruno, S. Dominick, S Francis, by
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; and for Ignatius Loyola, if he do not appear
as great a Fanatic (i e. Enthusiast) as ever has been in the World, we shall
be contented to be upbraided with the Charge of Fanaticism among us.

You may find the Doctor as good as his word in the following Pages. St.
Francis is said by Bonavent^re (a p 23^. ^^ ^n rita Fran. ^. 2.
canoniz^d Saint) to be an illiterate man, had no Teacher but Christ, and
learned all by Inspiration [for a long time, wherein he got his credit among
the Papists] once casting away his very breeches, and being stark naked before
them all, he said thus to his father, Hitherto I called thee Father on Earth,
but hence forward I can securely say, Our Father which is in Heaven. I know not
but the Quakers learned their going naked, and denying to call any father
(which was their practice at first, but the light grows wiser and wiser) from
St. Francis rather then the Prophet Isa.

Let us cite a little of the doctrine and phrases, some. 3.
of which are pretended from Inspiration by the Popish Votaries, and first of
Mother Juliana.

That the soul is so deep-grounded in God, and so 224
endlessely treasured, that we may not come to the knowing thereof, till we
have first knowing of God, which is the Maker to whom it is oned

Our kindly substance is beelo^ed in Jesu, with the blessed soul of Christ
resting in the Godhead -- for into the time that it [the soul] is in the full
^ights, we may not be all holy

The only proper disposition toward the receiving supernatural. 4. a. ^^ (...)
^^ ^anct. S^ia.
Irradiations from Gods Holy Spirit, is an Abstraction of life, a sequestration
from all business that concerns others, and an attendance on God alone in the
depth of the Spirit: And a little after, the lights here prayed for and
desired, are such as do expel all images of Creatures, and do calm all manner
of passions, to the end that the soul being in a vacuity, may be more capable
of receiving and entertaining God in the pure fund of the spirit. -- but they
seek rather to purify themselves, and inflame their hearts to the love of God,
by internal quiet, and pure actuations in spirit. -- so disposing themselves to
receive the influxes and inspirations of God, whose Guidance chiefly they
desire to follow-in all things.

Rejecting and striving to forget all images and representations of him [God]
or any thing else; yea,. 5. 8 ^anct. (...).
transcending all Operations of the imagination, and all subtilty and curiosity
of reasoning. And lastly, seeking an union with God, only by the most pure and
intime affections of the Spirit, what possibility of illusion or error can
there be to such a soul?

In which [passive unions] God after a wonderful ^^9 T^ Approbations. 1
and unconceivable manner affords them interior illuminations and touches; yet
far more efficacious and divine [then active Exercises] in all which the soul
is a mere Patient, and only suffers God to work his divine pleasure in her. --
The which unions though they last but even as it were a moment, yet do more
illuminate and pacify the soul, then many years spent in active exercises of
spiritual Prayer and Mortification could do.

Yea, so far is the soul from re^ecting on her own Existence,. 7. T^^^. ^.
s^ct. ^^. c. 1.
that it seems to her God and she are not distinct, but only one thing.

That God only, by his holy Inspirations, is the Gride and Director of an
internal and contemplative 27^ 215
life.

R^ynaldus tells of Norius the father of the Oratorians, out of Baci^s, the
Writer of his life, that he was so offended with the smell of filthy souls;
that he would desire the persons to empty the Jakes of their souls. Such a
divine Nose had this Saint among them! a degree of Enthusiasm above the
Quakers, who can but discern, not smell souls.

Some of you, called Quakers, pretend a great advantage from 1 John 2. 27. But
the anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not
that a y man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things,
and is truth and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him.

The Anointing here cannot be understood of Christ, neither do we find the
Anointing any where to be understood of Father, Son, or Spirit, essentially
considered, and indeed the phrase is not fit to be applied to God, who is the
Anointer, or Christ who is the Anointed.

The teaching of the Anointing being understood of the Graces, and the habitual
and special Enlightnings of the Spirit; these devote and addict the soul under
the power of them, to adhere to the true Christ. For the all things, it is to
be considered as restrained to the matter agitated in the Chapter, which is
their adhering to the true Christ; and this is plain in he 26. ver. These
things have I written to you con^erning them that seduce you.

The sum then is this, they knowing certainly the true Christ from any
Antichrist, that which they were mainly to look after, was a heart cleaving to
and improving him, which the Graces of God in their souls, actuated by the
Spirit of God, was sufficient in this matter, to make their knowledge of Christ
sanctifying and saving; As for the words in him, which render it Maj^. in the
Gr. it may be rendered in any Gender.

These Considerations duly weighed (if there were no more) are sufficient to
any who have respect to the pure truths of the Gospel, to render the principles
here detected and opposed, not only suspicious but hateful. It is no little
absurdity in the Quakers to make an outcry against Popery, Babylon, false
worship, forms that are not only unscriptural but also idolatrous; while in
the mean time they plant and ^ug the root in their own bosoms: from which all
those evils, and more and worse naturally spring

It were no hard matter to prove a symbolizing and agreement in a multitude of
particulars, between the Papists and Quakers, in those things wherein they are
contrary to the Protestant Profession of Christianity, and the Scripture-Rule;
but more especially in the spiritual part of their errors, which in the sight
of God are of all other the most sinful, and to men a snare most dangerous.

The Apostle speaks of more Antichrists then one, though of one as the Chief;
of whose Characters Quakerism has the blackest: I shall mention only two: the
first expressed in 1. ep. of John, chap 2. ver. 22. Who is a liar, but he that
denies that Jesus is the Christ; he is Antichrist that denies the Father and
the Son. That you who are called Quakers deny Jesus to be the Christ, I prove
at large in a Chapter by its self: that you deny the Father and the Son, is no
less true of you, who will admit no distinction between the Father and the Son:
so that the Father is (with you) as much the Son of the Father, as the Son is
the Son of the Father: and the Son is as much the Father (with you) of the Son,
as the Father is the Father of the Son, that by destroying these distinctions
you destroy the relation of Father and Son in the Godhead, which the Scripture
speaks of so plainly: and it is hereby apparent, that your quarrel is not so
much with the word Trinity, as with the thing thereby expressed. The next black
mark of Antichrist which is upon you is, that in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4 who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that
he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Do not
you advance your light within above the Man Christ Jesus, whom we worship as
God, and who is so called in the Scriptures: even that man, whose being is
above the visible Heavens? Do not you call your light within you God eternal,
Omnipotent, etc? Yea, you say it is the light in the Conscience (which is the
Temple of God, and there it does (as if it were God) rule, govern, judge,
execute, in contempt of the written and true Laws of the divine being. I
beseech you consider these things, and lay them to your hearts.

CHAP. V. The Quakers deny the Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and Life, or a
Judge and Determiner of Religious Controversies.
SECT. I.
THat this is to deny the Scripture, is obvious and plain to all who have not
the beam in their eyes. I have before proved them to deny its proper and most
frequent appellation; but if that be not sufficient to prove they deny the
Scripture, methinks denying their main use and employment, should render them
guilty of the full measure of that iniquity.

To little purpose will it be to call them the Scripture, the Holy Scripture,
etc. if after all, a conformity to their guidance and conduct, will render our
belief and practice never the less profane.

I shall not further persuade my Reader, that to deny the Scripture to be a
rule of Faith and Life, etc. is to deny the Scripture; for if this suffice not,
I know nothing will carry the Question; unless the Scripture should be brought
in begging some boon at the Quakers hands, and they proved so hard hearted as
not to to grant it. If this were necessary I should not fail in the proof
notwithstanding.

For the proof of the Charge, I shall first call sorth James Parnel, an early
and forward Quaker, Parnel's Shield of the truth. p. 10.
and much esteemed for his works sake. And he also that says the Letter is the
rule and guide of the people of God, is without, feeding upon the husk, and is
ignorant of the true Light, which was before the Letter was. By this man's
Verdict the Scripture is cast and condemned for husks, a false light, or but a
shadow; and its Observers charged with ignorance of Christ the true light for
so doing: But it were well if they could come off so. Behold in the next
Accusation, a Charge of no less than the highest robbery and sacrilege.

And if thou look upon the Scripture to be for a Smiths prim. p. 10.
rule and for trying; thou give that unto them which belongs unto Christ: for
he is the rule, and leads his people; and he alone searches the hearts and trys
the reins, and not the Scripture.

But if you will see a mouth full of blasphemy against the authority of the
Scripture, read with horror and amazement the following words. God is at
liberty to speak to his people by them [the Naylors light of Christ, etc. 1. 19.
Scripture] if he please, and where they are given by inspiration he does so:
but the sting is behind, in the tail of this non-such sentence, and so he is at
liberty to speak by any other created thing, as to Balaam by his Ass.

Then such a thing as Balaams Ass may call up our expectations of Gods
teachings, guidance, and rebukes, as well as the Scriptures: for God is at
liberty to teach us by an Ass, and he has put no more authority into the
Scripture, unless he shall please to hand them to us by renewed and immediate
inspiration. But I shall not rake into this Dunghill further, which of its self
gives forth so offensive a savor.

I intended to have given you upon this head the. 3.
assertions of some of the Romish Writers, who trample on the neck of the
Scripture with the same foot; only the difference betwixt them and the Quakers
lies in the aim and design: the Jesuits spurn at them to advance the dictates
of the Pope, and the Romish pretended Church above the Scriptures; but the
Quakers to advance the conceit within above them all. Yet I care not if I give
you one instance at large.

Omnis Judex, praesertim supremus and generalis, ita debet dicere sententiam,
ut altera pars litigantium evidenter sciat se vicisse: altera pars evidenter
sciat se causam amisisse, quantum est ex part hujus judicis. At hoc neque
Scriptura Sacra, neque Spiritus Sanctus loquens per Scripturam potest facere.

Ergo neque Sacra Scriptura, nec Spiritus Sanctus Argumentum Jaoobi Gerrani,
item Gretferi Jesuitae, in Colloquio Ratisbon,
loquens per Scripturam est talis judex. Et minorem illustrabat his totidem
verbis, Stamus ego and Collegae, and Domini adversarii, in conspectu hujus
judicis [Bibliorum] en contendimus, an sit judex Controversiarum. Jam ille
judex debet pronunciare sententiam, ut nobis constet evidenter. Sumus hic in
conspectu Sacrae Scripturae, and Spiritus Sancti; pronunciet sententiam, and
sic dicat, tu Jacobe Gretsere male sentis, cecidisti causa tua. Tu Jacobe
Hailbrunnere vicisti. Tunc ego statim transibo ad vestrum scamnum. Et paulo
post, Adsit jam Spiritus Sanctus, jam judicet, jam me condemnet. In English
thus,

Every Judge, especially who is supreme and general, ought so to give sentence,
that the one part of the contenders may plainly know they have overcome: and
the other that they have lost their cause, so far as it is in the Judge: But
this neither the holy Scriptures nor the holy Spirit by the Scripture can do.

Therefore neither the holy Scripture, nor the holy Spirit speaking by the
Scripture, is such a Judge. The minor he illustrates in these very words. I and
my Colleagues and the Lords Adversaries stand before this Judge [the Scriptures]
behold we dispute whether it be a Judge of Controversies. Now this Judge ought
to give sentence, so as it may be evidently manifest to us. We are here before
the holy Scripture and the Holy Spirit, let him pronounce sentence and say
thus; thou Jacob Gretferus believe not aright, thy cause is overthrown; thou
Jacob Hailbrunnerus have overcome: then I will quickly go over to you. And a
little after, Now let the Holy Ghost come, now let him judge me, now let him
condemn me. If he had not had the metaphorical word to have played with, the
world had not been troubled with so impertinent an Argument, and language so
ludicrous, abusive, and daring to the Holy Spirit. By this you may see, that if
the Quakers and Jesuits agreement in the same false Witness against the
Scripture will carry it, our cause is gone, and the Scripture must not
determine religious matters. But it is a sign it is a bad step, that so well fits
the Popes Foot to mount his usurped and infallible Chair by, and which both
Papists and Quakers tug for as for life.

I remember when I was a small Lad I heard our. 4.
Protestant Divines usually affirm, that every man was born with a Pope in his
belly; which to my then childish genius seemed a very pretty phrase; but such
an one (as I thought) as was not only improbable but also impossible: but the
Generation I am contending against tug for the truth of it (though under other
terms) tooth and nail. And I have ceased wondering that so many so easily turn
Quakers, when I consider how natural it is to shake off the Doctrine and
Discipline even of God himself, that we alone may rule (if not over the great
world of all others, at least) over the little world, our selves, without
control.

SECT. II.
For convicting the Quakers of gross error, and. 4.
establishing others in the truth; I shall prove from the Divine Authority of
the Scripture these four things.

First, That whatsoever is by the Lord affirmed in the Holy Scripture, it is
our duty to believe.

Secondly, That whatsoever is thereby or therein commanded of the Lord (not
being repealed by the coming of Christ) it is our duty to obey.

Thirdly, That the Holy Scriptures do (in their kind) determine or discover to
us; whether we believe and walk or practice aright or not.

For the first of these I shall prove from our Saviors. 5.
own words, O fools! and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken, etc. If it had not been their duty to believe according to the sayings
of the Lord by the Prophets (which were not immediate to the Disciples) it had
been neither their fault nor their folly not to believe, or to have been so
slow and unready to believe, even those Prophecies which foretold the death and
ill handling of the Messiah; which was so much above their understandings, and
so thwart to their affections. Yea the innocent and compassionate Jesus would
have been not a little faulty, for so severely rebuking them for what was no
crime at all.

But lest you should say, these Prophecies were within them; (as some of you
have said) know first, that they were ignorant of them, for as yet Joh. 20. 9.
they knew not the Scriptures. And it is said Luke 4. 27. Beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself. Thus much may suffice to prove it our duty, to believe what
the Scriptures speak, and that all and universally.

Secondly, What is therein commanded we ought. 6.
to obey, etc.

Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
God has commanded you; you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the
left,

If it be objected, this was obliging to them, not to us; who are not under
Moses's Administration. I answer, first, that the commands here chiefly
intended, were such as oblige all men in all Ages, for the matter of them which
is always just and righteous. Secondly, the ground of their authority being the
Lord commanding, reaches to whatever he commands in his written Word in all
Ages of the World. Thirdly, the Israelites had them not immediately by
inspiration, but by the hand of Moses; either from his mouth to that
Generation, or by Writing and Tradition to the Generations following.

Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the ^os. 12. 8.
Robbers? did not the Lord? he against whom we have sinned? for they would not
walk in his ways, neither were they obedient to his Law.

Thirdly, The holy Scriptures determine according. 7.
to their kind, or as much as a Writing can do, whether we believe and practice
aright or not. I hope you are not yet resolved (with the Jesuits and William
Pen) that because they do not express the sense contained in them, viva voce,
or direct it to thy conscience without any other help; and say, thou A. art in
the right, thou B. art amiss: therefore thou will not take them to be meet to
determine good and evil, right and wrong. We may as certainly determine by
words written as by words spoken; and they are altogether as worthy of credit.
Those who come under the executive determination of Laws, do find that Process
in writing does not lose its force, for the decrees and sentence being put into
that form.

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works: the words for correction here are (...), for conviction.

And herein [all things which are written in the. 9. Acts 24. 16.
Law and the Prophets] do I exercise my self, to have a conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men. What can be more plain? the judgment
whether he did righteously with respect to God and men, was passed in his
conscience by the Scripture; and that not by immediate inspiration only, though
he were an Apostle, but by the written Law, attained by study and serious
meditation. Herein I exercise my self, he labored by (...).
study and meditation therein (as the Greek imports) he was not an idle Quaker,
that must have knowledge dropped in his mouth, for dig he cannot, and to ask of
others he scorns it. But for all that I had rather be laborious, rich, and
humble with Paul; than slothful, poor, proud, and merely in conceit rich with
them.

To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak Isa 8 20.
not according to this word; it is because there is no light in them.

G. Fox, the grand Quaker, will needs have Christ to be the Law and the
Testimony: if so, I am as sure as can be, that they that are saved by Christ
are saved by the Law; and then farewell the Gospel, and the righteousness of
Faith, which the Apostle makes so much ado to bring people to embrace, and
disclaim justifying righteousness by the Law.

SECT. III.
The teachings, motions, and determinations of the Spirit of God by the
Scripture, are more suitable to the nature, and present state and condition of
man; and more certain to his knowledge, than any immediate teachings, which any
enjoy in our days.

More suitable to the present condition of man.

I prove it first from its being that dispensation of God, which he has put an
eminent Character of mercy upon. He shows his Word unto Jacob, and Psalm. 147.
19, 20.
his judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for
his Judgments they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord. If it were not more
suitable to man in his fallen state, and tending to his good, it would hardly by
the Spirit of God been expressed as a mercy so singular, so excelling his
dealings with any other people; and such flourishing matter for the praises of
the Lord. Never did any of the Saints of old call it a carnal letter, husks,
and by such like scornful names.

Secondly, The dispensations of the revealed and. 2.
written Word, render God nigher to a people, than to those who are without it.

For what Nation is there so great, who has God Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8.
so nigh unto them, etc.

Read the Context, and you will find that, the means of God being so nigh was
(chiefly) his written Laws. And it is notorious, that the Gentile Nations who
were without the Scripture, had lost sight of the true God so far, that they
worshipped the most despicable things in his stead: and as the Apostle says,
were without God in the world; for Ephesians. 2. 12.
all their light within, which the Quakers say all men ever had.

The dispensations of God in and to his Church,. 3.
rise higher and higher in excellency and glory. And this is a third Argument.

His first after the fall, were some few revelations to some few persons; and
by them handed to others: which might be then much more easy than now, for
that men lived so long, that the days of Methuselah and Noah took hold of the
days of Adam and Abraham: But men increasing in number, and no less in impiety,
they quickly lost that little was committed to them.

And before the Law and Covenants, and Scripture (in part) were written
(notwithstanding Creation, Providence, and some revelation) the knowledge of
God was very thin and scant in the world among good and holy men. And if you
will not believe me, believe Holy Job. By his spirit Job. 26. 13, 14.
he has garnished the Heavens, his hand has formed the crooked Serpent: lo,
these are part of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him. He is
speaking before of his works of Creation, yet they were but a part of the ways,
whereby God conveyed the knowledge of himself; but take all together, even that
of revelation with it; it was but a little of him that was known: whereas, when
his word was written, the Israel of God who enjoyed it, it is Psalm. 76. 1.
said of them: In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel. But the 2
Cor. 3. 11. speaks close and home to my argument: For if that which is done
away was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious.

A fourth proof may be, from the slipperiness of. 4.
our memories.

Who among the sons and daughters of men, is able to retain in the memory such
a multitude of particulars as concern faith and life? that if it should be
granted, that every man at some time or other should have the whole mind of God
contained in the Scripture, immediately, and by revelation imparted to him: the
memory would prove a very leaky Vessel, and bad Steward; and let slip a great
part, both matter and form; without a miracle to raise our faculty (not only
above the common course, or which is ordinary, but) above the faculty of any
man that breaths: whereas the word imparted by the Scripture abides, to which
as to an everlasting Record we may have recourse, and supply that defect.

More certain to the knowledge of man.

Since man was corrupted, and so long as there. 5.
remains either corruption or defect in him; the inward motions, and notions of
the soul will be affected therewith: the first risings and bubling up of
thoughts, and imaginations, which present themselves to the understanding,
judgment, and conscience; will abundantly vary from, and be opposite each to
other: and the sentiments or apprehensions of them, be warring, and contending
like pleaders at the bar of judgment, and conscience and those who know and are
concerned in the affairs (and their management) on the secret stage of the
Soul, must acknowledge (if they will speak their consciences) that whatever be
the question agitated in the mind, there will not want the appearances of
truth, and goodness; offering themselves on both the affirmative and negative
part: and in matters of religious concern, all pretend to the sanction, and
allowance of God himself. And as their pleas, so their importunities shall be
impetuously violent, that many times the poor creature is on the rack, and
which way soever its judgment and resolution inclines; the adverse thoughts
will attend it with their Checks, and clamours. In the multitude of my thoughts
within me. Psalm. 94. 19.
(...) my anxious, perplexed, careful, troubled, thoughts; beating against one
another like the boughs of a tree agitated with a fierce wind.

This was not only David's case, but the Saints which are now upon the earth.
And if it were David's, so good a man, and a man so frequently under the power
of special divine inspirations; much more may it be ours. Well, in such cases
what course should we take? if we expect, and depend upon immediate teachings
from the spirit, how shall we know they are such? and not the delusions of
Satan, or a vision of our own fancifull brains? we can give testimonies enough
to convince a Heathen or Atheist (if he will not abandon the use of reason)
that the Scriptures are the word and mind of the spirit of God: and therefore
what that speaks, is the voice of the Spirit, but it will be long enough e're
the Quakers, and those that plead for a sole dependence on the spirits
immediate teachings, will be able to give such proofs of theirs.

Moreover, the Quakers who pretend to these. 6.
teachings, and guidances; resolve against the exercise of a humane, (though
sanctified understanding) and resolve all into motions, impulses, and the
sensation of them: thereby depriving men of the direction of enlightened
faculties, leaving the most violent motions, and appetites; to carry away the
undoubted evidence, and character of the Spirits leadings.

But how far this is from a spiritual understanding, or a right discerning, I
leave those to judge, who are acquainted in themselves, or others, with violent
temptations from Satan, and the unbridled lusts of men; and this pure sensation
of stirrings, and motions, becomes better by far the stark blind, than those
who have eyes in their heads.

We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope Isa. 59. 10.
as if we had no eyes; we stumble at noon day as in the night. One of the
severest curses for disobedience, threatened against Israel was, and thou shall
grope Deuteronomy. 28. 29.
at noon day as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shall not prosper in
thy ways. And what is this principle of the Quakers, but to turn us again into
the darkness, and Chaos of Gentilism; instead of beholding as in a Glass with
open face the glory of the Lord, to be feeling after him, by the corrupt and
half senseless touches of a natural conscience, acting on the narrow, and
uncertain indications of Creation, and providence: which though they may teach
something concerning God, and our original duty to him: will be as far from
acquainting us with Gospel truths, or such as concern Christ, and our
redemption by him; as a stone or tree is from discerning, and expressing the
secret, and bosom counsels of God, or man.

I would not yet have you think, that we deny,. 7.
or disown a sensation, and feeling of the holy and blessed mind of God; for we
look on nothing of greater moment, than to have a heart and conscience
delivered from searedness, and being past feeling. But our feeling, and sense
of the truths of God, is by the faith of them, revealed to us in and by his
word: into which we desire absolutely to resolve our belief, and which is the
objective rule to the understanding by the senses.

CHAP. VI. The Quakers take men off from reading the Scripture, and looking
into them for instruction and comfort.
SECT. I.
IT is no matter of wonder at all, that they who are so far entered in the
denial and contempt of the Scripture, should advance this step further; it
being but the natural offspring of what I have already proved to be their
Tenets. And whatever else is the round of their writings and declarings* all
centres in putting people upon looking to the light within, as the only
Counselor and Comforter. And this is the meaning of our Doctrine, to bring
people to the everlasting Word of God in themselves, Smith Catech. p. 95.

Whereby they steal away their esteem and use of. 2.
the Scriptures insensibly: and they are shut up and lost in another Book [
viz. The light within] before they are aware: whereas if they should in so many
words forbid them to read the Scriptures, it would make their hearts recoil:
Alas, that men are such Children, who suspect not a design to rob them of their
Gold; when a Counter, a trifle i^ commended to them, and imposed upon them,
that they may not think of, or mind that which is a Treasure! and by this means
the Scriptures are forgotten, 'till the love and esteem of them be lost by
doting on the new and gay fancy of a divine and perfect light within. But to
the proof, further.

But turn your ears inward to the measure of light. 3. Morning watch Epist.
in you, which is without guile. So to that of God in thee -- I direct thee.
Their Pamphlets are stuffed so full with expressions of this nature, that I
should but show you their great road in citing their words: neither will any of
them deny what they are brought to prove.

But if they intended the judgment and conscience enlightened, and that this
ought to be minded in its place, we should not condemn for such directions: but
when it is made a God of, and by consequence an Idol; and those beams of divine
light shining in the Scripture excluded, as if they had the body of the Sun
within themselves: it is the highest instance of folly, and proof of taking men
off from reading the Scriptures for instruction and comfort.

Yet take their minds in express words, And by. 4. Parnel's Shield of the
truth. p. 10.
the same light do we discern, and testify against him to be in darkness and
blindness, and is a deceiver; who puts the letter for the light, and so draw
peoples minds from the light within them to the light without them: seeking the
living among the dead. You may here discern the confidence they have in their
light within, that they dare oppose it to the Scripture, yea and take its false
witness which it bears against the Scripture: and with what a black coal he
marks those who put the letter [ i. e. the Scriptures] for the light? and this
he construes to be a drawing peoples minds from the light within them, to the
light without them: so that by his own way of reasoning I have authority to
say, that putting the light within them for the Scripture the light without
them, they draw peoples minds from the Scripture. But the close of this
sentence is no less than a murderer of the holy Scripture ( seeking the living
among the dead) yea a Luke. 24. 5.
strangling the Scripture with one of its own silver Cords: Why seek ye the
living among the dead! as if the Scripture were a very Grave and Charnel house,
from which the living Jesus is for ever departed, or which is more congruous to
their sense, they are no more able to minister instruction and comfort than a
dead Car^ase rotting in the Grave.

Hear one more of their Trumpets sounding to. 5.
the same purpose: And although the holy Scripture without, and the Saints
practices are as lights in John Storys short discovery, etc. p. 2.
the world; yet far be it from all true Christian men so to idolize them, as to
set them in esteem above the light which is sufficient to guide: or to esteem
them equal with the light and Spirit of Christ within. The Scriptures are as
lights, but they will not right them so far as to call the Scripture a light:
and the commendations of that Idol the light, within are such, as if they were
true he were a stark fool who would direct his eyes to the Scripture, having
such an excelling light in his own bosom. But lest after all these allurings
they should not be understood, and people should be so silly as to attempt to
light their Candle at the Scripture Taper, they will tell you in plain English
the vanity of such an undertaking. For he [Christ the light within] alone
searches the hearts -- and not the Scripture. Smith prim. p. 12. So that to
draw people from attending to the Scripture, they do not only commend the light
within (being silent concerning the Scripture in the mean while) but tell you
in plain words, the Scriptures are in this matter of no service at all; as
Parnel before cited, he is the light and guide, etc. the Scriptures are not.

SECT. II.
A second Argument, they assert the light within to be sufficient, yea
allsufficient. This where it takes hold of the credulity, will draw as hard
from attending to the Scripture as the stoutest Team in England. Alas it must
then (if this be true) be but a piece of wantonness and the itching disease to
read the Scriptures, to which we must take a few steps, though they lie open in
the next room; while we have enough in our own bosoms; yea, which we can be no
farther from than from our selves; to the use of which we may pass as quick as
thought: it is but look inward, (not outward nor upward) turn the ear inward,
and the turn is served. But that this Argument may be heard, John Story and
some other such Chapmen vouch for its truth. The light which is sufficient to
guide. Before cited. And if thou waitest in the measure of the light of Christ
[within] thou will be able to try all things, Smith's prim. p. 10.

Quest. But if I should turn to it and obey it when. 2.
it reproves me for sin, is there power in it to save me from sin? etc.

Answ. Yes Child, all power in Heaven and Earth is in it. Smith's prim. p. 14.

Reader, can thou withstand the astonishment wherewith a tender conscience of
the true God is wont to be surprised by such an open mouth of blasphemy? if
thou can I must conclude thou art acquainted with this sort of people, and so
custom has made it no surprise; or thou art above half dead and benumbed with
the Opium of Quakerism. Yet this is as agreeable to their main principle, as
the same thing is to its self.

I wonder we hear it not more frequently from. 3.
them, that all power in Heaven and Earth is in every one of them; yea in each
of them, yea in each drunken Sot, and the silliest profane person. This is as
certainly their Tenet, as that God, Christ, Spirit are within them, and all
other persons, in the sense they hold. But if they should say that openly which
they believe and speak among themselves, they would be the most ridiculous, to
say no worse, people that breathe above ground.

SECT. III.
Thirdly, They affirm the Scriptures to be within. If so it is a great vanity
to read them out of a Book, and when I am persuaded to be herein of their mind,
I assure them so long as that shall last I will not be at the fruitless pains
of looking into a Bible as my Monitor. Fisher, the best Scholar that ever
professed Quakerism, asserted this, Ye have Moses and the Prophets within you.
Not in Latin Velataquaedam revelata, p. 4.
I dare be confident, neither had his Book (mentioned in the margin) been so
besprinkled with that Language of the Beast, for all his inspirations, if it
had not been first knocked and whipped into him, it may be by some wicked
tyrannical Pedagogue.

Yet here by the way observe, that such a wicked. 2.
thing may furnish with the gift of Tongues, while the Quakers divine Spirit
must be confined to speak in plain English, or be dumb. Another of the same
mind is Parnel (of whom I must give this commendation, that he speaks his
opinions openly, and not in parables as the most of them; who are afraid or
ashamed that their opinions should behold the light, any further than the
interest they have obtained may secure their Authors; but of all men Hypocrites
are the most odious and dangerous) Parnel's Shield of the truth. p. 11.
for the Scripture is within, and was read within before it was read without.

I would not wrong the Quakers as bad as they. 3.
are, and it is pity they should be wronged, who wrong themselves more than
enough: if they mean by the Scripture, the sense by them expressed, I wish they
said true; and if within be in the heart, i. e. not only known and readily
produced out of the heart, and men as a good man brings forth from thence good
things, but also esteemed loved with understanding; I am sure they would be no
Quakers. It is a blessed thing to have this Word hid in the heart as David
practiced, and as God commands: but if by the Scripture they mean the dead
Letter, Ink, and Paper as they call them when they list; they would be but a
bad and troublesome Inmate.

I do acknowledge with all my soul, that to. 4.
have the Scripture within in the sense of them, yea and the words too, is an
inestimable blessing; such a one as young Timothy, and eloquent Apollos were
crowned with: and few of the Saints there are who have not the Scripture within
in some good measure, but alas memory is so weak and frall it will not hold
all: and so confused ever and anon, that it is necessary to go to the Scripture
without not only to get in more, but also to repair decayed and broken notions
of them, and to be sure that our crazy imaginations by brooding upon the frame
of them within, have not hatched something of its own, and adopted it
Scripture: which the Quakers are not a little guilty in.

But while I am commending the first part of. 5.
their Tenet, viz. that the Scripture is within; supposing it taken in as good
a sense as it may be, I must not forget the latter part which has the dregs
and poison, viz. and was read within before it was read without.

If by reading it within before without they intended it only of the Penmen of
the Scriptures, I would join with them, and say so too: but they intend nothing
less, but, that, in the light which every man has within him, there is the
Scripture all and every part, at least that may be of use, if it had never been
without. I would willingly be resolved of a few things by those that are of
this mind. Wherefore did the gracious God expose the Prophets and Apostles to
so many difficulties, dangers, and deaths for declaring the matters contained
in the Scriptures, if they were read, and might be read by all men within?

Why did God with his own finger write the Ten. 6.
Words or Commands, and cause other of his Servants to write both them and the
other parts of the Scripture? Why does he command to read the Scriptures, and
by reading and studying them to get them into the heart, memory, understanding*
Deuteronomy. 17. 19. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days
of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words
of this law, and these statutes to do them. It was not to be with him as you
commonly phrase it [in him] there is no such it in the Text, but the Relative
it, has for its Antecedent in the Verse next before, he shall write him a Copy
of this Law in a Book out of that which is before the Priests, the Levites: it
shall be with him, etc.

Why did Christ himself read out of the Book if it. 7.
were within them? Why did not God chide Josiah for not doing according to the
Law (as being guilty of wilful neglect) before he found it in the Book? why did
God commend and reward his tenderness of heart in fearing, when the Law was
read out of the Book, if he were so hard hearted as not to hear the Law within?

Why did Jesus Christ never rebuke the Jews for not heeding the Scripture
within, while he often rebuked them for not heeding and believing the Scripture
without? these are enough and to spare, to discover the vanity of this conceit.

The truth is, the Scriptures were written (with. 8.
respect to us) first without, then within.

I would gladly hear any of the Quakers make a. 9.
report of any of the Gospel truths contained in the Scriptures, which you
could assure me you never heard or read without: or that you could all agree
without conferring together in a Narrative of those Traditions which the
Thessalonians were taught by word, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. and of those many other
things which Jesus did (or some of them) spoken of John 21. 25. which were not
written: this would be somewhat of conviction to us. But you are unworthy
beyond all men of the holy Scriptures, who by such means as these not only take
off others from reading them for their instruction, but also deny the mediate
and visible instruments and means of those notions you make such a noise and
jingling with in the ears of men, as if they were but home-born things.

SECT. IV.
Fourthly, They affirm that there is no light in them.

That light is in the Scriptures, prove that, or tell Lip of truth opened, p. 7.
me what one Scripture has light in it? If the Scriptures gives us a true
description of light, Ephesians. 5. 8. for whatsoever does make manifest is light:
this is not only an error of the first magnitude, but also one of the greatest
discouragements imaginable of looking into the Scriptures for instruction and
comfort: for if they manifest or signify nothing to us it will be but lost
labor.

I am apt to believe they may hold it for very Orthodox Doctrine, intending
thereby that there is no light in the Scriptures more than they have or may
have without them; and that the Scriptures can add no more to them than the
boasting Galatians who were false Brethren (though they seemed Gal. 2. 6.
to be somewhat) added to Paul; or that there is no Scripture has Christ the
light in it, he being (in their opinion) no where but within as a light.

I shall only prove that the Scripture is a light, or has light in it, and so
dismiss this argument.

O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead Psalm. 43. 3.
me, let them bring me to thy holy bill. By which we are to understand the
promises made to David: he knew the way to Gods holy hill, as well as most, but
his Adversaries had barred it up, and therefore he prays that God would perform
his promises, which were not only the light of comfort to him, but a guide to
his faith and hope, as they were truth and good: and such light the Scriptures
are replenished with and adorned, as the Firmament with Stars and
Constellations. But lest they should say this is but my meaning put to the
Scriptures, take one Text that tells its own meaning in so many words: For
the Commandment is a lamp, and Prove. 6. 23.
the Law is light.

A fifth Argument may be raised out of those dirty and disparaging Titles and
Characters which they give of the Scriptures. Of this you have enough before.

CHAP. VII. The Quakers affirm the Doctrines, Commands, Promises, holy
Examples, expressed in the Scriptures as such, not at all to be binding to us.
SECT. I.
THis is a denying of the Scriptures, and the authority of the God of the
Scriptures at once, and with a witness. If any shall be furnished. with so
small a measure of reason, as not to be able to apprehend that such an
affirmation is a denying of the Scriptures, I have little hope to convince
them. Yet I shall not leave them altogether without some Scripture evidence of
the strength of this Argument.

Lest I be full and deny thee; and say who is the. 2. Prove. 30. 9.
Lord? To say who is the Lord? or what has the Lord to do with us, to command
or bear rule over us? is to deny the Lord: and to say of the Scriptures what
are they to us? is as plainly to deny them. What is self-denial but rejecting
and denying what it would oblige us to, and impose upon us? to relinquish and
abandon its authority? To deal so by the Scriptures must needs then be a
denying of them. But why do I burn daylight? the Argument shines bright enough
in its own light and evidence,

The greatest expectation will be of the proving. 3.
matter of Fact, or that they do thus affirm: and I do verily believe that few
who have some tolerable opinion of the Quakers and their principles (except the
rank Quakers themselves) have had a suspicion that they are so grossly wicked:
but I shall blow the dust out of their eyes, by as strong a proof as their own
confession.

And it was the r^le unto them that gave forth the Scriptures -- and they spoke
the words as the Spirit moved; so that the Spirit was before the words, Smith
prim p. 10.
and was their rule that spoke the words, and it changes not, but is the same
for ever.

This he writes to prove that the Scriptures are not a rule, and does hereby
affirm that they had been no rule to the Penmen of the Scriptures themselves,
had they not been moved so to take them by the Spirit: and that this way of
obligation is unchangeable and abides for ever. He that shall read the
foregoing and following words in the Piece quoted, will no more doubt what I
have said, than that two and two make four.

For all the Saints have their commands in Spirit,. 6. Naylors love to the
lost, p. 16.
but yours is in the Letter; and so of another ministration. By the phrase [in
Spirit] they intend not that which reaches the heart only, but that which has
its original immediately from the Spirit of God in them. That Naylor intends no
other in this place, than its being from the Spirit immediately, he tells you
plainly: for that it is a different ministration from that of the Letter, by
which words [the Letter] they always intend the Scripture.

But more plain yet, if more plain may be: that. 7. Buroughs answer to choice
experiences, p. 6, 7.
is no command of God to me, what he commanded to another.

Neither did any of the Saints which we read of in Scripture act by that
command which was to another, not having the command to themselves: I challenge
^o find an example to it, E. D. A bold Challenger, who shall be answered in
good time: but let us hear a few more first.

-- Because its only queries gathered by the Author from the letter of the
Scriptures without, and no message of heavenly prophecy, doctrine, or
exhortation received by the Author from the Lord, through John Story Short
discovery, p. 1.
the divine inspiration of his light and Spirit within: therefore may I say
it is a very vain and Idolatrous exhortation which J. A. has given to J. B. his
little Book: But further,

And J. A. further says, let light without be guide. 8.
to light within.

Reply, If by this exhortation J. A. means that light without should guide the
true light within, which shines in the hearts of the Saints: then I must needs
say it is a very absurd and foolish exhortation; and being spoken upon a divine
account, it is full of Idolatry and evil, and greatly contrary to the Gospel,
and exhortation of Gods Ambassadors to the Saints on earth, which was, that
they should abide in the light or anointing that was in them, 1 John 2. 27. I
shall say somewhat to this in its order; hear one more and I have done.

And this is your work who at this day set up an James Naylor. p. 16.
imitation from the letter, of what other men have done; but have not received
your command and power in Spirit from the Lord; and to you it will be said, who
has required these things at your hands? for all the Saints have their
commands in spirit, but yours is in the letter.

But in your vain imaginations are judging you. 9. Page 31.
know not what, and limiting the spiritual Covenant of God to the literal.

Not in spirit, but in the old letter, or tradition Page 40.
from men.

I suppose that by this time my Reader is past doubting whether they are guilty
or no of this charge: it must not be expected that I should take up all these
citations, and deal with them in all their parts; if I should, I should often
actum agere, and give you one thing more than twice: but what they produce as
confirming their Tenet, I shall answer to, the falsehood of this Doctrine I
shall prove by Scripture, and rational evidence, and answering what they
pretend for the grounds of it.

SECT. II.
The Laws that were given by Moses, and the doctrines and promises also were
binding to the Congregation of Israel, Exodus 34. 32. And afterward all the
Children of Israel came nigh, and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord
had spoken with him in Mount Sinai. Who will say these commands were not
binding to them? Exodus 35. 1. -- These are the words which the Lord has
commanded that ye should do them. Will any one in his wits say, that in
receiving the command from God by Moses, they had it by immediate inspiration
from God? to say so is a contradiction in its self. Moses indeed had it
immediately from God, but the Israelites of that Generation mediately from
Moses, John 1. 17. For the Law was given by Moses. And the Scriptures were
given first immediately from God, and that is their authority with us, though
they are handed to us through many Generations, as the Books of the Law and the
Prophets were to the Jews.

And moreover it were a very superfluous thing. 2.
for God to send his commands to them by Moses, if they had them all at as nigh
and as good a hand as he* The like may be said of the New Testament Commands
and Doctrines, etc. 2 These. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the
traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or Epistle. Did you ever
hear of an Epistle come immediately from God? and all the Doctrines of the
Gospel were conveyed to others, except the Penmen or Prophets, Evangelists and
Apostles by Epistles; or what is of the same import in this matter.

But let us say a little about the obligation of examples. 2. Morning Watch.
of the Saints. That I may not run you out of one error into another, I am
willing to take some pains in this, as in the other parts of this Tract.

To imitate all the Examples of the best of Saints would lead us into sin, and
therefore cannot be our duty. This I will not plead for, for then we ought to
murmur, murder, dissemble, and be proud, which at some time or other, some or
other of the eminentest Saints recorded in Scripture have been guilty of.

To imitate and take example by them from the. 4.
mere authority of their Example, is not a little faulty, though the thing be
good in its self: But to take them for our examples, and follow their steps
wherein they act according to the written Word, or are commended and rewarded
by God for so doing, yea not any where reproved for so doing: their examples in
the like cases and circumstances, it is not only reason to follow, but a sin
not to follow: yet we are to follow their examples as they are some discovery
of the will of God to us, which we knew not so well and clearly without them:
or as they are a farther encouragement to our faith and obedience.

Neither are we notwithstanding to follow their. 5.
examples which were according to the mind of God when they lived, but since
those Laws are abrogated and repealed by a demonstrative act, and law of God.
As in the case of the Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies; with all those things
which were Typical shadows, the substance, and intendment of which is performed
and completed.

These things promised, I shall prove that their examples are binding to us,
yea are a superadded engagement to duty; and render a sin against a command so
backed with examples, to be more sinful and more deeply aggravated.

It is lawful, and a duty to imitate, and follow. 3.
the examples of eminent Saints.

Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that 3 Ep. of Jo. 11.
which is good. This is spoken of evil and good actions, and examples as
appears by the the 10th. verse.

Leaving us an example, that we should follow his 1 Pet. 2. 21.
steps.

Whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Heb. 13. 7.


For your selves know how ye ought to follow us. 2 These. 3. 7. and 9.
But to make our selves an ensample unto you to follow us.

For after this manner in the old time, the holy 1 Pet. 3 5.
women also who trusted in God adorned themselves.

Brethren be ye followers together of me, and mark 3 Phil. ^^
them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample.

These Scriptures are so plain to the purpose, that they need not a comment.

And his sons walked not in his ways, it was an 1 Samuel 8. 3.
aggravation that they did not only sin against the Laws of God, but the
example also of their Father.

Yea in doubtful and difficult cases; wherein we. 6.
cannot reach the knowledge of our duty, and the way God would have us walk in,
by the evidence of his Laws: it is our duty to follow the examples of the
greater number of the Saints, especially when the most serious, and
understanding are of the company. If thou know not (O thou fairest among Sol.
Song. 1. 8.
women) go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy Kids
beside the Shepherd^ Tents.

It were well if young beginners in Christianity. 7.
would practice this advice; until by diligence, and the blessing of the Lord
thereon, they came to an understanding more ripe, and capable of discerning the
mind of God in its more proper evidence: such a practice would evidence
humility, and aknowledge of themselves, and save them many a sin and trouble,
and the Churches peace in a great measure: and secure them from the snares and
delusions of Satan and his Agents; who have the greatest advantage on those
whose hearts are in their aims honest in the main, and whose understandings are
weak, and indigested; yet daring and presumptuous.

SECT. III.
I conclude this Chapter with some consequences of the denying the doctrines,
commands, holy examples in the Scripture contained, to be binding to us, unless
they come to us by immediate inspiration or motion of the Spirit.

Frist then all ministry by men is superfluous and vain; and that not only our
ministry, but that also which you call yours, who affirm this dangerous untruth.

Can you say your Ministers are the Spirit? if the. 2.
Spirit teach by, or through them it teaches mediately; but I say not this as
if I took it to be of bad consequence that your Ministry should cease: but to
show you how greatly contradictory you are to your own principle. You say the
light and the anointing within you, is a sufficient, and only Teacher; and no
other can oblige, or move you: and yet none make a greater noise in that you
call teaching, or declaring, or are so troublesome and importunate therein, as
your selves.

2. The consequence will be, that however the. 3.
Scriptures are a Monitor from which we may store our selves with Gods counsel,
and commands, etc. yet in the intervals, and mean whiles between inspirations,
and motions from the Spirit within: we have no obligation to any duty, nor can
we commit any sin. For where there is no Law, there is no transgression; take
away the Scripture Precepts, and to you there is none, but as inspirations drop
in: and then I assure you (for all your pretenses) you may live lawlesly
enough: inspirations being now so rare; and when they were more plentiful, but
one Balaam among the wicked was so visited, as we read of.

3. Then the Scriptures signify just nothing, but. 4.
a Romance to read, to exercise the fancy; or at most but as a profane or
common History, from which we learn nothing but what others did and said; and
how it was with them. If you read the Scripture commands, they are nothing to
you; if you have a command in Spirit (as you call it) it is enough: though it
never were in the Scriptures; yea, though it be contrary to the Scripture,
reason, and all modesty.

CHAP. VIII. They deny the Scriptures to be any means, by which we may come to
know God, Christ, and our selves.
SECT. I.
THis is a bold and strange assertion from those who call the Scriptures the
Scriptures of truth, and would be thought not to deny but own them with some
respect. But seeing it is within them, I love they should speak out.

If the Scriptures are thus impotent, I know no use they are of in things of a
religious concern; all Religions aiming at and depending upon the knowledge of
God and ourselves: and the Christian Religion as such, on the knowledge of
Christ. They may notwithstanding this affirmation call them Scriptures, i. e.
Writings still; but sure they do but mock them in calling them holy Scriptures,
or they are greatly ignorant what the word holy imports.

If the Scriptures then were burned, it would. 2.
not be a halfpenny loss, and the world would be rid of a burden or a snare,
or both.

I proceed to the proof of this Charge, and as I have done hitherto draw my
Arrows out of their own Quiver.

Quest. Is there not another way by which we may. 3.
come to know God?

Answ. Nay child there is not another way, for Smith prim. p. 24.
Christ is the way.

The Scriptures (which are Christ's own words) which say Christ is the way, John
14. 6. is far from countenancing what this Author shelters under its wing.
Christ says I am the way -- no man can come to the Father but by me. But he
does not say (nor is it in the least employed in the words as their sense or
consequence,) that there is no coming to the knowledge of God but by Christ;
for some knowledge of God may be attained not only without Christ as the means
but without the Scripture also.

As the Apostle Paul affirms (who we have reason. 4.
to believe before all the Quakers in the world) Romans 1. 20. For the invisible
things of him from thhe creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made: even his Eternal Power and Godhead.
Either they never read this Scripture, or the beam is in their eyes, who shall
say there is no other way to know God but Christ; if he had said no other way
to know God savingly without Christ, he had saved his credit here, and hit the
mark: but what will not men say that have a mind the Scripture should be
silent. The reason he grounds this upon is of like strength to most which they
produce under that name, or form: For Christ is the way, now this Scripture
does not speak of the knowledge of God, but of coming to God; which is somewhat
more than a bare knowledge of God; which must have a being in us before we can
come, or move toward him. But suppose he had said there is no other way to
come to God but Christ only, he had spoken falsely. For,

Though there is no other way to come to God. 5.
without Christ, yet there are many other ways to come to God by, in
conjunction with and subordination to Christ. So our reading the Scripture,
knowledge of our alienation from God, our sin, guilt, and danger,
sanctification, etc. these are all ways and means by which we come to God. Add
to these faith, love; yet who will say that any of these are Christ? (except
James Naylor, who says Christ is the Word and Prayer) but though we make these
to be some ways and means of coming to God, we make not any of them the way, as
the most excellent and only way: nor do we make them our Saviors, and
Mediators, and Intercessors with God for us: nor that they by shedding their
blood satisfied Gods Justice and appeased his anger, and made reconciliation
between God and man: and yet without these any one of them (at least such as
are within their reach) no person can be saved or be reunited to God. I will
give you a demonstration as easy as sense it self.

Suppose that over a great and deep River there. 6.
were but one Bridge; and he that would go to the other side must go by this
Bridge; and it should be said (and truly) no man can get to the other side of
the River, but by this Bridge: would this conclude that you must not enquire
where this Bridge is? how you may pass over by it? that you must not take those
passages, and steps that lead to the Bridge? that you must not have and use
your legs, and your eyes? and all because you cannot get over but by thy
Bridge. At no wiser a rate do the Quakers plead for Christ being the only way,
excluding all other as subservient. But enough of this passage: only observe,
that the Author quoted will not have the Scriptures, nor any thing else (Christ
excepted) to be any means of knowing God. Let us hear him explain himself a
little more.

Quest. Does God manifest himself within man?. 7. Smith's Catech. p. 2.


Answ. Yes, and man cannot know him by any other way but by the manifestation
of himself in his light within him.

Here he says much more than in his former sentence; there he says there is
no other way to know God but by Christ, here but by his light [Christ] and that
within him too: l^st we should mistake and suppose that the light of Christ
also is to be found in the Scripture,

Hear him speak plainer, and yet more to the purpose.

Then he [John] declared him as he knew him; Morning watch p 6. 8.
not from any tradition or writing before him: though then there was much
written which did truly testify of him. This he brings in to prove, that
Christ is to be known and made known to others, not by the Scripture but his
own light, or he himself the light within: and that though the Scriptures were
then in being, he made no use of them to declare Christ by, to the knowledge of
those he preached to.

They are such people as tell the world that Matthew, Paper sent out into the
world. p 2.. 9.
Mark, Luke, and John are the Gospel; they are but the Letter.

The Gospel is as much as to say a good message, or glad tidings, (...)
Strange! that they should not be glad tidings, because they are the Letter^ as
if a good message or glad tidings were never written in this world: And the
Scripture brings no tidings of Christ, because they are tidings in the most
ample form, viz. in writing or printing; which will abide much longer than a
breath or sound; and may be better considered.

Take another to couple with him, as very a Wiseaker as he.

And the knowledge of the Languages of Hebrew, John Higgins warning, etc. P. 7.
Greek, and Latin (which they call the Orignal) is nothing worth, as
pertaining to the knowledge of God. This Author did certainly lose the light,
or the light lose him, when he wrote this: I never heard the Latin called the
Original of the Scripture Translations before. Sure he believed that the
Scriptures peept first out of Rome, in that their Original Copy should be in
the Roman Language; as others of them, that the Lords Supper and Baptism were
from Rome and the Pope.

But however we have been hitherto of this mind, the Quakers infallible
monitor, the Light within (by which I am persuaded he wrote this) will have it
otherwise: and I dare assure this learned person if he be alive, and can but
prove the Latin to be the Original, the Pope of Rome will willingly give him a
Cardinals Hat for his pains.

But this is not his original error, though an error concerning the Original.
He says the Original is nothing worth pertaining to the knowledge of God. ^f
so our Translations which we had from thence are less worth than nothing: for
they must give the upper hand to the Original.

I have sufficiently proved their denial of the Scriptures being any means by
which we may come to the knowledge of God or Christ: one Witness of the third,
viz. of our selves, and I shall call in no more of them for the proof of this
Charge.

Christ by his light within shows you in a glass. 10. Scorned Quakers account.
P. 20.
your own faces, which the Scriptures cannot do.

Here I find them in love, yea so in love with a little Rhetoric, that rather
than go on plain ground, they will kick their own shins, and trip up their own
heels. Truly friends you have here gone on Glass or Ice, which you will. You
teach or declare in almost all your Writings, which concern teachings in a
religious sense, that you are taught immediately by the light within. Was ever
any thing in this world shown in a Glass immediately? that Glass may more
congruously be called a Mirror (the ancient name of a Looking-Glass) than any
I ever saw or heard of: however let whatever be the Glass or means by which, or
in which we may see our faces, the Scriptures (by your leave) must not be it.

But whether you will or no the Scriptures are a Glass, or as a Glass, wherein
if you or I will please to look with an honest mind, God will by it in a good
measure show us what we are: and they have one property above all the Looking
Glasses in the world, viz. that we can see your faces in and by them, though
you should not look into them, nor suffer the Book wherein they are contained
to be in the same house where you are.

SECT. II.
For the help of the unready in the Scriptures, I shall quote a few of its
testimonies to confute this Doctrine: although the consciences of the greater
number of themselves (if they will but turn over their records placed in their
memories) will give verdict against them. And for all those who have been at
the pains to learn what the Scriptures are capable of teaching, and have not
engaged themselves right or wrong to the service of the light within; I doubt
not but they will subscribe themselves experimenters of the truth here by you
opposed.

That all the people of the earth might know the Josh 4. 24.. 2.
hand of the Lord that it is mighty, that ye might fear the Lord your God for
ever.

As the heathen Nations, so the Generations and Posterity of Israel, who had
not seen those works with their own eyes, were helped to the knowledge of them,
and of the Lord who wrought them, by the means of the Scripture History.

And it shall be when he sits on the throne of Deuteronomy 17. 18, 19.
his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book; out of that
which is before the Priests the Levites: and it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God. Here the Scriptures are not only a means to know God, but also to fear
God; which cannot be without knowledge of him, and is more than a mere notion
of God.

And for the knowledge of Christ, it is not possible. 3.
that the Scriptures should be a prophetical, historical, and doctrinal account
of the natures, person, and offices, etc. of Jesus Christ; and yet no means for
the knowledge of him. And according to your own common phrase, a testimony,
declaration, and witness of Christ, and that they are some means, though not
the only means, that Text is enough to prove, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a
Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make the wise unto
salvation; through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

And who will doubt but that which is a means to save is a means to know God
and Christ? I have met with such a silly cavil as this in some of your
Writings, viz. that they are no such means to them who have not faith, i. e.
that obey not the light, and believe not in the light. True, if you understood
Christ aright; but yet they are a means of some kind, or it is not true that
they are able to make wise to salvation, whatever else be in conjunction with
them: we never yet said that they alone can do it, if we should say so, we
should be like unto you, who deny they can contribute any thing toward it.

Concerning the knowledge it gives of our selves. 4.
(whether we are believers or unbelievers) take two or three testimonies.

These things have I written unto you that believe 1 John 5. 13.
on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and
that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. Surely if they are a means
to know if we have eternal life, they thereby show us our faces; that we have
the faces of Children, not Swine; or Swine and not Children; and those
characters and marks by which one Saint may know it self, may be a means by
which another Saint may know it self, and so on the contrary. Paul knew himself
by the Law to be such Romans 7.
a sinner, as he knew not before. But I shall give you one Scripture which
answers the case in the Metaphor [a Glass] used by our Adversary.

For if any man be a hearer of the word and not a 1 Jam. 23. 24.
doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a Glass; for he
beholds himself, etc.

I know you who are called Quakers will say I pervert this Text, which is to be
understood of the light within, not of the Scriptures without; and that it
makes directly against me. I hint this to let people know what need we have to
preserve that appellation of the Scriptures the Word of God; which will
preserve the due reputation and use of those holy and blessed Writings. But I
would ask any Quaker, if it be not absurd and woeful lame language, to exhort a
man to be a doer of Christ? I must not dispute the same thing over and over,
but affirm this Text from what has preceded, and the particular Argument given
just now, to be a full and plain asserting the Doctrinal word to be a means by
which we may know our selves.

SECT. III.
I shall express in the close of this Chapter those absurdities, falsities, and
impieties, that are the Bastards this Error is traveling withal.

The Scriptures have less in them of demonstration,. 1.
with respect to God, than the dumb Creation, or the most despicable particle
of it; a Worm, a Stone, are some means to know God by.

A second consequence is, that no Writing whatsoever. 2.
can be any such means; for the holy Scriptures deserve a preference in
religious cases; and that (which will lie very heavy upon you who are called
Quakers) all your scribbling neither has been, neither can be to any such good
purpose, as the knowledge of God, Christ, etc.

Experience and sense it self, and that not of. 3.
one but many millions, are not all together worth a straw in point of
evidence: for so many have experienced as plainly as sense it self can
demonstrate, that by the means of the Scriptures they have come by the
knowledge of God, Christ, and themselves.

The incomparably greater number of those. 4.
whom you confess were Saints, and had peace with God, knocked and entered at
the wrong door; and so by your own Exposition of Scripture, are Thieves and
Robbers.

Then God, Christ, Prophets, Apostles, are all to. 5.
be charged with folly, who taught the knowledge of God, Christ, and man by the
matter expressed by the Scriptures; which was not to them immediately expressed
by God, but by Prophets, and humane Teachers.

You cast those Worthies who both disputed and. 6.
died to maintain not only some Truths concerning God, Christ, and man, (the
knowledge of which they came to by the Scriptures) but also for continuing in
the possession, and to the use of souls for such ends, the Books of the written
Word. Yea you condemn them as a company of Fools, who cast away and sold
themselves to all the miseries they suffered for a thing of naught.

Then neither is Reading, Preaching nor Instruction. 7.
of any such use. This I fear has gotten too much credit with you, who suffer
your Families and Children to take their own courses, except in the concerns of
this world, wherein few outdo you: and I should blame you the less if you
would so far keep to this principle, as to keep your light within, and your
thundering too; into which (though a self contradiction) it breaks forth with a
noise without sense or truth: to the amusing of the ignorant, who take them who
show the greatest zeal or heat to be the most sincere and intelligent.

CHAP. IX. The Quakers affirm the Scriptures to be no means whereby to resist
temptation; and that they are dangerous to be read.
SECT. I.
I Join these into one Argument, the latter being a high instance for the proof
of the former; and both together engage against the life of the Scriptures with
a strong hand. What shall we say of those men's owning the Scripture, who turn
this standing Table of the Lord into a snare, and render them not only no
Weapons to resist Satan and Lust our grand Enemies: but to be as Gunpowder to
blow up our selves: yea, as if God himself who is the Father of mercies, and
who in his abundant goodness has afforded us this Armor of light, did thereby
rather set a trap for our souls, than a means to deliver us from the snare of
the Devil; who leads the blind and unarmed captive at his will.

I shall not go about to give demonstrations, that. 2.
so to affirm is to deny the Scriptures, when I have proved that they are
criminal according to this Charge; I know not what impartial person will judge
them guiltless of denying the Scriptures. And therefore I shall attend to it,
as carrying the question.

It Is not your flying to the Scripture that can save Martin Mason loving
invitation. p. 4.
you from the fire of his wrath -- nor overcome the least corruption for you;
no verily, nothing then but a Christ within you, etc. and the next sentence is,
come thou then, O come with boldness to Gods faithful Witness within you! If he
had said the Scriptures without the knowledge of them, or the notion of them
without the power, or without the Spirits concurrence; he had spoken truth.

But, to beat these Weapons out of their hands, to cry out with a vehemence to
throw down those Arms as useless, and run away to that second Antichrist the
light within; this is horrid. The true Christ is not so far from the
Scriptures, nor so disagreeing with them, but he can dwell in one heart with
them; and arms all his Soldiers with the Weapons of the truths therein
contained: but Christ Jesus the Christ of God, and Redeemer of his people; and
the Quakers Christ are nothing of kin.

But one would think this should be but a slip of. 3.
his Pen, let us see if he speak not more favorably of the holy Scriptures in
his following discourse: but alas! the darkness within has so bewitched him,
that nothing but the Quakers Idol is good for any thing.

The Scriptures nor any other outward things are Page 11.
able to graple with him [the Devil] you must put on the armor of light [light
within] and with that resist him, or be taken captive by him.

What a rapture of zeal is here for the thing within! though the Scriptures
alone can do little, yet sure if God Almighty undertake the combat, either with
or without the Scriptures, he will be too hard for all the Devils, or he had
not kept his Throne from being usurped by him: and if God be not without the
Quakers, or any other person, as well as within them; he is not infinite as we
have taken him to be by the light of Reason, and more by the light of
Scripture. But what blasphemy will not men run into, who have changed their God
for that which is no God, and have turned their backs on the Lord Jesus, and
taken so gross a delusion in the room of him.

Again he goes on to the same purpose, lest you should not understand him. If
you use any other Page 11.
Weapons [than the light within] in this spiritual war, you cannot prosper nor
prevail against him. I have lighted on a proof of the latter part of my Charge
before I was aware, viz. for then it is dangerous to read the Scriptures, lest
you should be tempted to try some of those inviting Arms, which that Magazine
is stored with, and so spoil all your prosperity and prevalence in your
spiritual Warfare.

SECT. II.
However this shall not prevent the producing my intended proofs of the danger
(as the Quakers say) that attend reading the Scriptures.

But seeing (as the Quakers say) we must try. 2.
the Spirits by the Spirit; let us try William Smith's spirit by Isaac
Pennington's; who speaking of Pennington's quest. etc. p. 12.
knowledge gained by the Letter of the Scriptures, speaks thus; Making him wise
and able there [in his head] to oppose truth, and so bringing him into a state
of condemnation, wrath, and misery, beyond the Heathen: and making him harder
to be wrought upon by the light and power of truth than the very Heathen.

By opposing truth, we must needs understand it of the Quakers truth; and if
reading the Scriptures, and getting knowledge from or by them; puts us into a
bad condition (both as rendering conversion difficult, and our misery and
condemnation great) beyond the Heathen; I scarce know what is more dangerous
than reading the Scriptures. But the comfort is, it does but render us harder
to be wrought on to entertain the pernicious Guide and Savior, the Quakers
light within; and therefore is exceeding safe and necessary.

It follows in the same Author, My upright desire to the Lord for you is, that
he would strip you of all your knowledge [or wisdom] of the Scriptures after
the flesh. Their meaning of [ after the flesh] is, that which comes not by
immediate inspiration.

For those only are the Children of God, who are. 3. Naylors love to the lost,
p. 53.
led by the Spirit of God; to whom they who were led by the Letter, were ever
enemies.

So Naylor does as certainly say, it is dangerous to read the Scriptures to be
led by them; as it is truly dangerous and evil to be Enemies to the Children of
God.

SECT. III.
That this abominable Tenet is the Quakers, I know it sufficiently: and that
they look upon our adhering to Scripture light, as the greatest adversary in
the world to their adored light within. But I love not the Quakers way of
demonstration, viz. we witness this and that, but if you would know how they
witness it, it is only their own experience, which is a dumb kind of witness:
while they can make no proof or testimony of it to another, nor will ordinarily
attempt it; and so their witness is to themselves alone. But my witnessing of
what I here charge them with, shall have more light in it, that all that read
it may be convinced of its truth. Therefore take one instance more out of their
famous Author W. P. or William Pen.

But I will assure them, they shall yet grope in the. 2. W. Pen Spirit of
truth, etc. p. 23.
dark, till they come into the daily obedience of the light, and there rest
contented to know only as they experience; and not from a ravening
comprehending brain, that would in its unregenerated state grasp at the clear
mysteries of the Kingdom: into which fleshly comprehensions and notions can
never enter: but all must be as unlearned from their first birth, education,
and traditional read knowledge; as he is unmanned, that is again become a
little Child, before the secrets of Gods Work come to be made known.

That W. P. (of all others) should talk at this rate is most ridiculous. What!
know only as they experience, know what God is no farther than they experience.
Can we experience his Omnipotency? his infiniteness, which is not within the
experience of all finite beings put together? What! know the death (by Spear
and Nails of Iron or Steel, and Cross of Wood) of the man Christ Jesus, which
he suffered above 1600 years since, only by experience? What! know the life to
come, the judging of all men (that are, ever were, or shall be) by the Lord
Jesus; only by experience: where is faith all the while? what credit has God
with W. P? that he will know him, nor any thing he says, no further than he
sees, feels in his experience.

If none but Believers be Saints, such as W. P. are professedly none: if he
know not that objects of faith and experience are contradistinct things; he is
very unfit to assure who they are that grope in the dark, and is very unlikely
to mend his confused scribbling.

I shall not comment on his ravening comprehending brain (a most affected
phrase amongst the Quakers) nor his clear mysteries, as clear a contradiction
as it is; nor fleshly comprehensions, as much untruth and nonsense as
(according to their meaning of it) it comprehends; for I have not room to
spread all his rubbish.

What is to my present purpose is in the last part. 3.
of his saying, all must be as unlearned from their -- traditional read
knowledge, as he is unmanned, etc. Sure the Scripture knowledge being read
knowledge, or knowledge that comes by reading (as one means) is a most hateful
thing to God, that he will impart none of his secrets to those, that will
understand any thing by his written Word. How came God to fall out (at such an
irreconcilable rate) with his own offspring, his expressions of his mind
contained in the holy Scriptures? how can you have the face to call them holy
Scriptures, and yet make knowledge attained by reading them so nauseous to God,
that they shall be none of his Children, that learn any knowledge by that Book,
or forgo it not all? Did God write, and cause it to be written; and yet never
intend we should read it? or that reading it we should not believe a word on it,
nor understand, nor be the wiser for it? Shall they be judged by the Law who
lived under it, and yet the knowledge of God thereby be a sin and hindrance to
their salvation? To what a height of wickedness and folly do they quickly grow,
who are poisoned with that abomination of holding the light in every man's
conscience to be God, Father, Son, Spirit, Christ, Scripture, all?

But Mr. Pen what means your Latin and Greek,. 4.
your foreign Authors, your attempted (though misshapen) Logic; your quotations
of so many Scriptures, though some of them in a pitiful manner, all to a bad
end?

Did you learn all those things by immediate inspiration? Had you them not by
reading and tradition? Could you tell that (...) signifies light, rather than
(...) which signifies thick darkness, but by tradition and reading? But I smell
your design, you would have us throw away all the knowledge we have by reading
or tradition; 'till we come to be regenerate, that is Quakers; and then you are
out of its danger. But in the mean time you would have us without the Armor of
light (for whatsoever makes manifest is light) that we may not be able to
defend our selves against the most ignorant nonsense, that the meanest of your
votaries can attempt us with.

But the God above and the Scripture without has taught us better things.

I am not unwilling (though I hope few need it). 5.
to quote a few Scriptures, that people may have them in a readiness against
these untruths of the Quakers. Put on the Armor of light, etc. the Romans 13. 12.
Scripture makes it day in the World (but especially in and with the Saints)
for it makes manifest abundantly. There is your defensive Arms.

The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper Heb. 4 12.
than any two edged Sword, etc. There is an offensive Weapon.

Above all taking the shield of faith, wherewith Ephesians 6. 16, 17.
ye shall be able to quench, etc. 17. -- and the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God. A Sword of the Spirits making, and is effectual when of the
Spirits managing. Observe faith in the 16. ver. is preferred above the Word of
God in the 17. verse, therefore it is not Christ the Word, but the Scripture
the Word: for Faith is not above Christ.

Jesus Christ who had less need of the Scriptures Mat 4.
than any of us all, resisted Satan's temptations by the Scriptures, it is
written, it is written; and what was written, being opposed to Satan's
temptations, silenced and confounded him. But it seems since then he has
gotten more confidence. Consider that the Quakers will allow the man Christ to
leave us a perfect example.

CHAP. X. The Quakers deny the Scriptures to be read to any profit, any further
than they are before hand experienced by those that read. And they put the
Spirit of God and the Scripture in opposition.
SECT. I.
THey may as well say that hearing the word preached, is to no profit neither;
any farther than it is experienced before hand: for there is the same reason of
the one as of the other. But this is a strange Doctrine, that at one blow cuts
off both hearing, and reading the matter contained in the Scriptures, by men
unregenerate. For what I pray you have they experienced, who are according to
your notions stark blind, and utterly without sense of the things of God?

Quest. But if there be not another way to God, etc.

Answ. Why Child, all that are faithful to God. 2. Smiths prim. p. 29. 30.
in what he makes known unto them, they are not judged. This is pretty
charitable, but hear farther, the reason he gives why they that read the
Scriptures profit not in the knowledge of God, etc. is, but they read in that
book notionally, before they have passed the judgment experimentally. Again p.
30. For people wanting the life and power of Christ in themselves, they are
betrayed into the words, etc.

And such were the Scribes, who were ever scraping Fisher. Velata quaedam
revelata. p. 7.
in the Scriptures to find God, and his life; yet never knew him at any time,
nor saw his shape, because they heard not his voice, nor heeded not his word
within themselves. John 5. 37.

What a vile insinuation is here of the Scriptures, and the study of them? as
if the Scriptures were but a dunghill, and every unregenerate person (at least)
which all are with them who adore not the Light within as Christ) did but the
part of a Brute (which scraping implies) in searching the Scriptures to know
the things of God. For his blasphemous insinuation that God has a shape, and
that they who heed his voice within themselves see it; I am too sensible of the
invisible Majesty of God, to work my thoughts on such a horrid subject: yet, he
dares quote John 5. 37. to countenance it, which so far as it reaches it, does
deny any such thing to be seen.

To reprove this evil Spirit of (worse than) error,. 3. John 5. 39, 40.
read and understand these Scriptures, wherein there is not any great
difficulty.

Search the Scriptures, (for in them ye think ye have eternal life) and they
are they which testify of me: and ye will not come to me, that ye might have
life.

I have known more than a good many of the men of this controversy expound
this Scripture, as if Christ rebuked them for searching the Scripture, and
having such a fallacy in their opinion, as to think eternal life were to be had
by searching of them: and instead of and (which gives the absurdity of their
searching the Scriptures to find the true Christ, by their testimony; and its
testimony being so plain and clear, that Jesus of Nazareth, he that then talked
with them was he) they have read it but you will not etc. as if the one was
exceeding opposite to the other; viz. searching the Scripture, whereas the true
sense is, it condemns you as irrational men, that you should think to have
eternal life in the Scriptures, and will not believe their testimony. I must
remember to tell you, that I do not take the Scriptures to be able to give
eternal life to all that have them in their houses or heads, or that do barely
search them, and not set their hearts (according to its direction) to find
eternal life. It were ten to one if I had not said so much, some or other of
them would have had a fling at me, as making a Christ of the Scripture.

By what has been produced, you may be sure. 4.
there is the best profit, by Gods blessing on an honest reading of the
Scriptures.

Young Timothy was bred up from a Child in the Holy Scripture; and it was the
commendation of his Mother, and Grandmother for so educating him: but can you
think he experienced all he read before he read it? some of them are
prophetical of things to come. Can any of you alll experience things that never
yet had an existence or being.

And should the Gentiles and Jews have been reproved; for hearing Paul, and
Peter, and Christ himself preach the Gospel, and the Mediator of it? because
they did not experience it in themselves.

But why should I use many words about such a cause? the willing to understand
may see its grossness, and for those that will be ignorant, means signify
little to their cure.

CHAP. XI. The Quakers put, or render the Scriptures, and the Spirit of God in
opposition to each other.
SECT. I.
I Could produce a thousand instances of this crime against the life and being
of the Scriptures, committed by the Quakers as their principle and duty. This
wickedness, is their open highway, and beaten road.

If the Scripture had not been the word of the Spirit of God, the revelation of
his mind and will; whose holiness and authority had its being from God its
author; the frame of it agreeing to the nature and will of God: we would not
think it worthy the name of Scripture, in that peculiar sense which it has
obtained among Christians.

But if once we knew it opposite, and an adversary. 2.
to the Spirit (so far at least) that it must come to a parting: and they that
cleave to the teachings of the Spirit, must forsake being taught, comforted,
etc. by the Scriptures: and they that cleave to the Scripture teaching by the
Spirit, have forsaken the Spirit of God and his teachings: we would own our
such profession to be a denying the Scriptures; yea, should take our selves
bound in so many words to deny it; and send it as far out of the way as may be,
as dangerous to the just prerogative of the Spirit of God.

And if those who profess what I shall instance (and produce for proof) to be
truth, had any honesty in them; they would tell the world they utterly deny the
Scriptures to be, what the Christian world has accounted them: and in plain
and open words and testimonies as far as they can produce; exhort and move them
to lay them aside, and have no more to do with them: nor give them one good
word, lest the adversary to the Spirit should in the hearts and lives of men be
exalted against him.

For the proving of the Charge at the head of. 3.
this Chapter, take the words of James Naylor the Quakers proto-Confessor.

For all the Saints have their commands in Spirit, Naylor's love to lost. p. 8.
but yours is in the Letter; and so of another ministration; for the literal
ministration is done away in the spiritual.

Here you have the commands in Spirit, or by the Spirit put in opposition to
the Letter, which is the written Word or the Scripture: and so far in
opposition, that as heat being opposite to coldness, and light to darkness; the
one (so far as it prevails) expels the other, by its contrariety and
opposite qualities: so the spiritual ministration, or ministration of the
Spirit banishes and expels that of the Letter, as its enemy and contrary.

But if you will have a prodigious instance, a nonsuch for Blaspheming the
Spirit of God in the Scriptures; read what follows, out of a great Writer of
theirs William Smith.

And reading in the Scriptures, that there were Morning Watch. p. 22, 23.
some who met together and exhorted one another, and were edified and comforted
one in another; they observe and do as near (as they can) what they read of the
Saints practice; and so conceives a birth in the same Womb [the Scriptures] and
brings it forth in the same strength as others do -- and they make haste
thither, and open their eyes to look at the things which are seen [the
Scriptures] and this is pleasing to the carnal mind, etc. They [Worship, Order,
Ordinances, Faith, Practice, understood by the written Word] must all come
under the severity of his judgment, because they are Bastards and not Sons: for
these adulterous births have provoked the Lord and grieved his Spirit.

It would amaze a Christian and sound mind, to read what is contained in the
two pages in the Margin quoted, of vilifying and reproach to the Scriptures,
and the Doctrines from thence received: Traditions of men, earthly root,
darkness and Ib. 22, 23.
confusion, Nebuchadnezzars Image, putrefaction and corruption, rotten and
deceitful, all out of the life and power of God, Apostasy, the Whores Cup, the
mark of the Beast, Babylon the Mother of Harlots, Bastards brought forth of
flesh and blood, the birth that persecutes the Son and Heir, viz. [the Spirit
of God or light within] Babylons Brats and Children, Graven Images, contrary to
him [the everlasting powerful God] etc. If this be not opposing the Spirit of
God to the Scripture, and rendering them adverse to each other; the Devil
himself must despair of inventing words to express it by.

I conclude the proof of this Charge with the. 4.
words of Naylor.

And of this sort are they who have their preaching Naylors love to the lost,
p. 30.
to study and to seek at other men's mouths, or from the Letter; and have it not
from the mouth of the Lord. Then with him, and the Quakers who are of his mind,
what we have from the Scriptures, we have not from the mouth of the Lord. I
would know of the Quakers, what they will make of the mouth of the Lord? Do
they take it to be some part of his body, which is like our mouths, the Organs
of speech? We have thought hitherto that God being a Spirit has no mouth at
all; only to express things to our understandings, he speaks by similitudes
taken from such things we are acquainted withal: and so whatsoever God reveals
his mind by, may be called his mouth.

And it will follow that the Scriptures are his mouth, as eminently as any
thing, yea all things in the world, and more. For God speaks by them to us,
more than by all other things: he says to Jeremy, Jer. 15. 19. Thou shall be
as my mouth. As thou spakest by the hand of Moses. 1 Kings 8. 53. 2 Samuel 23. 2.


The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. Hear the
rod, etc. Is it not a frequent phrase in the Scripture? As says the Scripture.
They believed the Scripture. And what is that? but God speaking by the
Scripture, and believing what God spoke by the Scripture.

But now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures Romans 16. 26.
of the Prophets, according to the command of the everlasting God, made known
unto all Nations for the obedience of faith. What more plain that the
Scriptures are the mouth of the Lord, or those means by which the Lord does
manifest his mind to men.

But the Quakers will not have it so, and therefore it must not be so. But they
who enquire of or at the Scriptures for the mind of the Spirit, run another way
than that the Spirit walks and is to be found in; and sin against the Spirit of
God. And that you may see how they set the Spirit and Scripture together by the
ears, Naylor says further,

For those only are the Children of God, who are Love to lost etc. p. 52.
led by the Spirit of God; so far is true as truth it self; but as the old
Serpent, he never heads a saying with the Scripture, but he brings in a lie at
the end and tail of it, to whom they who are led by the Letter were ever
enemies.

Here you have two great Commanders or Leaders. 5.
brought into the field, as the most hostile implacable Enemies; whose
followers from the time there were any, were foes each to other. And what can
render the Spirit and the Scripture more opposite, than that whosoever follows
the Letter, is a foe to him that follows or is led by the Spirit? And the
Leaders are the formal causes of it too; and therefore it was ever so, and is
as inseparable as natural cause and effect.

If this be all true, well might W. P. say, We W. P.
livingly witness, against all the dry cavelling Lettermongers in the world.

SECT. II.
Having frequently met with that Scripture, 1 Cor. 3, 6. by them produced to
prove the Scriptures to have a contrary tendency to the Spirit; I shall here
open it, and show their mistake. The 1 Cor. 3. 6. opened.
words are, Who also has made us able Ministers of the new Testament; not of
the Letter but of the Spirit: for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life.

Whereas they would have us by the Letter, to. 2.
understand the whole written Word as written; that is the body of the
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, Law and Gospel without
distinction: and by the Spirit, the inward immediate teachings of the Spirit of
God, they are in both mistaken. For, it is as certain as that the following
words are truth, that by the Letter here is meant the Law, as given forth by
God from Mount Sinai; and by the Spirit, the Covenant of Grace; especially as
expressed in the New Testament, under the administration of the Redeemer.

But if the ministration of death, written and engraven Ver. 7.
on stones was glorious, etc. for if the ministration Ver. 9.
of condemnation be glory, etc.

All these passages express and explain the same. 3.
thing called the Letter in the 6. Verse; and that it was the Law given forth
by God, before it was written; (not only as written) the matter and manner of
which was glorious (but in terribleness) insomuch that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear Heb. 12. 21.
and quake, and it was death for any to touch the Mountain; yea the Israelites
were ready to dye with fear at the appearances of God on that Mount Exodus 20.
19.
Sinai, at the giving forth of the Law.

And as the manner of giving it forth by God, so. 4.
the matter of it was mortal; nothing but death was written in the forehead of
it, going alone. The Law works wrath. That is the Law of mere Rom 4. 15.
Commandments. And the Commandment which was Romans 7. 11, 12.
ordained to life, I found to be unto death: for sin taking occasion by the
Commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me. Thus it is plain what is meant by
the Letter; the Law of mere Commandments as given forth on Mount Sinai.

That by the Spirit is to be understood the Covenant. 5.
of promise in the hand of the Mediator, is as certain: and not of the
Scripture, or written Word in general: for in the 6. Verse it is opposed to the
Letter, of the New Testament, not of the Letter; that is, the Gospel, not the
Law: and it is called the Spirit in three respects;

First, As the New Testament or Covenant of promise (especially in the hand of
Christ) promises and conveyeth soul-quickning grace in a good measure to
sanctify and enable, and dispose the soul to keep the Laws of God.

Secondly, As by the New Testament or Covenant, life and spirit, comfort and
refreshment is put into the hearts of poor drooping sinners under the sense of
the severity of the Law, and their liableness to the punishment of it.

Thirdly, And chiefly, the intent and mind of. 6.
the Spirit in the terrible dispensation of the Law of Works, was by
discovering man's woeful estate; to make the promises of the Gospel, or the new
Covenant sweet and welcome; and to put souls on embracing the redemption
through Christ. So that the matter of the pure New Testament or Covenant in the
hand of the Mediator; was that which God especially aimed at to promote by the
Letter, or the mere Law of Commandments; in which alone there was not the least
appearance of mercy or man's welfare implied.

CHAP. XII. The Quakers hold it is a sin, and the sin of Idolatry, to believe
and live according to the instructions and holy examples expressed in and by
the Scriptures; except we have them by immediate inspiration, and at first hand
as the Apostles received them.
SECT. I.
I Am now come to the highest round of their Ladder, and I know not what one
step of sin beyond it (except the unpardonable one) they could charge those
with who walk by the light of Scripture day. Samuel, whose rebuke to Saul for
his sin in the matter of the Amalekites, was expressed in the keenest and
highest terms; compared his sin but to Witchcraft, Iniquity, and Idolatry. And
if this charge againstus were as true, as it is that they so charge us; it is
high time to serve the Scriptures as Hezekiah served the Brazen Serpent, And
brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent that Moses had made; 2 Kings 18. 4.
for unto those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he
called it Nehushtan, [that is Brass] nothing of a Deity in it but a little
piece of Brass. So it were fit the Scriptures should be demolished, as having
nothing of divine authority stamped upon them. When I have established this
Charge by the mouths of two or three Witnesses, it will be time to leave off
pouring in more, where the measure is already running over.

All people may search the Scriptures, and see how. 2. W. D. discovery of man's
return. p. 21.
you have been deceived by your Teachers; who have caused you to seek your lost
God in carnal and dead observations: which they have not any Scripture for.

Who this lost God should be (except Jesus Christ who is ascended above the
visible Heavens) is not to be imagined by those who are acquainted with the
Quakers Tenets and Phrases: as will appear more plainly where I treat on their
Idolatry: and if so, as there is reason to believe; there are two grand parts
of Idolatry we are charged with, in complying with the Scripture Precepts and
Institutions; as in Preaching, Prayer, Church Order, Baptism, Lord's Supper.

The first is a false object of worship; which all. 3.
of them that ever I met with in print or otherwise will not deny that to be,
which is given to the man Christ Jesus, who was crucified between two Thieves
at Jerusalem.

The second is false worship for the matter, which is Idolatry, although it
were intended to the true God as the object; the sacrificing of Children was
intended ultimately to the true God, yet it was gross Idolatry. And they have
built the high places Jer. 7. 31.
of Tophet, which is in the Valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their Sons and
Daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my
heart.

But you will say, how is this charge for walking. 4.
according to Scripture instructions and examples, seeing he does expressly
exhort to trying by the Scriptures, whether they do not thus? I answer, that
they take not any thing in the Scripture to be obliging, but what comes by
immediate inspiration; as the Scriptures were given to the Prophets and
Apostles; and whatever we do however consonant to the precepts there expressed,
is all contrary to the Scriptures with them, as I have proved already, if not
by immediate inspiration and motion of the Spirit. If this be not clear, we
shall pump clear by and by.

And this is Babylon the mother of Harlots, viz.. 5. Morning Watch. ^. ^^.
[to read and practice as the Saints did and the Apostles in the Scripture of
the New Testament] and the abomination of all uncleanness; -- That many
Children have been brought forth of flesh and blood, and of the will of man
(that is our choice and not passive obedience to the motions of the thing
within) which is the birth that persecutes the son and heir. -- And not one of
them must stand (though ever so seemingly glorious) for the day is come, and
the true birth is born (the light within) whose right it is to reign; and his
glory he will not give to another, nor his praise to Graven Images.

If erecting and worshipping God by Graven. 6.
Images be Idolatry, then the Quakers do charge us with Idolatry for walking
according to Scripture instructions and examples. He who will take the pains to
read this inspired Author (thou by an evil spirit) page 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
will find it his scope to prove all Idolaters that ground their worship and
order on the Scripture examples: and in page 17. he likens all professions
among Christians this day to Nebuchadnezzar's Image, and though some are more
shining and glorious in appearance, as the head of Gold was beyond his legs of
Iron; yet he calls all, parts of the Image, and the Scriptures the Feet of Clay
they had their standing on. And in page 16. has these words, Then searches the
Scripture for words to prove their Image a lawful Son, and this is the bottom
and foundation of all Religions this day.

I am even tired with searching these sulphurous. 7.
Veins of the Pit and Mine of Quakerism, the root of all which is the deified
light within: If you have not enough of this smoke to satisfy you it is the
bottomless Pit it rises out of, I will give you two ebullitions more, and then
leave you satisfied, or to get better senses.

So amongst the words you find how the Saints in Morning watch p. 45.
some things walked, and what they practiced, and then you strive to make that
thing to your selves, and to observe it and do it as near as you can; and here
you are found transgressors of the just Law of God; who says, thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Exodus 20. 4.
Image, nor the likeness of any thing. And it follows, now what difference is
there in the ground betwixt you and the Pope? though in the appearance there
seem to be such a great space.

SECT. II.
The Quakers having thus stripped the holy Scriptures of their divine beauty and
authority; both name and thing; plucked out their very heart and strength: let
us resume the particular Arguments, produced to prove that they deny the
Scriptures; and look on them at one view, so shall we better discern their
united testimonies and strength.

They who Deny the Scripture to be the word. 2.
of God. Equal their own writings and sayings with the Scriptures, and prefer
them before the Scriptures. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God.
Deny the Scriptures to be a rule of faith and life, or a Judge and determiner
in religious controversies. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God.
Take men off from reading the Scriptures, and looking into them for instruction
and comfort. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God. Deny the
Scriptures to be any means, by which we may come to know God, Christ, or our
selves. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God. Affirm the
Scriptures to be no means, whereby to resist temptation, and that they are
dangerous to be read. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God. Deny
the Scriptures to be read to any profit, any farther than they are beforehand
experienced by them that read them. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word
of God. Put or render the Scriptures, and the Spirit of God in opposition to
each other. They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God. Affirm the
doctrines, commands, promises, holy examples expressed in the Scripture (as
such) to be not at all binding to us. They who Deny the Scripture to be the
word of God. Hold it is a sin, and the sin of Idolatry; to believe and live
according to the instructions and holy examples expressed in, and by the
Scriptures: except we have them by immediate revelation as the Apostles.

They who do all these things mentioned in the foregoing particulars, deny the
Scriptures. But the Quakers do all these things mentioned in the foregoing
particulars; therefore, the Quakers deny the Scriptures.

If any one, or all these arguments together will prove what they are brought
to confirm; it is proved: if it be not I shall for ever despair to prove any
thing.

For as much as the holy Scriptures being our. 3.
compass on earth, and our evidence for Heaven; are mostly struck at by the
Prince of Darkness, and grand enemies of Souls: especially the two great
Antichrists, the Roman Bishop, and Church; and the new Upstarts, who hold the
Light within every man to be the Savior, Light, Righteousness, all: who do not
only as other erroneous, or heretical persons; a little eclipse, or pervert the
light of the Scriptures: but attempt to pull it down out of the Firmament, or
render it a dark and useless body; but as it receives Light from their Idol:
the one party to set up the Pope at Rome, as absolute in matters of Religion.

The other to set up the Pope within, as absolute, and more than he; in the
little world of every individual man.

I shall within these following parallel lines, give. 4.
you a view (though but in part) how both these adversaries do openly spit
their venom, and discharge their shot against the holy Scriptures. And
considering how they in most things jump together, in the contempt of, and
detracting from the Scriptures, you may conclude, that although the Jesuit was
not the first contriver of the Quakers grand notion of the Light within to be
Christ* (which I am verily persuaded of to be true) yet that he was a promoter
of the building erected on that foundation, we may easily guess. by his mark on
so many parcels of it; yet I must say that the Romanists were much more sound
in their opinions of the Scriptures until about Luther's time, wherein the
Protestants were too hard for them at those weapons.

I give you the mind of the Spirit of God expressed. 5.
in the middle colume, the Quakers Tenets on the left, and the Jesuits and
Papists on the right hand. I do not give the Quakers books, names, and pages:
because it would not be contained in any order, and in the body of the Book
they are exactly proved, I give you the Jesuits names and quotations of most
or all, because they are not mentioned in the body of the Book.

The Quakers Opinions and sayings of the Scriptures, and those that adhere to
them. The Spirit of God speaking by the Scriptures. The Jesuits and Papists
Tenets and sayings of the Scriptures, and those that adhere to them. The
Scriptures are not the rule of Faith and life. Thou shall not turn aside to the
right hand or to the left, viz. Gods Statutes and Judgments, Deuteronomy. 5. 31, 32.
The Scripture is not the rule of Faith. Greg. de Valentia Jesuita libro quarto
analyseos. Carranza in prima controver. The Scriptures are not the judge and
determiner of Controversies in religious matters. He mightily convinced the
Jews, and that publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ. Acts
18. 28. -- He had put the Sadduces to silence. Mat. 22. 3. viz. by Scripture.
Neither the holy Scripture nor the holy Spirit speaking by the Scripture, is
the supreme and general judge of matters of Faith. Beccanus item Gretserus
Jesuitae in Colloquio Ratisbon. It is impossible for the Scripture to be judge
of doubts concerning Faith and the Christian Religion. Lorichius Jesuita in
fortalitio. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John is not the Gospel. The beginning of
the Gospel of Christ the Son of God, Mark 1. 1. The Gospel is not Scripture, it
was commanded. to be preached, but not to be written. Carranza Jesuita in
colloquio. The light within every man is the rule and guide and not the
Scriptures, and this light is infallible and will teach you all things. If the
light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness, Mat. 6. 23. The
Tradition of the Church (i. e. Roman) is the first chief, certain, and
infallible rule from which any thing, may be known to be true and certain to be
held in matters of says and Christian Religion. Vain man would be wise, though
man be born like a wild Asses Colt. Job 11. 12. Carranza Jesuita in prima
controversia. The Tradition of the Church is the very rule of faith and piety.
Pighius. The Spirit was before the Scripture, therefore we must be led by the
Spirit, not by the Scripture; the Spirit with the Quaker is the light within.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3. 16. We
say that the Church is a rule before the Scripture and more known than the
Scripture. Carranza in secunda Controversia. The Scriptures are the Traditions
of men. Holy men of God spoke [the Scriptures] as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Traditions of the Church to be preferred before the
Scriptures. Frequent among the Papists. Light without must be guided by light
within. Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures. Mat. 22. 29. The Scripture is to
be ruled by the Church, and not the Church by the Scriptures. I have hid thy
word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Psalm. 119. 11. Carranza in
secunda Controversia. The Scripture is a dead Letter, carnal Letter, Ink and
Paper. The words that I speak unto you are spirit and life. Joh. 6. 63. The
Scripture has no voice, it cannot pass judgment viva voce. For the Word of God
is quick and powerful. Heb. 4. 12. Beccanus and Gretserus in Colloquio
Ratisbon. The Scriptures are but dumb judges. Pighius controversia tertia. The
Scriptures may be burnt. The Scriptures cannot be broken. John 10. 35. All the
Scriptures in the common and native tongues are to be burnt by a Law. Write
this for a memorial in a Book, etc. Exodus 17. 14. The light within was the rule
from the beginning, and not the Scriptures. The Scriptures were a rule so soon
as they had a beginning. The Fathers of the Church were expert in the
Traditions of the Church from the beginning as being more effectual than the
Scriptures. Pighius Jesuita in Colloquio. Dry cavelling Letter-mongers.
Scraping in the Scriptures. An eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures. Acts
18. 24. These Lutherans and Hugonots are all for the Letter. And Paul as his
manner was went in unto them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of
the Scriptures. Acts 17. 2. He that prefers the Scriptures before the light
within is blind in darkness* To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because they have no light in them, Isa. 8. 20.
He that shall say the Scripture is to be believed rather than the Church, is to
be condemned as a Heathen and a Publican and a Stranger to Gods people. Noguera
lihro secundo de Ecclesia. They are Idolaters that act by Scripture examples,
not having their rule by inspiration immediate from God. Whatever things were
written were written for our examples. They are Heretics and to be condemned
who take the Scripture for their rule without the authority of the Church. Be
ye followers of us, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an example.
The Scriptures do not give light nor are they binding any further, than they
come by inspiration, and are received in Spirit. Let us break his bands
asunder, and cast his cords from us, Psalm* 2. The Scripture not being
understood is no Scripture. Lorinus Jesuita in Psalmum 119. 105. They that are
under the Law, shall be judged by the Law. The Scripture without the authority
of the Church not binding. The Gospel of Matthew, no more than the History of
Titus Livius. Surdisius Cardinalis in Chatechismo. No more to be valued than an
Aesops Fable. Papists, Prelates, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, all
fly to the Scriptures. To the Law and to the Testimony. Isa. 8. 20. Most of the
Heretics, if not all take refuge in the Scriptures. Gretserus Jesuita. All
that are unconverted (that is not Quakers) must be shut out of the Scriptures.
I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they accounted them a
strange thing. The Scriptures are neither necessary, fit, nor profitable for
the common people to read. Harding Jesuita. Petrus Lizetus. Scriptures
profaned by their reading. All the false Religions this day take their rise
from the Scriptures. The words of the Lord are pure words, Psalm. 12. 6. Every
word of God is pure, Prove. 30. 5. All the Heretics pretend to the Scriptures,
and will seem from thence to fetch the venom of their Heresies. Hardingus
Jesuita. Bellarminus.

PART II.
CHAP. XIII. The Quakers deny, and subvert all the Ordinances of the Gospel.
SECT. I.
THe Ordinances of God are those means, in which God and his creature Man, do
hold and maintain a professed and mutual converse and communion; wherein all
men are (as their duty) to draw nigh to God in their express worship, and
acknowledgements of the divine Being: and therein to expect from God, his
gracious presence with them, and his blessing them both with spiritual,
temporal, and eternal blessings. And although God be not tied to this or that
way, wherein to shine upon his poor creatures by his manifold goodness; yet he
is far from being bound to the loose and wanton humors of men. And having
commanded some things to be done by us, as means in order to our being so
blessed, and thereto annexed many great Isa. 64. 5.
and gracious promises of being so found of us: it is an affront of no mean
nature to the divine Majesty, and contempt of our own welfare; yea an Deus non
superstitione coli vult sed pietate.
implicit denial of our dependence on him, to neglect, much more to deny, most
of all to disdain those his Ordinances, and to cast reproach, and scorn upon
them. The eternal God who gives being God will not take superstition but piety
for his worship. Cicero.
to all things that are, and to whose being and blessedness it is beyond the
reach of any, or all together, to make the least Iota or title of addition,
owes us nothing; and whatever of his free bounty he shall please to reach us
with, it is not only suitable to Scripture revelation, but right reason also,
that in order thereunto he should choose his own ways.

And although many enjoy plenty, and prosperity 2. (...) In the way which
pleases his own mind. Socrat. in Plato. Viz. God will be worshipped.
in the outward good things of this life, in all whose thoughts God is not, and
who are utter strangers to his worship; yet God will make them know one day,
that they not coming into the possession of those good things by the right door
of his holy and religious Ordinances, they are but thieves and robbers.

But for men to attempt, or expect spiritual blessings from God out of his own
ways, (so far as they are capable of understanding what they are, and how to
reach them) is such a direct opposition, and contradiction to a soul truly
addicted and disposed to spiritual blessings, as would fill up a volume to
enumerate its parts, and express its folly: except you will say, that spiritual
blessings have nothing to do with a conformity to the will of God, and a holy
complacency, and delight resulting to our souls therein: and that they are
Quicunque Deum aut Numen non agno scit, non tantum ratione caret sed etiam
sensu. Avicenna.
made up of nothing but a self-pleasing conceit, and fancy that we have brought
God to our own bow, and made him a subject and captive to our unbridled lusts;
and so our blessedness has been hither to spelled backward, but newly found
out really to consist, not in our conformity to God, but his conformity to us.

Some of these Ordinances of the Lord have been written in natures Book, by the
light of which men have been led to prayer, and some. 3. Who acknowledges not
God is void not only of reason but sense also.
kind of thankful and reverend acknowledgements of God.

More by revelation, which with respect to Ordinances had three steps: the
first what was revealed before Moses: the second by Moses: the third at the
beginning of Christ's administration.

By Gospel Ordinances therefore, I do not intend either those (with their
circumstances) that were known and practiced by the light of nature:

Nor those which were under the Mosaical administrations, with their
circumstances: but those Ordinances which were commanded by precept, or
prescribed by example in the New Testament: or which being of natural
obligation, are therein formed with the substantial and additional respect to a
Mediator already come in the flesh, and ascended in his humane nature into
heaven.

All those Gospel Ordinances according to. 4.
the abovementioned account, being so spiritual, and so suiting the grace of
the Gospel, stripped of those costly and burdensome members of the Mosaical
dispensations, which the Apostle calls beggarly Elements, carnal Ordinances;
Gal 4 9. Heb. 9. 10.
how aggravated a rebellion must it needs be, to kick against them, and not
endure so easy and so becoming a yoke? beside its rich and plentiful Incomes.

SECT. II.
I shall first prove that the Quakers deny Gospel Ordinances in general, and
then in particular, you must not expect on the first head, that I shall produce
their denial of Ordinances under the terms Gospel Ordinances: but if I prove
they deny all the things that are truly such, it is as much as can be
reasonably expected.

And we say he [Christ] has triumphed over. 2. George Fox, great mystery, etc.
p. 16.
the Ordinances, and blotted them out; and they are not to be touched, and the
Saints have Christ in them who is the end of outward forms: and thou art
deceived who thinks to find the living among the dead. This is the Quakers
chief Apostle, to whom they have all regard, as the first among the first three
of their Worthies.

In the first place he abuses the Scripture by a grossly false and directly
contradictious Exposition. The Scripture which most agrees with his words is in
2 Col. 14. blotting out the hand writing 2 Col 14 opened.
of Ordinances, (he might have added the next words, that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross) but
these words were not for his turn.

The true meaning of the Text is, that Jesus 3.
Christ by his death fulfilling what was signified by the typical Jewish
Ordinances, and abolishing the Mosaical dispensation, entered his house [his
Church] to undertake the administration of its affairs, which he in all things
disposed as was suitable to the gracious nature of the Redeemer, and that glory
of Gods goodness that now shines in the face of Jesus Christ.

But will this great Prophet G. F. say, that the pure Gospel Ordinances are
against us? contrary to us? or as the Jewish, standing in the way of the
conversion of the Gentiles through their burthensomeness? Will he say that
Christ by his death abolished his own proper Ordinances? Will he say that he
nailed them to his Cross before they had a being? diverse of them not being
formed, till by his Apostles after his resurrection. Will he say that he
blotted out the Lords Supper, and nailed that to his Cross also, as soon as he
had instituted it? as if he delighted in a fickle humor, as the Quakers; and
to give life to an Ordinance, and within twenty four hours put it to death: yea
to engage his Disciples thereby to remember his death as often as they did it,
and yet abolish the Ordinance by his death, and so take away all opportunity of
remembering his death thereby.

And that phrase of the Angel, (seeking the. 4.
living among the dead) because they are taken with the sound, is often used by
them, though not only beside the meaning of it, but contrary to the sense of
any Scripture. I am sure it was never intended to prove Gospel Ordinances dead.

You may hereby note, what he denies, viz. outward forms: they are not to be
touched, and his reason is an excellent one, the Saints have Christ in them. At
another time he will say Moses, Abraham, and the Old Testament Saints had
Christ in them, and that in their own sense; and yet I hope he will give us
leave to believe, that it was their duty to observe Gods forms. But I wonder
not that they that hold not fast the form of sound words, are so easily
persuaded to let go the forms of sound worship.

Let us hear another.

For this I say, that the Father has given his Son James Naylor, Love to lost.
p. 52.. 5.
for a leader and guide to all ages, and into and out of all forms at his will,
and in his way and time, in every generation: and therefore it is, that all who
know his will herein, cannot endure that any visible thing should be set up to
limit his leadings in Spirit:

Here you have the tenet, and the pretended reason of it; all that know his
will [that is the Quakers] cannot endure that any visible thing should be set
up, etc. But what if Christ have set them up? If they can prove as strongly
that Christ has pulled them down, and is departed from them, as we can that
Christ did set them up, and is present with and in them, we will quickly in
that point turn Quakers. But alas! the proof that he has done so, is but this;
they limit his leadings in Spirit, that is, the Quakers fancies: but if he
intended the Spirits leadings in a true sense, it is very strange that the
Gospel and Law of works should be both sick of one disease: that which was
ordained to life I found to be unto death. The Ordinances of the Gospel were
ordained to enlarge and raise the spirits of the Saints, but quite contrary
they are found to limit, and imprison the spirit: sure it must be Satan's
Spirit, and not Christ's, to whom the Ordinances are such chains.

That I may show you the Quakers Babel, let. 6.
us hear Isaac Pennington's Light speak contrary to the light of G. Fox.

When Israel was bent to seek after the Lord, and Isaac Pennington concerning
Unity, p 1.
applied their hearts to wait upon him in fasting and earnest supplications,
wherein my heart has often had the testimony that they were accepted of him,
and had many times the seal of his presence and power among them; yea my heart
did truly unite with and enjoy the Lord in what was then given forth, and I can
never deny the truth and worth of that dispensation, though I know it was
swallowed up by the breaking forth of a more lively dispensation.

This he says he found about the beginning of the late troubles. How does this
agree to G. Fox's nailing all those forms to Christ's Cross at. 7. P. 28. I deny
that God did ever or will ever reveal himself by any of those things thou
call the means of grace. ^ Atkinson.
his death, and then blotting out these Ordinances? But yet I. P. will needs
have them swallowed up now, though he gave them leave to live 1600 years, more
mercifully however than G. who would have them stifled in the womb, or
crucified so soon as born.

But Pennington is so cruel by that time he arrives to p. 38, that he says,
Such of the people of God -- as do not follow the Lord perfectly out of the
things City of abomination, [visible worship] -- but be found in any part
thereof when the Lord comes to judge her, the Lord will not spare her, nor the
spirits of his dearest people who are found there, etc.

Both by the Scripture and their own confession, Christ did not long since
dwell in those Ordinances, which we call Gospel Ordinances, and the Quakers,
Babylons forms, and abominations. Until they show us better grounds for
Christ's remove, than the secret witness of the Spirit within them, which we can
prove to be a Spirit of delusion, by Scripture, reason, and sense it self, let
none who follow not Christ blindfold, have the worse opinion of Ordinances for
all the Quakers talk.

I now come to particulars, and begin with the Gospel Ministry.

SECT. III.
They deny and subvert the Ministry of the Gospel, railing on the Ministers, as
the vilest persons, and veriest cheats in the world; making ill use of those
Scripture words, Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. Next to
the Scripture, they lay not their batteries against any thing so much as
against the Ministers of the Gospel, and have so little honesty as to rake up
all that is to be found on any one, or any that pretend to be Ministers of
Christ, and cast it in the faces of all without distinction, as equally guilty.
And for their more particular attempts, those who are the most faithful and
serious, are the objects of their greatest fury. I shall not blot paper with
their railing.

First, They deny all Ministry that has a mediate Par^el Shield, etc. p. 16
call to that office and employment; and their call to the Ministry we deny,
which is mediate.

But who can witness an immediate call from. 2.
God -- and speak it [the Gospel] as they are moved by the holy Ghost -- and
such travail from place to place, and have no certain dwelling place: this
Ministry Fox mystery, etc. p. 45.
we own and witness. Thou art corrected by the Scripture, and the Apostle
corrects thee, who says, I have not received it of man, nor by man, and bid
others look at Jesus the author of their faith. Their Writings are abounding
with matter of this nature.

We acknowledge that all the true Ministers of. 3.
Christ ought to have an immediate call, such as consists in grace, and gifts,
and disposition to that worthy office and employment; and such as have not this
immediate call, we account unworthy of the thing and name: but the Quakers
pretended-immediate call, is far from the Apostles, as I have proved at large
on the point of inspirations; neither are the Ministers of Christ now,
Apostles, as they were. But if we call for the Quakers proof of their immediate
call, hear what Farnworth says: As for pretenses, Farnworth against Stalham,
p. 22.
we do not pretend that we are immediately called, but we witness that we are.
And what is their witness? their own fancy, and their own say-so; and we
witness, that such witnesses will carry the cause no where but in the fools
Court, who the wise man says, believes every word.

And G. Fox's proof is as much to the purpose,. 4.
not of man, the call of the Apostle, while we pretend not to be Apostles. And
bid others look at Jesus the author of their faith, as if that Text intended a
faith that they were called to be Apostles, which speaks of the faith of all
believers, who received it by the mediate Ministry of the Gospel.

For being moved by the holy Ghost, which is by them made an essential mark of
a true Minister; we allow, but yet affirm, That those who are moved by the
commands of the Spirit in the Scripture, are moved by the holy Ghost,
especially when the Authority of God therein prevails with them.

As for having no certain dwelling place, and. 5.
leaving houses, lands and possessions; let them repair to William Pen, and
others of their Ministers for an Answer to it, who have large possessions, and
brave habitations, such as few Ministers whom they disclaim (especially the
poor non-Conformists) enjoy, and will not so easily (as Pen's phrase is) be
fobb'd out of them, as they fobb others out of the truths of the Gospel.

But indeed will you deny that the Elders that. 6. Tit. 1. 5.
were ordained in every City by the appointment of Paul, and by the hand of
Titus, had any mediate call? or those spoken of, Acts 14. 23. Acts 14. 23.
And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and had prayed with
fasting, they commended them to the Lord on whom they believed. If you will not
believe these had a mediate call, I despair of your believing any thing but
what you list.

SECT. IV.
Another ground of their denying our Ministry is, that they teach from the
Scripture.

And the Word is immediate, and all the Ministers Fox mystery, etc. p. 44.
of Christ preach the immediate Word, and wait for it, and the outward written
words with ink and paper are mediate: so then, The written Word being preached
from, makes a man no Minister.

And of this sort are they, that have their preaching W. D. p. 30.
to study, and to seek at other men's mouths, or from the letter, but have it
not from the mouth of the Lord. If the Scripture be not the mouth of the Lord,
there is no such thing as Gods mouth.

And here is the difference of the Ministers of the world, and the Ministers of
Christ, -- the one of the Parnel's Shield of the Truth. p. 17.
letter, the other of the Spirit. -- For they are mere deceivers and witches,
bewitch people from the truth, holding forth the shadow for the substance, and
what is the chaff to the wheat?

Here is not a bare denial of those to be. 2.
Christ's Ministers, who preach the Word of God out of the Scriptures, but
charging them with witchcraft; and what are the instruments of their
witchcraft, but the holy Scriptures? most horrid doctrine! and yet these
wretches will tell you, they honor the Scriptures, and a Scripture Ministry.
But this is not all, the tide rises yet higher.

And so he [the Devil] takes Scripture to maintain his kingdom, and this he
delivers by the mouth of his Ministers, which he sends abroad to deceive the
Nations, leading people in blindness, etc.

These words are plain, and no parable; therefore I leave you to behold without
a glass the villainy of these misleaders.

I have already proved that not only we ought,. 3.
but Christ and his Apostles did teach out of the Scriptures; therefore (by the
Quakers account) they were also as bad as they charge us to be, witches, and
deceivers, etc.

O, but there is another indictment against us, we are not infallible.

How can ye be Ministers of the Spirit, and not of Fox Mystery, etc. p. 72.
the Letter, if ye be not infallible? There is none but God alone absolutely
infallible. And for certainty of what we teach, we dare weigh with the Quakers
at any time. But sure I am, that I never met with one of their Teachers yet, in
Writing or otherwise, but I found him more than fallible, even foolish,
contradicting the Spirit of God speaking by the Scripture, contrary to the
clearest reason, and themselves also.

But more than all this, We are Hirelings,. 4.
preach for Hire, and take Hire for preaching. And a main question for a
scrutiny into the truth of our Ministry is, Whether is your Gospel Fruits of a
Fast. p. 21.
free, and without Charge; yea or nay? This is the nail they find will drive:
People love a Cheap Gospel, they that will sell them such a one shall buy their
souls into the bargain, and vassalize their understandings to their most
corrupt dictates.

To preach for Hire we call a Vile iniquity, to. 5.
receive Hire for preaching we dare not condemn: because Christ has said, The
labourer is 10 Luke 7. 2 Cor. 11. 8. 1 Cor. 9. 14.
worthy of his hire. And the Apostle said, He took wages of other Churches to
serve them [the Corinthians;] It is ordained that they that preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel: and so has the Lord ordained. So that a Ministers
maintenance for preaching the Gospel, is Gods ordinance. The Apostle exhorts
Timothy, To give himself to the work of the Ministry: as it is the duty of
every one ordinarily employed therein. And is God and Christ a hard Master? to
oblige his Ministers to give up themselves to that work, and let them and
theirs starve for it.

But moreover, you may know (if you please). 6.
that there are thousands this day in England, who preach the Gospel in poverty
and distresses, and cleave to their work when stripped of their wages; which
number there needs not, one Quaker to make up; yet take heed you commend them
not for it.

Another objection is, we study for our Sermons. 7.


What is study but meditation, and searching to understand the truth, and to
get it into our heads and hearts? if this be a sin, obedience to God is so. And
the Apostle bids Timothy (who 2 Timothy 2. 15.
had excellent gifts, and was brought up from a child in the holy Scripture)
study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth.

Then it seems it is no idle task to preach like a workman, and divide the Word
of truth aright; and that we may be approved to God, and free from shame among
men, we must study.

But that which turns us all off hand-smooth is,

SECT. V.
That till we are taught by the light within immediately, we cannot speak one
word of truth, but all lies, though the matter we deliver be the highest truth.

And all be in the Satanical delusions, that be not in Fox great mystery, p. 5
the immediate teachings from the Spirit.

But the greatest professors upon the earth are P. 62.
there of the Devil, that speaks the words of truth, but not as they are in
it; as so says Christ to the Jews, they were of their Father the Devil, they
speak of themselves -- they speak of themselves as the Devil does, but abide
not in the truth, but a liar from the beginning.

The Devil speaks a lie from himself, that is a truth, for no body need teach
the Devil to lie: but how will it follow that whatever any man speaks of
himself is a lie? then it seems for a man to be first in telling any thing,
true or false, it is a lie; whereas we use most to suspect the truth of that,
which comes by a second, or third hand, or more: but the conclusion is, what we
have not by immediate inspiration, and teach it, we speak it of our selves, and
therefore are devilish liars.

The learned Fisher will help the Fox at a dead Velata quaedam revelata, p. 7.
Jer. 5. 2.
lift, and piece his tale.

And to such wise sayers and knowers as these -- God says, though ye say God
lives, yet as I live ye swear falsely, and why falsely? was not that a truth that
God lives? but not a truth truly testified unto by them (any more than what is
testified in foro hominum, in men's Courts, by such as being not eyewitnesses
thereof, have it only by hearsay from others) because they witnessed to it but
in stolen words.

Here is then the proof, that we speak more. 2.
than we know, and therefore lie. This is indeed pretty near a lie; but that
they who live in the light of the Creation, and read and believe and know the
Scripture to be the Word, or the words of God; and affirming no nicer a truth,
than that God lives, should lie; because they know it not by immediate
inspiration, is very strange: He that lives, may know from thence that God
lives, who holds every soul in life that lives.

But the meaning of the Text may be (and I will trust the sober Readers
judgment to decide it betwixt us) that they did not believe the Lord lived,
and swearing what they thought untrue, or doubted of, they therein swear
falsely. But I desire those who give credit to such teachers as infallible, and
inspired immediately from God, to try by the instance I am now upon, whether we
are not likely to speak more rightly concerning God, from the Scripture, than
their teachers without book? In the quotation of this Text, Fisher has
falsified (beside his Exposition) in three plain cases, for they say he writes
ye say, for the Lord lives, God lives, there is both taking away a word, and
changing another, and makes God swear too, where there is not a word or title
of it in the Text, and so adds to the Word of the Lord these words, yet as I
live. This is ordinary from these inspired teachers, and to tell us God says
so, lest we should take them to be his own words, adds to the boldness of the
perverting the Scripture. I could write a Catalogue of a thousand such faults
in the Quakers citing of Scripture, some adding, some leaving a word or two out
through carelessness, or wilfulness. I have from what is here evident reason to
say to you, as the A postle to the Galatians, O foolish Gal. 3. 1.
souls who has bewitched you? Certainly it must be a strong delusion that thus
blinds you; He feeds on ashes, a deceived heart has turned him Gal. 3. 1.
Isa. 44. 20.
aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say is there not a lie in my right
hand?

SECT. VI.
The next Ordinance I shall prove them to deny is, a Gospel Church.

And the Church so gathered into God, is the pillar Naylor love to the lost, p.
17.
and ground of truth, where the Spirit alone is teacher.

The Gospel Church is a Church which has other teachers, and not the Spirit
alone; but such a Church is not James Naylors nor the Quakers.

The Church wherein the Apostles were, sure had some teachers beside the
Spirit; whereas the Apostles gave themselves to preaching of the Word.

And Elders were ordained in every (particular) Acts 14. 23. 1 Cor. 4. 17. 1
Cor. 12 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Church.

As I teach in every Church.

God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers. The Elders are exhorted to feed the flock of Christ which is among
you.

Priest (that is the Minister) he brings in,. 2. Fox great mystery, p. 32.
saying, we utterly deny all their ways and doctrines, who exclude all
teachings of man.

Answ. Contrary to the Prophets, who bid people cease from man, whose breath
was in their nostrils; a Text hugely to the purpose.

But most will conclude that these Authors do not speak the minds of the
Quakers, for that they have more teachers than all others.

Men-Ministers, Women-Ministers, and any one of them when there is a motion to
it.

It is confessed that in point of fact it is so,. 3.
but it is a most palpable contradiction to their professed principle: I should
be glad to hear they were more true to it, that the light within might be their
only teacher, and they would let others alone, till that turned them Quakers.
But Satan is cunning, and can give a dispensation, where it may serve so
greatly to the promoting of his Kingdom.

Sometimes they have silent meetings, as is known to most; then they say they
attend to the teacher within, which is sufficient, and by which they find more
comfort often, than when there is speaking.

But at a meeting not far from my dwelling,. 4.
there was the strangest teaching that I believe was ever heard of among
pretended Reformers; and I had it from a man of note among them, who was one of
the meeting. There declared, not a man but a woman (that is ordinary) not an
English woman but a Dutch woman, (that is not so frequent) not in English but
in Dutch, (this was orderly according to the Popish Mass) and prayers in an
unknown tongue to the people. But the strangest thing of all was, he told me
(that although not one of them understood Dutch, nor could the Dutch-woman
interpret into English, at least she did not) they knew she spoke by the
Spirit. I asked him how? he told me because they all found refreshings; so have
children many a time at Puppet-playes. What a pass are these people come to,
who yet deny all teachings by man?

But that you may not doubt the truth of the. 5.
Story, there being a dispute (or somewhat so called by some) between me, and
George Whitehead, the Quakers Champion; I did before all the audience charge
them with this thing, my Informer a Quaker being there, and many more Quakers
who were at that meeting: but none dared to deny one word of the Charge, only
George Whitehead said, it may be there was some body there that understood
Dutch.

But what have they to say, think you, to this. 6.
contradiction of their principles in teaching? Why, it is not they but the man
Christ, or the light or the Spirit that teaches; and if such light replies will
not serve turn, you may go somewhere else to be satisfied for them.

But beyond all contradiction, if the Church, and Churches mentioned and owned
in the New Testament, be Gospel-Churches, the Quakers deny a Gospel Church; for
all of them had men who taught them, at least they did not deny any such helps.

But we will produce a testimony or two more,. 7.
to see if we can make a further discovery.

For the Church is but one, and the Temple of God Parnel Shield of the truth,
p. 34.
we own, which is at new Jerusalem, the City of the living God.

I have read of the Church at Jerusalem, before it was destroyed by the Romans,
and of the Churches at Corinth, in Thessalonica, Ephesus, and many places more:
and I have read of the Church called Jerusalem which is above, and the City of
the living God; but never yet of the Church which is at new Jerusalem: this is
none of the Churches the Apostles ever built, or set in order. But let it pass
as a rumor till farther confirmation.

The holy Ghost made the Officers of the Church Overseers -- the. 8.
Overseers to be invisible, for they saw with an invisible eye, and so they was
in the Spirit which is invisible, and not in the flesh. Great mystery, etc. p.
8.

Quest. Which is the fold of the sheep? Isaac Penningtons Questions, P. 49.


Answ. The wisdom, life and power of the Father, even the same that is the
shepherd.

Object. Is not the Church the fold?

Answ. This in the Church, or the Church in this, is the fold; but not out of
this.

Seeing this is the best account we can get, I. 9.
must repair to William Smith, who tells us, That all we do according to
Scripture-patterns, is but building of Babylon, and that I am sure is not Zion:
and this is the scope of many Pages in his Morning Watch. But I have proved
them to Morning Watch.
deny all forms and visible things in Religion and worship, upon the general
head; but the Gospel Church is a form, in whom all the building is fitly
framed: I am sure that is a strange building Ephesians. 2. 21.
without any form; but to be framed and formed is one and the same thing with
being put into a form.

For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with Col. 2. 5, 19.. 10.
you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of
your faith in Christ, and not holding the head, from which (not in which only)
all the body by joints and hands having nourishment ministered and knit
together, increases with the increase of God.

So that a Gospel Church is a number (for (...) is a name of many gathered
together) united according to Christ's form, first to him, then one to another,
for mutual edification in the things of God. But this the Quakers utterly deny.

CHAP. XIV. They deny the Ordinance of hearing the Word preached.
SECT. I.
THey will allow a hearing the Word preached, and that must be the light
within, but the mind of God contained in the Scripture, they must by no means
hear preached: for (as I hinted from G. Fox) we must not hear man; for the
Prophets bid, Cease from man. But having already so largely proved their tenet
to be, That only the light within must be attended to, I need not do the same
thing over and over. I will give you a Scripture or two, to strengthen you
against this fancy-full teacher, the light within.

And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it Romans 10. 15, 18.. 2.
is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
peace? etc.

But I say, have they not heard? yea verily, their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

Here are more Preachers than one, and these Texts explain what is meant by the
word, nigh thee, in the 8th Verse, which the Quakers lay as a strong foundation
for their light within. This Word must be heard, or they could not believe; and
it could not preach it self, for they could not hear without a Preacher; and
these Preachers could not be the Word Christ, for they had feet, which Christ
as within believers, Christ as the eternal God, has not: and the Preachers
were more than one, whereas Christ the Word is but one, as appears by the
Relatives plural, they, them, theirs.

But now I am upon the point of hearing the. 3.
Word, a great mystery of the Quakers comes into my mind, and it is worth the
revealing.

That is this: They hold it is the light that preaches, the light that is
preached, the light that hears or is preached to; and so the light, which with
them is God, Father, Son, and Spirit, is all concerned in the Gospel, and man
nothing at all, for it is the light that does all also. I think when I have
proved this, I have discovered that which will render the Quakers the most
absurd and blasphemous Idiots, that ever undertook to speak with man's voice.

Quest. Is there something of God in my conscience, Smith Prim. p. ^
that will give me the knowledge of him?

Answ. There is not any thing else that can do it.

And man cannot know him [God] by any other Smith Cat. p. 2*
way, but by the manifestation of his light within him.

Now I shall prove that the light is the main. 4.
(if not the only) thing to be preached, according to the Quakers Tenet.

Mind the light of God, which has convinced you. Parnel's Shield of the Truth.
p. 42.


And this is the meaning of our doctrine, to bring people to the everlasting
Word of God in themselves.

And that this light within is also preached to, and the only auditor of the
doctrines which the Quakers say are preached, and taught by the light, is
proved by these instances.

To the light of God in all your consciences I speak, Parnel's Shield of the
Truth, Epistle. p 42. Fox great mystery, etc. p. 15.
which is one in all.

So I desire that you may mind the light of God, to which I speak, which is my
witness.

Priest. There is nothing in man to be spoken to, but man.

Answ. How then ministered the Apostle to the Spirit? And Christ spoke to the
Spirits in prison: And Timothy was to stir up the gift that was in him.

I must not ravel into these Texts now, as 1 Pet. 3. 19. opened.
brought in by Fox; I shall say more of it in the following Pages: only take
notice, That these spirits were the souls of those men (and so a part of them)
with whom the Spirit of God did strive before the flood, but are now (as the
Devils) under the irreversible sentence of damnation, which is in part already
executed on them, which is their now prison, wherein they are fast reserved to
future and greater punishments, and in part punished already.

Over and above, George Fox is both out of the humility, and the meekness (as
they phrase it) and out of the knowledge of himself, and out of his wits also;
in saying, That there is a proof to Fox great mystery, p. 64.
thee, that the Quakers are sent of God, who speak to thee of the Scriptures
right as they are.

I am lastly to show you by good proof, that the light within is the obedient
subject also, to its own absolute and infallible dictates; and then I have
discharged a very fair Province. Pennington quest. p. 26.


Now is the life, the faith, the obedience of the Son, the thing which is of
value in us.

So that their obedience is the obedience of the Son, alias the light in them;
which is all one with the light in me obeys. And upon this conceit it is, that
they say they are saved by the righteousness of Christ, because they account
all the righteousness done by them, to be the pure and unmixt acts of the light
within.

We are accused that we judge people. Parnel Shield of the truth, p. 3.


Where Christ rules in his Saints he judges, as Paul said, It is no more I,
but Christ in me.

I forbear here to remark his forging of Scripture, or making Gods stream to
turn the Devils Mill: But, right or wrong, it is plain he would have you
believe, it is not their act, but Christ's act. And if you enquire of any of
them, (that have drunk in their principles, and are not Novice-Quakers) whether
any act of their obedience to the light, be their obedience? they will answer,
no, no, it is the obedience of Christ; the obedience of the light.

SECT. II.
The Quakers disown Gospel-Prayer.

I take Gospel-Prayer to be, the souls uttering its wants and desires to God,
by way of humble supplication; with an audible voice, when it is exercised
solemnly in a Congregation, or Family; with or without an audible voice, when a
person is private: but always in the name, and for the sake and merits of Jesus
Christ. And this the Quakers disown.

That they use not prayer (audibly at least). 2.
with their Families daily, is known by all that have opportunities of so
conversing with them; wherein they sin against our Saviors Directory: After
this manner pray ye, etc. When ye pray Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.
say, Our Father, etc. And in both, one Petition is, Give us this day our daily
bread; wherein two things are employed:

First, Prayer by more than one; Our Father give us: Secondly, Family Prayer;
for that the whole family sharing in common in the plenty or scarcity of
provision, (especially for the belly which is the great spender) they are
concerned to put up their joint supplications to God for daily bread, and that
daily: which might have made a third Note, viz. That although we may pray every
prayer we offer up to the Lord, for provision to our lives end; yet we are to
pray for it every day, and especially for the provision of the present day. But
this the Quakers wholly disuse, as a contemptible form.

That they crave not Gods blessing, nor express. 3.
their thankfulness at set-meals for their Table-mercies, is as notorious as
the other: whereas we have Christ's example for it; And John 6. 11. Mark 6. 41.
Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed, etc. And
when he had taken the five loaves, and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven,
and blessed, etc. So Paul, He took bread and gave Acts 27. 35.
thanks to God in the presence of them all; and when he had broken it, he began
to eat, etc.

All that ever I could learn of the Quakers acknowledgement. 4.
of benefits received, or receivable by us, from what the Man Christ Jesus did
and suffered in the world, amounts but to this: He left us a perfect example;
and yet they think scorn to follow that, as below such spiritual persons.

He looked up to heaven, which implies, he did it for example sake at least,
(though all the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily) express the divine
Being (especially and in his more glorious manifestations) to be above, or
beyond the visible boundaries of this little world.

And as it is against Christ's example, so against somewhat more than a
Gospel-precept: For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be 1 Timothy 4.
4, 5.
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the Word
of God and prayer.

So that to omit this duty (which therefore Paul would not when in a storm, and
the company in a consternation with fear of death) renders the creature no good
to us, as being unsanctified by God.

But rather than this shall pass for a proof of what we assert, and for a
rebuke to the Quakers spirit of disobedience, James Naylor will engage his
infallibility to bring them off clear. But Naylor Love to the lost, p. 57.
where the pure is not (viz. the light) all things are defiled, when they are
not sanctified by the Word and prayer, and therefore are to be received in
fear, and therein remembering his death till he come, who is the Word and prayer.

And now ^oul take thine ease, eat and drink; for if thou have the Quakers
light within thee, thou need not frame thy self to the serious employment of
prayer, and thanksgiving at meals: for the light within (the Quakers only
Christ) is not only the Word that command prayer, but prayer also in the
abstract; and they that have that, cannot at any time be without prayer, though
they are altogether silent.

They also deny public Ministerial Prayer:. 5.
for although they have some who utter petitions, they do it (as I am informed)
always in the first person singular, I pray thee, not We pray thee. So that
although they may pray for others, they pray not with them as their mouth,
which is contrary to Christ's Directory, and the communion of Saints in the
Ordinances of the Gospel. And if uncontroulled fame fail not, they give this
reason for it, That they both pray and declare for the sakes of others, not
their own, who are obedient to the light; for they need neither.

SECT. III.
But there are three things that fully prove their denying of Gospel-Prayer.
First, Their contempt of true Gospel-Prayer.

So the same wisdom may deny the prescribed way, Smith Cat. p. ^^7.
as being formal, and may invent something instead of it, in a higher mystery
of iniquity; and though they may not speak in such formal words composed, yet
in the same wisdom their words are formal: they can set their own time to begin
and end, and when they will they can utter words, and when they will they can
be silent; and this is the unclean part which offers to God, which he does not
accept, etc.

What the wisdom here is intended by the Author, you shall see by and by: but
the main formality inveighed against is keeping of set-times; but they may
forgive us this error, it being so well known, that they have set-times, and
exceed their ordinary hours no more than we. And the wisdom of the flesh is,
that we do it in our own wills: if they mean not in obedience to the will of
God, it is more than they know: if it be according to the will of God, and our
wills comply with that, it is so much the better, for God likes no service
against, nor without the will: To choose the things that please God, pleases
God very well. It is well known, that many of them when they come into our
Congregations, and are present when the Minister is at Isa. 56. 4.
prayer, they will sit all the while in the midst, with their Hats on their
heads, in contempt, which I my self have experienced more than once.

Secondly, Owning no prayer that is not by immediate inspiration, and motion of
the Spirit; and without the use of our conception, and direction of the
understanding.

But as every creature is moved by the Spirit of the Naylor Love to the lost.
p. 13.
living God, who is that Spirit who will be served with his own alone, not with
any thing in man, which is come in since the fall; so the imaginations,
thinkings, and conceivings are shut out.

So all must come to the Spirit of God, by the Spirit Smith Cat. p. 100.
to be ordered, and cease from their own words, and from their own time, and
learn to be silent till the Spirit give them utterance.

That we ought to pray in the Spirit, and with the Spirit, is far from us to
deny: but he that prays according to the mind of the Spirit of God revealed in
the Scripture, (which is the Spirits Directory) and who by the commands,
exhortations and promises therein contained, is moved to pray: he prays in the
Spirit, and with the Spirit, although he have no immediate motions from the
divine Being. He that obeys Gods commands in his written Word, does his duty,
and is through Christ accepted of him.

But lest you should mistake the Quakers meaning of the phrase, traditions of
men, take notice, That they hold the written Word, and what is therein
contained as its sense, to be but the traditions of men, except it come to us
by immediate inspiration, as to the Prophets and Apostles, and not at second
hand; which I have already proved, and therefore need not do it over again.

And by what I have here produced you may learn, That they deny any thing of
man to be exercised in prayer. If he intended hereby, only the depravation that
is come in since the fall, it were very right: but certainly faith in the
Redeemer, and the promises which in him are yea and amen, as the encouragement
to prayer, is come in since the fall, though no part of the fall; and all the
Ordinances of Christ as such, are come in since the fall; and faith and
Gospel-obedience are all in man most eminently. But that the imaginations,
thinkings, and conceiving must be shut out also, is a most absurd notion.

What! must we pray, and neither conceive nor think what we are to do, what we
ought to do, nor how to express our selves? no, nor while we are praying? Must
all be done, as if man in his faculties of conceiving, knowing, were not Gods?
nor to be concerned in his worship? Certainly if nothing of man, soul or body,
be active therein, man does not worship God, nor pray at all, and so God
worships himself; which is the true result of the Quakers Tenets.

But let us consider a Text or two out of the Word of God.

I would order my cause before him, and fill my Job 23. 4. (...)
mouth with arguments. The word order in the Heb. signifies a marshalling his
words. Prayer is not only a petition, but a humble pleading, wrestling with
God: and sure there was somewhat of Job in ordering his cause, and he used his
spiritual skill in it: It Is rendered by Arias Montanus, disponerem, I would
dispose my cause.

Give ear to my words, O Lord. Psalm. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 15.


What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also, etc. Here is Paul's will in prayer, I will: and here is
Paul's understanding also exercised in prayer, verse. 15. But my understanding
is unfruitful, which he blames as a companion of prayer, that being supposed.

Thus I have proved the Quakers denying Gospel-prayer in this respect
abovementioned, and reproved their anti-Gospel notions, by the Scriptures.

Lastly, They own no prayer, but what is by the light, and in the light within.

And the prayers of such only are accepted, and not the prayers of those who
think to be heard for their much Smith Cat. p. ^12.
babbling; who have many words, but not in the life.

So that their prayers only are acceptable who pray in the life, (that is, with
the Quakers, by the motions of their light within) and although we are far from
thinking to be heard, for the sake of much better things than much babbling; yet
all the words of prayer that are not qualified by their principle, the light
within, is in their account but babbling.

For it is truth in the inward parts he seeks for, Naylor love to the lost, p.
16.
wherein none of you can worship, who know not the living Word in your hearts,
to keep them up to God in your worship, and that worship which is not in the
will of God, is the worshipping of Devils.

If you ask any of them, What is the truth in the inward parts? They will not
answer, it is sincerity, meanings suitable to our expressions, and appearances:
but it is Christ the light within, who is the truth. And for knowing the living
Word, it is of the same sense, it is all but the light within every man, the
Quakers Christ. And for the will of God, that is nothing but the immediate life
and motions of the light within. I have said enough out of their Writings to
prove these things, neither will they deny them* but Naylor tells you (and it
is not for any Quaker to resist the Spirit by which he spoke) that worship not
thus qualified, is the worshipping of Devils.

It may be some of the Quakers, though they know in their consciences that I
speak but the very truth of their Tenets and Notions, will say, I put my
meanings to their words: but if they will but bate me speaking from their light
within, which they hold necessary to qualify a man to speak truly, I dare
undertake to expound according to their meaning, their ill meant phrases, as
well as the most of them and their mystery is none to me at all.

And although they talk of praying in the. 5.
name of Christ, yet as Naylor phrases it, That is done in the name of Christ,
which is done in his light and power. But when all is done, this Christ, and
name, and light, and power, is but the light within, and its teachings and
motions.

It is to me reported on all hands, That they never pray in the name of Christ
as their Mediator; much less then do they pray to God, in, or in the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary; or of that one Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus; even that Jesus, who was crucified at Jerusalem
between two thieves, above 1600 years since. I have put this to many of them,
and they denied not this Charge; neither can I see how they can pray to the
Father in the name of Christ, seeing God the Father and Christ (with them)
admit of no distinction: and for the man Christ that was born of Mary, they
have nothing to do with him.

The Apostle says, A Mediator is not of one, but God is one.

And whoever they are that deny and disown prayer in the name of Christ, are
far from owning the Gospel-Ordinance of prayer.

SECT. IV.
Reading the Scriptures and Meditation, which are Gospel Ordinances, they also
deny.

I need not tell you of the contempt they put upon the Scripture as a dead
letter, the carnal letter; and on those who attend to it, as dry W. P. Spirit
of Truth.
Letter-mongers. Take only one instance of William Pens; But all must be as
unlearned from their first birth, education and traditional read knowledge, as
he is unmanned, that is, again become a little child, before the secrets of
Gods work come to be made known. And Fisher calls studying the Scripture,
scraping in the Scripture. I wonder wherefore God ordered and commanded them to
be written, if they are not to be read and studied.

The Spirit of Christ within, is the end of the Tables, Great mystery, p. 32..
2. William D^usbury Return, p. 7.
Law, Works and Books, and the Law is now in the heart.

Whatever thou be, whether a teacher of others, or a professor of what thou
comprehends to be truth from the letter of the Scripture; under what form,
name, or title soever thou be, thou art a dead man, and a dead woman, and the
wrath of God abides on thee, though thou see it not, Romans 7. 9. Miserable man!
that talks at this rate, and will father it on the Scripture too, and such a
one as is directly against him. But we have had enough of this smoke.

SECT. V.
I shall say somewhat of their abundant scorn of the Lords Supper, and Baptism;
wherein they express a superfluity of naughtiness, not only in their Tenets,
but downright railing.

The Ordinances I have hitherto considered in particular, are called moral,
from their natural obligation, although that substantial and essential part,
and qualification of them, their respect to a Mediator, will require a
denomination more evangelical, and without which we cannot call them Gospel, or
Christian-Ordinances.

Those two Gospel Ordinances I come now to consider, are purely and perfectly
positive, and depend merely upon divinely-revealed institution, without which
they had never come within our notice, nor had they been any way obliging to us.

Yet such is the sanction that the Lord has put. 2.
upon institutions of this nature, that not only since his revealed Law has
abounded to his Church, but also when the revelations of his mind immediately
to his servants was very rare, he did not omit injunctions of this kind. The
sacrifices we read of as early as Cain and Abel. Yea Adam in his state of
innocence, (who then needed not any indication of moral duties, beyond what was
within the reach of his natural, entire, and uncorrupted light, and innate to
his perfect frame, and holy disposition) had the obligation of a positive duty
from God, in the matter of the tree in the midst of the Garden.

And to me the main ground of it was, that the absolute sovereignty of the
Creator might be acknowledged, and man might learn to render obedience to God,
not only because the matter of it is just in its self, and would be so if God
had never explicitly commanded it, but also because it is the will of God:
yea, where his will obliges singly, without the respect of natural and
unchangeable equity.

And God has so expressed his jealousy over. 3.
this right of his, that when sins against not only natural light, but
superadded precepts to confirm and strengthen its doubtfulness and decays,
have been passed by without any special expressions of his provocation, sins
committed against his positive Laws, have been avenged with a high hand.

Adam's and Eve's transgression was against an institution and positive Law,
the commission of which so stirred up the displeasure of God, that he banished
them out of Paradise, and imposed that curse, under which the world groans to
this day. And it is not below our notice, that although they were capable of
sinning against God in many other respects, yet God affixes the direful
penalty to this positive Law: In the day 2 Genesis 17.. 4.
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

The case of Nadab and Abihu, when God bare witness against them from heaven,
by consuming them with fire, was as a pillar of salt to season others with an
awful reverence of God in his purely instituted worship. Vzzah was smitten and
died on the spot, when he miscarried so little, as in sinning against a
positive Law, by putting forth his hand to save the Ark, the intention of it
being good and commendable.

And as under the Old, so under the New Testament-dispensation, God has not
left his positive Laws without the fence of his special displeasure witnessed
against the contemners, and abusers of them: For this cause many are weak and 1
Cor. 1^ 30.
sickly among you, and many sleep; that is, are dead, turned into the grave.
This was inflicted on them for their disorder at the Lords Supper: although
(especially among the Corinthians) we read of many great sins against moral
precepts, yet the Spirit of God assigns not them, but this breach as the cause.

And if we consider the great inclination of. 5.
man, to pride himself in his own innate reason and wisdom, and great
unwillingness to subscribe to any thing, that is not in its own nature within
the reach of it; we may suppose, that something with respect to that, (which is
so apt to break the bonds of mere authority, even that of God himself) the Lord
has put such a guard on positive Laws, and will not, no not now under the
dispensation of the gracious Gospel, leave men without a test of their
resignation to his divine wisdom, and absolute (though never unjust)
sovereignty and authority. And I having observed these Ordinances of the
Gospel, (which are the only merely positive Laws of the New Testament) to be
slighted, because in their own nature they seem of no tendency to edification,
have given my Reader this (not superfluous) Introduction.

SECT. VI.
I shall begin with Baptism, it being the first in order of the two, both in
its institution and practice.

The Quakers deny Water Baptism, to be now an Ordinance of Christ.

The Baptism we own, which is the Baptism of Parnel Shield of the truth, p. 11.
Christ with the holy Ghost, and with fire, but we deny all other. Here is
Water Baptism plainly denied.

But this will not serve the turn, it must be stigmatized also, with all those
who ever so conscientiously and regularly practice it.

And now I see the other [Water-Baptism] to p. 12.
be formal imitation, and the invention of man, and so a mere delusion, and all
are Heathens and no Christians, who cannot witness this Baptism, [the Baptism
of the Quakers spirit of delusion] who can witness this, denies all other.
Farnsworth against Stalham.. 2.


Your brain-imaginations we deny.

Methinks they who have read the Scripture, should not call Water Baptism the
invention of men, that is too palpable an untruth; though to call it formal
imitation be an untruth also, it is more tolerable than the other: but to
brand it with the Charge of a mere delusion, is of such reflection on its
Author, as nothing but a heart steel-hard, and a head dungeon-dark, and both
void of the fear and awe of God, could thus suggest.

And to make up the measure full, all must be reproached as Heathens, and no
Christians, whose eyes are not as blind, and foreheads as impudent as theirs;
and yet as rank Quakers as this, will call me not only injurious, but a
blasphemer also, for saying and proving they are no Christians. But lies and
confidence with them are prerogativ'd things, while truth must beg and have
nothing but by their good leave and grace, and then it may starve or flee where
the Quakers rule the roast.

They [Baptism, Bread and Wine] rose from Smith prim. P. 39.
the Popes invention, and the whole practice of those things as they use them,
had their institution from the Pope, etc.

Without doubt the light within is wonderfully. 3. It was that which by the
Pope and Popish affected Priest was ordained, and by such it is upheld to this
day. Higgins Warning, p 5.. 4.
learned in History, and (as some of the Quakers write) does declare to them
the Creation, the Fall, and what not? without the Scripture. This regardfull
Prophet can tell you, that Baptism rose from the Pope, yea, and the Wine in the
Sacrament too, which the Pope indeed took away from the Laity, but never
instituted it. And this Author, as I have before cited him, tells the world, we
call the Latin the original: his mind is all on Rome, and there I Will leave him.

Yet that I may not imitate the Quakers, who will not consider the weightiest
Reasons, and clearest against their Tenets, I shall weigh theirs truly and
justly, before I determine this point.

They who would have one Baptism inward, another Parnel Shield of the truth, p.
11.
outward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture says, the Baptism is but
one.

I must tell him by the way, that he tells an untruth wilfully, and what that
is he could tell another. He uses (or rather abuses) the words of the Apostle
just before repeated, One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and there he adds his
but, which the Text has not. And here the Scripture says, the Baptism is but
one; let him find such a Scripture, and I will be bound to turn Quaker: but
there being no such, I am sure he has not the Spirit of God, and is by it
infallibly guided, who thus forges Scripture. But to the Objection, take
notice, That Water Baptism is the sign, the Baptism of the Spirit the main
thing (but not all) signified: now to have the thing signifying, and the thing
signified, called by the same name, does not make them to be two of that name,
no more than there were two new Covenants, because the matter contained in the
Covenant is called the Covenant, Heb. 8. 10. And Circumcision the sign of the
Covenant is called the Covenant also, Genesis 17. 13. He that is born in thy
house, and he that is bought with thy money, must need be circumcised, and my
Covenant shall be in your flesh, for an everlasting Covenant.

Moreover, Baptism with water is Baptism in a proper sense, Baptism of or with
the Spirit, but analogically so called, as having in it something a likeness
to, or proportion with it. (...) from (...) signifies washing with water,
dipping into water properly; that of the Spirit, washing the soul but
improperly, for freeing it from sinful pollutions. I hope none of you believe
a soul can be rinsed or dipped. Beside, in Water Baptism, which is proper, the
body being dipped or washed, or any part of it, the flesh is put into the water,
but the soul is not dipped or put into the Spirit. Therefore this Objection is a
mere fancy; and they that will contemn the Deeds and Seal, because they are
Paper, and Ink, and Wax, and cast them away, may lose Land and all for their
contempt, and then they will pay for, and repent of their folly.

Another ground for denying it is, it was not. 5. Naylor Love to the lost. p.
laid on the Apostle of necessity, but as they found it of service, or
dis-service.

This is to be understood only of Paul, who in his call (which was out of du^
time, and in an extraordinary manner) had not this of Baptizing mentioned, as
the rest had: therefore he 1 Cor. ^. 17.
said, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. Yet he did
baptize, therefore it was an Ordinance; and that he baptized so few in that
Country, it was rather providential than designed by Paul: for he being so
famous an instrument of converting the Gentiles, they began to cry him up as if
he had not been Christ's Minister, but rather his Competitor; and therefore he
thanks God, he baptized no more, lest they should have said he baptized in his
own name. But though he did not baptize, there might be enough beside for that
work; and we read not of one that omitted it, when they understood of the
Ordinance, and had any to administer it to them.

Object. It was to confer the holy Ghost.. 6.


That was but one consequence, but not what Baptism signified: beside, the
giving the holy Ghost was of a miraculous nature for the confirmation of the
Disciples in the newness of the Christian Religion, and conviction of others:
and the friends of Cornelius had the holy Ghost before Baptism.

Object. None were called to baptize, but. 7.
those that were sent to preach to all Nations.

Answ. Ananias baptized Paul, yet was not so sent.

The ends of Baptism, which was a sign of what interest they had in Christ, and
of Regeneration, and the righteousness of faith remain; and therefore that
remains to be dispensed, by the ordinary a^mediate Officers of the Church, who
are stewards of the mysteries of God, of which this is one. It being also a
cognizance of Christianity, there is the same reason for it, and it is in vain
to talk of Ordinances abolished, without some proof when, and why they are so.

Nailor says, Paul preached the Baptism of the Love to lost, p. 41
Spirit in its stead.

Let that be proved, and something is said.

But John Higgins says, That Water Baptism Warning, etc. p. 5.
was but the administration of John, is known and confessed. I say no more to
him, but I perceive he is but little acquainted with Confessions.

I must bring in the sentence of the great Patriarch ^reat mystery of great
Whore, p. 65.. 8.
George Fox to decide all, for after his words it is not fit any of his
inferiors should speak again. Where was Matthew, or Mark, or Luke, or John
baptized? and many more which the Apostle Paul thanked God he had not baptized?
Baptizing is making Disciples to the Lord Jesus, and baptizing them into his
name, thatis, his power, -- but he [Paul] told of the Spirits Baptism, and
brought the Saints off from the things that are seen, and Water is seen, and
its Baptism.

Strange arguments! as if the command and abundant instances of its practice,
had no force; unless we have an account where every believer was baptized, and
because Paul did not baptize all, therefore they were not baptized at all.

But for Baptism being a making Disciples, if it be understood of
Water Baptism, it will be no small friend to Infant Baptism: if of the Baptism
of the Spirit, I suppose George Fox will eat his words again, and acknowledge
that the Apostles had not power to bestow the Spirit of God on persons, and
make them new creatures; that was the mistake of Simon Magus, and now of George
Fox.

But the last argument is such an one as never. 9.
offered it self to such a service, till the Quakers light (which they say is
almighty) had the management of it, and so may make an effectual instrument of
any thing. Paul brought the Saints off from the things that are seen, and Water
is seen, and its Baptism. He that shall 2 Cor. 4. 18.
look into the Text to which his words refer, will admire his sharp-piercing
genius, or his non-such ignorance, that could find such a meaning of that Text,
or tell the world it was there. But if all that is seen must be cast away and
rejected, I counsel the Quakers not to be such eager pursuers of the world, and
that I dare ground upon the Text: but (above all) to reject their proud
dreaming intolerable notions, the ignorance and delusion of which is so gross,
that it is not only seen, but may be felt also.

But for all this, the Quakers will affirm they own Baptism, and believe that
George Fox is sent of God, because he speaks of the Scripture right as they are.

SECT. VII.
The Quakers disown the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, to be now a
Gospel-Ordinance, or any Ordinance of God at all.

As of Baptism, so of the Lords Supper; they will say they own it, (at least
many of them) but they call quite another thing by that name, which is the way
they have to delude people in all other matters of the Christian Religion.

If what the Apostle Paul says, he received of 1 Cor. 11 23.
the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. do express the true Lords Supper, the Quakers deny it.

Feeding upon the husk and shadow, which is Parnel's Shield of the Truth, p. 13.
carnal.

For the Bread which the world [all that are not Quakers] breaks, is natural
and carnal -- so also the Cup which they drink, and here is no communion but
natural, outward and carnal.

They [Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper] Smith prim. p. 39.
are the Popes invention. -- The Priest gives it to the people, and tells them
it is the Blood of Christ, which is shed for them, when it is Wine and not
Blood.

I will not trouble thee with so an unnecessary a thing, as a reply to these
silly cavils, and plain contradictions to the Scripture.

The main Objection the Quakers have against. 2.
this Ordinance (beside that against all forms, and all things that are seen)
is,

That Christ is come, and his Disciples were to do it in remembrance of him
till he was come; but Christ is come in the Spirit to them, and therefore this
precept does not bind them.

But who would think the Spirit, or Christ in the Spirit was not come (either
in shedding it abroad miraculously, as in the 2 Acts) or as a sanctifier) in
the hearts of his people) when the Disciples and whole Church at Jerusalem were
so frequent in this Ordinance, and when the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians,
The Bread 1 Cor. 10 16.
which we break, etc.

But that none must be engaged by this Ordinance, but those to whom Christ was
not come by a Spirit of sanctification, is exceeding cross: for whereas the
Ordinance is for the Saints, this renders it to be peculiar to those in a state
of sin, and unconverted to Christ; and they are not ashamed to own it to be so.

Which was the thing Christ in tender love to his Naylor love to the lost, p.
58.
Disciples, at his departure, warned them on, knowing that their nature would
draw to the earth-ward, not yet being changed, nor having Christ born in them,
to keep them; and for all this warning, and leaving this as a sign, etc.

If Christ born in the soul, be not till the light within be obeyed as Christ
the Son of the living God, we doubt not the truth of Nailor's speech: and that
the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were all strangers to such a conversion.

Before I part with this Subject, it will not be unmeet to inform you, what
they mean by the Lords Supper which they own.. 3. p. 57.


But if you eat in remembrance of him, and so come to die to that which slew
him, then do you show the Lords death till he come, and when he comes he shall
not find you eating, and drinking with the drunken, etc.

So that mortification to sin (taken in the best sense) is with him the Lords
Supper; but in his own sense, it is a dying to all that does not obey the
Christ of the Quakers, [The light within.]

At another turn it is somewhat else, and quite p. 56.
contrary. Which all know who come to his Supper, where the Father and the Son
are come in, and sup with the creature, which all the imitators and observers
of times are ignorant of, whose contention is about outsides.

In the words cited before, It was a Fast, a Popish cruciating Fast.

But this last cited a Feast, a spiritual Feast; and the Feast is constituted
of the coming of the Father and the Son, supping with the creature: whereas
before his mind was, that when Christ comes, the Supper is ended; but now it is
no other but Christ himself present.

But the strangest Supper of the Lord is expressed p. 54.
by the same Author in these words: And this was to be done at all seasons,
when they eat and drink; in their eating and drinking they were to do it to the
Lord, and therein to have communion with his Body and Blood -- yea when they
were to eat with Gentiles, they were to partake of the Table of the Lord, as is
plain, 1 Cor. 10.

Thus has the Lord given up these people to. 4.
confusion.

Sometimes the Lords Supper is quite gone, and done away.

Then it remains, but it is a fasting from, and dying to sin, and what they call
excess.

Then it is spiritual and within, and Christ's coming makes the Supper.

And last of all, it is every meal you eat, and every draught you drink; you
ought therein to remember the Lords death till he come, at breakfast, dinner,
supper, and afternoons luncheons also.

And yet this wretch Nailor (to whom some of the Quakers sang Hosanna, and
worshipped him, and called him the Son of God, The Christ; and none of the
Quakers now but own him, as a great Prophet, and highly honored and beloved of
God) and yet he dared to say concerning this false confused stuff; What I have
received p. 56.
of the Lord, that I shall declare unto you. And again, And this is known from
the Lord in the p. 57.
eternal, to be the true end of the Supper of the Lord, etc.

If denying the Ordinances of Christ after the manner proved of the Quakers in
this Chapter, be Christianity, or consistent with a Christian, the holy
Scriptures have given us a very un-intelligible account of Christianity, or a
Christian: and that mouth (which said, I deny that Chapter Atkinson.
God did ever, or will ever reveal himself, by any of those things thou call
the means of grace) was not full of blasphemy, or in any fault against
Scripture, Prayer, Hearing, which were intended by it.

CHAP. XV. The Quakers deny the transactions of Jesus, Christ, when he was
manifest in the flesh in Judea above sixteen hundred years since; or as he is
now at the right hand of God, to have any influence into our Justification
before God, and our Salvation.
SECT. I.
IN this point they come not short of themselves, who in every path of error
outstrip all others, who are found in the same crooked way. I shall proceed to
the proof.

All that are called Presbyterians and Independants, Ed. Bur. Trumpet, etc. p.
17.
with their feeding upon the report of a thing done many hundred years ago.

This he says by way of reproach against all that act faith on, and receive
comfort from the blessed effects of Christ's righteousness, and sufferings by
him wrought and suffered when he was in the world.

What righteousness Christ performed without me, Farnworth.
was not my justification, neither was I saved by it. I believe it of himself,
if he died in the same mind.

Can outward Blood cleanse the conscience? can Pennington Questions, p. 25.
outward Water wash the soul clean? A plain denial of the efficacy of the Blood
of Christ shed on the Cross, to cleanse the soul from the guilt of sin, by its
satisfaction to the justice of God.

Seeing the Apostle speaks of purifying the heavenly things themselves, Heb. 9.
23. it would seriously be enquired into, and the Lord waited on to know; what
nature those sacrifices must be of which cleanse the heavenly things? Whether
they must not of necessity be heavenly? If so, then whether it was the flesh
and blood of the Vail, or the flesh and blood within the Vail? Whether was it
the flesh and blood of the outward earthly nature, or the flesh and blood of
the inward spiritual nature? Whether was it the flesh and blood which Christ
took of the first Adam' s nature, or the flesh and blood of the second Adam' s
nature?

By these Queries you may see how far he is. 2.
from believing, that the offering up of the man Christ Jesus the seed of the
woman, has any influence into our remission, and cleansing from the guilt of
sin, contemning the value of the flesh and blood of the man Christ Jesus, as
beneath and short of such an efficacy: and that of necessity there must be
flesh and blood mysteriously included in the outward, and visible flesh and
blood, of a more heavenly and spiritual nature, contrary to the words of the
Apostle which he quotes, Heb. 9. 23. which is the Apostles most forcible and
plain argument, to prove the efficacy of the offering of Christ's flesh and
blood. For if the blood of those beasts, as they were shadows and types of
Christ, were so effectual, how much more the true sacrifice, shadowed out by
them.

But we may with pity and horror behold the woeful shifts men are put to, and
bewildred in, who forsake the plain paths of the Lord in his Word, and are
resolved to lay hold on any fancy, and foolish imagination, rather than let go
the lie in their right hand.

And this we witness, who through the Lamb our Parnel's Shield of the Truth. p.
30.. 3.
Savior do reign above the world, death, hell and the devil; but none can
witness this, whose eye is outward, looking at a Redeemer afar off, and still
live in sin.

As for the qualification of living in sin, they frequently express it, to put
a blind before the Readers eyes, and are far from the true meaning of that
phrase in the Scripture: for whereas the Scripture intends it of the
unconverted, and those who are not sincere in their hatred of sin, and
obedience to God; the Quakers will needs have all to be such, as live in sin,
who have any remains of sin in them, or whose lives are not totally free from
the stains of it. But nothing is more plain, than his utterly disowning the
Christ without, and faith that looks at him; to have any thing to do in the
victory over death and hell, etc. and that the man Christ Jesus, who lived and
died as far off as Jerusalem, is not the Lamb their Savior.

Let us hear one more, that it may not pass for. 4.
only one, two or three of their Doctors opinions.

And conclude to themselves a belief in Christ, and Morning Watch. p. 21.
apply his promises, what he did for them in the body that suffered without the
gates of Jerusalem; and by his death and offering all things is accomplished
for them, and no sin shall be imputed to them, though they live in it. And
through his mediation and intercession for them, as he is at the right hand of
God at a distance from them; they believe that they have access to God, and are
accepted of him, and yet p. 22.
they neither know God nor Christ, nor the place where they say he sits at the
right hand of God, and being in their mind persuaded that Christ has
satisfied, and has reconciled them to God, though they be yet sinners.

Those he calls sinners, and condemns, are all that repair not to the light
within as their Savior, by his teaching and power within them, as is the scope
of his Book. I should but cloy you to cite more for this purpose. It is their
opinion, That Christ did, what he did in the flesh, which he took of the Virgin
Mary, and what he suffered therein also, as our Example, and no more.

SECT. II.
The influence of Christ's transactions without us, above 1600 years since, into
the Justification and Salvation of Believers, asserted, and vindicated.

I shall not need to be voluminous in the agitating this subject, many far more
able and worthy having wrote on it at large. And although amongst persons who
deserve not only the name of Christian, but Venerable in the Church of God,
there is not the same prospect into some of the more curious parts of it; yet
that the transactions of Christ without us, and before we were born, are the
merit of our Justification and Salvation, they are so firmly agreed in, that
they may as soon be persuaded to condemn and throw away their Bibles, as to be
of a contrary belief.

I shall therefore consider Christ's Obedience as active and passive, and prove
them to have in them the efficacy denied by the Quakers, and answer some
Objections.

I shall then show you what Righteousness they profess Salvation and
Justification by.

The righteousness of Christ's active Obedience without. 2.
and before us considered.

And he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of Romans 4. 8. 11. opened.
the righteousness of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised, that he
might be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised,
that righteousness might be imputed to them also.

The righteousness here spoken of is in a complete sense, and unlimited to this
or that particular case; it is a righteousness without stain of sin or
unrighteousness. And indeed there is no such thing as a complete righteousness
in the sight of God, that has any the least crookedness, obliquity, or fault
in it.

It Is that righteousness of the Covenant of grace, or thereby expressed; for
Circumcision, the seal of this righteousness, was a seal of that Covenant.

The imputation of it is according to this Text,. 3.
a reckoning it to a person; verse 10. How was it then reckoned? verse 9. Faith
was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness: not as James Nailor says, And with
him his righteousness is freely imputed, Love to the Lost, p. 7.
or put into the creature; as if imputing were a putting in. It was imputed to
James Nailor that he was a blasphemer; was it then, and thereby put into him to
be a blasphemer? A very fit Expositor of mysterious Scriptures! However he hit
right of the Quakers mind, and therefore it must be no more but put in, to this
day.

But to return: it being reckoned, and that. 4.
as a grace of the new Covenant, it was not the righteousness of Abraham by him
wrought, or wrought in his own person, as the subject of it; for then it had
not been any grace or favor from God to reckon it to him: therefore it was a
righteousness of another that was reckoned to him, not his own. Whose
righteousness it was then, may be gathered by the title of the imputed or
reckoned righteousness, verse 11. A seal of the righteousness of the faith,
which he had being yet uncircumcised.

Well then, this consideration may lead us to the truth of imputed
righteousness; if we consider faith, as being an act of the soul, and therefore
not the righteousness imputed: for so far as that is righteousness in obeying
the command Hab. 2. 4 Romans 4. 5.
of God, it is our own act. The just shall live by his faith. His faith is
accounted for righteousness.

It must needs then be the object of faith, or that which faith acts on, or
looks to; and this is no other, but The Lord our righteousness, the Jer. 23. 6
great subject of the promise and Covenant; and is therefore called. The
promise, the Covenant, and frequently, The righteousness of God, as being the
worker of that righteousness in his own person, which is of Gods appointment,
to justify a poor believer, which is not a believers, but as it is reckoned or
imputed to him.

A second ground of this Doctrine of imputed Romans 5. 21.. 5.
righteousness, is in Romans 5. 21. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so
might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. That this righteousness of Christ is imputed to Justification, and
therein the abounding grace of God, is plain in the 17, 18, and 19 verses,
where the Apostle lays his argument for grace and righteousness through Christ,
in its similitude to the influence of Adam's sin by imputation. For if by one
man's offense death reigned by one, verse 17. Therefore as by the offense Rom 5.
17, 18, 19
of one, judgment came upon all men, verse 18. For as by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, verse 19. much more they which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ, verse 17. so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men, to justification of life, verse 18. so by the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous, verse 19.

And further to clear this truth (if clearer evidence may be possible) the
consideration of verse 14. will contribute a good measure.

Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adam' s transgression, who is the figure of him
that was to come.

There are two respects wherein (at least many. 6.
of) those over whom death reigned from Adam to Moses, did not sin after the
similitude of Adam's transgression.

First, They did not sin against a revealed Law, which Adam did, in eating the
forbidden fruit: and there was no revealed Law, or Covenant of life expressly
given from God after Adam's time, before the fall, until Moses.

Secondly, They did not all sin actually, and in their own persons, as Adam
did; yet death reigned over Infants, who were in respect of actual sin,
Innocents. And by what Law did Infants suffer death? if not as they were
included in Adam the first man, and his offense becoming theirs thereby;
according to those words, 1 Cor. 15. 22. For as in Adam all die, so in 1 Cor.
15 22.
Christ shall all be made alive. So that if it were not by the imputation of
Adam's sin, Children or Infants suffered a penalty without all Law; which is
contrary to the Apostles words, Romans 5. 13. But sin is not imputed when there
is no Law. But there was a Law then in force, viz. the penalty of Adam's sin,
which by imputation reached to his posterity. And in this very respect, Adam
was the figure of him that was to come, viz. Jesus Christ.

So that if the righteousness of Christ, of that. 7.
one man Christ Jesus, be not imputed to justification of all his children by
faith, or that are considered by God in Christ; the whole frame of the Apostles
arguing is but trifling, and concludes nothing of what it seems to aim at,
which is not to be admitted by a Christian.

There are four Objections (among others) I have met with, against the evidence
of these Texts, to the Doctrine I have vindicated.

Object. 1. Christ was our example, and. 8.
therein did answer to Adam as his figure; for sin came into the world by
Adam's example, and so righteousness by Christ's.

Answ. This is an old error; and what error so old and rotten, that the Quakers
will not embrace, who live in error as their element?

The Texts I have quoted, have not the least appearance of sin entering the
world by example; and the Infants over whom death reigned, were not capable of
sinning by example.

Object. 2. There might be a derivation of. 9.
Adam's corrupted nature to all his posterity, and so all of them might be
guilty of sinful dispositions and habits in their own persons; yet by
generation from Adam, and not by imputation of his sin committed in his own
person: so the righteousness that justifies, may be derived in spiritual
regeneration, whereby the soul is disposed, and enabled to work righteousness,
by that spiritual life and vigor it receives from him as its root.

Answ. That cannot be the meaning, for then the condemnation spoken of would be
by all and every one; which though it be true, that dispositions to sin are
derived from Adam by natural generation, and dispositions to holiness by
regeneration from Christ, yet cannot be the meaning of these Texts: for the
emphatical word which as upon the hinge the whole argument turns, is the word
one; by one man's offense, by the obedience of one; whereas if the Objection did
hit the meaning, the Apostle must rather have said, So by all or every man's
offense, condemnation came upon all: But there is no mention of that middle
thing, man's corrupt disposition to knit condemnation to Adam's sin, as a more
original and remote cause. Also it should then be in or into all, and not upon
all.

Object. 3. The condemnation that came upon. 10.
all, and that reigned from Adam to Moses, was but temporal death, and what is
that to eternal; or to bear a proportion with justification to life, spiritual
and eternal.

Answ. It is more than you prove, or can prove; that it was but corporal and
temporal death; and we can prove that it was the guilt of eternal death, if we
go no further to fetch the proof, than from what is opposed to it in the last
verse of the Chapter; righteousness to eternal life. And temporal death is not
remitted or discharged to those, who enjoy the benefit of the grace by the
second Adam Jesus Christ.

Object. 4. The Apostle James says, What. 11. Jam. 2. 14. opened. 21.
does it profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have no
works? can faith save him?

Was not Abraham our Father justified by works? etc.

Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, 24.
and not by faith only.

To the first Instance in the Objection I answer, The saying a man has faith,
is not sufficient to render him justified, or to justify him.

Secondly, A dogmatical or historical faith cannot justify, or so act on the
promise and Covenant, as to put us under the imputation of justifying
righteousness: for such a faith the Devils have; and there is a vast difference
between believing the History of the Gospel, and believing in Christ.

And this is the dead faith the Apostle speaks of, verse 17.

To the second Instance: Abraham's works. 12.
though they justified his faith, yet they did not justify his person. And the
History of his offering up his Son, does give evidence for this Exposition: Now
I know that thou fear God, Genesis 22. 12 Jam. 2. 18
seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me.

And I will show thee my faith by my works.

To the third Instance, which seems to join. 13.
works with faith in justification, that is, our works: I answer, That although
justifying faith is not without works, yet faith justifies without works: as a
man cannot have seeing eyes, if he have not lungs, and heart, and brains, which
are essential to life, and the living motion of every member; yet the eye only
sees, and not the lungs, or brains, etc. but if you should pluck the eyes out
of the head, they would so alone be to little purpose. So works are essential
to the being of justifying faith; yet faith alone is in the act of justifying,
or so acts on Christ, as to justify the person in the sight of God, by
clothing the soul with Christ's righteousness.

And although in the Text it is translated, not by faith only, it may, and (I
was going to say) ought to be translated, alone; and then the sense is but
this, That faith which is alone without works, does not justify a man in the
sight of God. And I shall give two good Reasons for it: The one, because it may
be so without wrong to the Original. Secondly, It must be so, because it will
otherwise contradict the Apostle Paul, and the truth also, as expressed
abundantly in other Scriptures.

(...) does as well signify alone, as only, and is. 14.
very often so rendered, as Joh. 8. 29. The Father has not left me alone, (...)
Joh. 16. 32. And shall leave me, (...) alone. Yea it is rendered, apart, Mat.
14. 23. He went up into a mountain apart to pray. I could instance abundantly
in the like: Now whereas being rendered, only, it implies, that works also
justify; whereas if it were rendered, alone or apart, (which is as fair in the
Greek) it would amount but to this, a faith which has not, or is separate from
works, will not be a justifying faith.

And it must be so, because else it opposes the great Doctrine of the Gospel,
or at least looks like such a thing: Romans 4. 2, 5, 6. For if Abraham were
justified by works, he has whereof to glory, etc. But to him that works not,
(that is, aiming at justification thereby) but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. -- The blessedness of the
man to whom God imputes righteousness without works, that is, without respect
to his works. But enough of this: only take one Text, that needs no Comment to
raise up this truth out of it, viz. That the righteousness of Christ imputed,
is that alone or only which justifies by way of merit, and which true faith
looks to for this end. For he has made him to be sin for us, who 2 Cor. 5. 21.
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

SECT. III.
I must not forget to do somewhat to satisfy. 3.
the very weak, of the influence the sufferings of Christ, the Son of the
Virgin Mary, has into the satisfaction of Gods justice, appeasing wrath,
reconciling us to God, etc.

Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the 1 Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 53.
4, 5, 6.
tree, etc.

And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, etc.

But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

That God was (not is, as George Fox has quoted 2 Cor. 5. 19.
it, to lose the truth, and save his error) in Christ, reconciling the world
to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.

Having made peace by the blood of his Cross. Col. 1. 20 Heb. 9. 22. Romans 5. 9.
Psalm. 85. 9, 10, 11. opened.


And without shedding of blood there is no remission.

Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him.

Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our
land; mercy and truth have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed
each other. Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look
down from heaven.

It Is generally agreed, these Verses respect. 2.
Jesus Christ, who is Gods salvation; the triumph and glory of whose effects
for his people, are chiefly two: First, The reconciliation of Gods mercy to us,
with his truth, and his righteousness, to our peace. The truth and
righteousness of God were engaged to destroy and ruin the whole race of
mankind, for their sinning against him, and breach of his Covenant, in those
words, For in the day that thou Genesis 2. 17
eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Now whatever inclinations God might have
to show mercy to man, and bless him with peace, the truth and righteousness of
God (he having that word gone out of his mouth) seemed to oppose it, as not
consisting with mercy, and peace toward man; and to have bound up those hands,
and locked up those bowels, from whence man's peace (through the Lords mercy)
might reach him. But through Christ (Gods salvation) and what he did and
suffered in our nature, as our public person, and in our stead, the mercy of
God in reaching poor sinners is set free, without any detriment to his truth;
and the peace of a believing sinner throws no scandal on the righteousness, and
justice of a gracious God: but these his glorious Attributes of mercy, truth,
righteousness, are at a full agreement, amity and union, not only in God, (as
they always were and never can be otherwise) but also in blessing man with a
reconciliation with his offended Creator. This Jesus arises like a divine Sun
in his almighty strength, with healing in his wings.

And this is no mean evidence of the satisfaction to the truth, justice and
righteousness of God, by what Christ transacted in the world, in the behalf of
lost and undone man. To declare, Romans 3. 26.
I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

The second glorious effect of this salvation of. 3.
God Jesus Christ, by his transacting our redemption is, That righteousness
shall look down from Heaven. The righteousness in the 11th. Verse (I suppose)
is not the same with that in the 10th. Verse: the former in the 10th. Verse
being the essential righteousness, and justice of God, which was to be
reconciled to sinners; which could not be done with a salvo to his Word, but by
some means which might answer to, and satisfy his justice. But the
righteousness in the 11th. Verse (seems to me to be) that sinless state, which
Christ who came down from Heaven has clothed them with, by imputing to them,
and putting upon them, that divine and glorious righteousness, which he wrought
in his own person, and in our nature, when he was in the world: and so renders
his believing ones, not only free from the direful strokes, and heart-piercing
frowns of a just and offended God, but also the objects of his love of
benevolence, yea, of delight and complacence.

To conclude, The whole transaction of Jesus Christ as Redeemer, is the ground
of our justification, and its effects and consequences, we being instated
therein: although the righteousness of Christ, considered as his obedience, and
fulfilling that Law under which he was made as man, and imputed to us, be the
glory of the Saints, wherewith they shine in the righteousness of God in him.
And with relation to our union with Christ, all those holy fruits the Saints
bring forth, by the strength and life from Christ received, are accepted of by
God, and shall be eternally rewarded: yet have no part nor portion in this
matter, of justifying our persons in the sight of God.

SECT. IV.
Having proved the Quakers disowning that justifying righteousness which the
Gospel holds forth, and in some measure vindicated and explained it: I shall
now address my self to a discovery of that righteousness, which the Quakers
adventure their justification before God upon.

They will tell you, They are justified by no other righteousness, but the
righteousness of Christ, with abundance of confidence: though (as we shall
prove) they know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm; their
righteousness being as far from what is pretended, as darkness from light, and
a poor puffed deluded creatures errors and miscarriages, from the obedience of
him who is God-man, who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express
image of his person.

Let us first see what they profess of justification by Christ's righteousness.

Quest. Do not you depend on the things you do, for life and salvation? Smith
Cat. p. 74


Answ, Nay, We do not so, etc.

Quest. What is the righteousness that justifies in Pennington mysteries of
the Kingdom* p. 17.
the sight of God?

Answ. The righteousness of Christ alone, etc.

One would think the Quakers in this point very sound, by this part of their
profession: but their Bell sounds not long, before its ja^ring with truth,
discovers it to be foully crack.

It follows in the Answer to the first Question: For we have life before we
have motion, to act or do any thing that is pleasing to God; and in that life
we have salvation, and so life and salvation is freely given us of God.

The latter part of the Answer is brought to prove the truth of the former; and
you will say, they are huge good at proving, who reason at this rate. They are
not the things we do, because we have life from God, and that freely, before we
can move or do any thing.

This being one of the great delusions of this poor people, wherein they show
so much ignorance, as without much grace from God, they are utterly incapable
of instruction: I shall (hoping in that grace for a blessing of conviction upon
them) demonstrate, by the most familiar and easy things, the falsity of their
such Conclusions.

By the same Reason, all your bodily motions and actions are the motions and
actions of God, and you do nothing at all the while.

Was there not life before motion? And did not God give you this life?

Can any man move hand, or foot, or tongue, in any natural action, but by that
life they first receive from God: but will you say therefore, these are Gods
actions, and not men's?

For you to say, Your good actions and motions are Christ's righteousness,
because you have life from him to perform them, is no less absurd.

Let us see if Pennington (who had somewhat of. 3.
a Scholar) will do any better, in the explanation and proof of his Answer to
the second Question.

This [righteousness] conveyed to the creature, in and through the seed, and
brought forth in the creature, by the seed, and the creature united to Christ,
in the seed; here is justification of life.

A strange justifying righteousness by Christ alone! brought forth in the
creature, by the seed. I would ask any of this opinion, Whether their tongues
and lips did not move in the words they call righteous words? And the hands in
some of those they call righteous actions? Sure they will not deny they do; and
how then can they say it is the righteousness of Christ alone, in which the
bodies of Thomas, John, etc. are employed?

But yet the fine mysteries in this Doctrine (which I must confess, may puzzle
many an honest Countreyman to find out the sense of) amounts to no more than
this great absurdity.

What a contradiction there is in the creatures being united to Christ in the
seed, the Quakers themselves (if any liberty be left them so to do) will find
out. Christ is the seed, and the seed is Christ, both but one and the same
thing; and yet the creature is united to Christ, in the seed, that is, to
Christ in Christ. But the blind swallow many a Fly.

For by the Law of faith, is self-sanctification,. 4. Naylor Love to the lost.
p. 64.
self-mortification, and self-justification excluded; right so far, the worst
will be in the tail.

Though they who received the Spirit were called to all this, by faith in his
blood, yet it is the work of God wrought by Christ in the believer.

Two things are here observable for error and ignorance.

First, They who received the Spirit, were called to all this self-work he
talks of, and that by faith in Christ's blood too; and yet by the Law of faith
it is all excluded. So here faith does and undoes; calls for
self-justification, etc. and when it draws nigh shuts the door against them;
begets children, and that by Christ too, and so soon as they are born, utterly
disclaims them. If he had said, they were called to sanctification,
mortification, and not put that blot of self in their Escutcheons, to render
them base-born; and then have asserted, they were not the righteousness by
which we are justified, he had spoken like a man, and a Christian: but they are
two things in the Quakers account, adverse and together by the ears; and
therefore Nailor will have to do with neither. But that a man should be called
by faith to selfjustification, is a strange riddle, and after all the
condemnation of these things, it is (for all that) the work of God, wrought by
Christ in the believer.

But to finish Nailor's testimony of justifying righteousness, observe what he
says somewhat more plainly.

Whereby such become his workmanship in Christ Jesus, wrought into his
obedience, and his obedience into them, in their measure, till they become of
one heart, one mind, one soul, one spirit, one flesh, one bone and blood, and
one obedience, and one life; that it is no more we that live, but Christ that
lives in us.

Here is some show, but a great deal of abuse of the holy Scriptures, and the
Spirit of God, by whom they were given forth.

Whereas those who are Gods workmanship in Ephesians. 2. 10.
Christ Jesus, created to good works, are thereby designed and disposed by God
to walk holily. Nailor will have the Saints wrought into the obedience of
Christ, and his obedience into them, and blended together so perfectly, that
the most discerning Quaker of them all can make no distinction between the one
and the other; yea, until body and soul, flesh and spirit, blood and bones,
and the obedience of both Christ and his Saints, and their very life too, be no
more distinguished, but what is the one, is the other: the Quaker is Christ,
(for which Nailor's tongue was bored with a hot iron) and Christ is -- I am
afraid to write it. From such stuff as this, the poor souls who hug these
Angels of darkness, talk at that confused and blasphemous rate, as they do; and
adopt whatever is the product of an idle, proud, deluded, raw understanding,
into the very acts and expressions of Christ himself.

He says moreover, which may a little explain 6.
this last Instance:

Which obedience, stands not in any thing seen from man, or by man done,
thereby to imitate or do the like; for that is two obediences.

-- That as the same Father calls for the same obedience in spirit, so in the
same spirit does the believer offer up himself.

I leave you to brood on these wild and worse sayings: I know their mystery,
and depth of Satan; but to spread them all in the light, will ask more Paper
than I am willing to write out in this Book.

Another expression and quality of the Quakers. 7.
justifying righteousness is, That it is within them, not without them.

Christ being within, there is justification.

Now is the life, the faith, the obedience of the Mystery of great Whore, p.
49. Pennington questions. Smith Cat. p. 98
Son, the thing which is of value in us.

And by this power in us, all our works are wrought for us.

So that the righteousness which Christ wrought before we were born, even in
the days of his flesh, is to the Quakers a dead thing; and Christ was mistaken
shrewdly, when he tells his Father, That he had finished the work which he had
given him to do; intending thereby, the last scene of death, which he was then
just entering upon, and therefore speaks of all as accomplished.

Another notion they have for the countenance. 8.
of the opinion of justifying righteousness, to be within them, not without
them, and wrought in the time of their life, not by Christ in the days of his
flesh, above 1600 years since, is,

That because the Scripture speaks of justifying by faith, and faith being
within, and wrought in the Saints in this life, and in every individual
believer; therefore the justifying righteousness is within the believer.

This is abused by the Papists, to prove that works justify, because faith is
a work or act of the soul; though that be false, for all grace consists
(essentially) in the habit and disposition, not in acts; for else a man must be
graceless when he is fast asleep, for then he is not in action, nor grace in
act. But the Quakers though they embrace many of the Popish Tenets that are
erroneous, they want wit to manage them as they. But to my purpose:

This justification is by the faith of Christ Fox great mystery* p. 49.. 9*
within -- for all the holy men of God were justified by their faith, and that
faith is in the heart.

For the right understanding of this, we are to consider faith as a disposition
and habit, and therein a principal part of the new creature. This disposition
of trusting in, relying on, adhering to God, has its acts suitable to its
self. Now the acts of faith either respect its fruits and effects, other parts
of sanctification, as love, patience, self-denial, etc. or its objects and aims.

Faith has for its immediate objects the promises of God, leaning, trusting,
hoping according to them: it is said to lean on the Lord, trust, hope in the
Lord; its aims and ends for which, are the good things wrapped up in the Covenant
of grace.

Now faith is not accounted for righteousness with respect to it self, as a
holy disposition, or its acts as holy acts; but as it looks on, takes hold of,
and trusts in the righteousness of Christ. It is no rare thing for the act to
be denominated from the object.

Though faith which justifies, justifies as it has. 10.
for its object Jesus Christ, who is the righteousness of God; and so though
faith be within, the righteousness of Christ which justifies is not within, for
faith justifies as it looks at somewhat without, and above our selves. Whom God
Romans 4. 25. Gal 2. 16 Heb. 11. 1
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, justified by
faith in Jesus Christ. Faith is the evidence of things hoped for.

Again, Faith is made the condition of justification, and that not only as it
may be considered singly, but as it includes the whole body of sanctification,
in some parts and measures of it. But to as many as received him, to them he
gave Joh. 1. 12
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. So
that faith is a receiving of Christ, who is both Prince and Savior, Lord of
life and Prince of peace, and receiving him as such, is conditional of this
acceptance with God, and so may be said to justify, as it performs the
condition of justification on our part.. 11.


But if faith were the meritorious cause of justification, it were a
justification by works. And if faith justified, looking no further then its
self, as it is subjected in the soul; it were a strange faith indeed that has
its self for its object, and then a man should believe in himself.

I might entertain you longer than your patience will hold out, in pregnant
proofs out of their own writings: That as Christ's obedience, so his sufferings,
upon which depend our justification, are all transacted within the heart of a
believer, his agony, his crucifying and death, etc. But I will give you but one
Instance, lest I leave too little room for what I am willing to be ample in,
the Subjects of the succeeding Chapters.

We believe that Christ in us, does offer up himself Smith Cat. p. 64. 12.
a living sacrifice to God for us, by which the wrath and justice of God is
appeased toward us.

This is instead of many, though their Books do generally speak of the
sufferings of Christ as propitiatory, to be done over in every person before
conversion. And the maddest humor of all is, That they make the seed, or the
light, or Christ being crucified in the soul by the power of sin and lust, to
be the crucifying and death of Christ, by which God is appeased. Do not they
which dwell there (in spiritual Sodom) -- put his flesh to pain, crucifying it
in and to themselves? Penningtons Questions, p. 29.

Take one Scripture to guard you against all the fancies of this sort, and to
close this Chapter.

But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for Heb. 10. 12, 13, 14
sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God, from thence expecting till
his enemies he made his footstool; for by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.

CHAP. XVI. The Quakers disown and deny the Christ of God, and set up a false
Christ in his room and stead; and attribute all to that false Christ, which is
due and pcculiar to the true Christ.
SECT. I.
THis is the grand and root-errour of the Quakers, that great non-such lie,
which travels with and brings forth that Babel, and confused heap of errors,
where with their Religion (if they have any such thing) is abounding.

First, They disown and deny the man Christ Jesus; who was born of the Virgin
Mary; who was of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh; who was nailed to
the Cross, and crucified at Jerusalem without the gates, to be the Savior of
believers; and he who wrought that righteousness, and underwent those
sufferings by which man's redemption was wrought.

This we certainly know, and can never call the bodily Penningtons questions,
p. ^3.. 2.
garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the body.

They do not deny, That there was such a man as Jesus the Son of Mary, and that
God was in him, or rather Christ was in him: but this is no more than they
profess of themselves, That Christ as God, and the eternal Word is in them; yet
that body of the man Jesus, which he calls here, the bodily garment, he tells
us, they can never call it Christ. Another passage out of the same Author will
explain this.

For that which he took upon him was our garment, p. 20.
even the flesh and blood of our nature: (very right) But what follows is
woefully false.

Which is of an earthly perishing nature; but he is of an heavenly nature, and
his flesh, and blood, and bones are of his nature.

The sum is this, The flesh and blood, and bones or body of Christ which they
own, is of a heavenly and eternal nature; but the body which Christ took on him
of our nature is earthly and perishing: and therefore they can never call that
or own that to be Christ.

This is as plain a denying the man Christ Jesus,. 3.
whose body of flesh was of our nature, and of the seed of Abraham, and the Son
of Mary, as can be.

They own him as one that once had a Being, but is now perished, that is, his
body of flesh and blood.

What can we expect of those men, who can disown what the Scripture speaks so
plainly and frequently? and that not now and then by the by, but as its main
scope? Do not all the Prophets that prophecy of Christ speak of him as to
come? Does not he himself, and others contemporary that lived with him in the
flesh, speak of him as then come? Do not the Scriptures after his death and
resurrection speak of him, as having finished the merit of our redemption and
salvation, and departed from the earth, ascended into Heaven, and there (at his
Fathers right hand) ruling the affairs of Heaven and earth, and making
intercession for his people? And all this, of the body of Christ, which he took
of man's nature; and this called Christ, and Jesus, and the Savior.

Let not these blasphemers of the Lord of life. 4.
and glory, delude people with a fancy, as if we believe, and preach the flesh
and blood of Christ to be Christ, separated from his soul, his soul of the
nature of man's soul, (but undefiled) or that we take his humane or man's nature
to be Christ, separate from his eternal and divine nature: for they cannot be
separated, the one is not (now) without the other; nor was the divine nature of
Christ complete Christ, until united to, and dwelling in its fullness in the
humane or man's nature of Christ.

Yet, as what the mind conceives in a man,. 5.
the man conceives; and what the least member of the body does, or suffers,
the man does, and suffers: so by a communication of properties, and union of
natures in Christ, the divine and eternal Being of Christ is called Christ
sometimes, but much more often the humane nature, or the man Christ Jesus. And
the reason is clear, because although Christ offered up himself by the eternal
Spirit, as both dignifying him to a worthiness for such a sacrifice, and
enabling him to undergo it as a Lamb, for patience, innocence and meekness, and
to overcome death: yet the man's nature of Christ, his soul and his body, was
the only proper sufferer and sacrifice; for God cannot suffer, nor be put to
death; and by the obedience and sufferings thereof, was our reconciliation and
redemption wrought. Only (as I said before) its union hypostatical with the
divine nature, did put it into such a capacity, and entitle God or the divine
nature (which in its fullness dwelt in him bodily) to all that he did and
suffered.

Having thus explained my self, that the. 6.
weakest that are but willing, may understand the truth in this point; I shall
quote some Scriptures, wherein the man Jesus, who was born of the Virgin, is
called the Christ and Savior: and that this man Jesus is now in being, and in
that body of flesh which he took of the Virgin; and wherein he eat, and drank,
and slept, and performed those actions proper to a body of flesh and blood and
bones; and that this man Jesus is still, and ever shall be the Christ of God.

And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that Luke 2^ 26.
he should not see death, before he had seen* the Lords Christ.

And he came by the spirit into the Temple, and when the parents brought in the
Child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the Law, then took he him up in
his arms, and blessed God, and said, -- Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. -- a light to lighten
the Gentiles.

This was the Lords Christ, whose parents were Mary by nature, Joseph in law,
and by reputation, as being Mary's Husband, though after Christ's birth; whom
Simeon then saw, and not before; whom he took up in his arms, not only into his
heart by faith and love: and this Christ is Gods salvation, and a light to
lighten the Gentiles.

Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God Acts 2. 30, 31.
had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the
flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit upon his Throne; he seeing this before,
spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his [Christs] soul was not left in
hell, neither his [Christs] flesh did see corruption.

This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are Verse 32
witnesses.

Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, Verse 36
that God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and
Christ.

The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye Acts 5. 30, 31.
slew and hanged on a tree; him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins.

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye Act. 1. 11
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have Acts 17. 3
suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus whom I preach
unto you is Christ.

Be it known unto you all, and to the people of Israel, Acts 4. 10, 11, 12
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God
raised from the dead; even by him does this man stand before you whole. This is
the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of
the corner.

Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

And though they found no cause of death in him, yet Acts 13* 28, 29, 30.
desired they Pilate that he should be slain; and when he had fulfilled all
that was written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a
sepulcher: but God raised him from the dead.

Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, Verse 38
that through this man, is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins.

For there is one God, and one Mediator between 1 Timothy 2 5. Rev. 1. 18.
God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

I am he that lives and was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore, amen;
and have the keys of hell and death.

I might fill many Pages with Scriptures of the like import: these are so plain
for what I produce them, and the Quakers deny, that they need no Exposition or
Comment, or (as the Quakers phrase it) have any meanings put to them.

If men be so blind as not to see the error of. 7.
disowning Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary, who was hanged on a tree, put
into the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea, to be yet alive, and the Christ of
God, by all these Scriptures; it is a blindness wherewith never any before the
Quakers, who professed the Scripture to be a true testimony, were smitten.
Surely God has given them up for their pride, giddiness, or idle ignorance,
and that in justice; and the Devil, the destroyer, has blinded their minds
with a witness, that this light of the glorious Gospel should not shine unto
them.

Can? yea, dare any of you (guilty of the error here charged) say? That all
this is true of, and to be applied to the light within every man, which these
Scriptures assert of Gods Christ? Read them over, and compare them with that
which is your only Christ and Savior. If this man Christ Jesus, in whom dwells
the fullness of the Godhead, and who was thus described by the Spirit of God, be
the Savior, your light within is not. If your light within be the Savior, and
Christ, and Redeemer, he was not. Of whom all these Scriptures and a thousand
more speak so plainly, The Lord be merciful to your souls; the Lord rebuke
you, who are so bold in denying the Lord that bought you, and ^rampling under
foot the blood of the Covenant. O consider, that fancies and dreams, though
having ever so strong an impression while you are possessed with them, will
when you awake out of your graves of earth and dust, yea, when your souls
depart from your bodies, leave you to the naked truth, which God in his Word (
the Scripture) has revealed to us; not to be abused after your manner; but
that we might believe, and live after their direction: which who despises, Woe
unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil to themselves. Isa. 3. 9.


I have not yet given you all the evidence I. 8.
have, out of the Quakers chief Writers, that they disown the man Jesus, the
Son of Mary, to be Gods Christ. Some of them take together. Pennington Quest.
p. 25.


Can outward blood cleanse the conscience? Yes, by faith therein.

We witness the same Christ that ever was, now Fox.
manifested in the flesh.

The man Christ Jesus was not ever, for he was made, and born in time of the
Virgin Mary, was Abraham's and David's seed after the flesh: and though he now
have a Being in Heaven, and is manifested on earth by his Word, and by that
faith, which is in the hearts of his people; yet he is not now manifest in the
flesh, according to that Scripture which says, God was manifest 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the flesh, not is.

And Christ's nature is not humane, which is earthly, Fox mystery, etc. p. 71.
for that is the first Adams. And immediately before, Where does the Scripture
speak of humane? -- Now we do not deny that Christ according to the flesh was
of Abraham, but not the word humane.

How pityfully does he wind and turn to get. 9.
out of the noose, and holds the world in hand, as if he did not deny the
thing, that Christ is constituted of the humane nature; only he will not allow
the word humane. Yet he that has a small measure of discerning, may see that
peep out, which he would fain hide.

He denies Christ's nature to be earthly, which the first Adams was. Sure if
Christ was the seed of the woman by Adam, his nature as man was such as Adams.
But for his questioning the word humane, as not in the Scripture, (he
pretending to be able to examine the justice of our Translators, in turning the
Greek into English, in his great Libel, called, Mystery of the great Whore)
should methinks have found as much as humane in the Greek, though not in the
English, (...) being five times used in the Epistles, which in the Latin is,
more hominum, humanus* after the manner of men, humane. And Christ's humane
nature is no more but his man's nature, of his nature according to man; and so
he is now in the humane nature in the Heavens. Seeing Heb. 4. 14, 15.
then that we have a great high Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus
the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. Mark the last clause.

For we have not an high Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
Infirmities here must not be understood of sin, the Text bars that; but such a
weak nature as is constituted of flesh and blood, liable to pains, grief,
hunger and weariness. And he was found in fashion as a man, and that I think,
is more hominis. Now this man is, (not was) but is our high Priest in the
Heavens, and not as Fox has it, was of the seed of Abraham, but is so.

A few Instances more yet.. 10. Smith ^rim p. 9.


And they that are false Ministers, preach Christ without.

Your carnal Christ is utterly denied by the light.

Your imagined God beyond the Stars. Sword of the Lord, etc. p. 24 Shield of
the Truth. p. 30.


But none can witness this, whose eye is outward, looking at a Redeemer afar
off.

So much of the proof of their denying that man to be Christ.

SECT. II.
I must not say, That the Quakers do not own a man Christ; for that they
frequently in their Writings and sayings express such a thing: but I desire
that none will be offended, that I will not take Chips for Guineys or half
Crowns, because some silly Cheats would put them upon me under those valuable
names: much more ought I and every one else, take heed of receiving that for
Christ, which God the Father has not sealed, because men of what countenance
soever will persuade us it is no other; whilst by the very Candlelight of mere
reason, it will appear to be a mere fancy. If I should say no more, but that it
is an absurdity as big as an impossibility, for a man constituted not only of a
soul, (for that may be crowded into a little room) but a body of flesh, blood
and bones, to be within a man; surely no woman with child ready to be
delivered, would by her swelling and bigness proclaim it to the eyes of all
beholders more effectually, than such who should be so inmated.

And although they talk of all this being by. 2.
faith, they must give me leave to tell them: That though faith in Christ be so
in the heart of a believer, that it does thereby enjoy the blessed effects and
fruits of the Redeemer; yet while the faith in Christ is in the heart, the man
Christ in his person, or if you will, his glorified body, flesh, blood and
bones, is as far from them as beyond the visible Heavens.

And I care not if I mind you of the Popishness of their conceit, near of kin
to Transubstantiation, (but that is but an Infant-absurdity to this) that one
single body, one individual man of flesh, blood and bones, should be entirely
in so many places at once, as in every Quaker; yea every man and woman in the
world. But it may be the Quakers being the only masters of the Mysteries, can
say more for it than we can imagine, I am sure more than any man in his wits
can believe.

Let us therefore give them the hearing, before we dismiss this importunate
Candidate with Ignoramus, or a condemning Verdict.

Now the woman here has a husband to ask at home,. 3. Fox great mystery, etc.
p. 286.
and not usurp authority over the man; but Christ in the male, as in the
female, who redeems from under the Law, and makes free from the Law; the man
may speak: Christ in the male and female, who are in the Spirit of God, are not
under the Law; but the Whore who drinks the blood of the Saints, is gone from
her husband from under the Law, to ask the Whoremaster that does drink the
blood of the Saints, which Christ the seed judges upon, to whom he gives
judgment.

I have transcribed the more of this Answer of George Fox's, that you may see
what spiritual rare matter the Quakers swallow, from the hand of Fox's
infallible and inspired Authority, the Chief among that Sect. The nonsense and
rarity of the Exposition of the Apostles inhibition of Women's speaking in the
Church, I shall leave you to construe and descant upon. But you find him owning
a man Christ, in the male, and in the female. The clearest Expositor that I
have met with among the Quakers, of this Mystery, is Isaac Pennington. Two
passages of many I shall quote out of him.

Was not the Word made flesh? And did not the. 4. Penningtons questions to the
professors of Christianity, p. 29. p. 20.
Word made flesh dwell and appear in a tabernacle of flesh? And cause the glory
of his own divine flesh, to shine through the earthly flesh?

Is it the flesh and blood of the body, which was prepared for, and taken by
him, wherein he tabernacled and appeared? Or is it the flesh and blood of him,
who took, tabernacled and appeared in that body? For that which he took upon
him was our garment, even the flesh and blood of our nature, which is of an
earthly perishing nature; and his flesh, and blood and bones, are of his
nature, etc.

The scope of this judicious Author in many Pages, (a non-such for new
discoveries) is, to let us know, that there was a heavenly, spiritual, divine
body, constituted of flesh, blood and bones, in which Christ came from Heaven;
and that he put that body into the other body of our nature, which he took of
the Virgin; and that outermost body of our nature he left behind, when he
ascended into Heaven, no body knows where. And this heavenly, spiritual body
(nothing of kin to Abraham, David, Mary, according to the flesh) is the man
Christ, which is in the Quakers; and so the Quakers are as complete Christ's as
ever the Son of Mary was: for they also have the divine nature of Christ
dwelling in a body of spiritual flesh and blood, and that dwelling in those
their bodies which we see, are but the outward tabernacles of the God and the
man Christ Jesus. And when they speak, and what they act, all is but the words
and deeds of this man Christ, within the bodies of every he and she. Quaker;
and so no more they, but Christ in them. However ridiculous this may seem to
be, it is no more but what they as seriously own, as any Article in their
Creed. I say no more on this particular, but that he that can digest such
fables as these, has a stomach hotter than an Ostrich.

SECT. III.
The Quakers in their opinion of the divine nature of their Christ, are
exceeding superfluous: and they have not more diminishing thoughts of the
humane nature of the true Christ, whose body they have doomed to perish into
dust and corruption, than they have magnifying apprehensions of the divinity of
their false Christ.

Their Tenet which I am next to consider, is,

That every man and woman in the world, have in them a saving light from
Christ, and this light is no other but Christ, the Savior, and God eternal,
and there is no other Savior but it.

It has been the opinion of some, (before the Quakers were known in the world)
that by the redemption of Christ (called universal) all men have a sufficient
light given them from God, the utmost improvement of which will prove saving:
but far were they from accounting this light to be the Christ, the Savior.
However alien my thoughts may be from this Tenet, it is not my work here to
consider it.

But that peculiar to the Quakers; that the light within every man is Christ,
and the only Savior, and very God.

Although there are none of them will stick to. 2.
proclaim this on the housetop, yet I shall for general satisfaction give it
you under their hands.

And no one knows salvation, but who knows this F^^ great mystery, etc. p. 8.
Christ in you, who is the salvation; and where he is within, there is
salvation.

And this [Christ in us] is he in whom our salvation Smith Cat. etc. p. 64.
stands, as the Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

And we also know and believe, that he is the same p. 71. *
Christ in us, which in dispensations past did humble himself to the Cross.

And you, whom the Prince of the power of the air. 3. FOX the younger, p 49, 50.
has led out of me, you scorn me, the light in you. -- They have disobeyed it,
and called it a natural light; and ye have said, that I the light am not able
to save those that believe in me.

That if you would believe and wait in me the p. 54.
light, -- I will purge out all your iniquities, and forgive all your
trespasses, and I will change your nature, and I will make you new creatures,
if you will hearken to me, and obey me the light in you.

How confident they are of this to be true, may be seen in a bold adventure:

If ever man be justified by his Maker, then by believing Martin Mason's loving
invitation, p. 5.
in Gods Covenant of light, which in the conscience bears its testimony against
all iniquity -- then let me for ever be condemned from the presence of the
righteous God.

My design is to do two things.

First, To consider the Scriptures, which they lay as their principal
foundation, and chief corner stones in this building.

Secondly, Prove by Scripture and Reason, the falsity and abomination of their
error.

SECT. IV.
That was the true light, which lights every man Joh. 1. 9.
that comes into the world.

The Exposition of these words I shall give, (according to what the Lord has
enabled me with) and refute what the Quakers give as the meaning of it, and
conclude from thence.

We shall not question that the Relative that, has for its Antecedent, and is
to be understood of the Word which was in the beginning, which was with God,
which was God, by whom all things were made, the light of men, etc.

The special Character of this Word, who was. 2.
God and Creator, that was the true light, I thus explain. Light is taken
properly for that which does manifest or discover any thing; so Christ 2 Timothy
^. 10.
is light. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel. The meaning is, That that salvation eternal, which
God had purposed to give to his people, which could not be seen in the purpose
of God as such, is by the appearing of Christ in the flesh, and therein
transacting and declaring this salvation and eternal life, abundantly
discovered.

For God who commanded the light to shine out of 2 Cor. 4. 6.
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

And as light properly is that which makes manifest, so metaphorically it is
that which comforts and rejoices: and as the first is put in opposition to
ignorance, or the absence of the means of knowledge; so the other is put in
opposition to affliction, grief, distress, which are so frequently called
darkness in Scripture, that I need not turn to their Instances.

And I do not in the least doubt, but Christ the Word is here called light in
both respects, and that eminently: for as he discovers the gracious thoughts
and purposes of God for the salvation of man, it has in its open hand the
light of comfort; they are glad tidings, and gladding tidings. And this I take
to be the import of the 4th. Verse, In him was life, and the life was Joh. 1. 4.
the light of men: That is, the salvation and life eternal of poor sinners, was
wrapped up in Christ as God, who being so qualified was capable of working it:
and this consideration of God manifest in the flesh for those ends, is matter
of strong consolation, as being an adequate and sufficient foundation for faith
to build on.

The qualification of this light, the true light,. 3.
comes next under consideration.

True is taken in opposition to false, but so we are not to understand it here.

True is taken in opposition to types and shadows; so Christ is the true light,
which all the types and shadows in the Mosaical dispensations were not, no more
than the picture and pourtraiture of a man drawn with the dark lines of
Charcoal, are the man they so express; or the figures for a thousand pounds in
a Bond or Bill, are the money. And this is the true Exposition of the 23d.
Verse of the 4th. of John: God never accepted Joh 4. 23.
in sincere and hypocritical worshippers under the Old Testament dispensation.
But the question being of worshipping at Jerusalem, or Mount Gerazim; he tells
her, as his sense, that question was now almost out of date, for that the
Temple being but a shadow and figure of Christ and Gospel Worship, they were
now shortly to use those shadows no more, Christ being come, and the Gospel
spiritual-worship, which they were but prefiguring of.

Again, The true light is to be understood of. 4.
the light eminently considered; and so, though John was a true light, and by
Christ's own testimony a burning and a shining light; and so the Prophets were
true lights; yet Christ excelled them all in light, as the Sun does the Stars.
The brightness of his Fathers glory, and express image Heb. 1. 3.
of his person. So that while they gave a more dim and imperfect light, Christ
shined as the daylight.

In the Text last mentioned, he is to be understood of Christ in the flesh,
before his ascension.

Lastly, By true light we may understand, his. 5.
being that light to whom and of whom all the Prophets bare witness: as Isaiah
did not speak those things read out of him by the Eunuch, of Act. 8. 34
himself, but of Jesus Christ, as Philip expounded them to him.

I now proceed to the efficacy of this light, wherein lies a great part of the
controversy. Which lights.

It is not to be doubted, but this light does give light; both in respect of
manifestation, (which may be of that which is matter of terror) and also of
comfort to a miserable world, by sin and its effects.

But I pray how will it follow from hence, that Christ is within those whom he
lights? Truly no more than the Sun in the Firmament is within every one it
affords light unto.

But it is the scope of some Pages in William. 7. Spirit of Truth, etc. p. 53*
etc.
Pen's late Piece, to prove that (...) should be rendered, not lights, but
enlightneth.

But by this I perceive he is as very -- as those Physicians who impose severe
abstinence on others, but they themselves will take their Cups off, and their
good cheer, to wantonness and giddiness.

I return to the business in hand, and grant,. 8.
that most Translators render it enlightneth. But what helps it? It Is never
the more the Quakers light within: for a seeing faculty can do nothing alone,
no more than the best eyes in the head without a light without, as a medium by
which to discern objects. And this faculty of man's understanding is enlightened
by Christ so, as that by his light it is made capable to discern the face of
God shining on sinners, according to the import of the Covenant of gra^ and
that enlightening may be no more. Two Scriptures will evidence. First, That
concerning Jonathan: And dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his 1 Samuel 14. 27, 2^
hand to his mouth, and his eyes were enlightened. -- See I pray you how mine
eyes have been enlightened. If the light within be no more in the conscience,
than the honey was in Jonathan's eyes, it will make little for the Quakers
notion of the light in the conscience, to be very Christ, and not only his
manifestations, which are his acts and influence, not himself.

The other Text is more plain to the purpose. 9. Psalm 94. 4.
His lightnings enlightened the world, the earth saw and trembled. If by the
earth be not meant the men on the earth, and by the world the men in the world,
lightning was not likely to be seen by, or help them so to see, as to effect
trembling; unless you will say, the mere animals were intended. Well then, the
world was enlightened by Gods lightnings, that were totally without them;
whether their seeing by those lightnings have respect to the objects of their
bodily eyes, or to God the object of the eye of the mind, who is in a good
measure made known by his mighty and terrible works.

But if you will needs have the enlightening in the. 10.
Text, to be a bettering of the faculties of the mind, to discern its spiritual
concerns; I grant, that the Lord Jesus Christ did by his redeeming work merit,
and does now by his Spirit effect that great good in his people: and they have
thereby better understandings, and a more pure and faithful conscience than
others. But that Christ by being (essentially considered) in the conscience of
every man, should be its enlightening, is a most base dishonor to his divine
Majesty; for what is it less, than to render God under no better notion, than
the qualification of the faculty of a pityfull creature?

Therefore however it be expounded, it makes nothing for the Quakers light
within, or rather the enlightening within, to be the Being of Christ.

Every man. If this phrase be taken strictly in. 11.
its full latitude, intending every individual without exception, Christ
enlightening, must be understood so doing as Creator, not as Redeemer; which
Exposition has a better countenance from the Context, than any thing that can
make on the Quakers side. For the Evangelist treats in the introductory Verses
of Christ as the universal Creator, and by consequence the eyes of the body and
mind (by which both are enlightened) are creatures of his framing. This is the
opinion of many (Superiors to me in judgment by far) and I shall not
contradict it; but modestly, and with submission offer my opinion. But if that
be right (which all the Quakers in the world are not able to prove it cannot be
so understood) the Quakers may quit this Text, as doing them no service. Some
have affirmed that John wrote his Gospel, upon the occasion of the Heresy of
Ebion and Cerinthus, in denying the eternal and divine nature of Christ.

But suppose it be to be understood of Christ's. 12.
enlightening as Redeemer, and so the enlightening to be with respect to the
Gospel-discoveries; it need not (it cannot lightly) be understood of all
universally.

Why more than that Text? Whom we preach, Col. 1. 2^
warning every man, and teaching every man, etc. Sure the Apostle being but a
man himself, could not warn and teach every man without limitation: it must
therefore mean all that he preached to, or rather the professors of Jesus
Christ to whom he preached; he thus taught and warned.

Commending our selves to every man's conscience, ^ Cor. 4. 2.
etc. There were many that never heard Paul, nor heard of him; therefore it
must be understood, that he had been so faithful, that he deserved
commendation from all (and had it from those whose consciences were pure) to
whom he ministered.

Well then, why may it not be understood thus? Every man that is enlightened
with a spiritual Gospel Light, is enlightened by Christ. I will show you a Text
of the like form, which must be so construed.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all Psalm. 145 14.
those that be bowed down. Sure it means, that all that are upheld are upheld
by God, and all that are bowed down, and raised up, are raised up by God.

Yet I rather incline to take the every man, to. 13.
be Jew and Gentile, without those limitations of the Covenant, dispensed
before Christ came.

The Prophets, the Temple, the Sacrifices, and all those typical
representations of Christ, were restrained to the Church of Israel, till the
coming of Christ. To them were committed the Oracles of God. The Disciples must
not go to preach the Gospel in the ways or places of the Gentiles. Peter is of
opinion, he must not converse with those who were Gentiles, as a Preacher of
the Gospel. The Jews are offended with him for going on so good an errand, till
they heard his commission from God, and the blessed effects of his Ministry.
But they are quickly informed of the partition wall being broken down, and
employed according to their commission, to teach all Nations. And the vail of
the Temple at Christ's death, was rent from the top to the bottom.

And as I take it, it gives a good countenance to this Exposition.

I have but one Hill more to get over, and. 15.
that is, Whether the Participle (...), refer to (...), or to (...): and so,
whether it may be read, The light coming into the world enlightneth every man;
or every man coming into the world, the light [Christ] enlightneth.

As I said before, if it should refer to man; every man in the very instant of,
or before his birth, Christ enlightneth: it must be meant of created faculties
in the natural body, as eyes, reason, etc. and so Christ as Creator enlightens
all: for experience and sense without (any one Instance to control it) will
tell us, that none can believe without hearing, nor hear without a Preacher,
for all the talk of some of the preaching Stars, and others of the preaching
Gospel Light in the conscience. Show us the man that can express any thing of
Christ, or the Covenant of promises, that never had any other* means.

But there is a Reason in the Text gives such a. 16.
countenance to referring it to the light, as will never be found for the
contrary. That was the true light, not this or this is; which plainly imports,
not the light Christ, as he is now in Heaven, nor as present with John and his
contemporary Saints, when he wrote the Gospel, (for then it would have been
this, or at least that is the true light, etc.) but it clearly points at
Christ's appearance in the flesh, in his state of humiliation, wherein he
transacted man's salvation, and conversed and shined among men, as he shall
never do over again; that state of Christ which was when John wrote his Gospel
past. And this construction is the very scope of the words, viz. That Jesus
Christ (who was shadowed out formerly, by types and figures, and whose
Ordinances for conveying knowledge and grace to the sons of men, and which were
the ordinary acceptable ways of Gods worship, were afore-time restrained to
the Temple and Jewish Church) was manifest in the flesh; and therein fulfilling
his work as Redeemer, has abolished those strait dispensations, and broken
down the partition wall between Jew and Gentile, making no difference, but
shining by his Ordinances and favor on either indifferently; so rising as a
Sun of righteousness, to give light to the whole world, without any restraint
by his Ordinance or appointment. Whereby those Prophecies are fulfilled, And he
said, It is a light thing that thou ^sa. 49. 6.
should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. So it seems he was not so
at the time of this Prophecy, although he were then the divine and eternal
Being, and he who should in time come, and redeem and save by his actual merit.

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and Isa. 42. 6*
will hold thine hand, and I will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant to
the people, for a light to the Gentiles. This speaks still of Christ to come as
such a light.

Let us consider that passage in the Song of Simeon.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou Luke 2. 30, 31, 32
have prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles,
etc.

So that the appearance of Christ in the flesh, in that body which Simeon took
up in his arms, was his being prepared to be a light to lighten the Gentiles.
Now this light was present: And in the Text agitated, John 1. 9. This light was
past, that is, that appearance and work of Christ, which made way for the
salvation of God to be divulged, and its ordinary means to be enjoyed by all
indifferently. This was the true light.

God was manifest in the flesh -- preached unto 1 Timothy 3. 16.
the Gentiles.

SECT. V.
The second Text they usurp, is in Romans 10. 8.

But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in Romans 10. 8. opened.
thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is, the Word of faith which we preach.

This Text joined with John 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God, they build their Tenet upon; that Christ
the Word is within every man; as upon the Text before agitated, they affirm,
that he is within them as a saving light.

Let us first consider, whether the Word in this Text be of the same sense and
import with that in John 1. which speaks of Christ the personal Word. That it
is not so, but the Doctrinal Word, is plain from these Considerations.

First, The Apostle does in these words allude. 2. Deuteronomy. 30. 14 opened.
to the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. This Word in Deuteronomy is
said in Verse 10. to be the commandments and statutes which were written in the
Book of the Law; which Book they had among them, and by that means had the
contents of it in their heart, either in the love of it, or by rote; as we use
to say, a writing is gotten by heart, when it is treasured in the memory; and
it was in their mouth, by profession or discourse.

Secondly, The Apostle gives the same Answer. 3.
to a supposed Objection, How shall we know what is our duty? How we should
please God, and be blessed therein? says Moses, It Is no such difficult thing
for you to know this; for what you have gotten into your heart out of this Book
of the Law, and what you have in your mouth by discourse and profession, that
is it you should observe and do.

So the Apostle, if you suppose while we preach salvation by Christ, whom you
must receive, that we preach impossibilities, for that the person of Christ if
in Heaven, or in the grave, he is out of your reach; this will cure your
mistake, to consider, that as the Word of the Law which Moses taught and wrote,
was in the heart and mouth to do it, so the Word of faith, or to be believed,
is in your heart and mouth to believe and confess it. And this will as
effectually save you, as if Christ in his person were in your arms, yea and
more too.

And that this is his sense, is plain in Verse 9. That if thou shall confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, Romans 10. 9.
and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved.

The third Consideration is, That the word. 4.
that is said to be in the heart, is said also to be in the mouth; and we all
know what manner of word uses to be in the mouth, that it is a word saying, or
speaking while it is there; such as that spoken of in Samuel, tidings in his
mouth; or that 2 Samuel 18. 25.
in Esther, As the word went out of the Kings mouth: therefore it cannot be
meant of Christ, but that speech, those sayings, which are or may be spoken, as
in the Gospel when preaching, or when written.

Fourthly, Both that in Deuteronomy, and this. 5.
word in the Romans, are said to be in the heart and mouth of those who were
the Church of God, as Israel was to whom Moses spoke, and the Romans to whom
Paul wrote; and so were taught by the one the truths of the Law, by the other,
of the Gospel. It sorrily follows from hence, that it is in the hearts of all
men.

Lastly, The Apostle agitating this Argument. 6.
farther, Verse 14. How shall they call on him of whom they have not heard? He
does not tell them, Christ Jesus the Word will preach himself, and he is in the
heart; where if you will but stand still, and wait and listen, you shall hear
him teach you all things, as is the Quakers Doctrine. Romans 10. 17.
No, but he tells them in Verse 17. So then faith comes by hearing, (so say
the Quakers too) but of whom? Verse 15. Of them that are sent, them whose feet
are beautiful for the sake of the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace which
they bring. And these are more than that one personal, or (as the Quakers
phrase it) eternal Word, Christ; for they are expressed by they, them, which
are Plurals; but Christ is but one.

Yet from this Text do they most confidently. 7.
avouch Christ the Word, who was in the beginning, and who is God, to be in the
heart; and not only in the hearts of the Saints and Believers, but in theirs
also, who are the most wicked and ignorant among the sons of men. And I have by
a grand Quaker been given the lie in the Pulpit, for expounding the Word in
J^r. 23. 20. of the Word of the Lord Doctrinally considered; and this Text in
the Romans, produced with no more but confidence, and of that enough, to prove
me so.

There is a passage of William Pen's, either in his Book called, Sandy
foundation, etc. or else, The Spirit of Truth, etc. which is this, (at least
the matter of it) That Christ is most eminently the Word, all will agree, or
none will deny. I have not time to look it. But I shall say thus much to
antidote that fancy: That that is most eminently the Word of that species,
about which we contend, which is most properly so, though other considerations
may render it more eminent in another kind, and not that which is sometimes,
but improperly so called.

Christ is called a Lion, a Door: It Is true, Christ as God is more eminent than
all things beside, in Heaven and Earth; and we use to say, (and do not yet
repent it) that all (uncompounded) good things are eminently in God. So, as
there is strength and courage in a Lion, with respect to strength and courage,
Christ may be said to be eminently, most eminently strong and courageous; but
to be the most eminently a Lion, would be a strange and untrue expression of
Christ: For, Formadat esse; and he that is without the form that gives the
being, cannot be so eminently such, as the meanest that has the true form. And
that the Word Christ is only so analogically, I have showed, and the definition
of a Word, in the second Chapter. I desire Mr. Pen to consider better next
time, and not think every body else; not a hairs breadth beyond his size.

SECT. VI.
A third Scripture I am willing to explain, to fence the weak against the
Quakers seductions is, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy,
whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

This more sure word of prophecy, refers to the voice from Heaven, which Peter,
James and John heard, expressed in Verse 17. and is by Peter affirmed to be
rather to be credited, than that, or any other immediate revelation. By the
more sure word of prophecy, is meant those prophecies written in the Old
Testament, which are called, Verse 20. prophecy of Scripture* and are called,
the light that shines in a dark place, as prophecies shine, but with a dim
light, (yet are welcome and give some light) comparatively with providence,
which are the fulfilling of those prophecies.

The dawning of the day, and the day star arising in their hearts, cannot be
meant of Christ, known and received by faith to salvation, and sanctification
too in some measure: for so he was risen in their hearts, when the Apostle
wrote this; or else he would not have said them to have obtained like precious
faith with him, and others the Apostles and Saints, which he does in Verse 1.
as the direction of his Epistle.

I therefore conclude that the sense is this, He. 2.
exhorts them to be intent on the prophecies, (whether verbal or figurative)
which had respect to (not only the coming of the Messiah, which they believed
already, but also) the abolishing of the Mosaical rites, and constituting in
their room the spiritual and Gospel-administration, till thereby they were
convinced of that truth: which is called, the dawning of the day, and the
day star, with respect to its light, and beauty, and reality, above the
Mosaical ceremonies and rites, which were but dim nightstars in comparison: or
till they were convinced that the day of the Gospel-realities was come, and so
the night-shadows of the Law to be done away.

The grounds I have for this Exposition are. 3.
these, added to the former.

Peter, the Penman of this Epistle, is said to be the Apostle to the
Circumcision, as the Gospel Gal. 2. 7.
of Circumcision was to Peter. And therefore we may gather, that those to whom
he wrote were Jews, whom the Scripture speaks to be zealously addicted to the
Law of Moses. And this is farther confirmed, by his direction of them to the
heeding of the Scripture-Prophecies, which few but the Jews were acquainted
with, or did own as worth the heeding, except the converted Gentiles; of whom
there was no danger that they should Judaize, unless moved thereunto by such of
the Jews as needed this conviction.

This to me is sufficient; I leave the grounds for others to consider.

One Text more I shall weigh, and then I judge. 4.
I have done enough to satisfy those that are willing, how the Quakers abuse
those Texts, which are not so easily understood as some others, to their own,
and others destruction.

To whom God would make known, what is the riches Col. 1. 27 opened.
of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the
hope of glory.

From hence they conclude, They have very Christ, his Being and Essence within
them.

It will not be easily refuted, That the hope of glory is to be understood to
be in them; which being a hope in Christ, the crucified Jesus, was such a
mystery, as the Gentliles called foolishness. But we preach Christ crucified,
to the Jews a 1 Cor. 1. 23.
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness.

For Christ to be in them (rightly understood) would be no such hard matter for
the Gentiles to believe, (who understood Metonymical phrases very well) as to
believe such a glory to be attained by faith in, and obedience to the Laws of a
man, who died as a Malefactor: and that this death of his, should reconcile God
to man, with the addition of such a purchase.

But because it is a truth, That Christ is in Believers; I shall therefore fay
that (which with the blessing of the Lord to a willing mind to be instructed)
will prove convincing.

First, The man Christ that was nailed to the. 5.
Cross, the Quakers do not believe to be in them, nor that he has a being or
life, nor can he be in them in his person as a man, if they had a sounder faith.

For the Godhead of Christ, that is (with respect to his Being and Essence)
every where, and every where alike. Do not I fill heaven and Jer. 23. 24.
earth, says the Lord? So that with respect to the infinite Being of God, who
comprehends all things, he is in every thing at all times, and nothing can be
void of his presence. So that if this be it you mean, the Saints have no more
privilege than any other creature whatsoever. But it remains, that Christ is
in his people by his graces, wrought by his Spirit, which is his image and
likeness; by his love, which has a uniting nature to its object; as we say,
such are one who love dearly: Every man is where he loves, more than where he
lives. And so also where he is beloved; for that will make him frequently
thought on, and a man to be sensible of his good or hurt, as if he himself
enjoyed the one, or suffered the other. And he is said to live in the hearts of
his people by faith, as faith believes how lovely and desirable he is, and so
loves him, and works all those other graces in the soul which are his image;
and do as effectually possess the soul for Christ, and to his use and interest,
as a faithful friend can do. According to that Text,

That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that Ephesians 3. 17.
ye being rooted and grounded in love, etc. You know what the Scripture says
of faith, that it works by love.

So that in very deed, Christ both as God and Man, does live in all his Saints,
but not in his person, but by the manifestations of his love and glory; his
works and image in, and on the soul. And this is enough to satisfy those that
are sober, and are contented with, and rejoice in those privileges which God
affords to his children; which are enough to render them blessed, rather than
those which pride and ignorance will choose, like our first Parents; to be as
Gods, and pay dear for the delusion.

SECT. VII.
Having stripped them of these Texts, wherewith they fortify their light
within to be the Christ and Savior; and proved, That the man Jesus of
Nazareth, in whom dwelt and now dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, is
the Christ of God; and not the man without the Godhead, nor the Godhead
without the manhood, I shall resume my Argument.

That this Christ of God, the Quakers disown and deny; and set up in his room
and stead another, viz. the light within every man: and therefore disown and
deny the true Christ, and set up another in his room, which is not the true
Christ, the Christ of God.

The light within every man, was not born of the Virgin Mary.

It was not the light within every man, of which Mary and Joseph were said to
be the Parents.

It was not the light within every man, that. 2.
was arraigned before, and condemned by Pilate.

It was not the light within every man, that was crucified (being hanged on and
nailed to the Cross of Wood) without the gates of Jerusalem.

It was not the light within every man, that was laid in the Sepulcher of
stone, belonging to Joseph of Arimathea; that rose out of that Sepulcher; that
eat and drank after his Resurrection with the Disciples; that showed to Thomas
the prints of the nails that nailed his hands and feet to the Cross; that
ascended up into Heaven in the sight of the bodily eyes of the Disciples: but
the Christ of God was he, and is he, that did and suffered all these things.
Therefore it is a most stupendous contradiction, to pretend to believe the
Scriptures, and that they own the Christ to whom the Scriptures bear witness;
and yet say, The light in every man is the Christ and only Savior.

And that the Godhead of Christ should be within every man, or any man
breathing; I have sufficiently refuted already: yet I shall offer a few of many
Arguments, farther to convince, That the Quakers Christ is not the true Christ
and Savior.

They call their light within the seed.. 3. Naylor Love to the lost. p. 3.


That he regards not the seed of God, which is fallen under all this death and
darkness; so long as the creature will but hearken to him [the Serpent] and his
lying promises, he will lead him from one thing to another in things without,
etc.

It Is a strange Christ, who is in the power of every man to be brought under
death and darkness, as long as the world endures; yet this is the Quakers
Christ. Whereas Gods Christ was dead, but died but once; and was offered up but
once for all, and that one offering has that in it which perfects for ever
them that are sanctified. But how the seed spoken of Christ in the Scripture
should be in every man, and yet the Son of Mary not be there, yea not be any
where, is a most ridiculous Riddle: for God, or the Godhead of Christ, was not
the seed of the woman, or Abraham, or David; the seed was the man Christ
according to the flesh.

So to the light of Christ, that which changes not in Naylor Love, etc Preface.
every one; I appear to be judged -- for therein alone, both these things and
all other that proceed from that root, makes for gathering creatures together,
unto that one name and seed wherein all the nations of the earth are blessed.

The Scripture he expresses the sense of is, Genesis 22. 18. And in thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed. But Christ as God was not the seed of
Abraham.

Who that understands any thing can be thus deluded, to take the light within
every man to be the seed of Abraham, the man Christ Jesus.

The Quakers light within cannot be the Savior, 4.
for their light within is, as they say, God, Father, Son and Spirit, without
distinction, and that they are but one: whereas the Christ of God is the
Mediator, and therefore must be distinct from God the Father, and sinful man;
who are the parties to be reconciled.

There is one Mediator between God and men, the 1 Timothy 2 5.
man Christ Jesus.

Compare this with Gal. 3. 20. No^w a Mediator G^l. 3. 20
is not a Mediator of one, but God is one. Well then, the light within, which
the Quakers say, is God without any distinction, and not the man Christ, who
was in the womb of Mary, cannot be a Mediator, for a Mediator is not of one,
but between two distinct persons.

Now this being a truth, where is their Mediator? God eternal is not a Mediator
to himself, nor man a Mediator to himself: so shut out the Christ without you,
(a middle person between God and sinful men) and you are in a woeful condition.

Christ as God separate from that man who was. 5.
born of Mary, is not, nor ever was complete Christ. So that if it should be
granted, that the light within you were the true God, God essential (which is a
blasphemy no tender and understanding soul dare come near the brink of) yet I
say, your light within were not Christ. God had no capacity to suffer, to die,
to do the Offices necessary for a Savior and Redeemer, according to the
conditions of the Covenant of grace: and although many were saved before Christ
was born, and died for sinners; yet they were saved by faith in the promised
Redeemer who was to come.

And these all having obtained a good report through Heb. 11. 39.
faith, received not the promise. And therefore until his Incarnation, he is
spoken of as Gods Christ in election, but not actually and completely Christ.

Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in Isa. 42. 1.
whom my soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles. Read Isa. 49. where you may with open face behold
this truth, in that discursive converse and expostulation between God the
Father, and God the Son.

Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Heb 10. 5.
sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me.

Then I said, Lo I come (in the volume of (...) Verse 7.
Book it is written of me) to do thy will O G^ What was this will, but his
fulfilling the L^ both actively and passively as Redeemer? which he could not
do as God, therefore God prepared him a body, that body which was born of the
Virgin; to which he being united, and therei^ dwelling, and performing our
Redemption, (...) became actually and completely a Savior, an^ not before.
Therefore if you believed arig^ concerning the Godhead of Christ, yet denyin^
his man hood which was made, a created Being a Being in time; you disown and
deny the tr^ Christ.

And that is a notorious unmanning of Christ. 6.
and denying him, which one of your great Writers says.

And the Scriptures throughout testify of him, and Morning Watch. P. 4.
declare his unchangeableness, who through all [ages] abides the same, what he
was in the beginning. Whereas if the man Christ were so the same, he never had
a beginning. And the Scripture or you are much out; for they tell us, When he
was Luke 2. 42.
twelve years old he went up to Jerusalem, and there disputed with the Doctors;
which would have been no matter of wonder, if he had been (as man) from the
beginning.

But if you will read such a mystery of iniquity, ignorance, and bold
perverting of Scripture, as the world was never till of late acquainted with,
observe what follows out of the forementioned Author.

And he [John] was sent of God to bear witness P. 5.
unto this truth, which was in the beginning -- but that is the true light
(says John) that enlightens every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9.
Observe he corrupts the Text, and puts is for was; which in my Exposition of
this Text, I show to be the break-neck of the Quakers design. You may hereby
perceive they are sensible how much the word was makes for my Exposition. But
he proceeds, Here was the light shone out of darkness in John, the morning and
the first day was come unto him, as was unto Moses. A most strange, false, and
absurd passage; to make Christ to be the morning and the first day: but any
thing to worm out our blessed Redeemer born in time. In the beginning of his
Book he tugs hard to have the created light and the day, distinguished from the
night, to be no other but Christ the light within: And here he will have it
shine out of darkness in John. It follows a few lines after, Then God sent him
to bear witness to the light which in him was made manifest, that all in the
light might believe; and he called to others to behold him, and said, he was
the Lamb of God, and was come to take away the sins of the world, Joh. 1. 29.
(Mark) he behold him -- weigh this truth all ye Priests and Professors, and
ponder it in your hearts. What cannot the Devil lead men into, who are led
captive by him at his will? and make them also glory in it, and stand to it with
a (Mark) in a Parenthesis, and call on men to weigh their wickedness. I am
amazed! The Lord have mercy on us, and poor weak souls, who know not how to
espy such gross delusions as this, That the Lamb of God John there spoke of,
was the light in him, and which shone forth in him.

The light within every man cannot be the Savior,. 8. John 4. 22. opened.
for that salvation is of the Jews; which the light within is not. These words
were spoken by Christ himself to the woman of Samaria, to convince her of the
Samaritans false worship Ye worship ye know not what, that is, ye know no^ what
to worship, nor for what end. The Temple at Jerusalem was a type of Christ, and
the worship of God which shadowed out Christ, a^ the Sacrifices, Altar, etc.
were restrained to that Temple, to show that whatever worship was not performed
in Christ, should not be accepted. Now says Christ, You know not what you do,
in worshipping at the Temple at Mount Gerazim, for no Temple but that in
Jerusalem is a type and representation of Christ; and withal salvation is of
the Jews. The true Savior is to be born in the true Church, and from thence to
bless the world. There shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn
ungodliness from Jacob. That is, out of the Israelitish or Jewish Church. For
out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

There is one Scripture much abused by those. 9.
I oppose, which I shall explain before I shut up this Chapter.

Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we
him no more. This Scripture is by them made a sufficient ground for their
infidelity in the Christ of God, the Son of Mary: for they say, he was a man of
our nature, of the flesh and blood of the earthly Adam and nature; as I have
already showed out of their Authors: but therefore he is not to be believed in,
which you have had proof of sufficient.

By the flesh, we are not to understand the. 10.
body, as if he should have said, we are to take no notice of our own, or
others, or Christ's body of flesh: for the Apostle calls them worse than
Infidels, who do not provide for the bodies of those who are of their own
house: or that we should have no remembrance of Christ, as he was in the flesh;
for then we must forget and be ignorant of the great mystery and foundation of
the Gospel. Great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh.
But we preach Christ crucified. I determined not to know any thing among you,
save Jesus Christ and him crucified.

The meaning therefore must be, That he and his fellow-Apostles did not preach
the Gospel for worldly respects, and esteem of men, and please their fancies
and humors, for the sake of outward and carnal advantages. The grounds of this
Exposition are three among others.

First, The subject and scope of the Chapter is. 11.
the life to come, and to persuade so to walk and behave our selves in this
world, as those that must quickly be uncloathed of this earthly tabernacle, and
be concerned with only the things of another life.

Secondly, The end of Christ's death expressed in Verse 15. That they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves. That is, to their outward, temporal
interests, as their prime and chief aim; for to their spiritual and eternal
selves, they were to live, which are best promoted by living to Christ.

Thirdly, From what is expressed in Verse 17 as necessary to making the honor
and interest o^ Christ our chief aim. Therefore if any man b^ i^ Christ, he is
a new creature; old things are pa^ away, behold all things are become new. As
if h^ should say, This proves those that are in Chri^ to be new creatures; that
their aims and en^ are holy and spiritual, which is too high for a^
unregenerate man, whose faith and love to them and concerning them, is much too
weak to steer the course of their lives, as those that are bound for Christ and
Heaven. And as their ends, so the means is altered; for as before they shaped
their whole course to please the flesh, it is now conformed to pleasing the
Lord, and providing for their souls welfare.

And whereas it is said, though we have known. 12.
Christ after the flesh, etc.

It may refer to the Apostles, in whose persons the Apostle speaks, (though he
himself were not concerned with them) who did sometimes dream of being great in
the world, and sharing with Christ in an earthly kingdom; but now being better
informed; and attained to a higher and more noble degree of spiritual
understandings and affections, they were crucified to those childish and carnal
designs, and their consideration of Christ in his glorified body, and his
exaltation in Heaven at the Fathers right hand, did raise their souls to a
longing after a further and complete view of his glory, and sharing with him in
his heavenly Kingdom. This is suitable to the eighth Verse of this Chapter,
which has some Contexture with Verse 16. We are confident I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. Then Christ
was not in them as in his Heaven and Glory.

To conclude, I beseech you who are engaged. 1. 3.
with the Quakers, from the good opinion you have of their Tenets, or from
other respects which may quickly produce their entertainment; do not think it a
light thing, to disown him who must be your Redeemer, or you must for ever
perish; or that the difference between the true Christ, and any thing else that
is so called, is so small, that you may wink and choose, no danger of
miscarrying which ever be your foundation. If ye believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins; was the saying of truth it self, and he was not the
light within, but the man Christ Jesus, who was then in Judea, and no where
else, who is now in Heaven, not on earth. How is it that the Apostles (whose
knowledge of and zeal for Christ, is not to be equalled by any of ours) did
preach Christ so abundantly by the name of JESUS, which was the proper name of
his humane nature; and as the CHRIST, which is a name proper to God and man in
one person, he that is the all-sufficient Savior, and not by the name of the
light within? which is not to be found once in the Scripture; and where the
words are found, (which Christ himself spoke) which is but once, it may be a
terrible and a seasonable monitor to you. But if the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness? I beg of you once more to weigh what I
have written in this Chapter, and beg for you, that the Lord would give you
understanding in all these things.

CHAP. XVI. The Quakers are gross Idolaters; and Quakerism gross Idolatry.
SECT. I.
THere have been great Contests in the world, about the imputation of this
Character of Idolaters, and what is Idolatry? Some have contended, That not
only a false worship (though of the true God) is Idolatry, and by consequence
that those who live in the practice of such a worship are Idolaters; but also
that any Appendices to that worship of God, (which in the substance of it is
his true worship) are also Idolatry, being of man's invention, and added by his
own proper Authority, as a part of divine worship: and that so doing is a crime
against the second Commandment in the Decalogue, or ten words, or Commandments
written in tables of stone.

The proof of my Charge against the Quakers, will not depend upon such nice and
disputable premises; but if there be any such thing as Idolatry in the world,
I shall prove them guilty in the highest degree.

And because this Charge looks very big, and would be no small sin against both
the principles and persons of those concerned, if untrue; and also that such a
crime of theirs is not so visible to the world, as may be within the cognizance
and notice of all who converse with them.

I shall dispose my Arguments plainly and formally.

All those that own and profess that to be God which is not God, are gross
Idolaters:

But the Quakers own and profess that to be God which is not God:

Therefore, the Quakers are gross Idolaters.

My second proof is in this Argument.

All those who worship that as God (professedly, and according to their
professed principles) which is not God, are gross Idolaters:

But the Quakers do so:

Therefore, they are gross Idolaters.

My first Argument I shall first prosecute, and with that perspicuity, as will
be apparent to all that are not more blind than Bats.

For the first Proposition, viz. That all those that own and profess that to be
God which is not God, are gross Idolaters.

I know none but will grant the truth of it, who (in matters of a religious
nature) can discern their right hands from their left.

The Minor or second Proposition of my Syllogism, I am concerned to confirm.

Here will be the issue depending; and if this be thoroughly proved, no man
convinced thereof, but will sit down by the Conclusion, That the Quakers are
gross Idolaters.

I shall manage my proof of this, by these two Syllogisms.

They who own and profess the light within every man to be God, own and profess
that to be God which is not God:

But the Quakers do own and profess the light within every man to be God:

Therefore, The Quakers own and profess that to be God which is not God.

Again, They that own and profess the souls or spirits of all or some men,
which are constitutive parts of all or some men, to be God, do own and profess
that to be God which is not God:

But the Quakers do own and profess so:

Therefore, They own and profess that to be God which is not God.

The first Syllogism I shall manage in the first place, the Major and Minor of
which I shall fully prove.

And although some have attempted the conviction of the Quakers, by showing the
natural faculties of light in man, to be far short of what they ascribe to it,
I shall not go their way to work, for so long as the Quakers hold their light
within to be Christ or God, it is vain to restrain it to less than infinite.

And I having to do with those, whose opinion of the light within depends on
such a conceit, I shall prove the light within every man not to be Christ or
God.

For the proof of the first Proposition, I must prove, That the light within
every man is not God: and in so doing, all that is requisite to the first
Proposition will be discharged.

That the light within every man is not God, I prove thus:

That which has not power in it to dispose and order 1. Arg.
the ways of a man, is not God:

But the light within every man has not power in it to dispose of the ways of
a man:

Therefore, It is not God.

The first Proposition will be granted, by all who own the omnipotence of God:
take away that, and you un-God him.

The second Proposition I prove from Jer. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way
of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. If
it be not in man, it is not within man: I cannot say that to be within me, that
is not in me; though that may be said to be in me, that is not a part of me. So
then, if the Prophet Jeremy were not mistaken, there is nothing in man, or
within man, that has the power to dispose, or wisdom to direct his steps; but
he may either fail in directing unwisely, or for want of power to perform, what
is well directed or determined: Therefore I must conclude against the Quakers,
That the light in every man is not God.

That which is not infinite and immense, or without 2 Arg.. 6.
or beyond measure, is not God:

But the light within every man is not infinite and immense, or beyond measure:

Therefore, The light within every man is not God.

The first Proposition I prove from Psalm. 47. 5. Great is our Lord, and of
great power; his understanding is infinite. To say, That which is infinite is
not beyond measure, is a contradiction in its self.

The second Proposition I prove by their own concession; and grant, There is
scarcely any one thing more frequent in their Writings, than to talk of the
measure of God, the measure of Christ, the measure of the light in men.

But turn your ear inward, to that measure of light Parnel's Shield of the
Truth, p 42.
in you.

I could fill a volume with Instances of this nature, how they measure out the
light within, and Christ, and God, and the Spirit: but none of them will deny
this.

It is a horrible abomination, for men through their gross and dark conceits
thus to dishonor God; to share him into more and less degrees and measures,
who is entire, infinite, indivisible; who is not (with respect to his Being)
less in one place than in another. This measuring would agree well to his
manifestations, and discoveries of himself to his creatures, and by his works:
it would agree well to those graces wrought by his Spirit in the hearts of his
people, which in some is more, some less, and capable of growing in all; but
God cannot be more or less than he is, and ever was.

That which may be darkness in a sinful and evil. 7. Arg. 3.
sense, (and that in the abstract) cannot be God:

But the light within some men, may be darkness in a sinful and evil sense (in
the abstract)

Therefore, The light within every man is not God.

I suppose, and hope they are not yet arrived to that height of wickedness, as
to charge God with ignorance or sin in the least degree, or that he is capable
of so degenerating: therefore I will take the first Proposition for granted.

For the second, I shall prove from Scripture, Ephesians. 5^8. For ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. What can be more exclusive of all
spiritual light, or light in spiritual things, than to be darkness in the very
abstract? But if you who adore the light within, shall say, this is meant of
man, but the light within is God, and Christ; and that is not man, of whom the
Apostle speaks. I answer, That sometimes you plead hard, that the lights in
Joh. 1. 9. should be rendered enlightneth; and W. P. tugs hard for it, in his
Pamphlet called, The Spirit of Truth, etc. but it will be granted with less
ado. Well then, if the light within every man be the enlightening of every man,
(at least virtually) so that if he be willing to be guided by its conduct, it
will lead him as you dream; then it must be within him, as a qualification of
his conscience, though it be not produced into exercise. And you tell men, they
have that within them, that will be a sufficient guide, if they will but listen
to it: therefore this Text reaches the light within you, which says, there was
a time when they were darkness. It would be a strange affirmation, to say, the
world or Creation were darkness, while the body of the Sun were in it shining,
although not one man should move by its light. And it is worth the noting, that
(...) in the Text rendered darkness, signifies such a darkness, as is the total
absence of light.

A second Scripture that proves this, is Mat. 6.23. But if the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! It is the same word in the Greek,
as in the forecited Scripture. And lest you should cavil, and say, Christ does
but suppose it, he does not affirm that the light in any one is darkness; the
foregoing Verse tells you, That if thine eye ^e evil, (that is, not single and
sincere in its aims) thy whole body shall be full of darkness. And sure you
will not say, but there are many in the world whose eyes are evil, who account
all such that are not Quakers. And it may be considered, that where the whole
body is full of darkness, there cannot possibly be in it any light. And that
this which men conceit to be light, and are conducted and led by it as if it
were such, is sinful ignorance and darkness; I shall not think it calls for
proof. Well then, it is as clear as day, that the best light some men have
within them, is but perfect night: therefore it cannot be God.

Thus I have proved by three Arguments, That the light within every man is not
God. I will but name a few more, and leave them to the judgment of the Reader,
without further proof.

That which may be kept under, and in captivity by 4. Arg.
the lusts of men, is not God:

But the light in some men (not only) may be (but). 9.
is kept under and in captivity by the lusts of men, (and that by the Quakers
own confession:)

Therefore, The light in every man is not God.

That which may be crucified, and put to pain in a 5. Arg.
proper sense, is not God:

But the light within every man (which the Quakers call God) may (by their own
confession) be put to pain and crucified, and that in a proper sense, (or they
talk but madly of being saved by its being crucified within them:)

Therefore, It is not God.

I proceed to the proof of the Minor, or second Proposition.

Viz. That the Quakers do own and profess the light within every man to be God.

This I must prove from their own Writings; which will easily be done, it being
the grand foundation of the whole Fabric of Quakerism: so that I may say, its
first stone is laid in gross Idolatry.

It would be needless to bring Instances of Morning Watch, p. 5, 6, 7. is
wholly taken up with it.
their asserting the light in every man, to be that Word which John speaks of,
Joh. 1. 1. Which was in the beginning, which was with God, which was God. It is
the first thing they teach, and that not suddenly and amphibiously (as they do
many other points) but in so many words.

But I shall furnish you with proofs enough, over and above that.

I will make you know that I the light which lights Fox the younger. p. 53.
every man that comes into the world, that all through me should believe, am
the true eternal God, which created all things; that by me the light all things
are upheld, and that there is not another besides me can save. Although in this
passage he does not call it the light in every man, yet it being a personating
the light within in a large and continued discourse, he does often express it
the light within; as in page 50. You scorn me the light in you. Page 54. Which
will not own me the light in them.

All power in Heaven and Earth is in it; [the light in the conscience.]

They that cannot read out of these passages (and that without spelling) that
the Quakers own and profess the light in every man to be God, are not like to
be much the wiser for whatever they read.

That it is in every one, hear one speak his mind who would be believed.

Light is the same in him that hates it, and in him Lip of Truth, etc. p. 45.
that loves it.

I have done with the first grand Argument, and proved abundantly, that the
light within every man is not God.

That the Quakers own the light within every man to be God, and profess it. And
these will prove that they are Idolaters; or none will ever be so proved.

I shall now show you another God of the Quakers owning, or at least their Idol
in another dress; in managing the second proof of the Quakers, owning that to
be God which is not God.

My Argument is this:

They that own and profess the souls or spirits of all or some men, (which are
constitutive parts of all or some men) to be God, do own and profess that to be
God which is not God:

But the Quakers do so:

Therefore, They own and profess that to be God which is not God.

Two things will prove the whole of this Syllogism.

First, To prove that not the souls or spirits of any men are God.

Why I put in all or some in the Proposition, you will see the reason, when I
prove, Secondly, That the Quakers hold the spirits or souls of all or some men
to be God.

If the souls or spirits of any men were God, then God may be polluted with
sin:

But God cannot be polluted with sin:

Therefore, The souls or spirits of any men are not God.

The second Proposition will be granted, not only by Christians but Heathens.

Is there unrighteousness with God who takes vengeance -- Godforbid. Romans 3. ^


He that reproves God, let him answer it.

The first Proposition I prove from Adam's pollution with sin, who of all men
(except Jesus Christ) was the most unlikely to have his soul polluted; who was
created upright, and had the greatest advantages of maintaining his innocence;
yet his soul was polluted, as may appear, Genesis 3. Romans 5. at large.

Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness, both of 2 Cor. 7. 1.
flesh and spirit.

Now the God of peace sanctify you wholly, and preserve you blameless in
spirit, and soul and body, etc.

This is enough to prove, that the spirits of men, yea of the Saints and best
of men, may be, and have been polluted with sin.

If the souls or spirits of men were God, then God Arg. 2.
may be in prison:

But God cannot be in prison:

Therefore, They are not God.

The first Proposition I prove from 1 Pet. 3. 19. By which he went and preached
to the spirits in prison. And these were the sinful and disobedient spirits,
who provoked God in the days ^^ Noah.

The second Proposition all men will grant, except the Quakers, who often speak
of the seed (...) captivity; by which seed they mean no other but Christ or God
within every man, or the lig^^ within every man.

If the spirits or souls of men were God, then G^ Arg. 3.
might be condemned:

But God cannot so be:

Therefore, The spirits or souls of men are (...) God.

That the spirits or souls of men may be so, ((...) tremble to write the word)
appears by that Text, 1 Pet. 3. 19. The disobedient spirits in the days of
Noah are now in prison, which is a part of their torment.

The whole current of the Gospel says it, or implies it.

I shall now prove out of the Quakers chief and allowed Writers, whom they
account infallible, and honor with their chief respects; that they hold the
spirits or souls of men, or both, to be God.

Every man has that which is one in union, and F. B. True Faith, etc.
like the Spirit of Christ; even as good as the Spirit of Christ, according to
its measure.

This he speaks of the Spirit in man, which every man has; and sure if it be
as good as the Spirit of Christ, it must be God, for the Spirit of Christ and
of God are one and the same. But to talk of its measure (their usual phrase) is
a blaspheming God, to speak his divine Being any thing less than infinite.

Now my soul and spirit is centered in its own Being F. H. Testimony, etc.
with God, and this form of person must return from whence it was taken. The
words of Ed. Buroughs the morning before he died.

Here he makes his soul and spirit one Being with God, or God to be the souls
own Being. And what follows implies, that as the body and soul are the form of
man while in this world, so at dissolution, as the body resolves into dust, its
first Being, so the soul to God, its first Being. A miserable Exposition of the
Scripture which says, The body shall return to the dust, and the spirit shall
return to him that gave it.

He lived and died a true Quaker, but a false Christian, if he changed not his
mind his last day.

Priest. It is an expression of a dark deluded mind, For great mystery, etc p.
16.
to say, that God is not distinguished from the Saints. Thus he brings in the
Minister saying.

Answ. But God and Christ is in the Saints, and dwells in them, and he [the
Priest] is a reprobate, and out of the Apostles Doctrine.

If it were only out of ignorance, in not understanding the word distinguished,
or of the manner of Gods Being in his Saints, it should not be his Charge in
this place. But you shall (if you read further) see he intends no less, than
the wicked import of his words. But to call him reprobate, and out of the
Apostles Doctrine, is over measure a great deal; he might have spared him that
in charity.

John Bunian says, He [God] is distinct from p. 16.
the Saints; and Bunian is deceived, who says, he is distinct from the Saints;
and so you are a company of pityfull Teachers.

By these expressions he renders not only t^ Souls and Spirits of the Saint the
same b^ with God; but their whole man without distinction.

Again thou makes a great pudder, that any (...) should witness he is equal
with God.

Answ. A Catechism of the Assembly of the Priest^ and put forth to the nation,
in which they have laid do^^ -- that the holy Ghost and the Son is equal in
power an^ glory with the Father; yet if any come but to witnes^ the Son
revealed in him, or come to witness the Holy Ghost in them as they gave out the
Scriptures, or witness the mind of Christ, and witness that equal with the
Father, they cry out horrid blasphemy.

Observe, he does not in the least deny the priests charge (as he calls him)
but calls it a pudder; he makes as if the most horrid blasphemies opposed or
charged on the blasphemers, were but making a pudder.

And to heal his sore he would wound the Assembly of Divines, by laying the
like monster at their door; but herein he shows his ignorance with his malice
and slander: For the rest of his phrases I shall only say this, that they make
no difference between the Spirits of the Quakers, yea of all men, and the Son
of God, or the Holy Ghost.

And is not that of God, which comes out from God? is not that of his being,
the soul which he has in his hand, and so divine?

There is a great difference to be of God with respect to relation, or
creation; and to be of God, as of his being, or the same being with him; the
one is to commom the whole Creation for of him are all things) the other is
peculiar to the blessed Creator.

Magnus Byne says the Soul is not infinite in it self, but is a Creature, and
Richard Baxter says it is a spiritual substance.

Answ. Now consider what a Condition these called Ministers are in, they say
that which is a Spiritual substance is not infinite in its self; but a
creature, that which came out from the Creator, and is in the hand of the
Creator, which brings it up; and to the Creator again, that is infinite in its
self, which the hand goes against him, that does evil, in which hand the Soul
is, which is immortal and infinite, which hand is infinite, which brings it up
to God is infinite.

If any man can match the ignorance confidence, blasphemy and nonsense of this
passage, out of the mouths or pens of any but the Quakers, he may be reckoned a
great discovere^. But this is received by those poor deluded souls as
infallibly true and a divine mystery (being the dictates of George Fox) whom
none of them dare or will contradict, such is the stupendous captivity of
these poor people.

Is not the Soul without beginning come from God?

It is not horrid Blasphemy to say the Soul is a part of God, for it came out
of him, and that which came out of him is of him.

Thus I have proved (not by remote consequences, but their open and plain
affections; and that pleaded for after their wild manner) that they hold the
Soul of Man to be God, a part of the Divine being, infinite in it self, without
beginning, part of the Creator, here is enough of blasphemy and idolatry for
one author to fill t^^ mouths of many. I shall cite yet more of their that none
may think it is but one Qual^ (though G. F. may stand for a thousand) who is
prodigiously wicked.

And whereas you Querie; whether the said Spir^ Fisher velata quaedam revelata.
p. 17.
[the Spirit of man] is mortal or immortal?

I answer, it is immortal, and neither mortal (...) corruptible; but the
immortal and incorruptible s^ of God, even something of the living word, which
(...) said to be made flesh.

What the word is that was made flesh John sait^ was God. 1. John. 1.

That which the Lord from Heaven begets of his Pennington Quest. 27.
own image and likeness, of his own [substance] of his own seed, of his own
Spirit and pure life. Speaking of the Saints the members of Christ.

Whether do you wait and believe, -- to have the Declaration against popery.
query 27.
same mind which was also in Christ Jesus? who thought it no robbery to be
equal with God.

And Christ thought it no robbery to be equal with God; yet he was no Pharisee,
though of the Pharisees judged a blasphemer, and as he is so are we, says the
Saints.

-- And they who dwell in the truth, witness one Parnel Shield, etc. p. 37.
with another; For the light of God owns its own, for God cannot deny himself.

They own the Spirit of God, Christ the seed, the spirit of man, to be but one
and the same thing; but sometimes will deny any to have a Spirit at all but the
regenerate, that they may not say the unregenerate have the Spirit of God, or
God the Spirit in them. See Fishers rare distinction to serve this turn.

As to the Spirit of man, -- which concurs to Fisher velata quaedam revelata p.
13.
the constituting of man in his primitive perfection; it is the breath of life
which God breathed into his Soul, after he had formed him as to his body of the
dust of the earth; whereby he came to be a living soul, a Soul that did partake
something of Gods own life, -- this (Spirit of man) is that living principle of
the divine nature, which man did before his degeneration, and shall again after
his regeneration partake of.

This Charge being of so black and horrid a nature, I did not judge it unmeet
to prove the truth of it by abounding instances, and now Reader judge, and put
on the largest Charity that a man or Christian ought in any case to exercise,
and give thy verdict, if I have not made appear, That the Quakers are gross
Idolaters, so far as owning and professing that to be God which is not God will
contribute to a demonstration.

I shall manage my second grand argument but briefly, for the work I have done
will render it not very incredible, that they should worship a false God;
seeing they own and profess a false God.

All those who worship that as God (professedly and according to their
professed Principles) which is not God, are gross Idolaters.

But the Quakers do so:

Therefore, the Quakers are gross idolaters.

I shall not prove the first proposition, which none will deny.

The second I prove by their own concession (considered with the proof I have
made of the light within every man and the Souls and Spirits of men not to be
God) but you may take the argument in this form.

All they who worship professedly, and according^^ their professed principles
the light within every man, the Souls and Spirits of any men as God, worship a
f^l^^ God.

But so do the Quakers:

Therefore, they worship a false God.

Who are not sprung from the noble gentle seed, and to Shield of the Truth, p.
25.
those honor is not due, neither can we bow unto them* for if we should, we
should set the Devil in the r^^^ of God, and give unto him that which is d^o^
God.

So that to those who are Quakers, and have the birth of the light within, the
noble and gent^^ seed, (as they call it) to them (with respect to that) they
may bow. And withal he tell^ you, it is such a bowing as is peculiar to God,
for where it is used to such who have not God in them (in the Quakers sense) it
is a setting the Devil in the room of God.

If it be objected, that they bow to none. I answer, that they pretend to own
no worship but what is inward, and yet they pretend to worship God, and meet to
that end, so that if they worship this light within, this Soul or Spirit in any
men, as they profess to worship God; they give them or it divine worship.

There was a time when many gave outward John Bolton senior
worship to James Naylor: One (now a grand Quaker) not being then pleased with
it, James told him that if they did it to him as a man, he disowned it; but if
they did it to the light within him, he accepted it, if any doubt of the truth
of this, the process against him in Richards Parliament will prove it. And John
Bolton the elder, the Quaker I speak of, can tell you more of it, and I doubt
not but that for the reproach and worse things which would follow it, we should
soon find it a general practice with the Quakers to give visible worship to the
Gods, that dwell in the temples of each others carcasses.

But I proceed to further proof.

He that will worship Christ in his fullness (in the Pennington. questions. etc.
p. 24
majesty of his glory dominion and power) must learn to bow down at the lowest
appearances of his Light and Spirit, even at the feet of Jesus.

He calls it worship by Christ, they all mean the light within, and the lowest
appearances must be bowed at, which is the least measure of the light within.

Priest. To say that Christ is within man is to worship angels, and not to hold
the head Christ: this he makes the Priest to say but whether any did so or no
it matters not to my purpose but his answer.

Answ. Which none comes to witness Christ the Fox great mystery. p. 55.
head but who witness him in them, that the angels must worship him that died
and suffered at Jerusalem and they that worship him in them, worship not the
angels, and they that are not worshipping him in them are worshipping Men, Devils
or Angels.

By the Christ that dyed and suffered at Jerusalem they intend nothing less
than the Son of Mary. I have already showed, they utterly deny him to be the
Christ, and they own Christ suffering at Jerusalem in no other sense than they
say he died, suffered or was crucified in every one of themselves, and that you
may be convinced of the truth of what I here affirm, mark what follows.

They are false [ministers] who preach Christ Smith Prim. p. 9.
without and bid people believe in him as he is in heaven above; but they are
the true ministers that preach Christ within.

C. This is a great difference in their doctrine for the one to pretend to
preach Christ without and another preaches him within.

Father. Yes, it does make a great difference and has no more fellowship
together than the East has with the West.

So that the Quakers Christ, the light within, is not only some part of the
true Christ who may (as Christ) be without as well as within them, but they are
at such odds one with another that they can have no more fellowship than East
and West; and this is the Christ they worship, and to worship any other (as Fox
says) is to worship Men, Devils or Angels. Thus I have made good my second
argument, and thereby proved them gross Idolaters.

And there is somewhat in their Idolatry, that is not common Idolatry; for it
is apostatical Idolatry, which is so earnestly and with such an emphasis
exclaimed against by the Lord: Has a^^tion Changed their Gods, which are yet
no Gods but 2. Jer. 11, 12.
my people have changed their glory, for that which does not profit. Be
astonished O ye Heavens at this, be ye horribly afraid, be ye verily desolate
says the Lord.

And it is no less agravated in that (while the Heathen who had not their means
to know God yet were gross Idolaters, and as Pen says true enough, worshipped
(as the Egyptians) an Ape a Crocodile, yea herbs, almost any thing) these
wretches (for better they are not*) worship that natural conscience that Spirit
of man which is not only a creature an ignorant creature; but full of darkness,
error, pride, all manner of Sin, and worst of all a blasphemer of the God of
Heaven and his Son Jesus Christ the dear Redeemer.

But what now does it boot them to say they worship and own the Creator and
Christ, and the Lord, and only him, and such like? and what folly is it after
such evidences for any to say sure they are not so bad, their principles are of
a more (tolerable at least) stamp, they are civil zealous people for religion
in their way? how! will nothing but drunkenness or robbery of men in their
outward goods and such like vices render men wicked? will not the highest
affronts to Heaven? must men be believed rather than God in his word? which
has spoken of such persons to arise 1 John 2. Chap. and many other places? See
how God excused those in the second of Jer. in the 19, 23, and 24. Verses.

Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove
thee: know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou
have for saken the LORD thy GOD, and that my fear is not in thee, says the
Lord God of hosts.

How can thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? see thy
way in the valley, know what thou have done: thou art a swift dromedarie,
traversing her ways.

A wild Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure,
in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her, will not wear
themselves, in her month they shall find her.

CHAP. XVII. The Quakers deny the resurrection of the dead.
SECT. I.
I Doubt not but all who are not infatuated with the Quakers spirit, to a
perverting the genuine sense of almost all the expressions of principles of
faith, will understand by the resurrection of the dead, the raising again to
life, and from the dust and corruption, the bodies of men and women, however
disposed of after their natural death or dissolution.

The Quakers will deny their guilt of this Charge, and come off with an
Allegorical evasion. They will tell you, that they believe and own the
resurrection of the dead, yea, of the dead body: whereas in truth their opinion
and meaning is quite another thing, than the Ordinary acceptance of that
doctrine, as will appear by the instances following., 12. Smith Cat p. 31.


And has no will, nor wisdom, nor reason left in him, but all baptized down
into the sufferings of Christ. -- and there the power kills him, and gives him
life again; and so man lays down his own life, and takes u^ life in Christ, in
which life, he comes to be raised in the resurrection of Christ.

I must confess this account is like his, who though he may have too much will
is utterly void of reason. But he that shall own no other resurrection of the
body, than what Smith expresses; comes under that severe rebuke of the apostle;
who concerning the faith have erred saying that the resurrection is past
already, and have destroyed the faith of some.

The foresaid Author says farther.

Quest. But must man pass through death, and p. 29.
rise again while he is in the Body?

Answ. Yes, for except he be regenerated, and born again; he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God: And therefore he must die to the first Adams flesh, and be
quickened and raised again in the second Adams Spirit: And so in the
resurrection and life, enter the Kingdom as a little Child.

You see here plainly, that their resurrection of the body is but their
regeneration, and this is fulfilled while they are in the body.

But above all that I have read of the Quakers, velata quaedam revelata.
Fisher is the best skilled in the allegorizing of the resurrection.

But if you will not be admonished, nor persuaded by Moses and the Prophets;
[within you] neither will you be persuaded by such of us, who were once dead in
Sin with you; but are now risen to life, by the power of God which is his
light, and in the same sent to speak unto you from the dead.

I know not how they can deny his words to be his gloss on 16 Luke 31. If they
will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one
should rise from the dead. If Christ had intended conversion or regeneration
there by rising from the dead, it were no rare thing to have such preachers
sent to them; for all the Saints of God are such as are regenerated.

And such preachers they had many at that time we may conclude, That the
resurrection spoken of by Christ was of some one in the state of the dead, to
have his body raised to life, and with that advantage of experience to preach
to them.

Whereby the heart is set free from corruption, and Naylor Love to the lost. p
3.
made able to escape the pollutions of the World, and to run the pare vvayes
with delight; which is the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, the
resurrection from the dead.

I have said enough of what abundantly implies 4.
their denial of this great and fundamental truth, I do not at all expect, nor
can I (with any reason) that they should in their writings in so many words
deny the resurrection of the dead, because so open and plain dealing in this
great point would render them intolerable, and shut the door against
Proselytes; but yet in verbal and private converse they stick not to deny the
resurrection of the same bodies, which ordinarily when dead are put into a hole
in the ground, and covered with earth.

I have examined many of their books that pretend to give a full account of
their tenets and belief, but in all of them their resurrection is no other than
I have already expressed.

Take an Account of one or two in their systems of their doctrine of the
resurrection of the. 5. Isaac Penington, some principles of the elect, called
Quakers, p. 34.
dead.

We say that Christ is the resurrection and the life, to raise up that which
Adam lost. -- and to destroy him who deceived him (viz. Adam.) so Christ is
the resurrection unto life, of body soul and spirit, and so renews man, etc.

What is this resurrection, but what they call regeneration? and the
resurrection of the body, is but in the same sense as the soul and spirit is
raised; which is not from a natural death or dissolution of their essential
form; but from their depravation and defection to a sensual and sinful
disposition, and their aversation from God.

Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead

In the Chapter entitled as above, he has these Naylor love to the lost* p.
78.
words.

But to such busy minds who are saying, how are the dead raised? And with what
bodies do they come? I say to such, the Apostles words are very suitable; Thou
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die, -- but the mystery
is sealed with the Sons of God; nor can any ever know with what bodies they
shall arise, but who comes to the flesh of Christ, and discerns his body; the
sight whereof in the life slays the Serpent, and opens the mystery: till then,
cursed is he that reveals that which God has sealed, and hidden from the
Serpents Wisdom, etc.

Naylor before and after, quotes many Scripture Phrases; which abundantly prove
the resurrection of the body after dissolution or natural death; but when all
is done, there is a mystery, a sealed mystery in his meaning, and a curse laid
on those who reveal their tenet: no wonder then, that they speak not out to any
other but themselves, whom he dare trust with the greattest abominations in
their delusions; but notwithstanding his inhibition, diverse of them have to me
acknowledged, that they believe not that the body which when dead is ordinarily
put into a hole in the ground, and covered with earth, and turns to dust;
shall ever be made alive again.

And that which may put you out of doubt, that this is their Tenet, I can prove
by many Witnesses that George Whitehead, one of their chief Misleaders, (after
much importunity to speakhis mind plainly in this matter) did affirm, That he
did not believe that his Body should rise again after its Death.

I never knew any of them affirm the Resurrection. 2.
of the Body, intending there by the Body which is such in a proper sense and
common acceptance: I have often discoursed them about it, and when I have
proposed the question so plainly, that they had no room to evade by their
allegories; their answers have been, Thou art upon the Catch, we shall not
answer thee. Or Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Sometimes
with that in Job, If a Man die shall he live again? and as the Beast dies, so
dies Man. But when all their Arguments are answered, which they think are
lodged in these Scriptures; their last refuge is their false interpretation of
15. Cor. 38. God gives it a Body as it pleases him.

Who will doubt, but that such who will not give a plain answer yea or nay,
when questioned about the Resurrection of the Dead; but instead thereof,
produce all those Texts which to them seems to deny the Resurrection, I say,
who will doubt that such do deny the Resurrection of the Dead? before I
discharge this subject, I shall answer their Cavils about this point, prove the
truth, and give some inferences from their corrupt wicked Religion, and foul
destroying Tenet.

First, their Cavil from that Scripture 1 Cor, 3.
15. 50. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. By Flesh and Blood
here, is to be understood Corruptible flesh and blood, which is clear from the
consideration of the following words, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption; compare this with ver. 42. it is sown in corruption, it is raised
in incorruption, and ver. 49. and as we have born the Image of the Earth, so
also we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly. So that it is still the same
body, only with the Change to spiritual and incorruptible.

For that in Job, if a Man die shall he live again? the meaning can be no more
than this, (if Job understood himself) he shall not live again in this world,
and in that state in which he lives before death, which is plain from what he
most confidently affirms, Job 19. 26, 27. And though after my skin Worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my
self, and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my Reins be consumed
within me. And it is remarkable, that God whom he here speaks of, seeing is
intended by him Christ the Redeemer who shall stand at the latter day upon the
Earth verse 25. for that in Ecclesiastes 3. 19. As the one dies so dies the
other. It is expounded in the next verse, all go unto one place, all are of the
dust, and all turn to dust again. But this does not at all oppose Man's
Resurrection out of his dust again.

But that silly evasion which is very frequent with them, but God gives it a
Body as pleases him; It does no way deny the Resurrection of the Body, or
condemn those that enquire into the manner of its being after the Resurrection.
For if God be pleased to acquaint us in his word, that there shall be such a
resurrection, and that it shall be then spiritual and incorruptible; it is our
duty to take his word, and to understand 4.
what he is pleased to manifest to us of this great truth. Another text they
frame an objection out of is 1 Cor. 19. 36, 37. Thou Fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body that shall be. I answer, that the Apostle does not call him a
Fool, who enquires concerning the resurrection (which is the common charge of
the Quakers from this Text) but him that doubts of the resurrection, from its
seeming impossibility, and for the sameness of the body: thought not in all
circumstances, yet that it shall be the same essence, is plain from the
relative it all along, which has for it antecedent the body of flesh and
blood, wherein we now live and are visible to the bodily eyes of one another,
and ver. 38. to every seed its own body.

I have met with some of them, who could not. 5.
or would not understand it of the same body, because the Apostle says, verse.
51. We shall all be changed: From whence they conclude, it cannot be the same
body. I would ask such, if they would be content to be refused their debts
owing to them when young, being demanded when old; or owing when well, if
demanded when sick; or contracted when they were not Quakers, and demanded when
Quakers? for as to the latter, they will affirm they are changed, and that from
natural to spiritual. But I suppose in such cases, they will show more
sagacity, and be content to believe that a change in a person is not the change
of a person; and for all those changes, they are the same persons still, to
whom the money both was, and is due.

I might say moreover, that if it be another,. 6.
and not the same body that shall be raised again, it is a contradiction; for
then it must not be a resurrection but a creation; and who will guess so wide
of the mark, that God should treat another body, which was never in this
world, and did either good or evil, to be rewarded or punished in stead of the
body concerned in those actions, which in the mean time shall be free among the
dead, and buried in everlasting forgetfulness?

Some of them have denied the resurrection of the body of Christ, and stood by
their error, upon the account of his entering the room when the doors were
shut, and his appearing in such forms, that his Disciples did not know him. To
which I shall say only this, that Christ as God could convey himself how and
where he pleased, and that the Disciples not knowing him, was not because he
was not in the same form as before, but because their eyes were withholden,
that they should not see him, Luke 24. 16

SECT. III.
The woeful companions and consequences of the error here charged on the
Quakers, and proved to be theirs, take a few of; which are enough and great
enough, to make any who are not resolved to be Atheists or Infidels; to tremble
at the first motions to such a delusion.

First, This tenet of the Quakers does naturally eat out the heart and vitals
of all Religion, if the dead rise not, Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we
shall die. All Religion obliges with a respect to the life to come. The opinion
of no resurrection lets loose the reins to the most extreme sensuality, an
Epicure is then the wisest Man.

Secondly, this error renders it a mere humor, and a piece of foolish
obstinacy to persist in the profession and practice of any thing Religious,
when indangering our temporal concernments. If the dead rise not at all -- and
why stand we here in jeopardy every hour? 1 Cor. 15. 29. 30.

Thirdly, it utterly subverts and makes Shipwreck of the faith of the Gospel,
that looking at a prise and reward on the other side the Grave. But if there be
no resurrection of t^ad, then Christ is not risen, and if Christ be not risen
then is our preaching vain, and your faith also in vain. 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14. For
if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ be not raised,
your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. 1 Cor. 15, 16, 17. So that there
is a Chain of the most woeful consequences that this wicked error draws after it.

Fourthly, Then the Gospel is a mere fallacy and delusion, which promises a
reward to man, whose persons are constituted of a body as well as a soul.

Many more might be inferred of so grand an import, as would render this
Doctrine the most pernicious, that was ever hatched among pretended Christians.

CHAP. XIX. The Quakers profess not the Doctrine of a future reward in another
world.
SECT. I.
I Have been a diligent enquirer, to find some expressions in their Writings or
verbal converse, that might satisfy me they owned a future happiness or misery
after this life: but all to no purpose; in this point they make no noise at
all. I have searched those Writings of theirs especially, which have pretended
an account of their principles, in all or most points of Religion; but though
this of a future state of reward or punishment, be the vitals and end of all
Religion, yet they do not so much as touch upon it. From whence I must
conclude, it is blotted out of their Creed. It Is said of the Gospel; which is
the Christian dispensation; that it brings life and immortality to light; what
was in the Scriptures of the old Testament more seldom and obscurely expressed,
is the very scope of the Gospel or new Testament the peculiar of Christianity:
but then certainly Quakerism is no Christianity, that is so silent in this
matter. I know they talk of immortality and eternal life; but what is
immortality with them? Fox says man is immortal before death in his great
mystery, and their Salvation is no more but what they have within them, and is
accomplished in this world. Farnsworth says (speaking of the righteousness of
Christ) neither was I saved by it. so that his Salvation was not future, but
present or past. And Pennington in some principles of the elect, etc. says and
so they who forget God, and do wickedly, they are to be turned into Hell. But
what Hell is this? no more than what they say is in this life, for they who
forget God and do wickedly, they go from the life and power of God into the
separation from him, and out of his acceptance; For in the life is the
acceptance: what is here more than is suffered in this life, which we call p^^a
damni or the punishment of Hell?

A Book entitled the spirit of the Quakers, etc. Charges the Quakers for
having their hearts much set on a Heaven within them, but not on the things
above; to which Pen replies and vindicates after his fashion the Kingdom of
God within, but says not a word to assert their belief of, and affections to,
the Heaven above; from whence it is plain, that they believe no such thing to
have a being.

I wonder not therefore, that this is so frequently their saying, That, if we
are not perfect here, we shall never be perfect.

It is easily deduceable from their more openly professed principles, that they
deny and disown a blessedness or misery in another world: For if they deny the
body to have life any more after it is dead, and turned to dust; and that the
Soul and Spirit are of the being of God, and that as the body returns to its
former dust from whence it came, and never revives again, so the Soul and
Spirit returns into God its first being, (all which I have already proved) what
then remains to be the subject of happiness or misery? e'ne nothing at all,
except God, and he is not man. E. Boroughs the day he dyed, expressed himself
thus, that he was now putting of this manner of person and returning to his own
Being or words of the same import, which I have quoted on the Chapter of their
Idolatry. When I have asked some of them, what should become of their souls
after death? Their Answer has been, they shall be taken into God. Let them
profess that they believe a happiness to be enjoyed by men and women, after
their bodies are rotted to dust, distinct from the Being of God, or that which
they had not a thousand years before they were born, ( i. e.) to be in God,
from whom (as of his Being) they say the soul came, and it will be news to me,
and all that are acquainted with them. In the mean time I. have given you
Reasons enough to conclude, they believe. no future blessedness or misery in
another world.

I shall now resume the Question, and gather up all the proofs of what I have
affirmed into an entire body.

If Quakerism be another dispensation than that of Christ settled and preached
by the Apostles.

If it deny the Scripture.

If it deny all the Ordinances of the Gospel.

If it deny any influenne of Christ's transactions in Judaea above 1600 years
since, into our justification and salvation.

If it deny Jesus the son of Mary, the Christ of God.

If it own false Gods, and be Idolatry.

If it professedly owns the worshipping of false Gods.

If it deny the resurrection of the dead.

If it affect not a future blessedness or misery in another world, to men and
women according to their deeds in this:

Then, Quakerism is no Christianity:

But all these things are true, and have been proved of Quakerism:

Therefore, Quakerism is no Christianity.

PART III.
BEING AN EXAMINATION Of the First Part of W. PEN'S Pamphlet, CALLED The Spirit
of Truth: With a Rebuke of his Exorbitances.
SECT. I.
WHiles I was writing this Book, I met 1.
with a Pamphlet of William Pen's, entitled The Spirit of Truth vindicated
against that of Error and Envy, etc. Which is pretended to be an answer to a
malicious Libel, entitled The Spirit of the Quakers tried, etc. I having the
Piece by me, I once perused it. In the general, I resented it, as one of the
best, and most ingeniously managed, and beyond all material and just exceptions
(at least by the Quakers) that ever I read against that sort of people. But
reading Pens Answer, and finding his Epistle giving such a Character of his
Adversaries Book and himself; for malice, lameness, trifling, and what not,
that might render it and him wicked and contemptible: I began to mistrust my
conclusion; supposing a person of P.'s education and pretenses, would not say
so much evil of it without great cause; and therefore I compared them
diligently.

But for P.'s sake, I shall believe it more than 2.
possible, that a man of the highest pretenses, having some more than ordinary
means to deal rightly and ingeniously; may yet so far deceive my expectations,
as to give the highest contradictions to them all.

I am altogether ignorant of the name, or person of the Author of the Piece
opposed by Pen; and if he be a Socinian, as Pen affirms, I shall be far enough
from vindicating him therein: but for the Piece it self, wherein Pen says he
could find neither head nor tail; I will sell my eyes and brains for two pence,
if it deserve so contemptible a Character. And for the Answerer Pen, if he were
not furnished with forehead, and tales beyond measure, his Pamphlet would have
had nothing remarkable in it.

I expecting next his Epistle and Preface, an orderly 3.
combating his Adversaries Charge; I find him taking up his Post in the Quakers
conceited strong hold of the infallible guidance of the Spirit of God, afforded
to his people; exclusive of any other means. In the debating of which he roams,
and tosses to and fro, like a man in a confused troubled dream, for above
thirty pages. His pretenses therein lying athwart my present work, I thought
meet to give some account of his Forces; especially considering him to be a man
of noise, and no small prop^ to the Quakers cause in their own esteem.

His Question which he pretends to include the Quakers strength, and which he
says he is resolved to stand by as such, he states in these words.

SECT. II.
The Question stated.

Whether Gods holy and unerring Spirit, is, or should be the proper Judge of
Truth, Rule of Faith, and Guide of Life among men, especially under the
administration of the blessed Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or
not? I affirm it, and proceed to prove it by Scripture and Reason.

Considering his words foregoing, (which are too many and too worthless to
transcribe) and what he aims at in the handling of this Question, I never read
one so lame and deformed in my life, come forth with such state and confidence,
and such a train or rout of mediums, as deformed as it self. There is in it
neither Logic nor Honesty: Certainly, if he had not turned Quaker, and in that
fall, put all out of joint, he could not likely after so good Nursing have been
thus lamentably crepled in his Intellects, and somewhat besides.

First of all, here is a fallacy, a been divisis, ad male 2.
conjuncta: many Questions confounded together. Secondly, no explanation of the
terms, most or all of which are metaphorical or amphibious, and in that part
especially affirmed, the greatest ambiguity of all.

Vt quisque est lingua nequior,
Solvant, ligantque quaestionum vincula,
Per syllogismos plectiles.
He tells us indeed, page 37. that there is no more difference to him between a
judge, rule and guide, than essentially there can be in the wisdom, justice,
and holiness of God; he should have added, nor between truth, faith, and life
among men, and then he would have showed himself a workman indeed, to have so
stitched them together into one, as would admit of no distinction. I do not
admire, that his acumen cannot distinguish Essence and Subsistence, three
Persons in one Divine Being and Godhead; who cannot distinguish these
Attributes of God, nor these acts with respect to men, mentioned in the
Question. He is unlike to wade through a deep River, who is so often over head
and ears in a shallow Dish.

But these escapes are but the Dust of the balance 3.
to what follows. The word proper in a Question, as modifying these Offices or
acts of the Spirit, is greatly improper. Proper, is sometimes in opposition to
figurative, sometimes in opposition to common, sometimes in opposition to meet
or fit; in which sense he would be understood, it does not fit his purpose nor
principles to tell us: but this is an unworthy part of a Disputant, and
becoming none but those, who are resolved not to be understood.

If he would assert the Quakers Tenet, he must say, it is the peculiar and
immediate guide, rule, and judge, and this is that he pleads for now and then
after his fashion, in his following arguments: And all the Quakers I have read
or discoursed, plead for in plain terms: but if it had been so expressed in the
Question, his nose would have been held too hard to the Grind-stone, in
attempting strictly to prove it. and most would have smelt the Rankness of
Quakerism.

But Mr. Pen, do you deal fairly and honestly with your Adversaries, to imply
in your Question, that we deny the Spirit of God to be a proper (that is one
that is fit and has right to be a) rule of Faith, guide of Life, judge of
Truth? You know that we own it to be such, and that it dothboth in the
Conscience, and by the Scripture, Creation, and Providence perform such acts,
and is to such purposes, and that of right: Only we deny that the Spirit
always performs these acts without the use of the Scripture, or any external
means or ordinances; or that it does so at any time contrary to its mind
expressed in the Scripture, this you should oppose, or you do but trifle, and
abuse us, and your unwary Readers.

The latter part of your question, which expresses 4.
the administration of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (especially to
countenance your tenet*) is playing at Blind-Mans buff. You should have told us
who, or what you mean by Lord and Savior. If it be understood of the Quakers
Lord and Savior, the light within every man, that is none of our Lord and
Savior. If it be understood of the Man Christ Jesus, who was of the Seed of
David according to the Flesh; who was the Son of Mary crucified to death on the
cross of wood by shedding his blood, and is now in his humane, or man's nature
united to the Godhead in one person, ascended above the visible heavens: he is
none of your Savior; and can be no more within you (personally considered)
than the body of one individual man can be entirely in all the men and women,
and children in the world, and at the same time: it must be a
transubstantiation, much more ridiculous than the Papists, that must support
such a fancy.

It is also no less strange, that you should talk of 3.
the Gospel administration of our Lord and Savior, who hold nothing of a
Savior, but what is eternal a part ante, nor any other Gospel, but the light
within, and its immediate dictates, which you generally affirm was within every
man from the beginning of the world.

I shall not spend time, and paper to show the many other absurdities in your
question; I have left a harvest for gleaners. For the proof of your affirmation
(such a blind one, as it is) you produce abundance of Scriptures, which are as
much to your purpose, as if you had quoted only the 36 Chap. of Genesis;
wherein is contained Esau's posterity, and how many Dukes there were of his
race. Yet I shall produce your arguments for the Readers satisfaction, that he
may believe his own eyes; and I shall be more honest, than to frame a mere
whimsie out of my own head to abuse you; and say, after this lofty manner of
disputing, you undertake our overthrow; which is your guilt and baseness in the
fourth page of your Book.

SECT. III.
Your first proof you pretend from Genesis 6. 1. And 1.
the Lord said my Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is
flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.

I will for once transcribe your Argument verbatim, that it may be notorious,
how loftily you dispute.

If God's unerring Spirit has been wont to strive with men, either to convince
them of, or convert them from the evil of their thoughts, words, or deeds; or
else, to provoke them yet more fully to do the will of God, so as to press on
from one degree of glory to another; then men have had an unerring Spirit to be
their teacher, and judge, and rule, and guide of that truth, concerning that
faith, and in that most holy way, which leads to eternal life: But the
Scripture proves the first Proposition, that Gods Spirit has frequently strove
with men, and for the ends before mentioned; and consequently, they have not
been, without an holy unerring Spirit to teach, judge, regulate, and guide them.

If I should only say, your whole Argument is a 2.
mere confused thicket of impertinencies and non sequitur's; I believe your
conclusion would be most absolute, that it wae for want of eyes; and that I
dare not touch a bough of it, for fear of pricking my fingers. A man had need
of good arithmetic also to number the terms. You tell us the Scripture proves
your first Proposition; you are a non Such for diving, if you can fetch up from
this Scripture what is expressed in your first Proposition; especially the
latter member of it.

It is more than probable that the Spirit did strive with them to make them
better than they were, yet none of those ends are expressed in the Text: but
that it should be, that they might more fully do the Will of God, and press on
from one degree of Glory to another, is a guess wonderfully well becoming your
infallibility. Why did you not say, or to turn them into Suns, Moons, and
Stars? which were all out as much in the Text as the other: and I dare say,
some of your Friends would have taken themselves bound to believe it, who find
no fault with greater absurdities, dropped from their admired inspired Dictators:
but

Quos Deus vult perdere, hos dementat.

There were eight persons saved in the Ark, but one Noah said to be righteous
before God; and all the rest overwhelmed by the Deluge for their extreme
impieties: yet, these were pressed on from one degree of Glory to another.

The consequence of your first Proposition is, all manner of Fruits which you
had a mind should be grafted on this Stock; but as the Text will not impart its
Sap to your Proposition, so your Proposition is as dry to your Consequence: but
that is no matter, if they will not grow one upon another, you will make them hang
together, right or wrong. Ay, and if the Spirit do but strive, it must be how
you will have it, and for what ends you please, or you will rack the letter for
it; but there is no cruelty to a dead letter.

But Mr. Pen, if your conscience have any eyes, 3.
I entreat you make use of the light here afforded you, to compare the Text and
what you lay at its door; and see how alike they look.

Your Question is of the Spirits teaching among men, etc. indefinitely, and
your proof speaks of the Spirits striving with wicked men.

Your aim is to prove it an immediate and peculiar Teacher, etc. of Gods
people, the Text speaks of neither. If I affirm the Spirit strove with them by
providential Chastisements, ominous presages of Calamities at hand; by his
goodness, which leads to Repentance; by the Ark which Noah built, (moved by
faith and fear) and by which he condemned the unbelieving besotted World: by
his Preaching righteousness, I can prove my being guided therein by the
unerring Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 2. ^.
at another rate, than you can your contradiction.

But your wanderings from truth and reason, can 4.
hardly have a higher instance and evidence; than that you should be so
infatuated, as to conclude from a Text which says, my Spirit shall not always
strive with man, that it does now teach, etc. and God has not left his people
in our present, nor will in future ages, without his Spirit to teach them
immediately, and solely; which is in your Question, or your prosecution of it:
and should have been expressed there, if you had had so much ingenuity. Instead
of being angry that I have showed your vanity, and made your folly in this
argument such a spectacle to the world; you have reason to give me thanks that
I examine it no further.

SECT. III.
However, before we part I will try you at another weapon; which you forge out
of Neh. 3. 19, ^0. Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the
wilderness, the pillar of the Cloud departed not from them by day to lead them
in the way, etc. This part of your quotation is not only no friend to your
affirmation and principles, but an invincible adversary. No man in his wits
will say, the pillar of the cloud and fire were the Spirit of God: and if God
led his people by them, they were not led only and immediately by the Spirit
of God. It may be the latter part of your citation may do more for you.

Thou gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them. This good Spirit was
(mainly) the Spirit of God, which he put upon Moses and Joshua, and some other
their chief Persons by Gods appointment, as is evident from these Texts.

And I will take off the Spirit which is upon thee; and 2.
will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with
thee, Number. 1^. 17.

And the Lord said unto Moses take thou Joshua the Son of Nun, a man in whom is
the Spirit; and lay thy hand upon him, Number. 27. 18.

Thou leadest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron, Psalm.
77. 20.

Now God is said to give them his good Spirit to instruct them, by bestowing it
in such a way and measure on their instructers and guides; though I deny not;
but every true Israelite had the Spirit also dwelling in him, yet they were
never the less, but the more submiss to the conduct of their mediate, or if you
will men-teachers, and guides for that.

SECT. III.
Your third chosen Scripture for your service is, 1.
But there is a Spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him
understanding, I shall explain Job 32. 3.
this text by another, which carries the full sense of it, and almost the same
words: For the Lord gives wisdom: out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. But does this encourage men to cast off all external means, and
the use of their reason? Nothing less. It is given as an encouragement to the
use of the means expressed in the four first verses, which are made conditional
of being blessed with that knowledge and wisdom, which comes from the Lord. If
thou searchest. If thou triest. It will now be more easy to take in the right
sense of your cited Scripture.

There is a Spirit in man, that is, a rational soul, say 2.
some; yet knowledge and understanding does not so depend upon its improvement,
as to shut out the breathing and blessing of God, from the chief efficiency. A
young man (as Elihu) may attain a measure by that divine blessing, beyond the
aged and more experienced. If you can prove that those holy men, who carried on
that debate, of which the Book of Job is a history, did neglect the external
means, which the Lord afforded them, for informing their judgments about divine
and spiritual concernments, upon the grounds of the inward teachings of the
Spirit of God, Eris mihi magnus Apollo: and unless you can do that, your
arguing from this Text is but mere trifling, beating of the air, and contending
for what is granted on all hands, but nothing at all to your purpose, who are
very busy at doing nothing.

And it is not beside the purpose to consider, that those holy eminent Saints
who contended with Job, were rebuked by God; for not speaking rightly of God as
Job did: and Job did not pass free without a chiding also, for his miscarriages
and presumptions; Job 42. verse. 7. and forward.

To conclude this Argument, you talk at a miserable 3.
lame rate, to say, that because the inspiration of the Divine Spirit gives
understanding, therefore it is not from the strength of man's reason, memory, or
utmost creature-abilities, that his knowledge of religious and heavenly things
comes; but from the revelation and discovery of the inspiration of the
Almighty. Let me tell you once for all, that if reason, memory, and humane
abilities have nothing at all to do in the search, and understanding of Divine
things; a mere animal, or such an idiot as Jack Adams may know as much of the
Divine and Heavenly mysteries, as W. Pen: but if I should say, such a one is as
able a Teacher, or Writer as you; I doubt not but you would take your self to
be not a little affronted.

And it is as lame arguing to conclude, because 4.
some men had Divine inspirations, and teachings of some Divine truths; when
there was not one Book of the written Word in being, (as I dare undertake to
prove) and they who had those inspirations, made use also of their reason, to
know Divine things, by all external means within their reach; therefore all
Gods people ( i. e. Quakers) have in these days, (wherein God has blessed us
with so large a portion of his written Word, or Word without us) sufficient
teachings by immediate Divine Revelations, to lead them infallibly in the way
that is most acceptable with the Lord, without the use of their created
faculties, or any outward means.

SECT. V.
The next Scripture you abuse is Psalm. 139. 7. Psalm. 139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence,
from whence you scribble thus: If Gods unerring Spirit be so nigh, and the
sense of it so certain, it must be either to reprove for evil done, or to
inform, uphold, lead and preserve in reference to all good: now in which of the
two senses it shall be taken, the presence of Gods eternal Spirit, and his
being the Saints Instructor, Judge, Rule and Guide, are evidently deduceable
from the words. -- Rudis indigestaque moles! worse than ever Bear brought forth
her Cubs! which with her licking may be brought into some shape; but your
products are so defective, both in truth, right reasoning, Syntax, and Sense;
that it is no dis-reputation to your Adversary to be confounded by them. It is
an effectual (but an impudent) course to silence all the world from opposing
you, by writing such confident, confused nonsense. Were it not for the sake of
many, who conceit your infallibility, which you are here so blindly pleading
for, I would as soon abandon my time to dispute with a distracted man, in his
raving Fits, as with W. Pen; till he come better to himself than I can find in
this Pamphlet.

If Gods infinite Being, Omnipresence, Omniscience, 2.
wonderful works of Creation, all-disposing Providence; (which is the scope of
the Psalm; and his Omnipresence especially, (the sense of the Text) do prove
that which you produce it for, and infer from it; you have found out away of
seeing, that may tempt us to dig out our eyes, punish them for mere cheats; and
for ever hereafter commend the blind archer for the best marks-man.

We may presume that you intend this Text to 3.
prove, that all Gods people are upheld, ruled, guided, etc. In reference to
all good by the Spirit of God; which you say is evidently deduceable from the
words. But who would have thought that such desirable considerations, and the
certain sense of them, should put so holy a man as David on such expressions of
going and fleeing from the Spirit and presence of the Lord?

No doubt the presence of God is every where, in the skies, the seas, the
wilderness; what then? does he therefore perform all these acts, where ever he
is present in his infinite being? even where there are no intelligent
creatures. Does he judge, inform, instruct stones, and trees, and mountains? I,
and must do so too, or else he does not answer the end of his presence being so
nigh? truly Mr. Pen we have had more reverend thoughts of the eternal and
omnipresent, God than to assign any thing as the end of his being but himself.

But it may be you lay your stress on the certain 4.
sense of it, and thus joined to his omnipresence will do your work.

Is the sense of it so certain to every good man? was it so to David when he so
long time was tainted with a heap of impieties?

Was it so with Jonah, when he fled (as he thought) from the presence of the
Lord? or was it so with you when you wrote some things in this book of yours
which I shall acquaint you with before I have done.

If it should be granted you, that all Gods people have the certain sense of
it, without doubting or alteration, it would be nihil ad rhombum, far from
proving Gods Spirit to be the peculiar teacher of his people, and so to teach
them, as to render them infallible, which is the mark you aim at.

SECT. VI.
The next Scripture you produce is* Teach me to 1.
do thy will for thou art my God; thy Spirit is good, lead me into the land of
uprightness. Psalm. 43. 10.

To bend this Text to your bow, you talk thus;

The Question will be, whether it was David's intent, and the scope of his
desire; that God should teach, and lead him by his good Spirit, or some other
thing? but methinks it is resolvable in the affirmative, in two respects. What
a strange Question is this! Who doubts but David commended the Spirit of God,
as a good teacher? what then? must all other teachers, which the Spirit of God
makes use of, as the means by which he teaches be cast off? Suppose I should
say such a Man is a good Schoolmaster, I would fain be taught by him; does
that imply I would not learn out of a Grammar, or other books which he uses to
that end? or, does it not rather conclude, that I like not only his abilities,
but his method and means by which he teaches? the Psalmist says, blessed is
the man, whom thou Chastenest, O Lord, and teach out of thy Law. You would
little less then hoot at him, that should from hence conclude, the Psalmist to
reject the Spirit as a teacher, and to admit of no other Teacher but the Law.
It is after this lofty manner of disputing, you undertake our overthrow.

When you have so learnedly framed your Question, 2.
which by the disjunctive Or, you make tor^ consist of two members, Which would
he have for his Teacher? The Spirit or some other thing? you answer it like
your self, Methinks it is resolvable in the affirmative. But I pray, which of
the parts of your Question do you affirm? Which do you deny? Why truly it is
the safest course you take, to affirm it of both: for then the truth is owned,
and (in this point) the quarrel ended. But then what need your fighting against
what you affirm, unless you are resolved to be quarrelsome.

Alas poor Man! it was by a mere mistake, you said truth, you intended to
resolve in the affirmative, that he desired to be taught by the good Spirit of
God; but in the negative of any other thing.

Canis festinans coecos parit catulos.
The two respects which thus blinded you, are enough 3.
to keep any man's eyes open, that is but willing to see. First, How that the
Word was hid in his heart. -- That internal Law, Word and Spirit, of God; which
plentifully shows, kow much he was an Enthusiast, and Quaker in the sense this
man esteems us most heterodox. Law, Word, and Spirit are all one with you. But
where do you find the Word hid in the hearts of the Saints called the internal
Word? It Is true, that it is within, in the memory, faith, love, and hide there
with the hiding of security: but it was as much without before it was within,
as the child's lesson which it gets by heart out of a book, which when done, you
might as well call it, the child's internal lesson.

Your second respect is, the very words (viz. of the text) imply the thing we
urge them for, and can import no other sense. Also what did that clause do
there? viz. thy Spirit is good. Can the Spirit be good for nothing, if the
external word be good for something as a teacher? I mistrust not the eyes of
any but the Quakers, but that they will see at first glance, what a feeble
Champion you are, without my pointing.

Parvas habet spes Troja, si tales habet.
I shall trace you foot by foot no further, you shoot at so many marks at once,
that it is hard to find which you level at, only in the conclusion, you presume
you have hit the Pin of the white.

Vnisonat cu^ulis, rudibus geminantibus odis.

Your Arguments are generally sick of one disease, 5.
you argue from the presence of the Spirit of God in and with his people, by
his motions, influences, manifestations; gifts, graces, means; to his essential
being; as the sense of those texts: which is fallacious, and as I prove by this
argument, answer it, when you can

The Spirit of God essentially considered, or as very God; is every where at
all times, without the least change or alteration for ever.

But the Spirit of God in and with his people, (according to the import of
those texts of Scripture which you produce) is not every where, at all times
without any the least change, or alteration for ever. Therefore the Spirit of
God in and with his people, according to the import of those texts of
Scripture, which you produce; is not the Spirit of God essentially considered,
or very God.

The First Proposition is proved from Mal. 3. 6, 6.
For I am the Lord I change not.

The Second Proposition I prove, from Joel 2. 28, 29. which you cite Page 21.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit on all
Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, etc.

This was in time, what, and where it was not before.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. Page 20. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my Statutes, etc. it was future, what it was not before; and is spoken
of the gathering of the Jews from all Countries. Then the Spirit of God shall
be put within them: but this is not always the same without alteration. 1 Cor.
6. 19. cited by you, Page 30. What? know you not that your Body is the Temple
of the Holy Ghost, which is in you. The Holy Ghost did not dwell in them,
according to the import of that Text, before their conversion.

The Lord was in the Temple at Jerusalem, and dwelt therein.

I have built a House of habitation for thee, and 2 Chronicles. 6. 2.
a place for thy dwelling. Who is able to build him an House? seeing the
Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens 2 Ki. 19. 15.
cannot contain him. How did God dwell there more then elsewhere? but, by
placing his name, owning a relation to it as his house, sanctifying it to his
own use, manifesting himself in it, to those who waited on his Ordinances there
solemnized. But now the place is void of all the footsteps of that presence.

I deny not, I doubt not, but the presence of God 7.
by his Spirit, in and with his people is much more glorious than that Type
posessed: yea such a Mystery of union and Glory; as will be matter of
intellectual exercise, and delight for ever: yet it is most certainly no more
his essential Presence, than is every where. The difference is his being
related to, actuating of, effecting in, and manifesting himself to, and union
with the Souls of his people; so as none in the world but they, are blessed
withal. And here in the Saints are so happy; they may well be content, and not
put the name of the Godhead (in a strict and proper sense) on these his
blessings. Such conceits are the natural sourse, (and have been) of opinions,
and practices dishonorable to God, and unworthy of his Grace.

Another fallacy in your arguings is from the 8.
Spirits teachings indefinitely, to the Spirits teaching universally: at least
all that concerns the duty of the People of God in religious things. The People
of God have the Spirit, therefore, they could not be destitute of an unerring
Spirit, in what concerned them either toward God or men.

SECT. VII.
But your main fallacies are these two, from an infallible Spirit teaching, to
the infallability of the Subjects, in which the Spirit dwells as a Teacher.

And from the Spirits teaching to its immediate and peculiar teaching.

For the first of these, I shall produce some of your wild reasonings.

1 These. 15. 19. Quench not the Spirit -- Those Page 33.
to whom he gave the caution had the Spirit, if those could not quench the
Spirit, who had it not. Consequently the Primitive Churches were not without an
unerring Spirit. But I believe, and can prove, that they who had not the Spirit
themselves, might quench it in others, by despising prophesyings in the
exercise of its gifts, 20. ver. and those who have the motions of the Spirit
(as you s^ the old world had before the flood) may be fai^ from having the
Spirit in the Scripture sense, i. e. dwelling in them to sanctification.

But supposing they had the Spirit dwelling and teaching in them, it is a
miserable erroneou^ and weak Conclusion, that they were infallible* That this
is that you would conclude from such improper premises, is apparently your
drift all a long.

A taste of this you give up p. 32. in these words* 2. Page 32.


If God sends forth his Spirit into the hearts of his children, then are they
not without an infallible Spirit; but the express letter of the Scripture
affirms i^* and consequently, our Adversaries reflection upon us, for making it
part of our belief is unsound and condemnable.

Your adversaries have not so little knowledge of the Spirit of God, as to say
the Spirit of God is fallible: nor yet so ignorant of your spirits, and of the
Scripture, as to say you are infallible. If the latter be it you say is
unsound, it is upon no other grounds, than your arguing from the infallibility
of Gods Spirit, to the infallibility of your spirits, or of theirs who are Gods
people. But we are not ignorant that your principles make no distinction, much
less a difference between the spirits of Gods people, and the Spirit of God:
which is indeed the secret bias, which moves you so obliquely, of which I shall
give a more ample account in its place. But you are yet so unwilling to speak
plainly your mind, that you appear in many shapes to insinuate this untruth,
but are industrious to be uncertain and amphibious.

Quo teneam vultus mutantum Protea nod^.
You say, Page 31. And how this man can be ^. Page 31.
esteemed a good Christian, who would render Christ Jesus the Head of a
fallible body, by divesting Christians of an infallible Spirit, I leave to
persons of better judgment, more honesty, and greater moderation to judge?

By this we may more than guess your mind: but verily, if the asserting Christ
to be the Head of a fallible body, i. e. that may in some things err or be
mistaken, be worthy of your such reflections; I know none will escape them
among professed Christans, but Quakers and Papists. I see by this you may serve
for a voter at Rome; but your logic is ^o leaky you will hardly attain a
higher promotion there; she will be loath to venture her grandeur, built upon
the Foundation of the Churches infallibility; upon your pitiful scribbling.

I wonder how you came to talk of Christsbody, 4
to which he is Head: Or what men of your principles can mean by it, with the
qualification of infallible? Sure you do not mean his body in the most strict
sense, i. e. the invisible Church; that is not yet completely existing, and I
doubt not, but when they meet and vote, they will be infallible: but that will
not be yet. Nor yet the Universal Church visible, i. e. Professors of
Christianity, Members of the universal Church, or any particular organical
Church: for your party have gored, and besmeared those to excess.

I know not how we shall get a vote from them, except in the Creed called the
Apostles; to which (a small matter excepted,) all give consent. But then the
Quakers are none of the Church, who will subscribe but to few of the Articles
in that Creed.

How shall we find your meaning? I will undertake 5.
to shoot near the mark, if not hit the pin in the white. You intend it of all
the Quakers, and every individual person among them, at least such who give up
to the light within, and its guidence: and is the Church in Spirit, (a Phrase
used by Friends more than once) in their writings, but never in the Scripture.

But Mr. Pen, if Christ be Head to none but the infallible, woe to the poor
Saints, who have trusted hitherto they had a Head in Heaven, who has pity on
the ignorant, and those that are out of the way; who is their Advocate with the
Father, and thereby a remedy against the sad consequences otherwise of their
errings. And I am sure Christ is then none of your Head.

But to conclude this form of your reasoning, 6.
what I shall say to it.

You may as well conclude, all Gods people are omnipotent, because they have
the Spirit of God, which is omnipotent. And they are omniscient, because the
Spirit of God, who teaches them is so. And they are infinite upon the same
grounds. The last two of these I can prove from some of the Quakers writings to
be their blasphemous opinions, from this ground on which you build.

Monstr' horrend' inform', ingens cui lumen ademptum.
Were you so judicious and humble to submit to 7.
the certain teachings of the Spirit, in and by the Scripture, you may know

That the Spirit, though it never teaches an error, yet those whom it
teaches directively may err, either not understanding, or not submitting to
his teachings, that where the Spirit moves, and strives too, Though it self be
omnipotent, yet it may move and strive in such a measure, as the corruption of
bad men, and sometimes of good men do prevail against its strivings and
motions. Although the Spirit of God will teach and move all the elect so
largely and so effectually; that they shall not fail of heaven, nor the
necessary means thereunto: yet there is not one that can be proved not to err
in practice, much less to have learned all things of a religious concern to
them.

SECT. VIII.
I might proceed to your fallacious arguing from 1.
the Spirits teaching indefinitely expressed, to its teaching peculiarly and
immediately; which is frequent in your Pamphlet, particularly page 18, 29. and
many more of your fallacious and confused arguings I might expose, were it
worth while to trace such a trifler in all his vagaries, who has the faculty
(only to the stupidly ignorant.)

Fallere mill modis, nec non intexere frauds.

In the winding up of your entangled bottom, you frame an Objection thus,

Object. 1. Though you have said a great deal, to Page 37.
prove that Christians should have an infallible Spirit in general: You want
neighbors, I see you would fain be praised, and rather than not have it
scratched where it itches, Manus manum fricat.
but if the judicious give their vote concerning your elaborate triflings it
will be,

Multa loquatur, nihil dicuntur.
Yet you prove nothing distinctly, but confound a Judge, Rule, and Guide
together.

Habemus confitentem reum.
Least you eat your words, I shall put good 2
proof of the truth of your confession upon record. You say in your answer to
your own Objection, That to me there is no more difference then essentially
there can he in the Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness of God -- They are so
interwoven, that the one goes not without the other; thus it is in being a
Judge, Rule, and Guide. etc.

If some should read their neck verse, at the rate you plead your innocence of
your own charge; the benefit of the Clergy would befriend them but a little.
What would you say of a man, that should affirm his brains and heart, and
lungs, (being essential to the life of the body, and so interwoven that the one
goes not without the other,) are but one and the same thing? the one cannot
live, and be in good state without the other: and therefore they are but one
and the same thing without difference, or distinction. And the man, suppose
John a Nokes, should upon this ground, when he has a delirium, or vertigo
(diseases seated in the brain) be very busy to enquire, what is good for the
Pthysick or Cough of the Lungs, or palpitation of the heart? but, being rebuked
for his impertinencies, should reply, they cannot be one without the other.
They are essential to the body of man its perfection, therefore what is said of
the one may be said of the other, and what is good against the Pthysick or
Cough, is good, must be good for a vertigo or delirium,

Mutato nomine, narratur fabula de te.
Let me advise you next time you write, to frame no Objections against your
self; unless you shall have learned better to solve them.

A second Objection you frame thus, But at this 3. Page 38.
rate you utterly contemn and seclude the Scriptures; as having no part nor
portion in being a Rule, Judge, or Guide to Christians.

I would your whole book had consisted of Objections; for you have spoke more
truth of your own framing, in two Objections; than in most of your
affirmations. You attempt to solve this with much the like success as the
other, you praise the Scriptures and hug them hugely, till you have reduced
them to much like the shadow of the true rule: And then you illustrate the
sense of their authority in these very words;

He that is so inward with a Prince, as to know viva voce, what his mind is;
heeds not so much the same, when he meets it in print (because in print) as
because he has received a more living touch, and sensible impression from the
Prince himself, to whose secrets he is privy. And this the Scriptures teach us
to believe is a right Christian state and privilege. For said the Apostle we
have the mind of Christ. And the secrets of God are with them that fear him.
And guide me by thy counsel, and bring me to thy glory.

What Friends, but when they read this Princely 4.
flourish, but will conclude, not only that he has done it neatly, but hit the
nail of the head full! and spoken their minds on as right, as if he had been
inspired by them all! and, no doubt, he shall be their White Boy, (for all his
defects;) who strokes them so finely, and advances them to such a singular
dignity, of privacy and inwardness with God; that not only his revealed will
in print is known by them in a more honorable, and immediate way; but also his
secrecs, which never stooped so low, as to be wrapped in letters.

Here we have (as in a glass) W. P's. opinion of the immediate teachings of the
Spirit to be; not only above his teachings by the scripture: as to have a thing
whispered in the ear from the princes own mouth, does excel any narrative by a
declaration: but also, so much above them; that he who injoyes this favor
(which must still be no other but a Quaker) heeds not so much the same in
print. How much? just not at all. For if this viva vox, more liveing touch, and
sensible impression, do not put authority into them, they are but mere Ciphers.
And if this living touch, etc. (as he be lieves) be without, or contrary to the
Scripture; it is all as good and authentic. It is upon my Spirit, is of much
more divine obligation, than, it is written. But Mr. Pen,

That, The Scriptures teach us to believe this is a right Christians state and
privilege, is a beetleheaded, and hard hearted saying. The Scripture knows
nothing of it, nor could I ever yet have a proof that any of you all ever heard
the voice of God (as viva voce is to be understood) and I am very well
satisfied, the Quakers may be mistaken, if they should presume they did; ever
since some of them took Paul Hobsons mumbling through a trunck, and a hole in
the wall, to be the voice of the Lord.

But that this should be the state of a right Christian! woe worth the days
past for so many ages! wherein among all professed Christians, but now and then
One, were in this state, and that but a little while, ere* Their folly appeared
to all men. Only now and then the Papists had a job to do, for which a viva
vox was a fit pretense.

But you have little Charity, in unchristianing 5.
all he world; whose very state is not according to these Characters. A man in
the dark (especially if his fancy be strong) is full of visions, which have no
other being than his imagination affords them: this appears to be your state,
and the part you are acting.

I shall in short consider your warrants, which you 6.
annex to your rare harangue. For said the Apostles we have the mind of Christ.
Sure he had a good part of it by tradition from the other Apostles, who were
Christ's witnesses of what he said and did: and we have it in the Scripture.

And the Secrets of God are with them that fear him. But where did the Apostle
say this? it is no matter, if it was not the Apostle Paul, it was the Apostle
Ps. 25. 14.
David, and that as good. Nay it is all one, if it had been the apostle G. Fox,
or the apostle W. Pen; whose words and writings are of propherical and
apostolical authority, and may be numbered among the Scriptures, as well as
Paul's, or David's, or any other. Witness your audacious lines put in a different
letter to be so understood. You say, but the Scriptures are herein fulfilled,
the holy way the vulturous eye did never see. -- and that same ravenous Spirit
after knowledge our adversary must come to Page 84
know judged, etc.

It is further to be considered, that the words 7.
you quote out of the Scripture you pervert and the sense also. For secret, you
put secrets. For Lord, you put God. For the latter you will say it is one and the
same sense; for the Lord is God, and God is the Lord: but here you are too bold
for all that. God has more Names in Scripture than one, and if the varying had
nothing of significancy, wh^ wisdom of God would not have so expressed himself.
But to put secrets for secret, marrs the sense. But you will say, not the truth.
Yes verily, the truth in this place: for this text does not say so, and to say
it says, and the Apostle says; what they say not; is an untruth, and if I
greatly mistake not, the words that that follow, and he will show them his
Covenant are interpretative of the word secret. For indeed though the matter
and surface of the Covenant be obvious to every common intelligence, yet the
necessity, worth, a considerable part of the sense; but especially the faith,
interest, and well grounded comfort of it; are the secrets, which this one
great, secret the Covenant contains, and this Scripture speaks of imparting to
those, who fear the Lord: yet it excludes not external means.

And guide me by thy counsel, What is this to oppose,. 8.
or exclude Gods guidence by his written or printed word? Have I not written to
thee excellent Pro. 22. 2^.
things in counsels, and knowledge? Sure these were then afit guide as Gods
means.

But verily there appears such a Spirit of slumber, idleness, and worse, in
your labors, as if you gloried Vitia nostra quae amamus defendimus and malumus
ea excusare quam excatere, Sen. Ep. 117. 9.
in a careless or designed perverting the Scriptures, both for sense, words,
and form: and to vindicate the sense of G. Fox, by the authority of your like
crimes, or greater.

The text says, thou shall guide me, etc. Which expresses his faith in Gods
promises, but you turn it in to a prayer, guide me, etc.

I had almost forgotten a main consideration in your flourish, about immediate
teachings; viz. he meets it in print (because in print) you here insinuate Psa.
73. 20.
the formal cause of our respects to the written word, or printed; to be its
being in print, and that there lies the difference between you and us.

Not so, good Mr. Pen, the beam in our eye is not so big, neither are we
inclined to that piece of superstition; for then no sooner you could get your
conceits in print, but immediately we must hugg them, and get the second
impression in our hearts without more a do: for they are in print. But if you
would know the Truth and speak it of us the next time you have occasion; it is
this,

We value not the sense for the prints sake, but the print for the sense sake,
and the blessings that attends that way of conveying the holy and revealed Will
of God. And so much to correct your vapor, which may do you good; if you have
so much good nature left, as is able to work with it.

SECT. IX.
And now Mr. Pen, to shut up this Discourse, 1.
I shall show you your face in the glass of sense, if you think your eyes worth
the using to that end. If you had dressed your self by the glass of the
Scripture, at this coming abroad, you had certainly been free of these spots.

Foul Epethites, as knave, puppy, fool, rascal, logger-head, Page 7.
Cheat. This, you say, was the language of your adversaries small Crier; but,
as you call it, of a loathsome scent, so you blow it on the Author of the book
within five lines. -- tryers of other men's spirits, who have so little proof of
the knowledge of their own, as to be wanting in the alphabet, or first
principles of common civility. This is not fair, to charge him with another
faults. But compare this Civility of yours, with your own, thus far this
impertinent man. To all this I say, he obtrudes an arrant Page 111.
lie upon our very senses. Wretched scribler! how idle? how frivolous? and how
very troublesome is he with his ridiculous remarks.

If you are not guilty of the obtrusion you impute 2.
to your adversary, (and that frequently, and apparently,) I cannot read and
transcribe english. But this I take the trouble of, to let the world know, that
W. Pen, will daub his Adversary; and that Per fas, per nefas, and like one
greedy of victory, Aut inveniam, aut faciam. You will find him in faults, or
make gross ones, and charge upon him.

G. Fox, he thinks, has miscited a Scripture, ergo Page 4
he is an Impostor, and the Quakers a pack of Heretics; It is after this lofty
manner of disputing, etc.

I never read a more confident untruth. The Authors Argument is too large to
transcribe here.

Your adversary says, some of you excel in many Page 1.
things, which are in themselves good and laudable.

You say, If we excel in all things, as he confesses, Page 10.
which is to say, that there are but few things wherein we don't transcend all
others: and you direct us to page the first, where we may prove your falsifying.

Your adversary says it is rare with him [ Fox] to use any text, and not abuse
it, Page 1,


You say, A few Scriptures he mostly confesses, that but one of us has
miscited; either in reference to a disorderly quotation of the words, or
unsuitable application of them, you know he pretends to deal but with G. Fox's
abuses.

Your Adversary says, And indeed I have found Page 2.
it very fruitless to deal with you, by way of reason and Scripture, and Page
3. I will not now deal with you, so much by Arguments drawn from reason or
Scripture and depending purely on the understanding and mind, etc.

You say, He promises for the future to avoid the Page 13.
use of both Scripture and reason, and direct to Page 2.

I could produce in your Spirit of Truth, many Audacter calumniare ali quid
adhaerebit.
more such falsities in point of fact, and you saying, page 1. you carefully
perused the Book; you prove your self to be more than a mere careless, even a
wilful transgressor.

But if this be your way of answering your adversaries, 3.
and throwing contempt and reproach upon them, it is not possible for any to
escape your hardest censures. And I am persuaded you are secure of your Friends
considering what is objected against your principles and practices of a
Religious concern, by any of your adversaries writings; or you would not thus
adventure your reputation with them.

I would desire you, if you will hereafter pretend 4.
to be an answerer; you would be more solid and rational, then (when you find
your adversary appealing to the light within you, to judge whether G. Fox have
rightly transcribed the texts of Scripture he pretends to use; which may be
done with a little measure of natural light, and common sense) to conclude with
a high rant, and charging P. 77. 78.
your adversary with infatuation; that he has given himself the lie, and you
the cause: as if thereby he acknowledged the light within you, to be so
alsufficient, as you pretend, and that if a man can judge infallibly, when he
reads, and compares a few written or printed lines; whether they agree in the
same words: The Quakers light must needs be infallible and indefinitely and
without any bounds, at least in Religious and Divine Concerns.

But above all, let me entreat you, that if your Adversary give you your due,
saying moreover, The light in every man is not to be extended to all cases
whatever: as if every man that attends to the light in him, did certainly know
what is good, what is evil; right; or wrong in every case.

That then you will not gratify him, with such Reason and Rhetoric, as in the
following words of yours. I heartily pity the man, and am really afraid he has
overcharged the strength of his brain; for with me such manifest contradiction,
is but a smaller degree of distraction. I would fain have a rational answer
from him, if he be yet capable of one. How can the Light be a judge of good and
evil, and not be so? And all within the space of ten lines. If the light, as by
him acknowledged, be a judge of good from evil, and the contrary; then in all
cases wherein good and evil, right and wrong make up the Question, the light
cannot be secluded, as wanting in true judgment; because good and evil are part
of the Question in the granted Proposition; deny that the light is sufficient
in any case of right and wrong, and deny all.

Verily, Mr. Pen, you seem to lay a Plot here, to blow, at least, all the
Judges off from the Bench, to make room for any Quaker, though the most witless
of them all. For, if he can but discern right and wrong in any case: Suppose,
whether in changing a shilling, he has wrong done him* if he receive but two
groats for (...) and right if he receive three? he can then discern right and
wrong in all cases whatsoever; and he that shall say the contrary, you will
chastise him with Sarcasms, as keen as a Badge^s Teeth.

Though I am a little pleasant (for I cannot sudare circa nuces) pray bear with
me. I assure you I have had some heart-akes for you, when I have deeply
considered, that a man of your hopes should be thus left of God (I fear for
pride and giddiness) as to be made a Pillar of Salt, to caution others to take
heed lest they fall into the same snare: which, whatever conceit you may have
of your self, is too apparent. Do not affect to be a Chief of a party, learn
that Lesson by Scripture Light:

It is better to hear the rebukes of the wise, (I Eccles. 7. 5.
mean not my self) than for a man to hear the Song of fools. It is great pity
that what parts God has given you, should be fettered, and ^meared with the
polluted Chains of the grossest* delusions: expect no other, but that God will
wither you in your Rationals more and more, if you will needs deifie such a
poor Creature as natural Conscience, and reduce so much within the compass of a
poor earthen defiled vessel: But if you are resolved to go on at this rate, let
the Title of your next Book be, instead of The Spirit of Truth, etc. The Spirit
of Babel; and this will much more properly express the Contents of it. Babel in
the Hebrew is the word from whence Babble in English.

The Pretenses of the Quakers to Apostolical, and immediately Divine
Inspirations considered; and a Spiritual and Rational account of truly
Apostolical men, and their immediate Inspirations.
SECT. I.
Next to their Tenet of the light within every man, to be the Christ and God
essentially considered: This, of its immediate Dictates (which they hold to be
as purely Divine as any the Apostles had, or the Scriptures express) is the
grand Pillar of their other Opinions, and Practices, called Religious.

This pretext, according to an Author of their own ( E. H. one of Antichrists
Volunteers defeated, page 5.) gives the credit to what they affirm; And yet
would fasten all these upon the Lord, so that his deceit might be of more
Authority, and no^^ might question the matter thereof, because the Lord always
moves to Truth and Righteousness. Well then, if we can prove that the Quakers
are not inspired persons, but far otherwise; we shall prove them gross
I^^^stors, abominable persons, slanderers, and blasphemers of the Holy and
Divine Spirit; and break that snare by which their poor deluded Proselytes are
fast bound, and chained to their Dictates.

But sure you will judge that they who pretend thus high, have somewhat like a
Reason for what they affirm: The main props of this Opinion of themselves, I
shall bring to light, and examine.

The first is a Prophecy of the pouring out of the Spirit, Joel 2. 28. -- I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, etc. Let us consider how much this will befriend them: They will not
say (I am persuaded) that all flesh (in the Text) is to be understood without
any limitation at all; for then Sheep and Oxen must prophecy: nor yet will
they allow that the Spirit shall be poured forth upon all men and women, old
and young, without some limitation; for then the most wicked, and sottish must
be of the number; yea, those who are the keenest Adversaries to their Doctrine
(among which I doubt not they will give me a room:) but if they say, every one
has the light within, which is a Principle capable of this Character, if they
gave heed to it, and at set it liberty; I answer, so had all men this principle
ever since the world began (if what they say themselves be true) but the
Prophecy says, It shall come to pass after those days: So that it must needs
be meant of a time then to come: but if it be to be understood (as without
doubt it is) as well of some particular persons, and not all universally, as of
some Age or Ages, and not all universally: They must bring some proof that they
are the persons inintended; or give us leave to tell them they have here in
stolen the words of the Lord, which belonged not to them, by falsely applying
it to themselves: And if the Exposition which Peter the Apostle gives of this
Prophecy be worth the heeding, it was fulfilled (at least in a good measure)
1600 years since; and whether the world shall ever hereafter behold the like in
that part of it, I shall not assert: Act. 2. 16, 17. and so on; But, this is
that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, etc. What? They spoke with other
Tongues (about fifteen in number) the wonderful works of God; and this was
ushered in by Signs from Heaven; A sound, as of a mighty rushing wind, cloven:
tongues like as of fire; all of which were witnesses sent by God for the
confirmation of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom they preached to be God's Messiah
before promised.

But let us see how near the Quakers approach. 3.
to this evidence. That they began with a noise, yea, a rushing noise, we know;
but that it was a sound from Heaven, we are sure of the contrary: that they
have tongues, and fiery and cloven-tongues also, we shall* not deny; but these
are not such cloven-tongues, like as of fire sitting on them, and appearing to
the bodily eyes of others: Nor do they speak variety of Languages by the gift
of the Holy Ghost, (though some of them have gone into foreign Countries, with a
confidence they should be gifted with strange Languages, but their Spirit
deceived them.) Those in the Text, in those Languages or Tongues spoke the
wonderful works of God; but the Quakers with their native* Language only speak
the amazing delusions of Satan. The persons in the Text had and used these
gifts to confirm and evidence Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ, 22 verse, and
that same Jesus to be exalted by the right hand of God, verse 32, 33* but the
Quakers improve their gifts (with all their might) to disclaim that man Christ
Jesus Christ, as having any being; and to exalt their own Christ whom they call
the light within every man: And considering also that the Prophet says, the
Spirit shall be poured out on all flesh; methinks they of all others should
claim the least share in it, who call others flesh, who are not of their mind
(but themselves Spiritual) and will not seem to endure any thing that has a
relation to the flesh (though sanctified by the Spirit and Grace of God) which
they rebuke in suchlike terms as these, Silence all flesh before the Lord.
Thus I have discharged this Text from so bad a service.

SECTION. II.
The next main prop for this mistake is, that they speaking and writing by the
conduct and motion of the light within them (that being with them the Spirit of
God, as well as Christ the Son of God) it must needs be by Inspiration of God,
and motion of the Holy Ghost. And by the same light [light within] do we
discern, and testify, etc. Parnel, Shield of the Truth, page 10. Yea, they
will have Moses, and all the Prophets to be inspired Divinely, as they were
guided and moved by the light within. The Word said, Let there be light, Genesis
1. 4. (mark this) and the light was brought out of darkness; so the morning was
come, and the day was created in the Eternal Word; and into this life (I
suppose it should be light) was Moses gathered, and had his understanding
opened, that he could see to the beginning -- And there was no Tradition to
give him the knowledge of it, but the light which shone out of darkness in his
heart, Morning-Watch, page 2. What words can express the untruths, absurdities,
and blasphemies of this saying! The Word [Christ] created the light [Christ]
the first created morning is Christ; and all this together within, was the
inspiration by which Moses understood what he wrote of the Creation.

Hear a third, that by the mouth of more than. 2.
two witnesses what I have said may be confirmed: John Story, Short Discovery,
etc. page 2. And though the holy Scripture without, and the Saints practices
are as lights in the world; yet far be it from all true Christian men so to
idolize them [the Scripture and Saints practises] as to set them in esteem
above the light, which is sufficient to guide: or to esteem them equal with the
light, and Spirit of Christ within, from which the Scriptures were given forth,
and are but branches of that holy root; and as it were fruits of that heavenly
Tree, viz. the appearances of God in the hearts of his people. You may see then
whence their Opinion of Divine Inspiration to be the inlet of their Notions
arises; and that the Scriptures are but branches growing from the same root,
viz. the light within.

That I may arm those who are willing to be defended against such a strong
del^sion (wherever it has once seized the belief) by Scripturelight, I shall
take she pains to lay down some certain Characters of all the Apostles divinely
inspired, and all their Doctrines that flowed from the Spirit of God by way of
inspiration immediate, contained in the Scripture, and having the ame divine
Authority.

SECT. III.
Characters of the Persons who were Christ's Apostles, and preached or wrote the
Gospel by Inspiration of God, which we call the Scripture, or Word of God.

They had an immediate Mission and Call from without them by Jesus Christ, to
preach, and declare the Gospel. That Call, and Commission which the Apostles
had, Mat. 28. 16. to the end of the Chapter, was from without; it was Christ
who conversed with them, and was the Object of their bodily eyes: It was that
Christ whom the women held by the feet, ver. 9. and his Call (as his person)
was without them; the sound of which was received by their bodily ears, in
those words, ver. 18, 19. And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All
power is given to me in heaven, and in earth: Go ye therefore, etc. And it is a
strong Argument to prove this immediate outward Call to be essential to the
Apostolical Office and Power, that when by Judas's fall the number was
imperfect, he that was chosen in his room, was chosen and called by an outward
Call; the Spirit of God determining by a Lot, Matthias to be the twelfth
Apostle; as Christ did the rest by his voice without them, Acts 1. 24, and 25
verses: they had a large measure of the Spirit within, (and Matthias in
particular,) but that was not sufficient.

Yea the Apostle Paul, who was born out of due time, had this immediate outward
Call when Christ appeared to him in that glorious and terrible form, Acts 26.
13. At mid day, O King, I saw in the way (not in the heart, or I in the way
saw) a light from heaven above the brightness of the Sun; (the light in the
Quakers, I am sure, would be seen by any who are not bodily blind, if it were
such shining round about me (then it could not be a light only within) and them
that journeyed with me; if it had not been without him, they could not have
seen it. Verse 14. I heard a Voice speaking unto me, (not within me) I am
Jesus, Chap. 10. Ver. 22. Jesus of Nazareth: and I am sure the light within is
not of Nazareth. These things are enough to prove the Apostles had all of them
an outward Call, or a Call from Christ without them to their Ministry and
Apostleship; and that the Quakers apostleship and inspired ministry is far from
Apostolical.

They were all such as had seen, and conversed. 2.
with the Lord Jesus in an outward visible form to the bodily senses.

And that I take to be the literal sense and import of that Scripture, 1 John
1. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of
the Word of Life. All these expressions cannot with any show of reason be
construed of a mental, or spiritual converse with Christ as an object of faith,
but must be understood of the exercise of the bodily senses and faculties upon
the visible humane nature of the Lord Jesus. And if it be objected, that it is
said this Object was from the beginning, which his humane Nature and body could
not be; I answer, There is a communication of both Natures in the person of
Christ, by which the properties and concerns of the one are attributed to the
other, as I might give abundant proof of. But I will instance in one which may
be sufficient: Acts 20. 28. -- To feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. God is not a being made up of flesh and blood,
but a pure impassible Spirit: yet Christ being God as well as man, the blood of
his Manhood is called the blood of God.

It is observable, that the Apostle John brings these proofs of his Apostleship
in the front of his Epistle, as being necessary for obtaining Credence to what
follows.

To put all out of doubt, consider what is expressed, 1 Cor. 9 chapter 1 ver. Am I
not an Apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Some did
probably object against Paul's Apostleship, because he had not seen Christ in
the flesh, as all the rest of the Apostles had done: but he answers this
Objection; Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? It could not be meant of
seeing him by the spiritual eye of Faith; for so all the Saints have seen the
Lord: that is common to the weakest babe in the Faith. And where did he see
him, but in the way to Damascus? Compare the forecited Text with 1 Cor. 15. 8
ver. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time. He
was not born a Saint, or Believer out of due time; for conversion will be in
season to the end of the world: But he was born an Apostle out of due time, the
Lord Jesus visibly appearing to him to that end in an extraordinay season. Thus
we see that to Apostleship the sight of the person of Christ, as an outward
visible object to the bodily sense, is necessary.

A third distinguishing Character is, they were. 3.
all enabled to work Miracles; such Miracles as were neither in secret for the
place, nor doubtful for the matter. I should but waste time and paper to give
instances of this: the Histories of the Evangelists, and Acts of the Apostles
will furnish you with enough. The Quakers having been conscious of the
necessity of this, have some of them pretended to Miracles to credit their
Apostolical pretended inspirations; but none can they prove. Some have
attempted such like performances, but have failed in the undertaking; so that,
if we will not believe them for their bold asserting, we are like to have no
better evidence: and he that is so silly as to believe on so feeble a ground, I
am sure his faith stands not only below the power and wisdom of God, but the
right reason of man.

And this must needs be a human faith (in the most sordid sense) which has not
any divine evidence for its support. We can by the grace of God give a reason
of that hope in us which is grounded on Scripture-verity, because we can prove
that it is the Word of God, which was sent from him by the Messengers by him
appointed, and furnished to that end; Acts 19. 13. Jesus we know, and Paul we
know; but who are ye?

Fourth Character of the Apostles inspired.
The Apostles as they were commissionated to teach all Nations, so they were
furnished with Tongues and Languages in a supernatural way; by which they could
speak to the understandings of any Nation or people to whom they were sent;
Acts 2. 8. And how we hear every man in our own Tongue, wherein we were born.
And it is remarkable, that the Apostle Paul was gifted this way above all, or
most; he being the Apostle (more eminently) to the Gentile-world, and traveled
more foreign Countries than any of the other, that we read of.

I cannot but wonder at the blindness of the Quakers, who give it as a mark to
the true Ministry (denying and disdaining all others) not to be confined to a
certain place in the ordinary exercise thereof; but as the Apostles, to have no
less than the Universe for their Bishopric: while it is apparent, that they do
not more outstrip others in pretenses of Spiritual and supernatural Gifts,
than they come short of them in visible qualifications for the ministerial
employment, especially the knowledge of the Tongues: and who ever among them
understand any Tongue, or can speak or write it, besides their native
Mother Tongue; let them say it if they dare, that they came not by it by
natural and ordinary means.

And if God had given them an Apostolical Call and Gifts, surely this of
Tongues would have made some sign and noise of it; for God never calls to
any Gospel-Office and work immediately, where he does not afford abilities for
the discharge of it. If the Quakers had the Gift of Tongues, who direct their
Pamphlets to all Princes and Potentates; to every Creature, and all Nations in
the World; surely some of them by that Gift would have preached their Doctrines
to foreign Nations: But some have attempted it, and sped so ill, as to become
dumb preachers in other Countries: Others have learned more wit than to make
the adventure; yet their Writings are full stuffed with the bold asserting of
their Apostolical Call, Gifts and Inspirations.

SECT. IV.
Having given you some Characters of the Apostles, who were called to that
Office, and were inspired by the Holy Ghost; I shall take some pains to give
you an account of inspiration it self, as it is distinct in its very species
and kind (not in degrees only) from those teachings and illuminations of the
Spirit, which are ordinary, and common in some measure to all the Saints.

The right understanding of this, will keep not only in the Controversy before
us, but in many other cases that may occur.

I shall (before I enter on the differences between the Spirits inspirations,
and common illuminations of the Saints by the Spirit) prove that there is such
a difference, and that the one is not in any degree or measure the other.

All the Saints have the saving and sanctifying teaching and enlightnings of
the Spirit; yet not all of them (nay, but a very few of them) had the
extraordinary enlightnings of the Spirit by way of inspiration. Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God? and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Now
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, 1 Cor. 3. 16. So
that every Babe in Christ has the Spirit of Christ in its saving
manifestations and operations, or effects; though but a few were immediately
inspired. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, etc. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.
28, 29.

The Apostle Paul does plainly express this. 2.
specifical difference, or difference in the very kind of the Spirits teachings
in and to his own person: But she is happier if she so abide, after my
judgment; and I think also that I have the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 7. 40. The
Apostle does in the case there agitated, give his advice as a Saint who had the
Spirit of God in the same kind of enlightening which other Saints had, or all
the Saints had; but in an eminent measure: yet this enlightening and teaching of
the Spirit was not by way of immediate, and Apostolical inspiration; but by
enlightening his judgment, and enabling his natural faculty of discerning to
pierce into, and rightly decide the difference.

For if the Apostle had received what he here expressed by Divine inspiration,
or the Spirit of the Lord immediately inspiring, it would have been not only
unnecessary, but very much injurious to the infallibility and authority of the
Spirit of God, to have made his judgment bear a part with it.

Yea, it had been an usurping on the Divine Spirit, which an exercise of our
judging faculty concerning its truth or falsehood, must needs be; where it is
evident that the Spirit of God does its part, by way of immediate inspiration;
to which ready and full credit ought to be given without hesitation.

SECT. V.
Characters of Divine Apostolical Inspirations, distinguishing them from all
other Instructions.

That Divine inspiration whereby the Apostles and Prophets (as such) were
illuminated, came in without the use of the bodily senses, as receptive of
outward Objects, and carrying them to the rational and considering faculties,
to make conclusions from them: and this is properly immediate Divine
inspiration, or revelation.

But Divine Truths received by the Saints (as Saints, ordinarily) are received
by such means as are Objects to the bodily senses, as significative sounds to
the ear, visible Objects to the eye, etc. let the Quakers or any other show me,
if they can, that the knowledge of God comes ordinarily to men by any other way
without these: Faith comes by hearing (that is, ordinarily; for a Babe may have
the habits of saving faith, whose hearing ferves little to that purpose) or by
reading: and that knowledge of God which the Heathen had, or might have had,
without the Word revealed handed to them as to us, it was by considering the
works of God's Creation and Providence; which were the Books wherein God wrote
to them many Lessons concerning him, and their duty. So that in few words,
persons being illuminated by inspiration, it was first within them; others have
it first from without them; at least in the premises from whence the
understanding assisted by God, infers Truths.

The great Objection of the Quakers against. 2.
the later Position is from his Scripture, Romans 1. 19, 20. because that which
may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them: for
the invisible things of him, etc.

The words in them in the Greek (...), are either in or among them; the later
sense is to me the most probable, because, that while the far greater part of
the Gentile-world were so brutish, that they little regarded or understood any
thing of God; but were so besotted with sensuality, that they understood and
minded nothing but what might gratify a blind, and impetuous appetite: some
among them whose intellects were better employed, came by the knowledge of
excellent things concerning God, which they not only taught, but left in
writing as a witness to Posterity.

But to put all out of doubt, the 20 verse speaks what I affirm plainly: For
the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, etc. Here you have an account what may be known of God by the Heathen,
who had neither revelation immediate to themselves, nor handed to them from
others by the Word heard, or read: viz. the eternal power and Godhead: and that
which they were condemned for, ver. 26. was not for not knowing, or practicing
what had relation to the Mediator, or not believing the word of promise, which
never was within the reach of their ears; but for their miscarriages against
God the Creator, whom they might, and ought to have known, and acknowledged.
God is in his essential Being, the invisible God; but he was manifest among
them, How? From the Creation of the World, by the things that are made. Take
another Text for the confirmation of my Exposition of this, Act. 14. 17.
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave
us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, etc. They were not without witness
concerning the Divine Being, and Attributes of Mercy and Goodness; yet if the
rain, and fruitful Seasons, were without them; the witness was without them
before it was within them.

But for the Quakers pretenses of their conceits of Divine things to be by
immediate inspiration of the Spirit to them, when we hear of Pagans and Heathen
who never had the least notice of, or from the Scripture, talk of Jesus Christ,
a crucified Redeemer, and the Promises, and Covenant of God; we may a little
listen to them: but for a people who live where the Scriptures are so much
known, to talk Scripture-phrases, and Gospel-phrases; and then tell us, they
had it all by Divine revelation immediate to themselves, is as ungrateful and
foolish, as for those who were born and bred in England, and have learned their
Mother Tongue from their childhood* after 30 or 40 years, to affirm they
learned every word of it by immediate inspiration, or could have known it as
perfectly if man had never taught them; while in the mean time those forem
Languages they never heard spoken, they can neither speak, nor understand one
sentence of, if it would save the world.

Again, Those Gospel-illuminations for the. 5.
matter which are by immediate inspiration, are beyond the utmost reach of our
natural faculties* of the mind (though sanctified) to attain by their
improvement: and therefore it is said to be, 2 Timothy 3. 16. (...), Divinely
inspired. It is not produced in the exercise of the rational faculties; the
Soul is purely passive or receptive therein; and is to those illuminations as
the wax is to the Seal; according to 2 Pet. 1. 21. For the Prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, (...), acted, carried. Some of them, viz. the Prophetical part,
were so far from being attained by the use of natural faculties (though
sanctified) that their very wills which are the first movers, even in
intelligent agents, did not ordinarily so much as direct their understandings
to the finding out the Truths which were revealed to them; but when their
thoughts (in their present posture) had no tendencie to any such particular
things (no more than a man in a deep sleep) they were then moved by the Holy
Ghost; that whereas ordinarily they are fixed, and bent to such or such ends,
by the humane will, here the Divine will takes its place and does all.

And for those Historical parts of the Scripture, as of the Creation, Fall of
man, written by Moses, etc. and the Doctrinal parts written by the Apostles,
etc. although the things in general might be the scope and aim of their
intentions; yet the gale by which they were driven steadily and infallibly, was
not the utmost of their natural, and sanctified, and highest improved
faculties; but the supernatural guidance of the Divine Spirit, whose product
was like it self, without the least stain or spot of humane frailty and
weakness.

Whereas that illumination of the Spirit, which (in the kind of it) is common
to all Saints, flows in by the Lords blessing on the improvement of their
understandings and judgments, whether on Creation, Providence, or matter
divinely revealed without them originally, viz. that contained in the
Scripture; which although their faith be resolved into, and determined by, yet
the highest pitch of their spiritual understanding is raised by a right and
sanctified ratiocination from those principles, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.

And experience teaches, that though an idle loyt^r^r may grow giddy with
empty swimming notions, which are rather the disease of a spiritual pride and
intoxication; yet God does mostly (if not only) bless those with high, and
solid illumnations, who humbly wait on him, and beg the concourse and
assistance of the Father o^ Lights, and Spirit of Truth.

That God does bless in such ways to the (such). 7.
illuminations of the Spirit, is clear from this Scripture, Heb. 5. 12, 14. For
when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such
as have need of milk, etc. It was their sin which was rebuked as the cause of
their ignorance; and what that should be, but their slothful unfaithfulness in
the use of advantages, I know not: But strong meat belongs to them that are
of full age, (this must not be understood of number of days, but measure of
knowledge) even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil. They were thus illuminated by the Spirit, in the
way of the use and exercise of their sanctified natural faculties, and the
Ordinances of God for that end.

If any Quaker shall say, True, we are illuminated. 8.
not by study, and poring (as they call it) on the Scripture, or any thing
else, but have our knowledge without such carnal toil, and the wisdom of the
flesh; and therefore it is by inspiration immediate. Let such know, that they
must show somewhat more then palpable error, gross ignorance, and unparalled
confidence, ere they gain credit with any but those simple ones (in a silly
sense) who believe every word. Prove 14 15. 9.


A third Difference is, that Apostolical illuminations and immediately inspired
are not habitual; they are not the more constant frame of the soul, but have
their fluxes, not as Springs or running Rivers, or Tides, which have their
ebbings and flowings, yet the chanel always plentifully supplied; but as bourns
and floods that sometimes rise high; yet the grounds they cover for a while,
are sometimes and ordinarily a long time dry, and no appearance remaining of
those inundations. The Apostles and Prophets had not such a Well and Spring of
this sort, as always run; or out of which they might ordinarily give advice, and
teachings of this kind.

Whereas the Spirits most ordinary illuminations common to all Saints, do in
their several degrees and measures in-dwell in their souls, and are as
qualities adhering to their subjects; their minds and faculties being so
united to them, as Sugar being melted in the Wine, its sweetness is constant
and abiding thereby.

And hence it was, that the Apostles, though they could always teach from the
habits of light and knowledge they were blessed with, yet in some cases, at
some times, could not speak as inspired by the Holy Ghost; witness Paul, who in
the body of his Epistle to the Corinthian^ makes this distinction, 1 Cor. 7. 6,
12. to the end of the Chapter: But I speak this by permission, ver. 6. but to
the rest speak I, not the Lord; ver. 12. Now concerning Virgins I have no
^ommandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment as one that has obtained mercy
of the Lord to be faithful. 25. But she is happier if she so abide, in my
judgment, and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.

The same Apostle gives instruction concerning the Choice of Bishops, that they
be such as are apt to teach; (...) the word signifies 1 Timothy 3. 2.
both the habit or faculty, and also a promptitude and readiness to employ it.
And to Timothy, to be instant in season, and out of season; 2 Timothy 4. 2.
that is, not only at necessary times in a constant course, but occasionally:
and he could not so preach the Word as became it, and an Evangelist, but from
habitual illumination. Mat. 13. 52. Then said he unto them, Therefore every
Scribe which is instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man that is
an Householder, which brings forth of his Treasure things new and old.

A fourth Difference, the inspiration of the. 10.
Spirit does not grow and increase gradually* and according to time and
industry.

Samuel had as elegant and powerful an inspiration or revelation, when a
Child* as when he was old. And the Apostles on the sudden at the effusion of
the Spirit in that way of ministration, had as eminent inspirations as ever
afterward.

But the illuminations where with God does usually (by the efficlency of his
Spirit) bless his people, does ordinarily grow, at least is capable of it. Some
to whom John writes, were grown to be Fathers.

For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, Heb. 5. That is, ye might have
grown to such a degree of illumination (if you had stood in the way wherein the
Spirit of God does usually bless there with,) as to have been able to teach
others. Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ himself (as man) did increase gradually in
these habitual illuminations, Lake 2. 45, 46, 47. Jesus grew in wisdom, and in
stature: And that it was meant of divine light, or light in divine things, Read
the 46, 47 Verses, where he is said to be disputing with the Doctors; and that
his answers were astonishing to the Hearers.

Fifthly, Apostolial inspirations were intended by the Spirit, fo^a divine and
authoritative Obligation to the Fai^^, Order, Life, and Consciences of others;
and are therefore rightly placed among the Scriptures; or w^tten Word. If any
man think hinself to be a Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the
things that I write are the Commandments of the Lord.

But the teachings of the Spirit to the Saints (as Saints) are no such
obligation, any farther than they agree with, and have their authority from the
mind of God revealed in the Scripture.

Sixthly, Apostolical teachings and inspirations were of authority to
constitute a now order and polity of the Church; to which the former, though of
divine authority (in their season) were to give place: Yea, those Doctrines and
Promises so revealed to them by God, and by them declared (as such) are binding
to our faith and practice; although we cannot discern any of the like import in
the Scripture before written.

But the teachings and illuminations (by the Spirit) of the Saints (as such) do
not add to, or change any thing of the Doctrine or Order established by Christ
and his Apostles; neither are they contrary to the written Word, nor in point
of Doctrine beside the sense of it, or beyond it.

To conclude, The teachings of the Spirit, and its Motions in the Saints, which
are most purely divine and immediate in ourdays, are the bringing to
remembrance, explaning to the understanding, imprinting on the affections, the
matter contained in the Scripture, and directing them to understand
providence, to act in their occurent occasions suitable to his will revealed
in the Scrip^re, and moving their wills to a compliance with his, out are all
to be tri^d by the Scripture, and not the Scripture by them.

Some I believe will reply, How did the Prophets and Apostles when they
received immediate revelations, and were inspired of God, know it was no
delusion? and if they knew it being men as we are, why may not we?

I dare not attempt to pry into the most secret ways of God, and undertake to
give you a history and description (to the full) of the Spirits workings on the
Souls of his Prophets, in conveying his will to them, and satisfying their
judgments and Consciences that they were the inspirations of God.

Yet I shall say so much of them as may satisfy any willing Reader to be
informed, that they had more to evince it than any have now; and we have enough
to convince us that they were inspired.

First, Whoever they were that were givers forth of the Law, or the Covenants
in their first promulgation, had the Testimonies of God for them, by Gods
outward Call to that as their special Office, and his promise of guidance in
the discharge thereof, signs and wonders wrought either by God immediately, or
by their hands; as the Apostles, Jesus Christ, Moses.

Secondly, All the Prophets have a Testimony of their being inspired of God, by
Miracles which they wrought, or by the quoting Scripture out of the Books
written by them, or bearing their names (in the New Testament) by Christ, or
his Apostles.

Thirdly, For the Historical part, which has. 3.
a respect to the things done within their knowledge as men, the Writers of
that, or those parts of the Scripture, were either under the Testimonies of
Miracles, or were by some express Testimony of God rendered holy men; and being
so qualified, they would not write more than they knew, and could not easily be
mistaken in matter of fact, and being Scripture, is said by Paul to be of
Divine inspiration.

Fourthly, All those Books of the Old Testament,. 4.
out of which somewhat is not quoted in the New as Scripture, were received as
Scripture by the Jews, and then Church of God, and that in the time of many
Prophets, to whom Divine Testimony has been given; and it cannot with any show
of Reason be supposed, that those Writings should be fa^^^y fathered on God, or
taken for authentic Scripture; and the Prophets not discover and reprove it:
whereas far less ha^nous evils than that would have been; were often the
subject matter of their sharp reprehensions.

Let any Quaker, of other, give me or themselves. 5.
the like satisfaction of their being immediately inspired, and they shall have
my leave to hold such an Opinion of it.

But for those inspirations which, they say, many had before the Scriptures
were written, the mention of their time will give full satisfaction; it will be
a poor Argument to prove men are now inspired as they, considering they had not
the revealed written Word at all, and we have it so full, that all things
necessary for any to know, are therein included, and thereby expressed.

The second thing I must reply to is, what the Quakers frequently Object, viz.
That we make the Scripture the judge of the Spirit, whereas the Spirit gave
forth the Scriptures.

I answer, this is for want of judgment in the. 6.
Objectors.

Far be it from us to bring the to-be-adored Spirit of God to any man's bar for
judgment to be passed on it, or any thing that is his immediate Work or Word:
all we profess in this matter to make the Scripture a judge or determiner of
is, whether this or that be the mind of the Spirit or no? but if once it appear
to be the Voice and Mind of the Spirit, we profess it our duty to reverence and
submit to it.

And we being certain that the Holy Scriptures were given forth from God, and
that God is not opposite to himself; we conclude that what is contrary to the
Scripture, cannot be the Word of the Spirit; because then the Spirit should
bear witness against it self; and the word of the Spirit would be contrary to
the word of the Spirit.

And moreover, if any shall pretend to abolish. 7.
(by the Authority or inspiration of the Spirit) those Ordinances and
Institutions which were settled by Christ, or Christ in his Apostles; it would
be unreasonable to credit them, without the same Testimonials (such Miracles as
they wrought) by which they were erected. But the Quakers are far enough from
showing such a zeal for their pretended Ministry and Order, And further, we are
obliged not to receive another Gospel (and that by the Holy Spirit) though an
Angel from Heaven should preach it: and we are warned not to believe any other
as Truth Divine against it, though many Wonders should be wrought for
confirmation.

The third thing I must reply to is, that our. 8.
knowledge of the mind of God by the Scripture, is uncertain. I answer:

If you mean a knowledge of all Gods mind, you are not to expect it; it you
mean all that is there contained, it is not necessary: and you may go to
Heaven, and do your duty, without such a vast knowledge; and if you endeavor
it* in your places, and as God has given you the means, it will not be your
sin, much less your condemnation, that you do not know it all. Sure there are
many Babes in Christ's Family, yet they are Children, and all are first Babes:
and that would be a Monster never yet seen in the Church of Christ, a newborn
Babe knowing the mind of God contained in the Scripture, as fully as the most
serious Christians of the longest standing! Jesus Christ himself grew in
wisdom, and in stature: and I entreat you be content to leave a little of the
mind of God, to be found out in the Scripture by the generations to come.

If you mean our knowledge of the mind of the Spirit is uncertain, so far as it
is necessary for our living in an acceptable manner to God, soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, and to attain Heaven at last; it
is a great mistake: for if pride, lust, and idleness stand not in our way,
there is no person (that has a few grains of Reason) but may understand so
much of the mind of God by the Scripture, as is necessary for him to know to
his eternal salvation.

But if you talk of the Scriptures being a dead. 9.
Letter, and not moving, and teaching with a voice, or impulse, without our
reading, praying, and applying it in the Lords strength, you talk at a strange
random; as if God had given us our eyes and brains, only to look after the
world, and the things thereof; but in the knowledge of God we must be merely
passive.

A KEY TO THE Quakers Usurped, and (to most) UNINTELLIGIBLE PHRASES.
THere is not any thing in the Quakers Method of deluding, which does more tend
to the insnaring of unwary Souls, than their asserting their false,
Antichristian, and Anti-Scriptural Tenets, under Scripture-Words and Phrases,
and in those very Terms wherein are expressed the Truths of God; while in the
mean time, they mean nothing less than their true import, and what People (who
are not well acquainted with their Tenets) suppose them to mean. By this
Artifice they beget a good Opinion of themselves and Errors with too many, and
by degrees so vitiate their Principles, that in a short time they are prepared
to embrance the grossest errors barefaced.

I shall therefore (as a work of no small use to such who are attempted by
them, or who have a Call or opportunity to deal with them for their convincing
or confuting; or the securing others who are in danger by them) give you a true
and candid account of their sense and meaning of a multitude of Scripture and
Religious Phrases, which they utter and apply to their falsehoods: and also of
their new-coin'd Words and Phrases, which are more peculiar to their Sect and
Notions. I dispose them Alphabetically, for their more easy finding on any
occasion.

A.
Above. NOt in locality but excelcie: so Christ and Heaven (they say) are
above, i. e. excellent, and may therefore be nothing but what is within them.
The Anointing. The Light within, Christ, the Spirit essentially. Assembling.
Meeting in Spirit. Assurance. What they feel in themselves (not what they
believe from the Scripture) the inward witness, viz. experience, teachings of
the light within.

B.
Babylon. All the Ordinances, Worship, Faith, Obedience, that have any thing of
a form or visible in them; or that are gathered from the written Word, or
pretended to be so. Baptism. Not any thing by Water, but the Spirit, i. e. the
Quakers Spirit, to an obedience and devotedness to the light within, and
inspirations and immediate teachings. Blasphemy. To speak against the light
within every man to be Christ and God, and what they hold it to be. Blind. Not
to acknowledge the light within to be Christ; not to know by immediate
inspiration. The Blood of Christ. The life of Christ, i. e. the power of the
light in them.

The spiritual Blood, which they say came down from Heaven, and was part of a
spiritual Body which Christ brought with him from thence, which dwelt for a
while in the man Jesus who died at Jerusalem.

Salvation, puririfying, reconciling by the Blood of Christ. Not by the Blood
of Christ shed on the Cross, but by the Blood of the spiritual Body of flesh,
blood and bones, which they say Christ descended in; which is in every Quaker
as really as in the man that was the Son of Mary: and so salvation is by no
other blood but what is in themselves. The Body of Christ. Not that which was
crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem in Judea; but the spiritual Body
aforesaid, which they say took up its Habitation, and Tabernacled in the Body
of Jesus the Son of Mary; and so the Body of Christ is as much in them as it
was in him. Bondage. Not only our selves in bondage to sin, but the light
within, the seed of God, or Christ, being in bondage under the disobedience of
men. Born again, Regeneration. Perfect Obedience to the light within, as Christ
and God. Comprehending Brain. A large understanding, o^ a desire of Knowledge
by the use of the rational Faculty.

C.
Gall. The motions of the Light Christ in the Conscience. Christ. Not the man
Christ Jesus the Son of Mary, which the Godhead assumed and united to its self
in one person: but the light within every man, a Christ that had nothing of
Adams Nature, whose Body (now in being) was not Created, or had a beginning in
time; which was never visible to the bodily eye. Not in any respect distinct
from God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost. Christ in the Saints. Not Christ
without them, an Object of the faith and love within them; but his very Being,
his Divinity, his Soul, and his Body consisting of spiritual Flesh, Blood, and
Bones; not his Image and likeness, but the self-same in his Being and Essence.
Christ's coming. In the Spirit, or his spiritual coming into his People, i. e.
no other but the prevailing motions of the light within, or by inspiration. The
Command in Spirit. By immediate inspiration and motion. Comprehension, Fleshly
Comprehensions. That Opinion or Belief which is grounded on a rational
demonstration, though from the Written Word of God. Carnal. All things of a
religious concern, which we are not enlightened about, and moved to by immediate
inspiration; yea, whatever has a form, or is visible to the bodily Eye.
Fleshly Conceivings. Those Opinions or expressions whose beginning and birth
are in the humane faculties; very great weakness, if not ^in and unbelief,
contrary to the assured and undoubted dictates of the infallible light and
Spirit within them. Condemnation. The reproofs and sentencings of the light in
the Conscience. Conversion. A full obedience to the light in the Conscience: a
total freedom from the prevailing of any sin; such a state as the Disciples of
Christ had not attained when Christ was crucified, nor Paul when he wrote the
Epistle to the Romans. Crucifying of Christ. Not that crucifying on the Cross
of wood, but a crucifying within us, by disobedience to the light in our
Consciences. A strange merit and purchase of Salvation, and way of pacifying
the wrath of God for sin.

D.
Damnation. Being condemnd within by the light in the Conscience; and the
terror and affliction arising from thence; but nothing of a pain of sense after
the body is dead, and turned to dust. Darkness. Not acknowledging the light in
every man to be Christ, and being guided by its immediate teachings, as the
only and all-sufficient rule. Death of Christ. The light within not obeyed. The
dead Body. The Body living in sin. Disciples of Christ. No other but those who
submit to the light within, and follow only its dictates.

E.
Election. Christ the s^ed: not the persons of men and women. Vulturous-Eye.
The understanding faculty piercing into, and earnestly seeking after Divine
Knowledge.

F.
Faith. A believing in the light within. Righteousness of Faith. Those acts of
Obedience performed by themselves in their own bodies, conformable to the
dictates of the light within; and in the Faith of its being Christ and the
Rule. Teaching or doing falsely. When not from the immediate motions and
teachings of the light within; though what is taught, be in its self true; and
what is done, be in its self good. False Prophets. All that are called by men,
however qualified otherwise; all that teach from or out of the Scriptures, and
not from immediate inspiration as the Prophets and Apostles, by whom the
Scriptures were penned. False Witnesses. All who speak not from inspiration and
inward merely divine motions, and experience not what they affirm in
themselves. Flesh. Whatever is not from the light within originally and
immediately. Wisdom of the Flesh. All Wisdom attained by industry. Denying
Christ come in the Flesh. Denying Christ come in the Flesh of Joseph, John,
Sarah, or any other who are Quakers. Christ come in the Flesh. Come in their
Flesh. The Flesh of Christ. The spiritual Flesh that descended from Heaven: not
the Flesh that lay buried in the Sepulcher after death. The Fold of Christ.
Christ himself. Following Christ. Obedience to the Light within. The Friends,
Friends. All professed Quakers. The will of the Flesh. All that is chosen by
man, though he be thereto disposed by the will of God revealed in the
Scripture.

G.
Preaching for Gain. Receiving any thing as the reward of preaching the Gospel.
State of Glory. The State of Peace and Joy, resulting from the witness of the
light within in this life. GOD. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, without
distinction; the light within every man, the spirit of the Quakers, every one
of them; the soul, the seed, and much more that he is not. Foundation of God.
The light within, and the inspirations and motions of it. The Gospel. Christ
the light within, not the written word or the sense of it as a narrative of the
good will of God to men in Christ.

H.
Handled the Word of Life. Not as the Apostles, who handled the Body of Christ;
but feeling by a spiritual sensation the motions of the light within, or the
Christ within them. Hearing the Gospel or Word. Listening to, and obeying the
light within. Heaven. Not the place where the man Christ is above or beyond the
visible skies, but the happiness they have within them. I could never yet hear,
or read them mention any other Heaven to be enjoyed by them as distinct
persons, but what they have within them in this world. Hell. The present
torment and loss within. Preaching for Hire, Hirelings. To have provision for
the outward man, as a maintenance or reward for preaching, though no bargain be
made, yea though such who receive it would preach, if they had never a penny
reward in this world from those they preach to. Holiness. Obedience to the
light within, and that without any failing. The woman's Husband at home. Christ
the light in the conscience.

I.
Idolatry. Often for worshipping the man Christ Jesus, who is at the right hand
of God, above or beyond the stars and visible Heavens; taking the examples of
the Saints and Churches in the Scripture recorded, and doing likewise. JESUS.
The light within, the Word in the beginning, not the Son of Mary, who was made
or created. The Imaginations. All conclusions (how demonstrable soever) which
accord not with their Tenets, or are not by immediate inspiration.
Enchantments, Bewitchings. A being persuaded, and established by reason and
Scripture, but especially, if humane arts or sciences have any hand in it.
Infidels. All that obey not, or do not place their salvation in the light
within. Workers of Iniquity. All that live not without sinning against God. The
Judgment, day of Judgment. Sin being judged in the conscience by the light
within in this life. Justification. Christ the light within obeyed.

K.
Kingdom of God. The rule and government of the light within, and the peace and
joy arising from thence. Carnal knowledge. All knowledge but what comes by the
immediate inspiration of the light within.

L.
The Law. Christ, the light within, the law written in the heart. Leadings in
Spirit. The motions of the light within, immediate inspirations and teachings.
The Life. Christ the light within. The life of Christ. The prevalency of the
light within. Eternal Life. Being taken into God. Saved by the Life of Christ.
A being saved by the prevalency of the light in the conscience. The Letter. The
dead Letter. The Letter that kills. The Scriptures or written Word. A Lie.
Lying. What is spoken (though true in it self, if) not from immediate teaching,
or the light within. The Light within. Christ, God, Father, Son, Spirit, the
seed of Abraham and David according to the flesh; Jesus, the only Savior; The
Law, the Testimony; The Gospel, the Prophets; The Advocate, Righteousness;
Sanctification, Justification; The only Rule, Guide, Teacher, Judge; the Way,
the only way to the Father; The Truth, the Life; The Power of God, the Eternal
God, God Almighty, that which pardons and conquers sin; the Judgment, the Lamb
of God that is slain from the beginning; the Word in the beginning, the Creator
of all things, the end of all Books, Laws, and abundance more than can be
crowded into many Pages. The Lust. All desires that accord not to the light
within, and proceed not from thence.

M.
The Man Christ. The Spiritual Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, which they say,
descended from Heaven, and dwelt in the Body of the Son of Mary, and does also
now in every Quaker. Cease from man, do not bear man. What the Faculties of Man
have any hand in, either by inventing, working or expressing; all that comes
not purely from the light within. Measure of God, of Christ, of the Spirit.
That degree of the power and inspirations of the light within. Something more
or less of the very being and Essence of God the Father, Son, Spirit. Meditate.
Not pondering or exercising the judgment and understanding on holy and divine
Objects, but a stilness and emptiness of all thoughts, attending for the
immediate impulses, suggestions, inspirations and motions of the light within.
In the Meekness. In the light within Christ, which is meekness in the abstract;
and between whom and their spirits there is no distinction. Ministers of the
everlasting Gospel. Both men and women Ministers among the Quakers, who declare
from immediate inspiration, not from the Letter of the Scripture. Ministers of
Antichrist, Babylon, Idol-Shepherds. All such who have a mediate call from man,
or preach from the Letter of the Scripture. Ministration of the Spirit. The
immediate teachings and motions of the Spirit, exclusive of all forms in
worship, the will (though sanctified) in choosing, and all premeditation and
acting by the prescription of the written word. Miracles. Sometimes Miracles in
Spirit, invisible to bodily senses, or humane understanding. The Star of the
Morning, the Morning of the first day. Christ the light within. Moved by the
Holy Ghost. An inward immediate impulse of the light and power within. From the
Mouth of God. Immediate teachings from the light within, excluding all other.
Mysteries of the Kingdom, Mysteries of God. Such things as the faculties of man
have no power to understand or express, no not from or by the Scripture; such
things as are only sensated in the experience. An allegorizing the Scripture.

N.
Natural man. Every man that is not a Quaker. The natural man. Every thing in
man which is distinct from God, or the light within. The New man. Christ the
light within, considered essentially. They did by Nature the things contained
in the Law. By the new Nature, which is Christ the light, contained in the Law
within the heart, which is also Christ the light.

O.
Obedience of Christ. What is done by men, by the power, life and strength of
of the light within them. Obedience in Spirit. Wrought by immediate impulses of
the Spirit. The Kingdom of God comes not with observation. The light within,
and its prevalencie (which they call, and that only, the Kingdom of God) is not
obtained any way by the study or consideration of the Scripture, or any thing
without us. Observers of times. Such as keep any certain days as separated to
holy use, as the Lord's Day; or such as propose an hour or two to be spent in
the Worship and Ordinances of God, or any time with limitation. Christ the
Offering. The light within. Offering up of Christ. The light within disobeyed,
or contesting with the lusts (yea) or the right reason of men. Officers of the
Church. Invisible Officers and Overseers, who do all their work in Spirit. Gods
Offspring. A part and measure of the very being of God, continuing* to be in a
degree as good and divine as God himself. The Souls and Spirits (at least) of
the Quakers, which they say, came out of God. The Old man. All that is
disobedient, or not conformable to their light within. One-ness with God,
Christ Spirit. Not relative, nor by love, or faith, or mystical Membership, but
such an one-ness as leaves no room for distinction between God, Christ, the
Spirit, and such whom they say are one with Christ. Openings of Life,
Springings of of Life. Sudden workings to action or impressions on the mind and
affections, proceeding from within, of their own accord and motion. Overcome by
the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of his Testimony. All amounts but to an
obedience to the light within (which Smith says, was the Lamb of God whom John
bid the Jews behold) and the force of the light and life within, which with
them is the blood, i. e. the life of the Lamb.

P.
Put Christ to pain. Resisting the motions of the light within. The painted
Whore. Not only the Papals with their irreligious Pomp, but all the good words,
thoughts and actions of any sort of men, who derive them not from the immediate
teachings and motions of the light within; yea, all forms of Worship, according
with the precepts and examples of the Scripture; and they are with them the
most painted, who come nearest to the Scripture as a Rule. The People of God.
They and none but they who profess the light within every man to be Christ, the
only Savior and Teacher, and give up themselves to its conduct as such.
Perfect Perfection. Not that which is sincere, or a Perfection of Parts, or
sanctification throughout in part; but a being without sin in the least remains
or stains of it. Persecution. Not only a penalty or hurt inflicted on their
Bodies or Estates, but also a speaking or writing against their Principles in
the most purely rational and Scriptural Authority. The s^ed in Prison, and
Captivity and Bondage. Pictures and Images. The light within not obeyed as
Christ and God. Not only those Images and Pictures that to the bodily-Eye
represent Christ, or God, or the Saints, and are adored with religious worship;
but all Worship, Opinions, Actions, Words, that are in imitation of the
Examples, and in obedience to the Precepts contained in the Scripture.
M^n-pleasers. They who comply with men, though in things not only lawful, but
also to edifification. Pollutions of the world. Not only things in themselves
sinful, as drunkenness, swearing, lying, etc. but also what ever customs they
dislike and decline; As Cuffs, Ribands, putting off the Hat, signs of respect,
etc. which they say are from the Devil: all recreations, as bowling, ringing,
though used seasonably and moderately. The Power of God. The Light within, the
Christ within. Praying in Spirit. Secretly or inwardly (not with the voice) by
the immediate impulses of the light and power within, without the exercise of
so much as the conceptions of man. Prayer. Christ the light within is sometimes
by them so called. The presence of the Lord. The powerful influences and
impressions of the light within, either to terror, or peace and joy. The pride
of Man. A not submitting to their light; and especially receiving tokens of
respect, and wearing Ribands, Cuffs and Lace. The Priests. A word of scorn put
on all indifferently, who are separated to the work of the Gospel Ministry by
men, or that receive maintenance for their work. The Worlds Professors. All
that are not Quakers. Formal hypocritical Professors. All that walk in the
Ordinances of Christ, commanded or prescribed in the Scripture, or in the order
of the Gospel. Spirit of Prophecy. Immediate impulses and inspirations. False
Prophets. All that act not by immediate revelation. Prophesying falsely. How
true soever in it self, if not from their spirit. Publicans and Sinners. All
that are not Quakers. Walking in the pare. Walking after the dictates of the
light within. Purifying the heart by the Blood of Christ. Acting and being
disposed according to inward motions, by the light and life of the Christ
within them.

Q.
Quenching the Spirit. Resisting the motions of the Light within. Quickened in
the Life. Stirred up by the power within.

R.
Raised to life. Conversion to Quakerisme. Ravening brain. Studying and
following after divine knowledge, or the knowledge of divine things. Inwardly
ravening from the Spirit. A recourse to the Scripture, or any thing else
(except their spirit) for light and understanding in the things of God. Carnal
reasonings, Reasonings of the Flesh. All use of the understanding and judgment
of man, for searching and finding out truths about divine and spiritual things.
Received from the Lord. By immediate Revelation. Reconciliation. Giving up
themselves to the light within. The Word of Reconciliation. Christ the light
within. The Lords Redeemed. Those who are conformed to the light within.
Redemption. A being reduced into the state of Adam in innocence; not what was
wrought by Christ in the Flesh 1600 years since. The Redeemer. Not that Jesus
Christ who is ascended above and beyond the Stars, but the light and power
within every man, as such. Refreshings in Spirit. Something they are pleased
with they know not why, and come by they know not how; As the Quakers who were
refreshed at the Dutch-womans declaring, while they understood not a word she
spoke. The New Man. CHRIST. The rest of the people of God. A quiet and peace
within, (though from a blind deluded conscience.) The Resurrection of Life.
Obedience to the light in this world. Resurrection of the Body. Resurrection of
the light within to a dominion in the man: for with them the body is Christ,
and Christ is the light within. Also the Body (which was a servant to sin)
being acted by the light and power within. Revelations. Not
Scripture-Revelations, but what come by immediate inspiration to them.
Righteous ones. Such as are without sin. Righteousness of Christ. That which is
wrought by the power and conduct of their Christ the light within. The Root of
Jesse. The Light within. The Royal seed. Christ and every Quaker. They who run
and not sent. All that teach the Gospel from the Scripture, and not by
immediate inspiration. Reprobation. Sin.

S.
The Sabbath. Every day, the present Rest and Heaven of the Quakers. The
Sacrifice of Christ. The light within obeying, or they obeying in the light
within. Having Salt in themselves. Having Christ in themselves. The Salt of the
Earth. Christ the light within. Salvation. Conversion to the obedience of the
light within. Sanctification. All one with Justification, all one with Christ,
obedience to the light. Building on the Sand. Making the Scripture a rule of
faith and life. The Savior. The light within every man. According to the
Scriptures. By immediate inspiration, as the Prophets and Apostles received the
mind of God. The Seed. The light within, or the Christ essentially within; the
Eternal Word, that which was in the beginning with God. The Seed of Abraham
according to the Flesh. The Eternal Word, Christ as God. All that is not from
the immediate motions within. Self-righteousness. Shadows. All Forms and
external worship. The Scriptures, which Pen says, are as the shadow of the
true rule, viz. living touches. Idol-Shepherds. The Ministers who have a
mediate call, or teach out of the Scripture. Shut out of the Scriptures. Cannot
understand them, have nothing to do with them. Signs and Miracles in Spirit.
No body can tell what. All flesh must be silent. Nothing must be said but what
comes by immediate revelation from the Spirit; for all else is the voice of
man, and of the flesh. In the simplicity. Without the use of humane
understanding; or if you will, out of your wits. To live in Sin, Sinners. Such
as have any remains of sin in them, or do at any time in any sort commit sin.
Slaying the Witness. Disobeying the light within; but especially a resolved
rejecting it as our only Rule, Teacher and Savior. Sons of God. Only the
Quakers. Soul. A part, or measure of God. Speaking in the Spirit. By immediate
Inspiration. Spirit of Anti Christ. That which leads to Forms, though Christ's
and Gospel-Forms. All that opposes the light within to be Christ. False
Spirits. They that ground their Doctrine on the Scripture, or any mediate
thing. Spirit of Bondage. Being under the power of any sin. Spirit of God. The
light within every man, God the Father, Son, Holy Ghost, without distinction.
Spirit of the World. Whatever is not conformable to the light within as Christ.
The Spiritual man. Christ, or Christ in every Quaker. The Lord has Spoken.
What comes to them by immediate inspiration. The Lord has not Spoken. Whatever
is not by immediate inspiration, though it be written in the Scripture. A true
Christians State. Being taught by God immediately, not by the Letter. The
Statutes of God. The Law in the heart, or within. They Steal my Word, every one
from his neighbor. Teaching Doctrines as the Word of the Lord taken out of the
Scripture. Stolen words. All that we have out of the Scriptures, and not by
immediate inspiration to our selves. In the stilness. An unactive attending to
the light within. Standing in the Counsels of God. Conformity to the Teachings
of the light within, and abiding therein. Studying for divine Knowledge (and
what comes thereby) from the Scripture. Carnal toil, birth and wisdom of the
flesh. Scraping in the Scriptures. The woman in Subjection. Weakness must
subject it self to the man Christ. The Supper of the Lord. Spiritual joy, or
joy in the Spirit from the presence and influence of the light within: all
eating and drinking to God, and in remembrance of Christ. Sword of the Spirit.
Christ the light within. What is declared by immediate inspiration of the
Spirit. Synagogues of Satan. The Assemblies of any sort of people for Divine
Worship, who are not Quakers.

T.
Christ Tabernacling in the outward vessel. Christ's dwelling for a little time
in the body, born of the Virgin Mary: The like of every Quaker. Taking away the
Tables. All Forms and Books, as useless in the things of God. Taught of God.
Taught immediately from the light within. Teachings of Men. All that is not
immediately inspired, though the sense and words of the Scripture. Cease from
man. From the Teaching by man. Outward Court of the Temple given to the
Gentiles. All Forms of Worship, all visible Worship, being the Worship of
Heathens, not of Christians. Testify to the light in the Conscience. Appealing
or speaking to Christ the light within. Bearing Testimony to the light.
Declaring for, and from the light within. The Testimony, and the Testaments.
Christ the light and Law within. Thanksgiving. Give Thanks in Spirit, or
inwardly. Thieves and Robbers. All that are Teachers by a mediate Call. All
Ministers but the Quakers. All that walk by Scripturelight. Traditions of men.
The Scripture, or written-Word. Trading with the Scripture. Having maintenance
for a Ministry: Ministering from the Scripture, or written-Word. The Birth, In
Travel. The time of wrestling betwixt convictions of the light within and
perfection. Trembling and Quaking. The horror and consternation that they are
under, from (as they say) the wrath of God, while the flesh is judged, and they
are in the hell of condemnation; ( which is all the hell they hold that I can
find) and this trembling and quaking (they say) is such as Moses and other
Prophets were seized with at the appearance of God. The Truth. No other but
Christ the light within. Speaking Truth, Truly. When it is spoken from
immediate inspiration and motion of the Spirit; but however true without these,
it is falsely spoken. Witnessing to the Truth. Declaring, or suffering for the
light within, and its dictates.

V.
The flesh of the Vail. The Body wherein Christ dwelt and tabernacled, which
for a while he took of the Virgin Mary; but at the death of that, left it no
body knows where. The Vail is over them. The belief of the man Christ Jesus,
which was of our nature to be the Christ, and now existing in Heaven, in that
body of flesh of our nature, which he took of the Virgin Mary. The Vessel. The
Body wherein for a while Christ dwelt: also our bodies. Victory over the Devil,
Sin, Flesh, World. Perfection in this life, resulting from the travail of the
light within. In the Unbelief. Not acknowledging the light within to be the
only Teacher and Savior, whatever the faith and life otherwise may be. The
Uncircumcised and Unclean. All that are not Quakers. Ungodly The same.
Unlearned and without Understanding. To be without the light within, its
teachings and immediate revelations. The Voice of the Lord. The secret
immediate lively touches and teachings within.

W.
Hirelings serving for Wages. Ministers who receive maintenance, little less
then Robbery, at least very Jewish and Antichristian. Wait on the light.
Desisting from a search after Truth by any external means, and passively
attending to the motions and teachings within. Watch to the light. To be so
listening and attentive to the inward teachings, as not either to let slip any
of its motions, or reject them. Blinde-Watchmen. Those Ministers who see and
warn by Scripture Light, and not their light within. Watch to the Morning. To
be diligent to observe and improve the first breakings forth of the power of
the light within. The Way. CHRIST. The way of Truth. Those into which they are
led by the pure light within. The Whore of Babylon. All forms of Worship,
visible Worship, all that is believed or practiced from the written Word. Will
of God. The commands from within, from the light. Will of Man, Will of the
Flesh. All that we Choose by the direction of the understanding; or in which the
humane faculties have any thing to do. Will Worship. What ever Worship is not
from the motions of the light within. Children of Wisdom. The Quakers, born to
the light within. We Witness. We experience, we speak it from the testimony and
feeling of the light and motions within. And Pen says, This is right
witnessing, to witness what they experience. But they that testify what they
believe from the Scriptures, and right rational demonstrations, go by hearsay
and reports, but cannot witness it. The Word. The Word of God. No other but
Christ the Eternal God. The Word of the Lord. The secrets of the Work of God.
The inward power and motions, neither wrought nor perceived by, or with the use
of the humane understanding and will. Righteousness of works. Whatever man has
any hand in, or does Choose. The World. All that are not Quakers. Worship in
Spirit. Not the Worship where the heart and will goes along with the outward
appearance, but what is from the motions of the light within. Wrath of God, Day
of Wrath. The inward judgings and terrors by the light Christ within, and that
in this world. The Writings when spoken diminishingly. The Scriptures or
written Word.

I have the witness of my Conscience, that I have not in this Key in any
measure abused or wronged the Quakers; but have declared what in their Writings
and verbal Converse I have found to be true, and could have proved by
particular instances, but for being too large.

And for that, they who weigh what is written in the body of the Book, may find
satisfaction in the most if not all of them.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Have not in this Treatise dealt with the more minute and light Errors and
Absurdities of the Quakers, because they would amount to too large a Volume for
this Subject; and I love not to tithe Mint, Annis and Cummin, where weightier
matters call forth my thoughts. Where the Lord shall make what has been
written convincing and effectual, those Superstructures and Appendices of the
conceit of Perfection, denying the sober use of civil Ceremonies, unnecessary
scrupling at modest Ornaments, Pedantick Words, Phrases and Gestures, obstinate
Jewish and Ceremonious respect to this or that place for Worship, and a
multitude more, will quickly and easily dissolve of themselves.

I doubt not but all whose Judgments are not in Captivity to the silliest
Errors, will conclude with me, that Quakerism is no Christianity, yea, Not
consistent with Christianity; being no more capable of dwelling together in one
Breast, than light and darkness in their absolute and supreme Dominion. I am
persuaded that all who have honest meanings among the Quakers, little think
that in turning to Quakerism, they turn Christianity out of Doors: yet it is a
truth, a sad truth, that calls for more serious notice than themselves, or most
others afford it, who profess (and that sincerely) a love to Truth and Souls.

My greatest discouragement in writing this Treatise, was from the sense of the
Quakers being out of the reach of Scripture and Reason, to almost, or
altogether a spiritual delirium. Yet I was not without some encouragement, from
my hopes that the Lord would bless it to the informing and securing of many
whose feet are yet out of their snare. I have not a little been amazed, to read
in their Authors such Expressions, as prompt us to divest our selves of being
men, that we may be Christians: As if Rational and Spiritual, God and the
Scriptures, Understanding and Christianity were mortal foes. I intended a
Chapter by it self to demonstrate Quakerism to be no Christianity, from its
excluding right Reason, any thing called Reason from having to do in the search
after Christianity, its choice, Defense or Approbation.

I care not if I collect a few, for my Readers satisfaction.

Quest. How do you manifest this inward foundation, Smith's Prim. page 56.
which you say is Christ, to be the true and only foundation which God has
laid?

Answ. From the feeling we have of it, by which we know that it is sure in us;
and from the sure and certain knowledge which we have of it in the feeling, we
manifest it from its own Nature and Being, to its own Nature and Being.

You may here perceive what a reasonable Religion the Quakers is, whose
demonstration is nothing else but sense and feeling; and this sense and feeling
nothing is capable of, but the very nature and being of this Foundation.

He proceeds further, page 65.

Quest. And can none have true faith unto salvation and life Eternal, but such
as are of your Opinion?

Answ. We are not in any Opinion, but in the principle of Life, by which we are
saved and receives life; and in this state we stand, not in any Opinion, but in
a feeling of life and salvation; for all opinions are in notions and
apprehensions, in which none feels the life and salvation in Christ, but what
they apprehend in the natural part, unto that they give up their own belief,
and so^rrs from the life in themselves, and neither believes unto salvation, nor
receives Eternal Life. Smit^ prim. p. 61.

I shall not trouble you with an explanation of these uncouth Phrases: you may
turn to the Key, and resolve your selves. Sure, i^is be the way to understand
truths, we may ca^hiere our understandings, and judge the most ensual to have
most of the Spirit. Mr. Pen is much of the same mind.

He calls those disputing from the Scriptures, Dry-cavilling letter-mongers.
Penington is a little ingenious, when he says in his Questions concerning
Unity, page 4. Wherein [confess my heart exceedingly despised them, and cannot
wonder that any wise man did, or does yet de^pise them.

Speaking of the way the Quakers have to get Proselytes, being without rational
demonstations.

This is far from the Apostes Doctrine and Practice, who demonstrated by Reason
that Jesus was the Christ; who reasoned with Foelix, and exhorts to be ready to
give a ^eason of the hope that is in us, to every one that ^^all ask us.

I expect some Replies to my Book agreeable to this irrational humor. But I
desire those who shall think fit to undertake an Answer, that they would not
play the Rats, and know here and there a scrap, leaving the grand designs and
Demonstrations of it untouched. I do assure them, I am not arrived ^et in my
own Opinion to such a perfection, but I am willing to learn from (even) my
Adversary: although I must likewise acknowledge, I am not very big with
expectation from the Quakers power of convincing. But if they shall instead of
answering, fill some sheets with personal reproaches and reflections, which do
not render the things asserted more or less true; I bless God, I am too much
above them to be moved, and have cast up my accounts of those costs before I
began this building.

If they shall deny what I charge them with in my Book, they must discard their
Authors I quote, or prove I give not the sense of their words. I shall be glad
of the former, and I fear not the later.

I desire the Quakers from henceforth, if they will maintain Moral honesty,
even such as many Heathens were possessed of; that they would no more call
themselves Christians, until they fall under another Conversion: for it is
gross Hypocrisy and Cheating, if not of themselves, yet of others: And
although some of them have scorned my Prayers, and told me they hated I should
pray for them: I shall love them with so much benevolence, as to ^eg of God to
convince them of the Truth, by this or what means he pleases, that they may
^ot only be loved of the truly good with goodwill, but also delight; but above
all, that they may glorify God on Earth in a better way, and enjoy God in
Heaven to a greater blessedness, than their Principles express. I have done.

But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another.

FINIS.

