A FUNERAL SERMON ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF Algernon Sidney, Esquire.

Who was BEHEADED on TOWER HILL, on December the seventh 1683. for HIGH TREASON.

LONDON, Printed for J. Smith. M DC LXXXIII.

Numbers XVI. 1, 2, 3, 4. Now Korah the Son of Izhar, the Son of Kohath, the
Son of Levi and Dathan and Abiram the Sons of Eliab, and On the Son of Peleth;
Sons of Reuben, took Men,

And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the Children of Israel, Two
Hundred and Fifty Princes of the Assembly, Fathers in the Congregation, Men of
Renown.

And they gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and
said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are
Holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift you up
your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?

And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his Face, etc.


SUCH is Satan's Malice, and the Corruption of Man's Nature, That the Church of
God is Exercised with variety of Difficulties and Distractions; Satan turning
himself into diverse shapes, appearing in variety of Forms, and by several sorts
of Instruments; sometimes acting one part, and sometimes another, whereof we
have plentiful Evidences in the History of Israel, penned by Moses, who wrote
the Story of many hundred years, and in the Book of Exodus, and this Book of
Numbers, the things that befell (for the most part) his own Government.

1. Satan seemed to show himself in Pharaoh, like a roaring Lion, or a wild
Boar of the Forest, breaking into the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts,
commanding first the Midwives, and afterward his own People, to cast every Son
of the Children of Israel that should be born, into the River Nilus, Exodus 1.
^. the last. And withal made the men of Israel themselves to serve with rigor,
and to sigh for hard Bondage.

2. And when (as it appears) after Moses and Aaron were sent from the Lord to
deliver them, and the Lord sealed to it by many Miracles, the Devil appeared in
the shape of a Mountebank or Jugler; apishly imitating the glorious Works of
God by counterfeit Signs, and Lying Wonders, until the Lord did confound him,
and brought him to an open Confession, This is the Finger of God. Afterward he
proceeds no further that way.

3. Now in the third place, the Devil puts on his Harness, and appears like a
mighty man stirring up Pharaoh by force of Arms to destroy them, and bring them
back again into Bondage after they marched out of Egypt; but the Lord caused
the Sea to fwallow up Pharaoh and all his Host.

4. And now Satan remembering, how he prevailed over our first Parents in the
Form of a Serpent, he puts on that shape, and windeth into the Bosoms of
many of the Israelites, stiring them up to Pride, Murmuring, Idolatry,
Fornication, Tempting of God, Lusting, and at last to Unbelief and Apostasy;
hereupon the Lord passes Sentence upon them, and excludes them out of the
promised Land, and adjudging them to wander Forty years in the Wilderness, the
Lord reserved the Mercies they had forfeited, for their innocent Children.

Now in this time of Vacation, their old Enemy was not idle, bnt seems to take
upon him the appearance of an Angel of Light, and by his Accomplices sets on
foot the Levelling Design, viz. by his Factors, Corah, Dathan and Abiram; who
said unto Moses and Aaron, Ye take too much upon you. What need have we of
Prince and Priest, seeing all the Congregation are Holy, every one of them,
etc. This was a most mischievous Plot, and more like to undermine the Church
than Pharaohs Rage and Cruelty.

Where ye may observe two things; First the Mutineers Attempt, and in that Four
Particulars;

First, The Actors, and they are of two ranks.

1. The Principals.

2. The Accessories.

The Principals are described by their Names and Pedigree.

And of these there were Two Parties. Korah a Levite, and Dathan and Abiram
Reubenites.

1. Korah and his Pedigree: He was descended of Levi, of the same Tribe whereof
Moses and Aaron was; yea he was of the principal Family of Levi, coming from
Kohath, who was the principal Son of Levi.

And this is thought to be one cause of the discontent, because the
pre-eminence was given to Elizapban the Son of Uzziel, Numb. 3. 30. He was
appointed to be the Chief of the House of the Family of the Kahathites.
Elizaphan was of the Fourth and youngest Family of the Kahathites, yet
preferred to be Prince over them. This (as the Hebrews think) was offensive to
Korah, who was of the second Family of Izhar, and occasioned him to rebel.
Korah is noted as the Principal in the Rebellion, which St. Jude calls the
Gainsaying of Kore. Epistle of Jude, v. the 11. And in Numb. 27. 3. only
Korah's Companies are mentioned, where Speech is of this mutiny. To Elizaphan
was given the charge of the Ark and the Table, and the Candlestick and the
Altars, and the Vessels of the Sanctuary, wherewith they minister, and the
hangings, and all the service thereof; therefore (as R. Sol. Jarchi on Numb. 3.
notes) Korah was offended, that Elizaphan and his Family should have this
Honorable Charge rather than Korah and his Posterity. Another part of these
Actors were Dathan and Abiram, and On, Sons of Reuben (i. e.) descended from
Reuben, who had forfeited his Birthright by defiling his Fathers Bed.

Reuben had lost his Honor by his Sin; which his Sons by unlawful means seek
to recover.

By the Sequel it appears, that Korah lifts up himself, not only against
Elizaphan; but against Moses and Aaron, who were descended of Levi, the Third
Son of Jacob, and they did not only stomach at the personal preferment of
Moses, but sought the Priesthood also, verse 10.

Now compare their Stations, Numb. 2. 10. Ye shall find, that the Reubenites
were to be placed on the South Side of the Camp of Israel; and on the otherside
the Kohathites, of whom Korah was, encamped on the side of the Tabernacle South
ward, Numb. 3. 29. These Reubenites encamped next unto the Kahathites, and so
being Neighbors in Situation, associated themselves in evil, which Sol. Jarchi
observing, says, woe, be unto the wicked, and woe unto his Neighbor. Their
quarters being so near one to another, their Agitators had leave to confer
together, and to hatch this Conspiracy.

The Accessories in general were certain of the Children of Israel; In
particular Two Hundred and Fifty Men, described first by their Degree, Princes
of the Assembly, or Called of the Assembly, or Senators called to the
Assembly, Men of Name, of Renown, famous in the Congregation, whereby the
Conspiracy was the stronger. A small number in comparison of those, who were
under Moses's Government; yet in regard of their Eminence, such as had a great
Influence upon the People.

2. Consider their Design, which as it was closely carried by them, so it is
covertly laid down here. Their Aim was to destroy the present Government settled
by God in the Church and Commonwealth of Israel; to degrade Moses and Aaron
from their Dignities, and in Case of resistance to murder them, and to raise
themselves to the Chief Places of Command, and so to bring the People into a
real Slavery, of whose Liberty they seemed so zealous.

1. That their Aim was at the Priesthood, it appears by Moses his upbrading
them, ver. 9, 10. And Moses said unto Korah; Hear I pray you, ye Sons of Levi,
seems it but a small thing to you, that the God of Israel has separated you
from the Congregation of Israel; to bring you near unto himself, to do the
Service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the Congregation, to
Minister unto them? And he has brought thee near unto him, and all thy
Brethren the Sons of Levi with you, and seek ye the Priesthood also? verse. 11.
For which Cause, both thou, and all thy Company are gathered together against
the Lord: And what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him? As if he had said, is
it not enough, that God has advanced you above thousands of your Brethren, but
that ye will lift up your selves above Aaron, and seek the Priesthood also?
This was the design or the Kahathites.

On the other side, the design of the Reubenites was against the Scepter, verse
12, 13. and Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the Son of Eliab, which said,
we will not come up; that is, we will not come up unto the public place of
Judgment, where Moses by debateing with them, might had persuaded them to have
desisted from their evil enterprise, and have found mercy. Is it a small thing
(said they) that thou have brought us up out of a Land that flows with Milk
and Honey, to kill us in this Wilderness, except thou make thy self altogether
a Prince over us? verse 14. Moreover thou have not brought us into a Land that
flows with Milk and Honey, or given us Inheritance of Fields and Vineyards:
will thou put out the eyes of men? We will not come up. Hereby you see that
they aimed at the Supreme Power.

Now. what was the fair Vizard, that they put upon so foul a Face? First they
pretend to be great Enemies to Ambition. They said unto Moses and Aaron, ye
take too much upon you; Why lift you up your selves above the Congregation of
the Lord?

2. They cry up the People.

They are an Holy People, all the Congregation, every one of them, and the Lord
is among them, Wherefore then list ye up your selves above the Con: gregation
of the Lord: The Presumption of their own Holiness, brought them to Ambition
and Affection of the Priesthood, an Honor that none should take to himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Hebrews 5. 4.

3. They seem to be very tender of the peoples sufferings.

First, Of what Moses had deprived them, Thou have brought us up out of a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the Wilderness.

Secondly, In regard of what he had disappointed them, Thou have not brought us
into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, or given us inheritance of Fields and
Vineyards.

Thirdly, They seem to be very zealous of the Peoples liberties. All the
Congregation is Holy, fit to govern themselves, let all be levelled, all be
equal to the Supreme Power, and none be above or under others. Here was their
pretense.

4. Consider what was their way of proceeding.

1. It was close and subtle, the Kohathites and Reubenites being gathered near
each other, had opportunity to contrive their PLOT closely to cheat the
Multitude.

2. Mark their Audaciousness.

First, They stood or rose up in a daring manner, affronting Moses to his Face.

Secondly, They gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, they
banded themselves and came strongly armed.

3. They spoke too saucily to them. Ye take too much upon you; why lift ye up
your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?

They charge them shamelesly for taking too much upon them; whereas they took
no more than God had given them; And for lifting up themselves above the
Congregation, when God had lifted them up to it. Yea Moses was very backward to
take a Commission from God, and after he had it, complains of his Burden, Numb.
11. 11. as desiring to be freed from it. Again, they tax them for bringing them
out of a Land, flowing with Milk and Honey, viz. out of Egypt, wherein their
Infants were murdered, and themselves cruelly enslaved. And charged them for
not bringing them into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey: Whereas it was their
Murmuring and Unbelief that kept them out of Canaan, and shut them up in the
Wilderness.

Now consider the Remedy Moses used. First, The Course he took, and there ye
may see.

1. That he showed his utter Detestation of this Wickedness. When Moses heard
this, he fell on his Face, as abhorring so foul a Rebellion.

2. He makes a solemn Appeal to the righteous God, v. 5. He spoke unto Korah
and all his Company, saying, even to morrow the Lord will show who are his, and
who is holy, by causing him to come near unto him, even him who he has chosen
will he cause to come near unto him.

Thirdly, He Summon's Korah and his company to the highest Judicature. This do;
take the Censers, Korah and his Company, and put fire therein, and put Incense
in them before the Lord to morrow: And it shall be, that the man whom the Lord
will choose, he shall be holy, verses 6, 7. As if he had said, ye reject mine
Authority, but I am content to plead this cause with you before the Judge of
the whole world.

Fourthly, He does unmask them, verses. 8, 9, 10. Seems it a small thing to
you, that the God of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of Israel
to bring you near unto himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the
Lord, etc. And he has brought thee near to him, and all thy Brethren, the Sons
of Levi with thee, and seek ye the Priesthood also? For which cause both thou
and all thy Company are gathered together against the Lord: And what is Aaron
that ye murmur against him.

Fifthly, He sends for Dathan and Abiram, to give an account of their Action:
and upon their refusal to come up, he is full of Holy Indignation against their
wickedness, and said unto the Lord, verse 15. Respect not thou their Offering.

Sixthly, He pleads his own integrity, I have not taken away one Ass from them,
neither have I hurt one of them.

Seventhly, He prays for the People whom God threatened to destroy upon a
sudden, for siding with these Rebels, v. 22. And then exhorts the people to
withdraw from the Tabernacles of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, lest they be
consumed in their sins. And then makes a Declaration to them; Hereby ye shall
know that the Lord has sent me to do all these works; For I have not done them
of mine own mind. If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the Visitation of all men, then the Lord has not sent me, verse
28, 29.

Now the Success of this course in respect of the Rebels was very dreadful. One
part of them the Earth opened it is Mouth, and swallowed them up quick; and the
other part of them was consumed with Fire, even those Two Hundred and Fifty Men
that presumed to offer Incense.

Now in Respect of the People, the Issue was very strange, though they had seen
the hand of God in a strange manner upon these Rebels, yet the People the next
day murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, ye have killed the People of the
Lord, Verse 41. Whereupon the Lords Wrath was provoked, and the Plague began,
and the Lord smote 14000 of them, though Aaron made all possible speed to get
between the dead and the living, to make aconement.

Here are many things to be noted by way of observation.

Observation I.
That the Churches of Christ in this world are subject to many troubles. So
Christ himself foretold John 16. In the world ye shall have Tribulation: The
Church in the World is like a Ship on the Sea, and it is nothing strange, to
see it tossed with Winds and Waves: Christ's Ships [his Church and passengers]
have in their Sailing more than ordinary storms, Lament. 1. 12. Behold and see,
whether any sorrow be like my sorrow, (says the Church) wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce Anger. The Ship in its nature is a
tumbling and rolling thing, moving too and fro, and by its constitution
ordained for motion. The Church triumphant is landed, and is above motion, but
the Church militant is afflicted and tossed with Winds and Waves, Storms and
Tempests. How many States and Commonwealths are up and down, now green and
flourishing, and anon in their cadency like May-Flowers? God does many times
Roll them like Bowls in an Alley: Pride, Excess, Oppression, Injustice, and
abounding Iniquity, do put a Biass on the Bowl, that it tumbleth over and over,
and God with the touch of his foot (as I may so speak) turns the Bowl out of
his place. Read the History of the Church, and ye shall find that the Church
for one good day of Ease, Peace and Rest, has had ten or twenty troublesome
days of War, Persecution, Division, Plots and Conspiracies. Read the History of
the Judges, and of the persecuting and Christian Emperors, and ye shall see
what vicissitudes the Church had: It was sometimes up and sometimes down; they
had Ease and Court, and favor but a short time with the godly Emperors.

It is true; Christ seems sometimes to be asleep, and this much shakes his
Childrens Faith, he lies as if he were asleep, that the Passengers may cry
aloud to him for help.

God sometimes would have his Church brought to a very low Ebb, and to be near
unto drowning; and then he stands up for their deliverance; yet not so, but
that new Storms may arise at such a time, and in such a Coast as they do not
expect. The Church was at a low Ebb in Egypt, the Males Children drowned in the
River Nilus, the tasks of the men multiplied: The Lord with ninescore Plagues
cannot rescue his People out of the hands of a Tyrant, God must step in with
immediate Omnipotency to pull them out with a stretched out Arm in the tenth
Plague.

Moses his word of deliverance, and Gods decree of bringing out the People, is
now ready to fall to the Ground. The roaring Seas are before them, the Enemy
behind them, and Mountains on every side: Is not the Church of God now in great
danger?

But then says Moses, stand still and see the Salvation of God. God divides
the Red Sea, for his Redeemed to pass through, and drowns their Enemies. The
Lord shall judge his People, and repent himself for his Servants: But when? When
he sees their strength is gone, and there is none shut up and left. When the
Church has neither hands nor feet, then God will arise for their help. Christ
can Sail against Wind and Tide, and without Wind: He never sinks his Bark, nor
breaks his Helm, nor loses a Passenger, nor misseth his Harbor: though the
Winds be strong, and the Sea tempestuous, yet the Port is sure: For this is the
promise of him that sits at the Helm, Isa. 54. 11. O thou afflicted and tossed
with Tempest, behold, I will lay thy Stones with fair Colors, and lay thy
Foundations with Saphyrs. Yea, the harbor is near. Behold I come quickly says
the Lord. In the greatest storm that ever fell on the Church, it could see the
Shore and dry Land, Let the Church remember that she is in the deep, and so
prepare for foul weather. The Church of God has had much experience of this
Truth in all ages, and happy are they that make aright improvement thereof.

Observation II.
2. That in times of vacancy and rest, turbulent Spirits are apt to be working
and hatching mischief. When Israel was confined to the Wilderness many years,
Korah and his accomplices fell into this mutiny. When men want grace in their
hearts, and business to employ themselves about, their lusts are apt to boil
them up into some mischievous attempts. When Heretical and Antichristian
Enemies are Vigilant and Active; Let us be Sober, Watch, and Pray: We have to
do with Enemies that are most busy, when we are least Apprehensive of Danger.
Those who outrun others in sinful Activity, or rather Turbulency and
Unquietness of their Spirits, as they are without peace themselves; So they
seek to molest and disturb the peace of others. The Prophet describes them to
be like the troubled Sea, which cannot rest. Isa. 57. 20.

Observation III.
That Pride is the cause of Contention, it makes men to overvalue themselves,
and undervalue others: Therefore the Romans painted Pride in the form of a
Devil, having three Crowns upon his head, one upon another. In the First was
written Transcendo, I surpass all others, because the proud man thinks he
exceeds all other men. Therefore says Hugo, Pride is a Vicious Haughtiness,
whereby a man despises his inferiors, and earnestly busieth himself to rule
over his equals, and those also that are above him.

In the second Crown was written, Non obedio, I obey no others; for pride would
give laws to others, but obey none himself.

In the third was written, Perturbo, I trouble all, and sometimes the Pride of
some persons troubles a whole Nation. Prove. 13. 10. Only by Pride comes
Contention; It is the great Incendiary of the World. Eusebius shows that when
the Emperors began to favor the Christians, they began to fall out and
disagree among themselves.

In the time of the ten famous Persecutions of the Church by the* Heathen Roman
Emperors, it is noted, that after the death of Valerian, the Church had rest
and prosperity for above forty years: In this time the Church grew exceedingly,
and Christians were gracious in the eyes of Emperors, and Presidents; and many
Churches were built for them, which prosperity being abused by the Bishops and
the Clergy and other Christians unto Pride, and Idleness, strife and
Contention; It moved the Lord to scourge them with another (See the tenth
Persecution) which began in the nineteenth year of the Emperor Dioclestan,
which raged very sore, and extended unto this Island, which was then under the
government of the Romans: Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, though they had a
Pre-eminence above many others, yet the Pride of their Spirits, causes them to
swell against Moses and Aaron.

Humility of Spirit is a special means to keep the heart in peace with God, and
from breaking out into irregular motions. An humble man blesses God that he
has raised him above any others, and is not troubled that others are raised
higher than himself. Jacob confesses himself to be less than the least of all
God's Mercies. Some think others too high, who think themselves not high
enough, Plenty, Riches, and Prosperity, do usually puff men up with Pride, and
Pride ingendereth strife and contention. He that is of a Proud Heart stireth up
Strife. Prove. 28. 25. Some men are contentious to show that they are men of
Spirit, Proud and Haughty Scorner is his name, who deals in Proud Wrath.
Prove. 21. 24. Some men are violent and wrathful merely out of Pride, that
others may know they are men of mettle. This is proud Wrath, as the wise Man
terms it.

Ambition, Pride, and immoderate desire of greatness moved Alexandria the Great
to wage War with Darius King of Persia. This was the Cause of the Civil war
between Caesar and Pompey, Sylla and Marius, Anthony and Augustus. Pride has
been the cause of many Schisms and Divisions in the Church. Hence the
Corinthians ran into Schisms and Parties, one was for Paul, another was for
Apollos, a third was for Caephas, a fourth above all Ministers and Ordinances;
he is for Christ alone. Whence arose the strife between Basil and Eusebius
Bishop of Caesarea, and between Origin and Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria:
whence arose the stirs that Montanus Demetrius, and Arrius made in the Epiphan
lib. 2. Theodoret lib. 1. cap. 8. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 18.
Church, whence were the contentions between Paulinus and Flavianus, Lucifer
and Eusebius; the Meletians and Eustathians, all at the beginning good
Christians, and embracing true Doctrine, yet at last so divided they were, that
the one Excommunicated the other; whence was the strife between Chrysostom of
the one part, and Cyril, Theophilus, and Epiphanius of the other about the
Burning of Origens Books, did not all these contentions spring from Pride?
whence were the contentions among certain Popes and Popish Bishops, was it not
from Pride, was it not about the Supremacy, which ambitious Popes have proudly
challenged? Humility is a low Postern, at which the Proud man will not stoop:
Heaven is an High City, yet has but a low Gate, as St. Augustine says, Peace
is humble, Pride quite overlooks her.

The safest way to keep fire is to rake it up in Embers, and the best way to
preserve Peace, is in Humility.

Observation IV.
That near Neighborhood between men of corrupt Principles and working Spirits,
is very dangerous to the public. Korah with the Kohathites, and Dathan and
Abiram with the Reubenites, were quartered on the South side of the Tabernacle.

This near Situation gave them opportunities of frequent coming together,
whereby they had an advantage of hatching this wicked PLOT against MOSES and
AARON.

Confederacy in Evil is strong in Operation. God complains, Ezekiel. 22. 25. of
the Prophets of Jerusalem, thus,

There is a Conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof.

The Hebrew for Conspiracy is from a root, (...) est ligare colligare, and
Metaphorice dicitur de animorum colligatione, conjurare, facere ligam.
or word which signifies to bind, to tie together, as Jeremiah 51. 63. Isaiah
49. 16. and metaphorically is referred to the minds of men combining together,
as 2 Samuel 25. 31. It is said, that Ahitophel is among the Conspirators with
Absalom: Backsherim in Conspirationibus, his mind with others of his
Associates, was United in a Conspiracy against David: So 2 Kings 12. 20.
Jehoash his Servants arose and made a Conspiracy: It is in the Original, they
conspired a Conspiracy; they were all of one heart and mind, and it was to kill
their Master. Being fellow Servants and dwelling together, they had the more
opportunities of meeting together to Plot the Destruction of their Master. So
the evil Prophets had a Conspiracy; they met in Jerusalem, they consulted and
agreed together to Prophecy the same things, that none should Prophecy
otherwise: they made a Conspiracy against the true Prophets, and those that
were truly Religious, opposing God and Godliness. Ye may read how they set
themselves against Jeremiah. Chap. 26. 8. and stired up the Princes and People
against him. verse 13. How they Prophesied the same things, Jerem. 23. 17. Such
was the Counsel of Trent, a mere Conspiracy, did they not agree together, that
whoever Preached against their Canons and Articles should be Anathematized; did
they not stir up the Princes and Powers of the world, to punish those they
Judged Schismatics and Heretics.

Observation V.
That outward blessings bestowed upon evil men, do commonly become snares to
themselves, and sometimes hurtful and prejudicial to the Commonwealth. These
Conspiratours were Princess of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men of
Name, or Renown. Their dignity put them upon this mutiny with hope of success.
Poison given in Wine works strongly, Sin meeting with outward advantages is
the more mischievous, when evil men come to places of Eminency, they vent the
Corruptions that lay hid in them before; they make Progress in Wickedness and
nothing restrains them, we are ready to think that great men that have had good
Education, are well natured, will prove admirable Instruments of God's glory,
and the public good; but we deceive our selves in some, when they come to high
and public places, their evil natures do appear, and they grow worse and worse.

Nero at first for five years carried himself well, like a Lamb, but he was a
Lion, and his Lionish disposition showed it self to the full.

These Princes of the Assembly perverted the end, for which they were ordained
of God, and set up by men, in Micahs days, the heads of the house of Jacob, and
the Princes of the House of Israel abhorred Judgment, and perverted all equity;
They build up Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity: and for their sins
and sakes was Sion Plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem made heaps.

The Venetian History informs us, that in a time when the Commonwealth of
Venice was much afflicted.

Baimonti Tepulo, who issued from a noble family, but bearing a Devilish hatred
to his Country, with diverse others of the same quality and means, conspired
against it, diverse of the common people being in pay with the Conspirators, who
in the midst of a horrible tempest intermingled with hail and rain, the air
being filled with Thunder and Lightening, ran armed to the Palace, which they
assailed, having filled the large Marketplace of St. Marks with armed men.

The whole City was quickly in Arms, and there was a sore Fight; the Fight
ceased not till such time as the Senate getting the upperhand, the Conspirators
were beaten back from the Palace. Baimonti returning from his own house through
the Mercers Street, a woman forth of a Window, threw a Mortar on his head, with
which blow he fell half dead to the Ground, and was slain out right by those
who persued him, who presently returned to the Palace. Some of the
Conspirators which were Patricians by birth, being taken on the Dice-Bridge,
were by the command of the Prince forthwith beheaded; whereupon that place has
ever since born the Name of Mal-pas. And to extinguish the memory of these
wretches, it was decreed in all places to deface the Arms of Baimonti and his
Accomplices; their houses were razed to the Ground, and all their Goods
confiscated, a Pension was given to the Woman and her Heirs, who with the blow
of the Mortar stayed Baimonti.

When James the First, King of Scotland, had besieged the Castle of Roxburgh,
which was ready to be surrendered unto him, the Queen came to the Camp in great
haste unto the King, signifying that there was a Conspiracy begun against him,
The King thereupon raised the Siege, and returned home.

Now Walter Stuart, Earl of Athol and head of the Conspiracy, pretending a
right to the Crown, procured his Nephew Robert Stuart, and his Cousin Robert
Graham to slay the King. Hereupon the said Robert Stuart and Graham, came one
Evening to the Black Friars in Perth, where the King then lay, and by License
of the Porters, coming into the house, ran up into the Gallery before the Kings
Chamber Door, minding to have staid there till one of the Kings Servants, who
was Privy to their wicked purpose, should come to give them entrance into the
Chamber; but before the coming of this Traitor, another of the Kings Servants,
named Walter Staunton, came forth of the Chamber Door to have fetched Wine for
the King, who seeing these two Traitors standing there at the Door, either of
them having a long Sword girded to him, he stepped back and cried Treason, but
e're he could get within the door to make it fast, they leaped upon him, and
flew him there.

Mean while a young Virgin, named Catharine Douglas, that was afterward Married
to Allexander Lovel of Bolunni, got to the Door and shut it; but because the
Bar was away that should have fastened it, she thrust her arm in the place
where the Bar should have been put, and being young, and her bones tender, her
arms was chrushed asunder, and the door broke up by force. Herewith they
entered the Chamber, slaying such of the Servants as made defense, and then the
King himself with many cruel and deadly Wounds. The Queen also was hurt,
endeavoring to save the King her Husband. Patrick Dunbar, Brother to George
late Earl of March, was left for dead on the floor, by reason of such Wounds as
he received in the Kings defense.

Observation VI.
That Pride, Envy, and Malice, will make men insolent in their carriage toward
those that are of greatest worth, and dignity and desert. Was ever Nation more
obliged to a man, than this People to Moses? Did any man carry himself with
more Meekness than he did, and more Integrity? But no Dignity and Worth can
exempt him from the malice of those whom Pride and Envy has made more brutish
than the Beasts themselves. Ye see how sawcily these men speak to Moses and
Aaron; Ye take too much upon you, Why lift ye up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? How stubbornly did Thomas Becket oppose King Henry
the Second? How Insolently did Bonner and Gardner, two Popish Bishops, behave
themselves against the Authority of King Edward the Sixth? In the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, how stubbornly did the Popish Doctors behave themselves
in refusing to dispute with the Protestants, according to that order which was
prescribed, and refusing to set the Royal Crown upon her Head? No wonder that
those who maintain Errors and Lies, audaciously and obstinately against the
truth of God, do all show themselves Presumptious and Insolent against Princes
and Magistrates. St. Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 20. Presumptuous and Self-willed.

Presumptuous, the word is in the Original (...), Men of daring and audacious
Spirits, impudently bold or presumptuous. Heretics, what they want of Truth in
their Doctrines, they labor to make up with impudency and boldness, not only
against Inferiors, but also against Governors, whom God has set in his own
place, especially when they have got strength on their side. Again says St.
Peter, they are Self-willed and stubborn, and refractory (...), Men that will
please themselves, and have their own will and way, in despite of Authority.
Heretics and false Teachers, proud, envious, and malicious men, out of
self-will Pride, and frowardness, behave themselves audaciously and impudently
against their Governors, and will go their own way, because they will.

In the first Reformation in England, under K. Edward the VI, the Popish
Prelates and Clergy (the State having before discarded the Pope) did easily
join with the Protestants, though not in their Opinions, yet in the public
Service of the Church, and had not the Pope soon after been restored by Queen
Mary to his former Authority, in all Probability that Faction long since had
been ended; but after the Readmission of the Pope, and his having Liberty to
tamper with his Party at pleasure, in the Second Reformation by Queen
Elizabeth, not a Popish Bishop could be persuaded to come to our Church: And
this practice has been continued by the greatest part of the Recusants, their
Followers, to this Day; notwithstanding our Service be, in it self, less
offensive to them, and in no part opposite to any point of their Creed, than
that in King Edwards was. Thus it pleased their Politic Governors, to
preserve and perpetuate the Remains of their party by this utter Breach and
Alienation, inhibiting them, not only the reading of the Protestants Books, and
repairing to their Churches* but also to join with them in any Divine Service,
by whomsoever, or how lawful soever performed, thereby kindling in them, an
extreme hatred and detestation of their opposites.

Observation VII.
That those that know not how to govern themselves, and are much more unfit to
govern others, are apt to despite Government, and labor to destroy it. This ye
see here in the Examples of Korah, Dathan and Abiram; Loose and Licentious
Spirits would have none above them that should have Power to restrain them.
Lust and Corruption are Irregularities, which abhor to come under Order. St.
Jude says, v. 8. They defile the flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities. They despise not only Men in Authority, but Dominion and Authority
it self, cannot endure to be in Subjection to Lawful Anthority. And it may be
observed, that both St. Peter and St. Jude, do join this sin immediately to
that Sin of Uncleanness, seeming to imply, that when men are given over to
Licentious Walking after the flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness, it is no wonder
if they be ready to shake off due Subjection to the Civil Magistrate; and
desire to be freed from all Restrait of good Laws and good Orders established
in the Commonwealth, that they may run on in their desolute and disorderly
Courses: Does it not seem a Light Matter to Men of Popish Spirits to despise
Government, and to trample upon Laws? What else did Pope Alexander III. when he
trod upon the Neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who was his Lord and
Prince, abusing the Sacred Scripture also, and turning it into a byword of
reproach against his Sovereign, saying, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the
Adder, the young Lion and the Adder shall thou trample under feet.

How did Pope Celestine III. despise Government and Dominion, when he Crowned
the Emperor Henry VI. with his Feet, and with his Foot struck the Crown from
his Head again? or Pope Adrian, that made the Emperor Henry IV. stand barefoot
a long time at his Gate in cold Weather?

What is it but to despise Government, to depose Kings from their Thrones (if
they cross the Popes Will) and to discharge their Subjects from their Duty and
Allegiance? Is it not a point of Antichristian and High Contempt of
Government, when a Pope shall expect, that the Emperor, his Lord and Prince
should hold his Stirrup, and then chide him for not holding it at the right
side? The Apostle goes on, and having showed the Root of this Contempt of
Government, viz. Presumption and Self-will, he shows some Fruits of it also:
They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities: The words in the Original are
very weighty, (...), they tremble not to blaspheme Glories; they tremble not;
whereby he implies, that this is a Sin to be trembled at, viz. This
Reproaching of Men, placed in Eminent Dignity, and that Men show themselves to
be given over to a strange height of wickedness, when they are not afraid to
open their Mouths in reproachful Terms against such: Then it is called
Blaspheming, because Princes are called Gods, and are in the place of God here
on Earth, God having communicated unto them some part of his Authority and
Command over their Brethren by his word, as by a Commission dated in the Court
of Heaven: And in that respect their Persons are in a manner Sacred, and it is
a petty blasphemy to reproach them. The Apostle calls them (...), Glories, and
so one translates it, gloria praecellentes, Men eminent in Glory: And Beza, tho
he translates it, Dignitates (as our English also) yet in his notes he does
Paraphraze thus; Augusta Majestate preditos, men endued with eminent majesty.
This shows what great things may be attributed to Princes and Rulers without
flattery; so that we do not exceed the bounds which the word of God has set.
Curse not the King, no not in thy secret thought, Eccl. 10. This is one strong
argument that the Lord does Reign throughout the Earth, who though he does
sometimes permit the corruptions of men to break out into disorder, yet he does
so far overruled them, as to preserye some order in the Societies of men. We
have cause to bless God, that though our Government has suffered so many
convulsions in our days, yet he has not suffered it to be utterly confounded.
If we look upon men we are apt to complain of many things, but if we look up to
God, we have cause to thankful that things are no worse.

Observation VIII.
It is no new thing for men of loose principles to cry down Magistracy and
Ministry, as these men would down with both at once. Those men that would level
us in Church and State, do not act without a Precedent. Korah and his company
have showed them the way. And I know not any thing does cross Satan more in his
design than a good Magistracy and a faithful Ministry; and therefore Satan
labors, first to corrupt them, which if he cannot do, then to disparrage them,
and alienate the People from them. What is Korah's Plea? First, the People are
holy all and every one; and then they are the Congregation of the Lord, etc.
And then here is the inference First, then no need of Magistracy, they need not
the Government of a man that have the Lord among them to govern them.

2. They are an holy People, they know how to govern themselves, they need not
a Magistrate to keep them in order. But tho it be granted, that they are
outwardly Holy, as being dedicated to God, and separated from all Nations in
the World; yet many of them were inwardly and really unholy, and generally they
were a stiff-necked People, more fit to be governed rather than left without
Government.

I suppose that our Enemies of Government, will not use altogether Korah's
Plea, they will not plead that all the People are Holy. But they go another
way: The Supreme Power (say they) is originally in the People, and why would
they suffer any one single Person to rule over them?

Resp. Should it be granted, that the power at the first was originally in the
People, yet to invest the body of the People with the whole Power, what does
this savor of but Frenzy, Anarchy, and Madness, and would soon turn to the
ruin of that People that should make the trial of it, and run the hazard of so
woeful an experiment. Many Histories inform us, how the multitude have always
been desirous of change in Government. Livy makes mention of the Citizens of
Capua, that being Livy, Decad. 3. lib. 3.
gathered together in a mutinous manner, would needs depose the Senate, and
being weary of their Government, agreed to put them to death. But Pacupius
Calavius the head Magistrate, being willing to save them, when they had passed
sentence upon one of them, to have him Executed, bad them first in his stead to
choose a good and righteous Senator. At the first they were all silent, not
knowing how to find a better: After, when some odd fellow of the crew, past all
shame and reverence, seemed to nominate one to succeed; by and by they grew to
loud words and great outcries; some said flatly they kenw not the man, others
laid heinous things to his charge, some said he was of a base beggarly
condition; others objected hsi trade and way of living: Thus they grew more and
more vehement upon the proposals of a second and third to their choice.
Whereupon they bethought themselves, and repentted of what they had done
already, considering how much they failed, and were to seek upon every new
Election; and so at length they were content to keep their old Senators still.
Just so it is with the many-headed multitude, as changeable, unconstant, and
variable as the weather, never at any certainty, discontented with the present
Government, which if changed for another, they would like no better, weary of
present things, affecting change and alteration; either they serve basely, or
rule proudly.

As for liberty, that is the mean between them both, they have neither the
skill to despise with reason, nor the grace to entertain in any proportionable
measure, Sir Wat. Ralegh History of the world.
as one says. But what say our Church Levellers, the people are all holy, what
need there be any one to teach them? they can teach themselves; the Church are
all Saints, they all know the Lord, from the greatest to the least; what need
is there then of any such thing as the ministerial Office, Heb. 8. 11. They
have received of God an Unction, or an anointing which teaches them: and need
not that any man should teach them, 1 John 2. 27.

Resp. By Unction and Anointing is meant the Spirit and his Graces, so called,
because they are the Unction wherewith Christ and his Members are Anointed. Now
to conclude from hence, that the Ministry and the Ordinances are not necessary,
but only the immediate teachings of the Spirit, is a conclusion never intended
by the Spirit of God. First, because this would be contrary to his own
Institutions and Commands, and so make God to contradict himself: For God has
set up the Ministry, to teach, edify, and perfect Saints, he has commanded
them to Preach in season and out of season. God prohibits us to despise
Prophesying. He threatens Damnation to such as shall neglect to hear the Gospel
Preached. To what end has God appointed and commanded these things, if his
mind be, that we shall be immediately taught of God by the Spirit.

2dly. St. John himself makes this evident to be his meaning, 1 John 5. 13.
These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of God. If they
had been all immediately inspired by the Spirit, it had been absurd for John to
write unto them. But because the Spirit of God does teach by the Word
mediately, therefore he writes to them. God's Courts are his School, his
ordinance are his books, by which he teaches Men: And they that will be taught
of God, must come to his School, and wait upon his Ordinances. St. Paul
shows, that the Ministry is to continue in the Church, till we all meet
together in the Unity of Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ. The
Ministry is to continue till we all meet in the Unity of Faith, in the
Universal Meeting, when Christ shall appear in Glory, when we shall have an
uniform Faith and Knowledge of Christ.

Observation IX.
That those that are the greatest Deceivers of the people, do often pretend
most Zeal for the Peoples Liberty: So we see here in Korah and his Company, St.
Peter says, 2 Pet. 2. 3. of false Teachers, that through Covetousness by
feigned Words they make Merchandise of those whom they seduce. Does not the
Scripture among diverse kinds of Merchandise in the Warehouse of the Whore of
Babylon, number the Souls of men? Rev. 18. 19. Heretics for Gain by feigned
Words do sell the Souls of Men to the Devil; by fair pretenses they draw Men
into damnable Heresies, etc. Pernicious Practices, and into the way of
Destruction.

Observation X.
That it is usual with evil Men, to draw false Conclusions from true Premises.
What was the ground Korah went upon: That all the Lord's People were Holy,
every one of them. This is true according to Scripture, in a Sense, externally
holy, as a people professing the Lord to be their God. But what was the
Conclusion they drew from hence, it was, that therefore Moses and Aaron took
too much upon them, and that there was no need of Magistracy or Ministry. Take
heed of sudden Entertaining any New Doctrine though it seem to be countenanced
by some Scripture misapplyed.

Observation XI.
That true Zeal does oppose great Sins with great Detestation. This mutiny
tended to destroy those two great Ordinances of the Magistracy and Ministry,
and to bring confusion into the Church and Commonwealth of Israel, and to
provoke the Wrath of God against them: And therefore Moses, though the meekest
Man upon Earth, yet he was far from coldness and neutrality, in this respect he
was full of Zeal, he falls upon his Face in Detestation of so foul a Rebellion,
and was very wrath with them, verse 15. True Zeal is proportioned to the
Object. The greater the Sin is against which it is set, the more it is stirred;
it is fervent as the Cause requires; it is governed by true prudence or
discretion, and proceeds with caution. A true Christian uses Zeal as a skilful
Rider does his Horse, making use of the mettle of his Horse, suitable to the
Use he has of him. True Zeal minds the Cause, and according to the
Importance of that, rises or falls as the Tide, which follows the course
of the Moon.

Observation XII.
That it is true Wisdom to undertake such a Cause, and so to manage it, that
whatsoever opposition may arise, a man may confidently and safely appeal to the
righteous God. So it was with Moses, he had undertaken an extraordinary Work,
and he had managed it in an extraordinary way; yet such was his carriage in it,
that he approves himself to God: And then if men did offend him, scorn and
resist him; here was his comfort, that his witness was in Heaven; though Men
did condemn him yet God did justify him. Carnal Wisdom thinks it best for men
to engage in such a Cause, and so to carry themselves, that men may be pleased
with them; but it is cold comfort to a Prisoner at the bar, that some ignorant
persons standing by shall acquit him, and the Judge on the Bench shall condemn
him: A good cause and an evil Conscience are so unsuitably matched, that some
slight occasion of discontent is enough to divorce them.

Observation XIII.
That evil Men are apt falsely to object things against their Betters, which
may truly be retorted upon themselves. These Men say to Moses and Aaron, Ye
take too much upon you, which Moses restores unto them, v. 7. ye take too much
upon you ye Sons of Levi, and justly accuses them for meddling with things too
high for them, which the Lord had never called them to, 1 Reg. 18. 17, 18. Ahab
says unto Elijah, Art thou he that troublest Israel? The Prophet retorteth
this upon him, because of his Abominations. The Pharisees charge Christ's
Disciples for transgressing the Traditions of the Elders: To whom Christ
answers, why do ye also transgress the Commandments of God by your Traditions?

Observation XIV.
That evil Men pretending only to quarrel with men, do many times rise up
against God. These Mutineers pretended to rise up against Moses and Aaron; but
Moses tells them, that they are risen up against God, That they were gathered
together against the Lord. What is Aaron that ye murmur against him? When by
the Providence of God, Men are placed in the Magistracy and Ministry, and
engaged in it, and act faithfully in their places: Those that band against
them, do band against the God of Heaven, denying his Prerogative, whose Right
it is to pull down one and set up another: Therefore when Men rise up against
such, the Lord vindicates his own Authority, and exalts his own Name.

Observation XV.
That undervaluing of Gods Mercies makes Men unthankful for them, and
discontented at their present Condition: Moses said unto Korah, seems it a
small thing to you, that the God of Israel-hath separated you from the
Congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the Service of the
Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the Congregation, to minister unto
them? And he has brought thee near to himself, and all thy Brethren, the Sons
of Levi with thee, and seek ye the Priesthood also? When great Mercies are
undervalued by evil Men, God has little Thanks, and Men have little Content.

Observation XVI.
That Evil and Unthankful Men are soon apt to forget those Miseries out of
which the Lord has delivered them. These men v. 13. call Egypt a Land, flowing
with Milk and Honey: They speak not of the cruel Bondage they were kept in,
that rigorous Servitude that made them weary of their Lives. Now they talk as
if God and Moses had done nothing for them, but deprived them of many comforts
they had there. How many men do soon forget those dangers, miseries and straits
out of which God has delivered them? Such forgetfulness is displeasing to God.

Observation XVII.
That those that undertake to maintain a bad Cause; who want Strength of
Argument to maintain it, they will strengthen it with great words, they will
talk confidently and peremptorily before the people, who are apt to be taken
more with words than matter.

So here these Men talk confidently to Moses, who being called to come up to
the place of Judicature, say, we will not come up: Will thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? Will thou put out the eyes of these Men? Unless
thou will say the people have lost their Eyes, they may see thou art guilty of
wronging the Multitude. False Teachers are said to speak swelling Words, full
of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 19. Heretics love to speak in a lofty strain, to amaze
the ignorant: With what great swelling Words do the Popish Heretics set forth
the Pope's usurped Supremacy* and the glory of their Church? How do they talk
of Antiquity, Universality, perpetual Succession, Insalibility, glorious
Miracles, such as Christ and his Apostles never wrought? How do their words
swell in extolling their Popes Authority over Councils, making his words spoken
in his Chair as Divine Oracles, as if they had issued out of the Throne of
Christ? let us then put a great difference between great swelling words of
Vanity, and solid and substantial truths.

Observation XVIII.
That Malice in accusing those that are innocent, does usually catch at shadows
to enforce an accusation against the innocent. Moses, had brought the Children
of Israel out of Egypt into the Wilderness, but with no intent to keep them
there. Now Korah and his company charge Moses, for bringing them out of a land
flowing with Milk and Honey, to kill them in the Wilderness. Now this was but a
shadow, it was their own sin that detained them there, and kept them out of the
land of Canaan. So Doeg to humor Saul, maliciously accused Ahimelech the
Priest of Conspiring with David against the King, because he enquired of the
Lord for him, gave him bread, and the Sword of Goliath. This should teach us not
to be too hasty in entertaining false reports upon men of worth and eminency.

Observation XIX.
Here ye may observe Gods severity against the Rebels and Traitors, that rose
up against Moses and Aaron, Enemies to Magistracy and Ministry: The ground
clave asunder that was under them, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto
Korah, and all their goods: they and all that appertained to them, went down
alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from
among the Congregation. And all Israel that were round about them, fled at the
cry of them; for they said lest the earth swallow us up also. And there came
out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that
offered Incense.

God's punishments on Traitors are of three sorts, External, Internal Eternal.

1st- External, either when he does it by ordinary means extraordinarily
stirred up. The Servants of Amon conspired against him, and slew the King in
his own house, and the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against King Amon 2 Reg. 21, 23, 24. Or by means which man cannot use, as
Miriam was smitten with Leprosy for murmuring against Moses, Numb. 12. 1. This
punishment was memorable both for the suddenness and soreness of it; wherefore
it is after-said, Remember what the Lord thy God did to Miriam in the way after
that ye came forth out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 24. 9. Absalom was hanged by the hair
alive upon an Oak and smitten by Joab, and here I have shown you how severely
God dwelt with Korah and his company.

2dly, Internal, in Conscience, such as will not obey for Conscience sake, Romans
13. 5, nor submit for the Lords sake, and deprived of a good Conscience, which
is a continual feast.

3dly. Eternal punishment, sedition is one of the works of the Flesh, a sin
that keeps a man out of Heaven without Repentance, Gal. 5. 19, 20. They that
resist this ordinance of God, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2.

As these men are odious to God, so likewise are they odious to men. No man
will trust a Traitor. When Viriatus his Soldiers had slain him, thinking to
please Scipio, and get a reward (in that Viriatus had stirred up Spain for
fourteen years together against Rome) they had nothing but this answer for cold
comfort, Nunquam placuisset Imperatorem a suis Militibus interfici, that it
never pleased the Romans to have an Emperor killed by his Soldiers. Selymus
the Grand Seignior, having hired his Physician to poison his father Bajazet, he
afterward cut off his head, lest he would be hired to do the like against him.
Philip of Macedon made use of Traitors to bring his matters to pass, but hated
them extremely afterward. When Lasthenes that had betrayed the City of Olynthum
to him, complained that the Traitors were called by the Macedonians,
Proditores, he answered, the Macedonians are plain rude fellows, calling every
thing by its proper name, calling a Spade a Spade. The Romans having taken
Rhegium, about three hundred Traitors were taken alive, who presently after
their coming to Rome, were by the Commanders of the war brought into the
Marketplaces, where they were whipped, and in the end their heads were struck
off, after the manner of their Country.

The Emperor Charles IV. in his war against Philip of Austria, corrupted three
of his Captains with promise of great reward if they would betray Philip into
his hands, by making him flee through false fear, they did it, and received the
promised reward.

The Emperor had provided for them a mighty Mass of Counterfeit Money, which
he gave them: they returning, afterward complained that they were deceived with
Counterfeit Coin; the Emperor answered, Adulterinum aurum, pro adulterino
opere, that counterseit Coin was a worthy reward for counterfeit Knaves, false
Coin for a false Work.

John Justian of Genoa having betrayed Constantinople to Mahomet, upon
condition, that he should make him King thereof under him, he made him King
thereof, and Crowned him most Royally, but within three days after cut off his
head.

Pausanias having received five hundred Talents of Gold of Xerxes to betray
Sparta, Agesilaus, his Father, when he fled into a Temple to save himself,
caused the Gates of the Temple to be walled up, and so he died of hunger, whose
body his Mother caused to be cast to the Dogs, and would not bury it.

All men hate Traitors, Plutarch says, men are affected toward Traitors, whom
they are driven of necessity to use, as men that use the poison of a Viper,
etc. they willingly use the poison, but hate the poysonful Creature. So many
that willingly make use of the Treason, do hate the Traitor.

Observation XX.
That evil men make an ill use of beholding God's judgments upon others:
instead of humbling themselves under the hand of God, they are apt to fall foul
upon others, verse 41. On the morrow all the Congregation of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron, saying, ye have killed people of the Lord. The
judgment of God against Korah and his Company was before then eyes, and yet on
the morrow they offended again, what they had seen God to do, they impute to
Moses and Aaron. Themselves had been saved by the Prayers of Moses, yet now
thus they requite them. They repine more at the loss of a few than at the
saving of themselves, and many thousands others. Murmuring in Scripture is
called by the Name of Rebellion. After this murmuring of the people against
Moses and Aaron in the next Chapter, v. 10. The Lord said unto Moses, bring
Aaron's Rod again before the Testimony to be kept for a Token against the
Rebels against God, to murmur is to have a heart rising against the Lord. A
general Discontent and Murmuring in a Nation is usually the Forerunner of
Rebellion and Murmuring is the root of Rebellion against God. Gregory says,
That Murmurers do enter into Judgment with God.

Consider the Evil of Murmuring.

First, It is a great piece of Folly to murmur at any of Gods Dispensations
with us, and God at one time or other, will show such Men their Folly. It is
great Vanity to think we can redress any Evils by our own Wisdom, for who can
make straight that which God has made crooked, Eccl. 7. 13. Moreover by
murmuring, ye dedeprive your selves of the comfort and sweetness of all your
Enjoyments. If it be a pleasant thing to be thankful, then on the contrary, it
is an unpleasant thing to be murmuring. And let me add, if you let loose your
Tongues to murmur against Magistracy and Ministry, and any of Gods Instruments,
God has an Ear to hear all your Murmurings, Exodus 16. 6, 7. The Israelites
murmured against Moses and Aaron; but say they to the people. In the Morning ye
shall see the Glory of the Lord, for that he hears your murmurings against
the Lord. And what are we, that ye murmur against us, verse 8. Ye murmur not so
much against us, as against the Lord. Therefore St. Paul gives us a Caveat, to
take heed of murmuring, Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and
were destroyed of the destroyer. The Israelites no sooner brake out into this
Sin after the death of Korah and his Confederates, but God sent the Plague
among them, that destroyed Fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside them
that dyed in the matter of Korah.

And now I wish that that Scripture, Psalm. 29. last may be made good this day;
That all that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn Doctrine. To murmur at Gods Providence, is very
prejudicial to us, Seneca tells us, that Caesar having prepared a great Feast
for his Nobles and Friends, the day fell out to be very wet, that nothing could
be done to the honor of that meeting; Caesar being greatly displeased, willed
all them that had bows, to shoot up their Arrows at Jupiter (then their chief
God) in defiance of him for that rainy weather; which they did accordingly. But
the Arrows fell short of Heaven, and falling upon their own heads, many of them
were sorely wounded; so by our murmuring against our Rulers, or against any of
Gods Providence, we hurt not him at all, but they will light on our own heads,
and wound us dangerously. Let us all study peace, and live peaceably, and
labor to make up those unhappy breaches that are among us.

Tacitus in the Life of Agricola his Father-in-Law, describing the Fashions,
Chivilry and Resolutions of the Britains in that time observes this also, that
they were then drawn into diverse petty Factions, and the greatest advantage
that the Romans had against that our Warlike Nation, was, That they had no
Common Council; They did not consult together, but each City fought against
their Neighbors, (and ita dum singuli pugnant, (says he,) universi vincuntur)
whilst one by one fights, all are overcome: And it is much to be feared, That
the Romans are again ready to set foot into our Land; they expect to get ground
by our homebred Factions and Divisions; so that the Pope has now hopes of a
great Harvest in England: And how can we think the Church of England can stand
(says one) when there be Sizers and Consizers, so many Cuters and Carvers of
her Members? Moreover let us all be content with that Condition in the World,
which God has allotted us, keeping our selves within our due Bounds.

There Is a notable Story for this in Plutarch, in the Life of Pyrrhus. One
Cineas advises him to desist from the Wars with the Romans.

May it please your Majesty, says he, it is reported that the Romans are Good
Men of War, and if it please the Gods we do overcome them what Benefit shall we
have of that Victory? Pyrrhus answered him, we shall then soon conquer all
Italy, with ease. Cineas replied, it is probable it may be as your Highness
speaks, but when we have won Italy, will our Wars be then at an end? If the
Gods were pleased, said Pyrrhus, That the Victory were achieved then might we
afterward go into Africa and so to Carthage: But when we have gotten all into
our hands, said Cineas, What shall we do then? Then Pyrrhus laughing said, we
will then be quiet, and take our ease, and eat, drink and be merry every day.
To whom Cineas returned saying, and what hinders us now from being merry
together, and at quiet, sith we enjoy that presently without further cost,
travel and trouble, which we should seek for abroad, with so much danger and
Bloodshedding. So how quietly and comfortably might men live together, could
they be content with their present Condition, did not the corruption of their
hearts swell them into Discontent, Pride and Faction; Making them to transgress
the Bounds, wherein God has placed them. Now the Lord of Peace give us Peace,
all ways, by all means.

FINIS.

