A PARALLEL: Wherein it appears, that the SOCINIAN Agrees with the PAPIST, If
not exceeds him in Idolatry, Antiscripturism and Fanaticism.

By FRANCIS FVLLWOOD, D. D. and Archdeacon of Totness in Devon.

Think thou this O man, that judge them which do such things, and do the
same, that thou shall escape, Romans 2. 3. Happy is he, that condemns not
himself in that thing which he allows, Romans 14. 22. IMPRIMATUR,

May 16. 1693. R. Barker.

London, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. 1693.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN LORD Archbishop of Canterbury, And
Primate of all ENGLAND. FRANCIS FVLLWOOD
Presumes with all Humility, to Dedicate this following short Discourse,
touching Socinianism, etc.
IT would be an unpardonable vanity in me, to imagine, either that the World
needed my Observation, how Seasonable and highly Acceptable His GRACE's late
Vindication of our Lord's Divinity and Incarnation was, or, my Recommendation
of it, could I find words worthy to do it.

Yet thus much I cannot forbear to utter, that it is a Rare thing to find such
Condescension, such Candor and such Charity even toward the Enemies of our
Common Faith, as well as to Friends of it, in a person of the Highest Station:
Whereby, indeed he shows himself forth, as an Eminent Head, not only Adorning,
but Influencing and Animating by an admirable example, the great Body of our
Church under him.

If I may presume to speak my mind in a few words more; the strength of Reason
is so dexterously managed in those four Excellent and Incomparable Sermons, that
it will not be easy to answer them, the two former of them have driven, both
the Arian and Socinian Reason, to palpable Nonsense: And the Two latter, have
given the World so reasonable and satisfactory account of the Christian
Economy, that all their idle Ideas and imaginary pretenses to the contrary,
are Deaded at the Root, and put to silence in the Grave without hope of a
Resurrection, at least, in the same Body.

The World is a sensible Witness of the truth of this, to which I was provoked
by the strange assurance of some amongst us, having no farther design in it
then the Public advantage; no, not so much as to gain his GRACE's Countenance
and Protection of this small Pamphlet (the usual pretense of such Dedications:)
But I most humbly beg His GRACE's pardon for the boldness of it: and pray
heartily, that GOD would long preserve His Person and succeed all His Excellent
Endeavors, in the Government, and for the good of this Poor Church.

Litton near Dorchester, April 25. 1693.
TO THE READER.
WHAT I have charged the Socinians with, viz That they are equally guilty of
Idolatry, Antiscripturism, and Fanaticism, with the Papist, if not more
hainously; is no more then what their Learned Adversaries do generally twit
them with. They have indeed done it obiter, or more by the by, and I have more
largely undertaken to prove it upon them in the following Sheets.

The SOCINIAN stands Indicted here of those three great Offenses in Religion;
and methinks it is but reasonable to expect, he should answer to this Charge
before he proceeds any farther to disturb our Common Faith, with his novel and
nice Disputes and Quarrels about particular Points.

If he think himself concerned so to do, I would advise him to begin with the
First Article of the Indictment, and clear himself and his Cause from Idolatry,
in the sense, we charge it upon the Church of Rome.

More plainly, That he would Consider and Speak out unto these two
Propositions, viz. 'That to give the Worship due to the Supreme God to a
Creature is Idolatry. 2ly. That it is Lawful and therefore no Idolatry, to give
the Worship due to the Supreme God to Jesus Christ.

These two Propositions divide the Unitarians, as they call themselves into Two
Parties: One of them affirms the First, and the other the Second, as I have
observed; and in my Opinion, both of them do their parts against each other
unanswerably: And if both be found so far in the right, I hope neither of them
will see Cause to deny the Conclusion; That then Jesus Christ is more then a
mere Creature, that is, the same with the Supreme God.

However, if any think themselves engaged to persist in the denial of either of
those Two Propositions, for the saving of their Cause, when we hear what they
can say, I doubt not, but they will have a farther and a fuller Answer if need
be. The Good Spirit lead us into all Truth.

THE INTRODUCTION.
The Design Stated and brought to an Issue.
THE SOCINIAN values himself much for his Opposition to Popery; and indeed some
of that Name, have managed it in many considerable Articles, with great Reason
and Merit; and were I such an Unitarian, as he pretends to be, I should esteem
it more agreeable and less Scandalous to be called a Jew, or a Turk, or an
Infidel, than so bad a Christian as the Papist is.

But the Socinian has one very dear and darling Opinion, and is a Man of so
much Reason and Resolution, that if Reason in the Service of his Hypothesis
require it, he seems not to stick at any thing, though it savor never so rankly
even of Popery it self.

Yea, though the things themselves abstractedly considered, are the Objects of
his professed Hatred and Detestation: And though they bear the burden of the
Socinian charge against Popery; and though he upbraids the Protestant with some
degrees of the same guilt; yet when the grossest of those things appear
necessary for the Maintenance of his Cause, the Popery vanishes, the
Opposition cease, and with great Friendship, the things otherwise detested,
are entertained and embraced, are openly professed and practiced, and pleaded
for, with all imaginable Reason and Zeal.

Now, That I may justify what I have said, it is observable, that there are
three small Peccadilloes, which lie pretty near the Root and Essence of the
Papacy, in the Judgment of the Socinians themselves, wherein (for the state of
their Cause no doubt) they do plainly Symbolize with, if not outdo the very
Jesuit. These have respect to the Term of their Worship, the Rule of their
Faith; And Lastly, the very Foundation of their Religion, and are no less or
greater than Idolatry, Antiscripturism, and Fanatical Enthusiasm. In short, my
present charge upon the Socinian is this; that he agrees with, and even goes
beyond the Papist in all these, viz. Idolatry, Antiscripturism and Fanaticism,
or Enthusiasm; all which, in the three Chapters following, I shall endeavor to
prove and demonstrate in a fair and just Comparison betwixt them, which is all
my present intention and business. For I must leave the Merits of the Socinian
Cause at large, to the Undertaking promised by the Excellent and Learned Dean
of St. Paul's, who the World knows, will perform it thoroughly and effectually,
and earnestly desires and expects it.

CHAP. I. The Socinian compared with the Papist in point of Idolatry.
SECT. I.
THE First Part of my designed Task is this, by comparing the Socinian and
Papist with respect to the Term of their Worship; to show, wherein the Socinian
agrees with, and out-does the Papist, even in the point of Idolatry.

Now, it is evident, as well by the Light of Nature as Revelation, that the
Secundo formale, the very Reason and Nature of Idolatry lies in this, the
giving that Worship that is due to God alone, that is Divine and truly
Religious Worship, to the Creature: And for this very reason, we charge the
Papacy, with the guilt of the horrid Sin of Idolatry. Now, if the Socinian be
found to profess and practice the same thing; that is, to give Divine and
Religious Worship due to God only to a mere Creature in his own Judgment, as
our Savior is, it cannot be any breach of Charity or Justice, to charge him
with the guilt of Idolatry in General, or in Special, with the same kind of
Idolatry we charge upon the Papist.

The Papist, when he Worships the Host, would excuse himself, because he
believes it to be God; yet the Learned Men of that Communion do acknowledge
upon a Supposition, that there is no Transubstantiation of the Elements, such
Worship of the Host, is at least Material Idolatry: But how shall the Socinian
be excused even from Formal Idolatry, though our Savior be indeed God as he is,
while they believe him to be but a Creature, and yet give him the Worship due
to the Creator.

This is some aggravation, but more is added if we allow the Papist's
Distinction, of the kinds or degrees of their Worship proportionably to the
various Objects of it. Doulia Hyperdoulia, and Latria: the latter of which,
they deny to any Creature, and count it peculiar to God alone: And though they
believe, that the Mother of our Lord, has so great Power with God, and over
her Son; yet they say, that she ought not to be Worshipped with Latria, of the
highest kind or degree of Worship: And their Learned Men affirm, that to give
Latria to any Creature, is to be guilty of Idolatry.

But, seeing the Papist do formally and Actually pay the same kind of Worship
to Creatures, that is due to God, though different in Degree, as certainly they
do, (call it by what name you please) their distinctions in Doctrine cannot
acquit their Practice from Idolatry: For Religious Worship of the same Kind,
with that which is due to God only, is Latria: and therefore, to give it to a
Creature, must be Idolatry by their own Definitions.

But our Socinians are not so mealy-mouthed. They professedly in their very
Doctrine, as well as Practice, they allow Divine Adoration and Worship truly
Religious, that is Latria, to one; that, they say, is a mere Man. This they do,
without Distinction or reserve; and consequently, their Idolatry is more
absolute, barefaced and inexcusable.

Aquinas teaches, that the Image of the Cross may be Worshipped with Latria. A
very wild Proposition; but he has the slight to make the Worship of the Image
to pass through it, and the Cross and our Savior, and terminate in God: Yet we
say his Doctrine is Idolatrous; do not the Socinians plead the same in effect,
when some of them say, the Worship terminates in God the Father, which they
equally pay to Christ as Image and Substitute: But if they give Divine Honor
to him, as a distinct Person and separate Object from God the Father; and
affirm, that the same Honor is due to Christ, that is due to God the Father;
and that the Supreme God has given his own Glory to the Creature Christ: Is
not their Idolatry more gross and fulsome then the worst of Papists?

In a word, our Learned Men have demonstrated sufficiently, that Popish
Idolatry justifies the Idolatry of the Heathens. And in my observation, the
Idolatry of the Socinians does not only justify but exceeds them both too and
that of their Fathers, the Arians. To make this evident, I crave my Readers
patience and pardon, while I make a little digression; which yet I hope, he
will not think impertinent to my main Design.

SECT. II. Socinians greater Idolaters then Pagans or Arians.
THE Papist justify Pagan Idolatry as much as they can, by giving Divine and
Religious Worship, though they pretend it is in a lower degree, to Angels and dead
Men; for the wiser Heathen pretended the very same: They accounted their
Demons the Ministers of God; secondary, Inferior Gods; a middle sort of
Intercessors, Dei facti: The Supreme God, they said, was the Maker of them:
Whom therefore they styled Divum Pater, (...). Just as the Socinians term our
Savior; they say, they were Gods Deputies and Officers, to Govern under him.
Conformably, as it is observed out of Hierocles, these inferior Gods were to be
Worshipped indeed; yet but with an Inferior and middle kind of Worship, called
Doulia: But the higher kind of Worship, or Latria, was due only to the Supreme
God: and they were so careful to maintain that Distinction, both with respect
to the Objects, and the Worship, that Caution was given to the People (this is
more I fear than the Papist do) not to give their inferior Gods more Honor
then was consistent with the Dignity God had given them. Hieron. page 10.

Does not this Care and Caution used by the Pagans in their Idolatry reproach,
condemn, and aggravate the more rash and confused practice of Socinians? These
affirm boldly enough, that, though our Savior is a mere Man, a dead Man, and
only a God by Office, and not so by Nature; that is, a mere Creature, though Gods
Substitute, yet they allow him equal Honor and Worship with the great God his
Maker, without the niceness of distinction or limitation.

As for their Fathers the Arians, they might have learned the like Caution from
them too. The Ancient Arians held Christ to be the great Gods Instrument, and
not God himself: And upon this principle they performed to the Sacred Trinity
Unequal Honors, as the Orthordox charged them, and they could by no means be
persuaded to Worship with equal Worship the Son and the Father; because they
believed Christ was but a Creature, or a made God. As Fulgent. Greg. Nyss. and
Cyril. Alex. have observed. Now are not our Socinians much wiser then their
Parents? For, though they have far viler thoughts of the Person, Birth and Nature
of Christ, than the Arians had, yet by what rule of proportion I know not, they
allow him as much higher and greater Honor: and like men of deeper Reason,
plead that equal Honor is due to Christ the Son and the Father, from that very
Text that the Arians expressly say was mistaken to that purpose, as those
Fathers observe also.

If we should enquire what should be the reason, why both the Papist, and
Pagans, and Arians too, are so careful to distinguish of the Objects and
Degrees of their Worship, what reason can offer it self but this? namely, to
secure themselves from the charge and guilt of Idolatry. They all agreed in the
proposition; that those that give the same honor to any Creature that is due
to God, is Idolatry. They all agreed in this Proposition, that leaves our
Socinian without excuse.

It Is plain in the Holy Scriptures, God would preserve his People from
Idolatry, by that first and great Command, which is but a beam of the light of
Nature; Thou shall have (that is, thou shall Worship) no other God but me, or
before me; it is as if he had said, this is Idolatry, and Spiritual Adultery, my
jealousy will not endure it. The same great Argument wherewith our Savior
resisted, refuted, and repelled the Devil, when he was Tempted by him to commit
Idolatry. It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve.

I call this great Principle, a Beam of the light of Nature, and the reason of
Mankind, seeing not only Jews, Mahometans and Arians, but even Pagans and
Papists as well as Protestants are united in it, and concur together to condemn
and aggravate the Idolatry of Socinians.

The just Conclusion of the whole is this; that by the evident Testimony of
Scripture and Nature, and by the joint and unanimous consent of all the World,
besides themselves, the Socinians, by allowing the same Worship to the
Creature, that is proper and peculiar to the great God, are pronounced guilty
of the most scandalous and foulest Idolatry.

SECT. III. Socinians allow Religious Worship without Distinction to a Creature.
PErhaps it may be yet thought requisite, to enquire a little farther into two
things. 1. Whether the Socinians do indeed allow Divine and Religious Worship,
as such without distinction to a Creature. 2. If so? Why they do it? These
things well examined the Argument may be somewhat clearer.

1. To begin with the First of them, That Socinus and his Adhearents and Party
do allow such Worship to a mere Creature in their own Opinion, cannot be
doubted by any that read their Books, and know their Opinion of our Savior,
and the Honor and Worship they allow him, and argue for.

I know there is a Party that go under the Name of Socinians, that deny our
Savior ought so to be Worshipped, for this very reason, because he is a
Creature; and join with us in charging the guilt of Idolatry upon those that do
so; these we may have something to say to by and by; but as for Socinus and his
Party, I would lay this Argument before them, and desire their plain and honest
answer to it. Those that give Divine Honor to a Creature are Guilty of
Idolatry; but Socinians as well as Papist, give Divine Honor to a Creature,
therefore they are both guilty of Idolatry. The Papist denying only the second
Proposition by distinguishing their Worship, allow the first; and indeed their
Learned Men are express, that to give Latria to any Creature is Adolatry: And
though they generally confound and neglect their distinctions in their Practices,
yet that consideration farther confirms their Concession of the first
Proposition, viz. That it is Idolatry to give Divine Worship or Latria to a
Creature; seeing they choose rather to deny plain and manifest matter of fact,
and bear any Contradiction betwixt their Doctrine and Practice, then dare to
question a Proposition, that is Self-evident to all Mankind, as the first
Proposition in the Argument is.

But, which Proposition will our Socinian deny, sure not the Minor; that they
may not give Religious Worship to a Creature. For they say, Christ is no more,
and yet allow Religious Worship to be given to him.

Socinus himself speaks home (Constanter asserimus and quidem Resp. ad Bland.
Tom. 2. p. 716.
jure) We constantly affirm, that we may of right direct our prayers to Christ,
and though he can find no command for it, yet he infers, a Necessity of praying
to Christ, because of the Kingdom Power and Government given to him.

Let their public Catechism witness for them, they having granted Divine
honor due to Christ, they ask wherein it consists; and answer, in Worshipping
and Praying to him: and say, farther, it is our Duty to Worship him: and then
that severe and damning sentence against their Brethren that deny it is
pronounced. Seeing Christians, say they, are described as such as call upon the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is easy to understand, that those that will
not do it are no Christians, Cat. Rac. s. 6. c. 1. p. 88. 92. Thus, they freely
and fairly grant the Two Propositions: but what do they say to the first, that
Divine Worship paid to a Creature is Idolatry? Here they hesitate, and seem a
little afraid to speak out, least they should seem either to fight with a Beam
of the Sun, or pronounce themselves Idolaters.

Here Socinus himself seems to be at some loss, and returns back to the second
Proposition, and forbears to consider Christ as a Creature, while he is the
Object of Divine Worship, and to respect him so far a God, as to be fit to be
Worshipped. Cum necesse sit (says he) eum cujus nomen in voces pro deo
competente sensu colere, etc. But will Socinus say, that this his God, whom he
Worships with Divine Worship meaning Christ, is not a Creature still? O yes,
this strikes at the Foundation, he is a Creature still. How then comes it to
pass that it is no Idolatry to Worship him with Worship due only to God, that is
no Creature. And how shall the first Proposition stand good, that it is Idolatry
to Worship any Creature with Divine Worship, to say he is Gods Deputy and
Commissioner, and therefore Divine Worship is due to him, will as well excuse
the Pagan; and to say, he is Mediator betwixt God and us, will equally excuse
the Papist, as the Socinian Idolatry. But by the same reason that we allow the
same kind of Worship that is due to the Supreme God, to our Lord Jesus, must we
not acknowledge him to be the Supreme God too? Qui rogat ille facit: Therefore,
by giving him the same Worship, do not we make him the same God, proportionably
to the Worship we give him: The highest kind, to the Supreme or Highest God.

Volkelius, having raised his Admiration of our Savior with the Consideration
of the many Excellencies and Honors God had given him, breaks out with these
words; Quis, inquam, Hunc Divino Honor dignissimum non existimet, ideoque
Sanctissimo Cultu non afficiat? Who would not count him worthy of Divine
Honor, and pay him the most Holy Worships? But would Volkelius say, he was not
a Creature still? That spoils his Rhetoric and Argument too.

If it be said, that though Christ be but a Creature, yet if God Commands us to
Worship him with the same Worship that is due to himself, it is then no
Idolatry; it is our duty to do so. This is said by some, but without Proof or
Credit. It imposes upon the Almighty, as if he had done that, which he has
Sworn he will not do, viz. Give his glory to another. I see no way left for
them to escape the charge of Idolary, but to acknowledge our Savior to be more
than a Creature, as we do; or to deny him the Honor due to God, as their
Brethren of the other Persuasion do: for the reason and definition of Idolatry
is Eternal and Immutable, and Inflexible, and will not bend to any of their new
Notions or subtle Invasions.

Scachinglius upon the first to the Romans, speaks home; the Apostle, says he,
teaches, That the Creator only, Exclusis omnibus Creaturis, is to be
Religiously Worshipped, and that it is a Sin either to neglect to Worship the
Creator, or to join Religious Worship to the Creature, with the Worship of the
Creator. Now, who could have said any thing better? And yet who could defend
his own great Opinion more absurdly and weakly against this confessed Doctrine
of the great Apostle? All that he offers is this; That, notwithstanding God
has given this Worship and Honor to Christ, though a Creature: But where has
God altered the Nature of, or dispensed with Idolatry? Where does it appear,
that God has changed his Vowed purpose, and given his Glory to a Creature?
Does not the plain Doctrine both of the Old and New Testament; and many
examples both of Men and Angels, and the very Natures of God and the Creature,
and the sense of all Mankind, reprove his Vanity, and forbid any Credit to be
given to his empty evasion that so evidently contradicts the Apostles Text, and
his own observation upon it.

Wolzog and Smalcius speak out indeed, The First is bold to In Matthew. 4. 10. p.
189.
say, That Divine Worship, which is due to the most high God, is now due to
Christ; and before, was to be given to Angels, Jure Meritoque, as their just
desert. And the Second as confidently Eras. 17. and 100.
assures us, that God may Command that any one of the Angels may be Worshipped
Pro Deo, for God. And he calls the Angels Dii Caelestes, to whom Divine Worship
may be given, and was actually under the Law. The ground of this Confidence is
only this, Quod omnis Legatus Sustinet personam Mittentis, and the same Honor
is due to him that is sent, by Virtue of his very Commission.

Now, here our Divines subvert the ground of this Confidence; First, by denying
the matters of Fact, That the Angels were Worshipped with Divine Worship, much
less by Gods own Permission or Precept, in the time of the Law, which they
boldly impose without proof.

Again, we answer, if God cannot deny himself, he cannot Command a Creature to
be Worshipped Pro Deo, for himself, and give his Glory to another; and he has
sworn, if he can, he will not.

Further, this Ancient right of Angels to be so Worshipped, if it were proved,
would serve indeed to extenuate the guilt of Popish Idolatry, who distinguish
of their Worship, and deny in their Doctrine, what these so shamelesly assert,
That the Worship due to God can be due to any Creature; but cannot reach the
height of this Socinian Doctrine, that without Distinction, Divine Worship, or
as they speak, the Worship due to the most High God, may Jure and merito, be
given to a Creature.

Notwithstanding their Reason, that they bear the Person of God himself as his
Delegates and Commissioners. For this does not make them really Gods, i. e.
proper Objects of Divine Honor: Or if the Argument were good, it would go a
great way farther, than they themselves would have any color to allow. For
then, not only Angels, but the Prophets and Apostles, and every Minister being
sent by God, as his Legates and Missioners, have Right to the same Worship that
is due to God that sends them, as well as Angels; this sufficiently shames the
Argument: Yet it is further observed, that though St. Peter was our Saviors
Legate to Cornelius, yet he with some Zeal for his God, refused the Adoration;
saying, Arise, for I my self am a Man also, not suffering him to comply with
the Socinian Doctrine, contrary to the standing fence against Temptations to
Idolatry used by our Savior: it is written, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve, as we noted before; and cannot two often
think upon, while we have to do with such Adversaries and Arguments.

But that we may have full proof, that these men dare venture to say any thing
to save their Hypothesis. They take courage, and say, That it is no Idolatry to
give Divine Worship to a Creature, for this incomprehensible reason: Non certum
est, as says Smalcius, Deum ob Naturam Divinam, praecise Colendum esse: i. e.
It Is not certain that it is morally due to God, to be Worshipped with a Worship
worthy of God. It Is not of Nature but by Positive Law, to give the Supreme God,
Supreme Honor: This is such a stretch of Reason or Confidence, as it is pity to
answer or reflect upon. If there be any thing Moral in the Decaloque, certainly
this is it, Thou shall have none other God but me; namely, to give Divine
Worship to. If there be any such thing as Natural Religion, these are the
undoubted branches of it, that there is a God, and that he ought to be
Worshipped, and as a God too, Pura mente Colindus, if there be any duty
resulting from the Relation of a Creature to its Creator, it is this, to give
him the Service and Honor of its Maker, when Men are driven to such a pass of
invention and shift, they have abundantly exposed their Cause themselves, and
it is time to leave them under this Conviction; that, notwithstanding all their
subterfuges, seeing they allow the same Honor and Worship to the Creature
(without Distinction) that is due to the chief God, as they express it, they
are guilty of Idolatry in a fouler and more scandalous manner than the Papist
are. q. e. d.

SECT. IV. Why Socinus Adored Christ, his Arguments against David, for it
prepared for.
THus we are lead to the Second enquiry proposed, viz. Why the Socinians allow
our Savior, though a mere Creature in their Opinion, the same Honor and Worship
which is due to the Supreme God.

This is an inquiry of considerable moment; for it must be acknowledged that
Socinus and his Followers herein, are Men of admirable Reason; and unless it
were for some importent end or purpose, they would not at once deny a Truth
which every one else agree in; namely, That Religious Worship is due only to
the Supreme God; and yet affirm, that it may even in the same degree or kind be
given to Christ, though a mere Creature. To say, they do this only to avoid the
Scandal of dishonouring our Lord, and offending other Christians, as Blandrat
seems to intimate to Socinus; seems too weak an account of this weighty matter;
seeing that might at least, in part have been avoided, by distinguishing of
Worship, as the Papists do; but they do not.

The plain truth seems to be this; the Holy Scriptures abound with Arguments
for the Worshipping of Christ as God; so glaring, he could not outface them,
though herein Socinus seems evidently to deny his own Reason, in reverence to
Revelation, which is rare in him; and to destroy his own dear Hypothesis, as
well as confute his Adversary.

For while he allows truly Religious Worship to be given to our Savior, he
thereby grants him to be more than a Creature; that is the Supreme God, both in
the Reason of the thing, the natural Consequence of his Concession, and in the
just sentence of the other Socinian Party, I mean Fr. David and his Adherents.

Here I crave leave to fix my foot, and with these other kind of Unitarians I
do affirm, and am provided to maintain, if need be, that Socinus and his
Followers, must either acknowour Savior to be more then a Creature, and become
an Orthodox Christian in this point; or that they are Idolaters in a more
Scandalous manner then the Papists; seeing they make to themselves a God of a
Creature, by ascribing the Worship due to the Supreme to their Creature-God;
and seeing they professedly Worship Two Gods, let them no longer glory in the
Name of Unitarians, but leave it for Turks and Jews, who better deserve it.

But I must beg leave to digress a little on Socinus's part, who has as
effectually baffled Francis David by clear Scripture Proof, that our Savior is
to be Religiously Worshipped; as the said David was too hard for Socinus in the
other point; that our Savior being supposed to be a mere Creature, it is
Idolatry so to Worship him, and if he ought so to be Worshipped, he is more
then a Creature, i. e. Truly a God.

I find this Argument has put some to second thoughts; they begin to startle
and are afraid of Idolatry: And therefore say, that some Unitarians are
contrary minded; and believe our Savior ought not to be Religiously Worshipped
and Adored as God: And this is the side, to which they seem now to lean, for
fear of Idolatry.

It Is for the sake of these chiefly, that I desire to dilate a little about
this great Article, and I earnestly beseech them seriously to weigh a few
things before they determine themselves in it.

First, You change sides for the worse: You leave your Master Socinus, who was
certainly more like a Christian, and cleave to David and his party, that are
more open and desperate Enemies of our Lord and Savior.

Secondly, You lean to a Party that brandeth the first and great founder of
Socinianism with gross Idolatry; and to avoid Idolatry, by giving Christ more
than you think is due; you come within the peril of Sacrilege, and rob him of
that which is of right due to him.

Thirdly, Consider, if it do appear that Christ ought to be Religious Adored
and Worshipped; the Consequence is irresistible in Francis David's Judgment, as
well as in the thing it self: We cannot, says he, Adore the Son, unless we
suppose Christ to be in the Father, and the Father in Christ, Unitate
Essentiae, by unity of Essence.

Fourthly and Lastly, Seriously consider the Arguments of Socinus himself (and
we need no other) before you leave him, in so great a point, wherein he is
certainly in the right; that Christ ought to be Religiously Adored and
Worshipped, what ever the consequence may be.

Seeing you incline to believe that David's point is well fixed; and that
Religiously to Adore and Worship any Creature is Idolatry, as we have all along
maintained: If Socinus make good his point too, That Christ is to be
Religiously Adored and Worshipped, let the Orthodox truth find its way by these
lights; and preserve or recover its place, in our Faith as good Christians,
touching our Saviors Divinity.

SECT. V. Socinus and his Parties Arguments, that Christ is to be Religiously
Worshipped.
LET us now take a brief Survey of Socinus and his parties Arguments to prove,
that we may and ought to give Religious Adoration and Worship to our Savior.
They do it sufficiently under these Three Heads. Profit, Necessity, and Example.

1. It Is our Interest and consequently our Wisdom thus to 1. Profit.
Worship him. The Rac. Catechis. teaches, That We should believe, that Christ
is able to do all things; and that, if we seek his S. 6. C. 1. L. 88. 89.
favor, he will do us good, and perform all his promises to us; and infer,
thence, that We ought to trust in Christ in the same manner as we ought to
trust in God. Again, they say, We may direct our Prayers to him in all our
necessities, because he both can and will help us, and he understands our
Prayers.

2. It Is our necessary Duty both with respect to his Person, and 2. Necessity.
the Law of his Father: Socinus himself infers a necessity of Praying to
Christ, because of the Kingdom, Power and Government given to him, as before we
observed: And in the Law of Blands Tom. 2. p. 716, 721.
the Gospel, to pray to Christ, is made the very Condition of Salvation.
Socinus acknowledges (against Fr. David) that passage in the Prophet, Joel 2.
32. Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved, is justly
applied to Christ, by the Apostle in Romans 10. 13. Yea, this is the very
Character the Holy Scriptures give us of a Christian, he is one that calls on
the Name of Christ, Act. 14. 9. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 22. and their own
Catechism asserts peremptorily, as we noted before, that they are no Christians
that will not pray to Christ; who tell us plainly and expressly, that it is our
Duty to Worship him, and prove it from, Joh. 5. 22, 23. All should honor the
Son as they honor the Father.

3. Their Catechism assures us, that we may pray unto Christ because Examples.
p. 89.
we have several Instances of Holy Men, who have done so. His own Disciples
prayed unto him, when he was upon the Earth for Temporal deliverance: Lord save
us we perish, Matthew. 8. 25. And even for Spiritual Grace: Lord increase our
Faith. And after he was gone to Heaven, St. Paul the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, that disputed so effectually against Pagan Idolatry, prayed unto him
more then once, I, says he, besought the Lord thrice, and his Lord assured
him, he did well in so doing, in this gracious answer, My grace is sufficient
for thee, 2 Cor. 10. 7, 8, 9. So far Socinus himself; his followers further
observe, that the same Apostle joins Christ with God the Father, in his prayer
mentioned to the Thessalonians, Now God himself and our Father and our Lord
Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you; and at other times, does the same in
effect, in his Salutations to the several Churches when he wishes them, Grace,
Mercy and Peace equally from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: These
instances, I hope are sufficient, I shall add one more, and that is a very
plain one; and one would imagine beyond exception: It Is St. Stephen praying in
these words, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, Act. 7. 59. but behold the fineness
of Fr. David's Invention; says he, it is (...); and because (...) may be either
the Genetive or the Vocative Case, according to the usual art of Socinian
reasoning, it must be taken in that sense, that will best serve a Turn, though
never so alien or contrary to the true interpretation, and the Reason of the
Context, he must have it, Lord of Jesus, or else it will prove either that it is
Lawful to Worship our Savior, and to pray unto him; or this first Martyr died
with Idolatry in his mouth.

But this Criticism is not so fine, as it is forced and absurd. The Learned
observe, that if [Jesus] had been the Genitive Case, the Article would have
been added; 'twould have been (...). We find the same words Rev. 22. 20. and
there they cannot bear the sense of the Genitive, and must be understood in the
Vocative Case: But, besides the ilness of the Grammar, the harshness of the
Sense, and the Novelty of this rare discovery; two or three things might abate
the Authors confident boasting of this Invention: The Syriac is beyond the
reach, of it, Domine Noster Jesu. Some Copies have it plainer yet, and Read it,
(...), O Lord Christ. And their admired Grotius's gloss is utterly inconsistent
with it, Invocantem nempe Jesum Christum* But why should I trouble my Reader
any farther about this Ridiculous shift of David, which you may find was long
since exposed and baffled by Socinus himself in a very strenuous confutation of
it, which its Author David had never courage or skill enough, to encounter
again, that I can find.

Now my Brethren consider, it is eternal Reason, that Reliously to Worship any
Creature is Idolatry, but we have found it the common practice of the best men
in Scripture, thus Religiously to Worship our Savior Christ it seems to follow
clearly, that either these Holy Men so doing, were Idolaters, or our Savior
Christ is more then a mere Creature, that is, he is the True God. I know you
will deny the First: I heartily wish you would confess the Second, it would be
so far well betwixt us.

However, you do not undertake to defend the part of Socinus from Idolatry,
more heinous then that of the Papists; which I hope I have demonstrated
sufficiently before.

CHAP. II. The Socinians Antiscripturist, as truly as, if not more then the
Papists.
HAving ended our First Parrable, betwixt the Socinian and Papist, with respect
to the Term of Worship, we come next to compare them with respect to their Rule
of Faith, the Canonical Books of the Holy Scriptures.

Herein also they both concur, viz. In their endeavors to undermine their
Authority: And when they think they have occasion so to do, they lay this Rule
aside, and set up another of their own, in the stead of it.

That the Papists do so the Socinians readily grant; and that the Socians do
like the Papists and exceed them therein, is as easily demonstrated.

SECT. I. The Papists vilifies the Holy Scripture.
1. FOR the Papists, the World is sensible enough, how vilely they deal with
this Rule of the Holy Scriptures, and make them indeed, as they sometimes call
them, A Nose of Wax, and a Leaden Rule: They take upon them to sense them as
they please; and use them only as Tools to serve a turn, and little otherwise.

Sometimes, they will admit nothing but the bare Words, without any reasonable
Construction of them; when they would advance their Transubstantiation. At
other times, when the proper and Litteral Sense is against them, O then the
Scripture is a Killing, a Dead Letter, and must receive its Life and Sense from
their Churches Interpretation, how wild and absurd soever it be to serve their
Hypothesis.

Thus, when they have disparaged, slighted, and set aside the True Rule, it is
no wonder they introduce and obtrude another Rule of their own devising, which
they do not only make equal with it, but prefer before it; I mean their Oral
Tradition, and the Authority of the Roman Church: Yea, when they seem to allow
the Holy Scriptures any Authority, they at the same time rob them of it, by
transfering that Authority to themselves, their own Sense and Sentiments, though
diverse from, and even contrary to the Letter, or plain and obvious meaning of
the Written Word.

SECT. II. The Socinians vilify the Scripture more then Papists.
WHile I have been speaking of the Papist, I have given you but an imperfect
draught and Character of a Socinian in this point: Verily, the Papist seems to
be the honester of the two: His is an open and downright attacking and
villifying those Holy Books; while the Socinian does it in disguise, and wounds
it deeper; lies in its Bosom, and stabbs it to the Heart; and with splended
Colors of Honoring, and Arguments proving its Divine Original and Authority,
makes it utter Nonsense, bad sense, or any sense, that their cause requires.

Now seeing these men, in other things, are Masters of a great deal of Reason;
it may be worth a Question, whether their Writing so much for the Divine
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, be from a real Opinion of the Truth of it, or
only in pretense, to serve their own purpose, and varnish their designs: For,
how is it possible, if their Opinion of it were Real, they should use it so
slightly, and after so trifling a manner, as it is pity, to see they do.

With how much gravity and solemn circumstances, do they make the Word of God
Felo de se; not so much by opposing, as by Apposing one part to another; and by
the idlest Phansies, or an odd kind of skill peculiar to themselves, make a
weaker text, take off the life and sense of a Stronger, and by a likeness, or
sameness, or neerness of expression (when there is no other reason in the World
for it) to enervate the strength of the best Arguments it affords, for the
Godhead of Christ, and the Sacred Trinity.

To make this out beyond exception, give me leave only to mention some
Instances of it: The mention only, is shame and reproach enough, one would
think, as well as confutation, in the sense of an Indifferent or modest Man.

1. When we prove Three Persons and each of them God, from the great Commission
for Propagating the Christian Church, by Baptising in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: They gravely answer, and would have us
take it for a full Answer; That it is said, the Israelites were Baptized into
Moses and in the Cloud; and that they believed in God, and his Servant Moses.

2. When we urge, John 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word; they reply that it
must signify, the Beginning of the Gospel or New Creation: And their proof is,
because we read [from the Beginning] in that latter sense, Luke 1. 2. and 1
John 1. 1.

3. When to prove our Savior's Incarnation, we use the Apostles words, Joh. 1.
The Word was made Flesh; they say, we must not understand by Flesh there, the
Humane Nature, but a State of Infirmity; because in that sense, the word
[Flesh] is somewhere else to be understood.

4. Where our Savior tells us, John 18. 28. That he and his Father are one;
They say, that is, they are one only in Will and Consent, forsooth, because our
Savior Prays, Joh. 17. that his Disciples may be one, as he and his Father are
one; i. e. Not in Nature, but in mind and heart: and this must be all the
meaning of our Savior in the place we have mentioned, notwithstanding the
obvious evidence of the Text to the contrary, viz. That he and his Father are
one, in Power, and consequently in Nature.

This is not only the general Sense of the Fathers, that weighs little with
Socinians; but also of their admired Grotius and Erasmus, whom they claim for
their own. Si pereant mea infirmitate. Patris potestas mea potestas; my Fathers
Power, is my Power, Grot. in Loc. Potentior est ad servandum, Eras. in Loc.

5. So our Lord Christ must be a God by Office only, and not by Nature, Why?
Because they find Kings and Magistrates are called Gods.

6. When we read Col. 1. 16. That by Christ were Created all things that are in
Heaven and that are in Earth, whether visible and invisible; whether they be
Thorns, etc. all things were created by him and for him: They restrain all
this to the Second Creation or Reformation of Mankind, and those great words
signifies only Men, and Orders of Men on Earth: Confounding Heaven and Earth,
visible and invisible, denying any thing that looks against them; and not
sticking to say any thing that their Hypothesis seems to need.

7. The Name Emmanuel, with so much solemnity given by an Angel from Heaven to
Christ, does not signify the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in him;
because others might have been called so before, as since some have; as
Eniedine gravely instanceth in Emmanuel Tremelius. These things are childish
and Rediculous, and deserve a severe Reflection, not any serious confutation.

SECT. III. Socinian Chriticisms in Articles.
THus the Socinians bandy the Scriptures one against another; and it is hard to
think that they believe themselves to be in earnest, while they are found
Ludere cara sacris, and impose such childrens play, though never so solemnly upon
the World; especially, if we consider their Schoolboys Criticisms; and that,
with a little Point, or a small Article, they would weaken and destroy the
Arguments of the greatest and strongest Texts in the Word of God against them;
wherein, indeed the Arians lead them the way.

They are both of them confident, that when (...), signifies the Father, 1
Articles.
or the Supreme God, in Scripture, it has its Article always before it; but
when the Son is called (...), it is without an Article prefixed to it. A mighty
fine observation, this sufficient doubtless, to evacuate one of the clearest
and strongest Arguments for our Lords Divinity, to distinguish the Natures of
the Father and Son; and to put a final end to this great Controversy, though it
has no foundation in Reason or Grammar, much less in the Holy Scripture, as
confident as they are.

Indeed, they truly observe, that by [(...)] in Joh. 1. 15. signified God the
Father, and the Article is prefixed; But does it follow, that it is always so?
within the compass of two or three verses afterward, they may see their
Observation utterly undone, viz. in ver. 6. for there the Father is called God,
(...), without an Article. So likewise in Romans 7. 1. the Son is, Romans 9. called
(...) with an Article: And if (...), without an Article is found to signify
God the Father, Why may it not signify the Godhead of the Son likewise, though
it have not an Article before it?

Erasmus on Romans 9. 5. would help them to avoid the force of that great Text,
for the proof of our Lords Divinity, with a Point, which looks like Push-pin
Divinity indeed: Punctum post (...) vel post (...), choose you whether. But
Erasmus himself confesses, that without these Nicities in Pointing, all the
Greek Copies have it as we read it; and refers the Relative (...) to Christ,
which is plainly more agreeable, as the Learned observe, both to the Scope of
the Apostle, and the Series of the words.

Besides, It Is worthy our observation, that though Erasmus is not forward to own,
that Christ is here meant, but thinks God here, signifies, and is to be taken,
vel pro tota Triade, vel persona Patris, yet by the same Words, he confesses
the Trinity; and consequently the Deity of the Son, as he does afterward more
expressly, on those two famous Texts, Phil. 2. 6. and Heb. 1. 6. where these are
his words upon the first of them, q. d. Qui cum esset and sit, non usurpativus,
sed verus Deus, non estimavit aequalitatem Dei sibi esse rapinam: and on the
Second, Et etate praecedit, quia aeternus, and dignitate, quia Naturalis, The
Eternal and Natural Son of God, which is enough to vindicate Erasmus, from
being either Arian or Socinian: How ever some boast to the contrary; we hereby
see what credit is to be given them.

It Is confessed, Erasmus notes, that St. Cyprian and Hillary omit the word
[Deus] in Romans 9. 6. Yet it is concluded by the Learned, that it was omitted,
not industriously by those eminent Fathers, but in curia Librariorum and res
ipsa ostendit; it is evident it must be so, Seeing, both these Fathers cite this
very Place, as a plain proof, that Christ is truly and properly God. Vid. Pol.
Synop. in Loc.

SECT. IV. The Socinians Enervate the Authority of Gods Word.
THey farther try their skill to loosen and weaken the Divine Authority of the
Holy Scriptures, by Enervating the Credit of the Gospel it self, and making the
Apostles, if not the Lord Jesus too, impertinent Sophisters; while they
Interpret the proofs, the inspired Writing bring out of the Old Testament, to
confirm the New, into mere Allusions and accomodations of Old Phraises or
Expressions, without any further force and use of them. But this lays the Ax at
the Root, and is of such import and consequence, that it deserves a larger
consideration and reproof, then my present design will conveniently permit.

SECT. V. Socinians have another Rule of their own, which they prefer above the
Scripture.
WE have seen how perversely and vilely, the Socinians treat the only Rule of
the Christian Faith; which yet, will appear more egregiously by our Second
Observation; that they lay it aside altogether, as a Rule; or measure it by a
Rule of their own, which they set up in the room of it, or above, as the Papist
do.

This Socinian Rule, which they measure the Holy Scriptures, viz. The Divine
Rule by, is nothing else, but their own private Sense (if not their Wit and
Fancy) much the same with the Quakers Light within, which they call, Reason.

I have elsewhere distinguished, betwixt a Rule and a Judge; and observed, that
these are not the same, but two distinct things, with respect to Religion: I
shall explain and apply them more fully in the present Argument.

We must in order hereunto distinguish, betwixt Natural and Revealed 1.
Explain't
Religion, as such.

1. I grant, with respect to mere Natural Religion, Reason seems to be both a
Rule and a Judge, for we have nothing without our selves, that can well be
conceived, to be either we know nothing of it, but the rational Notices, which
Humane understanding suggest; or the Dictates of pure Reason called forth, or
occasioned by the works of Creation and Providence.

2. But Revelation, being, from without us, is therefore a Rule imposed on us
from without; and must be distinct from Reason, which is within us and part of
our selves? and consequently, though Reason be a Judge, it must Judge of Revealed
Religion, by a Rule from without us; which is another thing, and not our
Reason: I mean, we must Judge of Revealed Religion as such, by that Rule by
which that Religion is only made known to us, that is the Holy Scriptures; and
then, it is no wonder, if all our Religion as Christian, or Revealed, be not
dictated or to be comprehended by Natural Reason. For if Reason had discovered
all before, What need of Revelation? And indeed, those that say, all our
Religion, lies within the compass of Reason, are in a fair way to reject all
Revelation; and to advance the Natural or Pagan Religion in the World, in the
room of the Christian.

But seeing Socinus (though erroneously) supposes, the Being of a God, could not
have been discovered without Tradition or Revelation, how absurd does it seem
(for him especially) to imagine, that things that can be known only by
Revelation, can be known or may be measured by Reason, or any other Rule, but
Revelation, or the Writing in and by which they are made known to Reason it
self, as Sencible Objects, being to be known only so far as Sense represents
them to our imagination, can have no other Rule by which our Reason can Judge
or measure them but our Senses.

And, seeing our Revelation is from Heaven, we must not only acknowledge the
Being of such a Rule, but the Fullness, Rectitude, and Authority of it; by
which, all the rules of Reason are to be determined, even in such things as
reason falls short of, and could not have been any other way discovered; or
being discovered, cannot be apprehended, but as they are Reveiled: if this be
not granted, where is the Authority or Divinity of that Higher Rule, which is
given by God, to be the only Rule and Standard of the Christian Religion as
such?

It hence follows, that this Divine Rule being supposed, Reason my Judge of it,
but by no means, presume to Judge it, so as to question, mind, alter, correct,
or lay it aside, or advance it self above it.

We must indeed, judge by Reason, what the things are that are so reveiled; we
must measure all Articles imposed on us, by our Reason indeed; yet the Rule by
which we are to do so, is only the Word of God: To exalt Reason or the inward
rules or dictates of it, to be the measure of things reveil'd, is to lay aside
the True Rule, or to judge God himself in the Authority of his holy word.

A Humane Judge, has likewise his Rule without him, viz. The Public Laws: and
if he should make his private Sentiments of Justice and Right, the rule of his
Judgment, he falls under his Superiors and every Man's Censure: It Is not his
Office, to question, or mend, or any way alter, much less abrogate the Law; but
he is only Jus dicere, to declare and apply the Laws in his Jurisdiction; not
to judge the Laws by the Rule of his own Reason, but to use his Reason, to know
and understand, and to pass Judgment according to the Laws: much less, are we
to question the reasonableness or equity of Gods Laws; or judge them
unreasonable or unfit for reasonable Creatures to give credit to; because they
seem not to square with our Natural reason: This were to believe our selves and
not God, to exalt our selves above God, yea to discredit and make God a Liar.

I am sorry we have so much reason to apply all this to Socinus and Application
his Followers: how shall we forbear to arraign Arrogance, with the Apostles
words, Thou art not a doer of the Law but a Judge. Who art thou, O vain Man,
that reply against God. Is it not a marvelous thing to see poor ignorant
lapsed Man to errect a Tribunal against his Maker; and with a shadow of Carnal
Reason to sit in Judgment upon Gods Word? and to level the greatest Articles of
the Christian Faith, to their own shallow and partial apprehensions? And yet
thus the Socinian aspires with his presumptuous Reason, to dogmatize upon
Revelation: To judge the Messiah, and all his concerns: His Generation,
Incarnation, Natures, Offices, Passion, Satisfaction, Mediation and
Intercession: To Judge and Condemn the Holy Ghost, and the ever Blessed
Trinity; and to measure the Resurrection of our Bodies by the Model of his
private apprehension.

Yet this sort of Men, show great Reverence to, and very strongly argue the
Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures: And they do not deny, but these great
Articles are matters of pure Revelation in the same Scriptures: Neither can
they evince any one of these great and misterious Points, are repugnant to
Sense or Reason, or any other part of Gods Word.

Men should have methinks, so much modesty as to judge, that their corrupt
Reason is as fallible as the Holy Penmen: Or, That it may be reasonable we
should have a Rule without, to Discipline and bound our extravagant Phansies in
matters of Faith: Or that private reason, may be mistaken in judging that a
Contradiction, which the Church of God, I mean the generallity of Christians,
Semper and ubique could never discover, and have hitherto verily believed, that
it is none.

I think it is plain, from what has been said, that the Socinian falls in with
the Papist, and goes beyond him, not only in villifying and laying aside the
True Rule of Faith, but in setting up another Rule of his own instead of it:
They both are guilty, only with this difference: The Papist's Rule, is the
Public Reason and sense of his Church; The Socinians Rule is his own, and
every particular Man's private Reason, and which of these is the wiser and
safer, let every Man's Reason judge.

That I do not herein wrong the Socinian, almost all their Books have something
in them to bear me Witness. Let Smalcius more then once be heard for the rest,
First, in that famous place of his.

Credimus inquit, etiam si non semel atque iterum, sed satis crebro, and Tom.
1. Disp. 6. Sect. 63.
Apartissime, Scriptum extaret, Deum esse hominem factum, multo satius esse,
quia haec res sit absurda and sanae Rationi plane contraria, and in Deum
blasphema, modum aliquem dicendi comminissi, quo ista de Deo dici, quam ista
simpliciter ita ut verba sonant, intelligere. i. e. Though we find it declared in
Scripture, not only once and again, but very often, and very plainly, That God
was made Man; because this is absurd, and plainly contrary to found Reason and
Blasphemous against God; We believe, says he, that it is much better to find
out some mode of speaking, according to which one may say this concerning God,
then to interpret things simply and according to the Letter.

Again, let us hear him to the same purpose, if not more Small. Hom. 8. in c. 1.
Joh. p. 89.
plainly in another place. Nullam Esse Religionis particulam quae cum ratione
non Conveniat: Et quae cum Ratione non Convenit opinio, eam etiam in Theologia
nullum locum habere posse: That is, that there is no small point in Religion
which does not agree with Reason: And whatsoever Opinion does not agree with
Reason, can have no place even in Religion.

What can this signify? But that when an Article of Faith is plainly revealed
in the Word of God, if it square not with Socinian Reason, we must reject the
evidence of Gods Authority, and hearken to Reason: That is in plain English,
Reason, and not the Scripture, is both the Judge and Rule of Socinian Faith.

I must conclude with an excellent passage or two, in that incomparable Book of
our Great Primate lately Printed, called his Sermons concerning the Divinity,
etc. of our Savior. I do readily grant, says he, page 79. that the Socinian
Writers have managed the Cause of the Reformation against the Church of Rome,
with great acuteness and advantage in many respects: But I am sorry to have
cause to say, that they have likewise put into their hands, better and sharper
Weapons then ever they had before, for the weakening and undermining of the Holy
Scriptures, which Socinus indeed has in the general strongly asserted; had he
not by a dangerous liberty of imposing a Foreign and forced Sense upon
particular Texts, brought the whole into uncertainty.

Again (says he) to speak freely, I must needs say, that it seems to me a much
fairer way to reject the Divine Authority of p. 78. 79.
a Book, then to use it so disingenuously, and to wrest the plain expressions
of it, with so much straining and violence from their most Natural and Obvious
sense: For no Doctrine whatsoever can have any certain Foundation in any Book,
if this liberty be once admitted, without regard to the plain Scope and
Occasion of it, to play upon the Words and Phrases with all the Arts of
Criticism, and with all the variety of Allegory which a brisk and lively
imagination can devise.

CHAP. III. The Foundation of Socinianism, Fanatical as well as of the Papacy.
WE have seen the Parallel, with respect to the Term of Worship, and the Rule
of Faith: We are now come to consider how the Socinian and the Papist agree in
the Foundation of their Religion.

I know, the pretenders to so much Reason, who make Reason to be both the Judge
and Rule of their Religion, will ill bear the Title of Fanatics and
Enthusiasts; but it is possible, that even such may be found, vel, cum, vel,
sine, Ratione Insanire. If the Socinian appear to do so, he must not take it
ill, to be ranked with the Papist in this charge also, and equally accused of
Unreasonable Religion, no better than Fanaticism, or Enthusiasm, as well as
Idolatry and Antiscripturism.

That this charge may appear fare and just; I shall first describe what I mean
by Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, or Enthusiastical Fanaticism, and then, I shall
apply it to our present Subjects, the Papist and Socinian, and see their
agreement in it.

SECT. I. Fanaticism Described.
MOdern Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, I reckon to be nothing else, but a Religion
(if it deserve the Name) that has no Foundation, either in the Word of God or
sound Reason, but is founded in Dreams or Phansies, or pretended Inspiration,
or Divine Revelation besides, and other then the Holy Scriptures: Now, whether
I err in this Idea or Character of Fanaticism or no, yet I am sure, that
Religion that may be thus described, is a Wild or a Mad sort of Religion,
Socinians themselves being Judges: Such is the Religion founded by Mahomet, and
is Fanatical and Enthusiastical plain enough, as all Christians acknowledge:
And whether the Papacy as such is much better, is doubted by all Learned
Protestants; and how far Socinianism is liable to the same Condemnation, is to
be enquired presently.

SECT. II. Fanaticism the Foundation of Popery.
BUT, First, for the Papacy, as such that this has no Foundation in Scripture
or Reason; That it is founded only in Dreams and Phansies, and pretended
Inspiration or Revelation, will be easily granted, if we consider how their
several Orders were first founded, namely in Fanatical Enthusiasm, as is most
evidently demonstrated, by the excellent pains of a most Learned Prelate of
our own now living. Bishop of Worcester.
Moreover, the very root of the Papacy it self, has no better ground, I mean
their Popes Supremacy, as St. Peter's pretended Successor, is nothing but dream
and Fancy; or which is worse, affected Arrogance and Presumption, or
precarious and violent Imposition upon the Christian World; because they found
it absolutely necessary for the support of a rotten or unsound Building. And
being without the help, either of Scripture or found Reason it rests only upon,
and resolves at last, into a feined Will of St. Peter, that was never proved
per testes, by lawful Witnesses.

Doubtless the Papacy is Fanatical from top to bottom; but how does it appear,
that Sooinianism is so. This is the next enquiry.

SECT. III. Fanaticism at the bottom of Socinianism.
TO be clear in this enquiry, we must consider the Fundamental point, on which
the Socinian Religion as such, chiefly if not entirely rests, and from whence
it arises: and it is plainly this, whether our Savior had a being before he
was born of the Virgin Mary: On this, hang all the great questions, touching
our Lords Filiation, Natures, Divinity, Merit, Satisfaction and Intercession;
and are decided and determined, as that stands or falls.

Now, this great point, Whether our Savior had a being before he was born of
the Virgin, has an essential dependence on another, which of absolute
necessity must be evinced before, in order to the determination of this, and
therefore this other point lies deeper in the Foundation, seeing upon it
depends that Resolution, whether our Savior had a being before he was born of
the Virgin or no; and that is, whether our Savior had a Being with his Father
in Heaven before he was born of the Virgin, or whether he had not been in
Heaven before, but ascended or was taken up thither only, after he was so born
and had been sometime in the Flesh.

Now, the Holy Scriptures abounding with so many plain proofs that our Savior
came down from Heaven (Nine or Ten times asserted in that one Chapter, the
Sixth of St. John) Socinus and his Followers dare not, do not deny it. But it is
so essential to their Religion, to deny that our Savior had any Being before
he was Born of the Virgin, and in consequence, to support their whole Fabric
upon this Hypothesis, they at last found out a Salvo, to reconcile the
contradiction; though at first they had different Notions and did hesitate about
it, yet at last they seem to agree, and do now unanimously affirm; that after
our Savior was born of the Virgin, he was taken up into Heaven; and then
coming down again, he is said to come down from Heaven so often, in the
Scriptures.

Then this is the very Root, Foundation, and Corner Stone, upon which
Socinianism is framed and supported, that our Savior after he was born of the
Virgin was taken up (in the Flesh) into Heaven, to receive instructions from
his Father for the Salvation of Mankind.

Now (to apply to our purpose) if this great point, upon Application*
which Socinianism so entirely depends, have no Foundation, either in the Word
of God or sound Reason; and be founded only in Dream or Fancy, or presumptive
Invention to save the Fabric, their great Hypothesis from sinking; or rather
in pretended Inspiration or Revelation; is not Socinianism, as truly Phanatical
and Enthusiastical, as the Papacy; not to say Mahomatism?

If they are so daring as to affirm, it is to be found in the Not in Scripture.
Scripture; they ought to be so kind to us, and so just to their Cause, as to
show us where: They seem to make us some resemblance of our Lords Assention
into Heaven as a Man, in Moses's being in the Mount with God; and St. Paul's
Rapture into the third Heaven, but it was St. Paul and Moses; where do we find
any such thing said of Christ, unless it were upon Mount Tabor, but that will
not serve their purpose.

It Is plain our Lord came down from Heaven: Our Doctrine is certain, that he
was there: And the Text is evident, that he came down from Heaven before he is
said to have Ascended: And he that came down from Heaven, and was on Earth, in
his Humanity, was still equally in Heaven, in his Divinity: all this is plain
Scripture, John 3. 13. No Man has ascended up into Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven; even the Son of Man which is in Heaven.

But where are we told that our Lord in Flesh ascended up into Heaven and then
came down again? Certainly, if this be the Truth that must support so much of
Religion, 'twould have been recorded somewhere in the Scripture, and not have
been reserved in Silence and Mystery.

Especially, seeing the Socinians themselves observe, (even with boasting;) the
Fullness, as well as the Clearness of those Holy Writings with respect to every
thing necessary to be believed; methinks their own great Reason should force
them to confess, that so great a point, ought not to be believed by themselves,
or obtruded upon the World, seeing it is no where to be found in those Sacred
Books.

That it is not to be found therein, appears evidently by some observations
touching the difference among the Socinians themselves; and the difficulties
they encountered with before they resolved to be satisfied about it.

First, They began to play with the Scripture, as they use to do in other
matters; and pretended a strange discovery of a Figurative Sense; and
interpreted our Saviors being in Heaven, either by his Heavenly Meditations or
Divine Knowledge: But when he came down, did he leave behind him his such
Meditation and Knowledge? This Nonsense Socinus was soon ashamed of, and came
to this Resolution; that our Savior, after he was in the Flesh, did ascend in
Person into Heaven; but upon the Time when he did so, he and his Followers were
not agreed.

Secondly, This is the Second difficulty, wherein they were plunged; that upon
a supposition, that Christ was taken up into Heaven, when it should be. Some of
them say, it was, when he was Twelve Years Old, and when his Parents missed
him, As Wo^zog. Schilict. Crellius.
and after three days found him amongst the Doctors: Others of great name
amongst them, suppose it was, during his being Forty days in the Wilderness,
and this now seems to be the general and current Opinion with them: But do
these Texts say any thing else, but that our Savior was in the Temple when his
Parents sought him; and that he was in the Wilderness tempted of the Devil (an
odd description of Heaven?) these places of Scripture then will not do. Have
they any other? We hear of no other: and therefore, we may be bold to conclude,
there is no ground in Scripture for that great Point, that is the Basis of
Socinian Religion.

Secondly, Neither in Reason, For if it be not Revealed in Scripture, Not in
Reason.
it is beyond the Ken of the most Sagacious, without a good Invention, to make a
Discovery of it, for that which can be known only by Revelation, can certainly
be known no otherwise; but none can possibly imagine (not the most phansiful
Socinian) how this matter of Fact could ever fall under the rational
understanding of any Man, except it were revealed from Heaven. If Reason could
discover some plausible color, Why our Lord should be taken up into Heaven
before his passion, yet certainly, That he was so, is matter of pure
Revelation, and not to be known otherwise.

We must conclude also, that this their great principle has no more foundation
in sound Reason, then in the Holy Scripture: That is, none at all. It Is
unscriptural, and no reason can be given for it, but the necessity of it to
support an Hypothesis, that falls with it, or without it.

Thirdly and Lastly, To shut up all, It Is not only not founded either Fanatic
and Enthusiastical.
in Scripture or Reason, and so Fanatical enough; but it is pure Enthusiasm,
even by their own Confession. How much Fasting, how much Study, what earnest
Prayers to Almighty God, did Laelius Socinus pay for this rare great and
notable Discovery? But was it any more then Dream and Fancy (if it deserve
not a worse name) though it commenced Enthusiasm?

I shall end with that smart and pertinent Reflection of the present Learned
Dean of St. Paul's in his late excellent Treatise of the Blessed Trinity, p.
143. Speaking of this Text, that Christ came down from Heaven. Did Socinus,
says he, find it so easy a matter to reconcile this Text to his darling
Opinion, when he was fain to fast and pray for it; and pretend Revelation,
because he wanted Reason to support it?

O Merciful GOD who have made all Men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should be Converted and
live; have Mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heriticks, and take from
them all Ignorance, hardness of Heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch
them home Blessed Lord to thy Flock, that they may be saved among the Remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one Fold under one Shepherd, JESUS CHRIST
our Lord, who lives and Reigns with Thee and the Holy Spirit, One God, World
without End.

FINIS.

