THE FAITHFUL PASTOR HIS SAD LAMENTATION Over, heart-renting challenge and
dreadful thunders against, Sharp reproof of, and seasonnable warning to his
APOSTAT-FLOCK.

In a letter written by a French Minister to those over whom the Holy Ghost had
made him an overseer upon their woeful defection, renouncing the faith, and
joining in Idolatrous worship.

Now carefully translated.

Together with A word to Mourners in Zion who by Grace have kept the faith, to
sleepers under the storm, and to the almost Christian.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God. Heb. 10: V.
31. If any man draw back my Soul chall have no pleasure in him. Ver. 38. Let
him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10: V. 12. Will
ye also go away? John 6: v. 67. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with
me in my thron. Rev. 3: V. 21. Printed in the Year. 1687.

THE FAITHFUL PASTOR HIS LAMENTATION, And warning to his APOSTAT-FLOCK.
I Suppose you will be surprised, after the reading of the first lines of this
Letter, not to find therein, a preamble stuffed with those consolations you
conceive you stand in need of in the sad condition you feell your Consciences
reduced into. I confess, I could wish I were able to accommodate, on this
occasion, my duty to your desires, and to speak to you at present of the things
that concern your peace after the same manner that I have so often formerly
spoken. But there is a Change happned in your Condition which obliges me to
speak to you in other Language. I have consulted for your sake the holy Oracles
of the Prophets and Apostles, which (as Basil. enarr. in Psalm. 1.
Basil speaks) are a perfect Treasure of remedies for all the diseases of the
Soul; the virtues whereof alley the greatest pains, and cure the deepest
wounds. But I cannot express with what sorrow of mind I have observed that
there is not one of these remedies fit for you; and if there be any that may be
useful to you, they are such as are bitter, strong and violent, they rip up
and consume before they give ease.

In what ever condition I consider the heart of Man, I find for it Comforts in
the Gospel. I find therein wherewith to rejoice the faithful in those
calamities which separate him from that which he loves most tenderly; in the
hardships of benishment, in the miseries of poverty, and in the horror of
Darksome prisons, I find therein Consolations and remedies against death it
self, which Disarmes it of its terrors, in what soever shape it be
represented, even tho, besides its natural Dreadfullness, it were armed with
all the instruments of cruelty. But to go farther, I therein find remedies for
the wounds of conscience, and a saveing Balm that easily closes up the wounds
of a broken heart. But this Balm and the remedies are for a certain forth of
sinners, whose sins are not the effects of a settled deliberation; who are
loaded and wearyed; who not contented to groan under the burden, use sincere
endeavors to be discharged of it; who so torment and punish themselves with
sorrow for their sins, that they show all the signs o^ an ardent desire to
amend them. In a word, they flame with a holy impatience to be delivred out of
the dreadful state of enmity against God what ever it cost them.

But notwithstanding all the diligence I have used in searching for Consolation
for a people that have broke their covenant with Jesus Christ, and have
preferred by solemn Acts, subscriptions and Oaths the profession of a lie to
the Truth, the service of the creature, and of idols to the service of the
Living God; who continue in their sin without any sign of repentance; as if
they intended by time and custom to render it more familiar and easy to their
conscience I say notwithstanding all my search for comfort to such a people in
the word of God, I find none.

It is true, the Scriptures speak of sins of this nature: but every where it is
with Sharp challenges, terrible threatenings and thundering declarations of the
wrath of God against such sinners. It is not Moses and the Prophets alone that
speak in this manner, Jesus Christ and the Apostles do the same: the whole
Gospel is full of lively expressions of the wrath of God against those that
persevere not in the truth. Matt. 10. Marc. 8. Luke 9.
If any man be ashamed of me and deny me before men, him will I deny before my
Father and before his holy Angels. He threatens in another place Apoc. 3.
to spue the Luke warm out of his mouth: and the Holy Ghost ranks the fearful
among the most Detestable of all men, Apoc. 21.
whose part shall be in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The
Apostles speak with great vehemence against Revolters, 2 Pet. 2 Heb. 10.
The last condition of these men (say they) shall be worse than the first. I
tremble when I read that which the Apostle in the Ep. to the Hebrews denounces
against those Ibid. 6. and 10.
who sin withfully, after that they have received the knowledge of the truth;
whom he accuses of crucifying the Lord afresh, of renewing of his reproaches,
and of trampling under foot the son of God; to have counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and to have done
despite unto the Spirit of Grace.

Tho I dar not be so severe as to affirm that this Doctrine does precisely
concern you. Yet whatever I desire or hope in this matter, there is resemblance
enough between you and those the Holy Ghost speaks of in the foregoing
passages, to make me fear your condition, and to endeavor to draw you, if I
can, from so dangerous a precipice, so nearly bordering on death. What shall I
do that I may not labor in vain; I have to do with the diseased that have an
aversion to painful remedies, yet I have no other to give them. I do not find
that God has charged me in his word to flatter the Rebellious, or that he
makes me a Dispenser of his consolations to those who abandon him. Shall I
therefore be silent because I have nothing to say that is smooth and pleasant,
Jer. 6.
or shall I slightly heal the cruel wound of the daughter of my peopele? Shall
I forsake as Jonas a Commission to denounce the judgments of God to a sinful
multitude, or shall I wait with Jeremie, Jer. 20.
till God constrain me to speak Esai. 58.
shall I cry aloud? Shall I lift up my voice as a trumpet to declare to Israel
his sin, and to the house of Jacob his iniquity? Or shall I act the Counter
part? Shall I forsake the flock which Christ has given me the Care of, because
they have forsaken him? When I see the Sheep which he has redeemed, to wander
and go astray From the Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls, shall not I run
after them, and whatever the danger be, bring them back to the fold? Dare I not
open my mouth to engage this people to acknouledg their sin, because frighted
and Lukewarm as they are, they durst not open theirs to confess the name of
their God?

No, I cannot resist the secret orders of God, who makes me sensible that I
must give an account of your souls, if I neglect the means of your conversion;
whose will it is, at least that I forewarn you of the evils that threaten you,
and his wrath against you, that I may not be guilty of contributing to your
ruin by my silence. I will not here follow the maxims of false Prophets, who
say peace when there is no peace; I speak to awake your souls out of a mortal
sleep and to alarm you into such a sorrow and remorse as may lead you to
repentance; not to palliate your sins or to sooth your dangerous security. It
is with regrate, that, after having carried so long among you the Pastoral
Staff, I should now be forced to use the more severe Rod of Discipline. It
grieves me that the same mouth and pen that has Labored so many years to
explain to you the Mysteries of the Covenant of God, and to apply to you the
Consolations of his grace, must now brand you with reproaches. But do it I
must, you have occasioned it, your disease being too great for any milder
remedy.

I will then speak to you, O servants of God, formerly faithful, but now
revolted Criminalls: I will speak in the bitterness of my soul, O Straggling
sheep, and almost lost. Being straightly bound and enforced by the bond of
Charity, and by the voice of the call of God, which I feel resounding in the
secret recess of my heart, as from God, and as in the presence of God, I will
speak as a Minister of Truth, I will not aggravate your Crime to overwhelm you,
I wish to God it were less, that at least, preventing my reproaches by
repentance, you might make me ashamed for having passed the bounds of my
discourse by my Hyperboles, and by unreasonably upbraiding you; But I fear all
I have to say will fall much short of what you have done, and that your sin has
gone to a degree that my words cannot reach.

Do not tell me now before hand that I go to accuse you in a safe harbor of
rest and ease, wherein I cannot judge of the miseries of those who were to
undergo as you, the fury of a Cruel Tempest; The Condition that I am in, gives
me a right to speak with more fredom to you than to any other, The share that I
have born in the afflictions of the Church has been great enough to authorize
me to upbraid the Cowardice of those who yielded before the fight, and who were
affrayed of the ennemy at the first threatening of his approach; I am yet
blackned with the thunder that struck me, stouned with the stroke that
overthrew me, still dropping with the Shipwreck that striped me, and
languishing with the wound that pierced my heart. It pleased God, who does all
things wisely, that you should have always before you continued and public
proofs of my grief, that you may be the less offended with the disgrace I brand
you with; and that I may have a right to address it to you with greater force.

It is true, I have received mercies from God, which should make me forget my
passed afflictions. There is no affliction so bitter which ought not to yield
to the sweetness of his Comforts. I speak by experience, his hand has been so
good to me that Jought to publish at all times the wonders of his goodness. The
rest that he has restored to me, is so far from making me silent, and from
hindering me from making you ashamed of your weakness, that it gives me a new
ground to accuse you. My happyness and my sufferings do equally condemn you.
What I have suffered for the sake of Christ and for yours, does furnish you with
an example of what you ought to do on the same account. The goodness of God to
me may be an example to you of what you ought to have hoped, if you had been
faithful. He had more than one blessing to give to his children: his bounty
was not exhausted by what he had done for others: there still remained in his
treasure grace and Comfort for you as well as others. Look then on what side of
me you please, either as persecuted by men, or as abounding in the riches of
Gods favors to me, on all sides you will find wherewith to support the justice
of my reproaches. One side upbraids you for not having the courage to bear a
temptation that an infirm man, as your selves, has sustained; the other
accuses you of want of faith in the promises of God, who is able to give you a
hundred fold for what ye might loose for his Glory. The one showed you that it
was not impossible to resist in a matter of salvation the alarm of an
affrighted body, and the afflictions of frail nature, seeing another has
overcome them; the other shows your sin in distrusting the riches of the
mercies of God, and the secret springs of his providence, seeing one of your
brethren has experienced them.

But after all, I dare say without ingratitude to God, that the sad condition
you are in, renders me unsensible of all the adventages it has pleased God to
confer on me. I cannot taste the sweetness of ease when I think on those things
that should pierce your souls. I do not think I have escaped the persecution,
when I am not accompanied with any of those to whom I have so long preached the
Gospel; I do not think I am saved from the storm, when I see not one of my
flock with whom I might share in the happiness of a deliverance. I may justly
say that which a holy Bishop of the first ages said to those that had revolted
as you have done. Cypr. de Laps.
I take no delight in my own health, my strength which yet remains entire,
suffices not to alley my grief: for a faithful Minister is more pierced with
the wounds of his flock then with his own. The affection I have for your
salvation works in me the same thing that the temptation has done in you, and
when I consider the persecution wherein you have fallen, compassion has reduced
me to the same state as if I had fallen myself. Receive then what I have to say
to you, either as from a Minister, whose faithful services have acquired to
him the freedom of speaking what he thinks; or as from one, whose trials are
not unknown to you; or lastly, as from a friend whose compassion has in some
manner involved him in your sufferings. Be not surprised if jou find some
smartness in my Discourse, as if it were not agreeable to the tenderness I
profess; True Charity is never fawning, tho it comply for the benefit of others
as there is occasion. It always intends well, but changes its style according
to different conjunctures. It comforts at one time it censures, and threatens
at other times.

What account then can you give me of your apostasy, o people, whom I dare not
call the people of God, since you have been ashamed of his name? What injury
has God done you? wherein has he offended you that you have so easily revolted
from his service? What have you found in him to deserve the indignity you have
done him? Have you observed any imperfection in his being, or any lie in his
Doctrine? In a word, what have you found in his Covenant worthy of your
Disdain? Or what have you found in the new Religion you have embraced,
preferable to the Religion of Jesus Christ and his Apostles? If you have well
comprehended the infinite difference there is between Idols and the living of
God, how could you have revolted from him, to throw your selves into the party
of Idol-worshippers?

But perhaps you have not made so great an improvement in the Gospel of Christ
as to understand all the depth of its mysteries, but tho for the time you have
been instructed, you might have attained to perfection, yet you continue in the
state of Infancy: Never the less, you have at least Learned the first
principles of Christ; and that is enough to render you inexcusable, and stop
your mouth in the presence of God when he shall reveal the secrets of our
hearts and bring to light the hidden things of darkness: You knew enough then
when you sinned, as to forsee the greatness of your fall.

You have Learned that God will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth; that he
gives not his Glory to another; that the will not hold the guilty innocent;
that Idolatry is an open declaration of war against him; and that in the
Scripture Phrase, its idolatry to hate God: as also, that to honor images with
veneration, and to fall down before them, is to hate him. What is it then that
has engaged you in an interest, so contrary to his holy Will, as to embrace a
profane, superstitious, and idolatrous worship, where the Creature is set up in
ye place of God, where human traditions make void the Commandments of God;
where it is not God who does reign over the heart, but man that tyrannizeth
over the Conscience.

You have learned that God is great, holy, powerful, and glorious; Clothed
with light and Majesty, why then have you entered into a communion where he is
other ways represented to you? Where they adore a God of their own making,
whom they carry, and shut up in a Box whom they break in pieces and eat? Have
you so learned Christ in the Gospel, is this the truth according to Godliness,
which he has revealed? You have promised to worship God, which you cannot do,
till the seed grow up which you have sown in your fields, a God which cannot be
without the Priest, and whom the Priest cannot make until the Baker has
prepared the matter for him; a God that owes his Divinity to the intention and
word of a man, who cannot be God until it please the Priest to make him so, as
Tertullian said of the Heathen Gods, whom they consecrated by Humane authority:
Lastly, a God that can preserve his Divinity no longer than the consecrated
matter lasts.

Speak your Conscience; Have you thus Learned Christ? Has this Mystery any
thing in common with the mystery of Godliness? Has the Doctrine of the Gospel
taught you that you are redeemed by a Savior which the Priest can make and
unmake at his pleasure? How often have you heard with indignation the words of
the Israelites who cried out in honor of the golden Calf, Behold thy God who
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt? And therefore how often have you condemned
your sin before you committed it? There is no difference between you and the
blinded Israelites, You have promised to take for your Savior the Bread which
the Priest pretends to transubstantiate, And tho you cry not, Behold thy God,
as often as you see it in the streets or in the Churches, the worship at least
that you have promised to give it, is what belongs only to the true Savior;
all the steps you are obliged to make, all the acts of your public profession,
cry louder then the Israelites, that you acknowledge this new made God for him
who saved you out of the Spiritual Egypt.

You have learnt in the Gospel the nature and excellency of the Sacrifice of
Christ, Hebr. 10.
who by one only oblation has perfected for ever those that are sanctified, the
infinite price whereof Heb. 9.
has parchased for you an eternal Redemption.

You have learned that God suffers not any Rival of his Glory, nor our savior
any in the work of our salvation; How then could you swear to make saints and
Angels Sharers of your Religion? I know not how you understand it, but I am
sure, if you invocate the Creatures you must necessarily acknowledge them either
for Gods of an inferior Order, to whom you have promised to give a
proportionable adoration; or for Intercessors, by whom you hope to attain of
God the success of your prayers. Choose which of them you please, the Crime of
invocating them is the same: For either you have promised to have more Gods
then one, which is to rob the true God of that service you ow him, which is to
adore no other but him alone; or you give to Christ Companions of Mediation,
and of his priestly Office, whereof Intercession is anessentiall part, which is
to rob Christ of his saveing Offices that are incommunicable. The frivolous
distinctions of the Church of Rome are only good to ignorant and wavering men.
But God is not put off with such miserable Shifts, which may as well justify
the most abominable worship of the Pagans, as the idolatries of the Religion
you have embraced. God in whose sight the most secret things are naked and
open, will not own a Religion to be true because its Idolatry is masqued with
some frivolous distinctions: and these absurd excuses are not a shield strong
enough to bear of his vengeance and Curse from those who put any part of their
trust and confidence in Creatures.

Have not you yet learned in the word of God the aversion he has to Images and
Idols? How then could you promise to serve those that are adored in Popish
Churches; Could you believe they are not Idols because the Doctors of that
Church affect rather to call them Images, as if the Changing the name of things
were to Change their natares? Or think you that the hommage paid them in that
impure Religion, is not to adore them, because its Guides who are ashamed of
their own worship, dare not confess that they give them true adoration; But can
they deny that they salute them, serve them, and fall down before them? Is not
this precisely the honor God has forbidden to be given to them, Exodus 20. [Thou
shall not fall down before them to serve them?]

But that I may not offer a Catalogue of all those things that are contrary to
Salvation, and which you have promised to comply with, I will say nothing of
Purgatory invented to the disparagement of the merits of Christ, and to throw
men's consciences into Slavery by its terrors; nor of Indulgences, by the trade
whereof they have set sin to sale, and rated the inestimable Grace of remission
of sins: Neither will I speak of Confession, which, by the maxims, Doctrines
and Canons of the Roman Church, that have poisoned the Lawful use of it, must
pass only for a yoke, whose weight overwhelms poor souls, and is now made one
of the strongest supports of the Antichristian Empire: nor of that immense
authority which the Pope usurps over the inheritance of the Lord, who gives
himself the proud title of Christ's Vicar, and of God on earth; nor of a hundred
other things contrary to the fundamental truths of the Gospel, and
inconsistent with the hope of Salvation. I will only ask of you how you could
submit yourselves to so many superstitious, mean, childish and ridiculous
observances, whereof the Roman Piety is compounded, after so many years
profession of a grave, reverend serious and holy worship? How could your mouth
(dedicated to God, and so often sanctified by the invocation of his name and by
the singing of his praises) pronounce those words that engaged you to so many
errors that corrupt your reasonable service; Your mouth, so often sanctified by
the frequent use of the Sacraments of our Lord, in a strict conformity to the
first institution, how could it swear to those corrupt and blind mysteries,
supported by monkish fables and pretended traditions? How could your brow,
marked with the seal of God, suffer that Glorious Character to de defaced, to
take on it the shameful mark of disguised Paganism? How could you put off the
Livrey of Jesus Christ, to take the rags of Slavery to which polluted Babylon
has reduced your Consciences? And how could your heart comply with the mortal
design of sacrificing your souls to the Devil, by Sacrilegious subscriptions?
Were not your eyes covered with darkness when they guided your pen in that
unhappy deed? Did not your hands refuse to obey when they were employed to
subscribe the sentence of your eternal condemnation? Could you endure to be an
ornament, to garnish the Triumph of Idols? to follow the pomp of their
processions, that you might renounce God with more solemnity, and publish your
shame with a witness.

Among all these things I confess you have done one thing rightly, That you
have promised and subscribed that you will no more partake of the cup of the
Lord, and that you have contented your selves with half of his Sacrament. In
this, its true, you have done your selves justice, and have rightly judged that
you were not worthy to drink of the Cup of his blood that was As you supposed;
but how, and how far indeed see page 13. marg.
shed for you, seeing you had not the courage to shed yours for him. But why do
I speak of sheding yours for him, you were not so much as exposed to the
danger. You forsaw at a great distance this extremity, A shadow of danger
frighted you, and you durst not give the least refusal that might preserve you
from the shameful revolt to which they commanded you.

But if the sin of this revolt begreat in it self, I find it yet greater when I
consider it in its circumstances. It is not the crime of a few particular men,
whose weakness might have given scandal to others; it is the Crime of a whole
multitude, who have conspired against their own salvation. You have made that
appear which was never seen in any of the persecutions of former ages, a whole
Church haled away, and not one man resisted this Lamentable stream. It is true,
persecutions have made a sad havoc of the Church at all times; for all
Christians were not Martyrs or Confessors. The age of the Apostles that
flourished with many great examples of Constancy, had its Apostats: But never
was there a persecution seen to triumph over a whole Church. Smyrna saw a rash
Quint us yielding to the fear of torments to which he unnecessarily exposed
himself: but it saw also a great number of Christians suffer with great
constancy after the example of Polycarpe. Some faint hearted Christians were
seen at Lions, who loosing courage themselves, cooled the ardor and Zeal of
many others; Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. E. 4. c. 15. Ib. Lib. 5. c. 1.
but at the same time the Church there was edified by the martyrdom of a great
many others. Epist. Dionys. Alexand. ad Flav. Antioch. apud Eus. Hist. lib. 6.
c. 31.
The Church of Alexandria in the Reign of Decius, after the publication of his
Edict against the Christians, saw a great many of her members revolt: but she
saw also many others more renowned who prevented their enemies by freely
offering themselves to death before they were attached; Some indeed fell throw
the fear of loosing their Offices: Some were forced by their parents and
friends to offer Incense, others protested they were never Christians; Some
resisted to Chains but lost their courage in prisons; and others having
surmounted the first torments were frighted at the sight of the instruments of
a new punishment. But a multitude of others suffered with great Courage their
violences, torments, prisons and death it self; Many mo saved themselves by
flight, and not daring to expose themselves to their persecutors were secured
from Apostasy by a prudent retreat: At Carthage there was a great number of
Christians who abandoned Christ to save themselves, but at the same time there
were a great many generous Martyrs who sealed the truth of the Gospel with
their own blood. There were many resolute Confessors, Ep. Luci. ad Celer. Item
Cypr. Ep. 35.
whom nether promises nor threats could hinder from a constant perseverance in
the Christian profession. Cypr. de Laps.
Some there, with the Minister, made a prudent retreat, whose resolution to
renounce their goods and Country was to them a Kind of Confession; The same
thing happned in the reign of Diocletian: the Constancy of many was shaken by
threats and torments, but thousands are recorded to have suffered martyrdom
under this Cruel Prince, and the number of them that persevered must needs be
great, seeing for ten years together their Persecutors found too many to
exercise their cruelties upon: and after all this was over, the multitude of
Christians that remained was so great, that it struck their enemies with
amazement and fear.

Run over the History of your Fathers, you will find the same thing: Many, its
true, were base and cowardly, but there were also many constant and faithful
witnesses who lost their ease, their goods and life it self for the
Reformation that you have abandonned. Show to me in that age any one Town that
did not produce some example of constancy, or any one Church that preserved
none of her members in the persecution? But not to go further, search into the
History of your own Town, and families: and ye will find there some examples
that you ought to imitate: for the most part of you do still bear the name, and
possess the goods of those that were then either Martyrs or Confessors; you are
doubly guilty, to have forsaken the truth that of it self is so worthy to be
preserved, and to have so ill kept the pledge which your fathers left you, when
they had purchased it with their valor and blood.

But perhaps it is too great a trouble to you to consult former ages, search in
your own age, and consider other Churches in your own Province, if there be an
example of Apostasy like unto yours. The greatest part, its true, have fallen
away, but there is not any place but some one or other has stood when the
battle was sharp, and kept constant for some time, and suffered to the utmost
extremity, before they were vanquished: The most part yielded not till they
came to subscribe the sentence of their death; They forced their enemies to
exhaust their lasting torments, and Cruel politiques, before they could bear
them down. You see every where the spoiling of their goods, and prisons, with
other violences, and above all you see a great many penitents who have repared
their forced fall by a couragions retreat, who fill foreign Countries, and
aedifie their brethren by a voluntary return to the truth, which they had by
constraint forsaken.

Is it possible, that there is none but you that have given an example of a
revolt without exception? What dismal conspiracy of a whole Church against the
Lord, and against his Christ? At all times and in all places, during the most
cruel persecutions, there have been some saints, some faithful Christians,
who have carried upon their Unshaken Root the Heavenly Commands, who having
been fortified by the doctrine of the Gospel, were not affrayed, neither of
Banishment, to which they were condemned, nor of the tortures that were
prepared for them; neither of the loss of their goods, nor of the most
frightfull punishments: Among you only there is found so little love to God, so
little Zeal for his glory, that you have not shown one instance of fidelity.

How will ye behave your selves in that day, when it shall please God to
restore peace to his afflicted Church? To whom will you address for a
reconcilement, seeing you have all revolted? Where is the Church among you, that
may receive you into her besome upon your repentance and submission? Seeing you
have, as I may say, extinguished it by your infidelity, So far, that there is
not one living member remaining: Whereas God has reserved some thousands of
true Christians in the Kingdom where you are, how comes it to pass that you
cannot make one of the number? Is there not one left that has not defiled
himself with an idolatrous worship?

But I mistake, there has been some examples of Christian Courage among you,
its true, but they were such as might load you with shame and Confusion; Five
or six women and maids were more Zealous then you, who chose caves and deserts,
rather than to submit to that sentence of death which you sealed to your own
destruction. Id. Ibid.
A holy Bishop of old Boasted that his Church produced women courageous enough
to partake with men in the Victory and Crown of Martyrs; but with you all the
Glory was on their side; That weak sex surmounted the temptations that men were
afraid of. We have seen women triumph over the vanquished men, who resisted
the evil example of their brothers, fathers and husbands, and raised themselves
on the ruins of the stronger sex: who by their constancy reproached the others
weakness and cowardice, ready to cry out with a famous Martyr of the first
ages, Farewell my life, farewell my goods: Basil. Sermon.
I love rather to loose all these then be guilty of blasphemy, and impiety
against God my creator by one single word.

Go on holy and generous women, and if there be any whose constancy, time, and
the example of their relations, has not shaken, perfect ye that which you have
begun; persevere to the end, and your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord;
The Crown of life is prepared for you, he is faithful who has promised. Love,
and know no more after the flesh, Know no Father but God, no Husband but
Christ; Keep for him your souls which he has redeemed, And Crown with a
Christian death your noble beginnings. Call to mind what a holy woman, ready to
die for Christ, said to those of her Sex that ran out to gaze on her as a
Spectacle, Basil. 16.
Dot not allege (said she) to me the frailty of our sex, thereby to shun the
trouble that accompanies the profession of Piety; We are made of the same
matter men are of, and created after the image of God as well as they; He did
not only take of the flesh of man to make the Woman; But he has made us bone of
his bone, and therefore according to the design of God, we ought to have as
mush patience, courage, and Constancy as they. Thus when Christ was taken by
the Jews, the most part of them abandoned him in the Garden, others denied him
at the High priests house, but the women were not afraid of his Cross, and
were ready to accompany him with the homage of their faith and love even to the
grave; Preserve the Glory of your sex, and relent not when there remains but
one assault more to obtain a complete Victory.

But as for you Husbands, less couragions then your wives; Fathers and Mothers
more fearful and luke warm then your Daughters: was it not enough to commit
so great a sin, without making it greater by revolting considerately and
advisedly. Should you have submitted your salvation to the arbitration of men?
Did you use art and cunning that you might with more advantage betray the cause
of God? and Must you agree on terms to destroy your seves. Some of you would
not sin alone, but chose rather than to want company; to draw in others by your
wicked Counsels. But there was not one found among you, who to restrain others
from this shameful action, had the Courage to speak with Joshua to those that
were going to betray the truth of God. Jos. 24.15.
Choose you this day the God that you will serve, but as for me and my house,
we will serve the Lord. So far, alas, were you from speaking thus, that you
encouraged one another to the mutual ruin of your souls; and to your bad
example added your unmercifull exhortations; When you saw any one whom the
importance of the Change kept unresolved, you determined him by your perverse
Counsels, and adopted the words which under the Law deserved death without
mercy. Deuteronomy. 13.6.
Come let us serve other Gods. Thus by an unparalelled conspiracy, you quickly
turned the Vineyard of the Lord into a desert; and made slaves of Superstition
a multitude of people whom Christ had set free. The preached Gospel, and all
Church privileges are the fruit of Christ's Death; and thus the unconverted
enjoying these may be said to be [set free by Christ] from paganisime,
Idolatrq, superstition: many thus bought 2 Pet. 2. v. 1. and redeemed by him,
who are not redeemed from sin, wrath, judgment, whatever they themselves
imagine, or others in charity may judge of them.


What was then the reason that induced you to this deplorable Apostasy? Were
you ignorant that God marked all your Steps, and would one day bring you to an
account? Were you ignorant that he sent you this severe trial that he might
prove you, and know the power of those bonds that engaged you to the profession
of his service? Were you ignorant, of the indignity done to his Majesty in
Choosing other Gods before his face? Or lastly, were you ignorant of the
threatenings he has pronunced against those who are ashamed of his Covenant, and
prefer in his sight the Worship of a Lie to that of the Truth. You might in
some sort be excused John 9.13.
if you were blind, as Christ said to the Jews of his time, but you are
instructed and enlightened, and therefore Ibid.
your sin remains in its full power and guilt. For you have not so soon forgot
your Conductors, nor their instructions so frequently repeated, after which you
went home contented, persuaded and convinced of the truths they taught you,
triumphing over the Disorder you often observed the enemies of your faith were
put unto. How comes it now to pass that you have abandoned, all on the sudden
and cast off the profession of so strong and so evident truths. Have you
observed that your teachers concealed to you any part of the Counsel of God?
Have you perceived that they wrapped up themselves in Mysteries to Disguise the
truth? Can you convince them that they have falsified the word of God? Your
Consciences bear witness against you in their behalf, and tell you,
notwithstanding the silence you impose on them, that you have done violence to
their dictates; and that to suppress them, you have abused your light and
judgment.

But after all, you were willing to perish, and it had been taken for an injury
to have saved you; but did not the interest of your families touch your hearts;
tho you had lost your own? Had you no pity on your Infants born, and to be
born, whom you your selves, to say so, sacrificed to impiety? It is not long
since I saw you overcharged with grief when you thought of loosing them at the
seventh year of their age. You were alarmed and trembled when you saw that
inhumane design executed on some of your children and families; Your groans,
and tears, with your sad and compassionate behavior, did then manifest the
grief you were possessed with: ah whence comes the change I now observe in you?
Ye then feared they would force your children into the Roman Church, but now
you freely carry them there your selves. Some would have thought it a remnant
of Comfort that others had done it for them, but you loved rather to sacrifice
them of your own accord: This is a kind of worship like unto that of Moloch,
where the parents themselves were obliged to throw their children into the
burning arms of the Idol with their own hands, and not to give the least token
of compassion at their innocent Cries; They have required of you something like
this, and you have done it, having willingly destroyed and murdered your own
children, you have sacrificed together with your selves those already born, and
have made them loose the sanctity the Covenant conferred on them, as being born
in the Church of Christ, You have robbed them of it before they came to age;
wherein without you, they might have preserved it. But to say more, you have
lost before hand those that are not yet born; You have bereaved them of the
life of their soul, before they enjoyed that of the body, and have been their
Parricides before you were their fathers.

What account will you then give of your proceedings, when he shall require of
you these infants which he had given you? Dare you Confess that you have
encouraged them by your example and Counsel to disown him before men; and that
you carried them in your arms to lay them down at the feet of idols, when
because of their tender age, they could not follow you; or that you devoted
them to Idolatry before they came into the world? What will you answer to the
secret reproaches of those little babes who will accuse you of their misery?
One day will they say, we might have been born children of the Covenant of God,
in the profession of the truth; more happy than those that are born to Kingdoms
and Empires; We might have been born into the hope of the Kingdom of Heaven, if
our fathers had not envyed us the honor of this happy birth; We have not
willingly engaged our selves in a sinful communion; If we had once tasted of
the Truth, we would never have quitted it for a lie; if we had known the table
of the Lord and the Heavenly bread, that is there Distributed, we would never
have partaken of the table of Idols; Our Fathers have betrayed us, and our
deplorable misery is the effect of their perfidiousness. What will you then
answer to them; what Defense will you make to an accusation so well founded?

I do not believe that five or six months profession of Popery has so hardened,
you, as not to perceive the truth of these complaints; What excuse will you
make? Perhaps, that some favor was shown you, and that they did not require of
you an abjuration of those truths you always believed; as also that you
managed the interest of your salvation so far as you were able, and that under
hand you were dispensed with in those things your consciences did most stick
at. But can you say this with any color of truth? Did you so little examine
the Formularies of Confession they made you read, or the General clauses of
submission to the Church of Rome that you subscribed; as not to understand that
they obliged you to approve all that the Church approves of, and to condemn all
that she condemns? and by consequence to embrace her errors, and to practice
the worship authorized by her Councils; as also to renounce those truths your
are convinced of, because her Councils have condemned them. How could you be
caught in such palpable snares, when pretending to dispense with some things,
the more easily to dazzle you, they engaged you to the whole by a captious
generality?

Moreover, where learned you the use of those ensnaring accommodations? Could
you, without doing despite to God the Father and Protector of Truth, yield any
thing to its prejudice, or compromise its rights under the good faith of its
ennemies. Truth suffers no shuring, it is indivisible, and where you consent to
loose a part, you loose the whole. It has something in its nature so pure, that
it is violated when associated with the smallest errors: The least mixture
corrupts it; and a corrupted truth is no longer Truth. The Jealousy of God
suffers no more a mixture of another Worship with his own, than to prefer
another to it: For it is the property of true Religion to be inconsistent with
any other: Therefore by thinking to save a part under the pretense of the
general terms of your engagements, you have abandoned the whole, and after
having submitted to so many errors, you can no longer glory in the truth that
remains: it is too much altered to bear ever afterward the honor of that name.

But suppose it were not thus, Did you hope they would let you enjoy the small
remains of your old Religion, while you were not through Papists? They promised
it, you will say, But could you believe they would keep their word to you? Had
not you experience enough of the perfidiousness of your pretended converters,
to be assured you had nothing to hope for, from their promise? How often have
they since the persecution began, openly violated all the Laws, Oaths, and
agreements that might give you the least occasion of confidence in them? Are
their new promises more solemn and sacred than the Edict of Nantes that you
have seen revoked? Or then the Edict of the Revocation it self, in the last
Article whereof, they promised a forbearance to the rest of the Protestants, on
whom the very next day after they sent dragoons to quarter; if once perfidious,
It suffices to be ever after suspected: You should have been on your guard
against the promises of your seducers, whom so many fresh experiences had
convinced you, to be incapable of observing them.

But you will reply, that they have forced you to nothing since you subscribed.
It may be so, yet this calm ought to be suspected, it is a trick of the Devil
to lull you a sleep by an appearance of rest: A too great force had kept you
awake, tho it would have made you comply with what they pleased, yet it might
have rooted a deep and lasting resentment in the bottom of your hearts, and
have made you detest in secret that which they had wrested from you by force:
But however the Devil cannot long belly himself, nor suffer long in peace those
he intends to destroy, tho at present a deceitful peace be more advantageous
to his designs. And what needs he more now, seeing he has obtained of you the
abjuration of the truth, if it be not to secure you in this condition? He
cannot drive you into another that is more mortal. His design is to accustom
you to slavery, and to render that worship familiar to you, who at first so
much abhorred it. He would manage your Conscience so that the alarms of it may
daily diminish, and the sentiment of your grief may be little and little
abate. He knows well that the Custom of that Communion will in time afford you
a reason not to come out of it; He knows well enough that repentance is made
more difficult by a long contracted habit of doing evil; and expects by this
dangerous calm that many of you will arrive at the last period of life, before
you think of recovering your selves by repentance.

Will you say, you were surprised, and the storm reached you before you could
forsee it? Can you say so in Conscience? How often did I advertise you of the
danger that threatened you, both by word and writting? Did I not publicly and
privately, together and apart, pursue you with Counsels and warnings? I have
wearied you with importunities and frequent repeatings of the same things,
which I inculcated in season and out of season, present and absent, every
manner of way I thought capable of moveing you. You received the same advices
from a hundred other hands, and therefore you cannot say, without being
convinced of the contrary, that you did not expect it.

But Consider further how God has dealt with you in respect of others. You saw
all the other Provinces of the Kingdom ransackt with violence before it
approached you, and in your own Province, error had conquered all the Towns
before it attached you. You saw therefore the storm arise at a distance. You
saw it advance toward you by remarkable Steps, and break in on your
neighbors, before it made the least havoc among you: Was not this a timely
advice for you to be on your guard, and to prepare you selves for the fight, or
for a flight? to take up the arms of God whereby you might have resisted the
evil day; or used those prudent precautions whereby you might have shunned
that Apostasy into which you are fallen? Was not this as a voice from Heaven
to you, to fly from the Storm, and to secure your selves from the Inundation
wherein you saw your brethren involved?

It may be the time was short, and warning coming too late gave you not the
leisure to take your measures. But why so much ceremony to do your duty? So
many delays and precautions in stead of brisk and courageous resolutions? This
was the first step of perfidiousness; But with all you had weeks, months and
years to prepare your selves, you had all occasions and conveniences desirable
to have secured your safety; Nothing was wanting to be faithful, but the
courage of being so.

You will perhaps answer me, that you were prepared for it, and had taken good
resolutions, but that you were forced, and that you were bereft of your
judgment by the evils you suffered, and your patience worn out by your
Torments. I wish to God it were true, and that your Crime had not all the marks
of a voluntary defection: But what hurt received you? Did they set up Gibbets
and breaking wheels in every corner of your streets? Or saw you any tied up
that were resolved to persevere in their duty? Or if this be too much, were you
dragged to prisons, or to dark and noisome dungerous, where many of your
brethren in other parts of the Kingdom were shut up? Were you beat, wounded,
torn in pieces, or kept awake many nights and days together as so many others
were? You might have been pitied if you had fainted under those or such like
torments. St. Cyprian (de lapsis) says; Those may only complain of torments who
have lost their courage by suffering under them; and those may use the excuse
of pain who were vanquished by it. But this Kind of Apology does no way belong
to you who have suffered nothing; Did they pillage or demolish your houses, or
quarter soldiers on you whose Barbarous insolences you were not able to
endure; Have they reduced you to poverty by taxes and confiscations? Display to
us your miseries, make an open show of your sufferings: I cannot observe any
foot step of violence done you either in your persons or families: Your bodies
are sound and healthy; You suffered no loss of your goods; You are free men,
and your trade and commerce has suffered little alteration; What then happened?
they threatened you with a few dragoons, and presently you were struck dead with
fear, and all your good resolutions vanished into smoke.

But is simple fear a lawful excuse for a crime, which neither tortures
themselves (if we consider the merit of the cause) nor the most cruel
punishments can excuse? According to the discipline of the first Christians,
one's defection from the faith, tho torn in pieces with talions of Iron, and
bruised on the rack, was esteemed an abominable erime: The very spectators of
so odious a weakness trembled, and were afraid lest the dreadful lightnings
of the vengeance of God should surprise them. They expected no less then Claps
of thunder from heaven, or that the earth should open its large abyss to
punnish a miscreant Church where but one was found to deny Christ; What would
they have said or done, if they had seen a whole Church yield to the first
attackes of fear, their bodies untouched, and their strength entire.
Acknowledge ye therefore the truth, and by a sincere Confession of the evil you
have done, give us some ground to hope of your repentance: Confess you have
fallen by a temptation that ought not to have shaken you; It seems it was of
you that a Cypr. de Laps.
Holy Bishop of the third age spoke, there is so great a conformity between you
and those whose defection he Laments; You have betrayed your faith all on a
sudden, at the first threats of the ennemy; you were not overthrown against
your wills by the violence of the persecution, but you overthrew your selves by
a voluntary defection. Does it not seem on your account that he adds what
follows; They did not wait, when they denied the truth, till they were asked a
reason of their faith; or till they were apprehended, and constrained to burn
incense to Idols, but were vanquished before the Combat, overthrown before they
were encountered; they did not so much as reserve the excuse That violence was
offered them; They ran to the Palace (or to the Idol Priests) of their own
accord, and hasted to deliver themselves up to death as if it had been a thing
they long desired; and as if they had embraced an occason that they had long
waited for.

Had the Gospel preached by Christ and his Apostles made so great a progress
in the world if it had been received Only by those of your temper? Had truth
triumphed over error, whose Empire was established by a long prescription of
ages, and mantained by all the powers on earth, if it had not found more
faithful disciples then you? Had Christ been received in the remotest parts of
the world by a barbarous and savage people and adored by the Kings of the
earth, if the first guardians of his Truth had so ill perserved it as you have
don; He is not beholding to you that he has any faithful servants yet
remaining; There would be none to Confess his name, if those who were
threatened by the ennemy, and exposed to his stratagems and power, had not had
more courage then you.

The Authors of the desolation of our Churches were ashamed of their own
Persidy and cruelties, and to color the matter they boasted of the pretended
conversions they procured; which struck all Europe with amazement for they gave
out that they forced no body, that the people obeyed the first orders of their
own accord, and that they retnrned to the Religion of their ancestors at the
first summons. This is that they publish by their hired writters, whose pens
are sold to impudence and lying, to disguise public and notorious deeds: Had
they not reason thus to write, if all your brethren had been as Cowardly as
you were? Your example confirms their excuses and makes an Apology for them.
In vain have so many thousands saved themselves, poor and naked, through so
many difficultes and snares; in vain have they filled all the Estates of Europ
with their complaints, and the account of their miseries; your conduct has
belyed so many thousand witnesses; And if it (praised be God it cannot) suffice
not to destroy their testimony, yet it renders their complaints in some manner
suspected of being too much aggravated: who can believe all they say, tho many
of them carry yet about them the Scars of their sufferings, when they see a
considerable Church thus overcome, and yield without fighting?

But you may still reply, That you were so much constrained that it appeared in
your Countenance then when you signed the Abjuration; You were pale, and
trembling as if you had been led to the slaughter, and tho you spoke not
against the compliance they required of you, your looks, groans and trouble of
mind were a silent protestation against the force they used: But these excuses
convict you, and give the greatest ground to condemn you. When one has
recourse to the deceit of a frivolous excuse, it is almost as much as if he had
committed the erime over again: Can any thing more clearly convict you, that
you have sinned against your own Light, then to confess that you feit in your
Consciences so strong opposition, or can you take that for an excuse, that is
the clearest indication of your weakness? should I draw your Portraiture? that
which Dems of Alexandria made of some weak spirited Christians of his time is
as proper as if it had been drawn for you. Some (said he) were seen approaching
the Altars pale and trembling, as if they were not come to sacrifice to idols
but to offer themselves for victimes; and on this account the multitude of
spectators disdained them, as those who made it openly appear that they came
neither to die nor to sacrifice. Do you not know yourselves by the draught of
this Picture? You had neither the courage to retain the profession of your
faith, nor the resolution to renounce it: neither hot nor cold in an occasion
that required the one or other; neither holy enough to prefer the glory of God
above all, nor cold enough to show your indifferency then when you repudiated
and put away the holy one. Judge ye of the effects of this Lukewarmness and of
what your pretended converters may think when they see you give so many public
marks of the basest weakness.

What should we have then done, you will ask me? What side should we have
taken in the extremity we were in? You had two measures to take, either to have
resisted, or to have fled; if you had no courage to stand it out. It is not
given to all to be proof against tortures, and to arrive at the highest degree
of victory. But a victory may be obtained by a retreat as well as by resisting:
Even thefirst ages, tho severe in this case, esteemed a prudent retraite to be
in so me degree a victory. But what shall we say of those who as you have done,
would neither resist nor fly? What can we believe of them but that they were
resolved before hand to do what they did? He that stayed at home to deny at
last Jesus Christ, ( said St. Cyprian de Lapsis.
in the like case) stayed of purpose to do so.

You will answer, God forbid that you should have so wicked a thought, We would
have fled if we could; All ways of retraite were stopped, and those that retired
with pasports may speak at their ease what they please, but for others, the
soldiers and Country were employed against them, and double guards set at all
places whereby they might escape: the prisons are full of those they took
either on the Frontiers or in seaport towns; and terrible were the punishments
inflicted on them: every one is not Galy-proof, nor can suffer the infection of
a noisome Dungeon, where those wretches dye a thousand times a day. We must
have done what we did sooner or later, a few days make no great difference.

I confess it is a sad case; and if you had been detained in your flight it
had made appear at least that you were willing to do your duty; Then you might
have alleged some specious excuse for your defense, that you were Constrained,
and that there was no choice but of the Change of religion, or a prison; And as
in the ancient Church they received with compassion the excuses of those who
had suffered the extremest pains for the profession of the truth, who to
obtain the peace of the Church used more their wounds then their tears, and the
marks of the tortures that tore their bodies, than the voice of mourning, as
Cyprian said, so likewise we would have pitied your Chains and prisons. But
what right have you to speak of the Dangers of retreat, who never tried it? You
who never lost sight of your houses, your excuse resembles that of the
Loiturer, who to have a pretense of his Lazyness, said Prove. 22.
there is a lion without. You seek for a pretense of yielding to the enemy,
Yousay, the passages were stopped, and a retraite was accompanied with a thousand
dangers, but why stayed you til the passages were stopped? You had time enough to
save your selves when they were all open.

Believe me, Fear made the danger seem greater then it was; You might perhaps
have seen all the difficulties levelled before you, if you had attempted to
surmount them. More then a hundred and fifty thousand of your brethren who
escaped the vigilance of the Guards, show what you might have hoped for, if you
had, had the courage to expose your bodies for the safety of your souls The
most of them that escaped, retired since the Revocation of the Edict, after
they had beset all the frontier places with guards of soldiers; Men, women,
and children, alone and in company, disappointed the industry and diligence of
those hunters of souls. God wants not still his invisible thariots to save
those that hope in him. He can yet blind, as he has often done, those who
oppose themselves to the retraite of his Children.

Let as then speak the truth, that we may not disguise the cause of your
defection; The fear of men and love of the world have made you fall; The dread
of men has made you forget the fear of God; You were afraid of the Dragoons,
(these Missionaries of the red Dragon) and the fear of falling into their hands
made you forget that it was infinitely more terrible to fall into the hands of
the Living God; You remembered not that all the injuries of men can only afflict
the body, but that God can cast soul and body into Hell sire; and therefore he
was more to be redoubted then men.

On the other hand, your Goods stack to your heart, Cypr. de Laps.
The blinded love of thee good things of this world has deceived you, and
perhaps you were not in a condition to retire, because you were chained by the
affection you retained for your perishing riches: so true is it that the heart
cannot share the service of two Masters, and that it is impossible at the same
time to serve God and Mammon. How unhappy is he who prefers the service of
Mammon to that of God! What miserable gain is it to gain the whole world and to
loose your own soul? This love of your goods includes two things equally
criminal; Ingratitude and distrust; First, Ingratitude, you received those
benefits of the bounty of God, and I do not believe that in prostrating your
selves before that Divinity made with men's hands (which you have promised to
adore) you dare think that it is to it you are indebted for them. It is God,
the living God, not made with men's hands, but by whom men are made, who
bounhfully bestowed them, who preserved them by his Providence, and increased
them by his blessing: Has he given them, preserved them, and increased them
that you might love them more than him, and prefer them, as your occasion
serves, to his service? Is this to give him the due acknowledgment of his
goodness, to choose rather to renounce his Covenant then the goods you received
of him? Has he been bountiful that you might be perfidious? Can you do him a
greater indignity then thus to set him at naught for the things that perish,
and to show your selves more slaves to them than religious guardians of his
truth? Consult all ye Masters that can inform you of the nature of
Ingratitude, you will find it the blackest and most shameful degree thereof to
use benefits to the disservice of the Benefactor, and to offend him by his own
bounty: This is that you have done to God, you have abused his liberality to
his dishonor: If he had given you less to loose, perhaps you would have served
him more faithfully; But because he made you live at ease, and filled you with
his treasure, you could not resolve to quit for his sake that which you held of
him.

Secondly, You have discovered a shameful distrust, You were afraid you would
never receive again what you had abandoned for his sake, and forgot the Mat. 19.
promise he made to those who love him above all; Mark. 10. Luke 18.
and to every one that has forsaken houses or brethren or sisters, or father
or mother, or wife or children or Lands for his names sake that they shall
receive an hundred fold in this world, and in the world to come everlasting
life. What think you? Did you believe he was not true to his word, or that he
wanted power? 1 Ep. Ioh. 5.
Have you made him a liar by your misbelieif, or Psalm. 77.
have you limited him by an injurious dustrust? Did you think he was not able
enough to remunerat you for that you were to sacrifice for his glory, or that
he was not rich enough to answer necessities? Did you think that he who had
given you so much, had drained his treasure by his beneficence? and if you lost
any thing for his interest that he was not able to make you amends? The
Histories of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, and of Job (who were richer after
banishment, after affliction, after losses) and so many examples ancient and
modern of the care God takes of those who fear him, were they not powerful
enough to make you understand what you were to hope from him if you had
confessed his name and suffered for his sake?

You thought perhaps that the present was more sure then the time to come; and
by a carnal prudence you loved rather to Keep what you had then to renounce
them for uncertain hopes. But why do not you use that prudence to a better
purpose, to Keep the pledge of the Heavenly truth that was committed to you?
Why dit you not hear Jesus Christ calling to you from heaven, where he sits at
the right hand of the Father; Apoc. 3.
Hold fast that which you have, and let no man take your Crown. You might then
have been assured that this precious treasure had not been taken from you. But
for those goods [of which you said, Job 31.
You are my trust] who promised you that they shall not be taken away? Should
you think that God will suffer you to enjoy them peaceably, who have don such
an injury to him by denying his truth? I should lament your condition if I saw
you continue without being partakers of the Rod which a good Father spares not
to the Children he loves. Hieron. in Ose. lib. 4. c. 4.
The wrath of God is then great, when after we have sinned, God Nihil
inselicius co cus, nihtlevenit adversi. Senec. de Prove.
treats us as if we were not worthy of his anger; It is the greatest proof of
his severity when he will not lead us to repentance even by Chastisements.
August. in Psalm. 98.
As for him to whom God is truly merciful, not only does he pardon his sins
that he may not suffer for them in the world to come but he afflicts a sinner
that he may not take pleasure in his sin. He tells you that he rebukes and
corrects those whom he loves: It would be a token of his love if he appeared to
you with a rod in his hand; And where could the effects of his vengeance fall
more justly, then on the cause of your sin, then on those good things you have
loved better then him? Thus he may make you know your error, In departing from
him; You have lost that Good which God would not and no power on earth could
ever take from you, and have preferred to it riches that he can take from you
when he pleases: For the Lord gives them, and the Lord rakes them away. You
have them from him, and by him only you can preserve them.

Perhaps he forbears the rod, to invite you to repentance by the riches of his
patience, long suffering, and bounty: but let not this delay deceive you; Cypr.
de Lapsis.
You must not think you have escaped because the punishment is delayed, There
is so much the more reason to fear the effect of this forbearance, that he
seems thereby to reserve the sinner to more severe judgments. You have by you,
those whom God will make use of to Chastize you; those Priests, and Monks, those
Officers of the Religion you have embraced will be the procurers and
instruments of your ruin; They have a mind to your Estates after they have
devoured your souls: Hitherto they have had no advantage by your professing
their errors; Your pretended conversion is not the least aim of their
interessed politiques: According to the genius and maxims of their religion
(which breaths nothing but riches and grandour) they will, after they have
deprived you of the Heavenly Treasure, deprive you likerwyse of your earthly
riches. Do not think that your obsequious compliance to their Worship will
content them, they never pardon that which they call Heresy, and when one has
once undergone that Character, there is no conversion will reconcile him to
their jealous Politiques: Heresy, they think, is a discase that is never well
cured, and Chiefly those Heresies which stop up the springs of their immense
riches, or overturn the foundations of their tyrannical authority: The
reconcilement of Henry the IV. to the Roman Church was not able to secure him
from a thousand conspiracy's, nor at last from death; The Jesuits first
suggested that Wicked Counsel in Charles the IX. time, of massacring those who
turned Catholics through fear of death; Do you think they have not still the
same mind, and the same opinions yet; I know not if they have a design on your
life, (God only knows that) It may be the present Constitution of the state
agrees not with their violent designs; Men arrive not to the highest degree of
mischief on a sudden; Perhaps they are preparing greater strokes as may be
collected from the experiments of inhumanity which have desolated so many
Provinces; It was by degrees they came to the perfidious revocation of the
Edict of Nantes; They passed from a secret hatred to an open war; from war they
came to manifest injustice; and from injustice they came again to secret craft;
and in the end having renounced all Modesty, from Craft they came to a public
breach of faith; and from thence to force, pillaging, and dragoons. You may by
this Lamentable gradation judge what they are like to do, who have published
their designs by so dreadful beginnings: You have reason to fear they will not
stop here; on the occasion of supposed new crimes the difficulty is only to
begin, after the first step the progress is easy, and great way is made in a
short time in the rode of iniquity.

But tho it were not thus, do you think those men who gape after confiscations
and look on you that are rich with the same regrate and envy as we look on
Usurers, that they will suffer you to enjoy your riches? Do not you know the
depth of their Moralls and maxims? Must you try experiments to be convinced of
their inhumane intentions?

Call to mind what you have read of the expulsion of the Moor's; The time that
passed from their Baptism to Phtl. 3. could not cure the jealous and
distrustful minds of the Catholic King? They were made believe from time to
time that the Moriskos, were still Mahometans in their heart, and that they
kept intelligence with the ennemiesof the State, and on the pretense of such
crimes, that very often were but Calumnies, they took occasion to spoil,
pillage, and banish them, and to ruin them by prisons and punishments; The
miserable remnant of the Jews who had settled in Spain, were used after the
same manner Isidor. Chron.
Sisebut (whom their own Historians say, had a zeal without knowledge) began to
force them to embrace the Gospel, and Council. Tolet. 4. tom. conc. 5. Conc.
Tolet. 6.
Sisenand (who some time after, succeeded) gave some moderation to those unjust
Laws; but Swinthil was yet worse than Sisebut, and constrained those miserable
people to be baptized against their Consciences, or to leave the Kingdom: But
this severity did not remedy their distrust, they were from time to time
accused to be hypocrites, and counterfeit Christians; and there were new
decrees made against them under Reccesainthe, Tom. 6. Council.
in the 8, 9, and 10 Councils of Toledo, and all the ancient Laws that were
made to suppress them were confirmed. But as persecuting zeal is always jealous
and restless, they never thought themselves secure of those new Converts
notwithstanding all the precautions that they had taken; Conc. Tolet. 17. Tom.
6. Council.
Egica found the best expedient was to suppress them utterly by reducing them
to slavery: They bereaved them of their Estates, and of all the rights both of
humane society, and of nature it self, of the education of their Children, with
the liberty both of their body and conscience. The History of the Waldenses and
Albingenses show how that these honest souls were from time to time ruined by
the cheating treaties, and fair promises of popish rulers.


Com pare your condition with theirs and you will find it agreeable enough in
the Circumstances to make you apprehend the like treatment; You were made
Catholics by the same expedients that they were made Christians; there is then
the same reason to mistrust your sincerity, and to take the same precautions
for you that were taken to secure them: And that you may not think that this
maxim was peculiar to a certain Age and people, it is worth your considering,
that from the beginning of Christianity the Persecuters distrusted those whom
fear of punishment had reduced to Paganism, and treated them some times with
more severity then those who were more constant and faithful; There is a
remarkable instance of this in the reign of Marcus Aurelius and Verus; Among
the Christians who were prisoners at Lions, some betrayed the farth to save
their life and estate But they were not better used then others, and their
Apostasy availed them nothing but rendered the Character of their prisons and
punishments more shameful: for whereas they imputed to the Martyrs the crime
only of being Christians, they took occasion of the Apostasy of those others to
indite them as Villains and homicides. Eusebius. Hist. Eccless. lib. 5. c. 4.
This is the account that those ancient Christians gave of them in the Letters
which they wrote concerning this persecution.

You know likewise that this is the Nature of the Inquisition wherever it
reigns; It suffices not to be converted, or to renounce; There are some
Heresies, which according to the principles of this devilish Institution never
obtain pardon, and upon which the pretended Criminal must necessarily suffer
either death or the Confiscation of his Estate, with perpetual infamy: To fall
into this cruel extremity, it is not necessary to be convicted, it is enough
to be suspected, or to have some strong interest against you. Judge ye how near
this touches you, who have seen a more cruel Inquisition then that of Rome and
Spain; who have seen the Jesuits the Promoters, may after a while see them the
executioners of these hellish Laws: You know that in the Religion that you have
forsaken, you believed many things that are of the number of those which they
will never forget.

What will then become of you if the Providence of God deliver you up to be
punished at their pleasure? How empty will you be; There will be nothing left
you in Heaven, or in earth; being deprived of your temporal estate by your own
Converters, and of God by your selves. But this is not all, death follows,
You approach unto this terrible passage at a great pace, and How many new
terrors have you added to it by your sin? At all times its name affrights you,
and you wax pale at the least appearance of its approach; What will you do now,
you see it inevitable? How will you master this dreadful Passage with the
burden of your Inconstancy? With what assurance will you appear before the
throne of God to answer his accusations? What will you oppose to the eternal
flames of his Vengeance? Do you believe that the Communion of a maimed
Sacrament, or the adoration of a God that must be carried to your bed side to
receive your homage, can secure you from this terrible judgment?

You tremble perhaps at the sight of those dismal objects that I have
presented to you, and will tell me you will not delay your repentance to this
extremity: God grant you may not; I earnestly pray that by a return of his
great mercies he would touch your hearts with a just dread of his judgments:
Return wandering flock, return unto God whom you have offended, and recover the
Profession of the truth which you basely rejected, and repair by a bold
confession the abjuration you made. Make it appear by a Speedy conversion that
your fall was rather the effect of fear then of a free and deliberate will and
choice.

You have often made reflection on St. Peter's fall, and perhaps compared your
own to his: But do not deceive your selves, If there be some small agreement
there is also a great disagreement; You only resemble his in the most
disgraceful part of it; You promised to suffer all as he did, but you failed
much sooner then he did, He followed his Master to the High priests house,
resolved to keep his ground, but you went to the Priests and Judges fully
resolving to renounce the truth; He fell without deliberation and forethought,
your fall was concerted and deliberate; But the greatest difference is, that
his defection lasted not long he quickly recovered, there was but a moment of
time between his fall and repentance, and this was a mark that it was not a
wilful sin he committed: his sudden bitter and abounding tears evidenced the
sincerity of his heart: Thus a great sin is in some measure excused, when as
soon as it is committed it is lamented, repaired, and expiated (to say Sin may
be said to be washen away and expiated by the tears of contrition and
repentance as [a Means.], Isa. 1. v. 16. and by the water of Baptism as [a
signe] and [seal], Act. 22. v. 16. But by way of merit and satisfaction only by
the blood and passion of Christ. Rev. 1. v. 5.
so) with the sacrifice of a broken heart: Has any such thing happned to you?
You have sinned with the Apostle, you have fallen through a prodigious
weakness, but have you by his example recovered your selves? Have you amended
your fault as he did? Did you see with him the Sun neither rise nor go down
upon your Sin? Alas! it is five or six months that you languish in this sad
condition, without giving the least token of Repentance.

What and do you yet expect to recover yourselves? How long will ye put off
your conversion that is so necessary? Who promised you that the patience of God
would not be wearied out with your delays; but would attend your leisure. Come
out of Babylon my People too much estranged from God! Come out of Babylon that
you may draw near unto him; If you will not do it for fear of her sins, do it
at least for fear of being partakers of her plagues. You have time to escape,
seeing vengeance is not yet begun, but you cannot avoid it except you separate
from that impure Church on whom the justice of God, (who is the Protector of
Truth) is ready to be revealed.

You know there is a kind of wilful sin, after having received the knowledge
of the Truth, that is never pardoned; a sin for which there remains no more
sacrifice, a sin that leaves no issue to sinners but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and of fire which will consume without mercy: I will not say that
yours is of this nature, I think and hope better things of you. I would a wake
your Consciences by just fears, but I would not sound a mortal alarm to you;
I would grieve you, but not put you into despair. Happy I, if I could work in
you a sorrow that conduces to your salvation, I would then bless the severity
of my complaints, I would rejoice to have made you sorrowful, not because you
sorrowed, but because your sorrow wrought Repentance in you.

Therefore I will not say, that the sin that you have committed against God, is
that sin for which there is no remission; I will only say they do not much
differ; Nor shall I aggravate your Crime tho I say there is but one step
between you and death; You have sinned against truth after you had handled the
word of life, and were enlightened with the knowledge of God; Your sin is
accompanied with such circumstances as give ground to believe you sinned
wilfully, and deliberately, against the dictates of your mind, and the motions
of your heart: Would you know if there be any ground to hope for pardon? It is
easily known; there is one Character that distinguishes the unpardonable sin
from all others; It is impossible for those that commit it to recover by
repentance: Repent therefore and you may be assured your sin has not yet
proceeded to so dreadful a degree; but repent quickly: I have already told you
that Repentance delayed grows every day more difficult; and if the freshness of
your sin be not enough to strike you with horror and remorse, you will come to
it more uneasily when sin is rendered familiar to you by a long continued
practice. Cypr. Ep. ad Pompon.
You must carefully with draw your ship from dangerous places, lest it split
against the shelves and rocks: you must quickly save your goods from burning
before the threatening fire reach them; It is impossible to be secure if you
remain long on the frontiers of danger.

It had been glorious for you to have continued Steadfast, and not to have given
to your enemies the joy of vanquishing your faith; But every one has not the
courage to overcome by heroic actions; it is necessary therefore for those
that have stumbled and fallen in the way to the Heavenly Kingdom, to recover
and establish themselves by repentance. Tho the Crown be properly for those
that run the race without falling, yet there remains praise and honor to those
who rise by repentance. Cypr. Ep. 55. ad Cornel.
The first degree of happiness is, without doubt, not to sin, but the second is
to acknowledge the fault, and amend. And the second does not so much differ
from the first when the amendment is not delayed. We do not find in other
persecutions that all those who fell, continued in their defection: they very
often recovered before they departed from the presence of their Judges; The
faithful of Lions gloryed that those whom fear struck down, were raised with
honor, and returned to the Combat with renewed courage. [Bibliade,] a woman,
who denied through weakness, and whom the Devil thought he was already sure of,
regained her courage in the midst of her Torments, and Confessed she was a
Christian; and many others guilty of the same sin, were restored with her:
Those who had already escaped death and were restored to their life and
liberty, by the Orders of the Emperors (who then, as it is now in use,
recompensed Cowardice, and punished Constancy) who were exposed in public to
be absolved of the reproach of being Christians, those I say recovered their
first zeal, and made open Confession of the name of Christ, loving rather to
die in the communion of the truth, than to enjoy life and liberty, as the price
of their denying it. Cypr. Epist. ad Cornel.
St. Cyprian congratulating Cotnelius Bishop of Rome for the Constancy of his
Church, writes thus, How many fell who were restored by a glorious Confession,
and who became more bold and valiant in the battle, even by the anguish of
repentance. It was without doubt a great joy to that faithful Bishop to see
his Church imitat his zeal, who was so far from seeing it diminished by the
defection of its children, that he saw it increased by the public Conversion
of those who had fallen in the former persecution: What a glorious spectacle in
the eyes of God, what joy of the Church in the presence of Christ, to see her
march to the battle offered by the enemy; not soldiers singly, but a whole
army of generous Confessors. You have fallen very short of this example; You
among whom not one would signalize himself by a single discovery of Constancy,
But do not add to the singular property of your fall, which has been common to
all, another fault more shamefully singular, by continuing in your defection.
It is enough that you could all fall, but it would be a prodigy if in so
general a fall none of you should rise again: Repent then, and let your
Conversion be as general, if possible as your sin.

You have hitherto had some pretense of not awaking from this sleep of sin: The
same affrightment that was the cause of your sin has made you persevere in it;
the same love of your estates that perverted you, has detained you in your
error; the same compliance that made you forget God, has deprived you of the
courage of reconciling yourselves to God, lest you should offend men; since
that time you have learnt of none who has labored to bring you back, or
thought of curing the deep wounds that you pierced your souls with; you have
not been ashamed of your fall, because there was none who reproached you with
it: But the case is now altered, I come to awake you with my cries, and to call
you to repentance; Take heed that my Labor be not in vain, and that you be
not offended with my exhortations: David had continued almost a year in his sin
without perceiving it, when Nathan came to break the Charm that allured his
Conscience; this Prophet raised his voice that he might succeed the more; he
used both reproaches and threatenings, he displayed before him a long train of
judgments and threatenings, but yet he carried the peace of God under the
severity of his words; and David no sooner had said, I have sinned, then he
declared, Thy sin is pardoned: Imitate this sinner in his repentance, and I
will imitate the Prophet for your Consolation. David was struck down with a
word, one word made him sensible of the horrid guilt of his crime, which a
flattering illusion had disguised to him: On a sudden being convicted, he
confessed his fault, and was ashamed to have committed it. Acknowledge ye
therefore yours, after so many words of reproach, after so many strokes, and
what I have brought to describe it.

It is true, Nathan does not speak to you, but perhaps, he is greater then
Nathan, for the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than the greatest
that is born of a woman: such as I am, I speak to you as if God spoke to you by
me, By the authority of the holy function which I a long time discharged among
you, whose honor I have preserved notwithstanding all the storms that have
beaten upon me, I may be bold to say that you hear Jesus Christ when you hear
me, and that you cannot despise my exhortation without despysing his word: But
if this be not enough, hear Jesus Christ himself, He still speaks to you in his
Gospel, he speaks to you from Heaven by those motions he excites in your
souls: Do not you hear your own hearts speak to you in his name, Psalm. 27.
seek ye my face? Have I shed my blood, says he, to be trampled under foot by a
people whom I have See page 25 marg.
redeemed? Have I sanctified the cross by my sufferings that you might be
ashamed to carry it after me? Have I carried your sins in my body on the cross
for you to lose the courage of bearing my reproach and of confessing my name?
was I humbled and emptied, did I bear your burden, your infirmities and
miseries, for you to refuse to fulfill for my sake the rest of my sufferings?
Return unto me, O ye people whom I have so mush loved, and let me not loose the
fruit of my sorrows and blood; Come unto me, you whose consciences are wearyed
and heavy Laden. I will yet ease you, I will yet give you rest, and safety
under the shadow of my pastoral staff, and under the resuge of my sold; In the
Religion you have embraced there is nothing to satiate your hungrey soul, but I
have yet bread for its refreshment, and balm for its cure; The words of others
do poison and kill, but in me only will you find the words of eternal lyse.

Therefore, Obey God who wills not the death of a sinner. One look of Jesus
Christ was enough to raise a fallen Apostle, and this Petrus a Petra nomen
habuit.
Rock at a look as with a stroke of thunder, was beat in pieces and melted down
into a stream of bitter tears; God does now look down on you from the throne of
his glory, and his looks are mixed with indignation for your sin, and
compassion on your weakness; Does not the power of them break your hearts? Can
you not shed such abundance of tears as to deface the memory of your sin?
Cler. Romans ad Cypr. Ep. 31.
Send your tears to Heaven as Ambassadors of your grief; Plead your Cause by
Groans drawn from the bottom of your heart; and for the reparation of your
Crime, let your shame and sorrow for it thus appear: Let your eyes, be a flood
of tears, and your heart by painful sighs, Vide page 21. marg.
expiate your Crime either of Vid. Ep. 26. Confess. ad Cypr.
beholding or kissing Idols: Strengthen your weak hands and feeble knees, and
make your paths straight; Harden not your hearts at the voice of God, which
this day resounds in your ears, after you have been so long deprived of the
Word of Consolation.

Must the weak sex every way surmount you; They resisted better then you did;
and of those of them whorevolted, one has given the first example of
repentance: Imitate her courage, and be bold to do that which awoman did: What
a shame is it, for a dying woman to have had more courage and zeal then strong
and vigorous men? Learn by the inhumanity you saw exercised on her body what
you are to expect; and withdraw in time from those among whom such cruelties
are accounted pious meritorious actions.

Be not Scandalized, because you see the Gospel of Jesus Christ out of
fashion: Think it not strange that Judgment has begun at the house of God, and
that you see the Disciples of our Lord undergo the fiery trial; the servant is
not better then the Master; You must not murmur against God because he Leads
his Children to Glory by trials; seeing he has consecrated the Prince of our
Salvation by afflictions: He does you no wrong to treat you as he treated his
only Son; And to remove every thing in the afflictions of the Church that may
offend you, look unto Jesus Christ the finisher of your faith, who suffered on
the cross, and despised shame; who has been accompanied with a great cloud of
witnesses, whose constancy God has proposed for you to imitate: Is it not
certain after all, 2 Timothy 2.
That if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him? How infinitely does
the recompense exceed the Sufferings? 2 Cor. 4.
A light affliction, which passe^h away, works in us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory.

Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of Repentance, that we may judge of your
sincerity by your diligence, till then I cannot speak to you as ye would; nor
ought you to expect of me words of consolation, until you be fitted to receive
them by Repentance. Bernard 10. Sermon. in Cant.
In vain do you lift up your eyes to behold the Heavenly treasures that are the
delight of the soul, if you have not first received the light of spiritual
confort by the remission of sins, which disturb your spiritual peace: Seek
therefore for pardon by sorrow for your sin, Id. lib. medit. c. 4.
and be so troubled for your past sins, that it may forewarn you for the
future: Do not think that the Repentance you stand in need of, consists in a
bare sorrow for your sins past; You are never true penitents till you recover
out of the condition which you are in: It is most true, Id. Ibid.
that to continue in the sin which you Lament, is to mock God, and not to
repent. In a word, If you would repent, either confess your sin, and Lament the
mortal alliance you have made with error, or retire from those places where
the temptation is stronger then you can resist.

How willingly would I then set forth the Comforts which the word of God
bestows on those who have a broken heart; What pleasure would I then take to
draw refreshment from the fountain of living waters, to communicate them to
your thirsty souls? What contentment would I take to display unto you the
promises of grace, and speak of the praises of your courage! How boldly would I
speak of the assistance which he gives to these that fight for his cause? How
would I triumph in describing the prize of your labor, and the delights of
eternal rest, where your light afflictions should happily bring you, I would
be transported with a holy joy in representing God unto you, Comforting your
hearts, curing your wounds, wiping away your tears, satiating you with his
presence, and crowning you with his glory. Give then O People, who may yet be,
if you will, the people of God; give unto those, who have watched for your
souls, the comfort of beholding with joy and glory your Conversion, in stead of
the shame and sorrow that we are pierced with by your sin.

I would willingly thus finish all that I have to say to you, which is much
more pleasant to me then reproaches and threatenings, but my duty, and the fear
of favoring your security by flattering words oblige me to speak to you in
other terms; Think therefore seriously on your condition; Your sleep will be
mortal unless you speedily awake, the care that is taken to invite you to
Repentance will serve only to render you inexcusable; They are many witnesses
that God can bring together for your conviction, and stop your mouth when you
shall stand before him in judgment, His word so often preached among you will
witness against the hardness of your hearts which it could not overcome; Your
Churches twice demolished will witness against you that you deserved not to
enjoy them, seeing you have kept so ill the pledge of the truth, that was there
taught you; so many Confessors, who have forsaken all for Christ's sake, will
accuse you of being unworthie of the name and Livery of Christ, for whom you
could not have the heart to forsake your goods; All the means and occasions you
have had of saving your selves from a perverse generation, which you have let
slip, will rise in judgment against you, and convince you of preferring the
base interests of the world to that of your salvation: I who now labor to
bring you back, must one day be obliged to declare against you, that you would
not hear my voice, and that I had no fruit of my care and Counsels; I shall
then with regrate, at the footstool of the Throne of God, discharge the
function of an accuser and witness, and from a Herald of his grace, I shall
become a solicitor of your deserved Condemnation.

Fear therefore these dreadful effects of your hardness of heart, and tremble
at the terrors of God; Think how terrible it is to fall into his hands; think
on the shame of being disowned by Jesus Christ before his Father, and before
his Angels; not to be Christ's, not to be known by him, to be deprived for ever
of his glory, Can any thing be more amazing and frightfull? Represent to
yourselves how he will separate the sheep from the Goats, and think on the
sentence which he will pronounce against those who are placed on the left hand
of his throne: Your business will not be then with a Regiment of Dragoons and
Cuirassiers, who can only hurt the body for a short time, but with immortal
executioners who will torment body and soul eternally: The Action will not be
then about some perishing goods, but concerning the inestimable riches of the
Kingdom of God, the loss whereof can never be repaired.

Be astonished and tremble at the thought of this judgment; and call carnestly
to Jesus Christ who can deliver you from this body of sin, and habitual
corruption, and pardon your late grievous transgressions; You can neither do
nor suffer too much to escape the terrible vengeance of God, and the wrath of
the Lamb. In fine, it is infinitely better to be partakers for a few moments of
the reproaches of Christ, that you may afterward partake eternally of the joy
of your Lord, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and afterward
to fall for ever into the horrors of the second death. I pray, that God would
reach unto you the arm of his grace to draw you out of the mortal Condition
you are in, and would establish you in the way of Salvation, that you may yet
persevere with Jesus Christ in his Temptations, and in the end may be partakers
with him in his Kingdom and Glory. AMEN.

Nam petest qui pati timet ejus esse qui passus est. Tertul. de fuga in
persecut.

Non admittit status fidei allegationem necessitatis delinquendi, quibus una
est necessitas non delinquendi. Tertul. de Cor. militis.

Nostri (ut de viris Taceam) pueri and mulierculae tortores suos Taciti vincuns
and expromere tllis gemitum nec ignis potest. Lactant. Div. Instit. lib. 5. c.
13.

Ego non habeo alind Contra Papae regnum robustius argumentuns quam quod sine
cruce regnat: [sed tandem cadet Babylon magna.] Rev. 18. verse 2. Luth. Tom. 2.
Page 323.

A WORD To MOURNERS IN ZION, To SLEEPERS UNDER THE STORM, And to the almost
CHRISTIAN: With directions to one and other.
IS it nothing to you all ye that pass by? behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow in this day of the Lords fierce anger against, and
heavy hand upon me? may the Church now say with captive mourning Zion, Lam. 1.
v. 12. But whatever those do who have no Interest in Zion, if her sons and
daughters have no bowels of sympathy they must be spurious, and but titular
Children; yea woe to him who ever he be, who is not touched and grieved for the
affliction of Joseph; Am. 6. v. 1, seqq, the evil day he puts far away, is
coming like an armed man to fall upon him; and what will he do in that day, to
whom will he flee for help? Isa. 10 v. 13, Rev. 6. v. 15, etc. Such shall
mourn, and mourn eternally, when the Mourners in Zion shall be comforted: yet
among those who would be accounted Mourners, there is so great a difference
that many (O if not the most part) deserve not that name and honor; Ah how many
mourners are there in Zion, who mourn not for Zion; their reputation, place,
estate, ease, liberty being in such hazard, (if they not already abridged or
robbed of these), they may with them Hos. 7 v. 14. mourn, cry, and howl for
such things, yet not cry unto the Lord with their heart, and for Zion; yea they
may add fasting to their mourning and crying, yea set and monthly fasting, (the
Pharisee sasted twice in the week Luke 18. v. 12.) during all the time of the
affliction, and yet (with them Zech. 7. v. 5, 6.) not fast unto the Lord, and
for Zion, but for themselves; Is it such a fast as I have chosen says the
Lord? a day for a man to afflict his soul, and not rather to loose the bands of
wickedness, Isa. 5, 8. v. 5, 6. to rent the heart and not the garments, and to
turn to the Lord? Joel. 2. v. 12, 13. yea there may be a turning, and yet not a
turning with all the heart; a loosing of bands, but not all bands of
wickedness; the right hand, and the right eye must be spared and kept, no
looseing of its band: many will part with much, yea with all; but not with, the
idol itself: a partial repentance, conversion, turning, cannot elevat a man a
bove the state of corrupt nature; and can be no evidence that a man is
delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of our
Dear Lord Jesus; if thou be a son thou must give God thy heart; Pro. 23 v. 26.
thou must give him thine cum self. 2, Cor. 8. v. 5; [God must have all or
nothing, he will not part stakes with Satan, nor dwell in that heart that has
reserved a room for an Idol;] a heart and a heart is the divine Leb Veleb.
Hebr. Dipsychos. Graec.
Character of an unsound heart; tho our sanctification will not be perfect till
this tabernacle be dissolved, yet no sin must live and reign in us, no Zoar
(tho thou call it a little one) must be spared, 1 John 3. v. 8, 9. Gal. 3. v.
10, etc. What does your faint and partial striving avail, and your being
brought near the Kingdom of heaven if ye enter not in? as good never a white
as not the better: ye come to the free market upon the Gospel Proclamation,
Isa. 55. v. 1. but ye do not offer freely; Christ seeks none of your money, or
what may do you good; but none of your idols, no lust must be kept back; he
seeks not for use, or what is to be kept, but that which must be cast away, or
for which thou must be cast into hell; and yet how many part with Christ, and
loose the pearl of price for a trifle; they bide and offer, and stand all day,
prigging with Christ, and come short of the high prize, and of salvation for a
base lust; almost perfwaded to be Christians, and continue in unbelief, almost
escaped, yet abide in Satan's snare, almost washen and not purged from their
filthiness; they have many sores cured, and the plague of the heart not healed,
nor removed, and thus are among those seekers to enter in ( Luk 13. v. 24.) who
can not because they will not, they will not go alone and without their idols,
and among those seekers of Christ ( Joh. 7. v. 34. John. 8. v. 12.) who shall
not find him, cannot come where he is, and who living in hope shall die in
their fins.

We are called to mourning, but Ah where shall we begin? what should most
affect, and most deeply wound our hearts? where can we cast our eye, on what
Church not groaning under sad persecution felt, or feared? the precious people
in the valleys of Piedmount, the progeny of these famous witnesses of Christ,
who in the night of papal darkness shined as lights, and when all the world
wondered after the beast, followed Christ fully, and sealed their testimony with
their blood, are now become a prey to the popish fury, and are driven from
their habitations and possessions; and such as fell in the hand of their
adversaries, put to suffer such hard things as may make their ears tingle who
hear; and the famous Church of France renowned for their knowledge, constancy,
zeal, resolution, sufferings, and martyrs lying so long in the mouth of the
Lion is now as it were devoured by it; so that he who got his life for a prey,
and to whom a door was opened to flee, did more rejoice then they who seized on
their forsaken dwellings and goods: time would fail, if we did enter on the
particular methods of cruelty followed by their merciless persecutors, that
these who fell in their hands would have judged many deaths rather to be chosen
then the barbarous usage, and lingering torments they were put to; so that many
ready to seal the truth with their blood did faint, denied the truth,
fuccumbed under the temptation, and defiled their conscience by an abominable
renunciation of the truth, and joining in idolatrous worship; whose case tho
matter of sad Lamantation, yet should not be improven to the reproach of that
Church, or for upbraiding those who have forsaken all for the Gospel; tho the
backsliders stand in much need of a word of warning, which is so seasonably,
and zealously tendered in the foregoing Epistle.

But tho the state of the Church be so sad upon the account of grievous
sufferings and temptation, yet we should rather mourn for the transgressions
provocations and corruption of sufferers, then for their suffering; that the
furnace appears not to be for purifying and refining, But as it was with that
degenerat people Jer 6. v. 29, 30. so it is now, the bellows are brunt, etc. If
we had once hearkened to the voice of the rod it would speak no more wrath to
us; if it had don its work it would quickly be gone, and not quarter for one
night: But Ah tho we will not hear what it says, yet the Lord hears what our
frame and conversation muttereth under it; Ah is not this its language, why
shouid we be smitten any more, we will revolt more and more? Oh that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears! that I may weep day and night
rather for the sin and provocation, then the stain and oppression of the people
called by thy name. Ah what would a deliverance from trouble profit us, if we
were not redeemed and purged from our iniquity? such a preservation would be
but a reservation for a sorer stroke, and more heavy judgment: Ah our spots
look not like the spots of Childeren, the best now, (as the Prophet once sadly
Asich. 7. v. 2, 4.
complained) is as a briar, and the most upright sharper then a thorn hedge;
the Good man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright among men,
no Nathaniels, no Israelites indeed in whom there is no guile, no Calebs who
follow the Lord fully, no Zachariases and Elisabethes who walk in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord bleamless: so that I may from a sad
heart with Ibid. Ver. 5.
him fay trust not in a friend, put no confidence in a guide, the righteous man
Perishes and is taken to heaven and we lay it not to heart, our Moseses and
Samuels, our Noah's Daniels and Jobs are departed and gone; Ah where are these
grave judicious, sober, zealous ministers I have seen in the Church? where
these humble serious sincere Christians? But now on the one hand profanity and
open impiety, and on the other pride, animosity, contention, and saying stand
by thy self for I am holier then thou has sucked out the power and life of
religion, so that some have no more but (and others not so much as) a name that
they live.

What (may you say) are these the words of one so often upbraided for his
charity? But 1, If I had more of Charity: yet 2, what pretense to charity can
these plead who so apparently walk in the broad way, and carry their ditty in
their forehead? who will call these clean who are wallowing in the mire and
lying in it? but 3. as for others I judge not any as to their state, there is
one who knows and will judge. 4. in the worst of times God has his hidden
and chosen ones, his thousands who have not bowed the knee to any idol whether
bodily or spiritual; and the most sincere usually least seen, and make little
noise with their feet while they are walking to heaven: but of many who have
taken on a big profession, we may boldly with a zealous Ancient say, vel hoc
non est Evangelium, vel isti non sunt Evangelici, either this is not the Gospel
that we preach, or these have not embraced it, and Sinunc Adam resurger^t and
videret hanc insaniam omnium ordinum, prosecto credo quod praestupore tanquam
lapis staret. Luth. in Genesis cap. 3.
are not Christians. If Adam were now risen again he would (said Luther) stand
as astonished at the madness of all ranks of persons walking as if they did not
mind eternity. 1. Ye earthly minded ones who have Religion in your mouth, and
the world in your heart; ye Mammon-worshippers cannot Worship God in spirit and
in truth: Mat. 6. v. 24. Ephesians. 5. v. 5, 1 Timothy 6. v. 9. 2. Ye proud arrogant
saucie supercilious ones, who have not ^^^rnt of Christ tobe meek and lowly in
heart: Mat. 11. v. 29. Jam. 4. v. 26. Psa. 138. v. 6. the factious, turbulent,
implacable, censorious; uncharitable, the evil speaker who cannot bridle his
tongue, not sparing the most innocent if not of his lure, who is never so in
his element as when sowing discord among brethren, and reviling the faithful
have abandoned the divine Character of those who will abide in Gods Tabernacle,
and who are precious in his sight. Jam. 3. v. 14.15, 16, 17. Gal. 5. v. 22. 1
Cor. 13. Psa. 15. v. 33. Pro. 6. v. 19, 3. Ye Herodians who hear gladly, and
do many things, but your right hand and right ey must be spared, saying
Naaman-like in this Lord pardon thy servant, and thou shall be my master; ye
who have indented with Christ on terms of your own choice, and with a reserve,
and the permission and consent of your darling and master lust, may suppose ye
have two masters: but Christian be none of them, ye cannot serve God and an
idol-lust, Mat. 6. v. 24; Christ must have the whole heart or he can have none
of it; if Satan get a part he has all; one lake and chink if not stopped will as
certainly sink the vessel as a thousand, Jam. 2. v. 10. If I might here insist
how many particulars fall under this head? But in a word, how can these think
to find life in the scriptures who will not acknowledge them to be the divine
infallible unerring rule of life? who dare presume to judge the rule by which
they must be judged, who reject and embrace so much of it as seems good in
their eyes: thou art inexcusable O man, and self condemned who professest thou
art a Christian, and wilt hearken to Christ's voice acknowledging all his
commands and ways to be equal and just, and yet dare cast so many of them
behind thy back, and set up a new and Antiscripturall way to heaven, in which
thou and thy lusts may walk together: Ah do thou profess thy self to be one
of those who tremble at Gods word, and yet art not afraid thus to add or take
from it; and do not tremble when thou read the dreadful curse Rev. 22. v.
18, 19.? these few British wretches who having disowned the late King his
authority, dealt more ingenouously, tho most balsphemously, in razing out of
their Bibles (as I heard some sectaries before them did) the word King, where
ever they found it; but before they arrived to that hight of impiety they had
fallen into many vile and abominable errors, and at length burnt the whole
scriptures; now tho ye abhor the thoughts of doing such a wicked thing, yet
have ye not too far homologated with them? have ye not rejected and cast Gods
word behind your back, so many clear and weighty commands, so pithily pressed?
and so often inculcated? ye durst not raze them ont of your Bibles, yet would
not suffer them to be written in your hearts; may not ye who have thus taken a
way from the word of life, fear lest God take away your part out of the book of
life? and tho yo have some room (and may be a name) in the church here, yet
shall find no place in the assembly of the first born in heaven, ye will be
ready with the first sadly to regrate and complain of papal and Cefarian
indulgences and dispensationes with laws divine and humane, and yet the pope
and Caesar within your own bowels are cherished in their dispensing with so
many express commands of God, and in indulging you to live in those sins he
has so severely forbidden.

What hopes can there be of such almost Christians? what hopes of ignorant and
formal professors? and what hopes of hypocritical zelots, self-seeking
worshippers, or scandalous ranters, that they will stand and ride out the
storm, if the winds become more boisterous? But supposing they may, (for a
natural conscience, a name, credit, and reputation may engage to do and suffer
much) yet what credit gain or advantage to the Gospel could their sufferings
bring? but Oh what a sad reproach and discredit to the honorable cause for
which they suffer must their unholy walk, and conversation be? and what a
woeful scandal and stumbling block to those that are without? while as the
sufferings of the upright and sincere, from time to time have proven such a
noble attractive to draw such into Christ, and a prevailing inducement to
embrace the Gospel hence the saying not more common then certain, sanguis
martyrum semen Ecclesiae, the blood of the Martyrs the seed of the Church:
plures efficimur quoties metimur, the more as Tertullian said, they were thus
cut down, they increased and multiplied the more; But Ah will ye thus put
Christ and his glorious Gospel to an open shame, while ye pretend to suffer
for him and his cause? will ye lose the honor and reward of your sufferings by
your ungospel-like life and deportment?

But O ye in whom are any grains of sincerity and uprightness, in whom is found
the root of the matter, your sufferings and blood are precious in the sight of
the Lord: and how are ye engaged to glorify God as by your sufferings, so by
your humility, self denial, zeal, and holy conversation, and think it not
enough to suffer for him, unless ye profit by your sufferings, reap the sweet
fruit that grows on a sanctified cross, and improve the rod as your talent
for to be laid out for your Masters honor, unless ye hear its voice, and
consider what it says; and unless the furnace become refining and purging to
you: now ye are called afresh to try and search your ways, to labor after a
greater measure of sincerity mortification, humility, self-denial, charity,
tenderness, zeal, circumspection: now ye are called to be more frequent and
fervent in prayer, to be much in the exercise of meditation, fasting, reading
the sriptures, and fearching after directions and consolations suitable to your
trial; there be many graces ye are now in a speriall manner called to
exercise, and many duties ye are obliged to perform: and O do not slight that
mercy, that while so many having made shipwreck of the faith and of a good
Conscience are called to Lament and mourn, and are held on the rack by their
fears and horror, you having by Grace been enabled to stand out under such a
terrible and lasting trial are called to abound in thankfullness, and to
rejoice: the times are sad, your Losses may be great, and you hay nothing in
hand, no provision for to morrow and none of your friends or relations at hand,
yet how much are ye Concerned to rejoice, to rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your privilege, and great shall your Reward in heaven be; Phil. 1. v.
29. Mat. 5. v. 22. your sympathizing Brethren who look on you with sad hearts
yet rejoice in your stedfastness; ye are your faithful pastors joy and Crown,
as they Phil. 1. v. 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 19. were Paul's; the blessed name of our
Lord Jesus Christ has been glorified in you as in them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. v. 12. and
may I not say of you what is said of these 2 Cor. 8. v. 23. O read it, I scarce
dare speak it and say, ye are the Glory of Christ, but he by his Apostle has
said it, and as he has honored you to be his faithful witnesses to assert
his truth, and to be precious Instruments to hold forth his Glory before a
persecuting and backsliding generation, so he will glorify you before Angels
and men; and ye who have owned him now shall be owned by him when he will say
unto the fearful and unbeliever depart from me I know you not.

O think you see Christ putting the crown of glory on your heads when ye see
men pletting a crown of thorns for you: say with the martyrs when stripped naked,
and shut out in the winter night to the open air, to be tormented with the
nipping frost, the air is sharp, the cold gresvous, but there is a sweet repose
and rest in Abraham's bosom; this night will shortly over and pass, your
Nubecula est cito transitura. Athanas.
ten days tribulation, and Satan's license (Rev. 2. v. 10.) to imprison and
torment you, will quickly expire, and then a blessed, long lasting, everlasting
Eternity of liberty, joy, and soul satisfying, unconceiveable felicity, glory,
perfection. Suppose ye see Christ now standing with a napkin in his hand to wip
all tears from your eyes, Rev. 7. v. 17. and with a pen in his hand writing
down, and holding a bottle to receive all your tears; all are booked and
botled. Psalm. 59. v. 8. suppose ye see the Angels rejoicing in your valor, and
stedsastness; (as they did Luke 15. v. 10. Yea and more then at thy first
conversion) and that ye hear the Lord stopping the mouth of the accuser of the
brethren with your faithfullness, and constancy as weell as once with his, Job
2. v. 3. suppose ye see Christ welcoming you to heaven, and saying to his
Father what once the Angel said to John of your Brethren, Rev. 7. v. 14, 15,
16, 17. these are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their robes, and made them white in my blood, let them come before thy throne
etc. and will he not own, and make good his precious promise Mat. 19. v. 29.
Mark. 10. v. 30. and say these are they who have forsaken house Lands, country
and all that was dear to them, for my name, and Gospels-sake, let them have the
great and glorious recompense I have purchased for them, and promised to them.
O then watch ye while a secure world is fast a sleep; stand fast in the faith,
quite you like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 10. v. 13. in nothing terrified by your
adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
salvation. and that of God. Phil. 1. v. 26. and consider the more sharp the
trial is, the more glory ye bring to Christ, his Gospel, and truth; and let it
be on record to the succeeding generations, and to your praise, that ye did
cleave to Christ, and abode with him in an hour of such terrible temptation,
while the persecution was (in some respect) more hot then the Neroman, Decian,
or Diocletian, and the methods more barbarous, cruel, and subtle then any
invented for tormenting the primitive Christians by merciless pagan Emperors.
Finally my Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; take
unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil
day, and having done and suffered all to stand. Ephesians. 6. v. 10, 13, etc. the eye
of your Captain, (who is the captain of salvation) his encouraging eye is on
you; and his supporting arm under you, and let your eye be toward him, and
your hands employed in fighting valiantly under his banner, in his name, and
for his cause; O do ye not see him with the crown of glory in his hand, and
hear him saying, so fight and strive that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. v. 24, 25.
to him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, and of the
hidden Manna; I will give him a white stone, and a new name which no man
knows but he that receives it; I will give him the morning star, cloth him
with white raiment, and he shaell walk with me in white; I will make him a
pillar in the temple of my God, and will confess his name before my Father and
his Angels; yea (O read and admire) I will grant to him to sit with me on my
throne; And because he has kept the word of my patience, I will also keep him
from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world, to try them.
Rev. 2. v. 7, 17, 28. Rev. 3. v. 4, 5, 10, 12, 21. dare ye then complain? will
ye fear or faint; who is he (Devil or man) that can harm you while ye thus
follow that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. v. 13. ye must prevail and carry the day,
be conquerours, and more then conquerours, yea in all these things in which
your enemies seem to triumph over you; your loss shall be your great gain, your
trouble, pain, blood, sorrow, anguish, work out your unspeakable joy and
consolation, your security, safety and eternal salvation; and your reproach
for Christ shall be your crown, and name of praise; Romans 8. v. 37. Rev. 12. v.
11. wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees and let
your feet still, walk in straight paths: Heb. 12. v. 12, 13. wherefore is thy
countenance sad, art not thou a Kings son? Let not your enemies think ye serve
a hard master, and have an unkind Father; and that ye live by sense, while ye
are contending for the faith, but let them know ye have meat they know not of,
ye have provisions, consolations, and supporting influences and supplies they
are strangers to, and intermedle not with; and say to such of them as have any
relics of natural tenderness, weep not for us but for your Vide Lactantium de
mortibus persecutorum.
selves, and your Children: and do not exclude the most merciless persecutors
from your compassion, but pray for them while they are digging pits for you;
yet let your compassion in a special manner be extended to your
Apostat-Bretheren; let your bowels yern upon them; O wrestle, pray, and cry
mightily unto God that he may pity and recover these backsliders; Oh how
deplorable is their case? and how can their hearts endure in the day the Lord
shall deal with them? or if now they would but consider these dreadful and
awaking Scriptures, Mat. 10. v. 33. Mark. 8. v. 38. Heb. 6. v. 4, 5, 6. Heb.
10. v. 26, 27, 31, 38. If their consciences be not seared as with an hot iron
their life must be (and we hear to many it is) more bitter to them then many
deaths: thus their dreadful fall should be so far from occasioning your
stumbling, and inviting you to follow their steps, that it should mightily
provoke you to constancy, and out of Gratitude to him by whose Grace ye have
been upheld make you (when by their example tempted to renounce the faith) say
what these renowned Martyrs said to their pagan-persecutors tempting them to
sacrifice to an Idol, because their fellows and Companions had done so, and
telling them they were not wiser nor better then they, nay (said these worthies
of the Lord and O Let the same mind be in you) but we will the rather, stand to
make up the woeful breach these have made; and we are ready to sacrifice our
Lives by your hands to the honor of our God whom they by their Idolatrous
sacrifice have so much dishonored. O ye excellent ones and Dearly beloved go
on and continue to be with these precious souls the repairers of the Lamentable
breaches made in our Zion by these fallen stars in this day of visitation: and
then 2, let this provoke you to thankfullness and to admire his unspeakable
Love to you, by whose supporting influences ye have been enabled to stand under
these boisterous storms and tempests; that poor nothing worm ye have been
strengthened to stand under such violent and strong temptations: O how are ye
Concerned to praise your holy and omnipotent keeper, counselor, and guide; and
under all your pinching straits and hard measures from adversaries to rejoice
that, ye are not of them who have drawn back unto perdition: as for these poor
souls who have put there salvation to such a venture, I need not speak to their
case, (tho it here fall in) that being so fully and faithfully considered in
the foregoing Epistle, to which I commend you, as for warning to take 1 Cor.
10. v. 12.
heed that ye fall not, so to excite you to abound more and more in praising
him who hitherto has kept you from falling, and is Iud. v. 24, 25.
able to present you faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding
joy.

I stopped here, resolving to add no more, but while the press was going I began
more seriously to consider that the time did call, and that as the need so the
desire of many might invite to stay a while in offering some seasonable
directions how to carry in such a day, by putting one and other in mind of the
most concerning duties now to be performed; and in warning of the snares,
precipices, sins and offenses to be carefully avoided and guarded against, for
stirring up one and other to walk as becomes Christians indeed, and such as
are sensible of the wrath gone out against us: let me then in all humility and
tenderness offer, and as a Minister of Christ in his name and authority require
you as you will answer to him in the day of accounts to hearken to the
following durections from his word.

1. Then I would entreat and obtest you to make Religion your Business, and not
to serve God in the by: O be more zealous for Gods Glory, and more careful
about matters of soul concernment then for perishing trifles; asknowing there
is but one thing necessary. Mat. 6. v. 33. Joh. 6. v. 27. Coloss. 3. v. 2. Luk
to v. 24. often putting up to your souls the question our Blissed Lord has
offered to your most serious consideration Mat. 16. v. 26. What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? if thou step
out of the way, thou may fall among thieves who will rob thee of that
jewel; O Remember the way is a narrow way, with difficulty diligence and
circumspection kept and walked in, Mat. 7. v. 31. Phil. 2. v. 12. 2. Pet. 1. v.
5. seqq. hence.

2. Walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. v. 15. taking heed to all your steps watching
over your thoughts words and whole deportment, that it may be such as becomes
the Gospel of Christ: O how are ye concerned (especially now,) to make the
light of your holy Conversation so to shine that others seeing your Good works
(and you by these) may Glorify your father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. v. 16.
that the Vexatio dat intellectum, Schola crucis Schola Lucis. Cypr. Sermon. 4. de
immort.
saying may hold in you, the School of affliction is the School of light and
instruction. O then take heed ye make not the Gospel which ye profess, and for
which, ye suffer, and are ready (as ye pretend) to suffer the loss of al
things, suffer by you, and be Blasphemiam ingerit relegioni quam colit qui quod
confitetur, non ante omnes impleverit. Cypr. de Sin Clericorum.
reproached by your ungospel like carriage: your steps are narrowly marked; by
the sin of a David, occasion was given to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme;
2 Samuel 12. v. 14. by a blot in thy carriage (tho it were but in reference to
thy relative duties) the name of God and his doctrine may be blassphemed. 1 Timothy
6. v. 1; Ah will thou dishonor, and wrong the honorable cause for which thou
suffer, by thy negligent walk and unsuitable conversation? O look to your
selves that ye lose not those things ye have wrought, but receive the great
reward. 2. Ioh. 8. there may be much done and much sufferred for a good cause,
and all amount to nothing. 1 Cor 13. v. 2; 3. O watch over your hearts and
ways! ye are now placed sentinels, the enemy is ready to break in, and make a
prey of all if he find us sleeping; Satan will be now ready to tempt, knowing
what a provocation it is, to sin in the face of judgments and in a time of
wrath and indignation; Remember Lots wif.

3. Walk prudently, as wise not as fools: Ephesians. 5. v. 15. hearken to Christ's
Counsel, and join prudence with your innocence; Mat. 10. v. 16. now satan will
be ready to sow his tares, to put on his surplice, and transform him self into
an Angel of light; and if he Cannot make thee split on the rock of profanity
and looseness, he will strive to sink thee in the gulf of error and
irregularities. O be Entreated therefore not to Believe every spirit but try
whither it be of God or not 1 John 4. v. 1. take heed what ye hear and how ye
hear. 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 21. Act. 17. v. 11. O what a noble ornament is prudence to
religion, and how ready are imprudent Zelots to cast a stumbling block in the
way of the profane, and to furnish the triumph of Papists by their heady, rash,
irregular actings, and wild fancies? O better you had never been born, then
thus to raise an evil report on Religion, to cast a stumbling block in the way
of them who are ready to break their necks without your help and to harden
those in their evil way who are but too resolute to go on therein.

4. Redeem time from the world, its work, business, fellowship; and lay it out
for God and for eternity; and ye shall be (ye can be) no loosers; for then ye
will trade with Christ, and for his gold that will make you Rich indeed, you
will not run as uncertain, and beat the air, you will not pursue shadows, and
perish in the pursuit; but will run and obtain, fight and prevail, and carry
the prize and Crown of Glory. Ephesians. 5. v. 16. Rev. 3. v. 18. 1 Cor. 9. v. 26.

5. In a time of such perplexity, and uncertainly Labor to secure 1. the
treasure and pearl of prize; 2 Pet. 1. v. 10. if it be in saftie what need we
value the loss of perishing trifles? 2. Provide a retiring and resting place
and when you espy no city of refuge, run to the strong rock, and provid you
Chambers there; and however tempestuous the storm may become. ye need not fear.
Isa. 26 v. 20. Pro. 18. v. 10. Psalm. 61. v. 23. 3dly while there is so little
love and kindness to be pected from men, and so little truth and fidelyty among
them, so that we may take up the word. Mic. 7. v. 5.6.4. rejoice that ye have a
friend in heaven, to whom ye may run, and whom ye may safely trust; and when ye
find little comfort in conversing with men let your Conversation be in heaven;
be frequent and servent in your udresses to God, and careful to mantain a
fellowship with the father and his son Jesus Christ; be much in prayer,
Meditation, reading, and take heed how ye perform these duties Phil. 2. v. 20.
Joh. 2. v. 3. Luke 8. v. 18. Heb. 4. v. 2. Jam. 1. v. 2, 22, 23. but you will
say, what could discourage us if these were secured? But how may that be don?
Ans. as to the first an heavenly Conversation is the best way to secure the
heavenly treasure. Coloss. 3. v. 2, 4. As to the second run in to that rock,
and these Chambers of security by faith; if thou thus cast thy self and all thy
burdens on the Lord he shall sustain and care for thee: Psalm. 55. v. 22. 1 Pet.
5. v. 7; If with him Psalm. 61. v. 4. thou trust in the Covert of his wings,
thou may with him. Psa. 63. v. 7. Rejoice under their shadow: O then, when
thy heart is overwhelmed, say with that eminent Believer Psa. 61. v. 12. Hear
my cry o God, and lead me to the Rock that is higher then I. As to the 3d, our
Blessed Lord assures you that ye are his friends, and shall abide in his love if
ye keep his Commandments, and do what soever he bids you. Joh. 15. v. 10, 14.

6. Set the Lord allways before you, and walk as under his all seeing eye, and
as hearing the sound of the last trumpet in your ears, and summoning you to
judgment, to give an account of all ye have don and said Psa. 16. v. 9. 2 Cor.
5. v. 5, 10.

7. Be tender and Audaciam existimo de bono divini precepti disputare, nec quia
bonum est (i. e. nobis videtur) auscultare debemus, sed quia Deus pracepit.
Tertul. de panit.
tremble at the word of God, at the whole word, not daring to cast any part of
it behind thy back; O said noble Luther let the word of God come, and tho we
had a hundred necks let them all stoop to it: and O said Cypr: loquere magister
bone, libenter te audio, and cum adversariis mihi and cum irasceris. O do not
wound Conscience in the Least; as knowing that ye Cannot please God in any
thing; unless ye carefully endeavor to please him in all things Coloss. 1. v.
10. Jam. 2. v. 10, 11. Act. 24. v. 16. and think it not enough to leave off the
practice of some sins, unless ye forsake all; and unless ye forsake and loath,
and find in your selves that indignation and Revenge against, and carefullness
to avoid it 3 Cor. 7. v. 11.

8. Beware of doing any thing out of a doubting Conscience, not being persuaded
of its lawfullness. Romans 14. v. 14, 23. and O beware of going against thy
light; if thou act against conscience thou art not subject to Gods authority,
but despisest him speaking (as thou supposest) by his deputy. Jam. 1 v. 5. But
(says Mr. Butroughs) take heed the Devil be not in the Conscience, (as the
place where he thinks he may lodge, with least suspicion) that must be no
sanctuary to him, but he must be pulled from the horns of that Altar: and
(says he) if a man be proud and turbulent in his Carriage, 2. if he will not
make use of means to inform his Conscience, 3. if he Can give no rational
account for his actings, 4ly if he go against his own principles, etc. we fear
the Devil is in that man's Conscience.

8. Let self denial be thy daily study, that being the first Lesson of
Christianity; and if we be Christians indeed it must be our daily task, it
being so necessary and so hardly Learned: that Idol, mistaken, miscalled, Satan
serving, God dishonouring, self destroying SELF, keeping still such Court in
the heart tho in part renewed, and having such power and credit with us while
in this state, may readily be Entertained and insinuat it self where it is
least suspected, in our professions, religious perfirmances, humiliations,
sufferings for, and labors in the Gospel, yea and with our Zeal, unless we be
very humble watchful circumspect; and that dead fly in the apotchecaries
ointment will make it stink; what we do for self will not be reckoned as
service done to Christ. Matt. 16. v. 24. Gal. 6. v. 7, 8. hence.

9. Be much at home and at the work of, self examination; be not strangers
where ye ought to converse most, and with what ye should be best acquainted: O
Be diligent students in the book of your own hearts and Consciences; search
after and diligently examine What have been, and are your works and way; and
whatever Business you may slight or neglect forget not seriously to try and
examine whether ye be in the faith or not; and to Commune much with your own
hearts, bringing your hopes and expectations, your profession and persuasion,
your works walk and way to the touchston of the sancturay, the word of God.
Psa. 4. v. 4. Psalm. 77. v. 6. 2 Cor. 13. v. 5.

10. Be Nathaniels Christians Indeed, abhorring Hypocrisy as the bane of the
Cristian profession: seek not a name, but to get the (new name) Rev. 2. v. 17.
and to have the name of God engraven on thy holy Conversation. Rev. 3. v. 12.
do not perform religious duties with sound of trumpet Mat. 6. v. 5, 17, etc.
Say not, pulchrum est digito monstrari, ac dicier hic est. Put not on more sail
then ye have ballast, and set not up a sign at the door for what is not within:
let not the wind of applause fill the sails if your Course be heaven ward; the
less dinne and noise ye make your profession will be judged the more fincere;
and since so many are ready to mock at Religion because of the Hypocrisy of
some empty professors, with what care should we abstain from all appearance
thereof, that none have occasion to laugh at us, for a piping voice, affected
tone, a sullen and austere countenance Artificial sighs and groans. Oh that in
such a day, so many should desire rather to appear, then be, and rather to
shine, then have light. O let your sincerity appear as in your zeal for Gods
worship and truth, so in your upright and righteous dealing with men, and in
your civil courteous Kind carriage to wards them. I would Farevvell Sermon. p.
157.
(says Mr. Watson) try a moral man by the duties of the first table, and I
would try a Professor by the duties of the second table. O study to answer your
relation, and conscientiously to discharge your Relative duties, these being
the touchston of our sincerity: who will account him an honest Christian, who
is not a good husband, parent, Child, servant, neighbor, who is not upright in
his dealing, faithful in his promises, and sincere in his Professions? O let
none have occasion to say he met with a cheat, while he had to do with one who
had a name in the Church! Joh. 1. v. 47. Romans 2. v. 21, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 8. v. 5.
hence.

11. Beware of a haughty heart and supercilious carriage, and do not exercise
thy self in great matters, and in things too high for thee, above thy reach,
and without thy Sphere Psa. 131. v. 1, 2. stretch not your self beyond your
line, and leap not over the hedge lest a serpent bite you; zeal is precious,
it is a heavenly spark, but fire not kept within the chimney may consume the
house: when we meddle with things without our reach, and play the Bishops (as
the word 1 Pet. 4. v. 15. imports) in another man's Diocese, as we act without
Gods warrant, so without his blessing, and may fear his hand: Ah from whence
does all mischief and confusion Come, but from men's pride driving them beyond
their line, and to act without their Sphere? and O what a quiet world should we
have ( Christ. arm. part. 2. Chap. 2.
says Mr. Gurnal) if every thing and person knew, and kept its own place! and
O if they (and how many such are there) who are guilty herein would ponder what
he further writes concerning such turbulent medlers what thou do without a
call, cannot (says he) be don in faith; 2. when thou thus actest thou putest
thy self out under Gods protection; 3. thou can have no comfort in suffering
for what thou do without thy Masters call and warrant; 4. such as dare go
without their Sphere know not by what spirit they are led, it must be an
erratique spirit that carries us out of our place; 5. men would consider from
what principle their irregular and eccentricall motions must flow, viz. 1
Pride, 2 discontent with their condition, 3. unbelief, (supposing that God did
stand in need of their sinful and unruly motions to carry on his work) 4.
blind and misinformed zeal. Ah if the eccentricall motions of the time were
rightly analized, I fear it might be found that much of that which is fathered
upon faith and trusting in God, and zeal for his glory, would be resolved in
unbelief, impatience, carnal policy, and self ends.

12. Prize and esteem persons and things according to their relation to Christ;
1 Cor 2. v. 2. Coloss. 3. v. 11. 1. as to persons love for Christ, and with
BVCER all in whom ye see any thing of Christ, tho they be not of your
persuasion as to matters controverted among the faithful, 1 Cor. 13 v. 2. and
make conscience of these duties toward the Brethren, to which this love does
engage thee; v. 4.5. art thou persecuted take heed thou do not persecute, and
wound by thy tongue these who are persecuted for Christ; Woe to them who add
affliction to them who are afflicted for his name by their Censorious and
uncharitable speeches, and by a tongue set on fire of hell, tho under a
pretense of zeal for heaven. 2. as to things prize his word, and prize and own
his truth while so many now are ashamed of him and it; Buy his truth, but sell
it not ye know not its worth; Prove. 23. v. 23. if ye sell, ye will loose on the
bargain, and repent of your folly; choose suffering rather then sin, and to
endure hard things rather then to part with this precious pearl: but tho ye
should prize every truth, and make Conscience of every duty on which ye see
Christ's signet yet Lay out your zeal mainly for what is of most concernment;
tho ye must not disown or deny any truth, yet ye should mainly contend for the
faith once delivered to the saints. Jud. v. 3. and tho we must not abandon any
duty, yet we must not with Hypocritical Pharisees prefer duties of less
concernment: Matt. 23. v. 23. Be not like the Hypocrites who will run many
miles and upon many dangers in following pretended duties whereby they may get
a name, and be noticed, and yet make little Conscience of serving God in his own
way if in it they be not noticed, and Cannot by it get a name. Once more prize
Gospel ordinances because they bear his seal, keep up their Authority as being
the means of salvation, the conduit of heavenly influences, and shining lights
whereby blind mortals must be directed homeward to their rest. Romans 10. v. 17.
Romans 1. v. 16. 1 Cor. 1. v. 21. and hence the many directions for keeping up
the credit of ordinances in most deficult and dark cases; Song. 1. v 8. Ephesians 4.
v. 12, 13. Heb. 10. v. 25. Act. 2. v. 42. Act. 20 v. 7. Jude v. 10. do not
Scare at your meat because ye have a quarrel against the Cook who dresseth it;
and slight not Christ's ordinances because of some failings in the
administrators; do not think ye can honor God by despising his worship: Ah
shall it become a mark of zeal, that hitherto has been judged an evidence of
profanity? the Lord knows how Sabbaths are spent by those who stay at home
while they are called to worship God in his public ordinances: Consider what a
guiltiness and provocation it is to withdraw from that part of his worship
whereby he is most honored in the world! and what a hazard it is, and how much
thou may loose by being absent where God has told us he would Come and bliss
us. Exodus 20. v. 24. Whereas ( says Ruth. Let. p. 421.
Mr. Rutherfurd) ye complain of a dead Ministry in your bounds; hunger of
Christ's making may thrive under Stewarts who mind not the feeding of his flock;
the flock is obliged to seek him in the sheepherds tents. [O Blissed soul that
can look above a pulpit, and over a man up to Christ:] conversion and life is
not tied to a man's lips and lively preaching, the blessing of ordinances must
be looked for from their Author upon whom we must wait, we know (says Reverend
Beza with 17 Ministers of Geneva in their Answer to non-conformists in England
Ann. 1547.) that it is better to have half a loaf, then no bread if thou were
hungry indeed thou would say, better course fare, then to starve.

13. Let your Moderation be known to all, your meekness, compassion,
tenderness, condescension: Philip. 4. v. 3. 1 Cor. 9. v. 19, 22. Romans 15. v. 1.
Now we are Come to a point wherein the safety, welfare and beauty of the
Church is so nearly concerned, viz. the unity of the faithful among
themselves. Let us therefore stay a while in pressing of it, and discovering the
evil of Schism and Division, how pernicious it is to the Church as displeasing
to God; and O if men persecut, God smite, and we cut and rend, how lamentable
must the case be; and how foolish we if we thus expose our selves to reproach,
to be a gazing stock to Devils and men, provoke the Lord against us, and
encourage persecutors to prosecute their cruel designs? therefore let us here
stay a while, and for our more clear and distinct procedur speak to this head
in several directions, whereof this shall be the first, O let your meek and
Moderat conversation make you and your profession amiable in the eyes of
others: Be not furious and Jehu like drive without Consideration, but ponder
dangers and precipices that are in the way; we cannot exceed in our love to
God, and zeal for his Glory, but it is easy and ordinary to exceed in the
ontgoings of our passion, which we are ready to father on our zeal; the famous
Antony being asked by the fathers of that time, what was the virtue whereby a man
was preserved in the Offices of piety, that he may continue in the practice
thereof to the end? wisely Cum haec question esset proposita inter Patres qua nam
virtus Christianum hominem in officiis pietatis recte conservaret? and alii
aliter responderent, alii id commode jesuniis vigiliisque, alii contemptu rerum
externarum, alii per charitatis officia posse fieri censebant; respondit tandem
Beatus Antonius inquiens, omnia quae dixistis utilia sunt Christianis, sed his
principalis Gratia tribuenda non est, idque plurimorum fratrum casus,
confirmant qui versantes in his observationibus deceptisunt, eo quod in bono
quod caeperant [modum and discretionem] non tenuerunt: in omnibus ergo quae
agimus discretio anteponenda est: constat sine discretionis gratia and modo
nullam perfici, vel stare virtutem posse. -- Porro addidit Divus Antonius
exemplum Heronis Senis, quo ostendere patribus voluit non posse sine gravi
periculo corporis and animae pretermitti modum ac discretionem] Vit. Antonii
per Nozerenum ex Athanasio page mihi 109. The saying [(...)] nequid nimis] is
well known tho little observed.
answered, that Moderation and discretion did herein excel; that tho the
exercise of many Graces was necessary, yet the fall of rash zelots might
convince us that herein Moderation must have the preeminence.

14. Be not selfwilled, turbulent, implacable, and tenacious in your own
quarrel, and as to what your personal Interest may be Concerned in: take away
Cesset propria voluntas and non erit infernum. Bern. Sermon. 3. de res.
(says Bernard) men's will and there will be no fire in hell; and take away
(may we say) passionat wilful will and the fire of contention will die out,
Prove. 13. v. 10. O But to be of a tractable humble condescending temper is a
noble commendation, Apud Plutarch de cohibenda ira.
I will (says Asthines to Aristippus) always acknowledge you the better and
more worthy man, because I began the strife, and you the peace. hence.

15. Let the Athenian Consult the Ministers of the provincial Synod at London
[Ius. div. minist.] part. 1. c. 13. and Praeface with M. Buroughs his
irenicum. page 286.
(...) be established, and a line of forgetfulness drawn over all our
differences, that they may be buried in oblivion: and let none say of thee,
that when the faithful are for peace thou art for war: O if thou have any zeal
for the Glory of Christ, and the good of his Church walk by that Divine rule
Phil. 3. v. 16. [Wherto we have already attained let us (says the Apostle)
walk by the same rule, minding the same things; and as for some particulars
wherein we may differ, let us not press our own sentiments on others but
patiently wait till God revile his mind to us as to these.] [If (says Gurn.
Christ. arm. part. 2. c. 2. see also M. Buroughs Iren. c. 10.
M. Gurnal) the servants by their struggling about the house dressing thrust the
child in the fire, and burn it, what thanks will they get from the parent the
Master at his return: the Child (says he) is religion, which is like to perish
by our debates and devisions] hence.

16. Let us mourn for our sinful, foolish, Church destroying, and self
destroying divisions which have been both the meritorious and Instrumental
cause of so much ruin; by these we have provoked God to wrath against us,
reproacht the truth we profess, and made our selves a reproach, have played the
Adversaries Game, have encouraged and strengthened their hands in their attempts
against us, weakened our own hands, and have not pondered what our Lord Warned
us of (tho so clear in it self) Mark. 3. v. 24, 25. nor the saying (not more
common then manifest) Divide and impera. O then, Mark them that cause
Divisions, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple; Romans 16. v. 17, 18. and, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellow ship of the spirit, if any bowels and Mercies
let nothing be don through strife or vain Glory, having the same Love and being
of one accord: Philip. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. O how are we engaged to love these
Ministers, and esteem them highly who are for peace unity moderation charity
and love among the faithful; Such Ministers being a blessing to the Church
while they live, and their Memory precious to posterity; the ornament of a meek
humble and quiet spirit being in the sight of God and man of a high price, and
may be called the truly zealous sincere Christian his Crown, the character of a
Gospel like frame, the comfort of the Brethren, and a noble attractive to
allure and draw in those who are without. 1 Pet. 3. v. 4. Coloss. 3. v. 12, 13,
14, 15. O then have no hand in renting and dividing the Church; is it not
Christ's body; Ah while the enemy is seeking to destroy it, will thou cut it in
pieces? How much so ever of zeal may be pretended for such a work, yet we are
persuaded from the word of truth, that only by pride comes contention. Prove.
13. v. 10. the zealous M. Firmin speaking of the woeful divisions and many
sects then abounding in England, and the abominable blasphemies vented by these
who once seemed to have been most zealous and eminent professors, think it not
strange (says be) to see it so, for I knew the most famous, and who seemed the
most zealous among them, and saw the bones of pride shamfully stick out in them
all. Little good can be expected from a prond zelot: O then while ye are
asserting, standing in defense of, and suffering for the faith, study to keep
the unity of the spirit, the unity of the faith, the Ephesians. 4. v. 3.
unity of the Church in the bond of peace. If any would but reflect on Christ's
legacy and last words to his disciples, his farewell Sermon, and solemn prayer
Joh. 14 v. 27. Joh. 15, v. 12, 17. Joh. 17. v. 11, 21, 23. Or if any would
seriously ponder the Apostles most pathetick exhortations, and the Arguments
whereby he presses these 1 Cor. 1. v. 10. Ephesians. 4. v. 33, etc. Philip. 2. v. 1,
etc. Phil. 3. v. 15, 16. Romans 12. v, 9, 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 9. with many more to
that purpose, and if any will call to mind the sharp rebukes and checks given
to, and the dismal characters of separatists and Church dividers, with the sad
regrate and Lamantations over them 1 Cor. 1. v. 11, etc. 1. Cor. 3. v. 31. 1
Cor. 11. v. 18. Gal. 5. v. 20; Jud. v. 19. who (I say) considering these things
could imagine that the tares of division and discord among Brethren could be
sown by any but the envious one, and his factors? Yet for the further
conviction of Schismatics, let us add somewhat more, beginning with that Gospel
like prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, that under it those who are by nature wild
like wolves Lions and boares shall ly down together, and sweetly feed: Isa. 11.
v. 6, etc. and did not Zacharias Prophesy of Christ, that he should guide our
feet in the way of peace? Luc. 1. v. 79. 2 is it not a special promise in the
Covenant of grace that the Lord will give us one heart, and one way? Jer. 32.
v. 39. Ezekiel. 11. v. 19. and O what a stumbling block is it to the Jews that
they see not these prophesies and promises fullfilled in those who are called
Christians? 3 is not Christ the prince of peace? Isa. 9. v. 6. is not his
gospel the Gospel of peace? Romans 10. v. 15. is not peace included in our
Christian calling? 1 Cor. 7. v. 15. did not Christ die with peace in his lips?
Joh. 14. v. 27. Joh. 17. v. 21. and after he arose from the dead, did he not
salute his disciples with the blessing of peace? Ioh. 20. v. 19. and did not
the Angles at his birth proclaim peace (as to, so) among the saints on earth?
Luke 2. v. 4. 4 has he not made love and concord the badge whereby his Genuine
followers may beknown, and appointed it to be worn as his Levery. Joh. 13. v.
35. and has he not made it a gagge for stoping the mouth of adversaries, who
are ready blasphemously to say he was not sent of God? Joh. 17. v. 21, 23. 5 is
not the Communion of saints an article of our creed and engraven upon, and
sealed by the Lords supper? which therefore bears the name of COMMUNION, as
with Christ our head. 1 Cor. 10. v. 16. so among our selves; v. 17. 6 how
pithily does the Apostle as at one breath hold forth so many and such strong
bonds of peace, and for keeping the saints in unity, that it might be supposed
the Devil, the world, the pride of man's heart could not be able to burst these
asunder? Ephesians. 4. v. 4, 5, 6. O precious and noble unity and Love? which makes
us Look, like Christ's disciples and Christians indeed; which is so beautiful
and amiable in it self, and so sweet and comfortable to those who follow it,
which is such a noble attractive and loadston to draw in those who are without,
the strength and ornament of the Church and a terror to enemies; such a noble
guard against heresies and error, and as for preventing much mischief from
men, so many sad judgments and strokes from God: and what shall I say more? It
is the bend of perfectness, above all things to be put on. Coloss. 3. v. 14. 1
Cor. 13. v. 13 O then would thou see God, 7amp; would thou have God to
bliss thee, follow peace and holiness. Heb. 12. v. 14. Romans 12. v. 18. Psa 133.
v. 1, 3. Psa. 34. v. 12, 14, and as the Lord from time to time has visibly
blessed his people when they walked together in unity and love, so when
divisions and contention once entered the Church, it proved a forerunner of
judgments and Gods wrath to break out against his people, and of sad
persecution from adversaries: and the judgments on, and tragical ends of
Schismatics have been very signal and remarkable, as appears, if we begin
at the first noted Schismatics Korah and his company, and follow the History
from the first Christian Churches to this day; especially since the reformation
happily begun by Zwinglius and Luther: we may not stay on a Historical account
from Sleidens commentaries or Osiander his Ecclesiastical History, but for a
brief view of Gods judgments on such, we now only refer to D. Hoornbeck his
sum: contravers. P. 739. seqq. M. Baily his disuasive from the errors of the
time, P. 13. seqque and his vindication of that disuasive P. 5. seqque And how
zealous the truly zealous have been against Schism and division, as being so
pernicious to the Church, and dishonorable to Christ, might at large be made
appear from their writtings; But we may not stay on citations, else whom could
we pass over who have written on that head? Yea thee brethren of the
congregationall way (tho they went too great a length toward separation yet)
pretend to join with us in our testimony against separation and [Firmin
Burronghs Norton] have written large treatises against it, and the five
dissentig Brethren in their Apologeticall narration speak to the same purpose:
nay so odious is that imputation, that they who are most guilty are ashamed to
be branded therewith, and will be ready to cry out against it; so that
Schismatics bear that black mark of obstinat Heretics Tit. 3. v. 11. they are
self-condemned. But what judicious sober Christian will not join with that
cloud of witnesses, the Reverend Ius. Div. Minist. Epist. to the reader.
Ministers of the provincial Assembly at London in their commendation of
zealous [Bucer] While he protests, that he would gladly purchase with the
lose of his life the removing of the great scandal by the division of
Christians, and with Luther (while in a good mood) professing thrt he was as
desirous to embrace peace and eoncord, as he wat desirous to have the Lord
Jesus propitious to him, and with them while they join with the Brethren of
the conregationall way in new England, protesting they can truly say that it is
far from them so to attest the discipline of Christ as to detest the disciples
of Christ; so to contend for the seamless coat of Christ, as to crucify the
Living Members of Christ; so to divide our selves about Church communion, as
through breaches to open a wide gape for a deludge of Anihichristian and Profan
malignity, to swallow up both Church and civil state. Ah what tongue is able to
express the mischief that has come to the Church by fiery contention and
Division? And who can produce so much as one Instance of any good that any
where or any time came thereby. So that we may well conclud, that [in a true In
vera and reformata Ecclesia nullum malum est tantum, and ecclesiae tam
perniciosum ac malum Schismatis vid. Aquin. loc. citand.
reformed Church there is no evil so great, and so Pernicious, as the evil of
Schism,] which alienats the hearts of Brethren, begets rancour and malice,
and often new errors, and strange opinions more dangerous then what at first
was complained of, (for schismatics being sensible how odious their schism is;
must pretend some great matter, and finding nothing that can be a just plea for
their course, they must start now questions not formerly moved, pick new
quarrels, and if nothing can be found manifest truths must be called
intolerable Errors; and Apostasy and defection must be objected tho the matter
in controversy neither Concern faith nor holiness.) And thus obstructeth
remedies and hopes both of union and reformation: thence M. Norton thus pithily
laments that evil, Alas, Alas (says he) is there no medium bettween a BONIFACE
and MORELLIVS, betiveen papacy and Anarchy; if there be a mystery of iniquity
in the one, is there not an university of iniquity in the other? Ah how sad is
it to hear the magistrate as a faithful nursing father upbraid the Ministers of
Christ for betraying their trust in destroying the Church with their indiscreet
debates, and schismatic practices? That while he labored to increase and
preserve it they sought to break it in pieces, and ruin it; thus the The two
Philips Father and Son, having no time to do much service to the Church, being
so quickly cut off by [Decius] his conspiracy, yet both are said not only to
have embraced the faith, but to have been martyrs for it: [uterque autem Decii
opera interfectus est ob susceptum baptismum, and professionem Christiani
nominis.] Carrion Chron. lib. 3.
first famous Christian Emperor Great Constantine challenged several Bishops
in his time, while he writes to these conveened in a Council at Tire, how is
it Nescio quid tot couventibus emolimini, nisi ut veritas subruatur: non
advertitis quid domino placeat, sed quomodo proximos opprimatis; Barbari per me
Christum colunt and vos illius cultu neglecto contentionibus and odiis
deseruitis, quae ad humanigeneris tendere videntur interitum Massaeus Chron.
lib. 10. page 138.
(says he) that ye do not inquire what is pleasing to God, but study to
oppress one another? And what is the fruit of your debates? The Barbarians by
me have been brought to worship Christ, and ye make his worship to be neglected
by your Contentions, which tend to the destruction of mankind; and in another
Epistle Vestra discordia emergente Sacra Misteria contemnuntur etc. ibidem page
135.
he tells them [how great his grief was because of these, and obtesteth them
to pity him, and to allow him some tranquillity of mind by seeing them live as
Brethren in unity; upbraiding them with the Carriage of Philosophers (as we may
now our Brethren with Papists) among whom tho there be great diversity of
opinions, yet they conspired together for the profession, and their own safety
in the unity of one body: But (says he) by your discord the holy Mysteries are
contemned, the Church despised, and the people rent asunder in factions and
parties] and with what indignation at the 1. general Nicen council did he cast
their defamatory libells into the fire? As for primitive Christians, they so
abhorred schism that without scripture warrant (as Jerome supposes) they set
up a Bishop (tho not a Lord prelat) above his Brethren, to prevent and remedy
it (which afterward was judged to be an improper remedy, as often feeding,
rather then Curing that malady) however thus their zeal against Schism was
hereby manifested: But let us add some few other testimones, [he who departs
(said) Eunod. apud Eprbes. instruct. Hist. lib. 14. c. 1.
Eunodius from the unity of the Church offers a fat sacrifice to the Devil.]
And says Apud Gratian. cause. 24. quest 1. c. alienus.
Cyprian, [he Cannot have God to be his father, who will not cleave to the
Church as to his Mother,] and says Iren. advers. Haeres. lib. 4. c. 62.
Irenaeus, [Whatever good be pretended to Come by SCHISM, it cannot
counterballance the evil of SCHISM,] which (says Apud Gratian. cause. 24.
quest. 3. c. Inter.
Jerome) cannot long continue without Heresy:] and Optat. de Schis. Donatist.
lib. 1.
Optatus Milevitanus is not afraid to say that, Schism is the chief of evils:
and judicious Ames. de Conscient. cas. lib. 5. c. 12.
D. Ames durst call it. Peccatum Gravissimum; a most grievous sin: but Optatus
goes on telling us, [that it is a greater sin then Homicid or Idolatry:] and
August. de Baptis. contra donat. lib. 1. c. 8.
Austin comes not short of him, while he says (having his eye as I suppose on
what our Lord says to Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 23. v. 15.) [if any be
converted by Schismatics from Idolatry, and infidelity, they are not gained,
but desperately hurt by the wound of Schism] and Denis of Alexandria in his
Epistle to the famous Church divider NOVATVS Apud Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 5.
cap. ult.
speaks to the same purpose, [thou should (says he) rather have suffered
any thing, then suffered the Church to be divided: it is a glorious nay I count
it a more glorious Martyrdom that the Church may not be divided, then to be
kept from sacrificing to an Idol] not as if these judicious fathers would
compare Schism with Idolatry and infidelity as to the immediate object, or
ultimat end; as if the glory of God were as directly and immediately concerned
in Schism, as in Idolatry; but they considered the consequents, and good of the
Church; and because (as Denis tells us) a multitude is concerned in the michief
from Schism, they looked upon it as so pernicious an evil: and thus 2. 2 Quest.
39. Art. 2.
Aquinas doubted not to affirm, [that no sin against the second table was so
great as Schism; and that in some respect it was greater then the sin of
infidells:] and if we would Ibid. quaest. 37. art. 2. and quaest. 37. art. 2.
consult that Author we will find its geneologie and parentage, as also its
daughters and offspring to be very dishonorable.

As for the properties of Schismatics and separatists, the Apostle tells us
that 1. they are carnal and walk as men not as saints; 1 Cor. 3. v. 3. 2. that
they are deceitful, creeping in to houses, and by good words and fair speeches
seek to deceive the hearts of the simple; 2 Timothy 3. v 6. 3 that they have a
form of godliness, but deny the power of it; and are such as should be avoided,
and marked; ibid. v. 5. and Romans 26 v. 17, 18. 4. that whatever they pretend,
yet they are sensual not having the spirit; and cannot in that mischievous
work serve the Lord Jesus; tho ( says Par. in Romans 16. v. 17.
D. Pareus) divisions may be in the Church, yet they are the Devils work.

We may not stay to discover those divisive principles ye must disclaim; these
divisive passions and affections ye must abandon; and those divisive practices
ye ought to guard against, and beware of: but for a discovery of these; with
their proper remedies, let me remit you to M. Buroughs his golden IRENICVM:
but O if Schismatics would but consider, that the Lord accounts the injury
don to his Church as offered to himself, that they who touch it touch the apple
of his ey: now if the touch be so smarting as thus to cut rend and divide, how
must he be concerned? [we have not (says the Apostle, Heb. 4. v. 15.) an high
priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our sores and infirmities:]
how nearly then must he be touched with such a wound as thus teareth and
divides his body? is not the Church his body? Ephesians. 1. v. 23. and are not we
Members thereof, and of his flesh and bones? Ephesians. 5. v. 30. will he not then
reckon Schismatics amongst the piercers of his body, and esteem the violence
thus offered to the Church as if to himself? and Ah must he not have the heart
of a tiger, who in a day of such distress dare thus wound the afflicted? and
can he call himself a friend, who while enemies are seeking to destroy it, dare
divide rent and cut it in pieces? [Schism being (as Par. in 1 Cor. 11. v. 18.
D. Pareus speaks) as great a destruction to the Church, as the cutting of
the hands or feet, or the dividing of the head in two is to the body.] Now let
us shut up this direction with the words of great Austin, [to whom Aug. de
Baptis. contra donat. lib. 2. c. 5.
(says he) will God reveal his truth, but to those who walk in the way of
peace? O remember we are men, and to mistake and err is a tentation common to
men; but to love our own judgment so as to break the unity of the Church in
pressing it, is devilish presumption: to err in nothing is the Angels
perfection; and wanting the perfection of Angels, let us not run upon the
presumption of Devils.] hence.

17. Let us not be easily provoked, nor think evil of our Brethren because
they differ from us in some points far removed from the foundation, and having
no direct influence on holiness; and perhaps not so clearly revealed, which may
be, (and are among the more sober and judicious) amicably debated according to
the analogy of faith: for while we know but in part, and see but through a
glass Darkly, it is not supposable but there will be different apprehensions
and judgments concerning such matters and questions; in order to which the
exhortation has place (and when will we be so wise and selfdenied as to
hearken to it) have thou faith have to thy self before God. Romans 14. v. 22. and
is not the rule clear, Philip. 3. v. 15, 16. Whereto we have already attained
let us walk by the same rule, and if in other things there be diversity of
sentiments, let us forbear one another till God reveal his mind to us
Concerning these. Ah there being a sweet harmony and unity in the faith, will
we not come, or continue under the bond of peace, and with all lowliness and
meekness forbear one another in love? Ephesians. 4. v, 2, 3. Oh who reflecting on the
seven divine cords and bonds of love and unity held forth in the 4, 5, 6.
following verses could imagine that a saint indeed could cast these of? hence.

18. Let me obtest you not to mistake, nor put a wrong gloss on the Commands to
seperat, Come out from among, to have no fellowship with, yea not to eat or
drink with such and such sinful persons. 2 Cor. 6. v. 15, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 3. v.
14. 1 Gor. 5. v. 11, etc. else you may cast your selves into a Labyrinth of
intolerable miscarriages, errors and inconveniences; and be tempted to cast of
these bonds the light of nature, morality, and reason have laid on; and may
with Hypocritical pharisees Matt. 15. v. 5, 6. Pretend religion and Conscience
for casting of the duties the law of God obliges thee to perform to thy
relations; wives may abandon their husbands, Children their parents, servants
their Masters, subjects their lawful magistrates, and the flock their
faithful pastors, contrary to the light of nature, to the fundamental laws of
Government Society and order, and the divine commands Coloss. 3. v. 11, 19, 20,
21, 22. Cor. 7. v. 10, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 2. v. 17, 18, 19. Heb. 13. v. 7, 17, etc.
But for understanding those places wherein we are prohibited to have fellowship
with unbelievers, with the profane, etc. Ye would remember that many such
prohibitions were occasional, temporary, particular and not to be extended to
all persons, times, and occasions; such were many prohibitions to the Jewish
Church, especially in reference to the seven nations devoted to destruction;
and in the new Testament, in reference to scandal, because of the weakness of
some new Converts; or 2. because of tenderness toward the converted Jews,
notwithstanding their adhering too tenaciously to some ceremonial customs
(which being once of Divine institution were to be buried honorably) of which
number that of separation and keeping at a distance from such and such persons,
was not the least, 3. because of the great hazard to the infant Christian
Church from promiscuous mixtures; especially where Churches were not well
constitute, and had no Eldership and consistory erected: but 2 the prohibitions
in the places cited do (as Calvin observes) relate to Idolaters, and do
condemn all joining with such in their idolatrous worship; and 2. with these
who were within the Church, after that by the sentence of excommunication they
were cast out, and contumaciously persevered in their wickedness; But if private
persons were left to be judges in this matter, who sees not what confusion
uncharitableness, and wrong judging might follow thereupon? But 3. as to others,
who are tolerat in the Church, and on whom no mark is set by the Eldership, yet
continuing in their wickedness, and their carriage being scandallous we are
forbidden to have any Intimat, voluntary, delightful fellowship with such; we
standing under no such relation to them as obliges us to a familiar
fellowship: and 4. when duty obliges us to converse with such, we must take
heed that we do not participat with them in their wickedness, or Encourage them
in their sinful course: Cavendum est ne quo sordium contactu nos inquinemus,
says Calvin. in 2 Cor. 6.17.
Calvin, to whose accurate and judicious commentaries on the places on which
men of sectarian principles fasten their wild glosses, Paulus de jugo
impietatis loquitur ^. e. departicipatione operum quibus communicare
christianis fas non est: -- Jugum ducere cum infidelibus nihil aliud est, quam
operibus infructuosis tenebrarum communicare, and manum illis in
significationem consensus porrigere. in v. 14. vid. etiam in 1 Cor. 5, 11. and
in 2 These. 3, 14.
we remit such as would not be deluded by Separists: let us then search the
scriptures and compare these diligently. and we will find 1. that there is
nothing in these prohibitions to scarre the most tender and circumspect
Christian from fellowship, and familiar conversing with sincere seekers of God,
who keep the unity of the faith, notwithstanding some differences concerning
matters of less importance, and not so clearly revealed: 2 such will find that
there is nothing in these to hinder them from joining in the ordinances of
Christ with these from whom they thus differ; if the ordinances be pure, and no
sinful conditions of communion be imposed on them: hence 3. such will find in
these no warrant to withdraw from ordinances because of some failings in the
adnimistrators, or the personal sins of them who are to join and partake of
these ordinances; for their sins cannot defile thee, nor polut the ordinances
of Christ hence.

19. Walk by rule, and make no singular example or privilege thy copy; let thy
obedience be regular, and conform to standing rules rightly understord, and
applied, so that that thou may be able to answer the question Isa. 1. v. 12.
who required what thou do, and who required it at your hand? Obedience if
not regular deserves not the name, and a performance without a warrant is no
duty; to supererogat is but to presume, prevaricat provoke: there be in the
word some special, occasional, and temporary commands given to some, at some
particular time, and on a peculiar account, as these Matt. 10. v. 9, 10, 14,
19. Luke 10. v. 14. 2 King. 4. v. 29, etc. And there are some singular
examples, as that of Phineas, Ehud, Iael, etc. And if thou set up these for a
rule thou may turn Quaker, Enthusiast, Morellian, Libertin.

20. Give no offense, be tender in the matter of scandal either on the right
or left hand, either by a wicked practice, or fond fancy and imagination, or by
thy apostasy and forsaking the way of truth and duty: however many pretending
tenderness are not afraid to scandalize the faithful. yet woe to that man by
whom offense Comes. Mat. 8. v. 7. 1 Cor. 10. v. 32, 33. 2 Cor. 6. v. 3. Phil.
1. v. 10. But tho some (whoever they be) may give, yet do not thou take
offense: Ah should thou brake thy neck because others have cast a stumbling
block in the way?

21. Love not to walk in untroaden paths, or to go alone; beware of singularity
as savoring of pride and Hypocrisy: tho thou must not be conformed to the
world, and walk in the broad way for company-sake. Romans 12 v. 2. so that tho
thou were (as Elias once supposed he was) left alone, thou must not step aside
to meet with others, and follow them in any sinful way, yet no plea from hence
for an humorous factious conceited singularity: if says Mr. Buroughs thy
singularity appear, 1. in things that are taken notice of by others, and by
which thou expectest to raise thy name; and if disappointed in that, and others
take little notice of these things, or of thee for appearing for them, thou
becomest indifferent; 2. if thou care little for such things when they come to
be common; 3. if there be no evenness in thy way, and no proportion kept in thy
course, but thou art singular in some odd notion or wild conceit and in things
material dare complie with, and conform (I do not say to the law, or with
the saints but) to the world, thy singularity is humorous and conceited.

22. Watch over thy tongue and bridle it; and abominat backbitting, defaming,
and wounding of ons name and reputation and speaking evil of the absent, as
being the fruit and evidence of a tongue set on fire of hell; Tit. 3. v. 2.
Jam. 1. v. 26. and 3. v. 6. Psalm. 15. v. 3. Levit. 19. v. 16. Prove. 11. v. 13.
2 Cor. 12. v. 20, etc. Tho we may speak of the faults of others 1. by way of
regrate, 2. for caution, 3. for useful information, and 4. to offer a
material for prayer either for them. or for preventing the evil feared by
them; Yet how abominable and unchristian like is it, to speak of the faults of
others 1. with delight, 2. frequently ordinarily and at every turn. 3. upon
slender little or no ground, 4. if of the faithful, misconstruing their
laudable actions, or venting gross calumnies, and spreading lying reports of
them; which sin is yet more aggravat if of those who are suffering for
righteousness sake, and if thus affliction be added to the afflicted, and
tongue persecution of the sadly persecuted for Christ: shall we count such
zealous and religious? nay says the Apostle pretend what they will their
Religion is vain. Jam. 1. v. 26. And as this sin is so odious to God, and
Veteres legislatores non ignoraverunt male dictis quam malefactis gravius
absentes laedi, difficiliusque a plerisque contumeliam perferri quam damnum
Camer hor. Suc. c. 3.
injurious to our Brethren whom we should love as our selves, so it is
abominated by very pagans so that one of their Absentem qui rodit amicum, qui
non defendit alio culpante -- hic niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto. Horat. lib.
1 Sermon. 4 Sat.
poets accounted it unbeseeming a Roman to company and converse with such: Ah
how far now a days are many who would be accounted good from BERNARD his good
man's temper? Who when he heard of the fall of any wept, and (as reflecting on
Galat. 6. v. 1.) in compassion to him, and out of sense of his own frailty said
ille hodie ego cras, if he to day has, I to morrow may fall: O if that
distichon which the eminent AUSTIN caused writ over his table, were engraven on
our doors, (and in it for his Mensam were put our aedem.)

Quisquis, amat dictis absentem rodere amicum,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
23. O let not a lying tongue be found in you, a thing so odious in it self, so
unbeseeming a man, much more a Christian: Ah art thou a sufferer for the truth,
and shall a ly be found in thy right hand? Will thou not hearken to the
exhortation Ephesians. 4. v. 25? But if thou will not, then look on that sad word
Rev. 12. v. 27. and 22. v. 15. And see thy name written among the dogs that
must abide without, and cannot enter into the new Jerusalem.

24. Let God have your first and last thoughts every day; 1. in the morning
asking your souls what ye may do for your Master his honor and Interest that
day, considering what opportunities of service may be offered in it, and set
out with a Resolution to walk with him, and to set him before you in all ye go
about, guarding against the snares and temptations ye may be tristed with in
your trade business company: O watch and pray that ye enter not into
temptation, Mat. 26. v. 41. Mat. 6. v. 13. and 2. at night allow no sleep to
your eyes till ye call your selves to an accomt how that day has been
employed, what ye have don in it for God, (what servant dare spend a whole day
not minding his Masters work) and whither ye have said or don any thing against
his holy commands, and to provoke him to wrath; and think it a lost day in
which thou have made no advance heavenward, and a sad day were in thou have gone
out of the way, and stepped aside; if the dark night of Death surprise thee while
thou art out of the way, where will thou lodge to all Eternity? O judge your
selves daily, that ye be not judged of God; 1 Cor. 11. v. 31. have your
accounts made, your summons may be to a short day: O let not thy night thoughts
and frame provide fuel for carnal lascivious or Satanicall dreams, tempt not
Satan to ride on thy fancy while thou art a asleep and know not how it is
set a work, and where away it runs; especially since thou know not but
that thou may awake in Eternity: Oh what other persons are we while
sleeping, then when awake? is not sleep a Stulte quid est somnus gelidae nisi
mortis imago, says the Poet, but yet the difference is great, for when Death
has once opened our eyes either in heaven (as he Psalm. 17. v. 15. was
confident his would be) or in hell (as his Luk 16. v. 23.) We shall sleep no
more to all eternity, as having no more a mortal body calling for ease by
sleep, and setting the causes a work that bring it on.
shadow of death, and the fancy then let loose of the conduct of reason and
Religion? How much then are we Concerned to commit its conduct to him who
neither slumbreth nor sleeps?

25. Take keed and watch thy heart with all diligence, that it cleave not to
the world (or any idol in it, any sensual and perishing object or lust-feeding
occasion) with an Adulterious embracement, for if thou thus set up an Idol, it
will steal away thy heart from God, provoke him to wrath against thee, and may
bring on spiritual and temporal judgments: Let not thy father complain of thy
unkindness, seek his face daily, continuing instant in prayer, let not Satan
rob thee of that time set apart for private prayer, or with thy family; and if
thou would not unfit thy self for a fellowship with him, keep thy heart loose
of the Creature, and in the intervalls of set or occasional prayer, let some
thought of God, or some desire darted up to him be employed for guarding
against that earthly mindedness and indisposition that unfitteth thee for a
communion with God: who knows (but he who observes his heart, and what is its
frame, and he who has experienced) what are the soul-enriching advantages of
such short ejaculations and Apostrophes to God? by these swift messengers we
may keep a constant correspondence with heaven, and carry on a spiritual trade
there, and no trade calling or business needs obstruct this spiritual
traffic and commerce, such short parentheses will make no Considerable
Interruption in our wordly business and employment; but if thou suffer thy
heart to stay too long here below, it is ready so to fasten on the Creature,
and take such deep root in the earth, that it will not be easy for thee to pull
it off, or to lift it up when thou do look to God; but by such spiritual
diversions it may be kept in some spiritual frame, that when the Lord either by
his providence, or by the inward breathing of his Spirit says to us, (as to
him Psalm. 27, v. 8.) seek ye my face, our hearts with him may reply thy face
Lord will we seek.

26 Prepare for suffering, and daily take up thy cross; take a lift of it before
it be laid on that thou may be the fitter to bear it when it comes, and thou
can not flee from it but by the back door of sin, that looks hell wards: do
not thou that has not yet resisted unto blood, say the worst is past, and thus
feed thy fancy with hopes of better days; but tho thy mountain stood as strong
as Jobs once seemed to do, if with him thou would carry sutably under it, with
him Job 3. v. 25. forecast; and with a fear of vigilance (but not of distrust
and dejection) provide against it, A warned man (we say) is half armed: ask thy
soul then what thou would suffer for Christ, and if thou dare Rom, 8. v. 35.
say shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword separate me from the Love of Christ, or make me deny him,
and his truth? God forbid. [there are (said a worthy Divine) none in heaven but
Martyrs, and does not our Blessed Lord say the same? Mat. 16. v. 24, 25. Mat.
10. v. 33, 37, 39. Mark. 8. v. 38, etc. If thou be not ready to part with life
and all at Christ's call, thou cannot be his disciple: But thou may thus offer
up thy self to Christ, as Abraham did his Isaac, tho he hold the hand of
persecutors, as he did the hand of Abraham, and suffer thee to escape; and if
there be a ready mind, ye need not be discouraged through the apprehension of
the greatness of the trial, the cruelty of persecuters, etc. Or of thy own
weakness; he will proportionat the burden to thy back, and if he lay more on,
he will give more strength; and has he not told thee what to do when thou
find it heavy? And bidden thee cast both it and thy care upon himself,
promising that he shall sustain thee. Psalm. 55. v. 22. 1 Pet. 5. v. 7. and that
he will not suffer that to be tempted above that thou art able, but will with,
etc. 1 Cor. 10. v. 13. O said one, I cannot burn for Christ, but shortly after
he was burnt in his shop by an accidental fire; what can thou not burn for
Christ, but must for a lust? can thou not for a short while endure burning on
earth, but wilt rather dwell with everlasting burnings, and be a prey to these
for ever.

27. Put a good construction on providence as knowing and firmly believing that
all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to such as keep his Covenant,
Psalm. 25. v. 10. that he is a father when he smites, as well as when he smiles,
and that tho provoked by the miscarrriages of his Children, yet smites in
love, and thus deals with them as sons; and never takes the rod in his hand
but if need be, and always for their good Heb. 12. v. 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. v. 6.
hence.

28. Let us hope, and patiently wait for the salvation of God; do not say the
days are evil, and we will neever see it better; let us look over our
deservings, and up to the bowels of our kind father who tho he cause grief yet
will have compassion, according to the multitude of his Mercies. Lam. 3. v. 31,
32. hence it is good that a man should hope, etc. v. 26. the false Prophets of
old prophesied of peace and prosperity, and thou may prove a false Prophet
in fortelling evil and adversity; the Lord has a way of soveraignity,
unsearchable to us, and in which he often walked toward his people in their
deliverances from the sadest adversity; look on Israel in Egypt, in Babylon,
etc. And consider what their frame was, whither it called for such a Mercy and
deliverance, as they were tristed with, many sleep in the furnace, (and O what
an evidence of stupidity must that be) until the Lord open their eyes by an
astonishing deliverance. Ezekiel. 16 v. 61, 62, 43. O then do not limit the Lord
either as to a work of mercy or judgment; hence 1 be not secure but provide for
a storm, a more boisterous storm and hoter surnace; yet 2. cast not away your
considence, but live by faith waiting upon him who hides his face until he
appear for the comfort of his people, standing upon thy watch tower to see what
he will say, as knowing the vision is for an appointed time, and that at the
end it will speak and not ly; and therefore tho it tarry we should wait for it,
because it will surely come, yea tho to our apprehension it may, yet beyond the
fit and best time it will not tarry: Habb. 2. v. 13. Heb. 10. v. 37. Psa. 102
v. 13: it ill becomes his Children to be jealous of such a father, it cannot
but be acceptable to him as to look up to him, so to wait for, and expect good
from him 1. if we make not have, 2. if with submission, 3. if in humility, and
4. if in a way of obedience and harkening to his voice: and what evil (I pray)
can there be in it, if we look to see him appear for our comfort? a Job could
say tho he slay I will trust; Job: 13. v. 15. can the case be more sad, the
provocation greater, and the distress more remediless then it looked to be then
while the Lord by his Prophets called his people to hope and wait for his
salvation? Lam. 3. v. 24, 25, 26. Mic. 7. v. 78. Hab. 2. v. 1, etc.

29. Let me Entreat that under these humbling dispensations ye would carry
humbly: and o let your deportment suit your Condition as to your garments; Is
not the Lord to day saying to us what once he said to that people Exodus 33. v.
5. put off thy ornaments etc. Ah what a provocation must it be in a day of the
Lords wrath, and of zions sad distress to indulge and satisfy a vain airy
humor in conforming your selves to the frothy empty prodigalls of the time,
whose work is to adorn the body scarce minding they have a soul? What a sad
sight then must it be to behold the exiles for Christ walking in Satan's Livery,
and to see their prodigality, levity, vanity engraven on their apparel? And O
how Great is the guiltiness of the preachers of the Gospel if they have not
learned of their Master ( Mat. 11. v. 29) to be meek and lowly in heart; and if
they be not parterns of humility and Gravity, as in their apparel, so in their
whole deportment, abhoring a high look, saucy carriage, and every thing that
might look like an indication of pride, and of high and overvaluing thoughts of
them selves, as they would have their Ministry succesfull; seriously
considering that PRIDE covetousness profanity in the preacher do most
effectually preach up Atheism and Infidelity in the hearers; especially let
novices and young preachers take heed they be not lifted up with pride, and
fall into the condemntion of the Devil: 1 Timothy 3. v. 6. Oh what a sad
prognostic of wrath is it, that this generation (yea lately and so quickly) in
vanity and prodigality (especially as to apparel attendants table and adorning
of honses) have arrived at such a hight beyond their Ancestors? Tho folly be at
the Bottom of every sin, yet not so written in the face of other sins as in
this; for in stead of that respect and Credit men seek to reap by their pride,
they meet with envy: reproach, disdain.

Time would fail me if I did here insist, therefore in a word summarily. O Be
entreated in the Lords name to exercise your selves to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward man, Act. 24 v 16. rendering
to all their dues, doing wrong to none, and owing no Man any thing but to love
one another; and whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do even so to
them: ^^is the law of God and the law of nature requires of you, this the
prophets taught, and all faithful ^^^^isters exhort unto, whither ye will hear
or forbear: Mat. 7. v. 12. O do not then say, what must I do? And what does the
Lord require of me? Do but reflect on this Comprehensive clear and plain
directory, and thou may there read and discern thy duty toward Man: and
love Delectio sola discernit inter filios Dei and filios Diaboli -- Baptizentur
omnes, Intrent Ecclesias, etc. non discernuntur filii Dei a filiis Diaboli nisi
Charitate: magnum judicium, magna discretio, quicquid vis habe, hoc solum non
habeas nihil tibi prodest; hoc habe, and implesti legem. August. trace. 5. in
1. Johan. ad. c. 2. v. 10.
to our neighbors (which oblidgeth us to the Performance of all relative
duties toward others) on which that directory is founded, is the fulfilling of
the law Romans 13. v 10. O then do not lay the blame on thy Ignorance (tho it may
be Gross, and thy guiltiness upon that account very great) has not the Lord
showed thee O man what is good? and what does the Lord require of thee, but to
do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. Mic. 6. v. 8.
thou stand under many relations; have received many talents, and have many
opportunities for services and the day of accounts is Coming apace, and cannot
be (...) off; O then for the Lords sake; for thy souls sake, for distressed
zions sake walk circumspectly, and take heed to your steps, walk futably to thy
profession and principles, sutably to thy vows and engagements, sutably to thy
relation place and rank, and sutably to the times to thine and the Churches
trials and distress: and be Entreated to lay to heart, to repent, and mourn
for, 1. thy neglecting and too often omitting of duty, 2. thy remissness
deadness and formality in worship, 3. Misspent Sabbaths, 4. Careless and seldom
reading the scriptures, 5. the neglect of family worship and duties, 6. the
unfutablness of our Carriage and conversation to the holy Gospel of Christ, 7.
our unsensibliness of the dishonor don to God, 8. wour living by sense and not
by faith, 9. our impatience murmuring and repining at cross dispensations, our
want of sympathy with suffering believers and not communicating to their
necessities: O mourn for, and be more sensible of these grievous provocations
if thou would have the Lord to hide thee in this day of his wrath, and
himself to be a sanctuary and hiding place for thee; if thou would be among
the number of these marked ones whom the Lord will spare when the devoring
Angel goes forth to smite, and that however the times go thou may have thy
soul for a prey. Now that the Lord would preserve thee from all evil, and
enable thee to keep the word of his patience, that thou may be kept from he
hour of temptation that is Coming to try them that dwell on the Earth: (Rev. 3.
v. 8.10.) and that in such a sad hour thou may be kept from falling and
after that thou have (if need be) suffered a while may be presented faultless
before the presence of Christ's Glory, is the prayer of.

Your sympathizing friend, companion in tribulation and patient waiting for the
Kingdom of God, and your servant in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

