Mr. William Fuller's THIRD NARRATIVE, CONTAINING New Matters of FACT, Proving
the pretended Prince of WALES TO BE A Grand Cheat upon the Nation.

WITH An Answer to some Reflections cast upon Him.

The whole Written with his own Hand.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1696.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Tunbridge-Wells August 30 96.
COming on Saturday night last, to Bonds-Coffe-house, on the Walks, I met with
some Letters, and a Book entitled The truest Account of Mr. Fuller's Discovery
of the True Mother of the pretended Prince of Wales, Born June the 10th. 1688.
By a Person of Quality.

Upon my perusing it, I confess, I could not forbear to pity the vanity of the
Author, who has made use of not so much as one true Argument, or substantial
Evidence or Circumstance to disprove any particular of my Narrative, which is
the business, he but indeed only seems to endeavor. But I neither fear or
value what he or any of the late King's Party can say, or do in opposition of
what I have writ on this Subject: Such snarling Impudent Liars I presume are no
ways extremely serviceable to the late King or his pretended Son's Interest;
for their Lies, Perjuries and Shams have been so often detected, from time to
time, that they will hardly ever gain any credit from the most rational Men of
this Kingdom, until they give us some strong proofs of their Reformation;
which this Spark I am sure has not done; and may well be ashamed to discover
his name: Certainly he thinks the bare name of Quality has a strong influence
on the belief of the People of England; but the Cheat is grown as common with
Authors, as Vizard-masks are endeavoring to pass under the same Notion, in a
side Box, or middle Gallery.

What I have writ in the following Treatise is my own, the Style is mean, which
(I hope the Reader will pardon, since the matter is truth, I writ it in have on
Monday morning August the 30th. 1696. without any help, as I can prove by
several at the Wells with me.

Mr. FULLER'S THIRD NARRATIVE.
THis Author first declares, that, whether the Birth of the pretended Prince of
Wales were Legitimate, or supposititious, has not been questioned or thought
worthy to be examined public by authority, and therefore seems to add, that
the Birth must be Legitimate because the present Government has not exposed
that vile Imposture: As, I am sure, they justly might; though the Clemency of
our present King, and his late Royal Consort of Blessed Memory, (whose
goodness, have always been equal to their Royal Births and Greatness) having in
this as in many other Cases, been willing to pass by the Greatest Abuses, and
Injuries, committed against them; for which their Majesty's have been only
abused by those they spared; which the Queen was very well assured of, and did
once command Mrs. Labaddies Letters, and other Papers relating to this
supposititious Birth to be Published: And how little soever this Quality, or
rather Billingsgate Writer would make me appear, I shall prove him much in the
wrong: and assure him, that this matter concerning Mrs. Mary Gray, has been
examined before Great and Lawful Authority; as the Chief Ministers of State of
this Kingdom; and the positive and corroborating Proofs of several Persons of
Quality and others, have all agreed sufficiently to convince the World of the
reality of this Impostor.

And that I published it for filthy Lucre, is basely false; for my Printer and
Publisher will Depose upon Oath, that I gave the Copy gratis, and would never
accept of any Present: No, on the contrary I did it to serve my King and
Country, and will maintain so just a Truth to my last breath.

Next, he charges me with calling in the assistance of a Poet, to exert so much
of his Wit and Eloquence, as might help me to entertain the Multitude with this
so diverting a Tragy Comedy (as he calls it) as my Discovery of the Mother, and
the Murder of the Mother of the pretended Prince of Wales. I cannot but stand
amazed at his Frenzy, or Impudence, to charge me with such a notorious falsity,
which is known to be so to the King himself, and several of the Ministers of
State, to whom I gave the above mentioned Narrative of the True Mother of the
pretended Prince of Wales, as is now Published; and I can produce a hundred
Gentlemen to whom I showed the said Narrative, and gave them exact Copies: Soon
after my lost coming from France, which was some years before I knew Mr. Settle.

And as to the latter part of that Narrative, relating to my own unhappy
credulity, occasioned by the immaturity of my Judgment, and the perfidy of
Dalleval and Hays, for whose appearance I engaged to the House of Commons, with
the relation of what I discovered to the King, concerning several former
Designs against his Sacred Person and Government, was all writ by my own Hand
at Canterbury; where I exposed it to several the same day I writ it, and I do
Declare, that neither Mr. Settle, nor any other Persons gave me any assistance
in either of my Books; only the Dedication, which I confess he did; I having
not been acquainted with things of that kind: nor should I indeed pretend to
Publish any thing but This, which is matter of Fact, and a Truth, which I defy
the World to Disprove.

As for my Birth, I gave an account of it in my last Book. And if it were not
so, certainly this Great Zealot for this sham Princes Cause, might easily
disprove me: Those of his Stamp seldom want Witnesses to Swear at Pleasure: But
it is evidently known, that I have had all opportunities of an ingenuous
Education; and had once the great Sabran (now Tutor to the pretended Prince)
for my Schoolmaster, or Governor.

And as for what he mentions page 3. of a Plot upon a Worthy and Reverend
Prelate of this Kingdom, I cannot imagine; and especially, since he says, And
how shamefully and visibly his (meaning my self) veracity came by the Lee, and
the lie too, in the Affair: This assurance of his, I look on but as a pure
piece of Popish Principles, by which they would yet endeavor, by palpable
lies, to support a bad Cause; for I do declare, I never gave any information
against any Bishop, but the late Bishop of Ely; only it was my misfortune, to
read a Copy of a pretended Address to the French King, which Mr. Hayes carried
to the late Queen at St. Germains; to which there was fixed the names of
several Bishops and others, whom I always believed knew nothing of it: which I
declared to the House, when I presented it, as it was my Duty so to do.
Therefore I may justly affirm this Charge as false as his others

Next, He tells you, that my Secretary seems to Envy for my sake, that Mr.
Pendergrass, Mr. Porter, and Mr. De la Rue, with their Companions, should go
away with the whole Glory of the late Discovery, etc. But, for this Conjecture,
he can have no more ground, then for the former; but resolves, if possible, to
banter such truths, as no honest or Conscientious man can deny: Such were my
discoveries, which have been evidently confirmed by the Lord Preston, Mr.
Crow, and others; which, I think, do in no wise lessen the services of the
above said Gentlemen, in their Discoveries of the Conspiracies against the
Kings sacred Person and Government* as this Spark would Insinuate, Confidently
affirming, That his Majesty, nor the Government, would hardly take notice of my
Informations.

I think* I have in my former sufficiently set forth the Endeavors made use
of, to Invallidate me to the King and Parliament, which the World has now
found, by experience, was the only means to secure the late King's Friends, and
cover their bloody Designs; which from the Year 1689. They have been contriving
against the present Government.

He now begins to bring together the Testimonies, of several upon Oaths, who,
he tells you, Unanimously declare the Late Queen to be the true Mother, etc.
Which Depositions are already Printed.

By these you may see, what pains this Gentleman has taken, to Collect those
Depositions; and after a serious view of them, I presume, most will allow his
time but wasted: For I cannot find, that any one but the Midwife does affirm,
That they saw the Child come from the Queens Body. But on this subject I will
not dispute for modesty sake; Besides, the weakness of those feeble Allegations
is a subject that has been often publicly exposed, and that lately too, which
this Quality-writer, wisely takes notice of, as being unable to Answer. I shall
therefore quit that needless Argument, and proceed to inform you, what I know
concerning Mrs. Mary Gray, and which has already, and will be sufficiently
proved, by a great number of Witnesses.

First, that the said Mary Gray, with another Gentlewoman, came over from
Ireland, both big with Child, with the Lady Tyconel, some short time before the
late Queen pretended to be delivered of the supposed Prince of Wales, which was
on the tenth of June, near ten in the Morning. Mrs. Mary Gray being several
days before Lodged privately in St. James, in the narrow Gallery, which was
near the Queens apartment; It is certain, that on Saturday the 9th of the same
June, Mrs. Gray was taken Ill; upon which the Queen came suddenly to St. James;
and one Sunday, when her Majesty pretended to be in Labor, Mrs. Gray, until
nine the same morning, was heard to Groan, and make faint screeks; and at her
ceasing, the Prince was soon Born. After which she continued three weeks at St.
James, and was then sent to France, and there Cloystered up in a Convent of the
Be^n^dict^^-Nuns in Paris; where there was a breach in the Garden Walls in
Febuary 1689/90. At which time she made her escape; which Alarmed the French
King, and the late Queen, and occasioned my being sent in order to imbark for
England to get her dispatched, at her Landing there; and that she was carried to
St. Germains to the late Queen, after her being taken in Paris, and also to the
French King at Merli, I do affirm to be truth; nor could the French Court at
this time so cuningly disguise the Consternation they were under, but it took
breath: And would our Malcontents, who are lately come from France, speak
truth; I am sure they cannot but Remember part of what I relate: However I
don't question, but this matter will be plainly made out, to the satisfaction
of all Europe, very suddenly, by a sufficient Number of Witnesses.

Now, to return to the other objections against me, alleged by this malicious
Gentleman, who tells you, I have been confessed guilty of Ingratitude to my
best Friends and pretended Relations, and have been openly Convinced of most
Villainous and Malicious Forgery, against a Reverend Bishop; and of a wicked
design against the whole Church of England. To these I Answer, and appeal to
any moderate Judicious, and Christian tempered Reader, that my Duty to my
Country ought to be valued above any private Interest, or Friend. And I must
confess, I have always had the greatest value and respect for the Persons of my
Friends at St. Germains: But the Barbarity of the Intriegues they had employed
me in, gave me sufficient cause to leave their service, in order to prevent the
effusion of my Countries blood, and the Ruin of the Liberties of England, by
bringing it under a French power; which looked very dangerously at the time of
my coming over: For the full Relation of which, I refer my Reader to my other
Books; only I beg leave to inform you, that I did not leave the late King and
Queens terms, without sufficient cause, and a serious consideration; I mean, in
regard to the public good for which I have suffered, and glory in my wrongs.

But as for any Forgery committed by me against a Bishop, I stand amazed that a
Person of Quality should persist in so known a Lie. I have heard, I confess, of
some such Villainy committed against the Bishop of Ro^chester; but sure I am,
that his Lordship, had never any Reason in the least to suspect me concerned;
besides the Persons were convicted; and I never till now was charged with such
a crime.

And he would insinuate, that I designed against the whole Church of England,
etc. Certainly this Author knows me not; for I presume most that do, can
answer, That I profess my self, tho unworthy, a Member of that Church; To which
I was brought over, and convinced of the Errors of the Church of Rome, by the
late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Tillotson.

He continues to repeat my misfortune before the House of Commons, and is
hardly put to his shifts for Arguments against me, to invalidate my Testimony,
and cover the cunning management of the Impostor-Prince, which will be made
Good by no less Number of prevailing Witnesses than his mighty Troop of Thirty
Seven: For Truth, tho oppressed and stifled for a time, Will at last break
forth, and maintain its Property against all such scribbling lying Opposers, as
this Gentleman has exposed himself to be.

He would reflect on the Papers and Letters which I purpose suddenly to
Publish; but neither himself nor Party will have much cause; for they shall
have them as soon as the Parliament sits, and which had e're this been
published; only the extraordinary consequence of them will, I hope, at that
time, be more serviceable to the true Interest of the present Government.

I must confess, I cannot positively affirm, that Mrs. Mary Gray was murdered;
but after what I had seen and heard from the late Queens, Mrs. Gray and Fa.
Sabran's own mouths, and missing her from the time of Conveying her from the
French King's back stairs, I had sufficient reasons, and did really believe she
was murdered.

He adds, That any Man, that has not a very strong Faith, would Hardly believe
(without very good proof) the escape of such a poor Woman should so mightily
Alarm the French King and late Queen; when her escape could have done them
little harm; since it had been more Innocent for them to pretend, that whatever
the woman, when in England, declared, she was hired, and words put into her
mouth, by King William and his Agents, etc.

To this I answer, and it is known to most in Europe; that the French King is
the most unfit person to impose such an untruth on the World: For his Gallick
Majesty very well knows* that had Mrs. Gray come over to England, and declared
this matter, all his Declarations, or charges against her, would have signified
but little: For the many false Impositions of the French King, and his
abdicated Brother, are too well known, for any to trust, or believe them for
the future, without good security. And on the other hand, all must allow King
William never gave encouragement to Villainies, nor false Imputations, to
support his cause or Interest in any kind; His Throne is Established on the
Basis, of true Justice and Virtue.

This Author adds, There was no need of the French Kings being there at the
personal Examination, of Mrs. Gray; and says, It was below him; nay it was none
of his concern; but the late King and Queens, etc. But in this, as in other
cases, he shows his Vanity, in opposing truths; and sure he must wilfully
forget, that King James was at this time in Ireland, which almost every one
knows: And the late Queen never did any business of concern, without consulting
the French King; to whom, at this time, she was in a more special manner
obliged to apply her self for his assistance; fearing without it, it might
prove Impossible for her to be any longer secured from being exposed, in this
her Masterpiece of Intriegue on which all her hopes, and even those of the
late Kings success depended.

As for their confining Mrs. Gray in some remote Convent, as tHat of Oublies,
etc. If ever the late Queen or French King had any such thoughts, it must needs
be stifled by the late Queens extraordinary Consternation, which she had not
then recovered: But, as in the case of the Duke of Monmouth, nothing but blood
could satisfy her: besides as their might happen a breach in those Garden Walls
too, or some other Contrivance, which might afford Mrs. Gray a second
opportunity of Leaving them, her Death was therefore undoubtedly thought most
secure, and might easily be practiced where it is not thought so great a sin,
but may be absolved, especially in so important a Cause.

This Gentleman now falls hard on Mr. Settle, for assisting me; which, God
knows, he did not; for I have no need of help in a Relation of a Matter, where
I was so nearly concerned; And as for his Advice, When he writs next for me,
etc. I do tell him, That, as in the two former Treatises, so in This, I have
writ nothing but what is true, and what I will maintain against all Opposers
whatever; of which I will give the World a further Proof, as soon as my
business will permit me: And, by reason I never heard of any Bishop, that writ
against me, I have no occasion to trouble my Self with the matter: And, as for
that of the House of Commons, I hope to have a just Hearing; and am contented,
that my Life should lie at stake, in case I prove not what I have writ, or said
in This, or Others, in my just Defense.

Having thus answered all the Objections of this malicious Author against me, I
now proceed to solve some other Queries, which have been spread abroad by other
Malcontents; who knowing their Instability, only Mole-like, work under
Ground, and try all Shifts and Arts to Trap me: One of these is Mr. S --, a
Zealous Roman Catholi^k, who was in France sometime, though now obliged to
return for Bread, and sets up for an Opposer of my Narrative; laying hold of an
Error in my first Book, committed by the Printer, viz. in these words, I
Embarked with the late Queen, her pretended Son, etc. from White Hall; whereas,
in my Original, the words were, That I Embarked in the same Barge which carried
the Queen; and the next Day following, we arrived at Callais, in a Yatch: I
confess, I should at first have enlarged on the full Account of this Matter;
but that I thought it might be too tedious for to trouble my Reader with, by
reason so many have writ formerly on the same Subject

Next, it is alleged by some, who are either wilfully ignorant, or malicious
in their Reports, That I never was Page of Honor to the late Queen, etc. I
confess, it was in France: But if the Testimony, or Confession of one upon his
Trial, for his Life and Death, may be credited* I hope, Mr. Crone's words may;
which were on his Trial these, viz. I confess, I was in France, and introduced
to the Queen by Mr. Fuller, her Majesty's Page, that was in waiting, when I
came to St. Germains: To which he adds, (and just before his Condemnation)
That, had he but known on what Account I was in France, when he was with me, he
would have used me as I had done him. Thus far his Irish Assurance prompted him
to Express his Zeal for King James's Cause, even when he was found Guilty of
High Treason; for which he was Condemned at the Old Baily, and Reprieved from
time to time, which he obtained by repeated Promises of making a full and
ingenuous Confession of what he knew to the Government; which he performed,
after having had Twenty Four Reprieves from the King and Queen; upon which he
was Pardoned, and set at Liberty; and Orders were given for the Indictments to
be drawn up against such as the said Crone, in his Confession, had Discovered;
as also, against those, to whom, with him, I brought Commissions, and
Instructions from the late King and Queen, and the French King, for the
furthering the Designs, then on Foot, to Kill King William, and His Royal
Consort Queen Mary, and to seize them Dead or Alive; with private Instructions,
to secure, in the like manner, Alive or Dead, all Lords and Others, which
should oppose King James's Interest, or the Authority of those to whom he had
given Commission, under his Broad Seal, bearing Date at Dublin, to Act for him
as Deputies, or Lords Justices of England.

Concerning this, I cannot forbear to acquaint my Reader; That these Lords,
trusted in so great a Concern, were appointed by the French King: For a
Commission of this kind, was sent over from Dublin to St. Germains in January,
1690. But the French King, being displeased with some Persons that King James
had Authorized, sent it immediately back to him by an Express, to notify his
dislike; which King James did not Dispute; but instantly dispatched the Lord
Thomas Howard to the French King, upon the adjusting of that Matter: And, on
his Voyage, that unhappy and ingenious Lord had the misfortune to be Cast away;
and his Fate not being known in some time, occasioned a tedious delay, in this
Matter: But the French King, recommending such Persons as he thought fit for
this weighty Affair, sent his Opinion, or rather Commmand, to King James; and
so instantly passed a new Commission, as the French King Nominated.

To this Affair I was Privy, as being sent by Monsieur Lovie, (recommended by
the Queen) to King James in Ireland; where I staid until the News was Confirmed
of my Lord Thomas Howard's hard Fate: Upon which I returned from King James at
Dublin, to France, with a Gentleman, who brought the last Commission to the
French Court; with which Mr. Crone, and my Self, was dispatched for England,
with several other Commissions, as soon as the French Court had News, that
their Fleet was ready to Sail, in the Year 1690. being the time King James's
Party had procured so great an Intrest and Provision, in England, in order to
assist a French Army: The Services I performed for the present Government, on
this occasion, I need not mention; since the King, in part, was Graciously
pleased to declare it to the Parliament; immediately after my Coming from
France.

I having writ this former Narrative at Tunbridge-Wells, and coming Post to
Town the Day following, in order to Publish it, a Friend of mine brought me a
few Lines, which he tells me, were writ by an Eminent Citizen, and one of the
Gentlemen, that was of Mr. Crone's Jury: The words as I have them fairly
written, are as follows, viz.

SIR,
WHat I Urged relating to Mr. Fuller, was this viz. That Mr. Crone, in his own
Defense Alleged, That he was employed by the late Queen to raise such Sums of
Money, as Mr. Fuller charged upon him; but not for carrying on the War, only
for the Queens Debts, and a Natural Child of the Abdicated King 's, etc. To
support the Allegation, be earnestly desired a Lady might be called, who
produced a Letter in Court, importing, that Mr. Crone was entrusted to raise
such Sums, etc. One of the Judges asking, Who wrote the Letter? Mr. Crone
answered, My Solicitor, my Lord; which startled the Solicitor, who said to
Crone, Plague Damn you, and so with drew himself. Crone's Answer was
pretermitted by another Judge's asking the Lady, How long long she had had the
Letter? etc.

SIR, My self, with several others of the Jury, heard Mr. Crone's Answer, which
absolutely Establishes the whole Truth of what Mr. Fuller charged Mr. Crone
withal, ab Origin; because Mr. Crone, on his Trial, Defended himself by a
Fictitious Allegation; and proved it to be such, by the premention'd Forged
Letter, which Demonstrates to impartial Persons, that Mr. Crone offered nothing
toward invalidating Mr. Fuller's Evidence, but Fiction and Forgery.

I shall Conclude this Narrative with the Observations this Gentleman makes,
That Crone endeavored to invalidate me, by the basest and vilest means, which
the Devil or Malice could invent; and such has been the restless Endeavors of
the late King's party, ever since; and particularly, the practice of this late
Author; whom I advise, in return of his Kindness to Me, to be better informed,
before he pretends to write again

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THese Two Books following, were Written and Published by Mr. WILLIAM FULLER,
(Page of Honor to the late Queen in France) Author of this Book, viz.

I. A Brief Discovery of the True Mother of the Pretended Prince of Wales,
known by the Name of Mary Gray. To which is Added, A further Discovery of the
late Conspiracy against His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Government, etc. As
laid before the King etc. and Deposed to a Committee of Parliament. By WILLIAM
FVLLER, Gent. sometimes Page of Honor to the late Queen in France.

Price, Six Pence.

II. A Further Confirmation, That Mary Gray was the True Mother of the
Pretended Prince of Wales. Together, with an Account of the Private Messages,
and Letters, sent by the French King, King James, the late Queen, and other
Persons of Quality, to their Agents in England. Published by WILLIAM FVLLER,
Gent. who was privy to whole Management. To which is added, the Author's
Vindication of Himself, from the Malcontents of this Kingdom.

Price, Six Pence.

Mr. De Labadie's LETTER to his Daughter Mrs. De Labadie, Nurse to the
Pretended Prince of Wales. Written in Characters, and Deciphered by Dr. Wallis,
Professor of Geometry in Oxford. Which said LETTER is referred to by Mr. Fuller
in his Two Narratives; and is a plain demonstration of that horrid Imposture.
With Reflections upon it, and a full Answer to the Material Objections, in a
late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Truest Account of Mr. Fullers Discovery, etc. By
another Hand.

Price, Six Pence.


