A SOBER INQUIRY OR, CHRIST'S Reign With his Saints a Thousand YEARS: Modestly
Asserted from Scripture.

TOGETHER With the Answer of most of those Ordinary Objections which are
usually urged to the contrary.

1 THESE. 5.21. Prove all things: Hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHen I first fell to the Study of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth; I did it with a
Resolution to have done the quite contrary to what is done in this small Tract;
viz. To have opposed and confuted it: But the more I studied the thing, the
less able I was to do what I intended. At last I was convinced into a change of
my opinion; and my grounds of so doing, I first (upon his request) communicated
to a Reverend Minister, now with the Lord, only in a Letter; himself and some
other godly Brethren desired me, a little more fully to set down in Writing
what I had to say for it: I did gratify them in part, so that one sheet of
Paper swelled into five. And having communicated the same sheets to some other
pious and godly Brethren, they cold me they would have it printed: This, I
confess, was beyond all my intentions; but I durst not altogether reject their
Requests, only considering we live in a touchy Age, I desired that I might
write it over a third time, that so if there were any thing which I could, I
might amend it, this they willingly granted. I did it: it is now (which was
contrary to my resolution) somewhat bigger then it was before: yet have I been
a^ brief as well I could; I have left out much that might be said, I hope
nothing is said that may be justly offensive to any I am very p^ain and
familiar in speech, for I thought that might be advantageous to the subject,
and not displease. I am not covetous to urge my faith upon any, only willing to
give you an account of the publication of this small Piece. If you say it is
not worthy the light, I confess, I always thought so, yet I submitted to those
that were of another opinion, and at this time you are entreated to (...) so
too. And let me beg one thing at your hands, viz. not to think that I differ
more from many godly learned Divines, then indeed I do. Some agree with m^,
some do not those that do not, differ not so much as you (it may be) may think.
The agreement and difference lies thus. 1. We are all agreed that Jesus Christ
will come personally, corporally, and visibly, from Heaven to Earth at the day
of Judgment. So he ascended, therefore so he shall descend, as we have ^t, Acts
1.11. So Job 19.25. He shall stand at the latter day on the Earth. In this (I
think) we are all agreed. 2 We are all (I think) agreed, that when Christ thus
comes, he will bring with him the souls of all his Saints, according to that.
Zach 14 5. the Lord my God shall come, and all his Saints with thee, 1 These.
3.13. At the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. 3. We all
agree, that their bodies shall be immediately raised out of their Graves, and
the soul and body joined and united together, and that though the soul
continues, remains, and is in Heaven, without the body; yes on earth it shall
not be so. 4. We all agree, that when it is thus raised, it is raised in glory,
1 Cor. 15.42. in incorruption in power, a spiritual body. Col. 3.4. When Christ
who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory: Not
thence forth ^ubject any more to sin or sorrow; to mutation or mortality, to
the want of meat, or drink, or clothing, or houses, or marriage, or any other
comfort, but shall be as the Angels, Matthew. 22.30. 5. We all (I think) agree
further, that this resurrection of the Saints shall be some time before the
resurrection of the wicked, that they shall have the pre-eminence and be the
first in order and time; (I say nothing now how long) but all agree they shall
be first, and the wicked shall not rise till some time (less or more)
afterward. See 1 Cor. 15 23 24 (...) These. 4.16. the dead in Christ shall rise
first, Rev 20 4, 5, 6. 6. We all agree also that the Lord Jesus Christ will be
some time in judging the world, that he will not huddle all over in a moment,
but he will make some stay on the earth, and that, as (though he has no need
of time) he took a s^ace of time in creating the world; so he will take some
sp^ce of time on earth to do what he will then do, viz besides the question in
hand, to judge and conclude all things in. 7. And all of us (I think) are
agreed in this also, that while Christ stays on the Earth (let it be longer or
lesser time) the Saints also must stay, and not go to Heaven, from the Earth,
until Christ goes, and carrys them up with him. 8. And all will grant, that it
must needs be a very glorious time, while it lasts, when Christ shall have
removed his Court from Heaven to Earth, and be in his glory, attended with
Angels, environed with all his Saints, who are also all of them in their glory,
O! how can such a time be (while it lasts) less then a glorious time, all
things will be new. 9. Lastly, the only difference will be in the time, how
long this day of Judgment or Kingdom of Christ, or Reign of the Saints, or
Millennium (call it what you will) shall last. I conceive (and so do many,
whose Books I am not worthy to carry after them) that it will last a thousand
years, and for the proof of that these following Pages are offered* But if
those of another mind, will point another time, and prove it; it shall very
well please me, who am (I hope) and ever shall be as willing to hear as to
speak, to learn as teach. And so entreating thee (courteous Reader) to pardon
whatsoever thou see, in me, amiss; I humbly beg thy prayers to God for me,
and (if that were any thing worth) I will not fail thee in mine, who always
desire to be (though worthless) a servant to Christ and thy soul.


I. F.

ERRATA.
Reader thou art desired to take notice of the faults in printing, and to amend
with thy pen, at least so many as either troble the sense, or may cause he
sitation.

PAge 5. line 17 read Amongst p. 13. l, 3. read these. p. 14 l. 13 r. principia
p. 18. l. 5. add, make this p. 22. l. 5. there, and so all along, the Hebrew
is without points, which in the Copy was pointed p. 24. l. 20 r. fits. p. 37.
l. 7. r. break. p. 43. l. 9. r. speaks of. p. 5^. l. 2 r. lle not. p. 56. l. 1.
r. of the beast. p. 60. l. 10. r. what is it to p. 90. l. 23. add wrested to.

The Rise and Ruin of Antichrist.
AMongst the many questions that this Age abounds with. These two great
questions seem more especially to be of concernment to us, viz When did that
man of sin, (who has been the Worlds burden, and the Saints bane) arise,
and when shall he cease? Secondly, Whether shall Christ personally reign with
his Saints and take into his own hands the Monarchy of the world, when? and how
long? if he do? I confess these Enquiries themselves are such as lie under the
censures of some, the reproaches of others, and the general neglect of very
many; so that it will not be needless to say something by way of justification
of our selves, before we come to the questions themselves. The which I shall do
in these three Conclusions.

a special help and advantage to the increase and quicking of grace, both in
the person enquiring, and the person reading and hearing. For even this is
included under that general Command, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures. God
commands not that which is prejudicial to our graces, but advantageous to their
growth and increase. Hence we may and must, 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, and
hold fast that which is good. Again, a word of blessing goes along with sincere
and faithful endeavors of this nature. Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads,
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein. Rev. 22.7. Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
Prophecy of this book. The Original word in either place which is translated to
keep, comes from the verb (...) and signifies to reserve, or observe: noting a
searching, so as to wear, or rub out, that we may keep what we so find. Again
we have a particular promise of fruit and success annexed to such an enquiry or
enquiries Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro, (that is about the time of the
end, when the things themselves draw toward an accomplishment, many shall run
to and fro, by enquiries, and searchings, and disputes) and knowledge shall be
increased. And this cannot be head-knowledge only, but heart-knowledge also;
for the first would be a poor blessing without the other.

Dan. 8.13. Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that
certain Saint which spoke, how long shall be the vision concerning the daily
sacr^fice, and the transgression of desolation to give both the Sanctuary and
the Host to be trodden underfoot? Dan. 12 5.6. How long shall it be to the end
of these wonders? It were easy, but I conceive it needless to multiply texts
for the proof of this. Therefore,

Dan. 12.4. But thou O Daniel, shut up the woras and seal the Book, even to the
time of the end. (...) Vsque ad tempus finis. And ver. 9. the words are closed
and sealed till the time of the end, and then (as I said) many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge) by these enquiries and disquisitions) shall be increased.
The Conclusion is, that at, or about the time of the end, Mysteries are, by
scrutination, searchings, enquiries, and serious studies to be understood, the
book unsealed, the Vision made known, and if so, then this our practice is
justifiable, and the practice of all those holy, godly, and learned Divines,
who have engaged themselves in studies of this nature, laudable, and
praiseworthy. And although many learned pens have been mistaken in some things,
yet they have hit right in many others; if some lines have been crooked, yet
many have been straight; men have not been infallible, and yet for all that,
very profitable, so that by their canvasing the matter to and fro, knowledge
has increased. But on the other hand the carelessness and remisness, and
negligence of the world, not looking narrowly, diligently, and seriously into
Mysteries, and Prophecies, has done a great deal of hurt. What else (I pray
you) was the cause, that when Christ, in his first coming was so earnestly
expected, and looked for, and desired, and all this about the time when he did
come, yet he came, and came to his own, and to his own that expected him, and
did his work, and went again, and they did not receive or own him? Again, what
else was the cause, that Antichrist should be looked for, and seared, that he
would come, and this about the time that he did come; and was written and
preached against, Yet he came, and came at that very time, and yet found
entertainment; yea, has almost lived his long life, done his work, and run his
thousand two hundred and sixty days or years; and yet for all this, the more
part will hardly take notice of it? but take him for Christ's Vicar, whom the
Dragon substituted and made to be his own Lieutenant. Again, is not Christ
almost ready to take the Beast and false Prophet, and cast both out of the
World into the Lake: and take to himself his great power and reign, and give
the Kingdom to the Saints, and reduce the Nations under his dominion, and bind
up Satan, and sit on the throne of David; and yet the more part will believe
none of all this. I pray you then, let me be almost the number of those that
run to and fro, that if it were the Will of God, knowledge might increase. And
give me leave to speak a few words; (and as it were by way of preparation to
the second thing proposed, which I mainly intend) to the first of these two
Questions, to wit, of the Rise and Ruin of Antichrist. And in the first place
we are to note, that the (...), postrema tempora, last time. So much spoken of
in the New Testament, in the general, note out unto us all the times from
Christ unto the consummation of all things; which times are the last, in
respect of the times of the world complexively considered, as old age is the
last times of a man in respect of his whole complex age. Now these (...), or
last times, consist of three great periods; as Meae, the sober Guess, and
others, have abundantly cleared and made out; the first of these was the period
or time of the Dragon, when Heathenism raged in the world; the second was the
time of the Beast and false prophet, who synchronize, when superstition and
idolatries prevail; the third is the Millennium or Reign of Christ, when Satan
is bound up. and the Kingdom given to the Saints. Note we further, that the
Scripture tells us of no other period, these three are all, and where the first
end, the second begins; and the ending of the second just precedes the
beginning of the third. Now our question is of the second of these three
periods. And in the first place, for the Rise of Antichrist, or the beginning
of the second period; or of the thousand two hundred and sixty days, or the
forty and two months. It is the opinion of Mr. Mede, that the beginning and
ending of them must be taken in some latitude, because the Epoch is not
certain, from whence the same exactly is to commence. This also is the opinion
of Mr. Leigh, in his Book called Excidium Antechristi; Also of Mr. Moore, in
his Idea of Antichristianism, lately come out, who has this passage, lib. 1.
p. 214. "A man may (not without ground) imagine, that there may be a Latitude
of reckoning in the Solution of the three times and a half, or the forty two
months into 126 Decads of days, as well as there is of those times and months,
and that any variation about or within, that exceeds not a Decad, breaks no
square. Divine Prophesies being, not for the ostentation of Gods Omnisciency
(for who knows not, but that he can compute events to the smallest moment of an
hour) nor yet for the gratifying of the excess of humane curiosity, but for
the use and exercise of his Church. Mr. Mede in his Diatriba, in a Letter to
Dr. Twisse, discoursing of the beginning of the 42 months, has this passage,
"The period of the 42 months, (says he) is likely and most probably to be
taken from some remarkable moment in the latitude of their beginning, which
remarkable moments (says he) are more then one, and shall be from one of them.
And he seems to incline to the year four hundred and ten; the time when
Alaricus took and sacked Rome, the Lady of the World; this is the remarkable
moment of the Political Ruin of the Cesarian Sovereignty. This Epoch will
bring out the 42 months, in the year 1670. To which he adds that the 42 months,
extend to the burning and sacking of Babylon, not the utter extinguishing of
Antichrist, which (he says) shall be some time after as appears chapter 19. yet he
protests against the precise determination of the time in this business. Now
according to Mr. Mede, I guess the beginning of the 42 months to be about Anno
Christi 410. As the Sober Guess also names that time. And my Reason is, because
this seems to be the most remarkable moment of all other, in the latitude of
their beginning, and that for these Reasons.

Mede, because this year Alaricus took and sacked Rome, the Lady of the World,
as Ecclesiastical History witnesses.

Leigh, in his Book called Excid um Antichristi, by his great pains in
searching the Records of time, has clearly evinced and made out. As also Mr.
Mede in his Apostasy of the last times, and in his Clavis Ap^calyptica.

Babylon. About this time began the Apostacy of the Church of Rome to new
pagan-idolatry and superstition, (quod est supra statutum) or
paganochristianity, the name; only changed. As T. L. in his Voice out of the
Wilderness, has cleared, in a parallel of 32 particulars. And the Sober Guess
in many more, as you may see at large, page 49, 50, 51, 52. Now the Whore, or
twohorned Beast, (which is all one) is synchronal to the seven-headed with ten
horned; which is evident in that this two-hourned Beast is the reviver and
healer of this sevenheaded ten-horned Beast. That is, an idolatrous Clergy
makes again a superstitious and idolatrous Empire; or the idolatrous and
superstitious Ecclesiastic part, makes the Polity such also, which is the very
image of the Beast before spoken of. There were moreover then sacrificers to
the dead, Adorers and Worshippers of Bell, and the Propagators of the worship
of the Baalim, that is, the worship of Demons, or false gods through the
World. To give only an instance in Innecentius the first, who was the Bishop of
Rome at this time: who did not only himself challenge the Supremacy, that is,
the priority of place, suffrage, and censures over all Churches, which by suit
he did obtain of the Emperor Honorius, after the death of Arcadius, as is
evident in our Ecclesiastical History, but also brought in the Worship of
Relics. The Bishop of Rome (says Jerome) against Viglantius, Tom. 2. p. 124.
Supermortuorum hominam, sicunoum nos, ossa v^neranda, etc. effert domino
sacrificium and tumu^os little Christi arbitratur altaria, etc.

But who was this Bishop of Rome under the Emperor Areadius, when Jerome writ
this Invective about the year 406. but Innocentius. But Zosimus records worse
things of him then this: For he says that Pompey the Governor of the City,
that he might do that more safely which he desired, viz. concerning the worship
of the heathen-gods, he consults all things herein with the Bishop of the City
of Rome, etc.

This is that Innocentius, says Zosimus, who truly preferring the safety of
the City before his own salvation, secretly permitted them herein to do
according to their Consciences, and his devotion left them to their wills. Also
under Innocentius the first, lying miracles were brought into the Church The
Author of the Chronological Compilation Anno 405. mentions one Leapard a
Presbyter, (of whom we read other things in the Counsels under Innocentius)
who presenting a gold ring with his offering to St. Agnes, that is, to the
Image, she stretched out her finger, and took the ring and wears it, etc. He
also brought in Abstinence from meats: And constituted the Saturday-Fast to be
celebrated, because on that day the Lord say in the Sepulcher. Moreover Platina
adds, because his disciples fasted.

Also concerning fordidding of marriage to Winisters, he writes to one
Nictorius a Bishop, that the Church ought to hold, that by all means Priests
mingle not with their wives, because they are daily occupied about divine
worship, and the ministerial function. Also the same Innocentius writing to one
Exuperius an Archbishop concerning Presbyters and Deacons; among many other
things did order and constitute, viz. that if any were discovered who had known
the form of living sent from Siricius, and did not forthwith cast off the lusts
of the flesh, and all incontinencie, etc. by which he means the incontinencie
of the marriage bed; as appears by the Priests among the Jews, going their
courses in the Temple, their continency brought for an example, to prove it
unlawful for Priests to accompany with their wives. Platina writes, that the
same Innocentius gave certain Rules concerning Monks. Now this Innocentius
began to ascend Peter's Chair Anno 402. and departed this life Anno 416.
Therefore he lived and did all this, at the same time when the ten Kings brake
in pieces the Roman Empire, and did perpetrate and act such things, as very
strongly smell of Antichristianism; which does plainly indigitate to us, about
what time Antichrist arose, was born, revealed; or (as Mr. Mede well phraseth
it,) editus in lucem. At this self-same time arose, both the ten horned Beast,
viz. that beastly political power, ten kinged (having ten Kings.) And the
reviver and the restorer of him the two-horned Beast, viz. that seeming
Lamb-like Vicar of Christ to look upon, but ^n reality the Devils Lieutenant,
and the Dragons Spokesman, the Pope and his filthy defiled Clergy and Party. I
say, at this time both this Beasts arose, quod erat demonstrandum.

And whereas it may be by some objected, concerning these ten Kings, that the
beginning of their reign is not to be fetched from their first irru^tion into
the Roman Empire, but from their firm constitution, and full establishment in
so many Kingdoms therein.

Answ. To this I answer, that the sacred Scripture does not hold forth this
character to us, from Kingdoms established, or confirmed, but received. For the
words run thus, Rev. 17.^2. (...). And the ten horns which thou saw are ten
Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one
hour [or at an hour] with the Beast; the sacred Prophecy fetches (as the
Courteous Reader may perceive) the beginning of these Kings and Kingdoms from
their first rising up, (and not from their established and fixed Government,
which was not till many years after) namely, when they had received power of
reigning from God, in whose power it is to confer and transfer Kingdoms, Prove.
8.15. And John in this place speaks plainly of power received: they received
power as Kings one hour with the Beast; which who does not see, though but
with half an eye, to be here referred to the time of their Reignings and
Kingdoms first taken. Concerning a matter not unlike Polibius, a most grave and
sober Writer, being to give his judgment concerning the Rise of the Roman
Empire, he compares it with the beginning of the Macedonian, and speaks thus to
us, Ego principio cujusque rei esse statuo, primus conatus, etc. I conclude
(says he,) that the beginnings of any thing are the first endeavors. etc. But
to let pass Polybius, I do suppose, at that time those ten Kings received their
power, when the Pope did not only take to himself the Primacie, and exercise
it: but did with his idolatrous Clergy, go about to paganize the Empire, by
his new idolatries and superstitions. For the holy Prophecy affirms that they
rose at one and the same hour: They received power as Kings one hour with the
Beast. The Kings receive power, and are actually crowned Kings at the same time
of this Beast, under the succession of the last Head, getting again into being,
and therefore this healed Beast his ten Horns are represented with ten Crowns
upon them, Chap. 13.1. which answers exactly to this present text, they
received power as Kings one hour with the Beast. The sense I guess is this,
that at what time the Beast should revive and be worshipped, that is, obeyed
and yielded to, or in plain English, about what time the Empire should re^apse
again into idolatry, and be re-assuming the ancient pagan-rites, though placing
them upon Christian-objects, about that very time the Empire should be rending
into ten Kingdoms: or these ten Kings should be receiving power as Kings, all
of them appearing or succeeding in their Enterprises, within a little time,
from the first degeneracy of the Empire into pagan-idolatries and
superstitions. Therefore not of the confirmed Kingdoms of this ten-horned
Beast, but of his youth and Infant-state when those Kings first challenged a
right to the Roman throne, the sacred Prophecy, Rev. 17.12. is to be
understood. Hence I conclude, the Character of the rising of the Beast or
Antichrist, which is all one, is to be placed about the year 410. For it is
evident from what was spoken before, that the Beast was risen, when all the ten
Kings were risen, among the threatening ruins of the falling Empire, which was
Anno Christi 410. or thereabouts. For the Readers further satisfaction herein,
viz. That all the ten Kings were then up, I shall refer him that will be at
further pains to that Tract beforementioned, entitled. Antechristi Excidium,
a most elaborate piece. As also to Mr. Mede's Apostasy of the last times, and
his Commentary on the Revelation, who fully clears this point.

Cantabrigiens, against those that think of the year 1666. for the time of
Romes Ruin, which I doubt not but some have heard of, (though it may be not
all) that this cannot be the time, because by the Computation of Helvicus we
have lost about four years since Christ's time, by negligence in our
Chronological Accoun^ts, the which also Bishop Usher thinks to be true, so that
it is already past. To which I answer,

Romes Ruin and Downfall, from that Text in Rev. 13. ult. His Number is 666.
interpreting the Number of the Beast, according to T.L. In his voice out of the
Wilderness, to be nothing else, but the period and final determination of the
usurped tyranny and dominion of Antichrist. But all are not of this opinion,
though they that are the followers of T. L. adhering to his Interpretation of
the Number of the Beast, (as the Authors of that Book entitled, Romae ruina
finalis) do make it in Anno 1666. It will fall therefore to their shares to
answer this Objection. I confess T.L. who gives this sense of the number of
the Beast, in his Book on some part of the Revelation, writes in a prophetic
style, and with a prophetic boldness, as if he had it revealed to him, which
does very much strike the Readers fancy. But I have read lately in Mr. Mede's
Diatriba, in some of his Letters, this passage, concerning T.L. As for T.L.
(says he) I have no fancy to him, he means to that his Interpretation of 666.
as appears by his following words; for he adds, I prefer Mr. Potter far before
him. The Sober-Guess also inclines far rather to Mr. Potters Interpretation of
the Beasts Number 666. And so do I.

T.L to be right, and that to be the meaning of the Mystery, that by 666. is
meant the ruin and final determination of the man of sin, to be in 666. that
is in the Year 1666. I suppose that this Objection might be answered, and were
I of that opinion I could this answer, which, if I be not deceived. would be to
the purpose, viz. That the Holy Ghost speaks according to the vulgar
Computation of the Year of our Lord. For the Revelation is not an History
(unless we call it an anticipated History) but a Prophecy; and the Spirit of
Prophecy foretells these two things amongst others. viz.

1. The Computing by the Year of our Lord that should be, for in the days of
John, and in the Ages immediately following, they did not account by the Year
of the Lord, but many other ways of Account anciently were used. Dionysius the
less, about the Year 532 after Christ, did begin to compute by the Year of our
Lord, and that way of Computation came not into use vulgarly till many years
after. So that if this should be the meaning of the Number of the Beast, then
the Spirit does foretell this way of accounting by the Years of our Lord, which
was not at that time in use.

2. If this were the meaning of the Number of the Beast, then the Spirit also
does predict, what shall be the year of Romes Ruin, to wit, the year that
shall be, or shall be called 666. respecting the common and vulgar account of
all Nations at that time.

But if the beginning of the forty and two months be rightly fixed upon, or
about the year 410, as is before hinted; And if also there be a loss of four
years in our Chronological Accounts, according to the Computation of Helvicus
and Bishop Usher, and these Cantabrigi^ns who affirm it; then Romes Ruin
indeed is likely, and very probab^y to fall out, and be in the Year 1666. or
not very long after that time.

But if instead of helping us into the way, they have led us out of it, and
told us that we mistake, when they themselves are deceived, then Rome's
destruction is most likely to fall out anno 1670. or thereabouts. But this is
all I shall trouble the Reader with, in reference to the second period, or
(...), or last times, which was the period of the Beast.

The Millennium, Great Judgment, or Reign of Christ.
I Come now in the second place, to that which I chiefly intend to speak to,
viz. to treat of the Millennium, or the Great Judgment, in the Compass whereof
Christ and his Saints reign together a thousand years. I must confess in the
words of Pareus, Pareus Com. on Apoc. cap. 20.
Haec explicare satcor me trepide aggredi: That I was somewhat afraid to
adventure upon the handling of these things: Because, what I conceive to be the
genuine sense and meaning of those Scriptures, which treat of this subject, and
the mind of God herein, is laden with many and inveterate prejudices: partly,
by the long disuse, and crying down of what was formerly received by Orthodox
Antiquity; and partly, because of the many fopperies, if not worse, which have
bin tacked to the truth; So that I shall herein dissent from many, who yet
profess the same things in the general; It being ( I hope) my design, to free
the truth from errors and falsities, which have a long time hung upon it: But
these I am willing to dissent from: I fear far more, lest I should not agree in
opinion with many worthy, pious, and grave Divines, from whom I am very
unwilling in the least to depart. But if I may not have the assent of all such,
as yet, having notwithstanding many famous lights, as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus.
Tertullian, Piscator, Alstedius, Mede, Dr. Twisse, Archer, Holmes,
Tilling-hast, cum multis aliis, to walk in the same path, and lead me the way,
I shall follow their steps so far as I may, beseeching the Reader to pardon me,
if now and then he see me step aside. I will promise to be as careful and
circumspect, as God shall help me, let me have the Readers charity. The
Mother-text of Scripture, whence the Church of the Jews did ground the name
and expectation of the Great Day of Judgment, with the circumstances thereto
belonging, and whereunto almost all the descriptions and expressions thereof in
the New Testament have reference, is that Vision of the seventh of Daniel, of a
Session of Judgment when the fourth Beast came to be destroyed: where this
great Assizes is represented after the manner of the great Synedrion, or
Consistory of Israel, wherein the Pater Judic^i had his Assessores, sitting
upon Seats semi-circle-wise before him, from his right hand to his left. I
beheld (says Daniel ver. 9.) till the Thrones or Seats were pitch a down
[(...): LXX. (...). Vutg. Lat. Donec throni positi sunt; not thrown down, as
our late English has it, but pitched down, namely, for the Senators to sit
upon.] and the Ancient of days, [that is, the Pater Consist^rii] did sit, etc.
And (subaud. I beheld) till the Judgment was per, (that is, the whole
Sanhi^rim, and the Books were opened, etc.

Here we see both the form of Judgment delivered, and the name of Judgment
expressed, which is afterward, yet twice more repeated, first in the
amplification of the tyranny of the wicked horn, ver 21, 22. which is said to
be continued till the Ancient of days came, and Judgment was given to the
Saints of the most High, that is, Potestas judicandi ipsis sacte: The power of
judging was made over to them. And the second time in the
Angels-Interpretation, v 26. But the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take
away the dom^^ion; to consume and destroy to the end. From this description, it
came, that the Jews gave to the Name of (...) and (...) dies judicii, and dies
judicii magni; the Day of Judgment, and the great Day of Judgment; whence in
the Epistle of St. Jude, ver. 6. It is called (...): the Judgment of the Great
Day; A far greater then any horary, even a Millenary Day, as shall more plainly
afterward (Deo adjuvante) be evinced and proved.

From the same description they learned that the destruction then to be, should
be by fire, because it is said, v. 9. His Throne was a fiery Flame, and his
wheels burning. A fitrie stream issued and came forth before him: And v. 11.
the Beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.

From the same Fountain are derived those expressions in the Gospel, where,
this day is intimated or described; As, the Son of man shall come in the Clouds
of Heaven: The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his holy
Angels: Forasmuch as it is said here, Thousand thousands ministered unto him,
etc. And that Daniel saw one like the Son of man coming with the Clouds; And he
came to the Ancient of days, and they brought (or place him) near him, etc.

Hence Paul learned that the Saints should judge the world, because it is said,
That many Thrones were set. and ver. 22. by way of Exposition, That the
Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High etc.

Hence the same Apostle learned also to confute the false fear of the
Thessalonians, That the day of Christ's second coming was then at hand; because
that day could not be till the man of sin were first came, and should have
reigned his time appointed: Forasmuch as Daniel had foretold it should be so,
and that his destruction should be at the Son of man's appearing in the Clouds;
whose appearing therefore was not to be till then. This is (...) in St. Paul;
whom the Lord (says he) shall destroy at the (...) of his coming; Daniels
wicked horn, or Beast acting in the wicked horn, is St. Paul's man of sin, as
the Church from her Infancy has understood, and always interpreted it.

But to go on: while this Judgment cites, and when it had destroyed the fourth
Beast, the Son of man which comes in the Clouds receives Dominion and Glory,
and a Kingdom that all People, Nations and Languages should serve and obey him,
ver. 4. which Kingdom is thrice explained afterward, to be the Kingdom of the
Saints of the most High, ver. 18. These four Beasts (says the Angel) are four
Kings which shall arise. But ( viz when they have finished their course,) the
Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, etc. And again, ver. 21. the
wicked Horn prevailed, until the time come that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom.

Again ver. 27. when the fourth Beast reigning in the wicked Horn was
destroyed, the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High.

Now these Grounds being thus laid, I argue as follows.

The Kingdom of the Son of man, and of the Saints of the most High in Daniel,
begins when the Great Judgment sits. The Kingdom in the Apocalypse, chap. 20.4.
wherein the Saints reign with Christ a thousand years, is the same with the
Kingdom of the Son of man, and the Saints of the most High in the Prophet
Daniel. Ergo, it also begins at the Great Judgment.
That the Kingdom in Daniel, and that of a thousand years in the Apocalypse,
are one and the same Kingdom, plainly and evidently appears thus:

First, because they began ab eodim termino, from the same Epoch or beginning,
namely, at the destruction of the fourth Beast; That in Daniel, when the Beast
(then ruling in the wicked horn) was slain, and his body destroyed and given to
the burning flame, Dan. 7.11, 22, 27. That in the Apocalypse, when the Beast
and false prophet (the wicked horn in Daniel) were taken, and both cast alive
into the lake of fire burning with brimstone, Rev. 19.20.

Secondly, because St. John begins the Regnum, or Kingdom, of a thousand years,
from the same Session of Judgment described in Daniel, as appears by his
parallel expression borrowed from thence;

St. John says chapter 20. Ver. 4. I saw thrones, and they sat upon them.

And Judgment was given unto them.

Daniel says chapter 7. Ver. 4. I beheld till the thrones were pitched down, and
the Judgment, (i. e. Judices) set.

22. And Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High.

And the Saints lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

And the Saints possessed the Kingdom viz. with the Son of man who came in the
clouds.

Now if it be sufficiently proved that the one thousand years begin with the
Day of Judgment, it will appear further out of the Apocalypse, that the
Judgment is not consummate till they be ended; for Gog and Magogs destruction,
and the universal resurrection is not till then: Therefore the whole one
thousand years is included in that great Day of Judgment.

But thus much may suffice to have spoken by way of Explication, to that Mother
Text in the Old Testament, the which I have so called, because hence it will
follow, quasi consectarium quoddam de interpretatione aliorum Scripturae
locorum huc pertinentium, that whatsoever Scripture speaks of a Kingdom of
Christ to be at his second appearing, or at the destruction of Antichrist, must
needs be the same which Daniel saw should be at that time, and so consequently
be the Kingdom of a thousand years, which the Apocalypse includes between the
beginning and consummation of the Great Judgment. All of them also have a
likeness, and are referred to this. Yea, our Savior calls himself so
frequently the Son of man, because Daniel so called him in this Vision of the
Great Judgment, and to teach us, that we are to look for the accomplishment of
what is there prophesied of, in himself. I had now done with this Text, but
that I have perceived by some Conferences I have had with some Reverend
Divines, that it is needful to answer an Objection which has bin started, in
opposition to all that has been said.

Object. Daniel (say some, who with Dr. Wills and others, take this wicked
horn to be meant of Antiochus Epiphanes) shows not the Roman Monarchies
persecution of the Church; and the fall of the same Monarchy. For, If the Roman
Empires persecuting the Saints, and the fall of the Empire were not revealed,
till Christ revealed them to John in the Apocalypse, then Daniel revealed them
not. But the Roman Empires persecution and fall were not revealed, till Christ
revealed them to St. John in the Apocalypse. Ergo, Daniel revealed them not.


The Major Proposition (say they) is clear. The Minor is thus proved.

The Romans persecuting the Saints, and their fall is revealed in the little
Book, Apoc. 5, etc. by opening seven Seals, and blowing seven Trumpets; all
concerning, and respecting seven-headed Rome: And none were able to open the
Seals of this Book, till Christ opened them to St. John.

Therefore the Roman Empires persecution, and their fall, were revealed to
none, before Christ revealed them to St. John.

The former part of the Antecedent is granted by all Interpreters of the
Apocalypse. The latter part is clear in the Text, Apoc. 5.3. None was able to
open the Book, None in Heaven or Earth, or under the Earth, to make the speech
more empharical. Paul who delivered to his Hearers all the Counsel of God,
could have preached the persecutions of the Roman Empire to his Hearers from
Daniel, if Daniel had in his Visions opened them.

This contains the strength of what I have been opposed withal, in reference to
the Exposition of this Text, the which I came now to make this Answer to it.

fourth Kingdom of Daniel, was believed by the Church of Israel, both before
and in our Saviors time, received by the Disciples of the Apostles, Vide
Jonathen Ben Vziel Chald. Paraph. l. 4. of Esdras Just. Mart. Ireneus
and the whole Christian Church for the first 400 years without any known
contradiction. And I confess, having so good ground in Scripture. it is with
me, tantum non articulus fidei, almost an Article ^f faith. For the four
Monarchies of the World in Daniel are twice revealed, first, to Nebuchadnezzar,
in a glorious Image of four sundry Metals, Dan. 2. Secondly, to Daniel himself,
in a Vision of four diverse Beasts, arising out of the Sea. Dan 7. The intent
of both is, (as I have showed in one already, and shall in the other when I
have done with this Objection) by that succession of Kingdoms, to point out the
Kingdom, and the time of the Kingdom of Christ.

2. I acknowledge also the subject of the Apocalyptical Visions to be fata
Imperii Romani post primum Christi adventum usque ad secundum super futuri; the
Fates of the Roman Empire, which after the first coming of Christ, was still to
continue in being, even till the second. And this I affirm. The Roman Kingdom
was revealed unto Daniel, but not according to that distinct succession of
things, and specification of the fates thereof (which was first made known unto
St. John) but only in general, and in imagine confusa, not to be Explicated but
by Christ himself. I say the Roman Kingdom was revealed to Daniel in the
general but the order of the times thereof, and the ^eries, rerum gerundarum,
or, course of things to be acted therein, not until the Revelation unto St.
John.

3. Nor is it strange or unwonted, that a thing may be revealed in general, and
yet most of the particulars concerning the same to be unknown and sealed; The
Calling of the Gentiles, or the Kingdom of Christ among the Gentiles, by way of
surrogation to the Jews, was revealed unto St. Peter and Paul, and the rest of
the Apostles, but the particular fates and states of that Kingdom, were never
known till Christ revealed them to St. John in the Apocalyptical Visions. The
like I say of the fourth or Roman Kingdom, the general Revelation whereof could
not but be before the opening of the sealed Book in the Apocalypse. since it
had then been so long a time in the World, as that it was grown past the (...),
and had fulfilled what it was to fulfill upon Daniels people.

4. As for the persecutions of the Church. I deny the Argument either of the
Seals or Trampers, to be the Roman persecutions of Christ's Kingdom, or that any
of them have reference to persecutions. save the fifth Seal only, or that any
thing contained in them was made known to Daniel, save the Catastrophe only
represented in the last Trumpet, which the Angelus tonitruum proclaims there to
be Consummati^ mysterii Dei prout annunciavit servis suis Prophetis; the
finishing of the mystery of God, as he has declared to his servants the
Prophets, and therefore cannot be denied to have bin both foretold, and
expected for the General, although not for the Manner, Time, and Order, in
Seri^ Rerum Gerundarum, in the course of thing to be acted, till then.

Clear it is, that the Assertion by some wonned, and in the Objection named,
that the Roman persecution was revealed to none, till Christ revealed it to
John, cannot stand, unless we deny the coming of the man of sin (who is a great
limb of that fourth Kingdom to be any part of the Churches afflictions; for
this was revealed unto St. Paul, both for the quality and the fall thereof,
viz. that Christ should destroy it, (...), which I make no doubt but St. Paul
learned out of the seventh of Daniel, where that ruffling-horn is not destroyed
until the Son of Man comes in the Clouds of Heaven to receive that universal
Kingdom, which shall never suffer persecution. But whereas it is said, that the
ruffling horn of the fourth Beast is Antiochus Epiphanes, I demonstrate the
contrary by this one Argument following.

The Ruffling-horn reigns until the Ancient of days comes in fiery flames to
destroy him, and to give Judgment unto the Saints of the most High, and until
the time comes that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, viz. until the Son of man
comes in the Clouds of Heaven, to receiv a Kingdom, wherein all Nations, People
and Languages should serve and obey him, Dan 7. ver. 9, 10, 11, 13. which is
expounded; ver. 22, 26, etc. But Antiochus Epiphanes reigned not until this
time, (for he died 160 years, and more, before the Birth of Christ, and almost
200 years before his Ascension; the least of which Numbers is a longer space of
time, then was from the death of Alexander unto Antiochus.) Ergo, Antiochus
Epiphanes is not that Ruffling-horn.
But I conceive this may suffice to answer this Objection. I therefore now
shall step a little forward, and look into that other Text, Dan. 2.31. to v 45.
where we have in Nebuchadnezzar's great Image, he four great Monarchies of the
World represented and held out unto us, and that in this order following, viz.

1. The first Monarchy was the Assyrian, which fell into the Babylonian, and
blossomed in Nimrod, Genesis 10.8, 9, 10 and was ripened in that present
Nebuchadnizzar, his Child and Grandchild. This Monarchy was represented in that
Image, by the Head of Gold, Dan. 2.38.

2. The second Monarchy was that of the Medes and Persians, which blossomed in
Cyrus, who conquered Babylon, and slew Belshazzar, and endured till Darius,
whom Alexander a Grecian overthrew. This Monarchy was expressed in that Image,
by the Breasts and Arms of Silver, Dan. 2.39. with ver. 32.

3. The third Monarchy was that of the Greeks which blossomed, or rather
immaturely and suddenly ripened in Alexander the Great of Mecedon, who
presently by his Victories over run the World; and by his sudden and untimely
death, was divided into four great parts, by four of his Chief Generals, who
parted the World among them, Dan. 2.39. This Grecian Monarchy was expiest, in
that Image by a belly and thighs of brass.

4. The fourth Monarchy was that of the Romans, which blossomed and ripened
leisurely, and by degrees; and was therefore more likely to last long. And by
certain gradations and much time rooted out successively all the inheritors of
Alexander; and the Upholders of the Greek Monarchy, and possessed all the Chief
known parts of the World, and so fetching its beginning lower Westward, and yet
up as high Eastward, it became a mightier Monarchy then any of the former.
This Monarchy was expressed in the Image by the legs of Iron. Dan. 2.32, 40.
because as Iron, it was strongest of all and subdued all under it, but in
process of time. the Body of the World, which it bore up, being so great, to
which it was a leg or supporter, it divided it self, (as it is in the natural
body) into two legs, and is in the Image so expressed, (though for a great
while it was but one Monarchy) yet at last it grew into two, the Eastern and
Western Monarchy. the Western, after the Eastern was lost, fell into feet and
toes, or Kingdoms, wherein was both strength and weakness, iron and clay, and
these never to be rejoyned or united, notwithstanding it has bin endeavored
by Marriages and other Covenants, to mingle and to rejoyne in one Monarchy. But
it shall never be* but to the period and upshot of their Sovereignty and
Monarchy, they shall remain Kingdoms distinct, as feet and toes of iron and
clay unminglable.

Now in the days of this fourth Roman and Western Monarchy, there shall be a
stone cut out without hands, Dan. 2.34, 36. which shall first ruin these
Kingdoms, it smote the Image on the feet that were of iron and clay, verse. 34.
and so swallowed up the whole Image, all the foregoing Monarchies were brought
under it, and by it to nothing, ver. 35. and it became a Monarchy over the
whole Earth, wherever any of the former Monarchies had ruled, ver. 35. that is,
as it is explained, ver 44, 45. a Kingdom, which that Stone shall obtain, set
up by the God of Heaven. And whereas the other Monarchies were erected by men
on earth, (though permitted by God) this Kingdom or Monarchy shall swallow up
in it all foregoing Monarchies, and that by no humane means or policy, for it
was without hands, or not in hand: that is, not of man, but a divine work every
way; and it shall reach and swallow up, not only the feet and toes, but the
legs of brass, the breast and arms of silver, the head of gold, Dan. 2.34, 35.
that is, all Kingdoms and States, that were from first to last under any of the
Monarchies shall be swallowed up by, and come under this. And this is a fifth
Monarchy which shall arise in the World after the former four, which is to be
understood of a state of Christ's Kingdom here upon earth as appears, 1 Because
it is called a Stone, as Christ is the Stone which the Builders refused, yet is
become the Head of the Corner, 1 Pet. 2.3. to 8. And fills the whole Earth, ver.
35. 2. it is a Stone (...) qui non ect in manibus, which is not in hand or not
cut out with hands, because by God immediately, without humane help, this
Kingdom shall be reared up. 3. Its duration, that it shall last for ever, shows
it is meant of Christ's Kingdom: no people shall swa low it up, as they have
done all other Monarchies: the Babylonian was left to the Medes and Persians,
and this to the Grecians and the Grecians to the Romans, but this shall be left
to none but shall be for ever, Dan. 2.44. that is, to the Worlds end; It is
left to no other Kingdom, for at the Worlds end when Christ delivers it up, he
delivers it not to any other people, but to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.


The next text we may look into, and as it were the eldest daughter of these
already handled, is that 20th. chapter of the Revelation, of which I shall
speak a little more largely, wrapping in many other Scriptures, handling the
fame thing with it; Where first we have ver. 1. the Lord Jesus Christ
descending and coming down from Heaven, in those words, I saw an Angel come
down from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in
his hand: This Angel is Christ called Michail, Rev. 12.7. who destroys the
works of the Devil, and is stronger then he, to bind him and cast him out of
the air into the pit. It is he that conquered him upon his white Horse, who
went forth. ( Rev. 6.2. (...), ut vinceret) that he might conquer He cast him
down to the earth; Rev. 12.8. He defeated him in his Lieutenant the Eeast. He
has the Keys of Hell and Death, and his regal power and authority is norably
set out by the Emblem of a great chain in his hand. And here he does three
things unto him.

1. He apprehends him, he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is
the Devil and Satan. He lays hold upon him by his power, and gripes him as one
in fury. The Description of the Dragon here, and chap. 12. v. 9. is one and the
same, to show that it is the same Devil, that there was cast into the earth,
and now by this descending Angel the Lord Jesus Christ is cast into the pit.

2. He binds him, the term of his bondage being expressed, and bound him, he
ties him up from his former liberty, and chains him as men do desperate dogs or
mastiffs, and that for a long time. And bound him a thousand years.

3. Imprisons him, the place where is in the bottomless pit, that is, an Abyss,
which he before feared, Luke 8.31. they besought him that he would not command
them to go (...), into the deep, or pit; as it is here the original word is one
and the same. And the Manner how was very securely, he shut him up, and set a
Seal upon him; As sometimes it was with Daniel in the Lions den, Dan. 6.17. And
with Christ's body in the Sepulcher, Matthew. 27. ult. which shows the certainty
and fullness of this restraint, and the complete power and superiority of the
Angel over him, who shall no more suffer Satan this thousand years to range
abroad, and to disturb the Reign of Christ and his people, and to do mischief
as before, being fast shut and locked up in prison; he shall neither use his
former violence nor subtilties. Lastly, the end of all this is, that he should
deceive the Nations no more; which I conceive is not to be understood
absolutely and simply, (as if he should not have any liberty to deceive any man
living, as some would have it) but with respect to such extent and success as
before, he shall not now prosper in his designs and attempts. And it signifies
a new and further restraint, beyond that in Rev. 12. where he was cast down to
the earth. when he was cast down from open heathenism, and open persecution as
a Dragon, under that notion he was cast out of the Church: yet he did begin
presently to try a new way, and that not without success; For as before he had
made the world mad in their heathenism, so now he makes them mad in idolatries
and superstitions, substituting the Beast in his room and place, giving him his
power, and seat, and great authority, Rev. 13.2. And causing that all both
small and great, rich and poor, free and bound, should receive a mark in their
hands or forehead, else they should not have the liberty to buy or sell, pray
or preach, traffic or trade with any.

But now he shall be bound from that liberty of deluding the Nations any more,
either by his Paganism, as he did in the first period, or by superstition and
idolatry, as in the second. Neither yet shall he tempt them any more, so as to
disquiet and trouble their peaceful reign with Christ on earth.

But to go on, this preparation being made, we read verse 4. I saw (says
John) Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto them, and I
saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for
the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image,
neither had received his mark, upon their foreheads, or in their hands: and
THEY lived and REIGNED with Christ a thousand years. In which words, that we
may come as near their sense and meaning as possibly we can, I shall endeavor
to explain and make clear these three things following, viz.

1. What Thrones and what Judgment is here meant? what must we understand by
them? 2. What are the Souls of those that were beheaded, and worshipped not the
Beast, etc? 3. What is their life and reign with Christ^ thousand years?
What Thrones, and what Judgment is here meant? or what must we understand by
them?

Answ. Let us observe the words in the original, which runs thus, (...). For
the right understanding of these words, two things are to be premised, which
are these next following.

1. That these Thrones are set for the Conquerours of the Beast and false
Prophet. For it is expressly said, they sat upon them and Judgment was given to
them, (...), namely to them of whom mention is made in the 14th verse of the
foregoing chapter. For to suppose the words (they sat upon them,) to relate
only to the following words, (the souls of them that were beheaded,) is to
place the relative before any antecedent. The Thrones therefore are set for
them who descended from Heaven with Christ, to make war against the Beast and
false prophet, Rev. 19 14, And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him
upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. For these, and not
others, are next mentioned, whom he had before more clearly described, Rev.
17.1^. These (namely, the ten Kings, who have given their power to the Beast)
shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcom them, for he is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called, and chosen,
and faithful, for these that come with the Lamb, and war with the Lamb are
these Thrones set.

2. (...), Judgment here is the same, and signifies the same with the word
re^gn or Kingdom, for it immediately follows, and they reigned. Which Kingdom
is in this place given to the Saints after the destruction of the Beast,
Antichrist. And it is the same Kingdom which Daniel speaks before handled. The
Thrones therefore here set, are the Thrones in which the Saints shall sit, at
the second coming of Christ, at the final destruction of Antichrist. And
judgment is that Kingdom, which the Saints shall then obtain, not a horary o^
diary properly so called: But a Millenary upon earth (as the text plainly, and
totidem verbis expresses) to be perpetuated in Heaven afterward to all
eternity; after the last Judgment properly and strictly taken, which shall be
the last effect of this Kingdom on earth: consisting in the final justification
of the just, and absolution of the faithful: and in the final reprobation and
condemnation of the wicked and ungodly. Of these Thrones, and of this Judgment
Christ speaks. Mat 19.28. Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me
in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of his glory,
ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. So
Luke 22.29.30. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto
me, that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Where in the former Text, by twelve
Thrones all the Thrones are meant, but they are called twelve in reference to
the twelve Apostles, in whom are represented the multitude of the faithful
judging and reigning. As Austin well notes in his 20th. Book de Civitate Dei
cap. 5. For of all the faithful the Apostle Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not
know that the Saints shall judge the World, that is, govern the same. And
lastly, John in the Revelation, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant
to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
Father in his Throne. But thus we see what Thrones and what Judgment is here
meant. The next Question which was proposed follows, which is,

What is meant by the Souls of them that were beheaded?

and vidi animas. And I saw the souls of them tha^ were beheaded. He saw
sitting on Thrones the souls of them that were beheaded. Now here let the
Reader weigh these particulars following for the right understanding of these
words, viz.

1. (...), Souls are here put for the dead. The Souls of them that were
beheaded, is the same with the dead that were beheaded. Animae percussorum,
idem sint quod mortui percussi. And this interpretation is manifest from the
opposite clause or sentence: Caeteri mortuorum the rest of the dead lived not
again, and therefore the first are considered as dead. Animae in sacris literis
non tantum personas sed cadavera denotat, (says Mede.) Souls in Sacred Wri^
denotes not only persons but dead bodies. S^ in the Hebrew Text souls are often
taken for the dead. Amongst those many places where they are so taken, see a
place or two, Levit. 21.1. There shall none of the sons of Aaron be defiled,
((...), pro anima in populis suis) for the soul, (for the dead, says our
English) among his people. So Levit. 19. ver. 28. (...) and incisionem pro
anima non dobitis in carne vestra, ye shall make no cuttings in your flesh for
the soul (dead.) So Psalm. 16.10. Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, i. e. me
dead in the grave.

2. These souls are those very souls that did cry under the Altar, for the
avenging of their blood, and waited for the redemption of their bodies, Rev.
6.9, 10. which appears not only from the Anaphorical Article here twice
repeated, ((...)) illas animas illorum, the very souls of them, but chiefly
from the identical description of those souls, Apoc. 6* ^0. And these here,
Apoc. 20 4. Souls of them that were slain, in the former text; Souls of them
that were beheaded in this, viz. the Martyrs of the first period under the
Dragon.

3. Now to these souls are ad^oyned also the souls of those that did not
worship the Beast, nor receive his mark, who also for this cause refusing to do
it, were killed, Rev. 13.15. The words in the Greek are (...), where after the
Conjunction ((...)) must necessarily be understood (...), as if he had said
(...), And the men, whosoever had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image,
souls and men are here joined. quasi termini convertibiles, and those and these
both taken in. (And lest we should doubt here to be fulfilled what was
mentioned, Rev. 6.9.10. To those very souls was promised, after the number of
these Martyrs should be completed, what they cry for, and is here fulfilled,
should be done v. 11. And it was said unto them, that they should rest for a
little season, till their fellow servants also, and their brethren that should
be killed, as they were, should be fulfilled,.) The expression here is very
curious, and such as is worthy diligently to be minded, for the Holy Ghost has
here linked together souls and men, to show that by those souls he meant men,
as also the faithful of the second period with the first, to show that both
shall live and reign with Christ now in this third period.

4. By the name of Martyrs also, by a Synecdoche are here understood all the
faithful dead in Christ, who here, and often elsewhere, especially in the
Prophets, are decribed as it were killed for Christ. Whence also they are wont
to be called Christ's dead body, Esaias 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, together
with my dead body shall they arise. So Paul writes of all the faithful, Rom
8.36. For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for
the slaughter. And of all the faithful it is spoken, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are
the dead which die in or for the Lord ((...)) Yea more, those whom Paul had
called dead in Christ, 1 These. 4.16. And the dead in Christ shall rise first. A
little before, viz. verse 14. He had called them dead for Christ, (...), per
vel propter Christum, who sleep through or for Jesus. Hence he is not only said
to come with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, Jude
14. with ten thousand times ten thousand, Dan. 7.10. But also with ALL his
Saints, Zac. 14.5. And the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with
thee. (...) -- (...) Omnes Sancti tecum Christ, vel tecum pro cum eo, Hebraeo
more. So that as I said by the name of Martyrs or slain, all the faithful dead
in Christ are here understood. All the Saints come with him

5. Certainly all the faithful are in very deed killed for Christ, and
therefore Martyrs; if not in the thing done, or in the effect, yet at least in
affection and firm purpose of mind. Therefore Christ says, Luke 14.26. If any
man come to me, and non odit animam suam, and does not hate his own life. (i. e
in comparison of me, and if ever I and it come in competition, be willing to
lay it down for me) he cannot be my disciple To conclude then, by Souls
reigning with Christ, are meant all the faithful dead in Christ: Concerning
whom the Apostle Paul thus speaks, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. If we be dead with him, we
shall also live with him, if we suffer, we shall also reign with him: unto
which words John seems to have respect here, when he says, They lived and
reigned with Christ. But so that brings me, (and I come) next to the handling
of the third thing proposed.

What is this life and reign of the Saints with Christ a thousand years?

ver. 6. (...). They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: And they
shall reign with him a thousand years. This life of the souls of them that were
beheaded, seems to be no other then the life of the body which they did lay
down in the death of the body, and which now in the Resurrection they receive
again no more to die the death of the body. Certainly this life cannot be meant
of life spiritual, in opposition to death spiritual, or death in sin, because
it is the life of those that were beheaded, to whom it is not granted after
death to rise from sin. Besides (lived) here is all one with the Resurrection
here spoken of, v. 6. They lived, that is, they rose again to life: Which that
it is meant of a corporal, and not of a spiritual Resurrection: there are in
the Text Arguments for the one and against the other. And first, these
Arguments in the Text offer themselves for it, viz.

1. Because John speaks of the souls of them that were beheaded, that is, of
those that were slain, or dead in body; And he says, they lived, that is, they
lived again, but the dead in body live not again, but by a Resurrection from
the death of the body. The Argument may be thus framed.

The Resurrection of the dead in body, is the Resurrection of the body, Mat.
22.31. Mark 12.26. Acts 23.6. Acts 24.21. 1 Cor. 15.12.

But the first Resurrection is the Resurrection of the dead in bodies, for it is
the Resurrection of those that were beheaded; Ergo, it is of the body --.

2. The Text speaks of such a Resurrection, wherein men live a thousand years
after they be raised, which cannot agree to any other life or resurrection, but
the life and resurrection of the body* Ergo, this resurrection is a bodily
resurrection.

3. Such a resurrection is meant, as happens to the rest of the dead after the
thousand years are ended, who lived not again ti^l the thousand years were
finished, ver. 5. which shall be of the body; Ergo, this resurrection is of the
body also.

4. The men that were beheaded, must so live during the thousand years, as the
rest of the dead lived not, all that while. But the rest of the dead lived all
that while, in soul separated from the body: Therefore, the men that were
beheaded must live all that while in soul joined to the body.

5. The men that were beheaded must so live at the first resurrection, as the
rest of the dead shall at the second resurrection, but the rest of the dead
shall live in body and soul too, at the second resurrection; therefore the men
that were beheaded shall live in body and soul too at the first resurrection.
But they cannot be said to live in their bodies, unless they be raised from
their graves, therefore the first resurrection is of the body from the grave.
But thus we see that the Te^t it self affords us Arguments to prove that this
resurrection is a corporal or bodily resurrection; It will also secondly afford
and yield arguments to prove, that it is not a spiritual resurrection, as,

1. John was not called upon from Heaven to behold that which he and every
Christian new before, or to have Tautologies told him. For if by resurrection
should be meant regeneration, (as some would have it) he knew, and so did every
Christian before, that such were blessed. And, according to that
interpretation, the words sound no more but this: Blessed and holy is he that
has part in holiness, which were but aharsh Tautologie.

2. This spiritual resurrection did begin in Adom after his fall, and has
continued ever since, and shall to the worlds end: But the first resurrection
here spoken of did not begin in Adom, but is to begin after the Armageddon
battle, (which will be the last and fatal blow, whereby the Beast and false
Prophet shall be for ever cashiered out of the world) and last a thousand years
and no longer. Ergo, this resurrection is not regeneration.

3. He that has part in the first resurrection, shall live and reign with
Christ a thousand years, but no regenerate man did ever live so long in a state
of regeneration; Ergo, regeneration cannot be meant by this resurrection.

4 No man is regenerate after death, but the men that were beheaded, did live
and reign with Christ a thousand years, after they were beheaded; Ergo, this
life and reign cannot be meant of regeneration.

5 The men that were beheaded, etc. are not any of them excluded from reigning
with Christ a thousand years; but if the first resurrection be meant of
regeneration, then begin the account when you will, and many shall be excluded.
To instance, suppose we begin at the death of Steven, Acts. 7. who was the
first that was slain for the witness of Jesus and the Word of God; The
thousand years were then ended about six hundred years ago, and all that were
beheaded since are excluded from reigning with Christ a thousand years. Or
suppose we begin with Constantine, as many desire, the thousand years were then
ended about three hundred years ago, and so they that were beheaded before the
days of Constantine, are excluded from the thousand years, and they that have
been beheaded since in the last three hundred years are excluded also. Ergo.

6. He that has a part in the first resurrection, has a share in the thousand
years, whether he were beheaded or no, as appears ver. 6. before mentioned, but
they that were regenerate before the death of Christ, had a part in the first
resurrection, (if we understand it of regeneration) and yet they had no part in
the thousand years, because they were dead before. And they that have been
regenerated since the thousand years, are supposed to be ended; had also a part
in the first resurrection, i e in regeneration, yet they had no share in the
thousand years, because they are supposed to be ended before they were
regenerate. Ergo,

7 If the first resurrection be meant of a Spiritual resurrection, then when it
is said, that the rest of the dead lived not again, till the thousand years
were ended: That must be meant of a spiritual resurrection too (for the words,
they lived not again, ver. 5 are opposed to the words, they lived, ver. 4. and
so consequently to the first resurrection, as is proved before.) But this
latter clause is not meant of a Spiritual resurrection, for then the rest of
the dead should be regenerate, when the thousand years are ended, and then none
should be for ever damned, which most exactly contradicts the Text, Rev. 20.15
Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of
fire: Ergo, no spiritual but a corporal resurrection is meant. If by the word
Donec until, we understand nunquam never, as some would have it, this is
contrary to the Scripture too: For when it is said, ver. 3. Satan shall deceive
the Nations no more, until the thousand years be fulfilled, the meaning is, he
should them not deceive while the thousand years continued, but should have
liberty to deceive them afterward. So when it is said, the rest of the d^ad
lived not again until the thousand years were finished, the meaning must of
necessity be, they lived not again whise the thousand years continued, but are
to live again when the thousand years are ended: but then they are not to live
again by a Spiritual resurrection; therefore that is not the meaning of the
words, but the meaning is, they shall live again in a bodily resurrection But
if this latter clause, be meant of a bodily resurrection, then the former
clause, where it is said, the souls of them that were beheaded, lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years, is meant of a bodily resurrection: quod
erat demonstrandum* But thus I have done with that first misunderstanding of
this Text, to understand it of regeneration, which (I confess) I Will not for
these and other reasons, how it can be. Neither yet can it be meant of a life
of of Glory in Heaven, (as some others would have it,) For John was not called
to Heaven, to see things to be done there, but to see things there, to be done
on Earth. Rev. 4*1. A door was opened in Heaven, and he called to come up, for
what end? to see things that must be hereafter, Where? in Heaven? No! but on
Earth, see, Rev* 6.1, 2, 3. And all done on Earth: Those things that were
represented to John in Heaven shall be done on Ear^h: As the Vision of the
Woman, and the great red Dragon, represented to him in Heaven, but fulfilled on
the Earth. There is not one instance can be given of any thing in the
Revelation, that is to be fulfilled in Heaven, except the Text do express it so
to be, which it does not here; for the Apocalypse is a Revelation of things to
be fulfilled on Earth. Besides, it cannot be meant of a life in Heaven; because
many of those who were killed, have lived this life before these thousand
years, and the life in Heaven, is not a life to end, when these thousand years
are ended. Nor can that life be called a living again, or a resurrection, for
that life and happiness of the Saints, is not the restoring of a life lost, but
the en^oyment and possession of a New life. It is therefore a Corporal life,
which at length the life from the dead, after the final destruction to the
Beast and false Prophet, in the day of Christ's second coming, which will be the
time of the resurrection, first of the first, and secondly of of the second.

The reign of these souls, that is, of the dead now living, as soon as ever
they are united to their bodies will be a reign upon Earth, as plainly appears
Rev 5.1 ^* And have made us Kings and P^iests unto God, and we shall reign on
the EARTH. Either then this shall be on the Earth, or else the four and twenty
Elders, were mistaken in their doxologie. Now what is there said in terminis,
is here in this 20 chapter said to be fu^filled ver. 4. and 6. They lived and
reign-with Christ a thousand years, and they shall reign with him a thousand
years; which cannot be meant (as I said) of Heaven after the day of Judgment,
for that is longer then a thousand years, nor of the Kingdom of Heaven before
the day of Judgment, for that also is more then a thousand years, but of a
Kingdom they shall have on Earth, as the words plainly show in the fore cited
Text, Rev. 5.1^.

Besides, that this Kingdom, and the Saints reign shall be on Earth, may be
gathered from two things in the Text, which offer themselves to leave this
beyond all doubt.

1. Because the Devil shall be perfectly bound up, in the bottomless-pit, that
the Saints may quietly reign, which would not be needful to be done, that the
Saints might quietly reign in Heaven, for he could make no disturbance there,
nor get thither.

2. Because unless they were to reign on Earth, Satan, Gog, and Magog could not
war against them. But we read, ver. 7.8. That when the thousand years are
ended, God. and Magog shall rise against them: From whence it does appear, that
the beloved City and the Camp of the Saints, shall be in the midst of Gog and
Magog, in the four quarters of the Earth. For it is said: They shall compass
the beloved City and the Camp of the Saints about, which they could not do, if
either of them were in Heaven. Therefore this Kingdom is to come upon Earth;
yet it shall not be an Earthly or a worldly Kingdom, as the Chilliastes, and
some Jews, vainly dreamed and imagined: but a gloriously spiritual and holy
Kingdom. Christ's Kingdom now is a holy and spiritual Kingdom in the hearts of
his people: But then it shall be so, and much more holy and spiritual, as well
as more glorious, then ever it was before, when the Kingdoms of the World shall
become the Kingdoms of God and of his Christ. When the Lord himself shall be
King over all the Earth, and his Name be one.

be granted, when the enemies of Christ and his people, the Beast and false
Prophet are overthrown and destroyed, and Satan himself chained and bound up,
there will be some eminent Kingdom for the Saints, and that here upon Earth:
yet I say it will be demanded, and the querie is, whether, this reign of the
Saints that had been beheaded, and Martyrs of Jesus, shall be in their own
persons, or in their successors, who profess the same truth with them: As many
godly and learned Divines do affirm and hold; that it is not to be understood
of the same individual persons, but of their fellows, and successors in the
same faith and profession, who follow in the same spirit and cause?



1. Because succession cannot in any tolerable sense be called a resurrection,
but this living again, and reigning of the Saints with Christ, is called a
resurrection, ver. 5. therefore it is not a succession: for a succession is of
other bodies in the room of those departed; but a resurrection is of the self
same individual bodies that were dead before. We had need (methinks) take heed,
lest while we plead for, and profess such a figurative and Improper
resurrection, we should at once both resist and deny the truth, and too much
gratify Atheists and Sadduces, who are willing to take all occasions to deny
the resurrection altogether; and tell us it is but a fancy hatched in the
brains of some men only.

2. Because the Apostle tells us, that if WE suffer with him, WE shall also
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. But the Saints do suffer in their own persons, and
not in their successors, therefore they shall reign in their own persons, and
not in their survivers and successors. Now by reigning with HIM cannot (I
conceive) be meant in Heaven after the day o^ Judgment is consummate and ended,
for then Christ as Christ, or as Mediator, reigns not himself, but as the
Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15 24. he delivers up the Kingdom to the Father, that
God may be all in all; he himself reigns but till then; if therefore we shall
reign with him, it must be while he reigns, and that is not in this life, when
he reigns in our hearts spiritually, for that is the time of our suffering with
him, ergo, our reigning with him must be when we are raised again, a thousand
years, during the day of Judgment, and this in their own persons, not in any
survivors or successors: For if WE suffer, WE shall reign with him.

3. Because if the Saints should suffer in their own persons, and reign in
their successors, this would be a very poor encouragement to any man to become a
Martyr, 1 Cor. 15.18.19. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished, if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.

4. What is to suffer with Christ, but to suffer as he did, and what is it to
reign with Christ, but to reign as he does, in quality though not in equality;
to be glorified with him as Paul expounds it, Romans 8.17. To sit with him upon
his throne, as John expresses it, Rev. 3.21. But Christ's reign is not a reign
in successors, for he ha^h none to succed him: therefore the Saints shall not
reign in successors, for they must reign as he does, and that is not in
successors, but in his own person, This may be a fourth reason against the
Saints living and reigning not in their own persons but in their successors.

5. When the text says THEY lived and reigned with Christ a THOUSAND years;
let the reader be pleased diligently to weigh these two things following.

1. If living a thousand years be meant of living in successors, then by this
reckoning before the thousand years began the Saints had no successors, and
after the thousand years are ended, they shall have no successors neither. As
suppose the thousand years should begin ( ut aliqui volunt, as some would have
it) in the days of Constantine the Great, which was about three hundred years
after Christ, then the Saints which lived and died before his days, had by this
reckoning, no successors, for the thousand years of living in successors was
not before then begun: And all the Saints who have lived and died since blessed
Luthers time, have had no successors, for according to this account, the
thousand years of living in successors, was ended before he did begin. What a
strange Prophecy have some made this for the Angel to tell John of a thousand
years in which the Saints shall live in successors, whereas the Saints have had
successors for above 1660 years already, since Christ's time, and how many years
more they may continue to succeed each other, who can tell, surely the holy
Prophecy must have some other meaning then of successors. 2. If by the reigning
of the souls of them that were beheaded, be meant reigning in successors, then
by this reckoning there is no reigning of the Saints at all. For if there be,
it is either before or after death, before death it cannot be, for that is a
time of suffering, not of reigning: And after death they reign not in their
successors; for their successors are in the same state of suffering that their
predecessors were, not of reigning; for instance, take we A,B,C,D, A does not
reign in his successor B, because B does not reign himself, if he do, it is
either before death or after death; but B does not reign before death, for that
is a time of suffering, not of reigning; and after death he does not reign in
his successor C, for C is in the same state of suffering that his Predecessor B
was, and not of reigning, and the self-same is the case of D, etc. But happily
you will say that A did reign in his lifetime a part of the thousand years,
and B did reign in his lifetime another part of the thousand years, after A
was dead, and C did reign another part after B was dead, and so of D, etc. But
this evasion is nothing to the purpose, for this kind of reigning, (if the time
of our suffering might be called the time of our reigning) is more then a
thousand years, yea, several thousand years; but the reigning John speaks of,
is just a thousand years, and neither more nor less. But to speak the truth,
there is no such kind of reigning as this evasion speaks of: for A did not
reign in his lifetime, for that was (as I said before) a time of suffering,
not of reigning; the same may be said of B, C, and D: And therefore A not
reigning in his own person while he lived, nor in his successor B, nor B in his
successor C, etc. reigns not at all, because they reign not after A is dead.
Again, the Apostle does not say, if we suffer we do reign, as if suffering and
reigning went together, but we SHALL reign, that is after death, not before. So
John here speaks of Souls, i.e. dead men that lived and reigned with Christ,
not in successors, who themselves were sufferers while they lived, and not
reigners but in their own persons.
6. God promised to give the Land of Canaan to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, and
they were to inherit it in their own persons, and not in their posterity only,
as will appear from Genesis 13.15. Genesis 15.7. Genesis 17.8. Genesis 26.3. Genesis 35.12.
Exodus 6.4, 8. Deuteronomy. 1.8. Deuteronomy. 11.21. and Deuteronomy. 30*20. But lest the bare citing
of the Texts should not be enough to convince one that is prejudiced against
this Argument, I will in a few words take only one of the forecited
Scriptures, and clear it from other glosses usually cast upon all such Texts,
leaving all the rest to the Readers search, Genesis 15.7, 8. And he said unto him,
I am the Lord that brought thee out of VR of the Chaldees, to give, THEE THIS
LAND to inherit it. And he said, Lord God, whereby shall I know that I SHALL
INHERIT IT. In which words (I coneeive) these things are plain.

1. That it was God that took Abraham out of VR of the Chaldees, and brought
him into the land of Canaan. Now if it was God, then what he promises must be
made good, for he is Truth if self, and has all power, so that it is
impossible he should be frustrate in his ends, being also Wisdom it self. 2.
That Gods end in bringing Abraham out of Vr into Canaan, was to give him the
land of Canaan to inherit it. For so the Text plainly expresses. 3. That for
the confirmation of Abraham's faith, God did promise again and again that he
would give that land (not only to his posterity, but) to him to inherit. 4.
That this promise was to be made good to Abraham living, not dead, for though
God ever live to give, yet the dead cannot receive, but the living may. 5. That
this promise was not made good to Abraham, while he lived that life which he
then had, Acts 7.5 He gave him none inheritance in it, ( viz. in the Land) no,
not so much as to set his foot on; yet he promised that he would give it to him
for a possession, and [not only to him, but] to his seed, [which seed came]
after him. 6. That Abraham did understand the Promise thus and desired a
confirmation of this faith, as appears by those words, whereby shall I know
that I shall inherit it, he understood it not only of his posterity, but of
himself, as is apparent. 7. That Abraham died in the persuasion, and
comfortable foresight of this promise, as appears, Heb. 11.13. These died in
faith, not having received the [accomplishment of the] Promises, but having
seen [the accomplishment of] them [to be] afar off, and were persuaded of [the
fulfilling of] them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers,
etc.
7. That therefore Abraham must one day live again, and inherit this promise of
God. For as I said, none of them, ( viz. neither Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob,)
did inherit it in their own persons whilst they lived, as is plain, Heb. 11.8*
9, 10.13, 16. Ergo, they must live again one day to inherit it, not in
successors but in their own persons, for the promises were not made to their
successors only, but to themselves in their own persons, as the forecited texts
declare. And this is the meaning of our Saviors Argument, whereby he proves
the resurrection of the dead, Mat. 22.32. which words (says Mr. Mede) must be
understood, with a reference to the promise made to Abraham, Gen* ^3.15. and
15*7. and 17.8. To Isaac, Genesis 26.3. To Jacob, Genesis 35*12. To all these, Exodus
6.4, 8. Deuteronomy* 1.8* and 11*21. and 30.20. Now he promises the land of Canaan
not to their seed only, but to themselves, therefore they must one day live
again to inherit the promised land, which hitherto they have not done. For that
God that thus covenanted with them, covenanted not to make good ^i^ promise to
them dead, but living, there is the strength of Christ's Argument, and it is
irrefragable, which otherwise would not infer any such Conclusion. Certain it
is, the divine Conclusion is strong and unanswerable, and such as the multitude
were astonished at it, but where is the irrefragibility of it, if not in this.

These are the reasons I offer against living in successors, and reigning in
successors, the which I submit to the trial of Gods Word; and the censure of
those that are sober and pious, and unbiassed, and have studied the point.

But let us proceed to see yet more Scriptures bearing witness to the truth in
hand, Psalm* 89.27. (...) Etian ego primogenitum dabo eum: excilsum regibus
terrae: Sic ad verbum sonat, Also I will make him (my) first born; high to the
Kings of the earth, or higher then, or high in comparison of the Kings of the
earth. Not in Heaven, where are to be no Kings of the Earth, but in the Earth,
where the Kings of the Earth are to be. And that this is chiefly to be
understood of the time of Christ's second coming. Paul to the Hebrews teaches
us, Heb. 1.6. (...). And again when he brings his first-begotten into the
world, he says. So most Translators and Expositors turn it, as our English
has done, placing the particle (again) so as it may have reference to the verb
(he says,) as if it had been thus expressed. And again he says, when he
brings in his only, etc. But the words in the Greek (as here is plain) are
otherwise placed then in our English Translation; word for word they run thus.
But when, again he brings his first begotten into the world: he says etc.
Again secondly, (for yield me but the ordinary liberty of construction, and)
the words will run thus. But when he brings again his only begotten into the
world he says, etc. Again, namely in his second coming, with a manifest
respect to this Psalm. And so very many interpret this Text in this psalm.
Loquitur hic ( inquit Ribera Com. in Heb. 1*6*) de secundo Christi adventu, cum
ad judicandum veniet, quae est secunda introductio in hunc mundum. He speaks,
says Ribera in his Commentary on Heb. 1.6.) of the second coming of Christ.
when he shall come to judge, which is his second bringing into this world.
Primb (inquit Chrysostomus) introductus est Christus in Orbem per incarnationem
passibilis and mortalis iterum vere, sive secundo gloriosus and impassibilis
die judicii. Tunc enim filium quasi inaugurabit eumque mittet reipsa in
possessionem totius orbis terr^^um ait Cornelius a Lapide. Firstly. (says
Chrysostom) Christ was brought into the world by his Incarnation passible and
mortal: but again, or secondly, glorious and impassible at the day of Judgment.
For then (says Cornelius a Lapide) he will as it were inthrone the Son, and
send him in very deed into the possession of the whole earth. Yea, some that
deny this reading and interpretation, do yet confess, the words may be
extended to that dignity and dominion which God shall give the Son over the
whole world, in that he has made him heir of all things, and given him the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. And the learned and
godly Annotators on the English Bible deny not, but that the words may be
understood of Christ's second coming as well as his first.

See also Psalm. 97.1. Where it is to be noted, that though the Psalm be without
a title, not only in our English Bibles, but also in our Hebrew Copies; yet the
LXX Interpreters either (doubtless) had then Copies in which this title was
prefixed to the Psalm; or else had received it by tradition, and knew that the
Psalm was fitted to that time, and therefore they have prefixed this title.
(...). Psalmus David, quando terraejus restituta est. A Psalm of David when the
earth is restored. As if the whole Psalm were made and fitted to that time,
and truly he that will seriously read and consider this Psalm, will see I
think) that time pointed at, if not plainly deciphered, and described. Thus the
Psalmist begins, (...) The Lord reigns, let the Earth re^oyce, let the
multitude of ^sles be glad thereof; which words seem clear for the reigning of
Christ in his second coming, for the Psalmist speaks expressly in the following
words of those things that precede it, a fire goes before him, and burns up all
his enemies round about him, etc. with a clear and evident reference to the
A^mageddon battle, and that conflagration which at that time shall burn up and
consume his enemies. Then (to omit all other passages) at the ^.v. he speaks
plainly of the calling of the Jews, or called at that time. Zion heard, and was
glad, and the daughtees of Judah re^oyced, because of thy Judgments, O Lo^d.
Again, v*9. for thou, Lord art high above all the earth, th^n art exalted far
above all Gods. This has never yet been, but shall then be, when he shall take
to himself his great power and reign, and all Nations shall serve and obey him.
Again, that is clear v. 6. All the people see his glory: And v. 7. worship him
all ye gods. Paul to the Hebrews in the place before cited, puts this out of
all doubt to be fulfilled in Christ's second coming, Heb. 1.6. worship him all
ye Angels. (...). All ye Gods, is rendered by the LXX. (...) All ye Angels,
which rendering the Apostle follows and approves. And thus Arnobius interprets
and applies this whole Psalm.

So Isa. 49.8. I will give thee for a Covenant of the people to establish the
Earth, and to cause to inherit the desolate heritages: namely, in a spiritual
manner, in the restoring the Kingdom of Israel, or in the restitution of all
things at Christ's second coming, v. 9. That thou may say to the Prisoners,
Go forth, and to them that are in darkness, Show your selves, viz. in the
resurrection of the just. And v. 10 They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither
shall the heat of the Sun smite them, for he that has mercy on them shall lead
them, even by the Springs of water shall be guide them, viz. after the
destruction of Antichrist. All which did begin somewhat to be fulfilled in
Christ's first coming, but because they far exceed that mean and low condition
of Christ here on earth, therefore they shall be perfectly and completely
fulfilled in Christ's second coming, and that upon earth, after the final
destruction of Antichrist, at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, contemporary
with which are the innumerable company of white-robed, palm bearing Triumphers
of all Nations, Kindred and People. Concerning whom the very same words of the
Prophet are used, and that in the same sense, Rev 7.16, 17. They shall hunger
no more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any
heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of them shall feed them, and lead them
to living Feuntains of waters, and wipe away all tears from their eyes.

See also Zach 9.10. And I will cut off the Charet from Ephreim, and the Horse
from Jerusale^m: and the battel-bowe shall be cut off, and he shall speak p^ace
unto the heathen, and his dominion shall be from s^a even to sea, and from the
river even to the ends of the earth. And chap. 13.2. And it shall come to pass
in that day, says the Lord ^f Hosts, that I will cut off the names of the
idols out of the Land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will
cause the Prophets and the unclean spirits to pass out of the Land. And chap.
14.9. And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth, and in that day shall be
one Lord, and his Name one, viz in the day of the second coming of Christ. I
only name these Texts, as being so clear and obvious, that they need no
Explication.

Also Mat 10.28 In the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit upon the
Throne of his glory, ye shall sit upon Thrones judging, i. e. governing the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Calvin understands these words de renovato Ecclesiae
statu, of the renewed or restored slate of the Church. And so do others of the
new heavens and new earth, spoken of 2. Pet. 3.13. And the world to come, Heb
2.5 Others of the resurrection of the dead, which Interpretation is approved by
Pa^eus, also allowed by the learned Annotators on the Bible, whose words upon
the pla^e are the^e; he means that in the absolute renovation in the
resurrection they should sit upon Thrones, etc. they that follow this sense
read the Text thus, by an alteration of points. Ye which have followed me,
shall in the Regeneration (when the Son of man shall sit upon the Throne of his
glory,) sit upon twelve Thrones, judging, etc. The Syriac Version very much
favors this, both by reading so pointed, and also in the Version of the w^rds;
for thus they turn it. Amen dico vobis, quod vos qui venistis post me; (...):
in seculo novo quum sedebit filius hominis, etc. Verily, I say unto you, that
ye who have come after me in the new age, when the Son of man shall fit, etc.
The Persian has it, in novo mundo, in the new world. The Arabic, in
generatione ventura, in the generation to come. The Ethiopick, in secunda
generatione, in the second generation. All these secretly hint (as Chrysostom
well observes) the Reign of Christ with his people, when he comes out of his
far Country, to the ordering and management of his Kingdom. See also Luke 1.32.
The Lord SHALL give unto him the Throne of his father David. These words I
confess, have been interpreted by some of Christ's spiritual reign in the
hearts of his people, without a personal. But it seems to me, that a spiritual,
without a personal, should not be here meant. For 1. David had no such reign
himself, nor Solomon his son, nor any of his seed. Yet we read that Solomon
his son did sit upon the Throne of David his father, 1 Kings 2.12.24. And what
man will say; that by Throne is meant, the spiritual reign of Solomon without a
personal. And if it be not to meant when it is spoken of Solomon, why should
any think it to be so meant when it is spoken of Christ. 2. The spiritual reign
of Christ belongs to him as he is God, but to sit on the Throne of David
belongs to him as man, As Acts 2.30. Therefore David being a Prophet, and
knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne, etc. The
Throne of David is one thing, and his spiritual reign another. 3. When Christ
is called the Son of David as Mat. 22.42. no man will say, that thereby is
meant the Son of God: No more ought any man to think, that when Christ is said
to sit on the Throne of David, that thereby is meant the spiritual Throne of
God. For doubtless they are two distinct things. 4. Christ did reign
spiritually, and that in the heart of Mary her self, before this Prophecy was
revealed to her: But Christ did not at that time sit on the Throne of David,
but the Angel told her, he should sit on the Throne of David hereafter. And
therefore this spiritual reign is one thing, and the Throne of David another.
5. The spiritual reign of Christ is in reference to spirituals; But his sitting
on the Throne of David is to order it with judgment and justice, Isa 9 7. Of
the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end; upon the Throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to stablish it with judgment,
and with justice, from henceforth, even for ever. So Jer. 23.5. Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch,
and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in
the Earth. This seems to imply some other thing and matter. 6. The Throne of
David is peculiar to Christ alone, and not common to all the three Persons: But
the spiritual reign of Christ in the hearts of men is common to all the three
Persons, and not peculiar to Christ alone. Therefore the Throne of David is one
thing, and the spiritual reign of Christ another.


See also Mat. 20.20 21. Then came to him the Mother of Zebedees children with
her sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him, viz. that her
two sons might sit, the one on his right hand, the other on his left in his
Kingdom. Now what is meant by this Kingdom? but the reign of Christ on earth;
Therefore they that be of this mind are of the same faith the Apostles were
of; but you will say, was Christ of the same faith too? I answer, it will
appear that he was, if we well weigh his answer to this request, v. 23. Jesus
answered and said, to sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give,
but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared. In which words we may
observe what it is that Christ denies, and what it is that he grants them. Now
that which Christ denies is contained in the first words; to sit on my right
hand and on my left is not mine to give, i. e. without my fathers leave, or it
is not mine to give to every one that asks it, or asked at that time* or I have
no Commission from my Father to give precedencies in my Kingdom to those that
affect them. But what is it that he grants? that is contained in the next
words: But it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. In
which words our Lord Jesus Christ seems plainly to insinuate and hint these
three things 1. That such a Kingdom as they speak of is prepared of his Father,
namely, a Kingdom on earth, such as our Savior had promised in the former
chapter in which the twelve disciples should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging,
etc. And such a Kingdom they meant, and their suit was for the first and second
place in it. 2. He grants that some shall sit on his right hand and on his left
in his Kingdom. 3. That it is appointed of his Father who those men shall be.
These seem clear.


See also Luke 19 12. A certain Nobleman went into a far country to receive
for himself a Kingdom, and to return. Who is this Nobleman but Christ
incarnate? And what is meant by his going into a far country, but his
Ascension into Heaven. And wherefore is he gone thither? but to receive for
himself a Kingdom. Now where is this Kingdom to be? Not in Heaven, for when he
has received it he must return. And what is meant by his return, but his
return to the Earth again, to the Exercise, Ordering and Government of his
Kingdom. For Job 19.25. He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. Zach.
13.4. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is
before Jerusalem on the East, Jer. 23.5. He shall reign and prosper, and shall
execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth. And we with him, Rev. 5.10. shall
reign on the earth. I confess, what they may do to others I know not, but to
me (for that little knowledge the Lord of his goodness has bin pleased to
impart to a poor worm) me thinks they are very clear and perspicuous.

See also that Text, Acts 1.7. Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom
to Israel: viz. what was promised by the Prophets; The Lord answers, it is not
for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in his own
power. In which (I conceive) he plainly insinuates these three things.

1. That the Kingdom promised, is one day to be restored to Israel. 2. That
there is a time appointed for it by the Father, viz. the time of the
restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. which God has spoken by the month of all
his holy Prophets since the world begun. All prophesied and soake of this. 3.
That the time when this shall be, is known only to God, as proper to him, not
to be communicated to any creature So also before in Lukes Gospel, chap. 29.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has daught us, that the time of his second coming in
glory, is the time of the Redemption of Israel promised: or the promised
Kingdom, which after the Winter of the Cross and Affliction should come, which
he calls a certain Summer, v. ^8. and 31.
Nextly see Luke 22 29, 30. Ye are they that have continued with me in my
temptation, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, etc. Now where is this Kingdom?
not in Heaven, there is no eating and drinking in Heaven, no judging the twelve
tribes of Israel, therefore it is on the earth in the time of Christ's second
coming.

Let us also take notice of that passage, Acts 15.14. Simeon has declared how
God at first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his Name;
and ver. 15. to this agree the words of the Prophets, (which are spoken of the
first calling of the Geniles, before the restoring of the Kingdom of Israel,)
as it is written ( viz. in Amos 9.11, 12 especially, from whom alone we may
judge of the meaning of the rest of the Prophets) ver. 16. After this, ( viz.
after their first calling,) I will return, and build again the Tabernacle of
Davi^ which is fallen down; and I will build again the remains thereof, and
will set it up: where it is carefully to be marked, that the word posthaec,
afterward, is not to be found in the Prophet Amos; but is added here by the
Spirit of God for Declaration-sake, with manifest relation to that first
calling; that we might certainly know that this should com to pass after the
first calling of the Gentiles, in the very, return of the Lord Jesus Christ to
his Kingdom, which is called the Kingdom of David. Ier. 23.5. Ezekiel 37.14. and
24. Hos. 3.5. see the words; I set them not down lest these sheets should
swell. And that which follows, both in Amos and in this text, very much helps
this Exposition, viz. v 17. that the residue of men might seek after the Lord,
and all the Gentiles upon whom my Name is called, viz. upon whom my Name is
called in the first calling of the Gentiles, who (as I said before) were but
few in comparison: But the second calling will be far more universal, when the
Devil shall be bound up from seducing the Nations any more, as formerly he had
done, then shall the residue of men come in, and all the Gentiles, as the Text
says, be converted to God.

This is that Kingdom joined with the Appearance of Christ ready to judge the
world, of which St Paul to Timothy makes mention, 2 Tin. 4 1. I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing and his Kingdom: His appearance is personal, for he appears to
judge, and then does this his Kingdom (...) begin, and dures the time of his
stay, which John tells us, Rev. 20 4. is a thousand years, and then comes the
second or general resurrection (which is another order in the resurrection) and
the general and last judgment; when, according to this self same Apostle. 1 Cor
15.24 to 23. Jesus Christ (the last enemy being destroyed) shall deliver up the
Kingdom to his Father, that he may be subject to him, who subdued all things to
h^mself, that God may be all in all: so far is he then from being said to enter
upon any new Kingdom that then he delivers up the old. That Kingdom therefore,
which neither shall be before the appearance of our. Lord, nor after the last
Judgment, is necessarily to be included between them* This is not nothing.

See also those words, Heb. 2 5. (...): For unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. (...) enim terra est, non
coelum. For this word (...) which we translate world, is Earth, not Heaven: but
(you will say) where did the Apostle speak in his preceding discourse of this
(...), world to come, that he should say, whereof we speak? I answer in v. 6 of
the preceding chapter, (...), etc. i. e. But when he shall bring AGAIN his only
begotten Son into the world, he says etc. For those things, which out of the
Book of the Psalms to the end of the chapter are cited (concerning the worship
of Angels, of his Scepter of Righteousness, of the renewing of the world, and
of the treading of his enemies under his feet) are all (if we crecit the
Apostle) to be referred to the second coming of Christ. But that Admonition
which is contained int he sour first verses of this chapter, is to be read as a
parent hesis, the which being ended, the Apostle in the fifth verse returns
again to his former Proposition, and more largely handles the Prerogative of
human Nature above the Angels which he had disputed. And amongst other things,
says he unto the Argels, has he not put in subjection the (...), world to
come, whereof we speak; which is to be, when God brings again his only begotten
son into the ((...)) world. I have here but one word more to add (for I spoke
before of the strange transposition of the words chapter 1. v. 6.) that (...), to
bring in, has a future signification, for so much as it is the second Aorist
of the Subjunctive mood.

Peter also (2 Pet. 3.10.) speaks (if I be not deceived) clearly to this.
Behold, the day of the Lord comes: How? As a Thief in the night, i. e.
suddenly: yet shall not as a Thief disappear the very same night. In that day
the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements melt, etc. which
shall not be done simul and semel, together and at once, as is manifest in the
words, dissolved, melt, burnt up, which require an order of time for their
accomplishment. But when that is done. v 13. we expect a new Heaven and a new
Earth, according to his promise, (which is in Esaias 65.17.) wherein dwells
righteousness Mark it, I pray you, a new Heaven, and a new Earth, is expected
in the second coming of the Messiah: But what is meant by Heaven and Earth in
the Prophetic style, when they lose their literal signification? surely
nothing else but the Church and Commonwealth; and when it is said that we look
for these new, it is in one word (...), a new world to come, or in two, (...),
new Heavens, i. e. new Churches; and (...), a new Earth, i. e. a new
Commonwealth; all is new: all old Church and Commonwealth fashions pass
away, Rev. 21.1. and there will be new Churches and new Commonwealths, wherein
dwells righteousness; And truly it must needs be a new world. Ecclesiastical
and Civil Polities must needs be new, when Satan, who did rule, is bound, and
Christ, who was rejected, reigns, when righteousness dwells, where sin did
rage, when all tears shall be wiped away, and there shall be no more crying,
sorrow or pain.

Lastly, the Apostle John, not only in that 20th. chapter, of which I have
already spoken, but also elsewhere frequently in the Revelation speaks clearly
of this glorious Kingdom of Christ upon earth. Of those many places I shall
name a few, See therefore Rev. 2.26. He that overcomes, and keeps my works
unto the end; to him will I give power over the Nations. Surely this refers not
to Heaven, but to this time of Christ's Kingdom we are speaking of: So we have
that which is as plain as words can make it, Rev. 5.10. We shall reign on the
earth. What can be the meaning of this, is it not what Christ promised, Mat.
5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, and what shall be
fulfilled when the Kingdom is given to the Saints, and Christ shall reign So
Rev. 11.15. In the days of the seventh Trumpet (which is a Trumpet of
consummation) these voices were heard: Now all the Kingdoms of the world are
become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever. And v 17. Thou have taken to thee thy great power and have reigned. And
that you may know that this Reign and Kingdom is circumscribed within the Great
day of Judgment, he tells you, v. 18. That this is the time of the dead that
they should be judged: And that (says the Text) thou should give reward
unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear thy
Name, small and great, and should destroy them that destroy the Earth. Also
Rev. 19 6. speaking of the same time, the Church breaks out in a song of oy,
saying, Halleluiah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns The Marriage of the
Lamb is come and his Wife has made her self ready. Also when John tells us
Rev. 20.4. that the Saints lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, we
must ever remember (which is the only thing I shall here add) that it is one
thing for Christ to reign in his Saints. and another for the Saints to reign
wi^h Christ; the former was, all the time of the Beast, the latter is not to
be, till the Beast be destroyed, and Sa^an bound, and the Messiah corn again
But (though it were easy to be almost infinite in the proof of the (...) of
this point) yet knowing that as some will think I have been too large, so
others will yet think all too little to convince them, I shall therefore only
suspend any further proof, until I have given you some reasons of this
Interpretation of these, and such like texts, and answered some of those common
objections, that against this, are usually objected, unless these may be so
ordered, as to contain yet further proof. And first, I shall offer these
following Reasons of this Interpretation, and why I choose to believe this to be
a truth, however by many much decried.

1. Because all those places of Scripture in the Old Prophers, which foretell a
certain, glorious, and happy estate of the Church upon earth, should never be
fulfilled here upon earth, unless there be a long tract of time appointed for
the fulfilling of them, wherein Antichrist being conquered, and the devil
chained up in the bottomless pit, the Saints might live safely, in the
enjoyment of all spiritual and heavenly delights Let us see (amongst many) two
or three Scriptures for this, Isa. 60.11 to the end. Therefore thy gates shall
be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring
unto thee the forces of the Gentiles; and that their Kings may be brought. For
the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those
Nations shall be utterly cut off. The sons also of them that afflicted thee
shall come bending to thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow down
themselves at the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee the City of the
Lord the Zion of the Holy One of Israel. I will make thee an ete^nal
Excillency, a Joy of many generations. Thou shall also suck the milk of the
Gentiles, and shall suck: he breast of Kings, and thou shall know that I the
Lord am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob. I will also
m^ke thy Officers Peace, and thy Exactors Righteousness. Viotence shall no
more be heard in thy Lend, wasting nor dest^ucti^n within thy borders, but thou
shall call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise. The Sun shall be no more
thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee:
but the Lord God shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
gl^ry. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self:
for the Lord shall be^th ne everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning
shall be ended. Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the
Lana for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hand^, that I may be
glorified. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
Nation; I the Lord will hasten it his time. Isa. 65.17, to the end. 'For behold
I creare new Heavens and a new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered nor
come into mind, but be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create,
for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a Joy. And I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be
no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an
Infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days. For as the days
of a tree, are the days of my people, and mine Elect shall long enjoy the work
of their hands. The Wolf and the I amb shall feed together, and the Lion shall
eat straw like the bullock: they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain, says the Lord, J^r. 23.5. 'Behold the days come, says the Lord,
that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch: and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execure Judgment and Justice in the earth. In his days
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name
whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 32.37. to the
end. see the words. Also Hos a 3.5. 'Afterward shall the children of Israel
return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the
Lord, and his goodness, in the latter days. This is said of Israel, after
many days, and in the latter days. See also Fzek. 37.11, 12, 13, 14. and v 20.
and so on to the end. And the sticks whereon thou writest, shall be in thine
hand before their eyes. And say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I
will take the children of Israel from among the heathen whither they be gone,
and I will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land. And I
will make them one Nation in the Land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one
King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more two Nations, neither
shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all. Neither shall they
defile themselves any more with idols nor with their detestable things. And
David my servant shall be a King over them: And they shall all have one
Shepherd, they shall also walk in my Judgments, and observe my Statutes and do
them. And they shall dwell in the Land that I have given unto Jacob my servant,
wherein your fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even they and
their children, and their childrens children for ever, and my servant David
shall be their Prince for ever. Moreover, I will make a Covenant of Peace with
them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them. My Tabernacle also shall
be with them; yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the
heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my Sanctuary shall
be in the midst of them for evermore. See also Mich. 4.1. to the end of v. 7.
Zach. 14.14. to the end. See the words. In which places, though there be not an
express mention of a thousand years, yet, as it is clear, the things therein
contained were never yet fulfilled, so they require a long tract of time upon
earth for the fulfilling of them, especially when Isaiah minds us of a child
an hundred years old, and of the days of a tree; which words (says Justin
Martyr) do secretly hint the thousand years. Certainly it was reserved for
John, who was the last of the Prophets, and writ last, to make express mention
of the time, how long it should be, to wit, a thousand years, and give light to
all the Prophets. And I verily believe that he that will be (that I may give it
you in their own words,) as the Syrians phrase it, (...) i. e. Discipulus in
Tabernaculo temporis, A Disciple or Scholar in the Tabernacle of time shall
understand those Prophets, and see clearly mysteries contained in them, better
then ever we have done.

2. Because all the Prophets do chiefly prophec^e of the Kingdom of the Messiah
upon his second coming, as appears Acts 3.21. Whom the Heavens (speaking of
Christ) must receive, until the time of this restitution of all things, which
God has spoken of by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the World
begun. So Amos 9.11. with Acts 15.15. Unto this agree the words of the
Prophets, As it is written, After this (viz. after their first Conversion) I
will return and build again the Tabe^nacle of David which is fallen down^ viz.
in the second coming of the Messiah. S^^ Isa 59.20. And the Redeemer shall come
to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, says the Lord.
Who would have taken this for a cogent proof of what we have in hand, since
this seems to fall so far short of those sublime expressions which are to be
found in many other places, both of this and almost all the rest of the
Prophets: If the Apostle Paul had not so applied it, Romans 11.25, 26 So all
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, and so quotes the words before cited.
So John tells us, (speaking of the finishing of the Mystery of God; and the
Seventh Trumpet sounding, Rev. 107.) that all is as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets. Verily, all those transcendent exprestions in the
Prophets; which hitherto by too too many have been very strangely to Christ's
first, low, and mean appearance in his humiliation: ought to be referred to,
and never yet were, nor shall be fulfilled, but at the time of his second
coming in exaltation, and gloriously, in his Majesty to reign. And with the
glorious brightness of this his second coming, shall the eyes of the Jews
Zach. 12.10 And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, etc.
be opened, who hitherto had bin so dazzled, that they scarce could entertain,
into their thoughts his first, low, and obscure coming, yea, the Prophets
themselves through the Glory and Majesty thereof, suffered a kind of ecstasy or
rapture, which occasioned, as it were, when they spoke of Christ, and of his
coming, a leaping presently from the Matters of his first, to the things of his
second coming, as is easy to observe, in the reading of a their Prophesies.

3. Because unless this be believed and held many. Arguments will be taken from
the Christians, whereby they may convince the Jewe of their obstinate
infidelity, and bring them to Conversion. For they have so drunk in these
principles and sucked the milk of them from al^ their teachers and
predecessors, ( viz. That the times of the Messiah will be times of
Righteousness, Peace and Blessedness, knowledge and all Joys, and that in
great fullness; And when the Scriptures also are so appostie for them, and many
texts, otherwise unanswerable) that without some competent satisfaction herein
(we have found by experience, and are like to find) they are not to be dealt
withal, nor will ever think of coming over to us. A Jewish woman in London said
lately to a friend: That your Messiah (he speaking to her of Christ) is not the
true Messiah, for when he comes there will be great peace and love, the wolf
shall dwell with the Lamb, none shall hurt or destroy in all his holy Mountain,
etc. whereas you Christians are divided, hate and devour, hurt and destroy one
another. I leave it (says that Reverend mystery Searcher, Mr. Mede, to the
judgment of learned men, and men well able to judge in such like mysteries in
Divinity, whether this be not the best and easiest way to deal with the Jews:
not to wrest those plain Prophesies touching things appertaining to this last
and glorious coming of Christ, to his first coming, for while we do so, the
Jews laugh and scorn at us, and are hardened in their infidelity. The Apostle
Peter takes this course to convert the Jews, Acts 3.19. Repent, (says he) and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the Presence of the Lord: And he shall send Jesus Christ which
was preached unto you, whom the Heavens must receive, until the times of the
restitution of all things, of which God has spoken by the mouth of all the
holy Prophets since the world begun.

4. Because unless this opinion of Christ's Millenary Kingdom, and reign with
his Saints a thousand years be granted and received, nothing of certainty can
be brought, concerning the true and genuine sense of the 20th chapter of the
Revelation, and that in the 7. of Daniel, and many other of the Texts before
named, wherein a man's Conscience can safely rest: Which (amongst some others)
Pareus himself confesses: who says, the more he studied it, the less he
found out whereby to untie the knot, which had so tortured all Interpreters,
only this he says he found, that it is more easy to tell what this thousand
years are not, then what they are. And a little after he says, I do not
therefore here promise you, that after all others, I, shall so untie this knot
of a thousand years, as to satisfy all men in this Millenary Reign of the
Martyrs and Saints with Christ. The Reason is given by a learned Writer:
because he left the letter of the Text, and did turn the whole discourse to an
Allegorical sense, without any sufficient reason or necessity at all. It has
doubtless been the unhappy fate of many, by their learning, in their
Expositions, to make plain Scriptures dark, and difficult texts far more
difficult then before.

5. Because it seems altogether unreasonable to go about to in^erpret that
whole place in the 20. chapter of the Revelation figuratively, because of one
or two figurative expressions in it, which yet have an ea^te explication
without any figure. In a plain ^^^^ence we may sometimes meet with one trope or
other, but it does not therefore necessarily follow, that all and every word in
the sentence must be so taken, nor is that reasonable. Propter unius verbi
translationem, nen totus locus figurate accipiendur est, says Austin. Neither
indeed is this Prophecy of a thousand years propoled under representations and
pictures, as many others are in the Apocalypse; but it is declared in as clear
and elegant word, as you can posibly imagine, be it by the Holy Ghost never, so
really meant.

6. Because this Interpretation of a thousand years, after the Armageddon
battle and the d^struction of Antichrist, in Christ's second coming, does best
agree with all those Scriptures which speak or this subject which consider a
long tract of time in it, as well as in his first-coming, as was showed before.
Now we are not to think, that because the Lord Jesus Christ, shall come as a
Thief, or like the L'ghtning; that therefore he shall presently like a thief,
or like the lightning, vanish or disappear. Nor because his second coming, is
joined with the final Resurrection, and last Judgment properly and strictly so
called: therefore they shall be done presently, together, and all at once: but
every thing shall be fulfilled in its own order and time: In a process of time
sensibly, and by degrees will the Lord proceed in the restitution of all
things: after the same manner as his proceeding was in the Creation of all
things, though he could have created all things in one and the same moment, God
will never huddle his works on helps.

7. Because to interpret the first Resurrection, of a piritual resurrection
from sin, is altogether new and unheard of, and unknown to all Orthodox
Antiquity, and that almost till Austins time: And was first of all found out by
Tyconius the Donatist, of whom Austin borrowed it; whom afterward Primasius
followed, Gregory, and others. Yea, they that deny this Interpretation, deny
that which was of old denied by the Heretics against the Orthodox, as it does
plainly appear from Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew: which
Dialogue is set down at large by Mr. Mede, at the latter end of his Commentary
upon the Revelation, whither I refer the Reader. But to clear the thing beyond
doubt, Consider, that though the death in sin may be called a death; yet it is
not, nor any wherein Scripture called, the death, either first or second: if
that death in sin be the death, then it is the first death, and the Life of
Grace the first Resurrection, and then all, that have a part in this, should be
freed from the second death, which second death by this reckoning must be the
death of the body, but that we see is false, for the godly die the death of the
body as well as the wicked. Therefore let us give way to the plain truth, which
is in a word thus. The first death is the death of the body, or a bodily death:
the second death is the death of the soul, or the souls everlasting punishment
in Hell: And the first Resurrection, or the first order in the Resurrection,
(for I speak not here of Christ, and those that arose then) is the Resurrection
of the body, or a bodily Resurrection of the Saints, and they that have part in
this are none but such as are holy, and by this their being within the Compass
of the first order in the Resurrection, or being raised in the first
Resurrection, they are beyond all fear of condemnation in hell which is the
second death: Therefore the Text says, Blessed and holy is he that has part in
the first Resurrection, on such the second death has no power: which
Resurrection (as we see) cannot be meant of the life of grace, but must be
meant of that corporal Resurrection, which is opposed to a bodily death, or the
death of the body, and not to the death in sin.

8. Because although Christ's Oeconomical or Mediatory Kingdom is but one, in
regard of its essential form: yet it is indeed twofold in respect of its
accidental form. For Christ's Kingdom, which is humble, low, and comes not
with observation, and is much accompanied with the Cross, and persecuted,
according to his first coming, which was humble and low, to his very passion,
is one thing: And his glorious Kingdom is another, which comes with
observation, as lightning shining upon the earth; and in great peace and
security, according to the nature and condition of his second coming, Luke
17.20. to the 26.

9. It seems altogether absurd for us to think, that Christ should come in
Glory and Majesty, to the ordering and exercise of his Kingdom, (his Kingdom
(...), 2 Timothy 4.1.) and presently the very same day give over his Kingdom
again, (1 Cor. 15 24. and so on) delivering it up to the Father. The King of
such a Kingdom might, not unfitly, be compared to Jonas his Gourd, which was a
shade to his head, and protected him from the heat, so that he very much
rejoiced in it; but that joy was but a short joy, for it sprung up in a day,
and it withered in a day. What other men can, I know not, but I cannot think,
that the Lord Jesus Christ, should descend from Heaven with all his Saints,
accompanied with glorious Angels, enter upon his Kingom ((...), as I said
before,) order it with judgment and justice, executing righteousness in the
Earth: compose a glorious Metropolis of those sinless, sorrowless, joyful,
immortal Saints, who descended and came with him from heaven; and cause the
rest who are godly in all the world (who are called the Nations that are saved,
Rev. 21.24. For then there will be a very great and unparallelable conversion;
but yet in another state) to walk in the light thereof, and take their
directions thence: Will he thus make all things new, and cause things old to
pass away? had the Saints an eye to look through all those sad and sharp
calamities, of a thousand and six or seven hundred years continuance, unto this
time? as they do, Rev. 5.10. did all the Prophets so esee, and speak of these
glorious times and things? did the Apostles make so many queries, and Christ so
many promises referring to this time and state? I say shall all this be? and
many things more that might he named, and all but for a day? and then to end? I
can never (I freely confess) believe it.

10. Because the Church is rightly divided into Militant and Triumphant, but
this triumphant is one Partial, another Total; one Inchoate, another
Consummate. The faithful now triumph in heaven, in respect of their souls, they
shall also triumph, in respect of their bodies: this triumph is inchoate here
upon Earth; and consummate in Heaven. And so great is the affection and
inclination of the blessed souls in Heaven, unto their bodies to which they
were united that they had rather be with them, in some kind of conflict (though
then there will be none) then without them in full and perfect triumph.

11. Because they who interpret the precedent chapter, ( viz. Rev. 19.) of some
begun destruction of Antichrist preceding Christ's second coming, but not of the
full and final destruction of Antichrist at Christ's second coming, do flatly
contradict the plain texts of Scripture, Rev. 16.14, 15. Rev. 17.14. Rev.
19.18.20, 21. And do directly oppose themselves to all Orthodox Antiquity, yea!
to Hierom and A^stin themselves, to whom they are wont every where to appeal,
even in this very controversy it self.

12. Because this interpretation of the reign of the Martyrs, or of the Saints,
(^or I take them for one and the same) and of Christ upon Earth, is no more
incident to some Labyrinths and (...), then some other interpretations,
concerning the second and last resurrection, and judgment; which opinion
notwithstanding is no whit to be rejected, because by Epicures and some
Philosophers, and Stoics, and others, that have always been exploded as
fabulous and false, and are by many others derided, as laden (especially as
they think, who have not well digested and studied it) with many absurdities.
In so great a Mystery, it will be sufficient to know the truth in the main, and
the matter in general; and not curiously to tearch into the reason of every
circumstance and punctilio. The Matter is grounded upon the undeniable sequel
of the Sea Mede's clavis apochalyptica part 2 synchr. 4.5.6.7. where the 1000.
years are placed after the ruin of the beast, and proved to follow it.
Apochalyptick order and consent of other Scriptures, especially Prophetical,
which do most wonderfully confirm the same. It is known to a Proverb, that one
fool may object more then ten wise men can presently answer; yet I freely
profess, I find this truth so plain (si dear, non de modo loquimur,) that I
know not any thing that can be objected, which admits not of a very fair and
plain solution. Those Objections therefore which are usually urged, and may
perchance be in the minds of some, I shall with the readers good leave, speak
next to with all brevity.

How can this principle hold good? for does not Christ tell us that his Kingdom
is not of this world? John 18.36. To this Objection I answer

1. That these words are to be understood of his first, and not of his second
coming. 2. It is not of its world ratione originis, in respect of the original,
but it is in the world in respect of place. If my Kingdom (says our Savior)
were of this world, (understand it as he there speaks it, of that his first
coming) then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence, i.e. of this world, as he said
before. Note also the word NOW, now, or at this time my Kingdom is not from
hence, or of this world. 3. It is not of this world ratione conditionis, in
respect of its condition. Thus the disciples and Christ himself were not of
this world, John 8.23. Ye are (speaking of the carnal Jews) from beneath, I am
from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world, John 15.19. If ye
were of the world (Christ speaks it to his disciples) the world would love his
own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. So John 17.14. The world hates them
(viz. the disciples of Christ) because they are not of the world, even as I am
not of the world. And they are not of the world, quantum ad affectionem
mundanam, as to worldly affection: but they are in the world quantum ad
corporalem praesentiam, as to corporal presence. We say the like of Christ's
Kingdom, est terrenum ratione loci, Coeleste ra^^one conditionis, it is earthly
in respect of place, it is heavenly in respect of condition; place and
condition are two things. 4. It is not of THIS world, so the words run, (...),
that is, of the world that now is, but of the world that is to come. For the
world that now is shall be changed, and in that respect shall cease to be, and
another world shall be erected, or come in place, called in Scripture, the
world to come, And in that world to come shall that Kingdom of Christ be, Heb,
2.5. and 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.1.
Job 14.12. That man lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more,
they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. If this be so, how can
this Doctrine of the Millennium hold good.

Lazarus, the Widows son, and others raised before, by a power extraordinary,
this text of Scripture does not contradict, or say against it: but this comes
not close to our purpose.

2. This Text of Scripture is to be understood of a Resurrection to this
present life: As we may see it more plainly expressed, Job 7.9.10. He that
goes down to the Grave, shall come up no more, ( i.e. to the enjoyment of this
present life, and possessions, for he adds,) he shall return no more to his
house, neither shall his place know him any more. He shall not return, as
Lazarus did, to live again a natural life after his resurrection, and die
again. But the resurrection we speak of in this place, is to another life; and
they that have a part in it, do not die again as Lazarus did, nor do they live
a natural or mortal life as he did, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven, as
Christ tells us, Mat. 22 30

3. Till the Heavens be no more, is as much (in other language) as till the day
of Judgment, in which sense it is true man lies down, and rises not till the
day of Judgment. Now the first resurrection is not till the day of judgment,
but at the beginning of it, or in the morning thereof: And the second
resurrection at the latter end of it, or in the evening of it, when the
thousand years are finished. Again, till the Heavens be no more, i.e. till
these Heavens be no more, for we look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, 2 Pet.
3.13.

It will be disadvantageous to the Saints in Heaven, to be fetched out of
Heaven, out of bliss; to be brought down to the Earth into the world again.

1. There is an imperfection in respect of number, there wants the full and
complete number of Gods Elect, Heb. 11 ult. that they without us should not be
made perfect. 2. There is imperfection, ratione totius compositl, i.e. in
respect of the whole composition, the body, which is a part of the whole man,
is yet in corruption, ergo that while there is imperfection, viz. a part
wanting.


them to come, and take their bodies, or stay on earth till the great Judgment
be finished.

3. If the souls of the Saints were to live again in their mortal bodies,
subject to calamities, as the body of Lazarus was, then this objection were
something, but their bodies shall be sinlesse, sorrowlesse, tearlesse and
immortal. These I think cannot be any way disadvantageous to them

4. If they were to be on earth without Christ, this were something. But the
text says, they live and reign WITH Christ, and they shall not be absent from
him one moment, Rev* 20.4.6. Yea, we shall (says the Apostle, 1 These. 4.17.)
be ever with the Lord. And what disadvantage can it be to be with Jesus Christ.

5. If Happiness were affixed to Heaven, that it could be no where else, there
were some strength in this objection: But Christ's transfiguration tells us,
that Happiness may be had with Christ on earth, Mat. 17.14. So we read 1. Cor.
2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Which is not
meant of Heaven only, but of this heavenly time on earth also, to be within the
thousand years.

6. Lastly, if Heaven it self, as it is a place would make men happy, and earth
as a place would make men miserable, then this were somewhat: But alas, Heaven
as a place makes not any soul happy, but as God is there, and manifests his
glory there with comfort to the soul: The earth makes not any man miserable
merely as a place, but because Satan is there, and sin is there, and wicked men
are there as tares among wheat, and Christ is not there. But if Satan were
bound, and cast into the bottomless pit, and if wicked men be removed from
among the Church, and Christ remove his Court from Heaven to earth, as in the
thousand years he will, then the case will be altered, and earth will become a
Paradise, and as happy a place to the Saints as Heaven is now. These things
being considered conjunctim, or together, what disadvantage will it be to the
souls of the Saints to live in their sinlesse, sorrowlesse, joyful, immortal
bodies, with the Lord' Jesus Christ.

The Scripture seems to tell us plainly, that all the dead, both good and bad,
shall be raised in one hour, in the last day, in the same moment, in the
twin^kling of an eye, there cannot then be a thousand years distance between
the one and the other, for all the dead are said to rise in one hour, John
5.28, 29. The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and come forth, they that have done good unto theresurrection
of life: And they that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation, John
11.24. I know that he shall rise again in theresurrection at the last day. And
John 6.40. I will raise him up at the last day. So 1 Cor. 15.52. In a moment,
in the twinkling of aneye, at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and
the dead shall be raised, etc.

the hour is coming, he does not mean the last of these, but the first; the
time is coming, in the compass whereof all that are in the Graves shall come
forth, etc. they that have done good to the resurrection of life, in the
morning of the day of Judgment, or the beginning of the thousand years: and
they that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation, in the evening of
the day of Judgment, when the thousand years are ended. That an hour is thus
taken for time in general, appears Rev. 11.13. The same hour was a great
Earthquake, (i*e. A Kingdom quake, a Nation quake) And the tenth part of the
City fell, which no man will understand of the same twenty fourth part of the
same individual day, but of time in this general acceptance.

2. We are to put a difference between the last day in general, and the last
day in special. Now what is the last day in general, but the great day of
Judgment; at the dawning of which the thousand years we speak of shall begin,
and then the godly shall rise: In the evening of which day the thousand years
shall end, and the wicked one shall rise, and not before. But if we speak of
the last day in special, it may have another day, or another year to follow
after it, acoording as the day or year is that we speak of: As suppose we speak
of the last day of this world; it has a day, and a year, and another word to
succeed it, Mat. 12.32. The world to come, Ephesians. 1.21. Heb. 2.5. As the old
world, of which St. Peter speaks had, 2 Pet. 2.5. with 2 Pet. 3.6. But if we
speak of the last day of the next world, it is the ultimate day of all, or the
last day under the Sun, and has no day to succeed it but eternity. And here we
are to take notice, the thousand years we speak of are in the world to come.
And in the last day of this world shall be the resurrection of the just: And in
the last day of the next world shall be the resurrection of the wicked. And
further we are to know, that in those two places of John, ( viz. John 11.24.
and 6.4.) where the last day is spoken of, there is mention only of the
resurrection of the just, no mention at all of the resurrection of the wicked,
and therefore it may be supposed they are left out, because they shall not be
raised up at that time, but be stayed till afterward.

3. We are to put a difference between one moment and another, and we say the
moment in which the just shall be changed, is the beginning of the thousand
years: and the moment in which the wicked shall be raised is the end of the
thousand years. Furthermore, by the word moment and twinkling of an eye, is
meant the suddenness of the change, and not the time when it shall be. And we
also, the Apostle speaks not of the wicked, but of the just only, and why
should they be left out? if that were their time of raising or changing, but we
see by other Seriptures that they shall have another time.

The Saints shall be caught up from the Earth to meet the Lord in the air, 1
These. 4 16. How then can they reign with Christ on the earth?



1. When Christ ascended up to Heaven, it is not to be doubted but the Angels
met him by the way, what man will say they did not return to heaven with him.

2. It is the custom when the Judges ride the Circuit, whither they intend to
come, the Sheriffs and Justices ride to meet them, and to accompany the Judges
to the place of judicature. And no other is the case here. When Christ is
coming to the Earth, the Saints shall be caught up, to meet him in the air,
when they have so done, they return back, and go with him to the Earth from
whence they came.

3. It is not said that Christ shall come from Heaven to meet the Saints, such
a speech would imply, that they are about to go to Heaven with Christ, and that
Christ came to meet them in the way, and to bring them thither: but the text
faith, the Saints shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, this speech
does imply, that the Lord Jesus Christ is coming from Heaven to Earth, and the
Saints meet him by the way, and return with him to the Earth, whence they came,
and he is going.

4. Lastly, unless the Saints did meet him in the air, and return with him to
the Earth, Christ should not stand, at the Latter day upon the Earth, as Job
says he shall, Job 19.25. (...) and novissimo super pulverem staturum. i.e. (I
know that) at, or in the last, he shall stand on the dust. That is, at the last
day, he shall stand on the dust of the Earth, which the most certain and
literal expressions the Hebrews have for that purpose. Neither else could
Christ come with all his Saints, as the Scripture says he shall, Zach. 14 5.
And the Lord my God shall come [and] (...) omnes sancti tecum, all his Saints
with thee. Or (which is all one) he shall come with thee, and all the Saints.
So 1 These. 3.13. At the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. So
1 These. 4.14. Those which sleep in Jesus Christ will God bring with him. And
whether will God bring them with him? but to the Earth, whence they were caught
to meet him.

Of what quality the first death is, of that quality the first resurrection is;
But the first death was a spiritual death, or death of the soul in sin, and
from hence followed the second death, which is the death of the body.

Rev. 20.6. On such the second death has no power. But the Saints escape not
the death of the body: The third death it cannot be, for we read in Scripture
of no such death, it remains then, that the death of the body, is the first
death, is the death of the body, as well as the death in Hell the second.

2. We must distinguish between death properly taken, and improperly taken. The
first death properly taken, is the death of the body, and the first
resurrection properly taken, is the resurrection of the body. Now John speaks
of death properly taken, and not of the other; and of the resurrection properly
taken, and not of the other. As appears by this, that this resurrection is such
to the godly first, as it is to the wicked afterward, which is a proper
resurrection.

3. We are to distinguish between death visible, and invisible, The first death
visible is the death of the body: And the first visible resurrection is the
resurrection of the body. Now the Apostle John speaks of death visible, and of
a resurrection visible, and not invisible, and therefore he has it in a
vision, visibly represented to him.

To do a thing with Christ does not imply his personal presence with us, but in
Scripture phrase, we may be said to do a thing with Christ, which we either do
for Christ, or by his assistance, or do a thing that Christ did before us,
though himself be not personally present with us. As Romans 8.18. If we suffer,]
does not imply, that no man can suffer, but be must have Christ personally
present with him on the Earth to suffer with him: No! that cannot be the
meaning, but we suffer with Christ, though we be on the Earth, and he in
Heaven; because we suffer for him, and by his assistance, and suffer the same
things he suffered before us. So this phrase of reigning with Christ, does not
imply Christ's personal abode with us, but only the doing of a thing, or
enjoyment of a thing, for Christ's sake, or the doing of that which he now does,
though in another place, or the doing of that which he did before us.

viz. To. 8.17. If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him: the
former clause, if we suffer with him, is spoken of a man before death, and does
not imply, that a man is personally present with him when he suffers. But the
latter clause, (we shall be glorified with him) is meant of a man after death,
and does imply that a man is personally present with him when he is glorified
together with him. So likewise for a man to live with Christ before death, does
not imply the personal presence of Christ; the reason is, because, before death
we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. But for the Saints to live and reign
with Christ after death, yea! after the resurrection of their bodies, this does
imply Christ is personal present with them where they so reign; and the reason
is, because after death, they are ever with the Lord, and never absent from
him. As the Scripture testifier. John 14.3. That where I am there ye may be
also. John 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou bast given me, be
with me where I am that they may behold my glory which thou have given me.
Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart and to be with Christ. 1 These. 4.17. And so
shall we ever be with the Lord. 2 Timothy 2.12. We shall also reign with him.
Therefore seeing the Saints are said to live and reign with. Christ, and are
not Saints Militant, or the Saints before death, but Saints triumphant, or
Saints after death, as has appeared before, it follows that Christ is
personally present with them so living and reigning.

This opinion dispeoples Heaven of all the ancient glorious inhabitants
thereof, and that for no less then a thousand years togegether.

Heaven in the time of the thousand years? and yet they shall be on the Earth
sometime too, John 1.52. Verily I say unto you, hereafter you shall see Heaven
open, and the Angels of God ascending, and DESCENDING upon the Son of man.
which words have a special reference unto the time of the thousand years, when
Christ shall be on the Earth.

2. How many souls were in Heaven before Abel came thither? So many shall there
be when the thousand years begin, and while they are, (...) many shall be left
in Heaven when (...) ^^^ement shall begin, and be; so (...) when the thousand
years shall (...) and no more, for they are one and (...).

This opinion implys a threefold coming of Christ, the first when he came to
take flesh, the second when he comes to take, receive, and enter upon his
kingdom, the third when he shall come to judge, to conclude, and end the world.

durante and currente die judicii, the day of Judgment continuing and running
on. His first coming (...) but one, and takes into it all (...) neither the
meaning of those texts, nor can the world bring any such thing to pass.

3. Both those forecited texts, are to be understood with intermination. Now
God will have the thousand years, to be a time of perfect and complete
intermination to the New Jerusalem, or camp of the Saints: For the Tabernacle
of God shall be with them, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be (among them) no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 2^^^ (...) also be a time of far
more per^^^ (...) intermination to the other (...) in a state of mortality, and
are (...) 21.24. the. Nations that are saved, and walk in the light of it, then
ever the sun saw, or the people of God enjoyed before. Now that those texts are
to be (as I said) understood with intermination is manifest, by that rest which
sometime the Church had. As Acts 9.31. Then had the Churches rest throughout
all Judea, and Galilee, and Sa^a^ia, etc. So also in Solomon's time, 1 Kings 4
25. (whose peaceful time was a type of the peace, rest, and quiet we are
speaking of) we see what an abundance of quiet they enjoyed, for the text
says: Judah an^ Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine, and under his
figtree, from Dan, even to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon. It such were the
peace of Solomon who was but a type: what is like to be the peace of the Church
under the antitype, who is a King, as of Righteousness, so of peace; as it is
said of Melchizedeck another type.

4. Tribulation is not essential to the Earth, but accidental only; and if
Christ be pleased to make that a place of happiness to the saints, which is now
a place of misery, let no man's eye be evil because Christ's is good.

5. What is meant by the Earth in this question? Not the Earth unreformed and
unrenewed, but reformed and renewed, as it shall be at the day of Judgment.
The former is a place of misery procured by the (...) Adam, the second is a
place of happiness, for that time, procured by the second Adam, Jesus Christ.

The reign of this Saints everlasting in Heaven, therefore it is not temporary
upon the Earth, as this opinion implys, Math. 5.10. 2 Timothy 4.18.



1 If we speak of the time before the day of Judgment, the souls of the Saints
departed are in Heaven; and they live with Christ in bliss, though (as I have
before proved) not in perfect bliss, and they shall there continue till the
day of Judgment, at the beginning whereof the thousand years begin and not
before.

2. If we speak of the time during the day of Judgment, we say that the souls
of the Saints shall remove from Heaven, as Christ himself shall, and be united
to their bodies, and shall remain with Christ on Earth, till the preat day of
Judgment be ended, which ends not till the thousand years be also ended.

3. If we speak of the time after the day of Judg^ment ^^ended, we say, that
the Saints shall remove from Earth to Heaven, where they shall remain for ever
with Christ. Thus we see the reign of the Saints is at several times in both
places.

We read Exodus 34.30. That when Asron and all the children of Israel saw Moses,
behold the skin of his face shone, end they were afraid to come nigh him. Even
so if the Saints should live again on the Earth, with and in their glorified
bodies, we should do, and be the like, viz. afraid to come near them. And so
there could be no communion between their glorified bodies and ours.

had glorious bodies? yet Abraham and Lot, were not afraid to come nigh them,
Genesis 18.2. He ran to meet them, So Genesis 19.2.

2. Were not the bodies of Moses and Elias glorified bodies? when they appeared
to Christ on the Mount, and yet the Disciples could endure their presence
Matthew. 17.4.

3. Was not Christ's body glorified after his Resurrection? yet his Disciples
could converse with him, and he with them, as the Evangelists declare, Matthew.
28. Mark 16. Luke 24. John 20.21. All testifying the frequent appearing of
Christ to his Discipler.

4. As Moses put a veil over his face while he was talking with them, so that
his face did not offend them: So the Saints can hide their glory, (is Christ
did Mark 16 12. Luke 24.16.
his resurrection,) so as that it shall not be offensive to the godly mortal
saints; And they can again manifest their glory at their pleasure, so as it
shall be a terror to the wicked. Can we think that such a little filly creature
as the (...), nitedula, or glowworms, shall at her pleasure withdraw, or cause
her pretty spark in the dark to glister: and shall not those raised glorious
Saints much more at their pleasure withdraw, or cause their glory to appear, as
an occasion for either shall require.

This opinion does imply that in this visible Monarchy, Christ shall change all
worldly customs, and pull down all kingly power, and greatness, (how just
soever) and set up a new way of Government, so as that there shall be no other
Lords but as it is written, Isai. 2.11. and ver. 17. And the loftiness of man
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day.



2. We read 1 John 5.19. that the whole world lies in wickedness; and if
Christ should change the custom of this wicked world, and set up better in
their room and place, why should any godly man be against that? It is enough
for the wicked of the World, Luke 19.14. to say we will not have this man to
reign over us.

3. And if Christ shall take the Kingdoms of the world into his own hands, he
does no man wrong herein, for God has made him heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.
and he is King of Kings Rev. 19.10. Therefore all Kings and Princes of the
world, must be content to resign their Crowns and Scepters into his hand, and
lay them down at hie feet when he calls for them; as the four and twenty Elders
did, Rev. 4.10.

4. Whereas it is said Christ shall put down all kingly power and greatness, it
is false, if they mean to exclude the Saints thereby: for the Saints shall live
and reign with him. And they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall
reign a thousand years, not in coordination with him, but in subordination to
him, as the text implies.

This opinion does not only imply the Conversion (which soz^e Divines have
granted, and believed) but (which others have doubted) the total reduction of
the twelve tribes of Israel and Judah into their own Land again.

I see not: For the Scripture seems to me very plain, not only for their return
or reduction in the general, that it shall be so: but also tells us many
particulars about it.

1. I say the Scripture tells us plainly in the general that it shall be so,
that they shall be brought into their own Land again. For this see these
Scriptures, Isai. 33.20. Look upon Zion the City of our solemnities: thine eyes
SHALL see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken
down, not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of
the cores thereof be broken, ver. 17. thine eyes shall see the King, (viz.
Christ) in his beauty, they shall behold the Land that is very far off. v. ult.
And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the people that ^w^l therein shall
be forgiven their iniquity. Jer. 31.27, 28. Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel, and the house of Judah with the seed
of man, and with the seed of beast. And it shall come to pass, that like as I
have watched over their, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and
to destroy, and to afflict so will I watch over them, to build and to plant,
says the Lord. And I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and
with the house of Judah, etc. Read ( I pray you) the rest, and consider these
expressions well; I will thank any man to tell me, and prove it, when every jod
and tittle of these and such like texts, were since those Prophecies,
fulfilled: If they have no^, I am sure they shall, for Christ (the truth) has
told me so, Matt. 5.18. Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one
jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.
But to go on, see Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. Then he said unto me, son of man, these
bones are the whole house of Israel: Behold they say, our bones are dried; and
our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. Therefore Prophecy, and say
unto them, this says the Lord God, behold, O my people, I will open your
graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the
Land of Israel. Moreover take the^ one stick and write upon it for Judah and
for the Children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write
upon it for Joseph, the stick of ^phraim and for the house of Israel his
companions, and join them one to another into one stick, and they shall become
one in thine hand And ver 20. And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in
thine hand before their eyes. And say (...), thus says the Lord God, behold I
will take the Children of Israel, from among the Heathen whiche^ they be gone,
and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own Land And I
will make them one Nation in the Land, upon the Mountains of Israel, and one
King shall be King to them all: and they shall be no more two Nations, neither
shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all. And David my servant
shall be King over them, and they all shall have one Shepherd, and they shall
dwell in the Land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers
have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even they and their children, and
their childrens children for ever, an^ my servant David [ i. e. Christ] shall
be their Prince for ever. Hosea 3.4, 5. The Children of Israel shall abide many
days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without
an Image, and without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim. Afterward shall the
Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King,
and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. Amos 9.11.14.15.
See also Isai. 11. the whole chapter. So Hosea 1. ult. Zach. 12. And many other
places, which for brevity sake I forbear to recite.

2. As the Scripture proves their reduction into their own Land again, so it
tells us many particulars about the manner of their conversion and reduction,
as for instance.

1. That this conversion and reduction shall be in the height of their misery*
when the greatest misery and affliction shall be upon them that ever was since
their di^persion. Dan. 12.1. At that time shall Michael, (i.e. Christ) stand
up, the great Prince, which stands for the children of thy people, and here
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to
that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, when they shall
be dry bones, and all hope shall be past with them, so that they shall say, our
bones are dry, our hope is lost, we are out off for our parts; then those dry
bones shall live; then God will open their Graves, and bring them out of their
Graves, etc. Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. Gods time of love above all other times is, when
men lie wallowing in their blood, when their hopes are at the lowest, then is
their deliverance nearest. In the Mount will God appear, when none is shut up
or left, then will his own arm bring salvation, and be their deliverance; so
that when he shall turn again the captivity of Zion, it will appear to them as
a dream, Psalm. 126.1. their deliverance being come, when almost all hope was
gone.

2. That in this conversion and reduction, they shall return unto Christ and
then embrace him whom they formerly crucified and rejected, saying, we will not
have this man rule over us: And his blood be upon us and upon our children. But
when this time shall come, Israel and Judah shall be gathered together Hos.
1.11. (which yet has never been since their resection) and they shall appoint
themselves one head; this head can be none other but Christ, whom they shall by
their own election in that day, appoint to be their Head or King. It is true,
he was appointed by the Father in his eternal decree, and in the covenant
between the Father and the Son before the world was as appears The word in both
places is (...) of (...), to appoint 0129 0 King: or inaugurate, regem
constitui.
Pro. 8 22, 23. and Ps. 2.6. But now their hearts shall be turned about, and
they that rejected the Covenant of God against themselves, and would not have
him to be their Head, whom the Lord had appointed, now they shall choose the
same, and consent to him; they shall appoint to themselves one Head, and elect
for themselves the same Head, Hos. 3 5. 'They shall return and 'seek the Lord,
and David their King, i.e They shall come to seek God, and Christ their King in
this latter day of their conversion and reduction. 'They shall then look on him
whom they have pierced, and mourn, and turn to him.

3. The Scripture tells us, that at their conversion and reduction there shall be
wrought in them a very great and real humiliation. Jer, 31.18.19. I have heard
Ephraim mark it, not Judah bemoaning himself, etc. Surely after that was
turned, Irepented; I was ashamed, yea! even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth Hos. 14 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more
with Idols. Zach. 12.10. They shall lock on him whom they have peireed, and
they shall mourn for him, and be in bitterness, etc. Jer. 31, 8, 9. Behold, I
will bring them from the North country, and gather them from the coasts of the
Earth, they shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them to
Zion, they shall come, but they shall come with weeping and supplications, etc.
But is not this spoken of their return from Babylon? How can it? did they come
out of Captivity weeping? and looking on him whom they had pierced, when as
then they had not pierced him. It cannot be meant immediately and ultimately of
that return, though there are different degrees of the accomplishment of
Prophecies. But if we look a little back to ver. 1. we shall find another
argument. At the same time, says the Lord, I will be a God to all the families
of Israel, and they shall be my people. The ten Tribes, or as the phrase is,
all the families of Israel, did never yet return out of their captivity unto
this day. There were indeed two tribes who returned from Babylon, but we no
where ever read of the returning of the ten tribes, but we read that they shall
return. And as they went into captivity with weeping: so with weeping they
shall return.

4. The Scripture seems to speak of their conversion and reduction, as if it
should be in an extraordinary way; Not by the preaching of the Gospel, as the
Gentile Churches were brought in unto the Lord, but by light, and by a visible
appearance of the Lord Jesus to them. I will not be positive in it, but set
before the Reader some Scriptures that seem to speak so much, Zach. 12.10. And
they shall look upon me (...) aspicient ad me Significat partem anteriorem a
capite usque ad ventrem inclinare ad intuendum aliquid.
whom they have pierced, and mourn, etc. This seems to be a rea ocular looking
upon, and beholding Christ, for so much is contained in the Verb here used, and
not barely a spiritual looking upon him by the eye of says, such as the Holy
Ghost, John 6.40. calls a seeing of the Son of man, and believing, etc. but a
bodily vision, and a seeing him with bodily eyes. So Dan 7.13. And I saw in the
night visions, and behold one like the Son of man came with the Clouds of
Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him
And he came (as we may see in the following words) to receive and enter upon
his Kingdom. But what Kingdom? sure his Davidical Kingdom, now to sit upon the
Throne of his father David When Christ receives and enters upon this Kingdom,
it is not like to his entrance upon his spiritual and providential Kingdom,
that was done in a more spiritual manner, by his Session at Gods right hand,
Psalm. 110.1. But upon the administration of this Kingdom, he enters in a more
humane manner, or as a man actually, when the four great and strange Beasts,
Dan. 7. princip. or Beastly Monarchs are destroyed: Then he comes in the Clouds
of Heaven, v. 13. And they bring him to the Ancient of days. It is true God
coming in the Clouds, and his riding upon the Clouds, notes out the eminent,
visible and glorious appearing of his Majesty. But this is the appearing of the
Son of man in the clouds, and the coming of the Son of man with the clouds,
which ( I conceive) is not to be found in Scripture, but when it denotes the
coming of the Lord Jesus at the last day to Judgment, whose appearance is
visible, and then does he receive dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all
people, nations and languages should serve him: And then, I conceive, (I speak
it with submission to better Judgments) will be that great conversion of Israel
and Judah so much spoken of in Scripture, then shall be fulfilled what is here
spoken 'they 'shall look upon him whom they have pierced, etc. Mr. Mede favors
this, whose words are these. The Jews (says he) are not to be converted unto
Christ, by such means as were the rest of the Nations, by the Ministry of
Preachers sent unto them; but by the Revelation of the Lord Jesus in his glory
from Heaven When they shall say, not (as when they saw him in his humility)
crucify him; but blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord Whose
coming then shall be as the lightning out of the East shining into the West:
and the Sign of the Son of man shall appear in the clouds of Heaven; and every
eye shall see him, even of those which pierced him, and shall lament with the
spirit of grace and supplication, for their so long and so shameful unbelief of
their so merciful Redeemer. So far Mr. Mede, Mat^ 24.30, 31. Then shall appear
the Sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall ye see the Son of man
coming in the clouds; happily this may be at, and for the great conversion of
the Jews. Paul was converted by an appearance of Christ to him, it is possible
the ewes may be converted by the same way.

5. The Scripture holds forth also, that the manner of their Conversion, and
reduction into their own^^ and again, shall be exceeding eminent and glorious,
to the admiration of all Nations, that it may be seen how the Lord has
honored them, Isa. 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee, Hosea 1.11. Great shall be the day of Jez^eel. It
shall be a glorious day to thein, that shall make them honorable in the eyes
of all the Nations upon earth. Zach 8 23. Ten men shall take hold in that day,
out of all Languages of the Nations, of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying,
we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you, Psalm. 102.16. When
the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory: They have had, and
shall have glorious appearances of him, such, as no people ever had: And this
shall make them to be the desire of all people. As they have been an abject
miserable people for along time, so when God shall turn their captivity as
streams in the South, their glory shall excel.

6. The Scripture also tells us the time of their calling, viz. when the
fullness of the Gentiles is come in, blindness so long happened unto them, and
shall no longer. For so St. Paul witnesses, Romans 11.25, 26. For I would not,
Brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, that blindness in part
is happened to Israel, until the fullness, of the Gentiles be come in; and so all
Israel shall be saved. So likewise Christ, Luke 21.24. And Jerusalem shall be
tro^d^n down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. But
what is the (...) fullness of the Gentiles. And these (...), times of the
Gentiles? I answer, the times of the Gentiles, (the fullness whereof must be
accomplished, before the full conversion and reduction of the Jews into their
own land, (...) seems to be no other then the times wherein the Gentiles should
have dominion, with the misery and subjection of the Jewish Nation, set forth
in the vision of a fourfold image, Dan. 2. and four Beasts, Dan. 7 which are
the four Monarchies, the Babylonian, Persian, Greek and Roman. The first began
with the first captivity of the Jewish Nation, and through the times of all the
rest, they should be in subjection, or in a worse state under them. But when
their times shall be ended, accomplished and fulfilled, then says Daniel, the
Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for
ever and ever, that is, there shall be no more Kingdoms after it; but it shall
continue, as long as the world shall endure. Three of these Monarchies were
past, when our Savior and Paul spoke, and the fourth was well entered. If then
by Saints there be meant the Jews, as well as other Christians, as questionless
they are not excluded but included, then it is plain enough, that is the time
of their full and complete reduction and conversion. I have said full and
complete. because I apprehend it possible, yea, very probable, that some before
that time shall be converted, and many more gathered together; yea, and for
ought I know they may have some battles with the Grand Seignieur in order to
the recovery of their Land, before the other be. Many other things the
Scripture tells us in reference to the calling of the Jews, as Ez^k. 32.27.
Ez^k. 48. nit. That there shall be among them a glorious Church, in which the
Presence of the Lord shall dwell, so that the name of their City shall be
called from that day Jehora shamma, the Lord is there, for the Tabernacle of
God will be with them, and dwell with them. That they shall have the purest
Orainances, Rivers of water of life, clear as crystal; not running with blood,
as in days of persecution, nor mixed with the fire of contentions, as formerly
they had too often been wont. That they shall live the exactest discipline, so
that all that love and make a lie shall be without, those Eagle-eyed times will
soon spy out the member that is rotten, and the sword of discipline keen
enough to cut it off. That then the Mountain of the Lords house shall be
exalted above the tops of the Mountain, and established in the top of the
hill^, and all Nations shall flow unto it. That then shall follow great peace,
and plenty and prosperity in the Church, and all persecutions either from
enemies without, or Tyrants within, shall come to an end. I say these, and many
other things the Scripture tells us in reference to the Jews; but I forbear to
speak of them her^, because I shall speak of them elsewhere, with a ref^rence
to the whole Church, and not the Jews only.

This Opinion implies a fullness of all temporal blessings, as Riches, Honors,
long life, a freedom from all offliciions, etc. under this Kingdom.

some) falsely and uncharitably suggested: But they mean hereby peace, safety,
riches, health, long life, or what else was enjoyed under any Kingdom, or can
be had in the world, or may any way make their lives more comfortable, yet
Withent sin. Mark the words, without sin, in the having of them. This is all
they mean by temporal blessings, and the sinful abuse of the creature.

2. To think the Saints the subjects of this Kingdom, if they have these
temporal blessings, shall abuse them to those carnal pleasures of bed and
board, (which have been dreamed of by sensual Turks and Talmudists) is to
unsaint them, and to make them vile gluttons, and unclean persons; contrary to
what the Word of God says of such persons, Romans 8. 5. They that are after the
flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: But they that are after the Spirit,
the things of the Spirit. So also 1 Timothy 4.5. Al: so Tit. 1.15. And Romans 8.13,
14. And in other places.

3. They that make this Objection, would make men believe that sensuality is
pleaded for in this question, but that is but an abuse, both to the Assertors
hereof, and to the question it self, for sensuality is not pleaded for, but it
is indeed holiness that they of this opinion plead for, which is so much by
most exploded; yea! derided and hated at this day in the world, who cannot
abide to hear of the Saints reigning on Earth with Christ a thousand years, for
then would be such a time, and such a height and measure of holiness on earth
as never was before, and never entered into the hearts of men to conceive of,
and this in reality is that they cannot endure, but it is a death to them to
hear of.

4. Suppose that some men have dreamed, or should, of carnal pleasure, as Turks
and sensual Talmudists have done; yet if we will know the mind of God in the
matter, we ought to look what God aims at in this Kingdom, and not what
sensual dreamers have said, or aim at. Now what God aims at in this Kingdom,
most evidently appears in Scripture to be a time of holiness and reformation,
a time of peace and purity, a Kingdom of Saints and sincere Worshippers, who
may worship him in spirit and in truth, according to his own appointment, and
give him the service which he himself requires. And this is it we are to look
after in the Kingdom of this question, we are to think what holiness, what
righteousness, what purity, what piety, what sincerity, what
heavenly-mindednesse, what knowledge of God, what Orthodoxity, what pure
worshipping of God, etc. shall be in this Kingdom, and not to talk of
sensuality and carnal pleasures, and so corrupt the point, by making a vile and
wretched use of so holy and so religious a Kingdom, as the reign of the Saints
with Christ on earth shall be. Certainly this Kingdom is most holy and sacred,
or else no Kingdom of Christ at all, for holiness becomes his Kingdom for ever.

5. The reason why Christ forbids carking and caring for the things of this
life, is because they take off the mind from thinking on God so often and so
frequently as we should: And the reason why God will have a plenty of temporal
and outward blessings, in this Kingdom ready at hand, for the use of all those
that any way stand in need of them, is, that the thoughts of his people, their
time or strength, may not be taken off from a close attendance upon God, by
looking after the things of this world, Mat. 6, 31, 32.

6. To say or think that temporal blessings are not promised to the children of
the Kingdom, but purely spiritual, is against the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness is profitable to all things, having the Bromise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come, Psalm. 34, 10. The young Lions do lack and
suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing,
Matthew. 6.33. All these things shall be added to you, Rev. 21.24, And the Kings
of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it. Those that need these
blessiags (as the Nations of them that are saved, and walk in the light of the
New Jerusalem, will) have the promise of them.

7. To say that temporal blessings are not proper for the fruition of Saints,
is to wrong the Saints of their right, for they only have a proper right from
God to them, which the wicked of the world have not, 1 Cor. 3 22, 23.

8. Though the worst of then may have these outward enjoyments for the present,
and the best men want them, whereof we see an Example in Dives and Lazarus, yet
it shall not always be so: for in the time of this Kingdom the best shall have
them, and the worst shall want them, Zach. 14 17 18.

9. Though the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, as Paul says, Romans 14.17.
in respect of its essentials, yet it is not without meat and drink in respect
of additionals, as that known place does testify, Mat. 6.33.

10. Though temporal blessings are now but for a moment, many times; yet are
they blessings while they are enjoyed; and though the grief of their cessation
may more then counterpoise the contentment of their fruition, to them that lose
them; yet it is very clear the Saints shall enjoy them in this Kingdom, during
life, and shall not lose them, Ezekiel. 34.26, 27, 28. And I will make them, and
the places round about my hill, a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come
down in his season; there shall be showers of blessing. And the tree of the
field shall yield her fruit, and the Earth shall yield her increase, and they
shall be safe in their Land, and shall know that I am the Lord, when I have
broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those
that served themselves of them. And they shall no more be a prey to the
Heathen, neither shall the Beasts, (beastly men) of the Land devour them, but
they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them (any more) afraid, Ezekiel
36.28, 29, 30. I will also save you from all your uncleanness, and I will
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you. And I
will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye
shall receive no more reproach of famine among the Heathen. And many other
places.

11. Though long life will keep a man from Heaven whilst it lasts, yet it is
counted for a blessing in the word of God to have it. In Exodus 20.12. It is
promised as the reward of obedience to the fifth Commandment. And Paul tells
us, Ephesians. 6.2, 3. That this is the first Commandment with promise, that it may
be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the Earth. Psalm. 91.16.
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Prove. 16.31.
Ahoary head is a crown of Glory, being found in the way of Righteousness. Is it
a blessing, a reward, and a crown now? and would it be a judgment then? sure I
am, had God thought so, he would never have made a promise of it to his people,
as he does, Isai. 65.20. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor
an old man that has not filled up his days, and ver. 22. At the days of a tree
are the days of my people, and mine Elect shall long i^joy the work of their
hands.

12. Lastly though long life be one of the privileges of this Kingdom, yet
there shall be death ( I conceive) at last; that is, to the Nations that are
saved, and walk in the Light of the New Jerusalem, but not to the camp of the
glorified Saints, or (which is all one) the New Jerusalem. And (though this is
controverted by some) that this is so, apears (ni fallor) plainly thus

1. That those, whose souls descend and come down with Christ, and are reunited
to their bodies, and are literally and properly the raised Saints, who are
raised in the morning of this (...) or (...), Great day of Judgment, or
beginning of the thousand years, and are that company, who are called the New
Jerusalem, and camp of the Saints, that these shall die no more, may be taken
(I think) on all hands, pro confesso, as a thing granted, which is also proved,
Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and THERE shall
be no more DEATH, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain, all which are applicable to them, but not to the other.

2. The other therefore, who came not down with Christ, but are upon the Earth,
and are called the Nations that are saved, and walk in the light, or by the
direction of the former, they, as also all who shall afterward be converted
during this Kingdom, have sin, and pain, and tears, and Kings, and Ordinances,
and eat, and drink, and are mortal, and die, etc. Now that they die (for this I
think will be most questioned by some) is plainly hinted by the Prophet Isaiah
chap. 65.20. The child shall die an hundred years old; it is beyond doubt that
the is speaking of this Kingdom, and though he tells us of a long life, where
he that lives the least, or but a little time comparatively, shall live an
hundred years; yet he owns death in this Kingdom for all that, the child shall
die a hundred years old. Also the Apostle Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15.26. (...).
That the last enemy, that shall be destroyed is death; Now Gog and Magog shall
be destroyed at, or after the end of the thousand years, therefore death, which
is the last enemy to be destroyed, cannot be destroyed a thousand years before,
but is destroyed after the destruction of Gog and Magog, when the thousand
years are ended or finished.

This Opinion makes the living Saints mortal; but the Apostle says, 1 These.
4.17. That they shall be caught up, and be ever with the Lord, now if the
living Saints (I mean those that are found alive at Christ's coming) be caught
up and changed, (which is something equivalent to death, and states them in
immortality) and be ever with the Lord, how can they and their posterity be in
a state of mortality for a thousand years, how can these things hold together?

Twisse, (in Mr. Mede's Diatribae part. 4 page 472.) having propounded and
answered nine Objections against this opinion, propounds this in the tenth and
last place, and leaves it unanswered, as not knowing what could be said to it,
whereupon Mr. Mede takes it for Tithe, and answers it, whose Answers you may
please to see and peruse, they are e^dens l. p. 473. I conceive, (submitting my
opinion still to better judgments in this mystery) that the plain and true
answer in this; those of Gods people, that are alive at Christ's coming, those
shall be caught up, together with the raised Saints, (which shall be don in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the Trumpet of the
initiation of that great day, for this is not the last trump, or the trumpet of
consummation) and be changed, and so put into a state of immortality, and
neither marry, nor have posterity, nor die, but be as the Angels, and therefore
they are not meant by the Nations that are saved, that walk in the light
thereof: But you will say, who are they then? I answer, that when Christ shall
thus gloriously manifest himself in person to the world, for his people, and
against his enemies, and shall have destroyed the most part of those that
oppose him by far, at that great Armageddon battle; I say then, there shall and
will be a mighty conversion of very many of those who see these things, being
such wonders as men never saw before: Yea, and all or most of those few that
escape destruction at that great Armageddon battle, being converted, shall go
and preach the strange things of that day and time, to the Nations who are afar
off, and have not seen and heard them; and of these when they shall have heard
those things, shall very many be converted: and these are the Nations of them
that are saved: who are mortal, and eat, and drink, and have Kings, and
Ordinances, and marry, and have children, and their children are all taught of
God. And many will be converted to God within the thousand years, all these
walk in the light of the New Jerusalem, and these Kings bring their glory and
honor to it, and take directions from it. And then when the thousand years are
ended comes the battle of Gog and Magog, and the last and general Judgment,
then sounds the last Trumpet, (which is, as I said before, the Trumpet of
consummation, as the other was of the initiation of that great day) and they
that are then found alive shall be changed as before, and Christ makes an end
of his Kingdom, after the separation, sentence, and execution, delivering up
the Kingdom to the father, that God may be all in all thenceforth for ever.
This Answer (if I be not deceived) cuts the ham-strings of this objection, if
it self be good; and there are but two things (I think) to be cleared to make
it passeable, 1. That the Rapture of the Saints, 2. That the Trumpets are such,
as in this predication they are said to be: a word therefore to these.


1. This Rapture of the Saints that are alive at Christ's coming, must be ( I
think) in the beginning of the thousand years, for they shall meet the Lord in
the air, which cannot be meant of the end of the thousand years, for then
Christ is on the Earth with them; so that although (...) and (...) first and
then, may admit a great distance of time, as Mr. Mede says in his first answer
to this objection, yet I see not how it can do so here. And if (as he says in
his fourth Answer) this Rapture should be to preserve the Saints from that
great Conflagration of the Earth, and the works thereof, 2 Pet. 3.10. that is
also held to be in the beginning of the thousand years, in the Armageddon
battle, before the New Heavens and New Earth. And that this Rapture should be
without their change, and stating in immortality, I think hardly any man will
say, for they are thenceforth ever with the Lord on Earth, during the thousand
years, and in Heaven ever afterward; Ergo, they neither marry, nor multiply,
nor die any more, but are as the Angels, and therefore are nore of the Nations
that are said to be saved, and walk in the light of the New Jerusalem, Rev.
21.24.

2. But the greatest question will be about the two Trumpets, the one of
initiation or inchoation of the thousand years; the other of consummation in
the end of the thousand years, or rather some time after, ( Rev. 20.9.) to wit,
when Gog and Magog's attempts are over, and their armies burnt with the fire
that falls from Heaven and consumes them; for then does the last Trumpet sound.
Now that this is so, I humbly offer what follows for the clearing of it.

1. Because all the dead are said to be raised at the sound of the Trumpet,
now, as we have already heard, they are raised at two distinct different times,
therefore there must be two distinct and different trumpets, for otherwise some
should be raised with the sound of the trumpet, and the rest without, which I
think hardly any man will affirm or grant.

2. Because the text tells us (1 These. 4.16. 1 Cor. 15.52.) of a trumpet, and
the last trumpet, which seem to be distinguished one from another, for the last
trumpet must necessarily be understood in opposition to a former of the some
kind: and whereas some have taken this last trump to be the seventh Apocalyptick
trumpet Rev. 11.15. and so called the last in opposition to the former six,
that cannot be, because those are judicial trumpets, but these are of another
kind, and have a distinct use and end from the former.

Our Creed speaks but of one Resurrection, not of two.

one man has his finnes forgiven before another, so it speaks of but one
eternal life, not of two, or ten, or many, yet one man enters into eternal life
before another, and indeed every man in his own order, so that if there were as
many eternal lives distinct one from another, as there is orders, or distinct
times of entering into the same, we must reckon, not one or two, or ten, but
many thousands; so it is with the resurrection of the dead, one man dies before
another, and one man rises before another.

2. The Church of Christ in her Primitive and purest state, taught this without
doubt, that the resurrection of the body is but once and one, and yet in these
parts, viz. of the just in their place and order: then of the unjust after in
their place and order; or at the Apostle phraseth it, 1 Cor. 15.23. (...),
every one in his own order.

3. All men die but once, yet all men do not die at once; So all men rise but
once, yet all men do not rise at once, but some at one time, some at another.

4. When we speak of the first and second resurrection of the body, we mean it
either of one body, or of diverse, if but of one body, there is but one
resurrection, and no more: But if we speak of diverse bodies, whereof one sort
is good, the other bad, and compare th^^ together; and ask the question which
(...) rise first: the Answer must be, the good sh^^^ rise first, and have their
part in the first re^ur rection; and the bad shall not arise until the second
resurrection. The rest of the dead lived not again till the one thousand years
were ended.

A spiritual resurrection is before the corporal, and every soul rises
spiritually from the death of sin, before he rises corporally from the Grave,
therefore the spiritual resurrection is the first, and the corporal
resurrection from the Grave is the second.

Paul say, the dead in Christ shall rise first, he should have said the dead in
Christ shall rise second, for a spiritual resu^^ rection was before it.

2. Though a spiritual resurrection be in some sense before a corporal, yet it
is never called the first resurrection in all the Scripture, that title belongs
to the resurrection of the body, and no other.

3. We may distinguish in this case between a resurrection properly and
improperly so called, the first resurrection properly so called is of the body,
though a spiritual resurrection improperly, and only analogically so called,
precede and go before it.

4. The first resurrection is so called, not ab^olutely but comparatively, and
that not in reject of one body, but divert bodies. Take one and the same body,
as for instance (Peter's) and ask the question what resurrection did befall him
first, a spiritual resurrection or a corporal? the answer is, a spiritual: But
take we diverse bodies, whereof the one sort are just and the other wicked, and
compare them together, and ask the question, which of these shall rise first
out of their Graves, and the answer must be, the just shall arise before the
wicked. And this the Scripture calls the first resurrection, and the
resurrection of the just opposed to the unjust.

If the first resurrection be the resurrection of the body, who has part
therein? not the Saints in general, for the Text speaks of Martyrs only, and
yet not the Martyrs only, for then they only should be blessed, which is false.

Rev. 30.4. speaks only of Martyrs (which yet it does not) in a strict fence,
yet other texts speak of all the Saints, and therefore the other Saints besides
Martyrs are to be added to, and counted in the number, Zach. 14.5 And the Lord
my God shall come, and ALL the Saints with thee. 1 Cor. 15.23. They that are
Christ's at his coming. Not only Martyrs in a strict sense, but they be they who
they will, so they belong to Christ they that are Christ's at his coming, 1
Thessal. 3.13. At the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. 1
These. 4.14. Even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.
And John Rev. 5.9.10. speaking of the priveledg of the Church redeemed by
Christ's blood, or rather they themseves speaking of it, say, thou have redeemed
us by thy blood out of every kindred and tongue, and people, and nation; and
have made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth.
It is not the privilege of Martyrs only, but of all the Saints, who for the
sake, and cause of God are killed all the day long, and are accounted as sheep
for the slaughter, and are slain, if not in effect, yet in affection. and
accounted as the offscouring of all things.

But thus I have briefly endeavored to remove twenty ordinary and common
Objections, which lying in the way have been an occasion to keep some off, from
giving any heart^ entertainment to this truth. It may be some will blame me,
for dwelling so long (in so short a tract) on objections; but I did it, because
I know men that are not persuaded of the truth in hand, will raise many. Others
perhaps will think of some that I have not named, but yet I hope an answer may
be picked out of what has been said, to them that may be further objected. I
have now only a few things more, in so many words to hint, and I shall
conclude, leaving the whole to the censure of the Church and people of God.

Note we therefore, that the resurrection of the just in the morning of the day
of Judgment, or beginning of the thousand years, is called the first
resurrection, not simply and absolutely, as if no other corporal resurrection
had gone before it; but the first secundum quid, because it is the first to the
thousand years reign, and the first in order to the second, which will be
universal of all the rest of the dead, in the last Judgment properly and
strictly so called. So here are as it were a determination of two
resurrections, differing not specie in kind, but only tempore and gradu, in
time and degree. Specie, in kind, it is but one resurrection only, of which we
say in our Creed, I believe the resurrection, not resurrections, for ^^ough we
hold two degrees, or two times of rising again from the dead, yet we beleev
(both making but one) but one resurrection. For we believe at the resurrection
of Christ, some Saints did rise again, and yet we hold no more but one
resurrection, Mat. 27.52. Yet without doubt the Greek Article twice repeated,
((...)) this that resurrection that first has a singular emphasis to
demonstrate some first resurrection known, and spoken of in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles. Of this resurrection of the just Isaiah seems to speak,
Isa. 26.14. They are dead, they shall not live: they are deceased, they shall
not rise. Where vivere it the same with resurgere, and it is meant of the
non-resurrection of the unjust, i. e. in that resurrection, and therefore it is
said on the contrary, and by way of opposition, verse, 19. Thy dead men shall
live, together with my dead body shall they arise, Awake, and sing ye that
dwell in dust: the earth shall cast out her dead. Here these dead (say the
Annotators on the Bible) are distinguished from those dead before spoken of,
ver. 14. ((...) vivent mortui tui [sicut] cadaver meum resurgent) and are to be
referred to the first resurrection, or the resurrection of life, as it is
phrased, John 5.29. That is peculiar to the faithful, and opposed to that, ver.
14. Thy dead men shall not live, etc. They that interpret this of an
Allegorical resurrection, depart from the literal sense, without need or cause,
contrary to the rule of any true and genuine interpretation. See also Jer.
31.15. Rachel weeping for her children, because they are not, that is because
they are killed: it follows, ver. 17. there is host in thine end ((...) in
novissimo tuo) says the Lord, that thy children shall come again into their
own border, viz being raised again from the dead: for it is irrational to
interpret this comfort, of any others, then of these concerning whom the
Lamentation and mourning did arise and grow. So Ezekiel. 37.12, 13. Therefore
prophecy and say unto them, thus says the Lord God, behold, O my people, I
will open your graves, and cause you to come up, out of your graves and b^ing
you into the Land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have
opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves: And
shall put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your
own Land; then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and performed it,
says the Lord See the whole text and context, it is very full and patt to our
present purpose, without any interpretation at all. Dan. 12.2. Many of them
that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
everlasting shame and contempt. That is, the just to life eternal in the first
resurrection: and the unjust to everlasting shame and contempt in the second
resurrection. Yea! Paul himself declares this first resurrection. 1 These. 4.16.
The dead in Christ shall rise first. The vulgar translation has the word,
primi, but the Greek is, (...), primum, but it comes all to one. And hence
Chrysostom upon the place says, Aute impios resurgent justi, ut sint primi in
resurrectione, non tantum dignitate sed tempore, the just shall rise before the
wicked, that they may be first in the resurrection, not only in dignity but in
time. Now if the dead in Christ shall rise first, when shall the wicked rise,
but in a second resurrection. And if the resurrection St. Paul speaks of, be
the resurrection of the body, why is not the resurrection St. John speaks of,
the resurrection of the body two. And Paul tells us plainly* 1 Cor. 15.23. to
26. that there is an exact order in the resurrection, and that the order is
thus, first Christ the first fruits and Captain of our Salvation leads the way,
and is the first in order. The second order is, of those that are Christ's, of
the godly, at his coming: And the third order is of all the rest of the^^ world
when the end comes. But I shall leave off to enumerate any further scripture
proofs, for the thing seems to me (ever submitting my self to better
judgments, and plainer proofs) exceeding clear and plain.

Yet when all this is done, methinks I hear some say, it is a novelty, surely
if it were true, it would have been made known, and been believed before now.

Ergo, it is no novelty: See Medes Diatrib. p. 4.) that all they were of this
opinion, is partly cleared in this small tract, and partly might further, but
that I am resolved it shall not swell; and other more learned men have done it.
I confess for the one thousand years Regnum Christi reign of Christ, to be
silent under the regnum Antichristi, it is not at all to be marvelled at,
greater far had been the marvel, if they who slew the Martyrs, had owned in the
least the Martyrs reign. Can any man I pray you, rationally conceiv, Antichrist
and his followers to be persons likely to own the reign of Christ and his
followers. When all the world wondered after the beast, Rev. 13.3, 4 C^e. the
Pope and his party, that beastly power and and faction) and worshipped the
Beast, and cry him upas a non such, saying, who is like him, who is able to
make war with him, as they did for one thousand two hundred sixty years, which
time (alas) is not yet out, as the sad face of Christendom at this day
witnesses, I say then, for Christ's reign and Kingdom, to be decryed, yea!
almost thrust out of acknowledgement, who can at all wonder. And yet for all
this (so far is the opinion from novelty) this Millennium has been fully owned
before, yea! and partly under the very reign of Antichrist. That it was
generally owned before, besides what has been already said, I have here (out
of many instances which might easily be produced) only made choice of one
more, because it bears so full witness to what I have in hand, that it may be
instar omnium, instead of all others. That great Counsel of Nice called by
Constantine the Great, besides their definition of faith, and Canons
Ecclesiastical, set forth certain (...), that is, forms of Ecclesiastical
Doctrine, some of these are recorded by Gelasius Gyzicenus in his Historia
actorum concilii Niceni Amongst these there is this formula, for the doctrine
of the state of the resurrection, the which (that I may do them no wrong) I
shall here give in their own words. (...). Which in English (for th^^ by most
is best understood) runs thu^. The World is made worse by By sin the knowledge
of good and evil.
foreknowledge, for God foresaw that man would sin. Therefore we expect New
Heavens, and a New Earth, according to the holy Scriptures, when the Apparition
and Kingdom of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ shall shine forth.
And then, as Daniel says, shall the Saints of the most High take the Kingdom.
And there shall be a pure holy Land, a Land of the living and not of the dead:
( which David foreseeing by the eye of faith, cries, I believe to see the
goodness of the Lord in the Land of the li^ine.) A Land of the meek and humble.
For bless d^saith he (i. e. Christ) are the meek for they shall inherit the
earth. And the P^ophet, and the feet of the Meek and Humble shall tread it.
Judge by this, notwithstanding fifty years opposition) how p^^verful the
Ch^^iastical party yet was, at the (...) of, and in that Council.

That this has been owned, even under the reign of Antichrist, appears
(amongst many other instances that might be given) by that Catechisin set forth
in King Edwards time, and by him Authorized May 20. in the last year of his
Reign, where the two siest Petitions of the Lords Prayer are explicated in this
manner. The Dialogue is between the Magister and Auditor. Upon these words,
sanctificetur nomen tu^m. Auditor secundo loco petimus, ut adveniat regnum
ejus. Adbuc enim non videmus res omnes Christo esse subjectas: n^n videmus ut
lapis de monte abscissus sit sine opere humano, qui contrivit and in nihil
rede^it statuan descriptam a Daniele: Vt Petra sola, qui est Christus, occupet
and obtineat totius mundi imperium a Patre concessum. Adbuc Antichristus non
est occisus, quo fi^, ut nos desiderem^s and precemur, ut id tandem aliquando
contingat and impleatur: utque solus Christus regnet cum suis sanct is secundum
divinas premissiones: utque vivat and dominetur in mundo juxta sancti Evangelii
decreta, non autem juxta Traditiones and leges hominum and voluntatem
Tyrannorum munde. M. Faxit Deus ut regnum ejus adveniat quam ^itissime. That
is, in the second place we beg, that his Kingdom may come, for as yet we do not
see all things to be subjected to Christ: we do not see that the stone is cut
out of the mountain without hands, which bruiseth and brings to nothing the
Image described by Daniel; that the Rock alone, which is Christ, may occupy
and obtain the Empire of the whole world, granted him by his father. As yet
Antichrist is not slain, whence it comes to pass, that we desire and pray, that
that once at last may happen and be fulfilled, that Christ alone may reign with
his Saints, according to his divine promises: And that he may live and govern
in the world, according to the decrees of the holy Gospel, and not after the
traditions and laws of men, and the will of the Tyrants of the world. M. God
grant that his Kingdom may come very speedily, thus far that. In the same
Catechism, there are many other passages to the same purpose, by all which it
appears (as I said before, that both before and under Antichrist, (where his
yoke has been but a little shaken off) this opinion has been owned and
believed, ergo is no novelty.

Quest. But lastly, some (it may be) will ask, when shall this glorious and
spiritual reign of Christ with his Saints on Earth begin?

Rev. 20.4.) but from the innate characters and circumstances in the Text,
plainly laid down, and to be gathered from the text and context. We therefore
say, that these thousand years of Satan^ binding, and the Saints reigning, must
take their beginning from, and after the destruction of the Beast, ( i. e. the
Pope) in the second coming of Christ, which was last mentioned, Rev. 19.20, 21.

1. The thousand years begins not till after the ceasing of the worship of the
Beast. For it is promised to all those (amongst others) as a reward, who had
been faithful unto Christ, in the time of that horrible Apostasy, and had not
worshipped the Beast, or his Image. But the worship of the Beast ceased not,
till he himself ceased, as appear^, Rev. 19.20, 21. For as long as he was in
place and power, there were always such (and those not a few) as did worship
him, whose names were not written in the book of life, ( Rev. 13.8.) Therefore
their opinion is very weak, who hold that the Beast, and his Image, and his
Worshippers, are in whole, or part, within the thousand years; when the
beginning and continuance of the thousand years, is promised to them that did
not worship the Beast, nor receive his mark.

2. The thousand years do follow the thrones that were set for the Saints
reign, v. 4. But the thrones (as has been already showed) were to be set at
the second coming of Christ, after the destruction of the great Antichrist, who
being overcom, the Saints may quietly reign.

3. The thousand years follows the Dragons deceiving the Nations by Antichrist,
which did not cease till Antichrist himself was destroyed, for it is expressly
said ( Rev. 20.3.) that he may not seduce the Nations any more, viz. as he had
seduced them, during the time of his being and reigning in the world. For the
words (no more) must needs relate to that deceiving, mentioned in the words
immediately preceding, which deception was the deceiving by Antichrist, as
appears Rev. 19.20. The Beast and false prophet which deceived them that
received the mark of the B^alt, etc.

4. The thousand years begins from the binding of Satan, v. 2. which binding is
not partial and inchoate, as it was in the first coming of Christ, Mat. 12 29.
but comparatively total and perfect, which is not to be hoped for till the
final destruction of Antichrist, for it is expressly said, ver. 3. That the
Angel bound him and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set
a seal upon him. Which words do evidently show a full bondage, whereby he is so
straightly bound, shut up and kept in the bottomless pit, as in his prison, that
there is no possibility for him to get out, Which was at the sounding of the
fifth Trumpet.
which yet is not fulfilled. For out of the bottomless which then was open, not
shut and sealed, chap. 9.2. Satan brings forth smoke, and in the smoke Locusts,
that darkened the very Sun and air. And under the sixth Trumpet arises that
false light Mahomet, ( Rev. 9.14. and so forward,) and under the sixth vial
three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast,
and false Prophet to seduce the Kings and the Nations of the Earth, chap 16.14.
Thus far therefore Satan was not fully bound. He was indeed cast from Heaven to
Earth, to rage both in the Earth and Sea, chap. 12. and chap. 13. But now be is
cast into the bottomless pit, chap. 20.10. which is the days of the seventh,
and last Trumpet, and not before.

5. These thousand years are the years of the peace and tranquillity, and of
some kind of glory and triumph of the Church upon Earth, in order to which the
devil is chained up, that the Church might more peaceably, securely and quietly
reign: But no such certain and safe peace and prosperity, no such constant and
lasting triumph of the Church upon Earth is to be expected, till after the
destruction of Antichrist, in the second coming of Christ, and the Dragon be
bound, and closely and surely imprisoned in the bottomless pit. For till then
shall the Cross and the persecutions of the Saints continue; witness the words
of our Savior himself in relation to his second coming, Mat. 10.23. When they
persecute you in this City fly unto another: Non consummabitis Civitates
Israelis.
for verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel,
till the Son of man be come. Which last words (absolute sic posita) always
signify the second coming of Christ. As if he should say, do not hope to be
free from the Cross, and from persecution, until my second coming. For the
spiritual, and after a sort, heavenly Kingdom of Israel, in grace, peace, and
prosperity, promised you by the Prophets, shall not be accomplished nor
restored to you, but in my second coming.

6. Lastly, these thousand years do precede the final destruction of Satan; as
the final destruction of Antichrist did precede and go before the thousand
years, so Satan follows after, Apoo. 20.10. The Devil is cast into the Lake,
where the Beast and false Prophet are, or (as Beza and others) where the Beast
and false Prophet was, viz. because the Beast and false Prophet, long before
were cast into the Lake. Therefore these thousand years are the times of
Christ's second coming, after the total and final destruction of Antichrist.
For Christ is said to destroy or abolish him, by the brightness of his coming.
And (to me it is without doubt) John had respect to that coming, and received
opinion among the Jews, in these thousand years he speaks of, Rev. 20. that the
great day of Judgment does contain the thousand years in it self. And to this
also Peter seems to have had respect, 2 Pet. 3. where making mention of the day
of Judgment, and perdition of ungedly men, he says, ver. 8. One day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Which place
Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, does interpret of the day
of Judgment. The last hour therefore, or the last day of Christ's second
coming, denotes a certain long tract of time, and is indefinitly put for the
last time, but not for one natural day, or hour, properly so called, as it is
commonly thought. In Luke 17.22. the Lord jesus himself speaking of the day of
his second ^oming. Ye shall (says he) desire to see one of the days of the Son
of man. Which Beza rightly interprets of one of the days of his second coming,
for in vain should they desire to see one of the days that were past, who did
certainly expect them to come, which they thought also to be at hand, but they
were deceived in that, and should not see them, that is, so soon as they
expected them. In Acts 3.20, 21, 24. Peter speaks of times of refreshing from
the presence of the Lord, and the times of the restitution of all things, which
God has spoken, by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, etc. He does not point
at one day in Christ's second coming but many; certainly so long as all things
shall continue after they be restored, so long the day of Judgment shall last,
but all things shall be restored at the day of Judgment, and continue in their
being, after they are restored, longer then a day of twelve or twenty four
hours long Surely for a man to say, that Christ shall come from Heaven at the
day of Judgment, when all things in the world shall be destroyed, and have an
end, Acts 3.21. Rom 8 21.
is to fight against the Scripture, which says all things at his coming shall
be restored, and therefore not dissolved at that time. Or to say all things
shall be restored at Christ second coming and be dissolved again by and by, is
like the fancy of those Heathens, who said, God made other worlds before this,
but he did undo them, as soon as he had made them, because they were not to his
mind, and thus (say they) he spent his time, until he made this world that now
is, which pleased him very well. Such a fancy they must needs have of God, who
think all things shall be restored, at Christ's second coming, and dissolved
again by and by. Without doubt, as when God made the world at first, he did not
make it to destroy it presently, but to continue for some length of time, for
man to live in it to his glory, and his praise: so when God shall restore the
world, at the great day of Judgment, he will not presently dissolve it, but
have it to continue some length of time, that Christ and the Saints may reign
in it, to his glory. Again, John in the Revelation speaking of the seventh
Trumpet, which is the last Trumpet, and the Trumpet (I mean of the judicial
Trumpets) of consummation, and so the Trumpet of Christ's second coming, he
attributes many days to it. In the days of the seventh Trumpet, the mystery of
God shall be finished, as he spoke by his Servants the ^rophets. Rev. 10.7.
Isaiah calls the second coming of Christ, the year of recompenses, Isaiah 34.
ver. 8. It is such a day, that in the same breath it swells into a year. For it
is the day (says he) of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses for
the controversy of Zion. Yea! this, day, in Isaiah 59.21 swells at the least
into three generations, and least that should be two little into a (for ever.)
For (says he) my words shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor our of the mouth
of thy feed, or seeds seed, from henceforth even for ever. And it is apparent
this is spoken of Christ's second coming, both from the text, By which we may
judge how to apply all those glorious texis which seem yet to be unfulfilled.
and context, and Paul ( Romans 11.26.) so applies the same.

The same Prophet tells us yet of a longer time ( Isaiah 65.17. for, says he,
the days of my people ( ver. 22.) shall be as the days of a tree, and mine
Elect shall l^ng enjoy the works of their hands. Pliny tells us, that the life
of an Oak is nine hundred years, more or less, which comes very near John's
thousand years. The words in the Hebrew are the wood of life, but the
Septuagint renders it the tree of life, with which also agrees the Chaldee
paraphraft. In which words says Justin Martyr we may understand the thousand
years to be secretly pointed at. It was the conceit of the same Justine Martyr
(and not altogether to be slighted) that the life of the tree of life, or of
man in the state of Paradise, was to consist of a thousand years that is to
say, that so long, man had he not sined, should have lived in this world, and
afterward have been translated into a more happy both place and condition. But
Adam having sinned, by eating the forbidden fruit, therefore neither himself,
nor any of his posterity (though some of them very long lived) should attain to
that number of years, but should die before they had any of them lived out so
great a day. But when all things shall be restored, that long lived day shall
be restored to the sons of the first resurrection, and they shall live one
thousand years. So the Prophet Zachariah speaking of the day of Christ's second
coming, chap 14.9. says, the Lord shall be King over all the Earth, and in
that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one. And adds ver. 16. they
shall go up from year to year, to worship the King the Lord of Hosts, and to
keep the feast of Tabernacles, which is an allusion to those old Jewish rites,
and betokens only their serving God; of which see Rev. 7.14, 15. Where those
Palm bearing triumphers are said to serve God day and night in his Temple.
Lastly, Christ tells us of a certain world to come, in which sins may be
forgiven. Matthew. 12.32. not to the sons of the resurrection, who are without
all sin; but to those who are of the Nations that are saved, and walk in the
light of the New Jerusalem. ( Rev. 21.24.) who yet sinning, and repenting of
their sins, obtain remission in Christ's blood.

And now (good Reader) hark a little to the peculiar privileges of that day
and time, yet for brevitys sake, take them almost in so many words.

I In the time of this thousand years there will be an end for ever of the
Beast and false Prophet. O! happy riddance to the world, for, what good did
they ever do, nay, what evil did they not. Farewell thou Whore of Babylon, Rev.
18.3. who did inebriate the Nations, and their Kings, with the wine of the
wrath of thy fornications. Thy judgments are come in a day ( Rev. 18.8.)
death, and mourning and famine, for strong is the Lord God that Judges thee.
Rejoice ( Rev. 18.20) over her thou heaven (Church) and ye holy Apostles and
Prophets, for God has avenged you at her hand. That wicked horn ( Dan. 7.21)
is broken off, who warred against, and wore out the Saints; the multitude of
thy offenses, now at last, has broken the multitude of thy forces, and thou
can not call back the day that is past. Thy two horns indeed made the world
to take thee for a Lamb, ( Rev. 13.11.) but thy speech against the Saints was
always like a Dragon. Therefore full well art thou cast into ( Rev. 19.20.)
the Lake of fire; for ever, as thine own dung, to perish, though thy branches
shot up to Heaven, and thy roots down as low as Hell; yet the Saints now do
reign, and rejoice in thy ruin.

II. Satan also is ( Rev. 20.2.) now chained up, and imprisoned in the pit.
That (1 Pet. 5.8.) roaring Lion, who went about seeking, by what means, or
whom, he might devour. O! happy time, when Lions lie in chains, and the
Dragons dwelling is in the deep.

III. Moreover now, there is a perfect and complete end of all godless
Governors, who did always oppress, disquiet, and vex the Church and Spouse of
Christ. God then ( Rev. 11.18.) destroys all those that destroy the Earth. Yea!
then, and in that day, shall our lord Jesus Christ, the Lamb and the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, the Spouse and husband of his Church, the Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings, who at the first went out conquering and to conquer, who did
before hand signify all these things to his servants, by his Angel, take to
himself his great power and reign, and let the Nations be as angry as they will
or can, yet in despite of all their fury, he shall give rewards unto his
servants the Prophets, and to his Saints and to them that fear his Name, both
small and great. Then ( Rev. 19.6.) shall the Lord God Omnipotent reign, with
the shoutings and Hallelujahs of his Elect. Yea! the Saints shall sit on
Thrones, (1 Cor. 6.2. Dan. 7.22.27. Matthew. 19.28.) and judge the World. This
well may stain the beauty and dazel the glory of all Earthly powers. For then (
Isa 24.23.) the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of
Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients
gloriously. Then shall Righteousness run up and down, and be as a mighty stream.

IV. Moreover then will be a lasting peace, and wars shall cease to the ends of
the Earth, when Christ the Prince of peace shall sway the Scepter, judging
amongst many Nations, and rebuking many people. Then shall their swords be
beaten into plow-shares, and their Spears into pruning books, Nation shall not
lift up sword against Nation, nor shall they learn war any more, Isai. 2.4. In
that day, says God, ( Hos. 2.18.) I will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the
Battle ax out of the Earth, and I will make them to lie down safely. Peace
before had been full often desired, but 'twill be then completely attained.

V. Also then will all persecution be brought to an end and cease. Then the
envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off,
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not envy Ephraim, Isa. 11.13.
Ezekiel 28.24. And there shall be no more a pricking Bryer unto the house of
Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised
them. See also Ezekiel. 28.25. and 26. then Christ weeds out of his Kingdom all
things that offend, and them that do iniquity. For it is a righteous thing with
him to render tribulation to them that trouble his Church, and to them that are
troubled rest, 2 These. 1.7.

VI. Then likewise will be an and of all oppression. For who is left to
oppress, the Beast and false prophet they are gone, the Dragon is bound, all
wicked men are now under the Hatches, and laid at Christ's footstool. Violence
shall no more be heard in her Land, wasting nor destruction within her borders,
Isa. 54.14. Ezekiel. 45.8. My Princes shall no more oppress my people, they shall
be far from oppression. The New Heavens and New Earth is a place wherein dwells
righteousness, Psalm. 72.2. He shall judge the people with Righteousness, and
the poor with Judgment, v 4. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall
save the children of the needy, and shall break in pleces the oppressor.

VII. At that day also, and in that time, there shall not be any that shall
hurt or harm, one beast shall no more hurt another, nor one man his fellow. For
( Isa 11.6, 7, 8, 9.) the wolf shall also dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid: and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall
feed, their young ones shall lie down together, and the Lion shall cat straw
like the Ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the Asp. And the
weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy Mountain. Understand we this of men or Boasts, and
neither shall be hurtful or offensive each to other, but great agreement will
be among them. And this some understand to be the meaning of the Apostle, Romans
8.19, 20, 21. in which words these four following things seem to be observable.
viz.

1. That now the creature is under the bondage of corruption, that is, prone
and apt to devour, destroy, and make a prey one of another. 2. That the
creature hereafter shall be delivered from that bondage, that is, they shall
not (as heretofore) hurt and destroy one another. 3. That there shall be a
time, when the sons of God shall have a glorious liberty, that is, they shall
not hurt one another, nor receive hurt from any. 4. That the creatures in their
kind shall partake of their liberty, and they shall not be hurtful one to
another, but live in peace and quietness.
VIII Moreover then shall be an end of fear, terror and dread. For they shall
no more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the Beast of the Land devour
them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid. Isa. 54.14.
In righteousness (says the Prophet) shall thou be established, thou shall be
far from oppression, for thou shall not fear: And from terror, for it shall not
come near thee. (Jer. 30 10.) Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob,
says the Lord, neither be dismayed, O Israel; for lo, I will save thee from
far, and thy seed from the land of their captivity and Jacob shall return, and
be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

IX. Lastly, this will be a time of such purity and holiness, of the fear of
the Lord and righteousness, as never was, nor will be till that time. This
will make it to be Millennium aureum, or oureum seculum. It will be a golden
day, and Age indeed, for the holy City, the New Jerusalem, that City of gold
and pearl, mentioned Rev. 21. does contemporate and synchronize with the
thousand years, as might be abundantly proved, if Reverend Mede had not done it
to my hand, so that it would but be act a agere, which I intend not. This will
be that time of truth without mixtures of error, a time of light without
mixture of darkness, a time of knowledge without mixture of ignorance, from
whence all Heresy does proceed. The light of the Moon shall be as the Sun, and
the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold as the light of seven days. The
Ordinances aso will then be pure, without mixtures of superstition, humane
inventions, and will worship. There are those Rivers of water of life, clear as
crystal, Great also will be the holiness of that day. ( Zach. 14.9. Rev.
22.1. Isa. 2.2.) For it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
Mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the top of the Mountains,
and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. And
many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths, for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word
of the Lord from Jerusalem. See also Zach. 8.19.20, 21, 22. The streets of the
City are all gold, and golden will be the lives and conversations of the
Citizens; yea, God shall be known in her Palaces for a refuge; the foundations
of her City are all of Pearl; her streets paved with precious stones; her
Gardens fragrant with all manner of pleasant flowers; her delightful walks are
always green; her Springs are living waters; her months are one continued May;
her Trees bear all manner of lovely fruits, and the leaves of the same are for
the healing of the Nations; her years are one lasting joyful Jubilee, and her
strength is always firm; her same men leap as Hearts, and the tongue of dumb men
then are loosed. O when shall we go, how shall we get to this holy and
beautiful City of God? Her time is coming, her year is at hand, and the Lord
will hasten it in his time. Reader, thou have here a little taste of the
beginning of Zions bliss held forth unto thee, only according unto our weak
and short manner of conceiving and expressing: the things themselves as far
surmount our thoughts and words, as the Heavens are above the Earth, and as the
East is distant from the West. Give me now leave to put a period to all in a
word or two of Application.

Rome must down before Christ will set up his Kingdom) and for the calling of
the Jews, for the beginning of this Kingdom must be with the Jews, they ^u^t
be Caput Imperii, the Head and Seat of this Empire must be among them. And let
us pray according to Christ's direction, Thy Kingdom come, and thy Will be done
on Earth as it is in Heaven; which will never be till these thousand years; Let
(as says David) all Nations serve thee, O God, let all people praise thee. O
pray that God would take to himself his great power and reign before the
Ancients gloriously.

durante and currente die judicii, within, and during the great day of Judgment.

Zion, and daughters of Jerusalem! O thou Wife and Spouse of Christ, thou art
She who have seen and do see affliction: yea, from thy youth up thou have
been slain, and killed all the day long, the furrows have been made long upon
thy back, and thou have been ^^ptied from vessel to vessel; Thy flesh has
(...) no rest, but troubles are on every side; without are sight^ (...) been
covered as with a cloud, and art for a (...) word and hissing to passers by:
yea, accounted as the offscouring of all things unto this day: But he of good
cheer, yea, awake and sing, thou that dwell in the dust; for thus says the
Lord God; O thou afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and not comforted; behold,
I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with Sapphire,
and make thy windows of Agats, and gates of Carbuncle, and borders of pleasant
stones. For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and thy
Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called.
Wherefore lift up thy head, for thy Redemption draws nigh, and the years of thy
deliverance are now at hand. O wait and pray, and bear up, yet a little a very
little while, and thy work shall be rewarded, and the wicked train shall be no
more, but the meek shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in a very
great abundance of peace; do but fight stoutly through the pikes, and win the
field, put forth thy strength, and spare no pains, no cost, no sweat, no blood;
O cast about a careful eye, use all holy policy, rally up thy force afresh; it
wants but a little, and all is thine own, and then thou art made for (...) (...)
dou^ (...) (...) pleasure to give thee the Kingdom. Thy (...) who has washed
thee in his blood, (...) made thee clean and spotless; behold, he ^^mes
quickly, and his reward is with him. ^rise, O Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered, ^^d those that hate thee flee before thee. Lay Babylon in the dust,
and let her Virgins be cut off. O (...) the hairy scalp of all thine incurable
foes. (...) Zion be exalted, and Jerusalem made a praise (...) the midst of the
Earth; preserve thy Spouse in (...) midst of Lions, strengthen her faith,
lengthen her ^^^ience, hasten thy coming; O be as a Roe, or ^^oung Heart upon
the Mountains of Spices. Ameu.

FINIS.

