A FURTHER EXPLICATION Of the PROPOSAL relating to the COIN,
SIR,
I Did never intend ny other Paper, as a System in the Matter of Coin, but
singly as a Memorial for Redressing the present Mischief, by the Alterations of
our Standard, Anno 1686: And by the several Alterations, Upps and Downs since
that time by Publict Order; Yet for further Explanation even as to my
Intention, I have scribled over what I thought might conduce to it, and jotted
out some of the Principal Alterations in the Matter of Money, since thereby
something of the Nature of Changes in Money may be understood. And if at
another time you desire to be more fully informed in these Matters, I shall
either abstract them for you from the best Authors, or at least give you an
Index of these Books, which may inform you more fully.

THE Sophisms used by some late Writers in England, to persuade the raising of
the value of Money, are scarce worth the Redarguing; Since the force of the
Truth, which they oppose, draws from them a Confession, that their Counsel is
Pernicious; For even Mr. Hodges their Chief Owns that Money is to be raised,
only for an Interim, Viz. For bringing in of Money for once, But that it is to
be raised shortly thereafter by Piece Meal, And then brought down again to its
former value? How far he is mistaken as to the first, what I have said, (as I
do think) does Evince: And as to the bringing of it down again by Piece Meal,
shows indeed that the raising of it was folly, but that the Cure would be also
Pernicious, by leaving the loss of all the cried down Money, on the Subjects
who were obliged to Receive it at an Overvalue, by the Governments Command: And
that, after a great deal of Money is Received at an Overvalue, And when the
evil is more deeply Rooted.

And that the Remedy by Cessing our Selfs in alse much as will Recoyn our Money
to a true Standart, timeously; Especially now, when there is so little Cash in
Scotland, whereby a Lesser Sum may now Recoyn it then hereafter, if the Cash
grow greater, is Preferrable; And if it be delayed too long, it may be feared
on too good Grounds, that there will be little Cash to be Recoyned.

This is not to be understood, as if the Denomination of Money were never to be
raised; For Money being here considered only as it is a Symbol in Trade, to
Facilitate Commerce; And that it is a Symbol Universally Received for that use,
being the fittest Catholic Symboll; Because the Matter. Viz. Metal is most
Universally useful and Known, most dureable by its Nature, most Retentive of
Authorizing Impressions, and uneasiest to be Counterfited. So it Receives its
esteem and Denomination, by Universal or Catholic Consent. And if one People
should estimat the Metal, viz. Gold and Silver twice as much as an other
People does, Ex: Gr: If A should esteem an Ounce of Silver worth six Pound, And
an other, viz. B should esteem it worth three only. When B. did buy Goods from
A. Then A who esteemed B his Piece of Metal worth six, would give him twice as
much Goods for his three Pound, as it was worth: But when A comes to buy Goods
from B, B will take the Three Pound-peice, but for Three, and A most give two
of these Three-pound-peices, to make up Six, albeit he Received one of them for
Six from B. Now suppose that C, D, E, F, etc. i. e. All the other Adjacent
Nations, should have the same estimat of an Ounce of Silver, that B has; Then
A most give two of the Three-pound-peices, which he received from B, when he
buys Goods from them in Exchange for these Pieces.

But if C, D, E, F, etc. should raise the Denomination, and esteem of the said
Ounce of Silver, or Three-pound-peices, to the same value that A did, viz. to
Six Pound, And yet not raise the value of their Goods at the same time; It is
evident in the first place, that when B brings his Ounce, or Three-pound-peice
to any of these Countries, he will get Six Pounds worth of Goods for every
Three-pound, which will be a vast advantage to B; Especially if the Metal be
his Native Product. And if it be not his Native Product, But suppose it be the
Native Product of H, his Country; It is then evident that H his Native
Commodity is valued thereby, at the double of what it was before; And in that
Respect, comparing the Goods of all the other Nations, with the Metal which is
H his Commodity; They are not worth above the half of what they were before,
And H will still continue Gainer, until the Goods of the other Nations be
proportionably raised, as the Metal was raised; This is the true case as to
Spain.

And if B should still value his Ounce of Metal, at Three Pound. when all the
Adjacent Nations have valued it at Six Pound, or any thing more then
Three-pound; Then if any of the adjacent Nations, were to buy Goods of the
Native Product or Manufactory of B: If the same kind of Product or Manufactory
were to be had in any other place, where that Ounce did give more than Three
Pound; To be sure, The adjacent Nations would go and buy these Goods, where the
Metal was most valued; And thereby B will come to a great Loss, since no Body
will come to buy his Goods.

From whence it is evident, That Money being the Universal Symbol, it must
receive its Estimat and Value, not by one or two Nations, but by the Common
Consent of all the Nations where that Symbol is used. And by the former
Deduction, it it also evident, that a Nation who will raise their Estimat and
Denomination above other Nations, do thereby debase the Value of their own
Goods, which are the Subject of Commerce, whilst they raise the Value of the
Symbols to their own Loss, to the Advantage of all Foreign Merchants, and
chiefly to the Spaniards. And on the other hand, they who keep the Estimate of
Money lower than their Neighbor Nations, do, in a manner, prohibit other
Nations to buy their Goods; Since Merchants will always go where they can get
most Goods for their Money, i. e. where their Money is most valued: And
therefore the General Rule is, that Money should be raised, or not, according
to what the Generality of Neighboring Nations do, especially these who are
best Governed, and with whom We have most Traffic. But there is one qualified
Exception from this, viz: If a Nation were so circumstantiat, that they had
some Native Product or Manufactory, necessar or very useful for Mankind; As for
Example, if England have Cloth or Tin, which other Nations have not of their
own, and cannot want; Then albeit England should keep the Purity of their
Standard Money, and the Neighbor Nations should raise theirs, and that England
should discharge any Money to pass within their Kingdom, except their own Coin;
Then the Nations which must buy their Cloth and Tinn, must also provide
themselves of English Money to buy it; And suppose that a great deal of the
English Coin, had been carried out of England, because of the higher Value put
upon it in the Neighboring Nations; Yet the Merchants must provide and buy
this English Money from other Nations, and bring it back again to England: At
least they must bring the equivalent of it in pure Bullion, or else they must
want the Cloth and Tinn of England.

But for all this, it were a great Imprudence in England, to keep their Money
at a lower Estimat than the other Nations with whom they Trade, by any
considerable Proportion; for that would in some measure discourage Merchants,
and in great Measure Embarrass and confound Exchange; So that Englands Prudence
in that Case, would be to advance the Estimate of their Money, to the Par: of
the best Standard amongst their Neighbors, and at the same time to advance the
Estimate of their Cloth and Tinn: Yet since their Cloth and Tinn forces even
Foreigners to bring in Money to them, its but Folly in England, not to keep
their Standard always as good, if not better, than any other Nation's Standard;
And ever since that Excellent Counselor, the Lord Burleigh, did restore the
Standard of England to its Purity: (and thereby England to its true Policy)
They have Religiously observed the Purity of their Standard, both in Weight and
Fineness: And when by the late mischievous Accident their Money was debased by
Clipping, and by that, the Nation brought upon the very Brink of Ruin; Albeit
they were long in adverting to it, as I adventured to notify in a Shedule
Printed at Edinburgh Anno 1695, being several Months before the Committee was
appointed for that End in England; They have since most prudently Repaired
their Common Wealth by returning to their Standard, with the boldest Step that
ever was made for Redressing of Coin, since Marius Gratidianus did Regulat the
Roman Standard, (...) for which his Statue was Erected in the Capital;) And now
England does find the Honor and Profit of this Noble Action.

To apply this to Scotland (which as is said) by a Solemn Contract with
England, is obliged to have the same Standard in Weight and Fineness, tho in
different Denominations, their pence being the Scots Shilling, and consequently
our Shilling their pence; So twelve of our pence making but one of their pence,
and twelve of our pounds making but one of theirs; But the weight and Fineness,
and therefore the Par: of Our Money and theirs is the same; We have likewise
the same Motives with them, to keep up our Standard, unless it be Our interest,
to debase the price of our own Native Product, and Manufacturies: And to induce
Mercliants to bring in a less Quota of Silver, and to give us an Exchange for
our Goods; then they would do, if our Standard were in its just Finaness, which
I shall not now repeat, having said enough to it, in the first part of this
paper; One fooiish Argument used by the Money Raisers, was there omitted. Viz.
That the receiving of English Money at an Higher Value, then the Standard;
Albeit a Merchant who have a mind to buy a certain Quota of our Goods, would
bring in less Money to buy every particular Quantity; Yet the very Gain that
they make upon our Raising of our Money, would induce many Merchants, to come
among them, and many Merchants will stll raise the market.

But is it not obvious, (Imo.) That all these Merchants bring in less Money to
buy their Goods, than they would have done, in proportion to the Quota of Goods
bought, if the Standart had been in its just height,. 2do. Will all these
Merchants buy more, then will serve the Mercats, whither they are to bring
their Goods, and that they would have done However, 3tio. The more Goods we
give out at an Undervalue, the more We loss, 4to. Is it not Obvious, That as
many Merchants will raise the Mercats at the buying here; So by the same Rule,
many Merchants will low the Market, where they Sell; And thereby the Loss and
Gain, by many Merchants is clearly Balanced.

But in true Reasoning, We have the same Motives with England to expect, that
the Merchants will bring in Money of Our own Standart, or the Equivalent in
Bullion, to buy Our Goods; For Our Goods are such, as are not bought by others,
for Vanity or Luxury, But such as are called for, only on Necessity, or
Urgent use; And use and Necessity needs no help of other Motives, especially
such Motives as are loss to us; But as was formerly said, it were far better to
give down of the price of Our Goods, then to receive worse Money then our
Standart, For any who Reads what We have said, or considers these Affairs
Seriously, will soon perceive, That the giving down a little of the price of
Our Goods, does only influence that Species of Goods, whereas the Debasing of
Out Standart, does influence the whole, both of our Real and Moveable Estates.

I having designed in this Paper, to make this matter as plain as I could,
Therefore I have Adventured upon Repetitions, rather than to leave things in
Obscurity; And for this end, I shall add a further Illustration of the main
Proposition. viz. That by raising Our Money, our Goods are Debased; And that,
by the Annalogie betwixt Money and Bills of Exchange, as to their Use in
Commerce. For albeit the Matter of a Bill be but Paper, and so of no value
Intrinsically, Yet as to Trade, a Bill on good Credit is as valueable, and has
several advantages above Coin? Now a Bank Bill of Holland, suppose it of 91
lib: 6 sh: 8 d Sterling, and which still will Answer for the value at
Amsterdam, or wherever a Bank Bill has Credit, If by Statute We Declare that
a Bill of 91 lib: 6 sh: 8 d of the Bank of Amsterdam, shall pass and be
estimate here, at a 100 lib, and Order, that whoever Sel's Goods for that Bill
in SCOTLAND, must value that Bill for 100 pound; Albeit it be most certain,
that that Bill when it goes back to Holland, or to any other Place which Trades
with Holland, that it will stand good, only for 91 pound, 6 shil: 8 d Does not
this Command us, to sell the Scots Goods, 8 pound. 6 shil: 4 d less, than if we
had got the said Bill at its true Value. And albeit this Bill may pass over all
Scotland for 100 pound in our Commerce; Yet is it not evident, that when I make
use of this Symbol, or Bill to Trade with any where else, that I must add 8
pound, 6 shil: 4 d to make it up to a 100 pound. So whether I use it, who did
take it for a 100 pound; or if it pass from me to another, who sends it Abroad,
either I or they must loss the said 8 pound, 6 shil: 4 d First, this
demonstrates that the crying up of any Symbol, used in Forteign Places, to more
than Foreigners do estimat it, does cry down as much of our Goods, as we sell
for that Symbol; For as a Bank Bill is to the Trade of Amsterdam, so Money is
to the Trade of every other Place, where Money is the Symbol of Trade.

2do. It demonstrates, that the giving down of the Ordinar Price of our Goods,
will encourage the Hollander to bring his Bill of 91 pound, 6 shil. 8 d as well
as he will be, by our declaring his 91 pound, 6 shil: 8 d to be in Scotland
estimat at a 100 pound, only to cry up Amsterdam Bills, is so much better than
crying up of Money Coined; Because it cries up only a Symbol for Commerce, used
by all People, and does not oblige us to sell all our Goods, to all and sundry
Foreigners in Europe, at an Uunder value; But the crying up of Money, obliges
us to sell all our Goods to all and sundry, at an undervalue of 8, less than
they value their Symbols, which they bring to Trade with.

The Roman AS was originally Coined of a Pound weight, in the first Punick War
a pound was brought to weigh but two Ounces. Fabius Maximus brought it to an
Ounce, and Papirius to half an Ounce.

And as in weight, So the Romans did abase their Money by Increase of its
Allay, wherein Livius Drusus did exceed, and great Confusion was produced in
the Roman Commonwealth, until Gratidianus when he was Triumvir for Coinage,
did bring it back to its true Standard, who in that was the Burleigh of Rome,
or Burleigh, the Gratidianus of England, to both their Immortal Fames.

But in the times after Augustus, the Empire ran both into Confusion and
Deminution; and it is certain, that Money is a true Pulse of the State of
Government: But Charles the Great in the Resurrection of the Western Empire,
brought the Empire and Money out of their Confusion, into a more solid
Consistence; For he renewed the Account by Pounds or Livers, dividing the Pound
into 20 parts, in France called Solz, viz: the English pence, and the Solz into
12 Denniers, an Scots Pence, so that twenty Solz contained a pound weight of
Silver. But the French have always since been variable in their Coins; and
certain it is, that they have raised the Value of their Gold above six times
what it was in St. Lewis time, and the Money above seven times, which has
occasioned many confusions and frequent Rebellions in France.

In England they have been more waric and constant, in the matter of their
Money, seldom raising it, or debaseing their Standart; But when forced thereto
by an Universal raising of Money, in the Neighboring States. In the year 1344,
their Sterling Standard of Gold was 23 Carrats. 3 Grains and an half Grain, and
a pound of such Gold was valued at 13 lib. 3 sh. 4 d. The Silver Standart was
eleven Ounce, and 2 pence fine, and a pound of Silver Standart was valued at 22
sh. 2 d. sterling. This was in the time of Edward the Third, Anno 1618: but in
his Anno 23. Gold was raised to 14 lib: And silver to 22 sh. 6 d. Anno 25.
ditto. Gold Hen. 4th. Gold raised to 16 lib. 13 sh. 4 d. And Silver to 30 sh.
per pound, Anno 49. Henry 6th. Gold was raised to 22 lib. 10 sh. and Silver to
37 sh. 6 d King Henry the 8th, by Advice of Cardinal Wolsey did much debase the
Coin, and confound the Nation; And which was never redressed, till Anno 14,
Elizabeth; that Gold was fixed at 36 lib. the pound and Silver to 3 lib the
pound; But Anno 24. she abased the Standart of Gold of a Grain; And the
Standart of Silver one penny, which raised the value of Gold 22 d. per lib. And
the price of Silver 3 sh. per lib. In the 2 d year of King James, the fineness
of Gold, was reduced to 22 Carrats; And the value of it raised to 37 lib. 4 sh.
per lib. which both together was almost an eleventh part, more, than the Gold
was at, Anno 14. Elizabeth, but afterward by Proclamation King James, ordained
every 20 sh. Piece of Gold to pass for 22 sh. which yet raised the Gold a tenth
part more; And the Silver was then raised to 3 lib. 2 sh. per pound; Whereby it
appears, that Gold Coin in Edward the thirds time, contained in true value,
above thrice as much, as it did in King James Time, and Silver Coin near
thrice as much.

I have seen a Contract attested by Mr. Yelvertoun, and presented by Mr.
Secretary Calvert, whereby it was appointed, that in 12 Ounces of Gold which is
a pound of 22 Carrat fine, there should be 41 Unites Coined, every Unite being
of value 20 sh. Sterling.

Nota, The foresaid fineness, both of Gold and Silver, was to be out of the
Fire. Ittem, the remedy of the fineness of Gold, as to fineness was 2 Grains in
the Standart; And the remedy in weight for 20 sh. Pieces, and 10 sh. Pieces was
2 Grains also: And in lesser Pieces, one Grain, providing that all the Remedies
in a pound weight of Gold, did not exceed in all, 50 Grains: And the Remedy of
the weight in Silver Coin, was two Grains on the Crown, half Crown and 12
shilling.

As to Scots Coin, I have not yet seen any Authentic Record before King James
the 6th Reign, Anno 1604: By Contract 'twixt the King and J: Atchison Master of
the Mint, The Weights are mentioned, conform to what was adjusted betwixt the
two Kingdoms; And which are also mentioned expressly in the foresaid Contract,
reported by Mr. Secretary Calvert; viz the English Weight is declared to be 12
Ounces Troy to a pound weight; and every Ounce, to be 20 penny weight, and the
Scots pound is 12 Ounces also for the pund, and 12 Denniers to each Ounce, But
the 12 Ounces or pund Scots weighs less then the English pund, be 4 pennies, 9
Grains English; or be 5 Denniers, 9 Grains and 18 primes of Scots Weight. And
so two Pyles were made, one for each Kingdom, of equal weight; adding the said
5 Denniers, 9 Grains 18 Primes to the Scots Pyle, for making it equal to the
English.

And according to this Adjusted weight, was the rule of Coining of Money, in
both Kingdoms as to Weight. the Fynenest still the same also

So before that time the Scots Weight appears to have been 12 Den: to an Ounce,
12 Ounce to a pound: But it likewise appears, that the Scots pound did weigh
less then the English, be 5 Denniers, 9 Grains, and 18 Primes. And albeit
Scotland does keep their old Denominations, yet this pound and all its
Fractions, do weight a little more then the old Scots pound, and its Fractions
did. And I wish we had the same Denomination also, for 20 pnnies to the Ounce,
and 24 Grains to each penny, is a far better Fraction and easier in Accounts,
then the Denniers, and Primes, which are unequal Fractions, and does Imbarass
Accounts.

However, Craig tells us in his Learned Treatise, de Feud: That about the time
of Pinkie Fight. Anno (...) That an Ounce weight of Silver was but one Merk,
which now is near five Merks; Whereby he observes, that the Fisc^ in that time
had swallowed up Insensibly four parts of five of the Subject, So great a
disadvantage did he see in the raising of Money. In that place also, he sets
down the Scots Standard and Fineness, 11 Denniers of pure Silver, and one
Dennier of Allay, in Silver Coin, and 22 Carrats of pure Gold, and 2 Carrats of
Allay in Gold Coin: But by the Contract betwixt the King and Atchieson. The
Standart for Silver in Scotland was to be 11 Denniers of fine Silver, and an
Dennier of Allay; And at the same time the Standart of England by Contract, was
11 Ounce, and 2 Pennies of Silver, and 18 penny of Allay, By which it appears,
that our Allay was a full 12 part, whilst the English Allay was two pennies
less, so that there Money was better than Ours in Fineness, or else they have
Compted wrong in the Contract: But the Standard of the Gold in Fineness, at
that time by both the Contracts was 22 Carrats pure Gold, and 2 Carratt of
Allay.

And as to the weight, the pieces of Coin was as follows, 37
Twelve-pound-peices, and 1/^ part of a Piece, was to weigh 12 Ounces, 5
Denniers, 9 Grains, 18 Primes, which was equivalent to 12 Ounces Troy, or a
Pound weight in England, And in Silver Coin, 12 Three pound-peices, and parts
more, Viz. Two Shilling Starling, were to weight 12 Ounce, 5 Deuniers, 9
Grains, 18 Primes, or 12 Ounce of English weight: But in the English Contract
produced by Calvert, The Unites of Gold, which are 20 Shilling Sterling, or 12
Pound Scots; there were 41 Pieces or Unites in the Pound weight of Gold, and by
the Contract Anno 1604. with Aitchieson. The Price appointed for Gold of 22
Carrats fine, is 34 Lib: 18 sh: Scots per Ounce, and 58 Shilling for the Ounce
of Silver of eleven Denniers Fine.

Now in Silver Coin, Our loss may be clearly perceived, First, By our own Coin,
which now is 8 and parts worse than the said Standart, and this in Weight.

And next by Foreign Coin, The Philip Dollar is but 10 Denniers Fine, the
Italian Dollar but 9 and ^4/20 parts, the Hollands Dollar but 9 Denniers, the
Ducatdown 9 Denniers. And many of these Foreign Coyns, do also want of Weight.

By all which Debasings, and passing of base Money amongst us. I boldly assert,
that our Nation is more prejudged and Impoverished, than by all the Cess we
have paid these ten years bygone, as may be made appear, if a Committee be
appointed, and think it worth their pains to know it; At which also, some
Overture may be proposed for Redressing this great Mischief, as much and as
soon as possiby can be expected, and if not Redrest, Infallibly Our Nation will
fall at once in Penury and Confusion, by several Degrees lower than it is; For
that Lean Cow, viz. The Act for Coynadge 1686, has Devou^ed two parts of
three, of what Gold or Silver was in Scotland before that Act; And that over
and above a considerable Stock of Gold and Money brought in by the Forces,
paid within this Kingdom by English Pay; As also a considerable quantity of
Money brought in by the Export of the Coal and Salt during the Wars, and since,
at an higher Rate than usual: All which is exhausted by the forementioned Lean
Cow; For as to the other Cormorant, Our Superfluous Luxury on Back and Belly,
which Eats our Goods without Digestion, for any Healthful Use, I shall offer my
Opinion in an other Paper.

FINIS.

