THE Case of the Times DISCUSSED: Being a Serious Exercitation of two Cases
grounded upon Romans 13. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

First, How far we are bound to Obey, when we are not Satisfied that the Laws
are for our Good?

2 d, Whether Subjection implies more than not to Resist the Powers?

To which is added, Some Remarkes upon a late Book, Entitled, The Protestant
Reconciler.

By Fr. Fullwood, D. D. in Exon.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Wilkins, at the Starr in Cheapside, next Mercers
Chapel, 1683.

To the RIGHT REVEREND Father in God THOMAS Lord Bishop OF EXON.
My Good Lord;
YOur Lordship is very sensible, that as Policy requires Obedience to the Laws
for the Preservation of the Public Peace; So Religion (especially the
Christian) requires That Obedience from a Principle of Conscience. And I know
your Lordship accounts it Your Honor to be a Minister of that Excellent
Religion, whose Zeal and Piety is so concerned, both by Your convincing and
free Discourses upon all Occasions, and by Your exceeding Constant and
Exemplary Devotions, to promote that Christian and Peaceable Principle into due
Practice. This also being the Chief End of the following Papers. I have made
Bold to send them forth under the Countenance of Your Great Name, as well as to
Acknowledge the many Personal Obligations I stand under by Your Lordships
Favors.

If such a Conscientious Obedience to the Laws could be generally obtained
among us, how happy a Prospect would it give us! However, if our Dissenting
Brethren cannot be satisfied of the Fitness of every thing that is enjoined, or
of the direct Obligation of Our Laws upon their Consciences, my Prayer for them
and our Israel is, That they would consider and see Reason in the words of
their great Friend (the Protestant Reconciler, p. 177.) viz. It seems to be the
Duty of Inferiors to Comply rather with the Commands of their Superiors, though
they conceive them Burdensome and Inconvenient, then to administer Occasion to
all those dreadful Evils both to Church and State, of which we have (and may
have) so sad Experience. And O that God would grant (as our Church prays) that
they may both perceive and know what things they ought to do; and also may have
Grace and Power faithfully to fulfill the same. I am

My Lord Your Lordship's Obliged and humbly Devoted Servant Fr. Fullwood.

THE Introduction, DISSENTERS Reasons Not from the SINFULNESS, but the
INCONVENIENCY of the things required by LAW.
I Have often wondered that so many, otherwise Sober and Ingenious Persons,
continue their Refusal to join with us in our Public Worship; and by their
Ill Example, Encourage Separation in the people to this day. I shall not wholly
impute it, either to their Ignorance or Stubbornness or Interest; but am
willing to conceive, that they have some Latent Principle, upon which they
imagine, they support their Consciences, and satisfy themselves in their Way of
Disobedience.

I have studied to find out What this Principle should be: It must lie in some
Exception they have against our Divine Offices; and I cannot imagine it can be
any thing, but either their supposed Sinfulness or Unfitness.

1. I do not think, that they do really and in earnest believe or suspect our
public Worship to be directly Sinful; for these Reasons, because so many
learned and pious Men have frequently and abundantly solved All Objections of
that kind, both as to Substance and Ceremony; which I presume our considering
Brethren have well weighed and approved as Satisfactory. Especially seeing the
old Puritan Nonconformists, whose Steps they pretend to follow, wrote so well
and zealously even for the Necessity of our Peoples communicating in our
Parocbial Service. Yea, consonant hereunto, many of the more learned
Nonconformists since the happy Restoration, have openly and frankly Justified
and Vindicated our Ordinary Public Worship. And one of their Great Men, in his
late Pleas for Peace (or rather for Non conformity) though he offers several
Objections against its Lawfulness, yet, as I take it, he Disowns them as for
himself, and puts them upon Others, that do or may so object. And indeed, at
other times he has argued strenuously for all parts of our public Worship, to
which he Conforms himself, though some are positive, That His Continuing to
Preach among the Dissenters, is an unaccountable Patronage of their Separation.
Besides, it cannot be unknown and unobserved, That most of those
Non-conformists, that have given us any Reason of their Desertion, have said
nothing against the Lawfulness of our Communion, but have urged only such
things as are in the Conditions of our Ministration, an nothing to our Peoples
Communion. Some could not renounce the Covenant: Some could not give their
Assent and Consent to all and every thing contained in the Book, meaning, some
Proposition and Computation of no practical Nature or Concern to the Peoples
ordinary Attendance in our Parish Churches: Others scrupled at Reordination,
and some perhaps liked not Canonical Obedience; and others, some of the Thirty
Nine Articles, and its possible some were offended at All these things: but
what are all these to our Lay-Communion? And therefore by the way, those angry
Persons that exclaim against the Hardness of the Terms of our Communion from
such things as these, are in my Opinion much to blame, as well as overseen:
seeing all these things are extrinsical, and not so much as Accidents of our
Ordinary Communion: and are only Conditions of the Exercise of the Ministry, to
which no man is bound.

The Substance and Matter of our Common Prayers is beyond this Exception of
Unlawfulness; and has ever been so accounted by all, but Persons infected by
Brownism; and indeed, almost every Phrase or Sentence in them, are either
express Scripture, or the evident Sense of some Particular Passage in the Word
of God.

If any thing will bear a Dispute, it is the Sign of the Cross at Baptism; yet
this their great Pleader, himself denies not the Lawful use of, as a Teaching
Sign; and it is no other, by the very words of the Administration in the
Common Prayer Book. Besides, What is the Use of the Cross to so many as have No
Children? Or to others, when they have no occasion to be particularly
concerned? Or indeed, to any, but to the Administrator? What is this to the
common or ordinary course of God's Worship amongst us? Can any be so weak as to
think, they are thus Excused for their Constant Absence or Total Separation
from us?

As for Kneeling at the other Sacrament, if a Man should tell me, That He
thinks it Sinful, I would not believe him. All the Dissenters that had Offices
when the late Test came forth requiring them to receive the Lord's Supper
according to the Church of England, that is, Kneeling, gave a Plain Experiment,
That they did not think or suspect them to be Unlawful; for they did certify,
That they had So Received it; neither did I ever hear, That their Friends were
much Offended at their such Advantageous Conformity. Besides, as before, What
is this to the Ordinary Use of Common Prayer, when there is no Sacrament
Administered?

2. From the Premises I think I may conclude, that it is not any supposed
Sinfulness in our Worship, but something else, that is the true cause of their
separating or dividing from us, and therefore, I cannot but observe, that when
they are urged to give us their Reason, they are backward to give us any,
muchless to show the Unlawfulness of any thing required. And truly, I cannot
apprehend that any thing sticks with them, but the bare Inconveniency; that is,
the Unagreeableness of our Worship to their own Notion, Apprehension and
Desires. That is, plainly, they do not like our Way of Worship, though perhaps
they are not agreed among themselves what they would have in the room of it. In
general terms, the old Brownists were for a purer Worship; and in the Modern
Language, they would serve God better: and perhaps, they have kept off so long
from us in hopes that we might be induced by their Distance, and Numbers and
Clamours to Reform, and bring things nearer to their apprehensions.

Besides, what has been observed to evince this, it may be further considered,
That as the Dissenters, to save their Offices, did conform, as before we noted,
which could not Consist with an Opinion of the Sinfulness of Conformity; so by
their Separation before and since the Test, they declare plainly, they are
against our Worship: that is, In their Opinion, it is not Sinful, but
Inconvenient; viz. They do not like it.

The same Evidence they gave us in the time of Indulgence. When a very great
Body of the People, called Presbyterians, who before joined with their
Neighbors in our public Worship, took their Liberty to leave us, and went to
the Allowed Meetings; and being demanded a Reason of that Practice, they gave
no other but this, The Non-conformists Way was more Edifying, and they Liked it
better; and many of them, I fear, have not yet found the way back again to this
day.

And do not we find daily, that the severer Use of the Laws brings in many of
the Dissenters to us, though it is confessed, that a great Number are yet more
hardy, and stand it out, who, we cannot perceive have any better, or other
Reason for Separation, then those that do come in? And why did these Continue
their Distance from us so long before? Charity must answer, while they could
enjoy their Own Choice without Loss or Trouble, they did so; but since they
cannot now, they are content to deny themselves, i. e. not to do that which is
Sinful, but only Displeasing to them, rather then Suffer.

Thus upon the whole, I persuade my self; that this lies at the bottom of
Separation: Men like not our Worship: Not because they Judge it to be Sinful,
but only Inconvenient: It Is not fitted to their private Notion and Idea. But
how this can satisfy the Consciences of reasonable and considering Christians
is the Question.

Satisfaction in this Case, must Depend upon such Propositions as these.

1. We are not bound to Obey the Laws that are not good in our Opinion, or
Persuasion. That is, though they be not Sinful, but Inconvenient, and we dislike
them.

2. Or that we have Liberty to run the Hazard of the Penalty, and to Refuse or
Deny Obedience to such Laws.

These we find hinted in some late Discourses; which indeed give Temptation to
the following Exercitations; wherein you will find, we have at large examined,
how far these Principles will support and warrant such Disobedience and
Separation.

The First QUESTION. Whether we are Bound in Conscience to Obey our Rulers,
when we are not satisfied the Laws are for our Good. Seeing, the Apostle says
(Romans 13. 4.) The Ruler -- is the Minister of God to thee for Good -- wherefore
we must needs be Subject.
The Argument for the Negative.
THe strength of the Argument for the Negative, as it is hinted and scattered,
especially in some late Books, seems to be thus.

The Laws of Rulers bind the Conscience only as they are God's Arg. Contr
Ministers: And they have no Authority from God to make Evil Laws, or any Laws
that are not for the Good of the Subject; being God's Ministers only for our
Good. Consequently, such Laws having none of God's Authority, cannot bind the
Conscience; or we are not in Conscience bound to obey them.

The Question Stated, and the Argument Retorted.

Rulers may be supposed to be of three sorts: First, Such as have no stated and
known Laws, but govern only by Personal Command. 2 d, Those that have Laws, but
such as themselves make, by their own single and absolute Power. 3 d, Such as
are to Govern by Laws, which are first chosen or consented unto by their People

Now, in case the first sort, not regarding either Reason or Equity, make their
Will their Law, to hurt and destroy their People; or the second sort, impose
(as Nebuchadnezzar or Pharaoh) impious or grievous Edicts: or the last sort,
shall slight their wholesome Laws, (the acknowledged Measures of Rule and
Right) and use only an Illegal Arbitrary Power against public Safety,; and to
the Injury of their Subjects. In all these Cases, indeed, great Authors speak
hard words. In Tyranno nihil ordinatum a deo. Qui perdendae reipublicae animum
gerit -- rex esse desinit. Rex non est Dei sed Diaboli, dum declinet in
Injuriam: that is, When he both forsakes the Just Rules of Law, and also acts
Injustice and Oppression, Contrary to Law. And in this sense, Dr. Tailor
acknowledges, He is the Minister of God to thee for Good, says St. Paul,
otherwise he is none of God's Minister, Cas. lib. 3. pa. 35.

Thus men may show their Learning and Discourse at large; but what is all this
to our own Hypothesis? if our Case be otherwise, as indeed it is, what are we
concerned in such Suppositions? Do our Kings pretend to govern with their
Personal Commands? or to make Laws without the people's Consent? or yet to an
Arbitrary Government, much less to oppress and destroy us; either contrary to,
or besides the Laws, quas vulgus elegerit, which our selves have chosen? and to
which they are sworn, according to our ancient Constitution; wherein is
supposed or employed, the universal agreement of the whole Community, for many
Ages.

Now is it not hard to say, while our King, as such, acts faithfully to God and
Man, and in discharge of his Oath and Trust, by the just and impartial
Execution of those Laws, which we our selves have chosen and desired, because
some of his scrupulous Subjects have gained a dislike of some of these Laws,
and that only in some small matters, is it not hard, yea very unconscionable to
conclude hence, that our King is no Minister of God; and such his Laws are No
Laws; and we are not in Conscience to Obey or Regard them: or to transfer the
imagined Faults of the Law upon our Rulers; or their Faults upon the Law; or to
charge both, or either, without Cause; while the Government proceeds according
to the Laws of our own choice? and yet this is our very Case. And in such a
Case, show me that Learned, Wise or Good Man, that ever thundered out his
Sentence of Condemnation against the King and Government.

Bracton indeed is our Ancient and Renowned Lawyer; and because his words may
be thought pertinent, (as they are severe) and are much insisted on, we shall
set them down at large; and then we shall easily perceive how far they concern
our present Circumstances; he says much, indeed, to magnify, but nothing to
question or quarrel the Laws, or the Execution of them.

His words are these, besides many more to the same purpose.

Attribuit rex regi quod lex attribuit ei, viz. dominationem and potestatem.
Non est enim rex ubi dominatur voluntas, et non lex, lib. 1. fol. 5.

Potestas sua juris, and non injuriae -- exercere igitur debet rex potestatem
Juris, sicut dei vicarius and minister in terra quia illa potestas solius dei
est; potestas autem injuriae diaboli and non dei, and cujus horum opera fecerit
rex, ejus minister erit, cujus opera fecerit. Igitur dum facit Justitiam,
vicarius est regis aeterni, minister autem. Diaboli, dum declinet ad injuriam
-- Rex -- Tyrannus dum populum sibi creditum violenta opprimit dominatione
temperet igitur potentiam suam per legem, quae fraenum est potentiae. Nihil
proprium imperij quam legibus vivere, Lib. 3. fol. 107, 108.

Perhaps, it may be said, Nothing more is intended by these Quotations, but to
secure us against Arbitrary Government. Be it so. But give us Reason then for
the present use of them, in such a nick and crisis as this. Has not his
Majesty given us sufficient assurance, that he will ever govern us by the Laws
of the Land? or do we find any Cause to Complain of the contrary? Is not this
an Engine to cast the Waters (or rather the Fire) of Jealousy upon the Common
People? Is it not an unseasonable and slye Insinuation (not to say an Evil and
Scandalous Reflection) upon the Government.

Certainly, the present Grievance of such as are dissatisfied with the
Government, is not Tyranny, Oppression and Arbitrary Power Contrary to Law, but
Government according to Law, viz. the Execution of the Laws.

2. But let us come a little nearer to the Argument, and we shall find it as
strong to the Sense of its Author; as it is to our Case. It does by no means
answer the size of their own Notion: and makes the Argument of the Apostle to
conclude a great way short, or beyond their own Mark. They plead (to serve
another Turn, as you will find upon the Second Question) that the Apostle
requires Subjection, and explains his Subjection by Non-resistance, and not by
Obedience, or doing what is required by Law. And therefote if we do not resist
the Power, though we do not actually obey, we do what the Apostle enjoins.

Therefore, if when the Laws are not for our Good, the Apostle's Inference be
of no force, his Injunction does not bind us. That is, We are not bound to be
Subject, but we may Reject. For the Apostle commands us to be Subject, and they
say, He means by Subjection, Non-resistance.

Now these Objectors themselves confess, That Subjection is a necessary Duty:
and on no hand would be thought to allow Resistance. Yet it is plain, this their
own Argument, from the Apostle's words, you see, does first of all and more
directly take away Subjection, and allows Resistance, against their own sense,
before it can gratify them with Liberty to Disobey, which they contend for.
And therefore, if consonant to themselves, they must confess this their great
Argument is fallacious.

This might suffice. But lest I should seem only to slur this esteemed
Argument, and be afraid to encounter it in earnest; and the rather that I
might vindicate the Apostle, and evince the Grounds of Christian Obedience
according to his excellent Doctrine satisfactorily, I shall apply my self to a
direct and more distinct Consideration of this Argument against the Necessity
of Obedience: and all along endeavor to accommodate my Reason and Discourse,
as near as I can, to our own Case. I shall reduce what I have to say against
the Argument to two Heads.

1. I shall show, that the true Force of the Apostle's Argument is, herein,
Over-seen, and made to rest where he never intended it.

2. And Secondly, That the Sense of the Apostle's words, upon which their
Argument is grounded, is grossly mistaken.

SECT. I. The True Force of the Apostles Argument Over-seen; and made to rest
where he never intended it.
THe chief Argument for our Obedience is intended in the first words of the
Apostle's Proposition, he is the Minister of God, as they are distinguished
from the Latin words, to thee for Good; as is more plainly expressed by the
Syryac Translation Minister dei, sed tibi in bonum. But this is little heeded,
though it be congruous to the Scope and Reason of the Apostle's whole Discourse
upon this Point. We must, says he, be Subject: Romans 13, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Why? because, he is the Higher Power, verse. 1. Because All Power is of God,
appointed of God. The Ordinance of God. Our Ruler, and God's Minister. i. e.
One that wears God's Image, God's Name, God's Sword, Minister and vicarius dei,
as the words of our Law are, plainly alluding to these of the Apostle: Thus we
see, the Argument used by the Apostle, takes its strength from the Fountain of
Humane Authority, and not from the End of it, as this Argument would insinuate.

2. Indeed the Apostle notes also, the great End of all Authority; and assures
us, it is appointed for our Good: and this is a very great Encouragement of
Subjection and Obedience, that the Wise and Good Governor of the World, has
appointed his Ministers to rule us for our Good: and worthy of a better
Acknowledgment than it usually obtains. But who sees not, that the Apostle
intends this Consideration rather as a Motive to our Obedience and Subjection,
than a Condition of the Obligation.

We must needs be Subject, partly (if you will) because he is a Minister
ordained for our good; but principally and chiefly, because he is the Minister
of God, he is a Minister to us for Good: this indeed commends Obedience to us
as matter of Prudence, rather than Conscience. Therefore observe it, that he
might effectually superside this Sophism, and fit his Argument beyond this
Quirk and fine Subtilty, he repeats the very words for the more direct
Obligation of Conscience [He is the Minister of God] and omits the words
before, viz. [to thee for Good] the very words they ground their Argument upon.
He is, says he in this very same Verse, the Minister of God, an Avenger, etc.
and thereupon immediately concludes, Wherefore we must needs be Subject, not
only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. As if he had said, Not only for
Wrath, because he is an Avenger, to execute Wrath; but because he is the
Minister of God for Conscience Sake.

Thus, if otherwise there might have been a Doubt, where the Apostle intended
the force of his Argument, whether upon the first, or last part of his
Proposition, the Apostle himself has resolved us, and the Ground of that Doubt
is gone.

Yet supposing we could admit that the Force of the Apostle's Argument does
rest upon the latter words [to thee for Good] unless our Sense of these words,
be the same with the Apostle's, we are still deluded with a gross Fallacy.

This therefore is next to be considered, what the Apostle means by [GOOD] in
this Text? And whether we do not Mistake his Meaning, and argue from a wrong
Sense: and Abuse of his words. This is my other, and my chief Exception to the
Argument.

SECT. II. Of the True Sense of this Expression, [To thee for Good.]
NOthing can be rightly concluded from these words beyond their intended and
true Meaning. And seeing the Argument rests here, it is necessary we should
have a right Notion of the Goodness the Apostle speaks of.

1. It Is evident he does not intend a particular and private Good, especially
in prejudice of the general and Public Good: For this Cause, says he, pay
you Tribute and Custom; and these, I think, but few reckon to their particular
Advantage.

2. Neither can we understand the Good here, to be a Good by Accident only: the
Law and Government has a direct Tendency to the good of the whole Community,
and every Member of it, yet by Accident it may be prejudicial to some good Man,
and ought so to be to all Wicked Men: a Terror to Evildoers. And indeed, our
Rulers, even then, when they are Avengers of Wrath, upon such, are the
Ministers of God to us for Good. We Conclude, the Apostle must intend, Salus
populi, or the Public Good, which is the proper Effect of, and directly flows
from a right Use of Government, upon the whole Body of the Commonwealth, and
consequeutly upon every particular person as he a Member of that public Body.

Now, if you imagine the Good we may expect from Government, to be either a
private good, or our own particular Ease and Satisfaction (which we may account
our good, without regard to, or in prejudice of the public good) or the Evil
which accidentally falls from good Government, upon the Disobedient; to be
contrary to the Good in the Text; we abuse the Apostle, and deceive our selves;
for you see this Good consists with our private Loss, by Tribute and Custom,
and with the execution of Wrath and Evil upon Evildoers. And yet
notwithstanding both, our Rulers are Ministers of God to us for Good.

3. But this offers a Third Distinction, somewhat more direct to our purpose.

This Good may be supposed, either in the Matter of the Laws whence they are
said to be Good Laws. Or with respect to the Execution of the Laws.

1. The First, namely, the Goodness of the Matter is only intended by the
present Objection. But cannot possibly be thought to be the Good which the
Apostle intended. Read his whole Discourse here, and you shall not find one
word bordering upon the Goodness of the Laws. This the Apostle presumes; that
the Laws were good. And gives us an excellent instance and Example of his
Modesty, not rashly to Judge the Laws; or without plain Evidence, to call them
into question. So their specious Argument when all is done finds no place in
the Text.

2. For nothing can be well more plain and evident, then that this Text only
speaks of that Good, which is the Effect of, and follows the just Execution of
the Laws Good, Natural, Civil, Moral and Spiritual: the Defense of our Persons
and Estates: the keeping of the Peace: the punishment and Reformation of
Wickedness, and Vice: and the Maintenance of True Religion and Virtue: as
Interpreters generally agree upon the place.

In praecedente membro potestatem, hic potestatis distributionem and (...), a
deo esse testatur. Bez. in verb.

Yea, the same is manifest from the whole Context: the Text affirms he is the
Minister of God to us for good. How so? No otherwise, but as he executes the
Laws impartially: and is thereby a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to them
that do well. Again, therefore will thou not be afraid of the Power? do that
which is good; for he is the Minister of Verse. 3, 4, 5.
God to thee for Good: but if thou do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he
bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger, to
execute Wrath upon him that does Evil. And then concludes upon the whole,
Wherefore we must needs be subject, etc.

Now I hope, the Objectors, to say no more, need not boast of their Advantage
from this Text.

SECT. III. Of the Judge of the Goodness of the Laws.
BUT suppose we should also grant, that the words do extend to the Good of the
Matter of Laws. May it not be doubtful, whether the Laws be good or not? And if
this be the Controversy betwixt the Rulers and the People, how shall it be
determined? There seems to be a Necessity to resolve this Point, before it be
drawn into Practice, one way or other.

The Question then is, When the goodness of the Laws is disputed, who shall be
the Judge, those that should be the Doers of the Law, or the Makers of it? Here
it seems reasonable, that seeing, as you heard, the public good is the proper
intendment of all Laws, and that our Legislators are Public Persons, and of
Public Capacities, and Conversation, the Advantage should lie on their Part;
especially, when the matter of Humane Laws clasheth not with the Divine: at
least, is not so evidently against the Law of God, as Obedience to the Laws of
Men, is required by the Law of God. For we must ever obey the Laws of our
Rulers; but when, by so doing, we shall Violate GODS Laws. So that our clear
Knowledge of God's Laws, in that very Point, is supposed in order to our
Warranty to disobey Man 's. This Rule is positively allowed and expressed by
Mr. Baxter himself, as well as all other Learned Men, that have considered the
Point.

But I shall hence take occasion to discuss the Matter more amply; and I shall
therefore, first Distinguish, and then State the Question, as I intend to
handle it, and then pursue it.

1. It Is agreed, that the Matter of a Law, may be either Evil, per se, i. e.
when it is contrary to the Moral or Positive Law of God; or only inexpedient,
though, in genere lawful. For the Apostle acknowledges, that some things are
lawful, that are not expedient. All Things (says he) Are Lawful for Me; but
All Things are Not Expedient.

2. As to the first kind; it is also agreed, that if the Matter of the Law be
Evil, per se, at least so evidently, against God's Law, as the Command of
Obedience therein is evident, the Subject is bound to judge it Evil, and
against God's Law: and to Obey God rather than Man. As Tol. in loc. Ut si aliud
jubet proconsu, sic si aliud Imperator aliud Imperator; obediendum est
Imperatori, aliud Deus jubeat, etc.

Man's Laws, whose Matter is against God's Law (as St. Aug.) are really No
Laws, and cannot obliege us: but the Reason of it ought to be weighed. It is
not properly or immediately, because such Laws are against the public good (as
the Argument supposes) this indeed ought to be the End of all Laws: but the
Formality of the Evil of Laws, lies in their Contrariety to God's Laws. That,
chiefly makes them sinful. And they are therefore void, and not binding,
because God has a prior Obligatiou upon us by his own Law, contrary thereunto,
who is in the first place to be obeyed.

But if the Law of our Prince, upon the reason of a prior Obligation cannot
bind us; much less can a Law, we unwarrantably put upon our selves, though it
be the Solemn League and Covenant.

3. As to the second kind: it is also agreed, that God does not allow any
Legislators to impose and require any thing in their Laws, that is inexpedient,
and not conducing really to public good; though it be not directly contrary to
the Word of God; for they are entrusted with Salus Populi, and the good of the
public, is the only End of all Government.

Quod necessarium non habet conjunctionem cum fine publici comodi non potest
praecipe lege humana. Suarez.

But impious and inconvenient, have not the same Latitude, neither can we
safely argue from one to the other. Indeed, every thing that is impious is
inconvenient; but not e contra. Laws whose Matter is impious, cannot bind us,
are indeed No Laws: But it does not follow, that Laws in some respect
inconvenient, are not to be observed when made, though they ought not to have
been made, or ought to be altered. The Reason is, because the Matter of such
inconvenient Laws may not be against the Law of God: God may not have before
concerned himself with it, in specie, one way or other; but has left it to his
Ministers amongst indifferent things undetermined: And though they are Men, and
may err in the Application of them, and not observe exactly Isidore's Rule, Lex
erit conveniens, etc. Yet it does not follow, these Laws lose their Force, or
the Ruler his Office, but that he is the Minister of God still.

4. Now we are arrived at the very Question, Who is to be the Determining Judge
in the Case of mere Expediency: and in this case, how far the Subject is bound
to acquiesce and obey.

Indeed, some have objected the Unlawfulness, and others, the Doubtfulness of
some Matters in our own Laws. But these have been abundantly answered, and
baffled over and over again, by very many Pious and Learned Men, especially
Bishop Sanderson and Dr. Faukner; therefore in those two Cases, I refer my
Reader that desires Satisfaction, to those Excellent Authors.

The only considerable Doubt, that I find amongst some of our subtilest
Dissenters, is touching things Inexpedient; and as I said, our Question here
is, who shall finally Judge of these. To which I betake my self.

SECT IV. Who is the Proper Judge of the Expediency of the Laws.
THE Question is, Who shall Judge whether the Laws be Expedient or not, the
Rulers or the People? I mean, so to Judge, as to determine whether they are fit
to be observed or not.

Obj. On the Peoples behalf, it is urged, That they have a Judgment of
Discretion: by which they ought to judge of the Reasonableness of their own
Actions, and consequently of the Laws that require their Obedience

Answ. It Is confessed, a Judgment of Discretion, is the Right and Liberty of
all Mankind. Yet this Liberty of Judgment, is twofold, either Natural, and at
large: or Civil, as bounded and restrained and limited by our relation to our
Rulers and Society; and their Concern and Interest in us. I have a Liberty at
large to go to LONDON, or not; to go thither when I please: but if I have
promised to come thither at such a day, and not before, my Liberty of going
thither is restrained by that Civil Obligation, I have put upon my self.

To apply it. Every man, doubtless, has Liberty, Reason and Power, to judge of
the Law as it is, or as he apprehends it: and indeed, it seems impossible he
should do otherwise: i. e. he must think as he thinks. So that, if the Law be
Evil, and he know it to be so, he must so judge of it: if it be only
inexpedient, and not otherwise Unlawful, he must judge it to be just so. And
thus he may use his Judgment or Discretion, about the Matter of the Law, as a
Reasonable Creature, and of Common and Natural Right.

Yet he has a Judgment of Discretion too, in a Politic and Civil Sense, as he
is a Reasonable Citizen and Subject. And here, he has not the like extensive
and unhounded Liberty. For his Reason is now limited, by his State and
Relation, by which he is concerned with his Relatives, and they, in him. And he
may thence see Reason, to make another Judgment of Expediency, at least, both
of the Laws and the Necessity of Obedience. Now he ought to judge, that he is
in a State of Subjection and Communion: That public Order and Peace ought to
be valued beyond a little private Satisfaction: That God's Ministers are the
proper Judges of what is fit and expedient with respect to the Public
Advantage; that may sometimes disagree with his private Interest: That God
himself Commands our Obedience, and has not limited us to things Expedient.
And that while we Obey his Ministers, we obey God himself. And that, though we
see no Convenience in the things required, yet our Governors may; and in that
Case, the less Reason we discern in the Matter of the Law, if not against God's
Word, the purer is the Honor and Obedience we yield to our Rulers, and to God
himself: and it need not be styled implicit, blind and brutish Obedience, that
has all this Light and Reason to guide it.

Lex nullo privato commodo, sed pro communi utilitate conscripta, ideo in ipsa
Constitutione ista Consideranda sunt. Quia cum leges institutae sunt, non erit
liberum arbitrium judicare de ipsis, sed oportebit judicare secundum ipsas.
Isidor. 2 Stymol. Which my Lord Coke highly applauds. Whence we find the
Judgment of the People, touching Laws, is distinguished. When they are once
published we may not judge of them, but we must judge according to them; as more
anon.

So likewise their Discretion is altered, or at least limited by the
definition which our Law books give of it discretio est decernere per legem
quid sit justum. At least, it is our Discretion, not to judge the Laws
themselves unjust, without very evident Proof: and not at all Inconvenient so
as to refuse to observe them, if they be not evidently unjust.

But of this also more distinctly in the following Sections.

SECT. V. If we may Judge of Lawfulness, yet not of Expediency.
Objection.

THE strongest Argument on the Peoples behalf, now follows to be examined: It Is
grounded upon our Concession, and is this; You allow the Subject Liberty to
judge of the Lawfulness of things required by Law; what Reason can be given,
why they should not equally judge of the Expediency of them?

Ans. The Reason of the Difference is plain. God is Lord Paramount, to whom
all, both King and Subject, owe undoubted Obedience. Now, in his Laws, he has
antecedently determined what is Virtue and Vice, what is Duty and what is Sin:
and has so published his Mind and Will therein, that all may and ought to know
it; and take notice of it at their Peril. But he has not pleased to deal so
with us in matters of mere Expediency. These, he has left undetermined, and
devolved them upon the determination of Human Prudence, in the course of his
Ordinary Providence. So that when Man commands what God forbids, we must not do
it, because God has forbidden it. But when Man commands that which we judge
inexpedient, if not forbidden by God, we must do it, because God has not
forbidden it; and because our Superior commands it; whom God has required we
should obey, next to himself.

Now, that we may speak more plainly to this great Point; let us consider Laws
in Act and already made, and constituted: and Laws in Power, and not yet
enacted; but to be made.

SECT. VI. The Liberty of Judgment in the People, with respect to the Making of
Laws, The Writ Convenes them, Ad Faciendum and Consentiendum.
IN our most excellent Constitution, it is granted, That the People of ENGLAND,
have a very great Liberty of Judgment, for the Prevention of Evil or
Inexpedient Laws. But this Province being above my Sphere, I should not have
aspired to touch it, had I not been somewhat provoked to vindicate my self,
against the Charge of Impeaching the Liberty of the Subject in this kind. I
hope, that will excuse a small Adventure upon it: And I shall come off well, if
I have not need of Pardon, both for meddling with this politic Point, and (not
for straitning, but) too much enlarging the People's Privilege as to the
making of Laws.

This Privilege belongs to our People, both at large, and in their
Representatives in Parliament.

1. It is the Natural and Civil Right of all English Men, being liberi homines,
to use their Judgment of Discretion for the Choice of Wise and Good Men to
represent them in Parliament, in order to our having Good and Wholesome Laws,
free from Evil or Inconvenience: yea, and to inform them when assembled, and
chosen, what they conceive may be fit to be made a Law. And by the same Reason,
what is Inconvenient in any Law already in being, in order to the Altering or
Repealing of it. And no doubt, these things require a great deal both of
Judgment and Discretion too, both about Laws, either to be made, or already
constituted. And lastly, perhaps the Laws have allowed the People within the
Bounds of Law to make Petitions, at least by their Representatives (as well as
private Significations) to the foresaid purposes. If that be a good Rule in
Law, which my Lord Coke mentions: Extra Parliamentum nulla petitio est grata,
licet necessaria; in parliamento nulla petitio est ingrata, si necessaria.

2. But this Privilege is more perspicuous and ample in the People as they are
represented in Parliament. They are called together ad faciendum and
consentiendum, touching Laws to be made (ordinari de negotijs ante dictis) of
weighty Matters: Concerning the King, the State, and Defense of the Kingdom and
Church of England; as the Writ speaks. And the Sheriff is therein strictly
charged to do his Duty; lest through defect -- or by an improvident Choice,
dicta negotia infecta remanerent: The greater Matters of the King, Church and
Kingdom remain undone.

Hence it is necessary that a Wise Election be made, and Discreet Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses be sent to Parliament, where they are to use all their
Judgment and Discretion in order to such Laws, as may be beneficial to the
Public, and consequently good and expedient. And as none but Discreet Persons
are therefore to be chosen, so unless, when chosen, they may exert their
Discretion and Judgment in Parliament, they seem to be chosen to no great
purpose.

I know the Learned Knight, Sr. R. F. would improve those words [ad faciendum
and consentiendum] in Diminution of the Power of the House of Commons. But if
they be not expressly and in terminis called to Consult; they seem to be so
plainly enough in the consequence of these very words.

I dare not affirm what the Extent or Meaning of the word, Faciendum, is: If
the Meaning of it be only, that they shall put the Laws in Practice, methinks
the word is mis-placed: For should not they Consent to the Laws, before they Do
them? Besides, their sending Home again, rather than their Calling to sit in
Parliament, seems rather to be fitted for that purpose, viz. the Execution of
the Laws: Yea, if they had nothing to do about making the Laws, why should they
be chosen, or called up at all? Why might not the whole Kingdom, without so
much Ceremony and Solemnity, be obliged ad faciendum in this sense, by a
general Publication, or Appointment of the Laws to be read in several parts of
the Country, as was anciently done? Or lastly, How comes it to pass, that the
KING in the Writ of Summons, intimates that the, dicta negotia, the great
Affairs for which they are called, will remain undone, if due Elections and
Returns be not made?

But they are called also, ad consentiendum: to Consent to the Laws that shall
be made. Well, but must not (usually) something be done by them, in order to
the making those Laws, to which they are thus to consent? whether it be the
framing of Bills or Petitions, I shall not determine. But I have heard, that our
Laws are Ld-Coke.
usually grounded upon such Bills or Petitions: and I have greater Authority
for it than Sr. R. F.

However, they are called to Consent: and if this be not in terminis to
Consult, it suffices, if their Consent be necessary to the making of our Laws;
for then their Consent here, does not suppose the Laws already made, but to be
made. For I know not, that their Consent is ever signified, as they are a
House, after the Laws are made; they are usually Prorogued or Dissolved upon
passing the Bills.

It is bold to say that ever the English Laws were made without the previous
Consent of the People, some way or other sufficiently expressed.

Leges cum fuerint approbatae consensu utentium, and sacramento Regum
confirmatae mutari non possunt nec distrui, sine communi consensu and consilio
eorum etc. Bracton, li. 1. c. 2. Whence the Name Parliament implies Parlizing,
as J. Jenkins notes: And accordingly Spelman's Definition of a Parliament is,
Parliamentum est solemn colloquium omnium ordinum Regni Authoritate Regis, ad
consulendum statuondumque de negotijs Regni indictum.

There is no Act of Parliament but must have the Consent of the Lords, the
Commons, and the Royal Assent, as it appears by Records and our Books. Coke
of Parliaments.

It Is certainly now too late to say, Laws may be made Without the Consent of
the Commons in Parliament. Is it not affirmed to be the Glory of the English
Liberty, that no Laws bind us but what are made by our selves. See over the
Style of our Statutes; anciently, they seem to have been made upon the
Petition; and of late, with the Advice and Authority of Parliament.

In Ancient Time all Acts of Parliament were in the Form of Petitions, as my
Lord Coke observes; but both imply an Antecedent Consent in the People.

Yet though, I like not the mentioned Knight's Reasoning or Design very well,
give me leave by the way to remark, that his Learned and Smart and Bold
Antagonist, seemed somewhat transported to another Extreme, when his Argument
tempted him to make a Bill of Exclusion of the King and the Bishop out of the
Fifth Commandment. For the Decalogue, has been hitherto taken as the Summary
of the Moral Law, to which, as to their Fountain-Heads, all Moral Duties are
reducible: and consequently, all the Moral Parts and Precepts in the
Scriptures, besides, are but Expositions of those Ten Words. And I cannot
remember that any other Person does (and I am sure I cannot my self) reduce
Honor and Obedience to the King or the Priest, so often enjoined in the Word
of God to any of the Ten Commandments, but to the Fifth; at least, so directly
and intelligibly, as to that.

But to return, and apply this Discourse. If the Consent of the Commons be
necessary in order to the making our Laws; this Consent is supposed to be
rational, and to be expressed with due Liberty: therefore they must Debate, and
at least Consult with themselves, and if occasion require, Confer also, and, as
it were, Consult with the Lords. And consequently, it is confessed, they are to
use their Judgments about the Lawfulness and Fitness of the Matter of Laws: And
they are therefore entrusted, from all parts of the Kingdom, to see that such
Laws, and no other, are to be made, but what are expedient, and for the
public Good: or as they are excellently described and limited by Isidor, in
the place so much celebrated by my Lord Coke, and commended as a Rule for all
Parliaments to follow. Erit lex honesta, justa; possibilis, secundum naturam
and secundum consuetudinem patriae, temporique conveniens, necessaria and
utilis, manifesta quoque ne aliquid per obscuritatem incautum captione
contrudat, nullo privato commodo, sed pro communi civium utilitate conscripta;
ideo in ipsa constitutione ista consideranda sunt; quia cum leges institutae
fuerint, non erit liberum arbitrium judicare de ipsis, sed oportebit judicare
secundum ipsas.

SECT VI. When Laws are once made, we ought to rest satisfied with their
Convenience. Many Reasons for it.
I Know not that any thing can be added to the Conditions of Good Laws, which
are given us by Isidore. These, we see, are to be considered, in ipsa
constitutione, while the Laws are making: that is, by the Legislators. Whether
they be convenient -- and pro commune civium utilitate, or for the public
good. But when they are once instituted, there is left no liberum arbitrium, no
liberry to judge of them, but it behooves every one to judge according to them,
and how to observe them.

When the Laws are once made, the People at large, (among whom the Parliament
Men themselves, when dissolved, are to be numbered) are to acquiesce in them,
and the Convenience of them, and to put them in practice, else they are made to
no purpose. And whatever Liberty men may naturally assume, to judge of the
Fitness of such Laws, as they are Citizens and Subjects, in this their Civil
Capacity, they are not to be Judges but Doers of the Law.

Do not we choose Discreet and Wise Men, and send them to Parliament for this
very purpose, to consider what is Expedient to be made a Law? Do not we devolve
our own Power of Judgment in this Case, upon our Representatives, and trust
them with it by our very Election? If we give them not this, we give them
nothing. Yea, we have thereby put them into the Place, and made it their Office
and Duty, to Judge for us. And the Wise men of the Kingdom, by our Act and
Consent are together to consult what is best, and have thereby infinite
Advantages to judge of public Conveniences, beyond the rest of the people
scattered up and down the Kingdom: Besides, it is an evident part both of the
Natural and Civil Honor due to our Lawmakers, and Rulers, to submit our
Judgments to their Determinations in matters of mere Order and Convenience: and
an absolute Necessity for Peace and the public Good, obliges us to it.

As to our Case; When the Laws are made, our Lawmakers, whom we entrusted for
that purpose, have already judged them Convenient. Now, what Reason have we to
except against them, if they be not against the Law of God? If you say (as some
do) the Civil Authority has made Laws in the Matters of Religion? it is well
known, they are also enjoined by the Spiritual Power: If others are offended at
the Ecclesiastical, the same things are required by the Civil Laws. And if one
of these Powers be not thought Sufficient, you have both: and indeed, in each
of them, you have your selves: For according to our excellent Constitution, you
your selves have determined in your Representatives, both in the Parliaments
and in the Convocation, what is Convenient both in Church and State: And if any
are dissatisfied with the Constitution, and would have that Altered to please a
Humor, they are scarce tolerable.

All the Commons in the Realm are represented in Parliament by the Knights and
Burgesses, Coke's Instit. p. 4, 158. And Sr. Thom. Smith says, Every English
Man is intended to be there present either in Person, or by Procuration; and
the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every Man's Consent. And no Laws
are made but in this sense they are said to be, Quas vulgus elegerit, according
to the Old Law.

If you say, The Rulers ought to judge what is expedient in making the Laws;
this is nothing, if the Subject has Power yet to judge them inexpedient, and
to refuse to obey. Say, what shall give the binding Sentence as to practice?
the Law or private Opinion? That is, plainly, Who shall Govern, the Rulers, of
the People? For certainly, they govern, that rule, practice and finally
determine what is fit to be done; whether they be Children, or Parents;
Servants, or Masters; Wives, or Husbands; or Subjects, or Princes.

If you say, The Subject ought to yield for Wrath's sake, this places
Government only in strength: but then, where is Conscience, where is
Christianity? Is it not like Christian Meekness, and Peaceable Subjection, and
Self-denial, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, to conclude; that God has
provided for the Order and Quiet of the World: he has therefore stated things
necessary himself: and for things of lesser moment and Expedience, he has
ordained Government, to prevent or end all Controversy.

The sum is, the Judgment of Discretion about God's and Man's Laws. And the
Nature, End and Use of Government, if well considered, may effectually convince
us, that, so far as Man's Laws contradict not God's, though we should imagine
something in them not so convenient as we could desire, yet they are to be
submitted unto as the Rule of our Practice, and in Conscience of Gods
Ordinance, and Command, and of the public Good and our Duty to be obeyed: And
we are to rest satisfied with this; that our Laws are made by the Higher
Powers; who are of God; ordained of God; the Ordinance of God; and our Rulers
and Governors, (and such as we our selves chose to make Laws for us;) and the
Ministers of God; and for our good too; viz. for public Order, Safety and
Quiet; Wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but Conscience
sake.

SECT. VII. Inexpediency of Law overballanc'd, expedient to Obey.
YET once more, Suppose we could allow the people at large to judge the Laws
already constituted; and to have power left them, to discern their
inexpediency, and to suspend their Obedience in such a Case: This still
acknowledges the matter it self to be indifferent, and the practice only in
such Cases, not so fit as we would desire.

Now, it is a clear Rule, that, that is so inconvenient or inexpedit, may be
found; by a considering and discerning Judgment, upon the whole, to be
expedient. And the matter to change its quality; if over-ballanc'd by a greater
Inconvenience on the other side: as Lead it self becomes light, when a greater
weight is in the other Scale.

This Rule is so undoubted, that it sometimes extends to things positively
commanded by God himself. For, when a Matter morally necessary, shall be
neglected for the practice of a positive Duty of God's own Worship, the present
Practice of such Duty, becomes not necessary, yea sinful, in the Judgment of
our Savior and great Lawgiver: Go and learn what that means. I will have
Mercy, and not Sacrifice. I prefer Mercy, though it be but to thy Neighbor's Ox,
to my own Service: yea, in that case, I prohibit attendance on my self, and my
own Worship: I will not have Sacrifice.

Apply this seriously, and admit the Law requires something that in it self and
singly considered, is inexpedient: Is there nothing in thy refusing Obedience,
more inconvenient, and of more Evil Consequence than that supposed
Inconvenience, which the Law requires? What if our not yielding to an
Inexpedient in the Law may endanger, if not prevent and frustrate the Real Good
of God's Ministry and Government, we so much contend for; and bring greater
positive Mischiefs upon us? Now, has not God given us the Judgment of
Discretion to balance Inconveniences, to weigh uprightly one against another,
and to judge and determine what is best and safest to be done? And indeed, to
admit of the less Inconvenience, as reasonable and wise men, for the prevention
of greater?

1. To help us in this Comparison, let us First consider, that the Law is to be
understood to be common and general, and the Inconvenience to concern all
others, as well as our selves: And if so, Why should not all others observe and
boggle at the Inconvenience as well as our selves, and then judge wisely, what
will be the Consequence?

2. Secondly, It Is a Rule that seems not to be questioned by any that have,
with any tolerable Learning, disputed this Point; that when the Law requires
that which we judge inconvenient, if not forbidden by the Law of God, it is not
to be disobeyed, if that Inconvenience cannot be Omitted sine scandalo vel
contemptu: without Scandal or Contempt. The Reason is, because the Scandal of
our Brother (as St. Paul teaches us) and the Contempt of Authority, is more
inexpedient, than the Practice of a bare Inexpedient required by Law.

But such Disobedience in a Matter of mere Inexpediency, must needs be
notoriously guilty of both.

1. It cannot be without Scandal to others: For such our Disobedience must of
necessity Scandalize others, especially if Conscience be pretended; because it
naturally tempts and induces others, at least, if we have any influence upon
them, either by our Parts, or Reputation, or Interest, or Authority, or any
other Obligation, to break the Laws, after our Example, as is too too manifest
by daily Experience.

2. And for Contempt of Authority, we can hardly be guilty of more or greater,
than by refusing to Obey the Laws, because we judge them Unfit or Inexpedient:
For, if we forbear to speak Evil of Dignities, this is certainly to Despise
Dominions. And declares openly, that we account our Rulers Weak or False,
Ignorant or Malicious. i. e. Knaves or Fools, that made the Laws.

3. Yea, this Principle, if pursued and practiced, is so highly injurious to
Government it self, both ways, both by Scandal and Contempt, that it plainly
dissolves the Power and Obligations of all Laws; for none can secure us, that
what is said against one or two Laws, (that they are inconvenient) shall not be
charged on the rest. It makes the Prudence of the People the only Law to
themselves; for thus a Law, to them is no Law, if they judge it inexpedient.
Therefore it sets the Conscience at so wild a Liberty, that when it shall be
improved a little further by fcrupulous People, it must needs end in perfect
Ataxy and a general Distraction.

4. Nay, has it not already sadly divided us? loosned all Duty and Respect to
Governments? wasted the Conscience of due Obedience? and enervated our Laws?
and disturbed the Order, and broken the Quiet and Peace both of our Church and
State? And do we not see a Black Cloud arising hence, and gathering upon the
Face of our Prosperity; darkning the Age; threatening all the Good we expect
from God's Ministers; and even exposing our Constitution it self to all
imaginable Danger.

Yea, which is more sad yet; does it not seem to Eclipse and Obscure the
Brightness and Glory of our Profession; and hazard the very Light of our
Gospel; and the Removal and Loss of the best Religion (once restored, and often
preserved with Wonders of Providence) from us and our Posterity forever? and
the Readmission of such a Religion as we most fence against, and as you will
find but untowardly consisting, either with Liherty, Property or Piety.
Consider it sadly; for if this should happen, both we, and the Children unborn,
may have Cause, hereafter, and too late, to Curse, such Unwarrantable Nicenes
and Pernicious Scrupulosity.

5. Lastly; If all these Mischiefs are at too much distance, and we cannot see
so far off; Let me speak home to you that yet indulge to your selves this
Groundless Disobedience. Methinks your own present Inconveniences by it,
should be put into the Scale. Does not it render you obnoxious to Law and
Justice? You, perhaps, have hitherto escaped; but are you not liable every day
to have your Peace and Quiet and Possessions disturbed? Does not your
Disobedience to the Law expose your Persons and Families, as well as others, to
the Penalties of Law? Neither can you well expect it should be otherwise, if
you continue Obstinate, and refuse to obey it. For our Rulers are Ministers of
God to us for Good, and ordained on purpose to prevent the forementioned
Mischiefs; and therefore they must be a Terror to Evildoers; that is, all that
violate and regard not their Laws; and Revengers of Wrath upon all that do
Evil; especially such Evil, as if not suppressed, may undo all: Yea, are they
not, and do they not think themselves bound in Conscience, both of their Trust
and Duty, to God and Men, in Conscience of yours and the public Good, not to
suffer all to run to Confusion.

Perhaps you take it to be in your Choice, whether you will Obey or Suffer:
Deceive not your ^elves: God Commands you as well as Man; and certainly God's
Command reaches the Conscience whatever you dream of Man's. And you must
answer to God as well as to Man for your groundless Disobedience; especially
when, by it, you through away or hazard the Blessings and Talents he has put
into your Hands, and entrusted you withal: This is ungratefully to Despise the
Riches of his Goodness. God and Nature have given you a Law of
Self-preservation; and you have no Liberty to destroy your selves, by
neglecting your Duty to your self, and affronting his Providence.

No Man is so absolutely his own, but God, the King and Country, his Relations
and Dependents, have some Interest in him. Men that have Estates and Families,
and Parts and Capacities fitting them for their's and the public Service, may
not causlesly throw them away, or dispose of them, but when and as God calls
for them. And if the Law requires nothing of them, which God forbids; they
cannot, for any other Satisfaction, suffer their Estates to be wasted, their
Wives and Children to be distressed, their Lives to be sowred and obscured, and
their Parts and Capacities rendered Useless to God, their King and Country, by
the Choice of Punishment for their Disobedience.

Active Obedience, so far as lawfully you can, is necessary, even from the Word
of God Himself; were there no other Argument for it, but that of Wrath, viz.
Escaping Punishment. For we must needs be subject, even for Wrath's sake; and
the very Argument from Wrath, obliges the Conscience.

Now, all these considered, let me beseech you to reason this Point calmly by
your selves. You have had the Inconveniences of your Disobedience, laid
against some things inexpedient, as you suppose, required in our Laws. And you
say, you have a Judgment of Discretion: has not God given you this Judgment to
weigh these one against another? And do you not discern the Difference between
them? Certainly, the Matter being supposed in it self Indifferent, that is, not
any ways forbidden by God, the less inexpedient is eligible, and to be chosen
before the greater: Yea, as you have seen, it is comparatively expedient for us,
to obey the Laws that we think inexpedient, for the avoiding those greater
Mischiefs of Disobedience. And upon the whole, I can hardly imagine, that you
should still think it Fit, for a small Satisfaction to a Humor or a Scruple to
incur the guilt of so many, great and Real Evils, both upon your selves and the
whole Kingdom.

Let us, therefore, so manage our selves, that our Rulers may be Ministers of
God to us for Good indeed: which must be obtained by a MEAMS contrary to the
Cause, of the aforesaid Evils, our unaccountable DISOBEDIENCE. That is, By a
Peaceable, and Cheerful, and Conscientious OBEDIENCE to them and to the Laws. I
speak as unto WISE MEN, Judge what I have said, and the GOD of PEACE give you
Understanding.

The Sum of the Answer is this. The Apostle's Words, as here insisted on, First
allow, what your selves condemn; RESISTANCE of our Rulers: Besides, you take
little of no Notice of that which is Argumentative in them, and place the Force
of his Argument where he did not intend it: For the Necessity of our Duty, lies
in the first words of the Proposition [HE IS the MINISTER OF GOD] and the later
words [TO THEE FOR GOOD] are rather a Motive to our Obedience. Further, should
we yield, that if the Laws be not FOR GOOD, the Obligation to Obedience
cease; yet you plainly mistake the Good which the Apostle intends; for it
is not the GOOD of the Matter of the Laws, but of the EXECUTION of them; and
thus his Argument is directly Against, and not for Disobedience. Again, should
we yet allow, that the GOOD of the Laws themselves, is here meant; yet it is
only the Good of Public Convenience, of which the RULERS, and not Private Men
are the proper Judges. Lastly, Suppose it were fit that Private Men might
Finally Judge of the Convenience and Inconveniency of Public Laws; yet they
are to Judge equally of the Convenience and Inconvenience of DISOBEDIENCE: And
if you Judge Righteous Judgment, you will certainly find, that the
Inconveniences of DISOBEDIENCE, do exceedingly overballance the supposed
Inconvenience of the Laws: And consequently, for the avoiding those greater
Evils, both Public and Private, that follow upon your Disobedience, Obedience
to the Laws that you judge inconvenient, in such a Case, becomes E^pedient, and
Good; and even by your own Argument, NECESSARY.

All which I hope has been sufficiently proved to the Satisfaction of the
Sober and Peaceable Dissenters.

Quest. II. Whether to be Subject in To. 13. be only, not to Resist the Powers;
or also Actively to Obey their Laws?
IN their new Politics, some seem to defend their Disobedience after this
manner. The Apostle, say they, requires, Subjection Arg.
indeed: but what is that to Active Obedience? He tells us he means, by
Subjection, Non-resistance: and we abhor Resistance though we do not Obey.

This is the best Argument of the modest and most moderate Dissenters; and I
hope they intend it for our Security: But certainly more is intended in the
Text. I would not be Uncharitable, or suppose that the wiser and better sort of
our Dissenting Brethren themselves, intend it so far, as thereby to enervate
the Apostle's Obligation to all Active Obedience: For, indeed some of them seem
to explain themselves otherwise. Yet because this is often hinted, and may
prove Prejudicial to Government, from the Intention of the Argument, if not of
the Persons that so familiarly use it, I have given them my following thoughts
about it, and Answer to it.

Answ. 1. Every Fallacy has its Verisimilitude or Likeness to Truth, otherwise
it could not be a Fallacy, that is, apt to deceive. I take the color of the
present, to lie in this. That when the higher powers requires any thing that is
Impious, even then, we must be subject; that is we must not resist the powers:
yet we must not actively obey their Wicked Commands. And this is so plain and
great a truth, that if we are Christians, we must Join in the Concession of it.
And in this Case our only duty is patiently to Suffer in Obedience to God. But
if this may be termed Passive Obedience, it must be so termed, with respect
only to Gods Law, which thus we do Observe, and not to Man's, which, for Gods
sake, we do not, dare Obey; but plainly Disobey.

Yet, if well considered, the Strength of this Objection rejects the too common
Abuse of it: We must in this Case, it is said, OBEY GOD, and not Man. But in
what Case? When, if we Obey Man, we should DISOBEY our God. And why then should
we Disobey God, but because God has declared his Will to the contrary; that
is, Has Commanded we should not do that thing which Man requires? For
consider, how do we in this Case Disobey Man, but by doing Contrary to Man's
Laws? Even so in the same Case, we Obey God only, by doing and observing God's
Laws? For Sin is the Transgression of the Law. And it is Convertible; where
there is no Law there is no Transgression.

Show us therefore, that Law of God which forbids any thing which our humane
Laws require; and in that case, but no further, content your selves with
Non-resistence, without Active Obedience. If you cannot, you do not obey God,
but plainly Disobey him, by refusing, on any other pretense whatsoever,
Actively, and Conscientiously to observe the Laws, both of our Church and
State; herein Non-resistance, or passive OBEDIENCE, cannot excuse you.

2. For Subjection is the Duty here expressly required; and the Apostle does not
tell us, that by Subjection, he intends Non-resistance only, or Exclusive of
Active Obedience. Yea, he assures us otherwise, and that he intends it in its
due Latitude. Subjection is denied two ways: by Opposition, and by simple
Disobedience: and the Apostle strikes at both these expressly. And Active
Obedience being more properly and the best Expression of Subjection, he is more
ample and express in his Argument against Disobedience. Indeed, he mentions
Resistance in Verse. 2. but not exclusively; for he insists upon Obedience and
Disobedience in the several following Verses, which he styles EVIL-DOING and
WELL-DOING, as will appear presently.

3. As for the Penalty of Damnation or Judgment, it yields us no Argument to
the contrary, whether we suppose it to be God's or Man's Judgment, or both, but
clearly confirms it. No doubt Resistance, whose parts are Sedition, Rebellion,
or any kind of Opposition, merits the Damnation or Judgment of God; for he that
Resists, resists God's Ordinance; and yet he that Causlesly Disobeyes God's
Ministers, provokes God too; and cannot be secure from Divine Judgment: For
Subjection, as such, and in its full Latitude, is to be yielded to God's
Ministers, even for Conscience sake; that is, as opposed to Resistance and
Disobedience; as the Apostle Argues, Verse. 5. after he had so explained
himself, and therefore if denied in any due part of it, we wound the
Conscience, and are guilty before God, and incur his Judgment.

But if it be Man's Judgment that is here threatened; this is more expressly
directed against Disobedience, under the Terror of the Sword, the Wrath and
Vengeance of God's Ministers; who bear not the Sword in vain, but are
Revengers, to execute Wrath upon all that do Evil, (Ver. 4.) or are
Disobedient; as truly, if not as severely, as, on those that resist God's
Ordinance.

4. But, if Simple Disobedience be found a Degree or part of this Subjection,
the Argument has no color from the Text: And indeed it is so very plainly,
both in the Reason of the thing, and the Apostle's Intention. First, one kind
of Resistance is, to Refuse to be Subject, as the Aethiop. renders the word in
the Text. Resistance, says Grotius, is a Military word: And Tol. reasons upon
it thus, Sicut Miles qui locum sibi a duce destinatum, duci resistit ipsiusque
ordinationi adversatur; as a Soldier which keeps not his place, resists his
Captain, and opposes his Command. And consequently Pisc. and Paraeus in loc.
Qui resistit: i. e. se subdure renuit, qui recusat obedire legi and edicto quod
a potestate procedit; modo lex sit justa. He which resists, i. e. refuses to
obey the Law or Edict of the Power, etc.

5. Accordingly the Apostle explains it himself after the same manner: For
otherwise what is the meaning of such Expressions as these are, which
immediately follow. He that Resists -- for Rulers are not a Terror to Good
Works, but to the Evil: Will thou not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is
Good. But if thou do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain.

Thus, the Apostle tells us what he means by Resistance, a Doing Evil, and a
not doing Good. What Evil, but that which the Law forbids? What Good, but that
which the Law requires? For Rulers, as such, take notice of no other Good, or
Evil. Neither did the Apostle so much as question those Laws, that then forbad
those Evils, and required that Good, which he supposes: for there was then no
occasion for it, as one says upon the place, as yet, non saeviebatur Romae in
Christianos: And Agrippa in Josephus notes, Nullos a Romany Magistratibus
missos ut bonis noceat. And agreeable hereunto, is the Apostle's whole
Discourse, wherein he does not observe the least Reason of scrupling Obedience
from the Matter of the Law: or of Suspicion, that their Obedience must be
Unwarrantable. Besides, you see what it was, that alone could secure them from
Punishment, namely, the Doing Good. And is not that something positive? if we
must do good, must not something be done? and if we do the good, that will
secure us from the Power, must it not be the very good thing, which the Law of
the Power requires? And he must have certainly an extraordinary Logic that can
conclude that, this Doing Good here, is a doing Nothing. i. e. a not doing the
Evil of Resistance. Again, If thou do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he
bears not the Sword in vain. What Evil? that of Resistance only? No
certainly, but that Evil, which the Law forbad. For the Sword would be born
very much in vain, if it should be drawn only against such as Resist the Power
in their sense; that is, by Violence and Opposition or Rebellion; thus the
Minister of God should rather Revenge himself than God.

6. Sixthly, This Argument is repugnant to the very Nature and End of all Law
and Government. Was it ever the Intention or Reason of a Law, either Negative
or Positive; that it should not, or need not be observed? Yea, the very Threats
and Penalties of the Law that we pretend to submit unto, intend we should
fulfill the Law, and not suffer the Punishment; and for that very purpose they
are annexed to the Law. And to the same purpose, are the Rewards of Obedience
proposed in a Law: and the Ministers of it are sent for the Punishment of Evil
Doers, and the Praise of those that do Well. That is, those, that perform what
the Law accounts WELL, and avoid what the Law reckones EVIL-DOING, or
DISOBEDIENCE.

And as this is the End of the Sanction of the Law, in the Threats and
Promises, so it is the very Reason of the preceptive part or the Command it
self: thus, When God himself gave forth his own Laws, his first and chief
Intention was, that Men should Obey those Laws, by doing what he requires, and
not doing what he forbids therein; and certainly not only by Not Resisting him,
in this strict Sense of Resistance the Argument insists upon. And thus
doubtless, the Ministers of God, after his Example, in all their Laws, intend
primarily, to have them observed: and God that enjoins our Subjection to them,
requires, that we Obey them, as his Ministers, in the same method, that he
requires Obedience to Himself. That is, By Doing what their Laws require, and
not only by not Resisting or REBELLING against them.

7. The Argument also prevents or frustrates the great use and benefit of all
Government: That is as the Apostle notes, the Public Good. He is the Minister
to us for Good. But now, suppose we should do all the Evil that is forbidden in
the Laws, and neglect to do all the Good toward God, the King, our Neighbor
and our selves. That the Laws require, only we do not resist Authority, what
Good do you think shall we reap from Gods Ministry? Will Non-resistance only,
will that secure us from all that Evil, and Compensate for all that good it is
beyond the Sphere of Imagination?

8. But to put the matter quite out of Countenance, the Apostle has
sufficiently explained himself in the very Text. And we are assured from his
own words, that he required more by Subjection, than this Non-resistance. for
he has given some plain instances, even of Active Obedience; and they are
prescribed also, as parts of that Subjection which he obliges us unto.
Wherefore, says he, we must needs be subject -- for this cause pay you tribute
also. Yea render to all their dues, (especially to Authority) Trihute, Custom,
Fear, Honor; and owe no man (especially to Authority) Tribute, Custom, Fear,
Honor, and owe no man any thing. and are not these more then bare
Non-resistance.

9. Therefore lastly we must conclude, this is but a Novell fancy, and refuge
of Figg-leaves to hide the Naked: And that by Subjection, here we must
understand Active Obedience, in the primary sense of the word; and intention of
the Text, as Beza's note is, Subjici i. e. Obedire Magistratui ejusque legibus
and edictis: to be subject, that is, to Obey the Magistrate, and his Laws, and
Edicts- And as Grotius adds usque ad aras. Another learned man upon the place,
as fully to our Purpose, glosseth non dicit, Obediat, honorem exhibeat, etc.
hae parts quidein sunt sed totum est Subjectio. Paraeus. i. e. The Apostle
does not say, Obey, and Honor, etc. These are parts indeed, but the whole is
Subjection. And the Apostle himself in another place, expressly explains his
Subjection, by Obedience. Be Subject to Principality's, etc. and Obey
Magistrates. Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind, or Admonish them, to be Subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to Obey Magistrates. that is, to show their
Subjection by their Obedience. Ut imperata faciant. Grot. And showing their
Obedience, by doing the things that are commanded, being ready or disposed (as
it follows) to every good work, or Duty required by their Governors. For as
that great Man infers, q. d. qui been and honesti vivere non recusant, libenter
parebunt Magistratibus, quippe qui ad humani generis conservationem ordinati
sunt. that is, those that do not refuse to live well and Honestly, will freely
and readily Obey Magistrates, seeing they are ordained for the conservation of
Mankind. i. e. are Ministers of God, to us for Good.

THE Postscript.
REFLECTION UPON THE Protestant-Reconciler.

SInce these Papers were in the Press, a Great Friend of the Dissenters was
brought to me, called; The Protestant Reconciler: The Book is a pleading for
Condescension in things Indifferent: And indeed, it is written with more
Exactness, Sobriety, and Strength, then any that I have met with upon that
Argument.

In this Book I find some Passages, let fall by the By, that are pertinent to
my purpose; and of Present Use and Advantage to both sides: These we should
take notice of: But for the main Drift and Scope of it, we need not at present
be much concerned about it; for it seems calculated for another Time, and
perhaps for other Persons, viz. a Parliament.

First, He assures us, he intends to plead more stiffly, and he hopes with more
Conviction for Submission to the Constitutions of the Church of England, then
he has done here for Condescension, pa. 59. Preface. He further tells them
roundly, That though it could be Lawful for the Dissenter to Refuse Obedience to
the things imposed, yet if it be not absolutely his Duty so to do, he cannot be
Excused for neglecting what is so expedient, for the Peace, Unity and Welfare
of the Church, and therefore highly Edifying, page 149. of the Book. Yea, he
adds, If Dissenters do not think it better that all the Evils (of Disobedience
and Schism) should ensue, then that they should Comply or bear with these Few
Ceremonies; then, must they in these matters Submit to the commands of their
Superiors. p. 22.

Thus, we have his Testimony, that if we know no Sinfulness, in the things
required, as he does not, we are in Conscience and Prudence Bound to Conform:
And that the moderate Dissenters do not believe any such Sinfulness, he
observes also as I have done, at least of late, (that is not insisted on (I
hope they are better satisfied in the Point now, then formerly) for the
Unreasonableness and Danger of Imposing indifferent and unnecessary Things,
bears the great stress of all their modern Pleas and Arguments, as my Author
witnesses.

I am persuaded, says he, in my Conscience, that such Considerations (which He
had noted out of Mr, Baxter's Book taken from heads distinguished from
Sinfulness) do more alienate the Minds of Men from that Submission which is due
to our Governors, and from communion with them, then all the Arguments they
have, or can produce against the Lawfulness of any of the Rites now practiced
in the Church, page 329.

Again, The same learned Author observes with me (page 3. of his Book) That the
Dissenters are very prone on all Occasions to cry out against Imposing of these
things as the Conditions of Communion -- but they say little of any weight or
moment to show it is utterly Unlawful under the present Circumstances, to yield
Obedience or Submission to the things imposed.

But here, I cannot forbear to wonder, that the same Author that makes this
Observation, uses the same Weapon in Favor of Dissenters. His main Point is
this, That Things Indifferent, which may he changed and altered without Sin --
especially under our present circumstances, ought not to be Imposed by our
Superiors as Conditions of Communion, etc. This is the Subject which he makes
the Scope and Business of his Treatise. Now, though I intend not to enter upon
this Argument, yet I must note the unseasonable pressing it under our present
Circumstances: And I am bold to say, it seems to be rather Clamor then
Scruple: Clamor without Reason; and a plain abetting the Error he observes in
others, and all to draw on his Designed Condescension, which yet no Body can
grant him.

1. For, even those that made the Law for Conformity, are themselves sub lege,
under that Law. And none have Power, out of Parliament (not now in being) to
Alter the Law. And though the same Persons that made the Law, be still our
Superiors, they are not now our Legislators, but only Doers, or at most but
Administrators of the Law, already made; and have no Power to Condescend in
these Matters, as his Phrase is. Of this, the Learned RECONCILER himself was
aware, though the Design of his Book would persuade to the contrary. I therefore
wonder, says he, at the Wickedness and Injustice of those Men, who clamor so
much against them, because such Condescentions are not immediately made: i. e.
because they do not change the Law which it is not in their Power to do, p. 9.

2. Yea, as the Conformist cannot Condescend to the Dissenter, by Altering the
Laws, so neither can he Meet him in the Abatement of his Conformity according
to them, without Breach of his Duty, and becoming a Dissenter himself, and a
Transgressor of the Laws; yea, a Violator of his Engagements, Promises and
Oaths. And if this Sentence be true, what would our Dissenting Brethren have us
to do? The Case is plain: If the things required be not sinful, They may and
Ought to come to us; but we cannot, there is a Great Gulf fixed, I say, we
cannot come to them. Certainly, in our present Circumstances, this is worthy
their saddest Meditations.

3. Hence, give me leave to observe, That supposing, as our late Pleas for
Condescension do suppose, that the things required are Indifferent, though
Unnecessary, the Face of the Controversy seems to look Otherwise than it did
heretofore; for indeed, the great Argument betwixt us is quite inverted.
Before, it was thus, on their side, when the Pretense was, That they could not
have Communion with us, Without Sin.

You acknowledge the Things in Controversy are in themselves Indifferent and
alterable, we believe they are Sinful. Therefore we cannot Ascend to you, but
you May and Ought to Condescend to us, and remove the Difference.

But now it is quite otherwise, on the Conformists side. He now pleads, You
acknowledge the Matters struck at, to be Indifferent (though you like them not)
We say, Though they are so in themselves, yet the Use of them is by the Law, etc.
made Necessary: You may come to Us Without Sin; We cannot, Without Sin, come to
You. Let the Fault, the Breach, the Schism, and all the Dread Consequences of
it, and Fears attending it, be laid no more at the Conformists Door.

4. To Conclude; Let me beseech the Protestant-Reconciler, seriously to reflect
upon his late Book; and consider, Whether he has pursued the True Point,
whereon our present Duty, and Peace, and Safety depends. He has very
industrously labored to lay Grounds for a Happy Accommodation, when we shall
have a Parliament and Convocation. But in the mean time, where are we? Our
Condition is deplorable; But what is the present Remedy? Would not half this
pains have bin better bestowed to Persuade Dissenters, that Union, Submission
to Authority, and the doing of our duty, is always necessary: and that we are
bound in Conscience to attend Gods Public Worship among us Established by Law,
seeing there is nothing there required, but what we may Lawfully Practice? and
that this is the only probable means, in Reason, Policy and Divinity: to
Scatter our fears, defeat our Enemies, and Secure us from Destruction?
Especially Considering, we know not Certainly when we shall have a Parliament,
and we know less, whether when we have a Parliament, they will see reason in
all that he has said, to Alter the Law, for their Satisfaction. And lastly,
that the question, what the King and Parliament ought to impose, does not so
much Concern us, as what is our Duty to do.

5. Yet I must not charge this our Reconciler with a total Omission of that
necessary Point; I have noted something already. And in his page 58, 59. we
find him asking some Pious, Seasonable and Argumentative Questions, of our
Dissenting Brethren; which, I heartily pray, they would seriously weigh, and
then answer, not in Word, but in Deed, and in Truth. Thus he accosts them in
the midst of his Many Arguments on their Behalf.

Here, let it be noted (says he) that those Arguments propounded from the
Example and Sayings of our Savior, against the Imposing of Indifferent Things.
I say, these Arguments fall, many of them, with more weight on the Dissenters,
provided they can show no Law of God plainly Forbidding their Submission to
these things.

For, let me ask them in the Spirit of Meekness these few Questions; Do they
prefer Mercy before Sacrifice, who will not submit to Rites and Circumstances,
or to the use of things, no where forbidden in the Word, to prevent Schism, and
all the Dreadful Consequences of it; but rather will cause their Superiors to
judge them Scandalous Resisters of Authority, and pertinatious Disturbers of
the Church's Peace? Are they Compassionate toward the Sheep, according to our
Lord's Example, who rather will Refuse to become Laborers in the Harvest, than
Suhmit to these Little Things, in order to their regular Performance of this
Blessed Work? Do they not Scandalize, and Contribute unto the Ruin of CHRIST's
Little Ones, who do involve them in a wretched SCHISM on the Account of things
which They may Lawfully Submit unto? Do they not shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against Men, who Forbid them to ENTER IN when they may? Do they not Impose
Heavy Burdens also, who say to their Disciples, Hear Not the COMMON PRAYER;
Receive not the SACRAMENT Kneeling; suffer not your Children to be signed with
the Sign of the CROSS; communicate not with that Minister who wears a SURPLICE,
or with the Church which Imposes any Ceremonies, or any Constitutions, but
concerning the Time or Place for Public Worship? If the good Shepherd should
lay down his Life for the Sheep, should not they lay down their Unnecessary
Scruples for their sakes? If Nothing does so scandalize Christ's Followers, as
to find their Teachers at Discord, can they act as his Disciples who are not
willing to procure Concord, and to avoid this Scandal by their Submission to
Things Indifferent in their own Nature, and not forbidden in the Law of God?

THE END.
BOOKS Printed for Jonathan Wilkins at the Starr in Cheapside, next Mercer's
Chapel.
SCOTIAE INDICULUM: Or the Present State of SCOTLAND: Together with diverse
Reflections upon the Ancient State thereof.

(...): Or a Philosophic Discourse of MAN; being the Anotomy both of his Soul
and Body. Wherein the Nature Origin, Union, Immaterality, Immortality,
Extension and Faculties of the One, and the Parts, Humors, Temperaments,
Complexions, Functions, Sexes and Ages, respecting the Other, are concisely
delineated. By Samuel Haworth Student in Physic.

New and Curious Observations on the Curing the VENEREAL DISEASE; and the
Accidents that it produces in all its Degrees, explicated by Natural and
Mechanical Principles; with the Motions, Actions and Effects of Mercury, and
its other Remedies. Wherein are discovered on the same Subject the Errors of
some Authors, and the most notorious Cheats of Empiricks, Mountebanks, and
generally of ignorant Pretenders and Impostors. Written in French by Mo^sieur
de Blegny, Chyrurgeon in Ordinary to the French Queen; Englished by Walter
Harris, Doctor of Physic, late Fellow of New College in Oxford. With the
several Approbations of the most Eminent Doctors and Chyrurgeons in Paris.

The Damnable Principle of the JESUITS touching the Murdering of Kings; Fully
laid open in Two Eminent Instances de facto, by their own Confession.

Prophecies concerning the Return of POPERY into England, Scotland and Ireland:
By Archbishop Usher, Mr Herbert, Dr Paraeus, Mr Buroughs. Mr Seldom, Mr
Baxter, Dr M. Luther, Archbishop Grindal, Bishop Jewel, Bp Gauden, Mr Hooker,
Dr Sutcliffe.

The City's Exaltation by Uprightness: A Sermon preached at Guild Hall Chapel,
on Sunday, June 6. 1680. before the Right Honorable Sr Robert Clayton, Lord
Mayor of the City of London, and the Court of Aldermen.

Advertisment.
That famous and most excellent medicine, known by the Name of The Spirits of
Scurvey-Grass Compound, both Plain and Golden; The Plain working by Urine, and
the Golden Purging Spirit by Stool: This Famous Spirit has been Experienced in
most parts of this Narion, to be the greatest preservative of health of any
chim^eal medicine yet prepared, and under God has saved the Lives of many
Thousands, as Letters from Scotland, Ireland, and other Foreign parts, as well
as from most Counties in England, to the Famous Author can Testify. It
purifies the whole Mass of Blood from Center to Circumference, and never yet
failed in Curing the Scurvey, Dropsy, Stone, Gout, and several other Diseases,
which are here too tedious to Name. This Spirit is only prepared by the first
Aurhor, Mr. Henry Clarke, Chemist and Apothecary, at the Lamb near
Somerset House in the Strand. And since under God this Famous Spirit has been
so beneficial to all that have used it, some ignorant and illiterate Fellows
have had the impudence to counterfeit his Spirits; Therefore that the Buyer may
not be deceived, he is desired to Enquire for CLARK's Essential Compound Spirit
of Scurvey-Grass, which is Sealed with his Coat of Arms, being three Swords in
Fess to prevent Counterfeits, It has been thought convenient for puplick good
to give this Advertisement, that they are to be Sold both in City and Country,
at one shilling each Bottle, with Plain and Easy Directions for the Manner and
Way of using them; and they are Sold particularly in London, By Jonathan
Wilkins at the Star in Cheap Side, next Mercers Chapel.


