A Faithful RELATION OF THE Most remarkable Transactions which have happened AT
TANGJER; Since the Moors have lately made their Attacques upon the Forts and
Fortifications of that Famous Garrison, LIKEWISE The Strength and good posture
of Defense it remains now in.
With an Account of the Trenches, Lines and works they have already drawn in
order to their besieging several of the said Forts strongly Guarded by the
English, and the advantageous success the English have obtained over those
Infidels, in a late Fight between them; burning and demolishing their works,
beating them out of their Trenches, killing them and pursuing them even to
their Camp.

ENglish Valor has spread it self into the corners of the yet known World, so
dread in Arms have Britains Worthies ever been, that the amazed Earth has
often trembled at their prouess, whilst they have with small numbers made the
now haughty Nations bow and yield unto their Conquest in tears of blood our
Anger mourned, and felt our just revenge; then can we fear proud Aff^i^ks
threats upon our famous Garrison well Manned? Or fearful Moors though ods of
numbers press? whilst such brave Heroes, fraught with highproov'd English Souls
so nobly defend their charges against those barbarous Infidels, whose
slaughtered Corpse so often has strewed the neighboring Plains, in their several
but unsuccesful Attempts, yet being obstinate end wilful in their own
destruction, will take no warning, but by their frequent Attacks expose
themselves as subjects to the English Valor to whet upon, and thereby to
shine more bright.

But seeing at this time those barbarous Moors besiege that famous english
Garrison of Tangier, the honor of our Nation, lying and maintaining its bounds
and large dependances in Africa with but a handful of Men in comparison,
against the populous and powerful Nations that border upon its Territories, I
shall give the Reader an impartial Account of most of the noated transactions
that have happened there since the beginning of the now Siege. The Moors under
the command of the Alcade of Alcasar their Captain General, in their last years
Assault upon our well-mann'd Forts being shamefully repulsed with great
Slaughter as well as loss of Ammunition and vast expense, killed in the very
breach themselves had made, so lamentably as can be imagined, in the chance of
War were forced to retreat in confusion to the Town of Alcazar, and being
pursued, many of them fled even unto Morocco, their chief City; of which
shameful defeat, their King or Governor being advertised, sent for the Alcade
in great wrath, charged him to regain the Reputation he had lost, by drawing up
his Forces once more against this famous Garrison of Tangiers. Upon which, a
Body of about 8000 Men lay hovering about the Walls of Alcazar, till Orders
were given for their breaking the Ground, in order to which, about the middle
of March last they began to draw a Line between the Town and Charles and
Henrietta Forts, and there intrenching a great number of Foot, and some Horse,
had set their Pioneers to undermine the said Forts in order to the blowing them
up, but the Cannon and small shot playing upon them from all sides, so
furiously that they proceeded but very slowly in their Enterprise, many of them
being daily killed as they endeavor to widen their Trenches, and over and
above, the Forts being well manned and Victualled sufficiently for six Months,
in Charles Fort are about one hundred and fifty Men, commanded by Captain St.
John's, and Captain Trelawney; both persons of great Courage and resolution and
Henrietta Fort against which they bend their greatest Force, Lieutenant Wilson
with about an hundred men furnished with all manner of Ammunition for a brave
defense, upon this latter Fort, about 5 or 6 hundred Moors were commanded to
make an Attack, their main Body lying about half a League distance; they came
on very resolutely and brought with them long pieces of Timber; which they
placed against the Walls of the said Fort, and brought Fagots, Boards and other
pieces of Wood to pile upon them, that so under the shelter of them they might
undermine, and blow up the Wall of the said Henrietta Fort, which being
perceived by the Lieutenant he gave order to ply them with Hand-Granadoes, the
which was accordingly put in Execution with great success, killing and wounding
several of them, whilst the great Guns from the other bo^^ played upon them,
and beat in their Works upon them, and di^ great Execution; yet sheltered by
darkness, they all that night continued the Assault, but when morning appeared,
they found the place too hot for them, and that their purpose would no^ take
effect, nor force stand them in stead against English-Vallour, so leaving many
dead upon the place they retreated in much confusion and disorder, our Cannon
and small shot still playing upon them, that for haste they left all their
combustible ^^^^er behind them, to set which on Fire, Lieutenant Wilson caused
to be let down five men in Ropes, who effected the same, and were drawn up
again without any hurt or damage, after the Moors were retired, Lieutenant
Wilson to show them how little he feared their force caused two Moors Heads to
be cut off and fixing them upon Poles, and placed them publicly upon the Walls
in the sight of the Moorish Camp, which all of that Nation hold for the
greatest indignity that can be put upon them, because according to their
Mohammedan superstition, they hold that when they die, their Bodies immediately
are translated into ^aradice* but if they are dismembered, they can in no wise
enter, so blinded are they by that preposterous Doctrine, but to our purpose,
sin^^ this Attack the Moors have again advanced their Lives, and as it is
supposed recruited, they have drawn a Trench between Charles* Fort and the
other part, and made their lines of Communication, yet our Men have made
several Sallies, and done great Execution upon them, filling up some of their
Trenches, and taking some Prisoners; they have of late brought a great number
of Boards to cover their works, which are as it is supposed to shelter them from
the excessive heat of the Sun and do proceed with promise to themselves of
better success than formerly; but there being about four hundred Soldiers
arrived from Ireland, this Garrison is in so good a posture of defense that we
fear not what the assailants can do against us, besides we expect new Recruits
from England, and having all Provision Plenty, it is conjectured that after
they can no ways prevail, they will quit the Siege and retire as they have
often done, and not expose their Lives to hazard upon such impossibilities, by
reason there is almost every week several English Men of War and Merchants
lying in the Mould which will readily supply us with Men and Arms if occasion
require, so that we are able to make a considerable Body of Men, and if the
Portugals who first took the piece could maintain it with half the number we
have now in Garrison against the Moorish Armies under the Command of their
several Kings, then it is not to be feared through the assistance of the
Almighty, but we shall as bravely defend it and atchieve as great if not
greater exploits for the honor of our Country and the far famed name of true
English Valor.

FINIS.

