engraved portrait of King Edward The true Portraiture of King Edward the
Second King of England and Lord of Ireland Duke of Aquitaine etc: He Reigned
19. years and Seven Months: Buried at Gloucester:

F. sculpset.


THE HISTORY Of the most unfortunate Prince King EDWARD II.

WITH Choice Political Observations on Him and his unhappy Favorites, GAVESTON
and SPENCER: CONTAINING Several RARE PASSAGES of those Times, Not found in
other Historians.

Found among the Papers of, and (supposed to be) Writ by the Right Honorable
HENRY Viscount FAULKLAND, Sometime Lord Deputy of Ireland.

LONDON: Printed by A. G. and J. P. and are sold by John Playford, at his Shop
near the Temple-Church, 1680.

THE PREFACE.
HENRY CARRY, Viscount Faulkland, (among whose Papers the following History was
found) was born at Aldnam in Hertford-shire; his extraordinary Parts, being a
most accomplished Gentleman, and a complete Courtier, got him such an Esteem
with King James, (who for his great Learning and Sagacity is styled The English
Solomon) that he thought him a Person fitly qualified to be Lord Deputy of
Ireland, (the Government of which place required at that time a Man of more
than ordinary Abilities) which Trust he very well discharged. Being recalled
into England, he lived honorably here, 'till by an unfortunate accident he
broke his Leg in Theobald's Park; of which soon after he died. He was a Person
of great Gallantry, the Ornament and Support of his Country, which he served
with no less Faithfulness and Prudence abroad, than Honor and Justice at home,
being an excellent Statesman. During his stay at the University of Oxford, his
Chamber was the Rendevouz of all the eminent Wits, Divines, Philosophers,
Lawyers, Historians, and Politicians of that time; from whose Conversation he
became Eminent in all those Qualifications.

The Subject of the following History (supposed to be written by the
abovementioned Nobleman) is the unhappy Lives, and untimely Deaths, of that
Unfortunate English King Edward the Second, and his two Favorites Gaveston and
Spencer; for his immoderate love to whom, (says Dr. Heylin) he was hated by the
Nobles, and contemned by the Commons. This King (says Sir Richard Baker) was a
comely Person, and of great strength, but much given to drink, which rendered
him unapt to keep any thing secret. His greatest fault was, he loved but one,
for if his Love had been divided, it could not have been so violent; and though
Love moderated be the best of Affections, yet the Extremity of it is the worst
of Passions. Two Virtues were eminent in him, above all his Predecessors,
Continence and Abstinence; so continent, that he left no base Issue behind him;
so abstinent, that he took no base Courses for raising Money.

Our Author closes his History without declaring the Particulars of the Murder
of this Prince, wherefore I shall give you an account thereof, as I find it set
down by the aforesaid Sir Richard Baker.

Many ways were attempted to take away his Life. First, they vexed him in his
Diet, allowing him nothing that he could well endure to eat, but this succeeded
not: Then they lodged him in a Chamber over Carrion and dead Carcases, enough
to have poisoned him; and indeed he told a Workman at his Window, he never
endured so great a misery in all his Life; but neither did this succeed. Then
they attempted it by Poisons, but whether by the strength of his Constitution,
or by the Divine Providence, neither did this succeed. At last the pestilent
Achitophel, the Bishop of Hereford, devised a Letter to his Keepers, Sir Thomas
Gourney, and Sir John Mattrevers, blaming them for giving him too much liberty,
and for not doing the Service which was expected from them; and in the end of
his Letter wrote this Line, Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est; craftily
contriving it in this doubtful sense, that both the Keepers might find
sufficient warrant, and himself excuse. The Keepers guessing at his meaning,
took it in the worst sense, and accordingly put it in Execution. They took him
in his Bed, and casting heavy Bolsters upon him, and pressing him down, stifled
him; and not content with that, they heated an Iron red hot, and through a Pipe
thrust it up into his Fundament, that no marks of Violence might be seen; but
though none were seen, yet some were heard; for when the Fact was in doing, he
was heard to roar and cry all the Castle over. This was the lamentable End of
King Edward of Carnarvan, Son of King Edward the First.

What became of the Actors and Abettors of this deep Tragedy, Sir Winston
Churchill tells us in these words, with which I shall conclude.

Poor Prince, how unkindly was he treated, upon no other account but that of
his own overgreat kindness! Other Princes are blamed for not being ruled by
their Counselors, he for being so: Who whilst he lived, they would have him
thought to be a Sot, but being dead, they could have found in their hearts to
have made him a Saint. How far he wronged his people does not appear, there
being very few or no Taxations laid upon them all his time; but how rude and
unjust they were toward him, is but too manifest. But their violence was
severely paid by Divine Vengeance, not only upon the whole Kingdom, when every
Vein in the Body Politic was afterward opened, to the endangering the letting
out of the Lifeblood of the Monarchy in the Age following; but upon every
particular Person consenting to, or concerned in his Death. For as the Throne
of his Son that was thus set in Blood (though without his own guilt) continued
to be imbrued all his Reign, which lasted above fifty Years, with frequent
Executions, Battles, or Slaughters; the Sword of Justice, or his own, being
hardly ever sheathed all his time: So it is said, that the Queen her self dyed
mad, upon the apprehension of her own, in Mortimer's disgrace, who was executed
at Tiburn, and hung there two days to be a spectacle of Scorn. The King's
Brother Edmond had this punishment of his Disloyalty, to be condemned to lose
his Head for his Loyalty, it being suggested (and happy it had been for him if
it had been proved) that he endeavored the Restoration of his Brother; his
Death being embittered by the mockery of Fortune, whilst by keeping him upon
the Scaffold five hours together, before any body could be found that would
Execute him, he was deluded with a vain hope of being saved. The Fiend Tarlton,
Bishop of Hereford, who invented the cursed Oracle that justified the
Murderers, dyed with the very same Torture, as if the hot Iron that seared his
Conscience had been thrust into his Bowels. Of the two Murderers, one was taken
and butchered at Sea, the other dyed in Exile, perhaps more miserable. And for
the Noblility in general, that were Actors in the Tragedy, they had this Curse
upon them, that most of their Race were cut off by those Civil Discords of
their divided Families, to which this strange Violation gave the first
beginning, not long after.

The LIFE of EDWARD II.
KING OF ENGLAND.
EDWARD the Second, born at Carnarvan, was immediately after the death of
Edward the First his Father, crowned King of England. If we may credit the
Historians of those times, this Prince was of an Aspect fair and lovely,
carrying in his outward appearance many promising predictions of a singular
expectation. But the judgment, not the eye must have pre-eminence in the
censure of Human passages, the visible Calender is not the true character of
inward perfection, evidently proved in the Life, Reign, and untimely Death of
this unfortunate Monarch.

His Story Eclipseth this glorious Morning, making the noontide of his
Sovereignty full of Tyrannical oppressions, and the Evening more memorable by
his Death and Ruin. Time, the discoverer of truth, makes evident his
imposture, and shows him to the World, in Conversation light, in Will violent,
in Condition wayward, and in Passion irreconcilable.

Edward his Father, a King no less Wise than Fortunate, by his discreet
Providence, and the Glory of his Arms, had laid him the sure Foundation of a
happy Monarchy. He makes it his last care so to enable and instruct him, that
he might be powerful enough to keep it so. From this Consideration he leads him
to the Scottish Wars, and brings him home an exact and able Scholar in the Art
Military. He shows him the benefit of Time and Occasion, and makes him
understand the right use and advantage. He instructs him with the precious
Rules of Discipline, that he might truly know how to obey, before he came to
command a Kingdom. Lastly, he opens the closet of his Heart, and presents him
with the politic Mysteries of State, and teaches him how to use them by his
own Example, letting him know, that all these helps are little enough to
support the weight of a Crown, if there were not a correspondent worth in him
that wears it.

These Principles make the way open, but the prudent Father had a remaining
task of a much harder temper. He beheld many sad remonstrations of a deprave
and vicious Inclination, these must be purified, or his other cautions were
useless, and to little purpose. A corruption in Nature, that by practice has
won it self the habit of being ill, requires a more than ordinary care to give
it reformation. Tenderness of Fatherly Love abuses his belief, and makes him
ascribe the imperfections of the Son, to the heat of Youth, want of Experience,
and the wickedness of those that had betrayed his unripe Knowledge, and easy
Nature, with so base impressions. He imagins, Age, and the sad burden of a
Kingdom, would in the sense of Honor, work him to thoughts more innocent and
noble; yet he neglects not the best means to prepare and assure it. He extends
the height of Entreaty, and uses the befitting severity of his paternal Power,
making his Son know he must be fit for a Scepter, before he enjoy it. He takes
from him those tainted humors of his Leprosy, and enjoins him by all the ties
of Duty and Obedience, no more to admit the Society of so base and unworthy
Companions. Gaveston, the Ganimede of his affections, a Man, as base in birth
as conditions, he sentenceth to perpetual Exile.

The melancholy Apparitions of this loath to depart, gives the aged Father an
assurance, that this Siren had to dear a Room in the wanton Cabinet of his
Son's heart. He strives to enlighten his mind, and to make him quit the memory
of that dotage, which he foresaw in time would be his destruction. But death
overtakes him before he could give it perfection, the time is come, that he
must, by the Law of Nature, resign both his Life and Kingdom.

He summons his Son, and bequeaths him this dying Legacy, commanding him, as he
will in another day answer his disobedience, never to repeal his sentence. To
his Kindred and Peers, that with sad Tears, and watery Eyes, were the companions
of his Deathbed, he shortly discourses the base conditions of this Parasite,
and lets them understand, both their own, and the Kingdom's danger, if they
withstood not his return, if it were occasioned. They knew his injunctions were
just, and promise to observe them, he is not satisfied till they bind it with
an Oath, and vow religiously to perform it. This sends him out of the World
with more confidence, than in the true knowledge of his Son's wilful
disposition he had cause to ground on.

The Father's Funeral Rights performed, Edward in the pride of his years
undertakes the Crown, and guidance of this glorious Kingdom. He glories in the
advantage, knowing himself to be an absolute King, and at liberty; yet thinks
it not enough, till the belief of the Kingdom did equally assure it. He esteems
no Act more proper to confirm it, than running in a direct strain of opposition
against his Predecessor's will and pleasure. The strong motives of his violent
affection suggests reasons, that the Majesty of a King may not be confined from
his dearest pleasure. When he was a Son, and a Subject, he had witnessed his
obedience, being now a King and a Sovereign, he expects a correspondence of the
same nature. Where there was so ready an inclination in the Will, Reason found
strength enough to warrant it, which made him make Gaveston's return the first
Act of his Sovereignty. No protestation of his Lords, nor persuasion of his
Council, can work a diversion, or win so much as a befitting respect. The
Barons that were unable to withstand, are contented to obey, attending the
issue of this so dangerous a resolution. Where the News was so pleasing, the
Journey is as sudden, Gaveston loses not a minute, till he felt the embraces
of his Royal Lord and Master.

Edward having thus regained his beloved Damon, is so transported with his
presence, that he forgets the will and ordinary respect due to the greatest
Lords and Pillars of his Kingdom; and hence proceeds their first discontent and
murmur. Many ways are invented to dissolve this enchantment, but none more fit
and worthy then to engage him in the sacred knot of Wedlock. The Interest of a
Wife, was believed the only remedy to engross or divert those ^^^ted (...)
^^fe^t^^ns, which they beheld so loosely and unworthily prostituted. Isabel,
the Daughter of the French King, the goodliest and (...) L^dy of her time, is
moved, and the tender o^ (...) plausibly accepted.

This sends Edward, scarce a King of nine Months standing, into France, and
brings him back, seas'd of a Jewel, which not being rightly valued, occasioned
his ensuing Ruin. The excellency of so sweet and virtuous a companion could not
so surprie her Bridegroom, but Gaveston still kept possession of the fairest
room in his affections. He makes it more notorious by creating him Earl of
Cornewal, and the Gift of the goodly Castle and Lordship of Wallingford.

Gaveston applies himself wholly to the humor of the King, and makes each word
that falls from his mouth an Oracle; their affections go hand in hand, and the
apparent injustice of the one never found contradiction in the other. The
Subjects Voice was so fortunate, that it was always concurrent where the King
maintained the party: If the discourse were Arms, Gaveston extolled it as an
Heroic Virtue; if Peace, he maintained it not more useful than necessary;
unlawful pleasure he styled a noble Recreation; and unjust Actions, the proper
and becoming Fruits of an absolute Monarchy. These Gloses so betray the willing
ear that heard them, that no Honor is thought good and great enough for the
Reporter. The greatest Commands and Offices are in the person or disposure of
Gaveston. The command of War, and all Provisions Foreign and Domestic, are
committed solely to his care and custody. All Treaties for Peace or War had
their success or ruin by his direction and pleasure. The King Signed no
Dispatch private or public, but by his consent or appointment. So that all men
believed their Sovereign to be but a mere Royal shadow, without a real
substance. Neither was it enough to advance him beyond his desert, or the rules
of a modest proportion; But his Power must be made more extant in the
Commitment to the Tower of the Bishop of Chester, whom he quarrels as the
occasion of his first banishment.

These insolences, carried with so great a height and contempt, are
accompanied with all the remonstrances of a justly grieved Kingdom. The ancient
Nobility that disdained such an Equal, justly exclaim against the Iniquity of
the time, that made him their Superior. The grave Senators, that understood
their own worths, are discontent to see themselves rejected, while Upstarts, by
Money or Favor, possess the higher places. The Soldier that with his Blood had
purchased his Experience, laments his own dishonor, seeing unworthy Striplings
advanced, while he like the ruins of a goodly Building is left to the wide
World without use or reparation. The Commons in a more intemperate fashion make
known their griefs, and sad oppressions.

Gaveston, that both saw and knew the general discontent, sought not to redress
it, but with an ill advised confidence strives to out-dare the worst of his
approaching danger. Lincoln, Warwick, and Pembrook, whose noble hearts
disdained the o'regrown height of this untimely Musherompt, let the King know
their fidelity, and his apparent Error. He must free himself, and right them,
or else they will seek it in another Fashion.

Edward knew their Complaints were just, yet was most unwilling to hear or
relieve them; till seeing their strong resolution, and himself wholly
unprovided to withstand the danger, he makes his affections stoop to the
present necessity, and consents to a second banishment of his so dearly beloved
Favorite. Gaveston, in the height and pride of his ambition, is enforced to
leave his Protector, and to make Ireland the place of his Abiding. With a sad
heart he takes his leave, departing yet with a more desire of revenge, than
sorrow for his absence.

All things thus reconciled, the Kingdom began to receive a new life; men's
hopes were suitable to their desires, and all things seem to promise a swift
and fair Reformation. But the bewitching Charms of this wily Serpent made it
soon evident, that alone his death must prevent his mischief. The personal
correspondency taken away, the affections of the restless King becomes far more
violent. In the short interim of his absence, many reciprocal and sweet
messages interchangeably pass betwixt them: Edward receives none, but he
returns with a Golden Interest. He is not more sensible of his loss, than the
Affront and Injury, which persuades him, it were too great indignity for him to
suffer at the hand of a Subject: Though with his own hazard he once more calls
him home, pacifying the incensed Lords with an assurance of reconciliation and
amendment. Those strict Admonitions so fully expressed, were not powerful enough
to reclaim the Fondness of the one, and Insolency of the other.

The King regaining thus his beloved Minion, dotes on him in a far greater
measure; and he to make the Music perfect, is of a far more violent temper. He
affronts and condemns his Adversaries, the ancient Nobility, surreptitiously
wasting and imbezelling the Revenues of the Crown. He enflames the King's
heart, so apt to receive it with all the motives of revenge, unquietness, and
disorder. The Jewels of the Crown, and that rich Table and Tressels of Gold,
are purloin'd and pawned to supply this wanton Riot. He had so true a knowledge
of his Master's weakness, that he made him solely his. His Creatures were alone
preferred, his Agents were the guides, and no man has the King's ear, hand, or
purse, but such as were by Gaveston preferred or recommended.

Edward in his voluptuous sensuality supplies the place, but he had the sole
execution of that Royal Prerogative, that was alone proper to the Crown. The
Nobility, whose Lyon-hearts strugled betwixt the sense of their just grief and
allegiance, at length resolve, the King as to himself, must be so to them and
the Kingdom, or they may no more endure it. With grave and weighty Reasons,
they make the King know both the error and the vanity of his Affections;
letting him truly understand, that they had a dear Interest, both in him and
the Kingdom, which they would no longer suffer to be so abused and misguided.

Edward, being himself thus hardly pressed, and that no entreaty or dissimulation
could prevail, he must now set right the disorders of the Kingdom, or have his
work done to his hand, with less honor and more danger. Once more he
subscribes to their will, which he sees he cannot withstand or alter. Gaveston
is again banished, and makes Flanders, the next Neighbor, the place of his
reception. Infinite was the joy of the Kingdom, who now expected a secure
Freedom from that dangerous Convulsion that threatened so apparent an intestine
ruin.

This their imaginary Happiness was made more real and perfect, in the
knowledge that Windsor had blessed them with an Heir Apparent. The Royal Father
is pleased with the News, but had not (wheher his divining Spirit, or
Gaveston's absence were the cause) those true expressions of joy that in
justice became so great a Blessing. The absence of his Minion could not lighten
his heavy Soul, but all other comforts seemed vain and counterfeit, his
distracted brains take new and desperate resolutions; he revokes the sentence
of his grief, and vows to justify it against the utmost strength of
Contradiction.

He that dares do those things that are dishonest and unjust, is not ashamed to
justify and maintain them: This Error gave this unfortunate King more Enemies
than he had Friends to defend them. Kings that once falsify their Faiths, more
by their proper Will than a necessary Impulsion, grow infamous to foreign
Nations, and fearful or suspected to their own peculiar Subjects. He that is
guilty of doing ill, and justifies the action, makes it evident, he has won
unto himself a habit of doing so, and a daring impudence to maintain it by the
protection, of which he believes all things in a politic wisdom lawful. This
position may for a time flatter the Professor, but it perpetually ends with
Infamy, which stands with Reason and Justice; for as virtue is the Road-way to
perfection, so is the corruption of a false heart, the true path to a certain
and an unpittied ruin.

The enraged Barons are not more sensible of their own disparagement, than the
inconstancy and injustice of their Sovereign. They think this affront done to
them and the whole Kingdom, of too high a nature to be dispensed with, yet with
a temperate resolution they a while attend the issue. The Actions of injustice
seldom lessen; they believe progression to be in all things an excellent Moral
virtue. He that has a will to do ill, and does it, seldom looks back until he
be at the top of the Stairs. This makes the ill affected return of this our
Favorite, more infamous and hated. With an imperious storm he lets the Lords
know, he meditates nothing but revenge, and waits a fit advantage to entertain
it. They believe time ill lost in so weighty a cause, and therefore draw
themselves and their Forces together, before the King could prevent, or his
abuser shun it. The Clouds presaging so great a storm, he studies the best
means he could to avoid it. The general distaste of the Kingdom takes from him
the hope of an able party. Scarborough Castle his last refuge he makes his
Sanctuary, but it was too weak against the number of his Enemies, and the
justice of their quarrel. He falls at length into the power of those, from whom
he had no cause to expect protection or mercy. The Butterflies of the time,
that were the Friends of his Fortunes, not him, seeing the Season changed,
betake themselves to the warmer Climate. His Greatness had won him many
Servants, but they were but Retainers, that like Rats forsook the House when
they beheld it falling. The Spring was laden with many glorious and goodly
Blossoms, but the Winter of his Age leaves him naked, without a Leaf to trust
to.

In this uncomfortable case remains this glorious Cedar, in the hands of those
whom in his greater height he had too much condemned and abused. They resolve
to make short and sure work, unwilling to receive a command to the contrary,
which they must not obey, though it should come from him to whom they had sworn
Obedience. Forsaken, unpittied, scorned, and hated, he falls under the the
hands of Justice. Gaverseed is the place which gives the Epilogue to this fatal
Tragedy, whence his Adversaries return more satisfied than assured.

Thus fell that glorious Minion of Edward the Second, who for a time appeared
liked a blazing Comet, and swayed the jurisdiction of the state of England, and
her Confederates. He did not remember in the smiles and embraces of his lovely
Mistress, that she was blind, nor made himself such a refuge as might secure him
when she proved unconstant. Such a Providence had made his end as glorious, as
his beginning fortunate, leaving neither to the just censure of Time or Envy.

The King's vexations in the Knowledge, are as infinite as hopeless, his
Passions transport him beyond the height of Sorrow. He vows a bitter revenge,
which in his weakness he strives to execute with more speed than advisement.
The graver Senators, that had most Interest in his favor, mildly discourse his
loss to the best advantage. They lay before him his contempt and abusive
carriage, his insolence, Honor beyond his Birth, and Wealth above his Merit,
which must to all Ages give a just cause to approve their Actions, and his
Fortune. The least touch of his memory adds more to the King's affliction, who
is fixed not to forget, o^ forgive, so hold and heinous a Trespass.

The operations in the King were yet so powerful, but the jealousies of the
Actors are as cautelous, so fair a warning-piece bids them in time make good
their own security. Lincoln, the principal Pillar of this Faction, follows his
Adversary to the Grave, but with a much fairer Fortune. This Man was a goodly
piece of true Nobility, being in Speech and conversation sweet and affable; in
resolution grave and weighty; his aged temper active above belief; and his
wisdom far more excellent in a solid inward knowledge, than in outward
appearance.

When the harbinger of Death plucked him by the Sleeve, and he saw and knew he
must leave the World, he calls unto him Thomas Earl of Lancaster, that had
married his Daughter, giving him a strict Imposition on his Deathbed, that he
should carefully maintain the welfare of the Kingdom, and make good his place
among the Barons. This reverend old Statesman saw the King's ways, and knew him
to be a most implacable Enemy, and with a kind of speculative prediction, would
often seem to lament the Misery of the time, where either the King, Kingdom, or
both must suffer. The Son, whose noble Heart was before seasoned with the same
impressions, assures it, which he in time as really performs, though it cost
him the loss of his Estate, Life, and Honor.

Things are too far past to admit a reconciliation; the King's Meditations are
solely fixed upon revenge; and the Lords, how they may prevent, or withstand
it. The Kingdom hangs in a doubtful suspense, and all Men's minds are variously
carried with the expectation of what would be the issue. Meditation and
intercession brings it at length to Parliamentary discussion, which being
assembled at London, enacts many excellent Laws, and binds both the King and
Lords by a solemn Oath to observe them. Thus the violence of this Fire is a
while suppressed; and raked up in the Embers, that it may (in opportunity and
advantage) beget a great danger.

A new occasion presents it self, that makes each part temporize for a while,
and smothers the thoughts of the ensuing Rumor. Robert le Bruce reenters
Scotland, whence he had been by Edward the First expuls'd, inverting all the
English Institutions, that had so lately settled the Peace and subjection of the
Kingdom. Edward, tender of his Honor, and careful to preserve that purchase,
that had proved so dear a bargain, adjourns his private spleen, and provides to
suppress this unlooked for Rebellion. He knew the justice of his quarrel, and
wakens from the Dream, that had given him so large a cause of sorrow. He gives
his intentions a small intermission, and a less respite; with all speed he
levies an Army, and leads it with his own Person. Whether it were the justice
of Heaven, or his own misfortune or improvidence, the Scots attend and
encounter him, making Eastrivelyn the fatal witness of his disaster. His Army
lost and defeated, he returns home laden with his own shame and sorrow. His
return is welcomed with a strange Impostor, that pretends himself the Heir of
Edward the First, and the King the Son of a Baker. A Tale so weak in truth and
probability wins neither belief or credit. Voidras, this imaginary King, is
apprehended, and makes Northampton Gallows the first Stair of his Preferment.
His Execution is accompanied with as strange a story, which suggests the
instigation of a Spirit, that in likeness of a Cat, had for two years space
advised it.

The King, with a true seeling grief, lamenting his dishonorable Return from
Scotland, where his noble Father had so often displayed his victorious Arms, does
vow with a speedy rescue to revenge it. He communicates his resolution with the
whole body of his Council, who are in their advice equally concurrent in the
Action. The former loss exacts a more care, and a better provision. York, as
the fittest place, is made the Senate of this grave Assembly. Thither resort
all the Sages of the Kingdom, and make it their first deliberation to secure
Berwick, that is one of the Keys of the Kingdom, and exposed to the greatest
hazard. This Charge is given to Sir Peter Spalden, who was believed able
enough, both in fidelity and valor. A short time discovers him truly possessed
of neither. A small Sum of Money, with an expectant Preferment promised,
betrays the trust reposed, and gives the Scots the full possession of the
Charge to him committed.

The Pope, wisely foreseeing into the misery of this dissension, out of his
Christian and pious care, sends over two Cardinals, to mediate a Peace and
Agreement. They being arrived in England, find the King well disposed, so the
Conditions might be reasonable, and such as might become his Interest and
Honor. They pass from hence into Scotland, and are by the way with a barbarous
Example surprised and robbed. The King is infinitely discontented with so
inhuman an Act, that threw a taint upon the whole Nation. Great enquiry is
presently made, which finds out the Actors, and sends Sir Peter Middleton, and
Sir Walter Selby, to a shameful and untimely execution. Immediately at the
heels of this follows another Example, no less infamous, and full of danger.

Sir Gilbert Denvil, and others, pretending themselves to be Outlaws, with a
jolly Army, to the number of Two hundred, ramble up and down the Country,
acting diverse notorious Insolences and Robberies. The Fame of an attempt so
new and unexpected, without a speedy prevention, seemed to intimate a greater
danger. A Commission is immediately sent out, which apprehends the heads of
this increasing mischief, and delivers them over to the hand of Justice. They
which confessed themselves out of the protection of the Law, and glory in their
being so, fall under his rigor.

Those that duly examined the truth of this action, believed the pretense to be
but a Mask, that hid a more perilous intention. The King, by his untemperate
and undiscreet actions, had lost the hearts of his People, and there was a
general face of discontent throughout the whole Kingdom. The Ulcers festered
daily more and more, which seemed to presage and threaten, without some speedy
prevention, a dangerous issue. All Men discover their ill affections, expecting
but a Patron that durst declare himself, and adventure to hang the Bell about
the Cat's Neck. If this disorderly attempt, which was but to taste the Peoples
Inclinations, had succeeded, the King (as it was to be feared) had much sooner
felt the general loss, and revolt of his whole Kingdom. But this work was
reserved to future time, and the operation of those, who had the time to effect
it with more power and pretense of Justice. The crying Maladies of this Climat
were such, that the Divine Power sent down at one and the selfsame instant his
three fatal Executioners, Plague, Dearth, and Famine, to call upon us for a
repentant Reformation. No part of the Kingdom is free, but was grievously
afflicted by the unmerciful Prosecution of one, or all these fatal angry
Sisters. So great a Misery was too much, but it is seconded with a sudden
Invasion of the hungry Scots, who apprehending the advantage of the present
Visitation, and ill Estate of their Neighbors, like a Land-Flood, overrun the
naked and unprovided Borders.

The Archbishop of York, a grave and wise Prelate in his Element, but as far
from the Nature, as Name of a Soldier, resolves to oppose this overdaring and
insolent Eruption. He levies in have an Army, in number hopeful; but it was
composed of Men, fitter to pray for the success of a Battle, than to fight it.
With these, and an undaunted hoping Spirit, he affronts the Scots, and gives
them Battle, making Mitton upon Swale, that honored his Enemies with the Glory
of a second Triumph, the place of his Disaster. Many Religious Churchmen, with
the purchase of their Lives, begin their first Apprentiship in Arms; whose loss
christ'ned this overthrow The White Battle.

The intent of this grave Prelate was questionless worthy of a great and
singular Commendation, but the Act was wholly inconsiderate, weak, and
unadvised. It was not proper for his Calling to undertake a Military Function,
in which he had no experience; neither did it agree with his Wisdom or Piety to
be an Actor in Blood, though the occasion were so great and weighty. Too much
care and confidence improperly expressed, does many times overthrow and ruin the
Cause it seeks to strengthen and advantage. There ought to be in all
considerations of this nature, a mature Deliberation before we come to Action,
else we lose the Glory of our Aims, and commit all to the uncertain hazard of
Time and Fortune. The Cardinals are now returned out of Scotland, by whom the
King truly understands that the hopes of Peace are desperate. Their leave
taken, and losses fairly repaired, they return to Rome, acquainting his
Holiness with the success of their Employment. The Pope being truly informed,
that the Scots were neither conformable to his Will, or the general Good,
excommunicates both that usurping King and Kingdom.

The King, nearly touched with the loss of Berwick, enflamed with the Insolency
of his barbarous Enemies, and grieved with so great a loss of his People,
resolves no more to suffer, but to transport the War into the very Bowels of
Scotland. To this effect, with speed he hastens out his Directions, and gives
present Order for the levying of Men, Arms, and Money, to begin the War, and
continue it. The Royal Command, and desire of Revenge, gives Wings to this
Resolution. An Army is ready, and attends the King's Pleasure, before he
conceits his Will truly understood, or bruited. Nothing is wanting but his own
Person, or a fit Commander to lead them; he oseth no time, but appears in the
Head of his Army before his Enemies had the least knowledge of this Assembly.
With a hopeful expectation he leads them on, and makes Berwick the Rendezvous,
that should make his Number complete and perfect. Before this Strength that had
the warranty of Art and Nature, he makes the first Experiment of this
Expedition. The Town begirt, was not more confident of their own strength, than
assured of a speedy supply or rescue. This gave the King a longer delay than he
believed, and his Enemies leisure to raise and enable their Provisions. They
saw it a work too full of Danger and Hazard, to venture the breach of the Body
of so great an Army, that in Worth and Number so far exceeded. The memory of
former Passages and Trials, taught them how to understand their present
condition; this begets in them a Resolution more solid and hopeful. They leave
the Road-way, and war rather by Discretion than Valor, which succeeds so
fortunately, that they surprise all the English Provisions, and enforce the
King to a second Return, more Fortunate, yet much less Honorable. It is true,
he retreated, and brought back his Army in safety, but he had quitted the Siege
which he had vowed to continue against the United Power of Scotland, and lost
wholly all that Wealth and Luggage he had carried with him.

This filled all Men's mouths with a complaining Grief, and made Foreign
Nations think the English had lost their former luster, and renowned valor. It
was wondered, that an Enemy so weak and contemptible, should three several times
successively, bear away the Garland from those, that had so often, and knew the
way so well to win and wear it.

But now begins a second Fire of a higher Nature, that made the Kingdom a
Theater stained with the noblest Blood, that within her Confines had or Life or
Being. The King, discouraged with his Foreign Fortune, lays aside the thoughts
of Arms, and recalls into his wanton Heart the bewitching vanities of his
Youth, that had formerly bred him such Distemper. He was Royally attended, but
it was by those that made their Tongues, rather the Orators of a pleasing
falsehood, than a true sincerity. These were fit Instruments for such an ear,
that would not hear, unless the Music answered in an even correspondency. The
Infidelity of the Servant is in a true Construction the Misery of the Master,
which is more or less dangerous, as is the weight and measure of his
Employment. It is in the Election of a Crown a principal Consideration, to
choose such Attendants, whose Integrity may be the Inducement, as well as the
Ability, else the imaginary help proves rather a Danger than Assistance.
Neither is it safe or honorable, for the Majesty of a King, to seem to depend
solely on the Wisdom, Care, or Fidelity of one particular Servant. Multiplicity
of able Men is the Glory and Safety of a Crown, which falls by degrees into
confusion, when one Man alone acts all parts, whence proceeds a World of Error
and Confusion.

The King was not ignorant, that such a course would make such as were his but
at second hand, yet he resolves to make a new choice, of one to supply the room
of his lost beloved Gaveston. Though his diseased Court was furnished with a
large variety, yet his Eye fixes on Hugh, the younger of the Spencers, who was
always tractable and conformable to the King's Will and Pleasure. This Man was
in show smooth and humble, of an insinuating Spirit, one that knew his Master's
ways, and was ever careful to observe them. He had applied himself wholly to
Edward's will, and fed his wanton pleasures with the strains of their own
Affection. Heat of Spirit, and height of Blood consult more with Passion than
Reason, and a short Deliberation may serve, where the Subject was so pleasing,
and to each side agreeable.

The King, to make his Resolutions eminent, with more have than advisement,
makes him his Lord Chamberlain, and lets the World know, it was his Love and
Will that thus advanced him. Scarcely is this new great Officer warm in his
unbefitting Authority, but he exactly follows his Predecessor-precedent to the
Life, making all things lawful that were agreeable to his Master's Will, or his
fantastical Humor.

The Peers of the Kingdom, that saw the sudden and hasty Growth of this
undeserving Canker, resolve to lop or root it up, before it should o'retop
their Luster. Spencer, that in the precedent Story of Gaveston, beheld the
danger of his own condition, begins in time to provide and strengthen a Party.
His aged Father, fitter for his Beads than Action, he makes a young Courtier,
and wins the King to give him Power and Assistance. He labors to remove from
his Master's ear all such as might endanger him, and supplies their places with
such as were his Creatures. Those that were too high for such a surprisal, by
Persuasion, Money, or Alliance, he seeks to engage, and make the Parties this
his coming Faction. The Body of the Court thus assured, his Actions in the
State went in an even Correspondency. Those that held him at a distance,
valuing their Fidelity and Honor before so base an advantage, saw themselves
disgracefully cashiered, and others installed in their Rooms, that had neither
Worth, Birth, or Merit. The Factious Entertainers of his proffered Amity, not
only enjoy their own, but are advanced higher, which made them but the
Instruments to act and further the Corruptions of his Will and wicked Nature.

This Foundation laid, they now seem to contemn all fear of danger, and in that
assurance, express their Contempt and Scorn against the Nobility, who they knew
would never entertain their Society or Friendship. While thus the Rule and
Manage of all the Royal Affairs in their Power, was daily more and more abused,
the Incensed Barons meet at Sherborough, where the Earl of Lancaster, the Prime
Agent, lays before them (in a short and grave Discourse) the Iniquity and
Danger that seemed eminently to threaten both them and the whole Kingdom, if
such a Resolution were not taken, as might assure a speedy Prevention. The
Foreknowledge of their Sovereign's Behavior, which would observe no Rule or
Proportion in his immodest Affections, gave them small hope to prevail by
Persuasion or Entreaty. They too well understood that Spencer's Pride was too
great and haughty to go less without Compulsion, and they must sink a Key, or
neither the Kingdom or themselves (against so Inveterate a Hatred) could expect
in reason Safety or Assurance. Hertford, Mowbray, and Clifford, sore a higher
pitch, and in plain terms affirm, That all other Resolutions were vain and
hopeless, 'twas only Arms that must right the Time and State so much
disordered. Benningfield and Mortimer approve this Resolution, and as soon give
it Life and Action. They enter furiously on the Possessions of their Enemies,
spoiling and wasting like professed Enemies.

Such an Outrage flies with a nimble Wing to the ears of the Owner, who as soon
makes the King the sharer of his Intelligence, and increases it to his own
advantage. The King sensible of so great an Affront, and as tender of the one,
as cruel to the other, publishes by Proclamation the sentence of his Royal
Will and Pleasure. The Actors of this Misdemeanor must appear and justify
themselves, or presently forsake the Kingdom.

The Lords that saw their Interests at Stake, as they had begun, resolve to
maintain the Quarrel. New Levies and Preparations are daily made, to make good
the succeeding Issue. Yet the more to justify those Arms, that in the best
construction was deemed Rebellions, they send to the King a fair and humble
Message. The Tenor whereof lets him know, their Intentions were fair and
honest, and the Arms thus levied, were rather to defend, than offend his
Person; only they in all humility desire, he would be graciously pleased to
remove and punish those Vipers, which had too near a Room in his Royal Heart,
whereby they had overthrown and undone the Peace and Tranquillity of the
Kingdom.

The King that fears, is enforced to believe: he knew their Informations were
just, and he had no Power to deny, or withstand them. He assures a Reformation;
to make it more real, he adjourns it to the ensuing Parliament, which is
immediately summoned to appear at London. The jealous Lords, that too well knew
the cunning and hatred of their malicious Adversaries, appear like themselves,
bravely attended with a Crew of lusty Yeomen well Armed, which styled this The
Parliament of White Bands. The Major, seeing such a Confluence from all parts
of the Kingdom, so ill inclined and well appointed, with a careful Providence
reinforceth the City Guards, and planteth a strong Watch throughout all the
strengths and parts of his Jurisdiction.

This great Assembly being now met, the complaining Barons find in both Houses
a ready Belief, and as sudden a Censure. A solemn Declaration gives the King
knowledge of their Sentence, which commands both the Spencers, Father and Son,
into perpetual Exile. The King, as weak in his disability, as wilful in the
least advantage, gives a sad and unwilling consent; which being known, gives
the Spencers no time of Imparleance; their Judgment is immediately put in
Execution, and they find more Servants than they desired to attend Dover, where
they are immediately shipped to go seek a new Fortune. The Elder, whose Snowy
age, and more Innocence, deserved Pity, makes his Tears witness his true
sorrow, and his Tongue unfold them. He taxes his Son's Vanity and Ambition,
and his own Weakness, that had so easily consented to his Ruin. He laments his
misfortune, that in the Winter of his Age had cast him from his Inheritance,
and had made him the Sea-mark and scorn of a whole Kingdom. He confesses the
folly, that led him (by indirect means) to the preservation of his high and ill
acquired Greatness. He wishes his carriage had been such, that in this so sad
a change of Fortune, he might have found either Pity or Assistance. But it is
the inseparable Companion of Greatness that is gotten in the By-way, and not by
a just Desert or Virtue. It labors to support it self more by cunning and
falsehood, than by a sweet and winning temper, when it is of all other the most
erroneous Maxim, that believes, Affections can be in a subordinate way gotten
or assured. They are the proper Functions of the Soul, which move alone in
their own course, without force, or the least impulsion. All other ways are but
Temporary Provisions, that serve the present advantage, but he that by a just
Desert wins the love and belief of his worth, has laid a sure Foundation,
making his Honor his own, and the Succession hereditary and permanent, to his
everlasting Glory.

These imperious Servants thus removed, the Father, in obedience of his Doom,
betakes himself to a Foreign Quietness. The Son, of a more turbulent and
revengeful Spirit, keeps still a Seaboard in the skirts of the Kingdom, and
falling short in Power, to requite the Authors of his disgrace, he expresses
his malice to the whole Nation. The Merchants free from all suspicions in their
Voyages and Returns, are pillaged and rifled, and he the principal Actor.

Such a Domestic Piracy begets a general terror and exclamation, which fills
the King's ears, and presses (as it required) a speedy prevention or remedy.
He knew the Action was foul, but it was one of his own that had done it; and
such a one that was too dearly valued, to be either persecuted or punished. He
studies first to satisfy his own Passion, before he right this injurious
carriage against the Subject. This makes him reject the wholesome Admonitions of
Friends, the Validity of his Laws, and those fearful Apparitions that present
him with the danger of so foul an Enterprise, while with an Example new, and
full of assured hazard, he repeals the sentence of their Exile. This Act gave
him too large a time of Repentance, and may be a befitting instance to all
ensuing posterity. The Actions of a Crown are Exemplary, and should be clean,
pure, and innocent; the stains of their Errors dye not with them, but are
registered in the story of their Lives, either with Honor or Infamy.

But to proceed in this Historical Relation: The Spencers thus recalled, and
reinvested in their former Favor, they express themselves in another kind, and
now by a strong hand strive to crush by degrees all those of the adverse
Faction. Sir Bartholomew Baldsmer was the first that tasted their fury and
injustice. His Castle of Leedes in Kent, under a pretended and feigned Title,
is surprised and taken from him, without a due Form, or any Legal Proceeding.
Their return, and the abrogation of that Law that banished them, was
provocation enough, there needed not this second Motive to inflame the hearts
of the angry Barons. But when the unjust Oppression of the Knight (their Ally
and Confederate) was divulged, and came to their ears, they vow a bitter
Revenge, and make speed to put it in Execution. They see the Fruits of their
dalliance, and long abused confidence, and waken out of that slumber that had
fed him with the Chimera's of so dull and cold a proceeding.

The King, who formerly had been so often surprised, in time arrives to provide
a Remedy: he knew his Arms and not his Tongue must plead the injustice of his
Actions, wherein if he again failed, he feared another manner of Proceeding.
The Spencers, that evidently saw the eminency of their own dangers, make it
their Masterpiece to crush the Serpent in the head before it grew to
perfection. They knew the height of their Offenses were beyond the hope of
mercy, and there was no way left of assurance, but that, which they must wade
through in blood, and make good with the Sword their Lives, or else be sure to
lose them. An Army is provided, and appears at Shrewsbury almost before it was
bruited. The first exploit seiseth the two Mortimers, that had begun again
their former Invasion of the Spencers. Their strength was great enough for such
an Incursion, but much too weak to withstand or encounter this Royal Army. This
first hansel so fortunate, gives life to their Adversaries, and Imprisons them
in the Tower, before their Associates could be truly informed, or ready to
relieve them.

There is now left no time to dispute: The Barons must with their Arms warrant
their Proceedings, or they must miscarry in the Action. They had soon gathered
a strength, with which they resolve to encounter the King at Burton. The
knowledge of the great Power that came against them, and their own Weakness,
wins them to a retreat, not more dangerous than dishonorable. But their
Reasons were just and weighty; the Earl of Lancaster had sent Sir Robert
Holland to raise his Tenants and Friends, which he hoped would in time
reinforce his Army.

Valence Earl of Pembrook, that commands his Master's Forces, seeing the
disorder of their going off, lays hold of the advantage, and charge them so
hotly, that they break and betake themselves to their heels, with great losses
and confusion. Holland entrusted by the Earl of Lancaster, having accordingly
performed the work he was employed in, marching up to the Rescue, is advertized
of the State of their Affairs, which makes him seek his own Peace, and resign
this supply wholly up, to be disposed of at the King's Will and Pleasure. The
Supply so unexpected is graciously received, and there is a set resolution to
employ it to the best advantage.

The despairing Lords, with their Adherents with much ado recover Pomfret,
there a second Deliberation is taken, which held it the safest course to pass
on, and to possess the Castle of Donstanborough, which was deemed a strength
tenable enough until they could reinforce their Party, or work their own
Conditions. This Resolution is presently attempted with more have than fortune.
Sir Andrew Harkely meets and encounters them at Burrowbrig, where Hertford,
Clifford, and others, died honorably, in maintaining a brave defense, while
Lancaster, Mowbray, and many of their Adherents were taken, and with their
Heads paid the ransom of their Errors. The Spencers, like two furious Tigers
that had seized their Prey, give not their incensed Master leave to deliberate
on the weight of so sad a Work; the Lives of many brave Subjects are taken away
in an instant, and each part of the Kingdom is stained with loss of that noble
Blood, that had been much more gloriously spent in a Foreign War, than in these
Domestic and Civil Tumults.

Edward, that was apparently guilty of too many other Vices, drowns their
memory in this so cruel and bloody a Tyranny. The wreaking Blood of so many
brave Gentlemen so unfortunately and untimely lost, does cry for vengeance, and
hurry on the destruction of the chief and principal Actors. Mercy should
precede the severity of Justice, if not to all, yet to some, since they were
not alike guilty. If Lancaster had been of so unnoble a Disposition, the
Spencers had neither had time nor cause to rejoice in his Ruin. How often had
they by a full advantage had Power of these their Enemies, yet made it evident,
their aims were not Blood but Reformation. And assuredly in this their last
Act, their Intents toward the Crown were innocent in all other respects, than
the desire of supporting it with more Honor. As things fell afterward out, it
had been to the King a Happiness if their Arms had prevailed, for this Victory
was the principal and fundamental Cause of his ensuing Ruin. Fear, and the
expectation of danger, kept both him and his Favorites in a better temper, so
long as there was so strong a Bridle. Certainly in the Regiment of a Kingdom,
it is a wise and discreet Consideration to maintain and uphold a divided
Faction, and to countenance them so, that the one may be still a counterpoise
to the other; by this means the King shall be more truly served and informed.

The Subject that is too far exalted, and has no one to contradict or question
him, considers not the Justice, but the Means to preserve him, by which the
Judgment of the King is taxed, and he is robbed of the Hearts of his People.
The greater the height, the stronger is the working to maintain it, which
seldom goes alone, but is accompanied for the most part with those
State-Actions of Impiety and Injustice, which draws with it so perpetual an
envy and hatred, that it leads him headlong to a fatal and dishonorable
Conclusion. Though the Fury of this enraged King had so fully acted this bloody
Tragedy, yet Mortimer is spared, rather out of Forgetfulness than Pity, whose
Life had been more available than all these, that with so great a speed had
felt his Rigor. But he is reserved for a second course, to teach the Spencers
that same legem talionis, and Edward, the plain Song of his Error. The Kingdom
seems now in better Peace and settled; the principal Pillars of the
Commonwealth are taken away, and those which remained are utterly disheartened
in the danger of so fresh an Example.

This gains such a liberty to these triumphing Sycophants, that they make the
whole Kingdom, as it were, the just Fruits of an absolute Conquest. The King
approves and maintains their Actions, giving them the Regal Power for their
Warranty. All kind of insolent and unjust Oppressions are now confidently
practiced, without contradiction or question. No Exaction or unlawful Action is
left unattempted, while the grieved Kingdom languisheth under the burden, yet
durst not stir to redress it. The great Ones suffer basely beyond their Birth
or Honor, yet look faintly one upon another, not daring to revenge their
Quarrel. The Commons murmuring complain, yet find not a Man that will give them
heart or leading.

The watchful Spencers, that saw and knew the general hatred, and infamy of
their own conditions, lessen not their height, or fear the Sequel. With a
politic care they use their best means to prevent it. The King's Humor
naturally vicious, they feed, with all the proper objects, that might please or
more betray his senses. They strive to make him alike hateful to his Subjects,
that in the change of Fortune they might together run one and the self-same
hazard.

There is yet another piece of State to this great work as proper. Edward is
but a Man, and a Creature in nothing more constant than his Affections, yet
these with age and time may alter, this gap must be so stopped, that they may be
more assured. Hugh, the younger of the Spencers, who had a searching Brain,
wise and active, believes this work had two several dependences, the one to
keep him in continual Fear, the other in a perpetual Want. These being
marshalled with Discretion, he knew would knit fast his Master's Love, and add
to the opinion of his Wisdom and Fidelity; imposing a kind of necessary
Impulsion still to continue him. In his Breast alone was locked all the
passages and mysteries of State, whereby he was most able to provide for the
future inconveniences.

From this ground, with a kind of loose scorn, he continues the French
Correspondence, and secretly contriveth a continuance of the Scottish Rebellion.
He omits no Act of Contempt against the ancient Nobility, that they might in
the sense of their disgrace be, or at least daily threaten some new Combustion.
The confluence of so many threatening dangers work the wished effect, and keep
the king in perpetual fear and agitation. The ill success of his Armies, and
Expeditions in their Memory, help strongly to increase it: Yet is not his
faithful Servant neglective in the second and remaining part. He so orders his
business within doors and without, that the Royal Treasure of the Crown is
prosusely wasted and spent without Account or Honor. The ancient Plate and
Jewels of the Crown are in the Lombard, and their Engagement drowned, before it
had the warmth of a sure possession. The Subject is racked with strange
Inventions, and new unheard of Propositions for Money, and many great Loans
required, beyond all proportion or order. Lastly, the Royal Demeans are set at
Sale, and all things that might make Money within the Kingdom.

To supply these inconveniences, which are now grown to a greater height than
the Plotter of them intended; a new Parliament is called at York, where the
elder Spencer is advanced to the Earldom of Winchester; and Harkely, another
Chip of the same Block, is made Earl of Carlisle. Baldocke, a mean Man in
Birth, Worth, and Ability, is made Lord Chancellor of England.

In this Parliament, which was by Fear and Favor made to his hand, he makes
known the greatness of his Want and Occasions, the justly aggrieved Commons
entering into a deep consideration of the times, freely give the sixth Penny of
all the Temporal Goods throughout the whole Kingdom.

When this Act came to the general knowledge, it utterly estranged the Hearts
of the Subjects, which plead an Impossibility to perform it, in respect of
those many former Exactions. Yet after some light contestation it is levied, no
man daring to make so much as a show of resistance.

If we may credit all the Ancient Historians, who seem to agree in this
Relation, there were seen at this time many Sights, fearful and prodigious.
Amongst them no one was so remarkable, as that which for six hours space showed
the glorious Sun clothed all in perfect Blood, to the great Admiration and
Amazement of all those that beheld it. Following times, that had recorded it in
their Memories by the sequel, believed it the fatal Prediction of the ensuing
Miseries. Those that more aptly censure the present view of a Wonder,
conceited, the just Heavens showed their incensed Anger, for the Noble Blood of
the Earl of Lancaster, and his Adherents, so cruelly shed, without Compassion
or Mercy.

The Scots working on the condition of the times, so much dejected and amazed,
seize the advantage. They saw by the last Parliamentary Proceedings, that the
King was so enabled, as the hope of any Attempt in England, was altogether
hopeless. Yet they resolve to be doing somewhere within the King's Dominions,
or at the least his Jurisdiction. This draws them to assemble themselves, and
to Attempt a surprisal of the Northern places of Ireland. As the Action was
vain, so the Success proved as unfortunate; they are defeated, slain,
overthrown, and return not with the twentieth part of their number.

The King remembering those many Indignities he had suffered, and resenting this
their last Attempt, with an implacable scorn and anger, resolves to let them
speedily know that he meant to call them to an after reckoning. Upon this he
sends out his Summons, to call his Men of War together, and makes all
Provisions be prepared, for this so constantly resolved a Journey. His former
Misfortunes had instructed him to undertake this Design much more strongly and
warily. And this so grave a Consideration brought him together the remaining
Glory and Strength of the greater part of his Kingdom. With these he marches
forward, and invadeth the nearer parts of Scotland; but whether it were the
Infidelity of those about him, the will and pleasure of Him that is the Guider
and Directer of Human Actions, or the unfortunate Destiny of this unhappy King,
he is enforced to return, without doing any Act that is truly worthy his
Greatness or Memory.

The wily Scots, that durst not set upon the Face of his Army, wait upon the
Rear, and in a watched opportunity, surprise his Stuff and Treasure. This sends
him home a third time a discontented Man, and whether with a just Guilt, or to
transfer his own Fault upon others, the newly created Earl of Carlisle is put to
a shameful Execution. The Grounds against him were very probable, but not
certain, and it was enough that he is believed, like Judas, for Money to have
sold his Master. The principal Motive that may lead us to think he was deeply
faulty, was the Honor and Gravity of his Trial, which gave him, on a full
hearing, so sincere and sharp a Sentence.

Scarcely is the King settled, after his tedious Journey, when comes a stranger
News, That the French King had made a Hostile Attempt upon the Frontier parts
of Guyen, which was seconded with a Declaration, That he was no longer resolved
to entertain the Friendship or Peace with England.

This Feat had been cunningly beforehand wrought by the secret working of
Spencer, yet he desired to have it still in Agitation, and not in Action. He
wished his Master thence might be possessed with the fear of War, and not feel it.
The French were of another mind, they saw into the great Disorders and
Misguidance of England, and thought it a fit time, either by War or Policy, to
unite so goodly a Branch of their Kingdom. It is true, they had matched a
Daughter of France to the Crown of England, and had solemnly swore a Peace, but
these they thought might be with ease dispenst with on so weighty a Cause, and
so fair an Advantage. Edward seeing into the danger, and taxing bitterly the
Infidelity of the French, begins to survey his own Condition, whereby he might
accordingly sort his resolution, either to entertain the War, or to seek Peace
upon some Honorable, or at least reasonable Conditions.

He in this passage finds himself more hated and feared, than beloved; he saw
his Coffers empty, the Scottish War and Surprisal had quite exhausted the Sinews
of his last Parliamentary Contribution. He feared the Inclination of the
Subject would refuse any further Supply, or in consenting, make it conditional,
which he was wholly unwilling to undergo or adventure.

Lastly, The Misfortune that waited on him ever since he was absolute, he
feared had estranged and dejected so the Hearts of his Soldiers, that they
would hardly be drawn forth, or act any thing with their accustomed Valor and
Resolution. In this Distraction, he seeks not by the Advice of a grave Council
to qualify or prevent it, this Medicine he conceits worse than the Disease,
but calls unto him Spencer, the Cabinet of his Heart, he alone is thought fit
to communicate this deep Secret, and to give the Resolution. His Father
Baldock, and the rest of that Faction, by his persuasion and entreaty, are
admitted to make the Party greater, and the Discourse more serious and likely.
Before them is laid the Condition of the King, the Estate of the Kingdom, their
own Danger, and the Intentions of their Foreign Adversary. Many several ways
are devised and advised, and in conclusion, no one is believed more sound and
proper, than that the Queen should personally mediate the Atonement with her
Royal Brother. This as it was cunningly laid, so had it a double use and
reflection. The Spencers saw the Subject more inclinable to adore the rising
Sun, in which Act they thought the Queen's Mediation and Presence would be a
dangerous Instigator. They believed her absence could not work such and so
great an assistance as might countervail the domestic danger. They knew the
French light and inconstant, and those which with a kind of natural fear,
abhorred the English Wars, out of the limit of their own Kingdom. And in the
worst construction they conceited Money, or a resignation of that part was
holden by the King in France, would beget a Peace at their own will and
pleasure. Yet these Considerations were attended with some doubts, which
delayed and put off the execution.

The Queen, who had long hated the Insolency of the Spencers, and pitying the
languishing Estate of the Kingdom, resolves in her mind all the possible ways
to reform them. Love and Jealousy, two powerful Motives, spurred her on to
undertake it. She saw the King a stranger to her Bed, and revelling in the
embraces of his wanton Minions, without so much as a glance or look on her
deserving Beauty. This contempt had begot in her Impressions of a like, though
not so wanton and licentious a Nature. She wanting a fit Subject for her
Affections to work on (her Wedlock being thus estranged) had fixed her wandering
Eye upon the goodly shape and beauty of gallant Mortimer. He was not behind
hand in the reception and comel entertainment of so rich and desired a
Purchase. But his last Act had lodged him in the Tower, which was a Cage too
strait to crown their desires with their full perfection, yet is there a sweet
correspondency continued, Letters and many loving Messages bring their Hearts
together, though their Bodies were divided.

By these is Mortimer informed of the Resolution for the intended Journey of
his Royal Mistress, whom he vows to attend, or lose his Life in the adventure.
The Queen understanding the Intentions of her Servant, strives to advance her
dispatch, and hastens it with all her best endeavors. But where was so great
an Inconstancy, there could be no expectation, that this Proposition should be
more assured or permanent. New delays and doubts interpose, insomuch, that the
hopes of this Journey were now grown cold and desperate.

The Queen seeing her self deluded, and this opportunity stolen from her, by
those whom she before so mortally hated, sets her own brains a working, to
invent a speedy remedy. She was therein so fortunate, as to pretend a Journey
of Devotion and Pilgrimage to Saint Thomas of Canterbury, which by her
Overseers was wholly unsuspected. Things thus prepared, by a faithful Messenger
she gives Mortimer the knowledge of her Design, who prepares himself with a
more dangerous Stratagem to meet it. Her eldest Son, her dearest comfort, and
the chief spring that must set all these wheels a going, she leaves not behind,
but makes him the Companion of her Travels.

The King's Joy was great, that saw by this occasion, he should gain a free
liberty to enjoy his stolen Pleasures, which were before so narrowly attended by
the jealous eyes of his Queen, that in this kind had been so often wronged.

The aspiring Spencers were well pleased, that to be assured would have given a
free consent to her perpetual absence. A short time brings her to the end of so
short a journey, where she makes her stay of the same measure. Winchelsey had
the honor to have the last farewell of this pair of precious Jewels. Thither
comes Mortimer, having made a fortunate Escape, and with the Earl of Cane
resolves to venture his Life in the Attendance and Service of so brave a
Mistress. An Exploit so weighty and dangerous gave no time of stay or ceremony.
They immediately Embark, and make a trial where they may find another Climate
more propitious and fortunate. The watery Billows and the peaceful Winds, as if
they were consenting to their Enterprise, entertain them with an aspect clear
and quiet, sending them with a fresh and pleasing Gale safe to their desired
Port of Bulloign.

The King and Spencers being truly informed, are startled with the matter and
manner of their Escape. They knew the Birds were too far flown to be caught or
reclaimed; and did imagine the Plot was too surely laid that had so prosperous a
beginning. Now all the former Resolutions are useless; new Deliberations are
required how this Breach may be handsomely sodered, or the threatening danger
prevented. All other ways are deemed short, that one of taking off the King of
France was believed most sure and easy. They knew the French strain to be
giddy, light, and covetous, and applied themselves in the right Key to fit
these several humors.

The King, whose presaging soul misgave his welfare, grows sad and melancholy,
calling to mind the Injustice of his own Actions, and the fair Cause his Wife
had to seek her right and refuge. The neglect and breach of Wedlock was so
great an Error, but so to contemn so sweet and great a Queen, was a fault, in
his own thoughts, deserved a heavy censure. She had not only felt a particular
share of her own grief, but suffered deeply in the general sorrow of the whole
Kingdom. Those which had erected their petty Tyrannies over the Subject, were
in like sort authorized by him that ought to have had an equal share of her
affliction, more and more to abuse her.

The sad Impressions of these Disorders, and the reeking Blood of so many noble
and brave Subjects, so basely spilt, do seem to cry for Vengeance. This, for a
while, wrought deeply in his distressed thoughts, but a small intermission
brings him back to his former temper. A customary habit of a depraved Nature,
dulleth the sense of the Soul and Conscience; so that when our better Angels
summon us to restitution and repentance, the want of a lively true
apprehension, leads us blindfold into a dangerous despairing hazard.

The French King having notice of his Sister's arrival, with a wondrons
plausible and seeming Joy, does entertain it with an honorable Attendance,
fitting more her Estate, Birth, and Dignity, than her present miserable
condition: she is waited on to Paris, where she is soon Visited by the Royal
King, her Brother. When she beheld the refuge of her hopes, she falls upon her
Knee, and with a sweetly coming modesty, she thus begins her Story.

The King, unwilling to suffer such an Idolatry from her that had a Father,
Brother, and Husband so great and Royal, takes her up in his Arms, and then
attends her Motives.

Great Sir, (quoth she) behold in me, your most unfortunate Sister, the true
Picture of a dejected Greatness, and the essential substance of an unhappy
Wedlock. I have with a suffering, beyond the belief of my Sex, overcome a world
of bitter Trials. Time lessens not, but adds to my Afflictions; my Burden is
grown too heavy for my long abused Patience. Yet it is not I alone, but a whole
Kingdom, heretofore truly glorious, that are thus unjustly wronged. My blushing
Cheek may give you knowledge, I too much Honor the Cause of mine Affliction,
to let my Tongue discover it. Yet this in Duty and Modesty I may ingenuously
confess, My Royal Husband is too far seduced, his Ear is too open, his Will too
violent, and his Heart too free, to those bewitching Sirens, that make his
Errors their Profit and Glory. All hope of his return is lost, so long as they
shall live, and remain his Leaders. How many of his noblest and bravest
Subjects have attempted his freedom, and by an unjust and inglorious Death
miscarried? Alas! all expectations are vain and desperate; if I had not known
the impossibility to disinchant him, I had not in so mean and miserable a case
stolen to you for Succor. You have a fair way to make known to the World, the
truth of your own Glory and Goodness. Fortune leads you by the hand to an
Action not more Just than Honorable, if you would dispute it. Can there be a
more precious Motive to invite you, than the view of these unhappy Ruins? See
here two Royal Branches of the Flower-de-luce withering, sullied, and
depressed. Would you truly consider, how great and noble a Work it is, to
support those that are unworthily oppressed, Heaven and Earth must witness the
true value of your Worth and my Petition. Let it not breed a Jealousy or
Discouragement, that I appear before you, and seek your help with so poor a
Train and mean Attendance. Besides the Justice of my Cause, I bring with me the
Griefs and Hearts of a Kingdom, that have both Sworn and Vowed to defend it.
Nor may you with reason doubt their Integrity, while you have my wretched self,
and the Heir apparent to be your Pawn and Warrant. For God's sake, Sir, by your
own Virtue and Goodness I desire it, and in the challenge of that Royal Blood
whereof by the Laws of God, Men, and Nature, I have so large a Share and
Interest. Let not after Ages taint your Memory with such an Aspersion, That you
are the first of all the Kings of France, that denied to relieve a Sister so
deeply wronged and distressed.

She would have spoken more, but here the big swollen Fountains of her watery Eyes
discharge their heavy burden. Her Tears, like Orient Pearls, bedew her lovely
Cheeks, while she with a silent Rhetoric invites a noble pity. Her sad
Complaint won a general remorse, and her liquid Tears, a deep and strong
compassion. Her Brother vows Revenge, and promises to make England and the
World know she was his Sister.

The Lords and Peers of France tender their ready help and assistance; the
Service is so hotly pursued, that the poor Queen, with an abused confidence,
believes she shall be speedily and strongly righted. 'Twas not alone her Error,
it is a general Disease. We easily credit that News we most desire and hope for.

The Spencers, whose watchful eyes were soon informed of these Passages, too
late condemn their own Improvidence and Folly, that gave the wronged Queen so
fit and fair an advantage. They fear not all the Power of France, but suspect
Intestine danger, where they knew the Hearts of all were alien'd and estranged.
They well enough understood the vanity of Female Passion, but suspect, that the
rising Son would be followed and admired, whilst their declining Master would
be left forsaken and dejected. These Conceits work so deeply, that they
conclude they must fall, if they could not stop the Foreign Danger. The English
were Cowed, there was in them no fear, unless the strangers strength gave them
new Life and Spirit. In so weighty a Cause there was no time left for delay or
dalliance. They dispatch presently away their Agents to the French Court, laden
with the Treasure of the Kingdom, and many glorious Promises. They instruct
them how to apply themselves to the Time and present Necessity, and teach them
the way to work and undermine the Queen's Proceedings.

These Messengers arriving at Paris, find the French heat well qualified and
cooled. This gave them more time and hope, to bring their Master's Will and
their own Employment to a speedy perfection. They set upon the Pillars of
State, such as in their Master's Ear or in his Council had most sway and
pre-eminence: they give freely and promise more, till they have won a firm and
fair assurance. No one had an Interest, and was known to be a favourer of the
adverse Party, but his Tongue is tied with a golden Chain to a perpetual
silence.

When thus this Practice was ripe, the King is persuaded of the danger and
peril of so great and weighty an Action. His Sister's Reputation and
intemperate Carriage, though tenderly, is often touched. A Woman's Passion is
believed too weak a Reason to engage two so Warlike Nations in a War, wherein
themselves had formerly so often suffered.

The King, for all his first great and high Expression, had much rather have to
do with the English in their own Kingdom than in France, yet was well enough
content not to try their Arms in either. Yet still he feeds his sorrowing
Sister with good words, pretending many vain Excuses, which made her suspect
and doubt his meaning. She arms her self with a noble patience, hopeful at
least, that she and her son might there remain in peace and safety.

By the intercourse of Messages that had so often passed and repassed, the
Spencers are assured, that their Affairs in France went fairly on, by which
they were well onward in their Journey.

There could be yet no certain or assured confidence, until they had again
gotten the Queen and her Son into Possession. No Promise or Persuasion is left
to win her to return, but her Ears were stopped, she too well knew the sweet
Enticements of such alluring Serpents. This Project falling short, a solemn
Letter is framed from King Edward to the Pope, and a Messenger after their own
hearts appointed to carry it. The Contents were full of Humility and
Bitterness, complaining to his Holiness, That his Wife had, without just Cause,
forsaken both Him and his Kingdom, carrying away his Son, the stay of his Age,
without his leave or license; a Traitor to Him and his Crown, that had
publicly acted a Rebellion, and was taken and Imprisoned for it, had made an
escape, and was now her sole Companion; and though he was not hasty to report
or credit, ye he had just cause to fear he was the abuser of his Wedlock. The
King of France, with whom he had sworn so solemn and firm a League, being
Summoned, had denied to restore her.

These goodly Glosses and Pretexts find a ready passage, and an easy belief
where there was none to contradict, or justify. If these Aspersions had been
as they were pretended, just and true, the Fact had been odious, and justly
deserved a fair and speedy reformation. The greater Cardinals, that were at
that time most great and eminent, had tasted deeply of the King's bounty, which
gave the Pope a daily instigation to pity and reform so great and gross an
Error. On which an Admonition is presently sent out to the French King, that he
cause immediately the Queen of England to depart forth of his Dominions.

Whilst this device was in action, the English discontented Barons send privily
to the Queen, informing her, that they were almost crushed to pieces with their
suffering. They solicit her to hasten her return, and promise really to engage
themselves and their Estates in her Quarrel. With a joyful heart (as it
deserves) she entertains this loving proffer. And the more to advance her
declining Affairs, she instantly acquaints her Brother with the tender. He had
then newly received his Summons from the Pope, which taking out of his Pocket,
he delivers her back, wishing her to peruse and read it. The amazed Queen, when
she beheld so sad a Sentence, falls humbly on her Knees, and desires, That his
Majesty would grant her but so much favor, that she might more truly inform
his Holiness, and justify her self by a fairer and noble trial. With Tears she
instanceth the malice of her Adversaries, that had taken so strange a course
both to abuse and wrong her. Her Brother, glad of such a Protection to shadow
his dishonorable and unnatural falsehood, lets her know the necessity of his
Obedience, and that he must not for her sake adventure the Censure and
Interdiction of himself and a whole Kingdom. He wishes her to arm her self
with patience, and to return and make a peace with her Husband, in which Act
himself would use both the persuasion and strength of his best Power and
Interest, letting her withal know, that she had but a short time to deliberate,
for she must instantly leave his Kingdom. Scarcely had he ended these his last
unwelcom words, when away he flings, with a seeming discontented show of
sorrow, rejoyceing inwardly, that he had freed himself of the Expense of her
Entertainment, and found so fair a color to avoid the Justice of her daily
Importunity.

The drooping Queen, thus abandoned, with an amazed grief, relates this unkind
sad passage to her faithful Servants, Cane and Mortimer. Their valiant hearts
make good the loss of their hopes; they accuse the injustice of time, and
exclaim against the French unnatural baseness. Mortimer, whose inflamed Passion
flew a higher pitch, breaks out, and with a bold freedom, would have fallen to
a bitter Expostulation. The Queen, that knew the danger, and was loath to hazard
that little miserable freedom she had left, with sweet and mild persuasions
reclaims him to a milder temper. She had a second doubt, lest in such a
contestation she might be sent back against her will to her Husband. This makes
her temporize, and cunningly seem to provide for a voluntary return, which
might prevent that danger. She failing in the Master, yet tastes anew his
Servants, and leaves no means unattempted to bring about and alter so hard and
strickt a Censure. They that were the first betrayers of her hopes, do now with
a more confidence and constancy express it, and with one voice sing the same
Tune with their Master; declining Misery, the touchstone of Friendship, finds
it self shunned, like some infectious Fever. The sunshine of Fortune has as
many Professors as Beams, but if her Glory be once eclipsed, they all, with a
coward baseness, seek some other succor. This Lesson, that is so frequent and
familiar, should guide our election more by judgment than affection. They are
not to be chosen or valued, that in the pretense of Love, though it be for our
proper good or service, will act any thing that is base and unworthy; the same
in the least change will not be squeamish, for a poor advantage to confirm
their former practice, though it be to our loss or destruction. Where Virtue
guides our choice, it begins with truth and honor, ending with a like
resplendent glory. No worldly cross, nor height of affliction, lessens the
worth and value of such a Friend, who, like a goodly Rock, in fury of the
greatest Storms, makes good his proper station. Mutual correspondency in
affections ought to be pure and innocent; if private respects taint the
sincerity of the intentions, it makes this traffic rather a commerce than
friendship. Opinion of faith is a powerful Motive, yet not weighty enough,
unless it become as well with real ability, as appearance, the subject of our
Election.

But to proceed, The Queen being in this distressed Agony, finds an unexpected
refuge. The gracious God of Heaven, who never forsakes those which are his,
sends her a comfort when her dying hopes were almost sunk and desperate.

Robert of Artois, a Man as truly Valiant, as Noble, was one of the first that
in the French Court had tendered the Queen his Service. He was a wise, grave,
and steady, well resolved Gentleman; his first Devotion was not led by matter
of Form or Complement, but was truly grounded on a true Compassion and Honor.
This brave Friend beholding with a noble eye, the Vanity of his fellow Friends
and Courtiers, and looking into the Misery of the Queens forsaken Condition,
sets up his rest to appear like himself, a Friend in all her Fortune, firm and
constant. In this resolution he waits a fitting opportunity to let her see and
know it. The time was favorable, he finds her in her melancholy Chamber,
confused in her restless thoughts, with many sad distractions. She fancying the
occasion of the coming of so great a person was great and weighty, with a
silent and attentive Ear expects his Message.

Madam, (quoth he) It is the most excellent part of Wisdom, with an equal
Virtue, to entertain the different kinds of Fortune. This World is but a mere
composition of Troubles, which seems greater or less, as is the quality of the
Heart that entertains them. I confess the Justice of your Grief, and truly
share it, but Tears and Sorrow are not means to relieve or right you. The just
Heavens assist those that with an active and lively hope invoke their Succor.
The tenderness of your Sex, and former free Condition is yet a stranger to
these Trials; Time will let you know they are the familiar attendants of our
frail structure of flesh and blood, when you will confess it too great a
weakness to sink under the burden of our Afflictions. For your own goodness
(Noble Queen) erect and elevate your thus dejected Spirits: behold in me the
Character of an unworthy, but true Friend, that am resolved my Life and State
shall attend and run with you the self-same Fortune. You may no longer make
this unthankful Climate, the place of your Birth, the stage of your abiding;
the way is paved with Gold to your destruction. Wherefore, if my Advice may
sway, let speed prevent your danger. The confines of the sacred Empire are near
adjoining, where are many brave Princes, who may happily afford you Succor; at
the worst, you may there enjoy a more assured peace and safety. Neither do I
presume to direct this course, but lay it humbly before you, offering my
faithful Service to attend you, to what part soever of the Universal World your
resolution shall fix on, desiring you to be assured my Life, before my Faith
shall perish; for I have vowed my self, and will continue your everlasting
Servant.

Infinitely was the Queen rejoiced in this so grave and sincere an Expression,
she doubles a world of Promises and Thanks for this so free an offer, and with
a secret and wary Carriage she speedily provides to begin her thus resolved
Journey. Though here she saw a far less appearance of hope, when her dearest
Brother, and her Native Kingdom had forsaken her, yet she resolves the trial
rather than to return, without a more assurance. She knew she had too far
waded, and incensed her malicious Adversaries, to expect a reconciliation, and
feared to be mewed up from all hope of future advantage. These Considerations
made her with a sad heart and weeping Eyes forsake the fruitful limits of
ungrateful France, and betake her self to her last, but most uncertain Refuge.
The Condition that is truly miserable, finds few real Friends, but never wants
Infidelity to increase its sorrow.

Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, who had fled to the Queen, and made himself a
sharer in this weighty Action, forsakes her Party. He seeing the French hopes
vanished, and these remaining so poorly grounded, thought to work his Peace by
losing his Faith, and in this conceit, in have, returns for England. His
Intelligence reconciles and wins him favor, but it was purchased at too dear a
rate, that stained the Honor of so high a Calling, and made him most unworthy
of so divine and grave a Profession.

By this Treachery, the King and Spencers understand both the Queen's
Resolution and Weakness. They fear not the German Motions, that were a dull sad
Nation, that seldom use to sight for nothing. Time has at last brought our
Royal English Pilgrims to the shrine of their devotion. The Earl of Heynault, a
Man truly noble and virtuous, understanding her arrival within the Precincts of
his Jurisdiction, gives her a free and loving welcome. This bountiful honest
Earl, esteems it his glory to entertain so Princely Guests like themselves, and
to become the Patron of their so weak condition. He had a Brother that made his
Arms the honor of his Profession, who thinks the Estate of this forsaken Queen
in justice deserved a true relief and pity. He tenders her his Service, and
believes the occasion happily offered, that might leave to ensuing Times the
Memory of his Virtue, Worth, and Valor.

So fair a Morning puts the Queen in hope the Evening would prove as fortunate:
By all those winning graces of a distressed Beauty, she strives to confirm and
more engage this first and fair affection.

The Earl having knowledge of his Brother's resolution, thought the Attempt too
full of hazard, and with a grave and mild temper, commending the nobility and
greatness of his Spirit, advises him to quit the Action; he lays before him
the weakness of the Foundation, the Queen was in want of Men and Money, and had
not such a Correspondency in England, as might warrant her against her incensed
Husband, who was waited on by so warlike and valiant a Nation. He in like sort
acquaints him, how impossible a thing it was for him to raise such an Army as
might credit the Cause, and countenance the beginning. True Valor consisting
not in daring Impossibilities, but exposing it self where Reason, Judgment, and
Discretion were the leaders.

Sir John with a quiet patience hears his Brother's Admonitions, which he knew
sprung from the freedom of an honest and a loving heart, but he imagined Age
had robbed his Breast and Head of all their Noble Vigor.

Sir, (quoth he) If You and all the World forsake this Noble Lady, my single
Arm shall maintain her Quarrel, since I had rather lose my Life than my Faith,
so full and freely engaged. After Ages shall not blot the Glory of our House,
so great and noble, with so inglorious a stain of baseness and infidelity: such
Precedents are seldom seen, and ought to be more tenderly regarded. A Queen and
the Heir apparent of so great a Crown pleading so just a pity, nor may, nor
shall be forsaken. If in the Reason of State you list not to be an Actor,
reserve your self, and make not the King of England your Enemy. Know I have
both Arms and Friends, I will pawn them all, rather than in the least degree
falsify my Word and Promise.

These words spoken with such a resolution and fearless bravery, stopped all
reply and contradiction. The Queen, that had already both a French and an
Italian Trick, had no less reason here to doubt it. She knew no means would be
left unattempted from her Domestic Spies, to make her once more forsaken. This
enforces her with a more Importunity to hasten and advance her Enterprise. All
the good Offices, that might spur on the enflamed heart of her brave Protector,
she makes the Handmaids of her Female Wisdom. But alas they needed not her
careful Agent, they had quickly gotten together a voluntary Troop of Three
Hundred well resolved Gallants, that vow themselves to follow him even into the
mouth of the Canon. He stays not to increase his number with a multitude, but
believes if there were an answering Correspondency in the English, with these,
to overrun the Kingdom. Arms, Shipping, and all Provisions necessary attend
their coming. They, with the glory of their hopes, lead the revived Queen a
Shipboard. Now do they expose themselves to the first trial of their Fortune,
aiming at Donge Port to take their hoped possession. The Heavens, that favored
their Design, out of their present fear preserves them beyond belief or
expectation. Her Adversaries had a forerunning knowledge of their intended
place of landing, and had there provided to give them a hot and bitter welcome.
The raging Billows and the blustering Winds, or rather the Divine Providence,
after the second day's extremity, brings them aland safe at Orwel, near
Harwich. They were ignorant, being driven to and fro by the violence of the
Weather, what part of the Kingdom they had light on; and were as much
distressed with the Unshipping of their Men and Baggage, as with the want of
Harbor and Victual. Three whole days in disorder and confusion they make the
bleak and yielding Sands their habitation, perceiving the vanity of their rash
and desperate Attempt, which in the least opposition or encounter must have
wrought their confusion. It was in vain to attend longer here, where they saw
so small sign of better Entertainment; this makes them march on with this
little weather-beaten Troop, to win and Conquer a Kingdom. St. Hammonds, an
Abbey of black Monks, was honored with the welcome of their long lost Mistress;
here she and her Princely Son had their first Reception and Entertainment.

The bruit of this Novelty, like a Welsh Hubbub, had quickly overtaken the
willing Ears of the displeased Commons. Who, ever desirous of Innovation, like
Bees, in swarms, do run to her assistance. The Barons so depressed and unjustly
grieved, with itching Ears attend the News of this advantage. When the tidings
of their arrival came to their knowledge, with so liberal a relation, which
made her Army ten times greater than it was, they lose no time for fear of some
prevention.

Henry of Lancaster was the first, who was seconded by many others of the
braver Peers of the Kingdom. By this means the Queen and her adherent strangers
lose the depth of that Agitation, that till now had kept them doubtful.

The King, that till this time had slumber'd out the Prologue of this ensuing
Danger, secure in the belief of the Spencers Strength and Providence, in so
general a Revolt, awakens from his licentious Pleasure, and beholds nothing but
a grim and fearful face of Sorrow. The Council of his Cabinet, accompanied with
their own guilt, are affrighted in the sad apparitions of their approaching
ruin. The time of prevention is lost, their abused confidence had only labored
to shut the Gate, but not assured the Family. The present necessity admits no
long deliberation, this flame was too violent to be quenched, and such a course
is to be taken as may rather assure them time to temporize, than with a strong
hand to strive to repel it.

The City's Guard is recommended to Stapleton, that had so unhappily, and with
so little credit changed his Master. The King and the Spencers forsaken, but
yet strongly attended with the guilt of so many and so foul Errors, fly to
Bristol, a Town strong enough, and well provided. Arundel, and the elder
Spencer, undertake the defense of the City, while the King and the others make
the Castle their hope and refuge.

The Queen being informed, that the King had forsaken his Royal Chamber, and
had stoll'n a flight to Bristol, she soon apprehends, and lays hold of the
advantage, addressing a fair but mandatory Letter to the Mayor, to keep the
City to the use of her and her Son, that was so like to be his Sovereign. The
inconstant Citizens, that ever cleave to the stronger Party, are easily
persuaded and entreated. Stapleton, that foresaw and feared the danger, summons
the Mayor to surrender him the Keys of the Gates for his assurance. Chickwell,
that was then Lord Mayor, incensed with the Imperiousness and Injustice of this
Demand, apprehends this inconsiderate Bishop, and without all respect to his
Place or Dignity, makes his Head the Sacrifice to appease the angry Commons.
This act had too far engaged him to recoil, he must now wholly adhere to the
Queen's Faction. Four of the gravest and most substantial Burghers are sent, to
let her truly understand their Devotion. They are graciously and lovingly
received, the Mayor has thanks for his late bloody Act, which was styled an
excellent piece of Justice.

This Gap thus stopped, with her Army she marches to the Cage that kept those
Birds, whose Wings she would be clipping. She knew if she struck not while the
Iron was hot, the heat of a popular Faction would quickly sink and lessen. All
the way of her Journey, she finds according to heart's desire, a free and noble
welcome. Her Troops, like Snow-balls, in her motion more and more increasing.
When she came before this great and goodly City, she saw it was a strength by
Art and Nature, and did believe it furnished to outwear a Siege of long
continuance, which made both her and her adherents more jealous, and suspect
the issue. Where the Person of an anointed King was at stake, there could be no
assurance. But smiling Fortune, that had turned her wheel, resolves this doubt,
and makes the Action easy. The Citizens, that knew not the Laws of War or
Honor, will not expose their Lives and Goods to the mercy of the Strangers,
and the hazard of an unruly Conquest. They had too much tasted the afflictions
of the Kingdom, to think the Quarrel just, or to adventure their Protection at
so dear a hazard, for those that had been the cause and instrument of so much
Blood and Trouble.

From this Consideration they send an humble Message to the Queen, and desire
as well to capitulate for their Commanders, as their own Interest. All other
Conditions are despised and disdained; if they will have Grace, they must
purchase it with the resignation and delivering up their Captains. This doom
was esteemed heavy, they would have been glad that she had had her will, but
were themselves unwilling to be the Actors. But the time no more Imparleance
admitted, neither could they have a delay or remedy. The Queen, that had won so
far upon their yielding hearts, knew their Condition well enough, and would not
give them respit, but calls upon their present Answer.

This round and smart Summons brings with one and the same art, Arundel,
Spencer, and the City, into her possession. This part of the Prey thus gotten,
no time is lost to call them to a reckoning. Sir Thomas Wadge, the Marshal of
the Army, recites a short Calendar of their large Offenses, when by a general
consent they are approved guilty, and without Judge, or other Jury, they are
sentenced to be drawn and hanged, and their Bodies to remain upon the Gibbet.
The rigor of this doom, Spencer, the Father, feels, that was Ninety years old,
and could not long have lived by the course of Nature.

The Castle-walls, and the eyes of the King, and his unhappy Son, were
witnesses of this sad Spectacle and his disaster. This praeludium gives them
the sense of their ensuing story, which with a world of melancholy thoughts,
they study to prevent or alter. A despairing resolution at length wins them to
a desperate hazard. While the Queen was laboring to surprise their Fortress,
which was like too long to hold good, if some stratagem were not found to get
it, there were no Citizens to betray them, it needed not, themselves were soon
the Actors. They steal into a small Bark that rode within the Harbor, hoping
by this means to make an escape undiscovered; they find the merciless waves and
winds a like cruel. Twice had they gained St. Vincent's Rock, but from that
Reach were hurried back with sudden Gusts and Tempests. The often going off
and return of this unguided Pinnace, begets a shrewd suspicion. At length she
is surpised, and in her Bulk is found that Treasure that ends the War, and
gave the work perfection.

The King is comforted with the smooth Language of those which had the honor
to take him, and believes the Title of a King, Father, and Husband, would
preserve his Life, if not his Sovereignty.

The Queen having now made the Victory perfect, no Enemy or other work
remaining, resolves with her self to use it to her best advantage. Yet she
gives her incensed passion pre-eminence, revenge must precede her desire and
strong ambition. No sooner had Sir Henry Beamond brought the imprisoned King
and his dejected Favorite to the Army, but she dispatcheth away her Husband to
Barkley-Castle, and Spencer is delivered over to the Martial, and immediately
has the like entertainment only, he has somewhat a longer time, and a far
more cruel Sentence than his Father. All things thus ordered, the Queen removes
to Hereford, and in all the places of her passage is welcomed with joyful
Acclamations. With a kind of insultant triumphing tyranny, far unworthy the
Nobility of her Sex and Virtue, she makes her poor condemned adversary in a
strange disguise attend her Progress. He was set upon a poor, lean, deformed
Jade, and clothed in a Tabarce, the Robe in those days due to the basest
Thieves and Rascals, and so was led through all the Market Towns and Villages,
with Trumpets sounding before him, and all the spightful disgraces and affronts
that they could devise to cast upon him.

Certainly this Man was infinitely tyrannical and vicious, deserving more than
could be laid upon him, yet it had been much more to the Queen's Reputation and
Honor, if she had given him a fair and legal Trial by his Peers, according to
that ancient and laudable Custom of England, wherein by his death he might have
given both the Law and his Adversaries a full satisfaction. It is certainly,
give it what other title you will, an argument of a wondrous base condition, to
insult or to tyrannize over those poor Ruins which Fortune has thrown into our
power. A noble pity is the argument of an honorable and sweet disposition, and
the life of Man is great enough to expiate all offenses. To satisfy our
passions with the bitterest extremity of our power, may justly be styled rather
a salvage and barbarous Cruelty, than true and perfect Justice. No question it
was a pleasing sight to all the wronged Subjects, to see such a leprous Monster
so monstrously used. But when the heat of blood was past, and men had
recollected their senses, it then appeared to be too great a blemish to a
Queen, a Woman, and a Victor. But whether she were now weary with imposing, or
he with suffering, Hereford, on a lofty Gibbet, of an extraordinary height,
erected on purpose, gives him the end of all his Torments. Which being
performed, Order is left behind for the Execution of Arundel four days after,
which is accordingly performed.

I could never yet read a fair and just cause, why this Earl lost his Life,
unless it may be counted Treason not to forsake his Lord and Master, to whom he
had so solemnly swore his Faith and Obedience. It certainly was no such capital
fault, to accompany and seek to defend his Sovereign, when he was by all others
forsaken, that by their Vows and Oaths ought to have been as deeply engaged. If
being taken with those that were so corrupt and wicked occasioned it, I see yet
no reason, why he alone was Executed, and those, that in their knowledge, were
his only Instruments and Creatures, were suffered to live, and be promoted. But
we may not properly expect Reason in Women's Actions, whose Passions are their
principal guide and mover.

Now she is come to London, and received with all the Honor due to so great a
Queen and Conquest, the People crowd to see her, and with applauding shouts
extol her, that in the least change of Fortune would be the first should cut
her Throat, or do her any other mischief.

A Parliament is immediately called and assembled, in which the Pack was
beforehand easily laid, for Edward had lost the Hearts and Love of all his
People; the Errors and Abuses of the Kingdom are there with too great a liberty
against a Sacred King yet living, laid open and discoursed. All men were of one
mind, a present Reformation must be had, which, in a true construction, was but
a mere politic Treason. The three Estates presently assent to the deposition of
the Elder, and raising the Younger Edward, to the sole Regiment and guidance of
the Kingdom; not a Peer, Bishop, Knight, or Burgess, speaks a word in defense
of him that was their Master but; diverse are sent from both Houses to the yet
King, to let him know their Declaration. When they were come into his presence,
Trussel, Speaker in the lower House, in the Name of the whole Kingdom, resigned
up all the Homage due to him, and then pronounces the Sentence of his
Deprivation.

Edward, that long before had notice of these Proceedings, arms himself to
receive it with patience. He gives them back no Answer, knowing a contestation
or denial might hasten on his death, and a consent had made him guilty by his
own confession.

Thus did this unfortunate King, after he had with perpetual agitation and
trouble, governed this Kingdom Eighteen Years, odd Months and Days, lose it by
his own Disorder and Improvidence, accompanied with the treachery and falsehood
of his own Subjects. And that which is most miraculous, an Army of three or
four hundred men, entered his Dominions, and took from him the Rule and
Governance, without so much as a blow given, or the loss of one Man more than
such as perished by the hand of Justice. In a declining Fortune all things
conspire a ruin, yet never was it seen, that so great a King fell with so
little Honor, and so great an Infidelity. But what could be expected, when to
satisfy his own unjust Passions, he had consented to the Oppressions of his
Subjects, tyrannized over the Nobility, abused his Wedlock, and lost all
fatherly care of the Kingdom, and that Issue that was to succeed him. Certainly
it is no less honorable than proper, for the Majesty and Greatness of a King,
to have that same free and full use of his Affection and Favor, that each
particular Man has in his oeconomic Government; yet as his Calling is the
greatest, such should be his Care, to square them always out by those Sacred
Rules of Equity and Justice; for if they once transcend or exceed, falling into
an extremity, they are the Predictions of a fatal and inevitable Ruin. Let the
Favorite taste the King's Bounty and enjoy his Ear, but let him not engross it
wholly, or take upon him the sway and governance of all the Affairs of his
Master; this begets not more Envy than multiplicity of Error, whose effects do
for the most part occasion a desperate Convulsion, if not the destruction of
that State where it has his allowance and practice. As Kings ought to limit
their Favors, so ought they to be curious in the Election, for persons of
baser or meaner quality exalted, are followed at the heels with a perpetual
murmer and hatred.

Neither is it safe or proper, that all the principal Dignities or Strengths of
a Kingdom should be committed to the Fidelity of any one particular Subject,
though never so gracious or able. There must be then a kind of Impulsive
necessity still to continue his Power, and approve his Actions, else, having
the Keys in his hand, he may at all times open the Gates to a Foreign Trouble,
or a Domestic Mischief.

The Number of Servants, as it is the Master's Honor, so is the knowledge of
their Ability his Glory. Where by a discreet distribution, they find variety of
Employment, and are indifferently heard, both in Advice and Action, they more
secure their Masters safety and greatness. Kings, in their Deliberations,
should be swayed by the whole body of a Council, and, in my opinion, should
take it ill, to have any Servant esteemed much wiser than his Master. Their
Royal Glory should be pure and transparent, suffering not the least eclipse, or
shadow: Be the advice of a single Wit never so grave and weighty, let the Act
and Honor be solely the Kings, which adds more and more to the belief of his
ability and greatness.

If once the Royal Heart be so given over to Sensuality, that the befitting and
necessary Cares of a Kingdom seem a burden, and by Letter of Attorney assigned
over to the Fidelity of another, he is then by his own Indiscretion no more an
absolute King, but at second hand and by direction. It is the Practic and not
the Theoric Act of State that aws and assures the heart of the Subject, this
being once doubtful or suspect, estrangeth the will of our Obedience, and gives
a belief of liberty to the Actions of Disorder and Injustice.

Neither is the Error and Imbecility of a Crown more prejudicial to it self,
than dangerous in the Example. Majestic Vanities and Vices find a ready
imitation and practice, so that it may be concluded, an ill King may endanger
the Virtue and Goodness of a whole Kingdom. Our Nature is prone to the worser
part, which we more readily are inclined to practice, with the condition of
time, and so powerful and eminent a Precedent.

Kings that are subject to a natural weakness, or grown to the practice of any
other particular Error, by corruption, should act their deeds of darkness with
such a reserved secrecy and caution, that there be not a suspicion to taint
him; for if it once win an open knowledge, besides the particular aspersion, it
brings with it an ensuing supposed liberty of Practice, both in Court and
State, by his Example.

As these are most proper to the Affections, so are there some as necessary
Instructions for Kingly Passions, which, of the two, are more violent and
dangerous.

Though it a while delay the concluding part of this History, yet my Pen must
not leave them untouched. I must confess, if Man could master and govern these
rebellious Monsters, he might justly merit rather the name of an Angel than a
mortal Creature. But this, in a true perfection, is most impossible. It is yet
in Divinity and all Moral Construction, the most absolute Masterpiece of this
our Pilgrimage, to dispose them so, that they wait on the operations of the
Soul rather as obedient Servants than loose and uncontrouled Vagabonds. A King
that is in these deficient, having so unlimited a Power, and making his Will
his Law, in short time loses the Honor of his Calling, and makes himself a
Tyrant. Intemperate and heady Actions beget but disorder and confusion, and if
they end in blood without a warranty of apparent Justice, or inevitable
Necessity, they cry to Heaven for a deserved vengeance. The Law has Advantages
and Punishments enough for those that lie at his mercy. Let not incensed have
betray the Royality of a Crown, to make it self both Judge and Executioner.
Kings are Gods on Earth, and ought in all their Actions to direct the imitation
after a Divine Nature, which inclines to Mercy more than Justice. Men's Lives
once lost cannot be redeemed; there ought therefore to be a tender
consideration before they be taken, lest the injustice of the actor in time be
brought to suffer in the same measure. As is the quality of the Fact, so is the
condition of his Agent to be maturely deliberated, wherein there may be such
dependencies, that it is for the Crown more profitable, safe, and honorable,
to save, or delay the Execution of the Law, than to advance or hasten it.
Howsoever, it is the more innocent and excellent way to offend in the better
part, and rather to let the Law, than once own Virtue and Goodness to be
visibly deficient, and disesteemed. The Actions of Repentance are numbered with
the Register of our Misdemeanors, where none appear more fearful than those,
which an inconsiderate Fury, or the violence of Passion, has acted with too
much have and cruelty. Let then the height of so great and excellent a Calling
be suited with as sweet a temper, neither too precipitate or slow, but with a
steady and well-advised Motion.

As these Considerations are in the one part necessary, so ought there to be a
correspondent Worth and Care in him that has the happiness to enjoy in so
great a measure his Royal Master's Ear and Favor. If the Actions of the King
be never so clear and innocent, yet he must favor or protect the Error of so
great a Servant, which makes him an Accessory, if not an Actor, in the unjust
Oppression of his Kingdom. It is not discretion, neither has it any Society,
with the well grounded Rules of Wisdom, for the Subject to exalt or amplify
the height of his own Glory, it is in the Eye of all, too great a presuming
Insolence, and Kings themselves will rather alter their Affections, than to be
outshined or dazzled in their own Sphere and Element.

He that has made his Master's Love, and has ascended the Stairs of his
Preferment, should make the same Virtue the stay of his Advantage, framing his
carriage to his Equals and Inferiors, with a like sweet and winning Temper. If
he swerve from this sacred Rule, and arrive to win Fear, or a vain Adoration,
let him know, the first is the Companion of Trust and Safety, the other of a
jealous Diffidence, that must betray his Life and Honor.

But to return to our History, which now removes Edward the Father to
Killingworth, where he remains under the keeping of the Earl of Lancaster,
while his unripe Son is crowned King, and the Queen, with Mortimer, take into
their hands the whole Sway, and Administration of the Kingdom. Their first Act
sends Baldock the Lord Chancellor to Newgate, a fit Cage for such a Haggard,
though far unworthy the Eminency of his height and dignity.

Now do the recollected Spirits of the Kingdom begin to survey and examine the
injustice of that Act, that had disrobed and put down a King, their
unquestionable Sovereign, that had been so solemnly Anointed, and so long
enjoyed the Regiment of the Kingdom: They find the condition of their Estate
but little altered, and according to the vanity of their Hearts, are as ready
to attempt a new Innovation. Many Suits are made to the King, and the
Protectors, to release him out of his Imprisonment, but all prove vain and
fruitless. The Black Friars were in this request more earnest, who in their
denial, sought to bring it to pass by force or surprisal. They make Donhead,
one of their number, their Captain, but he knew better the use of
Church-Ornaments, than how to handle his Weapons, or manage an Army; he is
intercepted and sent to Prison, where he dies, before he had so much as
mustered his Congregation.

This Cloud dispersed, the Queen believes it a fit time to take her leave of
her assistant Strangers, who mainly hasten their departure. She was unwilling
they should be witnesses to the unnatural succeeding Tragedy, which was too
much for her own Kingdom, and unfit for the Strangers Climate, which was filled
with the belief of her Virtue and Honor. She liberally and freely requites to
each particular the minute of his Pains and Travel, but Sir John of Henalt, and
the better sort, are honored with many rich Jewels and Gifts, besides
continuing Annuities, and annual Revenues. They hold themselves nobly
contented, and taking a solemn leave, are honorably attended to Dover, leaving
the Kingdom with a merrier Eye, than when they first beheld it.

Now is the Earl of Lancaster, who, though he had least cause, was nobly
disposed toward his old Master removed, and delivers over his Charge by
Indenture, to Sir Morice Barkeley, and Sir John Mattrevers, who lead him back
to his first place of Imprisonment, where, in the presence of his Keepers, he
one day in a melancholy Passion, does thus discourse his Sorrows:

Alas! Is my Offense so great, that it deserves nor pity nor assistance? Is
human Piety and Goodness so wholly lost, that neither in Child, Wife, Servant,
or Subject, appears the least expression of Love or Duty? Admit my Errors
unexcusable, wherein I will not justify my self, nor accuse others: though it
has taken from me the Glory of my former Being, I am yet a Father and a
Husband, these titles are without the jurisdiction of Fortune. If I be so,
where is the Affection and Duty that becomes the Child, and Wedloc? Sure my
Misery has not made me such a Basilisk or Monster, that my sight should beget
or Fear or Hatred; can they believe a danger in the visitation of a poor
distressed Captive? I know their hardened Hearts are not so noble and apt for
Compassion, that they need suspect themselves or me in so poor a courtesy.
What then occasions this neglect or estrangement? Are they not content to enjoy
all that was mine, as yet by the Laws of God, Man, and Nature, but they must
despise and forsake my withered Ruins?

Alas! I know my poor Children are Innocent, both they, and my injurious Queen,
are betrayed by cunning wicked Mortimer, whom if I had paid with his just
desert, when Heaven, and his own Guilt, had laid him at my Mercy, I had not
lived to endure this Affliction, nor he to be the insulting Instrument of my
Dishonor. But Time, and this sad Trial, has taught me Patience, and learned
me how to know the height of my Misfortunes, which (if my divining Spirit err
not) will not be long unseen and unrevenged. Am I unworthy to be seen? I am
then unfit to live, and will receive it as a well-becoming pity, if my Death
may send me hence from this so great a Sorrow.

When he had thus ended, and with a few manly Tears smothered in the depth of
that heartbreaking sigh that enforced his silence, he was by one of his
Attendance made this ruff uncivil Answer:

My Lord, your Wife and Children are jealous, and fearful of your cruel furious
Nature, whereof both they and the Kingdom have too true a knowledge to trust
you: Besides, they are informed your resolution is fixed to do them mischief,
if they approach your danger. This keeps your Queen from you, she once so truly
loved.

My Queen, (quoth he) has she that remaining Title, while I that made her so
am less than nothing. Alas poor wretched Woman! Has she, nor could she sind no
other more tolerable excuse than this, so faint a pretended fear and danger? Is
there a possibility in her suspicion? Or have I the means (if I were so
resolved) to do it, that am here a poor forsaken Man, as far from Power as
Comfort? And, fellow, thou that take so audacious and saucy a Liberty, to
character thy Sovereign's Disposition, which thou art bound to Honor, and not
to question: Know Edward 's Heart is as free from thy base Aspersion, as thine
from Truth or Honesty.

When he had ended these words, he retires himself to his Chamber sad and
melancholy, believing his case was hard and desperate, when so base a Groom
durst face to face affront him. The Queen and Mortimer revelling now in the
height of their Ambition and Felicity, had yet a wary Eye to the main, which
they knew did principally rest on the safeguard and sure keeping of the deposed
King. Though they had all the marks and essential parts of an absolute
Sovereignty, the Name alone excepted, yet they had unquiet and troubled
thoughts in the fear and imagination of losing it. They saw their plausible
Incomes was dully continued, and there was a beginning murmur against the
manner of their Proceedings. They knew there was no constancy in the People,
that would be as ready to take them off, as they were to bring them on, in any
new stirring or Innovation. The Lords that were their principal Supporters were
content, but not satisfied, all things concurring to make them suspect their
own condition.

Edward the Father's faults were extenuated, his Vices ascribed to those that
had betrayed him, and his Estate infinitely pitied, that had so dishonorable a
usage, far short of what in justice appertained to the honor of his first
Calling. These Reports made their Ears tingle, and incites them in time to
think upon some besitting Remedy. Many ways and devices are thought upon, but
they all are subject to some manifest imperfection. On this Mortimer falls to
the matter roundly, and tells the Queen plainly, That there is no way left to
make all sure, but absolutely to take away the Cause, and to leave the Party by
Edward's death hopeless, that by his life sought to make a new Combustion.

The Queen, whose Heart was yet innocent of so deep a Transgression, was deeply
and inwardly troubled with this unhappy Proposition. She believed his
sufferings were already greater than his faults, and was unwilling to stain the
opinion of her worth and virtue, with so foul an Act of injustice. She was
assured it could not be so done, but it would be discovered; if the Eyes of Men
could be blinded, yet that all-knowing power of Heaven would reveal and punish
it. Such deep Actions of crying Sins are seldom long unrevenged, which made her
most unwilling that her consent should pass, or be assistant. To kill a King,
her Husband, that had once so dearly loved her, was more than an Act of Blood,
nor could she expect, but that the Son grown up would revenge the death of the
Father. Therefore (quoth she) sweet Mortimer, let us resolve rather any other
hazard, than this which is waited on with so great Infamy and certain Ruin.

Mortimer replies, Madam, who has the benefit of time, and neglects the
advantage, if he fall is justly unworthy pity or compassion. Have you exposed
your self to all the bitter Trials of Fortune, suffering so meanly, so many
Miseries, and having overcome them according to your desire, are you willing to
return to your own condition, and former sorrow? If it be so, Mortimer is
wretched in sacrificing his Devotion and Heart to such a Female weakness. In
cases of extremity, a tenderness of Conscience begets a certain danger, nor is
it disproportionable so to continue a Crown, that by blood was gotten and
surprised; had Edward known I should have lived to see his Ruin, my Head had
paid my ransom. The impressions of Fear make his subject less in sense than
apparition; think not me of so poor a Brain, but I as well know how to work as
move it, such Actions are not to be done, but such a way as may prevent proof,
if not suspicion. But why do I seek thus to charm your Ears, if you be willing
he shall live, let him, let the inclining People set him free to call you to an
account for his oppression, let him parallel his Spencer's death in your
Affliction, perhaps he will spare you for your Brother's sake, who he knows so
dearly loves you, and did so bravely witness it in your Affliction, perhaps
he will suffer you still to guide the Crown, and your fair Son to wear it. If you
be pleased you may abide the Trial. Mortimer's resolved, since you neglect his
Judgment, you will as soon forget his Service, which he will in time prevent,
before it be debarred.

With this he flings away, as if he meant, to give his words a real Execution.
The amazed Queen pursues and overtakes him. Stay, gentle Mortimer, (quoth she)
forgive my Error, I am a Woman fitter to take advice than give it. Think not I
prize thy Love so little as to lose thee. If Edward must dye, I will not seek
to divert it, only I thus much beg, I may not be partaker, or privy to the
time, means, or manner.

Madam, leave that to me, who will alone both undertake the Act and Danger; all
I require from you, is but to seal a Warrant to change his former Keepers.

Sir Morris Barkley had been tampered withal, and was so far from consent,
that he plainly declared he did abhor the Action. This Answer suddenly
discharges him, and commits his Masters Guard to Sir Thomas Gourney, and his
former Partner Mattrevers. They having received both their Warrant and
Prisoner, convey him to Cork-Castle, the place in all the World he most hated.
Some say he was foretold by certain Magic Spells, that this place was to him
both fatal and ominous. But whatsoever the cause was, he was at his first
arrival deeply sad and passionate. His Keepers, to repel this humor, and make
him less suspicious, feed him with pleasant Discourse, and better
Entertainment, while his misgiving Spirit was heavy, sad, and melancholy.

The Night before his Death he supped heartily, and went to Bed betimes;
scarcely were his heavy Eyes locked up in silent slumber, when his forsworn
traitorous Murderers enter his Chamber, and finding him asleep, inhumanly and
barbarously stifled him, before he could avoid or resist it. The writers differ
mainly in the manner of his Death, but all conclude him murdered, yet so, that
the way, on search and view, could not be known or discovered. A small passage
of time gave the most part of all these Actors of his Death, an end fit for
their deserts, and this so bloody an Action. Their several Relations and
Confessions occasion so many various Reports, and different kinds of Writing;
the truth whereof is not much material, since all agree, he came to an
unnatural and untimely Death.

Thus fell that unhappy King Edward the Second, who was Son and Father to two
of the most glorious Kings that ever held the Monarchy of the English Nation.
Main Reasons are given probable enough to instance the necessity of his fall,
which questionless were the secondary means to work it. But his Doom was
registered by that inscrutable Providence of Heaven, who with the self-same
Sentence punished both him, and Richard the Second his great Grandchild, who
were guilty of the same Offenses. The Example of these two so unfortunate Kings
may be justly a leading precedent to all Posterity.

Certainly we have had other Kings as faulty and vicious, that have o're-liv'd
their Errors, and died not by a violent hand, but by the ordinary and easy
course of Nature. The condition and quality of these, was not in themselves
more perilous and exorbitant, than hurtful and dangerous to the Estate, Peace,
and Tranquillity of the whole Kingdom. If by height of Youth, height of
Fortune, or a corrupt natural Inclination, the Royal Afflictions loosely fly at
random; yet if it extend no farther than the satisfaction of the proper
Appetite, it may obscure the Glory, but not supplant the strength and welfare
of a Monarchy. But when it is in it self not only vicious and ill affected, but
does patrocine and maintain it in others, not blushing in such a justification,
it is a forerunning and presaging evidence, that betokens a fatal and unpitied
Ruin.

It is too much in a King, that has so great a Charge delivered to his care
and custody, to be dissolute, or wantonly given, but when it falls into a
second Error, which makes more Kings than one in the self-same Kingdom, he
opens the way to his own destruction. The Subjects hearts, as they are obliged,
so are they continued by the Majesty and Goodness of a King; if either of these
prove prostitute, it unties the Links of Duty and Allegiance, and hunts after
Change and Innovation.

It is of so singular and great a consequence, that Kings ought to be well
advised, and sparingly to accumulate their Honors and Favors, wherein both
the Time, Person, and Occasion, ought to be both worthy and weighty; for the
Eye of the Subject waits curiously on his Actions, which finding them
degenerating from his own Greatness, and inclinable to their Oppression, vary
their Integrity to a murmuring discontent, which is the Harbinger to a revolt
and mischief. Nor is it proper (if the Sovereign's Affections must dote) that
the Object of their weakness should sway the Government of the Kingdom. Such an
Intermixtion begets confusion and Error, and is attended by a perpetual envy
and hatred.

Is it possible but there must be perpetual Error and Injustice, where all
things are carried more by Favor and Affection, than Law and Reason? Or can
the lesser Fountains be clear, when that main Spring that feeds them is tainted
and polluted? Alas, common and familiar Experience tells, that the Actions and
principal Use of a Favorite, is to make good by his strength and favor, those
Designs that are in themselves unjust, perverse, and insupportable.

A good Cause in the Integrity of Time, needs no protection but its own
Innocence; but where the sacred Rules of Justice are inverted, the sincerity of
the Law abused, the conscience of the Judge corrupted or enforced, and all
things made Mercenary, or carried by indirect Favor, what expectation can
there be, but that Kingdom, which is the Theater of so infamous a practice,
should fall speedily into a fearful and desperate Convulsion. Though the
Histories of these times are plentifully stored, and few Commonwealths are
free from the Examples of this nature, yet I shall not need any other instance
than the story of this unfortunate Prince, whose time presents a perfect
Mirror, wherein ensuing Kings may see how full of danger and hazard it is, for
one Man's love to sell the Affections and Peace of the whole Kingdom.

Had Edward (...) own particular been far worse than he was, he ^ight have
still subsisted, but when for his inglorious Minions Gaveston and Spencer, who
successively engross him, he fell to those injurious and dissolute Actions,
that made all Men, and the Kingdom, pray to their insolent and imperious
Humors, he quickly found both Heaven and Earth resolved to work his Ruin. Not
only his own, but theirs, and those of their ignoble Agents, were made his
proper Errors, which took so wholly from him the Love and Hearts of his
Subjects, that he found neither Arms nor Tongue to defend him. A more
remarkable Misery I think no time of ours produces, that brings this King to
destruction, without so much as any one Kinsman, Friend, or Subject, that
declared himself in his Quarrel.

But he found the Climacteric year of his Reign before he did expect it: And
made that unhappy Castle, which he ever hated, the witness of his cruel Murder;
where I must leave him, 'till he find a more honorable place of Burial, and my
weary Pen a fortunate Subject, that may invite it to some other new Relation.

FINIS.
Books sold by John Playford, at his Shop near the Temple-Church.
MVsic's Recreation on the Viol Lyra-way, containing a Collection of New
Lessons, with Instructions for Beginners. Price 2 s.

Apollo's Banquet for the Treble-Violin, containing new Theater-Tunes, Airs,
Corants, Sarabands, Jigs, and Horn-pipes; to which is added, the Tunes of the
new French Dances: Also Rules and Directions for Practitioners on the
Treble-Violin. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Treasury of Music, containing three Books of Select Airs and Dialogues to
sing to the Theorbo-Lute, or Bass-Viol; Composed by Mr. Henry Laws, and others.
All bound in one Volum in Folio. Price 10 s.

Choice Airs, Songs, and Dialogues, being most of the newest Songs sung at
Court, and at public Theaters. Composed by several Gentlemen of His Majesty's
Music, in Folio, newly reprinted with large Additions. Price 3 s.

The Musical Companion, containing Catches, Airs, and Songs, for two, three,
or four Voices, bound up in Quarto. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Introduction to the Skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, by I.
Playford, in Octavo. Price bound 2 s.


