A FAITHFUL HISTORY OF THE NORTHERN AFFAIRS OF IRELAND: FROM The Late K. JAMES
Accession to the Crown, TO THE Siege of LONDONDERRY.

Giving a True Account of the Occasions of the Miscarriages there: And of the
Reasons why the Gentry abandoned those Parts.

By a Person who bore a great Share in those Transactions.

LICENSED

December. 10. 1689.


LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers Hall. M
DC XC.

A FAITHFUL HISTORY OF THE NORTHERN Affairs of Ireland, etc.
NO sooner was the late King Jumes advanced to the Throne, but he fixed his
whole study upon the Establishment of his darling Twins, Popery and Slavery;
and having by several Instances formerly experienced the English Aversion to
the Principles of that Religion, he therefore first set himself to consider
such Methods as might best serve for the Introduction of it, without giving
them too near a Prospect of the Revolution intended. It was sor this reason
thought fit that Ireland should be the first unhappy Scene of the ensuing
Tragedy, where such a Change seemed very practicable; for the far greater
number of Inhabitants being naturally Slaves to the Yoke of Rome, could not but
welcome the Chains of a Popish Tyrant; yet was not this to be effected on a
sudden for fear of alarming England, which was not at that time brought under
the Awe of a Standing Army; besides, the most considerable part of the Forces
then in Ireland, consisting of such as were Protestants, obliged the King to a
more wary Prosecution of his Designs. It was therefore concluded to move by
slower steps, and to continue the Administration of Affairs in such hands, as
should seem to be Protestants, that his Popish Councils might carry the better
Gloss, and his English Subjects be less sensible of his varnisht Designs. Thus
Ireland languish'd under the unhappy Circumstances of being ruined by its
pretended Friends, when in England the unwary Compliance of such as would
hazard all to be thought Loyal, gave the King an opportunity of appearing more
public in that which he before durst only dissemble; for upon the Compliments
that were daily paid him in England, he presumed to divide the Military from
the Civil Power in Ireland, and settled the Regulation of the Standing Army in
the hands of a Papist, who was obliged to frame it to such a model as might
best square with the Turn intended: For this Service Talbot was created Earl of
Tyrconnel, and sent over armed with an absolute Power of disbanding such as he
should judge disaffected to their Designs.

At his first landing, he was highly courted by the Two Lords Justices, both of
them paying him that Respect (tho as is supposed by the King's directions)
which they ought to have received from him, and as he has been often heard to
say, doing his Business faster than he could have done it himself. Nor could
the Earl of Clarendon, who succeeded them in the Government, stop Tyrconnel's
career; and tho he often interposed his Civil Authority, yet could he not
prevent the whole Military Strength from devolving into the hands of the
Papists; for in his time were most of the Protestant Officers and Soldiers
cashiered, the Militia of the Country disarmed; the Forts and Strongholds put
into the Possession of the Papists; and every thing else done, which might
prepare an easy Access sor a Popish Governor.

Thus far were their Designs advanced in Ireland, under the Umbrage of a
Protestant Power, when Monmouth's Rebellion, and the great Loyalty that
suppressed it, raised the Popish Party so far above their former hopes, that
they now thought it high time to lay aside the Mask; and to this end it was
resolved, That the Civil and Military Power should reunite in a Papist, who
might act both as Deputy and General in that Kingdom. This double Trust was
conferred on the Earl of Tyrconnel, whose past Services, and avowed Prejudices
to the Protestant Interest, recommended him as the fittest Person to Act that
Part of the Tragedy; He was a man of a comely Presence, but Haughty, Proud, and
Insolent, and therefore was not at first reputed Master of so much Policy and
Discretion as he afterward appeared to be; his open Practices against such as
Professed the Reformed Religion, and his severe usage of them whilst he was
but a Private Colonel, made them fear a sudden Stroke from his greater
Authority, upon which many of the Richest and most Powerful of the Country,
removed themselves with their Effects for England; and his Aversion to the
British Settlement was so generally known, that very few durst stand the Test
of it. This great Change in the Civil Government, much Impoverished and
Deprived Ireland, not only of its Wealth, but of a far greater Treasure, its
Wisest Men, those that were left behind, being only such, as although they had
known how to have helped themselves, yet wanted both Power and Means to Effect
it.

Though the Protestant Interest was chiefly struck at in this great turn, yet the
Trading part of the Papists were also sensible of the consequences of it; for
the whole Kingdom in a short time languished under a general Consumption of
Trade; and the Exchequer Receipts were so reduced, that it was feared they
would not Answer the public Payments. This put Tyrconnel upon a pretended
Moderation, who for some time concealed his Temper under a mask of gentleness,
hoping thereby to have deluded back such as had been the staple Traders of this
Kingdom; but they being convinced that the same designs were still on foot,
though carried on by slower steps, would not be persuaded to re-embark their
Fortunes under the Convoy of a Popish Pilot; Tyrconnel seeing himself thus
disappointed in his Art of Dissimulation, reassumed his own Nature; and laying
aside his Hypocrisy, openly acted as the professed Enemy to the British
Interest; and having already Invested the Native Irish with a full Power over
the Lives of their Conquerors, by Arming them with the Swords of Revenge, he
afterward packed such Judges on the several Benches as were every way engaged
to subvert the Legal Settlement of the whole Kingdom.

These were the unfortunate Circumstances the poor Distressed Protestants of
Ireland labored under, when nothing but the happy News of our present King's
Charitable Designs, could have raised them to the Hopes of a better Fortune;
and His Majesty's good Endeavors, being Crowned in England with a suitable
Success, put them upon projecting such Methods as might best serve to complete
their Deliverance.

The only parts of Ireland where the Number of Protestants exceded the Papists,
were the Northern Counties, whose nearest seituation to England and Scotland,
had invited several Families to Transport themselves thither, by which means
they grew so Populous, that they became a Terror to their Irish Neighbors, and
were for that reason believed to have been thrice as many, as they afterward
appeared to be; several Protestants flattered themselves with the same
thoughts, which proved the greatest Spur to their present Confusion; for the
Gentlemen of that Country, presuming too far upon the Opinion of their own
Strength, and finding the Affairs of England run Successfully on the
Protestants side, rashly fancied themselves able enough to Attempt their
Deliverance; and being in daily hopes of a considerable supply from England,
thought it would very much conduce to their Honor should they be found in a
Posture of receiving it; but that which fixed their Resolutions, was the
necessity they seemed to lie under, of Arming themselves against a Numerous
Rabble, which Tyrconnel was then raising, and who had no other visible means to
subsist, but on the Plunder and Ruin of the Protestants.

In the Prosecution of this Affair, the Ld. B -- in the Counties of Ardmagh and
Monaghan, and Sir A -- R -- in Down and Antrim, appeared most forward; but the
Councels of the latter, were chiesly managed by Mr. H -- ton of T -- who about
September 1688. very much busied himself to engage such Gentlemen in an
Association, as he knew his Reason could best influence; inviting them to it by
urging the Probability of Successes, from the current of Affairs in England,
and showing several Letters from thence, which promised a Speedy Relief, tho in
the end most of them proved as false, as the late Accounts from Londonderry.
Tho this Gentleman was but of Moderate esteem at other times amongst them, yet
his Arguments in this Conjuncture, were so enforced by the general
Dissatisfaction of the Country (some having just before lost their Livelihoods
with their Employments, and others daily expecting to be ejected out of their
Estates by the corrupt Trespasses on the Acts of Settlement) that they were
easily persuaded to join in any Confederacy, which might rescue them from the
approaching Ruin; and at this time their Resolutions seemed confirmed, by such
an Opportunity as Promised an undoubted Success to their Designs; for most of
the Disciplined Army that Quartered in the North, were just before embarked
for England, in order to oppose our present King's Landing.

Hitherto none of the Nobility had appeared in the Counties of Down and Antrim,
which held several Gentlemen of those Parts in Suspense, who were unwilling to
engage in an Enterprise of that Consequence, unless Countenanced by Persons of
the best Quality, and tho otherwise the Lords of M -- and M --, were men of no
extraordinary great Interest, yet it was generally thought more agreeable to
the Rules of Policy and good Manners, that the Heads of a Party should spring
from the Nobility, whose precedence was Indisputable, than from the Gentry or
Commonalty, where every man's equal pretense might breed Confusion: It was
therefore concluded, that such Methods should be immediately taken, as might
best serve to engage those two Noblemen, and the E. of M -- being deaf to all
Arguments, was at last drawn in by a Letter found in Comber-Street directed to
his Lordship, and importing the discovery of an Intended Massacre by the
Papists, upon the Ninth of December following; and for the better credit of
this Letter, it was pretended that notice of the same design had been sent to H
-- ton of T's Brother, all which (as I have been very well assured) was only a
contrivance devised, as the readiest means to engage the Earl, and animate a
dejected People, who of themselves were backward to all Arguments of that
Nature. However upon this Information, H -- ton of T -- Rid Post for Dublin,
and it was so ordered, that my L -- M's -- Letter met him at Dundalk, by which
means he went up fraighted with a double Discovery; The Arrival of this News at
Dublin, so Alarmed the City, that above Five Thousand Protestants Appeared in
Arms that Night, and many Hundred Families Embarked from all Parts in such
Confusion, that they left every thing but their Lives behind them; but that
which happened of greatest consequence upon this Discovery, was, the
extraordinary accident that attended the account of it in Londonderry; where it
had no sooner arrived, but it seemed to be confirmed, past a doubt, by the
Advance of a Considerable Part of the Earl of Antrim's Regiment, consisting of
Five New-raised Companies, which together with the Rabble that followed, made
up at least a Thousand men (designed for a Garrison to the Town); the
Inhabitants seeing such a Number, and concluding them to have been the
Instruments designed for the Execution of the Pretended Massacre, immediately
shut up their Gates, and Discharging some great Guns upon the nearer approach
of the Irish, (who were only intended for a Garrison to the Town) obliged them
to Retreat in great disorder; and the Townsmen keeping their Gates shut, issued
out a Declaration, showing their Reasons for what they had done; which they
wholly imputed to the Apprehension of a Popish Massacre; this Contrivance did
very much weaken the Protestant Interest, by lessening their Numbers; so did it
much surprise Tyrconnel; who either supposing it to have been but a Fiction by
the English, had reason to believe it devised in order to promote some Future
Design; or else, knowing it to have been really intended, could not but be
touched with the Discovery of it: The Effect was, it hastened the Advance of
Forces in all parts of the Kingdom; Tyrconnel having dispatched Circular
Letters to the several Counties, encouraging the raising of men, by promising
to each Person a Commission suitable to the Number he should List; The Earl of
Mead, Grenard, and other Protestant Peers, Residing at that time in Dublin,
and foreseeing the Evil Influence that would necessarily follow the Conjunction
of so vast a Rabble joined in a Remonstrance, and Petitioned, That no more
Commissions might issue; but received such an Answer, as hastened the Earl of
Mead for England, under color of Representing the Melancholy Circumstances
of that Kingdom; but what Service he did for the Country (tho it be many
Months since) we are not yet sensible of.

The raising of these New Levies, was the great step to those heavy Misfortunes
that soon afterward fell upon the whole Kingdom; for their Officers having
abandoned them to their own shifts, and the Government allowing no other
subsistence than what they could Plunder from the Protestants, brought such a
Fate upon the Gentlemen of Lemster and Munster, that most of them enjoyed but
one days space between Riches and Beggary. Amidst these Convulsions, the North
only remained undisturbed; for Tyrconnel not having yet raised any consierable
Numbers, rather Feared than Despised them; and the News of what happened in
Londonderry, made him dread the Consequence of such an Example; which put him
upon engaging my Lord Mountjoy, to use his utmost Interest and Endeavors
toward the Reduction of that Town; who after some Debate, and upon Condition,
that the Irish should be first Disbanded, was admitted with Five Companies; and
being under an obligation of returning, Recommended the Care of the Garrison to
his Lieutenant Colonel Lundy.

Matters being thus far Accommodated in Derry, and Tyrconnel being willing to
secure himself against the Northern Numbers, Prudently resolved to keep up a
fair Correspondence with them; and in order to it, he invited several of the
Leading men to attend him at Dublin; but the Country not judging it safe to
venture many of them, lest they should be detained as Hostages; nor Politic,
wholly to despise his Summons, concluded that only Sir Robert Colvil should be
entrusted with this Undertaking; who being very kindly treated by the
Government, was dismissed with repeated Assurances, That if his Countrymen
would continue quiet in their Respective Habitations, they should be only
charged with the Encumbrance of Two Regiments; but as it soon afterward
appeared, Tyrconnel had never intended to keep these Promises any longer than
they served his Designs; for immediately upon Sir Robert's departure, he
Commanded a Detachment out of another Regiment to reinforce the Garrison at the
Newry. It Is likewise to be presumed, that Sir Robert Colvil promised more in
behalf of the Northern Gentlemen, than they were willing to make good; for at
his return he found them engaged in a Project, which as well in respect of his
Promise, as in common Prudence, he thought himself obliged to oppose; judging
it not fit to incense a Government that courted them, especially such a one as
he very well knew they could not be able to oppose, should they be reduced to
extremity, being sensible that the Northern Strength consisted much more in
Reputation, than in any real Force they could make; but all his Endeavors were
vain, and his Advice branded with the Epithetes of Cowardly and Popish, by
those who had afterward Reason to wish they had yielded to such Moderate
Councils.

The Two Regiments which by Tyrconnel's engagement were designed for the
Northern Quarters, happened at this time to be Garrisoned in Lysburn, Bellfast,
Carricksergus, and other adjacent Places, under the Command of the Earl of
Antrim, and Sir Thomas Newford; when upon a solemn debate by a Committee of
such as had subscried the Association, it was concluded that those Regiments
should be disarmed, and the Castle of Carrickfergus secured, in which were Arms
for Two Regiments more. Upon the Strength of this Attempt they purposed to have
opposed Tyrconnel upon equal Terms, and by putting a Garrison into the Newry,
they hoped to have stopped that Pass, and thereby to have secured the two
Counties of Down and Antrim for the Protestant Interest. This project seemed
the more Feasible, because one Hundred and Fifty of Newcomen's Regiment,
consisting only of 500. were Protestants, and ready to join in the execution of
this Design, offering as a farther demonstration of their good will to the
Public Service, an excellent Stratagem for the Surprise of the Castle at
Carrickfergus, which they proposed to effect, under the pretense of their
Collonel's purpose to Garrison there; but the failure of their Designs against
Belfast, rendered this Contrivance useless, which happened in this manner. When
the Project of Disarming the Popish Soldiers in that Town was upon Execution,
Sir W -- F --, Mr. V --, and Mr. H -- ton of T --, together with Capt.
Leighten, Capt. Berningham, Lieut. Barnes, Lieut. Tubman, and several other
Officers of the Regiment, and Citizens of the Town, met in order to accomplish
their Designs; but the first three, relenting, absolutely denied to go on, tho
often pressed to it by the Officers; Capt. Leighton urging the Feasibleness of
it, by engaging to Disarm the whole Garrison, with the assistance only of as
many men as might serve to bring off their Arms; but the three first Gentlemen
discountenancing the Captains offer, and interposing their great Authority with
the Town, the whole Project fell, and H -- -- -- ton of T -- Gallopped toward
Sir Arthur R --, who Marching with Five Hundred men to make good the Attempt,
was advanced within Five Miles of the Town; when this ungrateful Message
diverted him, and occasioned his giving such marks of Reproach, as was due to
those who had stifled so hopeful a Design: Those who had been appointed to
Seize the Popish Arms in Lisburn, having taken the advantage of the night, did
the work; but their Correspondence at Belfast assuring them of a failure by the
Undertakers of that Town, made them dread the consequence of being solely
exposed to the Revenge of the Government; which consideration put them upon
returning those Arms they had taken; the several Gentlemen who Commanded in the
Army, having by this vain Attempt Discovered their aversion to the Popish
Interest, Marched off with 150 of their men, hoping thereby to prevent any
Surprise, which might have afterward betrayed them into the hands of their
Colonel, who likewise finding his Number very much decreased by the Desertion
of so many of his Soldiers, and fearing the consequence of a Second Project,
Retreated in all haste to safer Quarters: The Garrison of the Newry (which at
that time only consisted of two Companies) hearing of the Protestant Design
against the Soldiers in Lisburn and Belfast, and expecting a sudden onset from
the Inhabitants of that Town, quitted their Posts, and could not be persuaded
to return, till they were first assured of the Unhappy failure.

As this miscarriage proved a Warning-piece to alarm the Popish Party; so on
the other hand it very much discouraged the Protestant Interest; for several
Gentlemen (especially such as were to have been actually engaged in this
Attempt) being apprehensive of the dangers that might attend such timorous
Councils, provided for their future safety by securing a Passage for England;
and Tyrconnel being now convinced of the Northern Designs against his
Government, immediately reinforced the Garrison at the Newry, thereby securing
an easy entrance into the North, and intercepting all Correspondence between
the Northern and other Protestants; which proved a matter of such Consequence,
as by this means no Letters or Messengers were suffered to pass or re-pass, but
such as he knew would best serve his turn.

The Gentlemen who had been the unhappy occasion of all these Mischiefs, being
sensible of the unfortunate Circumstances to which they had reduced that
Country, now began to consider of such methods as might make amends for their
past Miscarriages: To this end a General Meeting at Comber was concluded on, in
which they might agree what Course next to steer, and how for the future to lay
such a Scene of Affairs, as might give them a better Prospect of Success. Mr. H
-- ton appearing most officious upon this occasion, and having undertook the
Dispatch of Circular Letters, summoned only such as he knew would be either
guided by his Counsels, or else wanted Interest to oppose his Designs; for he
neither summoned Mr. Annesly, Sir Rob. Maxwell, Mr. Ward, Mr. Savage, nor any
other Gentleman whom he believed would not readily resign a blind assent to his
humor, tho they were otherwise Persons every way qualified for the Public
Service: But that which happened of greatest difficulty, was the exclusion of Sir
Rob. Colvil from this Meeting, whose great Estate in the Country, and Interest
in the very Town where they sat, seemed to oblige them to take notice of him;
but it was so contrived, that the Gentlemen who were designed for Council,
assembled on the 13th, at which time the methods were concluded on, and Sir
Rob. summoned the next day, to assent, if he pleased, to what he could not
alter. This Convention, which only consisted of Sixteen Gentlemen, being sat at
Comber, the first things discoursed of, were the Disorders, Delays, Openness,
and other Inconveniences that attended their former Meeting, to which the
failure of their Designs was chiefly attributed; and to obviate those
Mischiefs, it was agreed, That a Junto of Five should be chosen for the County;
any Three whereof should be empowered to act as the Representatives of the
rest, whose Decrees and Orders should be as binding, as if they had been
concluded by the general Voice of the Country.

And it was likewise agreed, That an Association should be proposed by the
Gentlemen of that County, to the other Counties of Vlster, for the joint
Preservation of the Public Interest, and Protection of the Protestant
Religion. Matters being thus far adjusted by the consent of the whole
Convention; the next thing to be considered, was the Election of Five such
Persons as were best qualified to represent the County; and for that service,
the E. of M -- Sir A -- R --, Mr. H -- of B --, Mr. H --, and H -- of T --,
were proposed at the instance, and by the directions of the latter; who having
packed the greatest part of the Assembly, could not want a Majority of Votes to
declare in favor of such as he thought fit to recommend.

These Gentlemen being complimented with a tender of the Care and Trust of the
County, at first as modestly refused, as the New Pope does the Papacy, which
they afterward as willingly embraced; and tho some of the Convention thought
others far better qualified, both in Interest, and Parts, for a Charge of that
Consequence, particularly Sir Rob. Colvill, whom they would have at least
complimented with the choice of being one, considering his Fortune was almost
equal to the Joint-Estates of the other Five, and that his Age and Experience
had rendered him much fitter for an Employment of that nature; but H -- ton of T
-- being well assured that Sir Robert would not be prevailed with to serve any
private Designs, passionately opposed all Motions in his favor; and for want
of a better Argument, threatened to desert the Assembly, if they should admit a
Proposal so averse to his Interest. Till this Meeting at Comber, many thought H
-- ton's earnest Solicitations had proceeded from a real Concern for the
Protestant Interest; but it was now plainly discovered, that the whole scope of
his Designs tended only to settle him in such a Post as might render him more
remarkable to the English Government.

The Convention having invested the Junto with the whole Power of the County,
were of course dissolved, and the Junto immediately withdrew from the rest of
the Company, in order to act separately, in pursuance of their new Commission:
It was first determined, That a fit Person should be sent with an Address to
our present King, congratulating His Happy Access to the Throne, and imploring
the Assistance of England for their speedy Relief; and several Gentlemen were
proposed for this Expedition; but none so generally approved of as Mr. Hamilton
of Comber, who besides his other Qualifications, had a just pretense to the
Employment, having been formerly chosen for this Service by the Vote of the
whole County; but H -- ton of T -- fearing perhaps that he might by this
opportunity forestall his Designs, set up Capt. Leighton in opposition to his
Kinsman, and by his Interest so far prevailed, that the Captain was preferred
to this Honorable Errand; Mr. Hamilton seeing himself thus postponed by the
Contrivance of his own Relation, and the Honor conferred on his Competitor
without the least Apology for rejecting him, was so highly sensible of the
Abuse, that he soon afterward quitted the Country.

Whilst these things were debated in Council, several Expresses arrived from
Dublin, which by Public Orders were immediately carried to the Junto, and some
Gentlemen then in Town, who had been always privy to the former Correspendence,
being denied a sight of these last Accounts, very much reflected upon the
measures newly taken, expecting but slender returns from a Council, who in its
very Infancy presumed to act so arrogantly, disobligingly, partially, and
imprudently: The Junto fearing the consequence of these Public Censures, very
much labored to quiet the minds of the Malcontents, who began to unravel the
very Methods by which they were convened, and to protest against the evil Arts
that established them. The next day, according to the return of his Summons,
Sir Rob. Colvill came to Town, on whose Appearance it was judged convenient to
admit him of the Council, hoping thereby to reconcile themselves to the
Gentlemen of the Country; and to make way for him, my Ld Mount-Alexander was
appointed General of the Forces of the two Counties of Down and Antrim: Sir
Robert being admitted, the Junto proceeded to nominate Five Persons out of
every Barony to represent the Condition of it, proposing by this method a
clearer view of the Strength and Force of each County; and it was likewise
moved and agreed, that every County for its better intelligence should
substitute one Person to be always resident at Hilsburg, by which means the
several Circumstances of the North might be the better understood, and the
execution of their Designs be for the future grounded on more united Resolves.
To this purpose it was judged necessary that a general Association should be
subscribed by the Gentlemen of that Province, and that the Methods devised by
this Junto, should be proposed as an Example to the neighboring Counties; Sir
W -- F --, who with Mr. H -- ton of T. had formerly contrived the Association,
went to my Ld Massareen's, where he had appointed the Gentlemen of the County
of Antrim to meet, who on the next day appeared to the Number of Five and
Thirty, and Sir William having addressed himself to them, proposed the several
Decrees of the County of Down, as a President fit for them to follow; urging
the Convenience of a separate Council, as also several Arguments to induce them
to a General Association; but my Ld Massareen, and several of the Gentlemen,
earnestly opposed it, alleging the want of Arms and Experience, both which
were judged to be antecedently necessary to so public a Declaration, which
would otherwise rather prove a means to hasten their ruin, than to promote
their Deliverance; and for that reason they inclined to wave the thoughts of an
Association, and only join in a private Address; but Sir W -- F -- pressing it
upon them by many specious Arguments, urging, That it would convince the King
of their Readiness to serve his Interest; and that the People of England would
be thereby obliged to send them a more early Supply, prevailed with the
greatest part of them to Associate, and appoint a certain Number of Gentlemen
for their Representatives; tho they would not agree to the same Methods with
the County of Down, who invested their Junto with an Absolute Power, not
approved of by any other County. Antrim having thus far agreed to what had been
proposed, in the next place proceeded to an Election, and made choice of Sir
William Franklyn, Mr. Vpton, Mr. Davis, Mr. Harrison, and Mr. Shaw, for their
Junto; and the County of Ardmagh following the same course, elected Sir Nich.
Atcheson, Capt. Points, and Midleton; but Derry, Donnegal, and Tyrone,
absolutely refused to resolve themselves into any Committee; neither could they
be persuaded to agree to an Association, and yet they likewise put themselves
in a Posture of Defense, under the Command of Col. Lundy; but the other Project
of a Resident at Hilsburgh, was so generally approved, that each County, in
pursuance of the Methods proposed by the Junto of Down, recommended their
several Representatives, who when they met, formed themselves into a General
Assembly, and in a little time assumed the power of a Supreme Council: The
several Gentlemen who were preferred by their respective Counties to this great
Trust, were as follows, viz. Mr. Vpton for Antrim, Capt. Points for Ardmagh,
Mr. Cunningham for Derry, Mr. Johnsten for Monaghan, and Mr. H -- ton of T --
for Down, who were Convened under the Presidency of the E. of Mount-Alexander.
The Constitution of this Assembly did in a great measure supercede all Inferior
Jurisdictions; especially in that County where they sat; so that the Junto of
Five became by this means of little or no use, and consequently the whole
Management of Down fell under the directions of Mr. H -- ton of T --, who at
their first Session proposed to dispatch Capt. Leighton with an Address to the
King; but that matter having received its first Motion in the former Junto, the
rest of the Council thought fit that nothing should be determined without their
approbation and Consent; and it was therefore ordered that Letters should be
sent to summon the Junto; and by some private Instructions Sir Rob. Colvil was
industriously omitted, who believing it to proceed from the former Prejudices,
and concluding the business of the Address already agreed on, to be the only
occasion of that Meeting, did not give himself the trouble of appearing that
Session; but when he afterward found that Capt. Leighton was not only engaged
to Present the Address, but likewise entrusted with a particular Recommendation
of such Persons as were judged fittest for the Military Service, he then
concluded they had omitted him with a design of foreclosing his Pretenses to
that Post in the Army, to which his Estate and Interest in the Country would
have entitled him; but that which increased his Resentments, was to find the
several Precincts of the Country allotted to each Col. for the raising of his
men; and that his Estate was appointed to that Person whom he had the greatest
reason to suspect for the only Author of this Abuse. No sooner was a Journal of
the Proceedings of this Sessions Published, but the Country generally
exclaimed against the Injustice done to Sir Rob. Colvil; and to amuse the
People, it was some time afterward proposed to meet at Sir Robert's House,
under color of acquainting him with such Papers and Instructions as they had
sent by Capt. Leighton; being well assured, that the Injury done him, was now
past retrieve, Capt. Leighton having received his Credentials, and being at
that time ready to embark for England. Sir Robert, upon perusal of the Address,
seemed better satisfied with the slight they had placed on him, because several
Particulars of it did not only contradict his private Sense, but were also
contrary to the general Opinion of the whole Country; for first, It was
supposed they flattered themselves in giving too great a Character of their own
strength; and that proposing only twelve Regiments to be newly raised for the
Defense of the North, seemed as if they either understood not the Power of the
Irish, or else had a mind to betray their Country. In the next place they
greatly discovered their own weakness, by joining Five Counties in the raising
of Twelve Regiments, which Tyrconnel and the Irish always believed able to have
advanced above Fifty Thousand men; and tho it was proposed that each Regiment
should consist of 13 Companies, and every Company of 100 men, yet this was
likewise judged imprudent, because many Gentlemen were thereby excluded, who
would have readily commanded a Company, tho unwilling to serve as a subaltern
in such a Militia. They were also very much condemned for appointing the
several Officers for each Company, without consulting them whether they were
willing to serve; but that which fixed the greatest Reproach upon them, was the
particular Returns of several Colonels; for knowing their own County would not
afford them scope enough to provide for all their Confederates, they presumed
to reverse the Decrees of other Counties, without the Privity of their
Representatives; this practice is very remarkable, in the Affront they placed
upon Capt. Points, whose former good Services in the Army, and Interest in
Ardmagh, had recommended him to the Character of being Resident for that
County, and was afterward represented as a Person best qualified to command
their Forces; but H -- ton of T. fearing it might be inconsistent with his
Designs to admit this Gentleman to a place so considerable, pretended some
urgent Affairs to be transacted in the County of Ardmagh, in which Capt. Points
was engaged; and the other taking the advantage of his Absence, procured that
Command for a Gentleman of his own name; the Capt. being returned as Lieut.
Col. to Sir John Macgill, and finding himself thus abused, separated from their
Council, and for ever after denied to act in Consult with those who had so
basely betrayed him.

The Twelve Regiments recommended for Commissions, consisted of 8 Foot, 2
Horse, and 2 Dragoons, which together with their Colonels and Counties, take
as follows, viz. E. of Mount-Alexander, a Regiment of Horse to be raised in
Down and Antrim. Ld Blany, a Regiment of Horse in Ardmagh, Monaghan, and
Fermanagh. Mr. Skeffington, Dragoons in Down and Antrim. Sir Arthur Rawdon,
Dragoons in Down and Antrim. Sir John Macgill Foot, Down. Mr. Hamilton of
Bangor, Foot, Down. Mr. H -- ton of T. Foot, Down. Mr. Francis Hamilton, Foot,
Ardmagh. Sir Will. Franklyn, Foot, Antrim. Mr. Vpton, Foot, Antrim. Mr. Lesley,
Foot, Antrim. Mr. Montgomery, Foot, Fermanagh.


Besides these Twelve Regiments intended to have been raised by Commission;
there were several Gentlemen of greater Interest in their respective Counties,
tho not thought so fit to be returned by the Junto; who purely upon their own
Credit, advanced a great Number of men; for in the County of Down, Sir Rob.
Colvil raised a full Regiment; and Mr. Adare another in the County of Antrim;
and many more Independent Troops and Companies were Levied by several
Gentlemen, who proposed no other reward for their Service, but the Public
good; and therefore would not value their Interest at so cheap a rate, as to
become private Sentinels to such as were very much their Inferiors, in Birth,
Experience, and Estate. The Gentlemen, who had been thus forward to restore
their Country, amongst whom Mr. Annesly; who by being bred a Soldier abroad,
was both able and willing to serve, having at his own expense, raised a full
Troop of Dragoons, and two Hundred Foot in the Barony of Kinelcarty, had their
Services when offered, Rejected by the Governor.

The raising of Independent Troops and Companies, turned very much to the
disadvantage of several Gentlemen, who had friends enough in the Council to
recommend them for Commissions; but wanted interest in the Country to raise
their men; but this fell heaviest upon Mr. H -- ton of T's -- Regiment, who
having that Precinct assigned him, where the Country had been pre-engaged to a
better Interest, could never advance above 300. men; whereas the Volunteer
Regiments consisted of three times that Number.

No sooner were these things acted in the North, but Tyrconnel received an
exact Account of them in Dublin; and believing my Ld Mountjoy to have been the
private spring that set the Country in this motion; dispatched an Express to
him, by which he was kindly entreated to return; but his Lordship being at that
time very much indisposed, offered his want of Health, as a reason to excuse
his attendance. This Answer confirmed Tyrconnel in his former jealousy, and
made him more sollicitous to disengage my Ld Mountjoy: who was at last
prevailed with to quit his Country; and being come to Dublin, was flattered
with Tyrconnel's Treacherous Designs of surrendering the Kingdom; having often
heard him say, that he could easier make it a heap of rubbish, than any way
serviceable to the Late King James. My Ld Mountjoy being deluded by those. Arts
and Contrivances, into a belief of what was never really designed; was the
easier persuaded to undertake a Voyage for France, under pretense of
acquainting the Late K. with the Circumstances of Ireland, and Tyrconnel's
Opinion in relation to the Surrender of it. And for the greater amusement of
his Lordship, and the Gentlemen of the North, several Articles were
Condescended to, which were very much in Favor of the Protestant Interest; for
before my Ld Mountjoy was prevailed upon to engage in this expedition,
Tyrconnel had solenly Promised to put a stop to the intended Levies, and to
disband such as were but lately raised; he likewise declared against Quartering
any more Soldiers upon the Province of Vlster; or making a Garrison of any
private House; and my Ld Mountjoy in the Name of the Protestants, tho without
any Commission from them, engaged for their good Behavior, so long as those
Promises should be kept, and until a return should be made to this pretended
Errand. The differences in Ireland seemed at this time very far advanced
toward an accommodation; and it is generally believed all acts of hostility
would have continued under a suspense, if my Ld Mountjoy had been the only
person entrusted with this Message; but when the Protestants found that
Tyrconnel had recommended one Sir Stephen Rice, who was then Chief Baron, and a
most Inveterate Papist, to be his Lordship's Colleague In this Expedition, they
began to suspect the Designs of the Irish, and it was generally believed that
my Ld Mountjoy's Commission, only served as a facing to the Chief Baron's
private Instructions. It cannot be imagined that his Lordship could be wholly
ignorant of Tyrconnel's double Design in this Conjuncture; tho perhaps being
once in Dublin, he could not have easily avoided his Commands; but his Lordship
fearing the censures he might incur, from his overeasie compliance with them;
set himself to write an Apology for engaging in this Embassy, in which he
justified his Undertaking, tho against the Opinion of the Northern Protestants,
from the private assurances he had of Tyrconnel's Resolution; which he could
better judge of, than his Friends at a greater distance; and besides this
Letter to the North, his Lordship writ other Letters to some Persons of Quality
in Munster, urging them to keep that Country in a peaceable expectation of his
Lordship's return; and inviting them to it, by engaging (in an expression of
his own) that all would end in a Can of mild Beer: Notwithstanding these
Endeavors used by my Ld Mountjoy to reconcile the Country to a good Opinion
of this Undertaking, every ordinary Capacity could judge, That this Errand was
chiefly pretended, to give Tyrconnel the better Opportunity of carrying on his
Designs; and it was generally believed, that my Ld Mountjoy was only made use
of to prevent his Resolutions of engaging on the Protestant Party; which was
afterward confirmed by Tyrconnel's abuse of all his Promises, and his
Lordship's Imprisonment in France. The loss of a Gentleman so considerably
qualified for the Public service, gave a mighty blow to the Protestant
Interest; but more especially to the affairs of Vlster, in that it made way for
the Supreme Council to choose the E -- of M -- for their General; who being
wholly ignorant of all Military Discipline, and not much prepared for so great
a Command, resigned himself sometimes to the directions of Mr. H -- ton of T. a
Person less qualified than his Lordship, being of Moderate Reputation for his
Conduct, and oftentimes so unhappily fond of his own Opinion, tho never so
inconvenient, that no arguments could alter him.

This Gentleman was entirely Governor both of the General and the Council, so
that whatever he proposed, passed beyond all contradiction for a Rule to the
rest.

The Country began to be jealous of the great Authority of this Gentleman;
having formerly suspected his Integrity from his favorable carriage toward
the Papists at the Quarter Sessions; which together with his many Popish
Relations, and great intimacy with Col. Marcus Talbot, base Son to Tyrconnel,
made many fear that the Game began to be a little more ticklish than formerly
on the Protestant side: And that which daily increased their jealousy, was the
several unfortunate events that altered his Councils; for having (as is said)
assumed to himself an absolute Power over the Governors and Council, so as all
things moved by his directions, it so happened that nothing prosper'd in which he
had a hand, very little being attempted in his time, which did not savor
either of folly or ignorance; and tho several good Proposals had been made, yet
they were either not taken notice of, or else openly rejected; as for instance,
It was moved that a Pacquet-Boat should be settled between the North and
England; and tho nothing was urged against, yet it was never effected. The want
of Arms and Ammuition was complained of, and several ways Proposed for the
purchase of them; but they were judged needless, for England would supply all;
when securing and fortifying some places for a Retreat in case of Extremity,
was discoursed of, that was judged unnecessary, for we should be able to deal
with them in the Field; and at last when the Enemy came down and expected to
have been opposed, the Passes were all opened, and instead of Uniting the
Protestant Forces, they were industriously Dispersed, and by that means exposed
to the loss of their Country without having one stroke for it.

But to proceed from what they left undone, to what they did, the first thing
Resolved on, was a necessary Provision of Money, the Sinews of War, and several
methods were Proposed for the raising of it; as First, by calling a private
Sessions, in which they might charge the Country, under a pretense of finishing
the Bridge begun at Belsast; but this was condemned as inconvenient: Then it
was moved that Money should be advanced upon the public Faith; but that was
feared to have been almost Bankrupt. It was afterward Proposed, That the
Revenue might be Confiscated; but his was not agreed to, till the Collections
were all drawn off; so that the only Methods conluded on, was, by voluntary
Contributions, either in Money, or Goods, as might best suit with the
Gentlemen's convenience; and it was Ordered for the better Collection and
Disposal of them, that Mr. Hamilton of Bangor should be Receiver, and Mr. H --
ton of T's -- Disposer. The Gentlemen of the Country, and Merchants of
Belfast, having subscribed to such Sums as they were able or willing to
advance; Copies of their Subscriptions were dispersed into the several
Counties, and proposed as an example to induce others to Contribute; amongst
the rest H -- ton of T -- for his part subscribed Thirty Pounds, which he
pretended to deduct from One Hundred Pounds due to him, for so many Barrels of
Beef, at 20 s. per Barrel, laid in by him for the Public use; but Beef being
then at 12 s. per Barrel, this piece of Policy was so obvious, that instead of
being a good Example, it hindered many Gentlemen from Subscribing; who seeing in
the disposers own Gifts a certain Profit, concluded that the same use would be
made of theirs; and when it was afterward desired that an account should be
given of the Receipts and Disbursements, it was only Answered; That Superiors
ought not to account to their Inferiors: But however several places were
Garrisoned; and the Soldiers maintained, tho it is said, their best Subsistence
was upon the Irish Plunder. open acts of Hostility being now common to both
Parties; insomuch as the Frontier Towns were quite wasted.

Tyrconnel in this juncture busied himself in a close Correspondence with the
North, encouraging them to follow their Husbandry; and assuring them that he
would Surrender the Government, upon the return of my Ld Mountjoy; but these
expressions were only made use of as a Cover to his Designs; for at the very
same time he was raising New Levies, and as it was confidently Reported, gave
out Commissions for above 40000 Men. Amongst other Irish Gentlemen, who by
these New Commissions were advanced to be Colonels, Cormuck O Neale of the
County of Antrim, who at that time had Professed himself a Church Papist, was
engaged by the Government to raise a Regiment on the Confines of Down and
Antrim; but the Protestant Gentlemen of that County, supposing him to have been
drawn in contrary to his inclinations, advised him against the acceptance of
it, which he seemingly submitted to; but as soon as his Lieut. Col. Felix O
Neale came into the Country, they privately raised their Regiment on both
sides the Ban; and immediately Marched that part of them which Quartered on
this side of the River, to Garrison Carrickfergus; but such as lay on the other
side, could not be so easily brought over, for fear of the Protestants in
Antrim; and Cormuck O Neal being very sollicitous to secure a Passage for the
rest of his men, purposed to have done it by making himself Master of Tuam
Pass; but being well assured that the Protestants would be jealous of any of
the Popish Troops, he was therefore forced to pretend a fear of being disarmed
by Col. Stuart's Soldiers; under Color whereof he hoped to secure the March of
a Troop of Dragoons to Tuam; but this Project was too gross to impose on the
Protestant Party, who immediately Pursued the Dragoons with a small Detachment;
and having given them a Total Defeat, and Dispersed that Part of O Neale's
Regiment, They built a small Fort at the Pass, and Garrisoned it with 60. men,
thereby intercepting all correspondence with the Papists beyond the Ban.

The Success of the Protestants in the confines of the County of Antrim, and of
the Ld Blany in some small Skirmishes in Armagh and Monaghan, raised the
Ambition of the County of Down, who had not hitherto approved their Courage to
Attempt somewhat that might make them remarkable; and having often in their
Cups Threatened the Irish Garrison in the Newry, which had always lain forgot,
as soon as they grew Sober, now either found or made a Noble occasion of trying
their Strength and Policy against Carrickfergus; which by the accession of
Cormuck O Neale's New-raised men, consisted of Nineteen Companies, besides the
Country that daily flockt to that Town, as being the only Popish Asylum in
those Parts. The Protestants begun to grow jealous of the great Numbers crowded
into that Garrison, and to prevent the mischiefs that might spring from so great
a Concourse of Irish, they ordered such Provisions as were designed for that
place, to be intercepted; and amongst others, Col. Edmunston by command from
the Council, seized on a Boat Laden with Provision, at Broad-Island; which was
intended for my Ld Antrim's private Family, and sent it cross the Bay to
Bangor, whither the Enemy could not advance but through Belfast. The Earl
incensed at this usage, threatened to Burn the Collonel's House; who to prevent
any attempt of that Nature, had secured it with a Garrison of 100. Men; and the
same design being declared against Bangor, Col. Hamilton made the same
Provision against it. The Council upon second thoughts, ordered the Boat and
Provisions to be restored; but Col. Hamilton under whose Command it then lay,
judged it not convenient to obey their Orders, having with the advice of Sir
William Franklyn and some others of the Council, resolved to Attack the Town.
The E. of Antrim and his Officers, having proposed a Parley which was agreed to
by the General and his Council, met at Belfast where the Irish remonstrating
the unreasonableness of intercepting their Provision; and finding the great
concourse of People to be the only reason offered by the Protestants, in excuse
of their usage, they desired leave to divide their Numbers, and that some of
their Soldiers might Garrison in Belfast, or any other indifferent place; but
this proposal was rejected, unless the Earl would first suffer them to be
disarmed; which he obstinately refused, but offered to disband the New Levies,
if they could be insured of a peaceable Living in their respective Houses: The
Gentlemen, who preferred the Quiet of the Country, thought this to have been a
sufficient condescension, and that the Protestants might have thereby gained a
very great point, at least in Reputation; but it made a disterent impression on
the General and Council, who believing this easy Compliance to have proceeded
from an inward distrust of their own Strength, concluded that nothing was
wanting but a bold Attempt to make themselves Masters of that Garrison. This
Design was chiefly promoted by H -- ton of T --, hoping thereby to make amends
for his past Miscarriage; and countenanced by the General, who never failed of
a ready Assent to such Methods, as the other thought fit to propose: Mr.
Hamilton of Bangor was particularly concerned to forward the Attempt; fearing
lest the Neighborhood of that Garrison, might prove dangerous to his private
concerns, being sensible of the provocations he had given them, by detaining
the Earl's Boat and Provision. Sir W -- F -- was likewise engaged in promoting
the Attempt; for having rendered himself particularly obnoxious to Tyrconnel by
his Correspondence with him; he resolved to rescue himself from the
apprehensions of falling into his hands, by leaving the Kingdom; but being at
that time entrusted with the Command of a Regiment, and his Soldiers having
Notice of his Designs, forced him against his Inclinations to Stand to his
Arms; which made him willing to undertake any Attempt, how desperate soever,
hoping thereby to wipe off the Aspersion of his past Endeavors.

These were the secret Springs upon which this Project turned, against the
general Opinion of the rest of the Country; and these Gentlemen, with some of
the disbanded Officers, were the chief Promoters of this Enterprise, which was
opposed by Sir Rob. Celvill, Mr. Vpton, and most of the Country; who easily
foresaw the difficulties that attended it, and would have dissuaded them from
engaging in a design that would infallibly end in a discovery of their own
weakness, and in all probability would hasten down Tyrconnel's Forces against
them, which they were in no condition to oppose; but all these Objections were
answered by the strong Reason which was always ready upon such occasions, viz.
That they knew best what was fittest to be done; and that to question their
Resolutions after the Trust rep^sed in them, tended only to Disorder and
Confusion. Having resolved to attack Carrickfergus, the following Stratagem was
agreed on, as the best Expedient to effect it: Mr. Davis, an Inhabitant of that
Town, whose Hospitality and good Humor had rendered him very much esteemed by
the Popish Officers, was engaged to give them such a hearty Welcome, as might
drown all sense of their Duty, and make them incapable of opposing the
Protestant Onset; the Design being thus laid in the Town, Circular Letters were
dispatched from Belfast, to summon the Country Regiments to Rendezvous by Five
the next morning, near Carrickfergus; who notwithstanding the short Warning,
great Distance, and Winter Season, were very punctual to the Commands of their
General, and appeared at the Time and Place, to the Number of 3000; and tho
they had undergone the Fatigues of a Rainy nights March, in a very deep way,
yet were they so forward to approve their Courage, that nothing but the
positive Commands of their Officers could prevent their falling on the Enemy,
whose chief Commanders were so well secured by Davis's Eiquor, that it is
generally believed our Soldiers might have taken the Town, by killing only the
Out Sentinels; but here our General and his Council, tho to blame before, for
their sudden Resolutions, thought fit to act with greater deliberation; and
instead of executing their former Resolves, they now began to consult anew, by
which means they gave the Officers time enough to sleep themselves sober, and
the Garrison an opportunity of calling a Council of War, who believing the Town
not to be in such a Posture of Defense as would oppose the sudden assault of an
Enemy provided with all things necessary for a general Attack, judged it
convenient to beat a Parley; which was readily accepted by our General; and
Col. Talbot being sent from the Town to manage the Conference, entertained our
General with such Trifles, as it plainly appeared that nothing was designed by
the Enemy, but the discovery of our Strength, and the gaining so much time as
might prepare them for a defense; for having manned their Walls, and lined some
Hedges without the Town, they took no farther notice of the Parley, but Sallied
on the Suburbs, Killing Plundering, and Firing all that lay before them: Upon
this treacherous Abuse, and the discharge of their Cannon, it was proposed that
Col. Talbot should be secured for a breach of the Truce; but our General
judging it neither Honorable nor convenient, dismissed him with a safe Convoy
to the Town; and having afterward advised with his Council, they unanimously
agreed upon a general Attack, tho they had neither Cannon to Batter, nor
Ladders to Scale, nor any other Provision fit for such an Attempt. It is not
yet known what Passion moved them to this desperate Resolution; only it is said
by some, that it was chiefly undertaken out of a fear they had, that the E. of
Antrim would lay down his Arms to save his Estate; which was so considerable,
that they had rather give him this fair opportunity of offending, than not
oblige him to a forfeiture; for certainly they could not be so stupid (tho we
have no great reason to commend their Prudence) as to flatter themselves with
the hopes of taking a Walled Town, well Manned and Fortified, with the only
Artillery of Pikes and Muskets.

Whatever the Motives were, that induced them to a Project seemingly so
unreasonable, their Resolves were confirmed, and the Army divided into several
Battalions for a general Assault, who upon the first Word of Command, in
defiance of the Enemies Cannon, marched up to the very Walls of the Town; which
they would have undoubtedly taken, if Pikes and Scythes could have prevailed;
but having spent their Ammunition, and experienced the impossibility of the
Attempt, they were at last obliged to retreat, which they performed with no
great loss; but their Preservation was rather due to Providence, and the
indiscretion of their Enemies, than to the Care or Conduct of their Geral, or
Council; who after they had given Orders for the Attack, left their Soldies
exposed to the Cannon, and retired under the Shelter of a Barley Field and
Pidgeon-house, hoping thereby te secure themselves from the Noise and Danger of
the Enemies Shot. The news of this Retreat having advanced as far as the
Headquarters; the General and his Council concluded upon a Parley; and being
resolved it should end in Peace, the Soldiers were commanded to their former
Quarters; in this conjuncture it was thought the Town might have proposed their
own Terms, but Col. Talbot being willing to return the Civilities lately
received, only insisted upon the same Proposals that had been formerly made by
the Earl of Antrim, and desired that a Cessation might be punctually observed
on both sides, 'till such time as fresh Supplies should be sent from Dublin.

The General and Council facing their ill Success with the pretended Advantages
they boasted to have gained upon this Parley, returned as it were in Triumph to
Hilsburgh; but it cannot be supposed that they were wound up to such a degree
of insensibility, as not to be touched with a sense of their misfortunes,
considering they had failed in an Attempt which was undertaken upon their bare
humor, contrary to the Directions and Advice of the rest of the Country; the
evil Consequence that followed the Protestant's Defeat at Carrickfergus, so far
encouraged the Irish, that they immediately ventured upon Public Acts of
Hostility, plundering the Protestant Houses at Noon day, and Massacring such as
they thought would have opposed their Villainies: And now the Dragoons of the
Newry, who never before durst quit their Garrison, ventured themselves abroad,
and having intelligence of the advance of a Protestant Party under the Command
of Capt. Poe, which had been detatch'd from Loughbrickland for Forage, they
laid an Ambuscade, and by a Surprise killed the Captain and Eight of his men.

As these and many other unfortunate Accidents which ensued the Defeat at
Carrickfergus, very much advanced the Reputation of the Popish Party; so on the
other side, it made a quite different Impression on the Protestant Soldiers,
who were so far discouraged by their ill Success, and for ever after
entertained so mean an opinion of their General and Council, that for the
suture they never yielded an exact Obedience to their Commands.

Upon this Defeat at Carrickfergus, there arrived a Packet of Declarations at
Hilsburgh, directed to the General, etc. Requiring all the Irish to lay down
their Arms by the 10th of April, on pain of being accounted Rebels, with an
assurance of Pardon and Protection to such as embraced the Proposals, and a
promise of the Estates of the obstinate, to such persons as should contribute
toward their Reduction. This Declaration was so caressed by the Ptotestants,
that they caused them to be publicly read in several Market Towns, and at the
same time proclaimed K. William and Q. Mary. This great Solemnity was scarce
over, when Capt. Leighton returned with Commissions for such Regiments as had
been recommended by the Council; but there being at this time some Regiments
and several Independent Troops and Companies which were not established by any
of these new Commissions, and were to be of course thereby disbanded, it was
very much to be feared that this great Change might widen the Breaches already
begun between the Country and their Council; for the better preventing of
which, it was proposed, That the Country should act in their own Model, till
such time as more Commissions were sent over; and that in the interim, all
Persons should join their strength to avert the dangers that Threatened their
Speedy Rume; but this met with the Fate of several other good proposals, and
was generally rejected.

Now Danger began to draw near; of which Tyrconnel's Proclamation was a
Forerunner; Commanding all Persons in Vlster, to give up their Arms, and
Serviceable Horses, with an offer of Pardon to all such as had been any way
Engaged, excepting the E. of Mountalexander, Ld Massareen, Ld Kingston, Mr.
Sheffings, Sir Robert Colvill, Sir Arthur Rawden, Sir John Macgill, Mr.
Hawkin's, Mr. Sanderson, and Mr. Hamilton, now Sir Francis Hamilton, who were
said to have Sinned beyond his Mercy; several of those Proclamations were sent
into the North, and industriously distributed to the Gentlemen of that
Country, who remained fixed to their former Resolution, notwithstanding the
many Threats and Promises that were urged to persuade them to other Measures.
These coming to the hands of H -- ton of T. --, he burned them, instead of
dispersing them.

Such Gentlemen as read this Proclamation, were not a little surprised to find
several Persons, who had always appeared most Active and Open in the
Prosecution of the Protestant Designs, not comprehended in the clause of
exemption; for neither Mr. H -- ton of T --, who was the most Active, and
indeed the Principal manager of the whole Affair, who had a casting Voice in
all their Councils; nor any of the Hamiltons of Down, Antrim, or Ardmagh, were
foreprized, tho Gentlemen that Acted in Conjunction with them; and others that
were Inferior to them, were particularly exempted; but this only served to
revive the former jealousy the Country had of Mr. H. of T's sincerity.

Tyrconnel, who at this time was undoubtedly privy to every particular
circumstance that happened in the North, and perhaps had been the chief Contriver
of what was Transacted: Now he began to think it convenient to prepare his Army
for a March toward those Parts; and having made a necessary Provision for the
subsistence of his Soldiers, he dispatched part of it to Carrickfergus by Sea,
which was then in want, and the rest he sent by Land; but it happening that one
of his Ships Laden with Biscuit, was forced into Dundium Bay, and immediately
Seized by the Protestant Garrison, and sent to the public Stores, to be laid up
for their March against the Irish. From these Preparations it was generally
concluded, that Tyrconnel's Army would be suddenly on it is March, and therefore
thought advisable that such necessary Measures should be taken, as might best
serve to oppose their entrance; but so it happened, that in this Conjuncture, a
News Letter was pretended to have been received by the Council; and tho all
Correspondence between Dublin and the North had been intercepted for a
considerable time before, yet this Letter came dated from thence, and was
industriously Dispersed by some of the Council, as a true account of the Popish
Circumstances; in which were contained several Arguments to urge the
Improbability of Marching an Irish Army Northward, chiefly drawn from the
intractable Genius of the New-raised Forces, their want of Arms and Ammunition,
and the general Apprehension they lay under from the Protestant Numbers, and
the Landing of an English Army. These observations, with several other less
remarkable, were the subject matter of this Letter; which coming down at a
time, when the whole Country was big with the expectation of an Irish Army,
the News whereof had been confirmed by several particular Accounts, made
different impressions upon the Protestant Gentlemen; some of them supposing it
to have been devised by Tyrconnel, and sent down on purpose to amuse the
Country; hoping thereby to render his Motions less suspected; but this
construction being inconsistent with his Printed Proclamation, was generally
rejected; and tho it seemed very hard to place this contrivance upon any of the
Council, which only tended to the confusion of their former Designs; yet there
were some amongst them, who were severely censured for their too great Industry
in Publishing it, when it was in their Power to have it suppressed.

This Letter, tho it weighed but little with the Gentlemen of the Country; yet
the General and Council seemed so far convinced by the reasons of it, that they
Postponed their former resolve of Providing against the approach of the Enemy;
for tho they had always proposed to fortisie and secure Hilsburgh for a
Retreat, it being the only Fort in Down and Antrim, excepting Carrickfergus,
which lay convenient for the Defense of the Frontiers, and was at that time a
Magazine of all their Arms and Ammunition; yet they rejected all offers that
were made in pursuance of their former Designs; and neither suffered the
Trenches to be Scoured, nor Commanded any other thing to be done which was
necessary for the Defense of it; tho the Inferior Councils being more sensible
of their Duty, Fortified and secured many places of less consequence.
Tyrconnel's Forces being advanced under the Command of Lieut. Genesis Hamilton,
within an easy days March of the North, the whole Country seeming more
apprehensive of the dangers that might attend their former security, busied
themselves in a warmer application to their General and Council, who being now
sensible of their credulous Error, promised to use their utmost Endeavors
against the approach of the Enemy; upon which they made a show of drawing the
Forces of the two Counties into one Body, which being above 10000 men, would in
all probability been able to have disputed, if not defended the Country from
the farther advance of the Irish Army; tho it must be confessed, the greatest
part of them wanted the Exercise and Arms of a well Trained Militia; but that
might have been in a great measure supplied by the Prudent Proposals of some
Gentlemen, who advised that the Passes might be Guarded by their best men, and
such only left to secure their Country, as were less Serviceable.

If these Measures had been taken, we should have certainly impeded the Enemies
Progress, and have thereby given time enough to the more Northern Counties, to
have joined their Numbers, who had been engaged to advance upon the first
Alarm; but the General and Council, instead of following this advice, only
continued their Forces in motion, still keeping them at their former distance;
which Method was the great occasion of our ensuing Miseries; for the several
petty Divisions desparing of any Success from their own Strength, never durst
encounter the Enemy, who always Marched in a main Body. The first instance of
this Nature happened at Loughbrickland, a place within 3 Miles of the Newry;
where only a Detachment of Sir John Macgil's Regiment, and an inconsiderable
party of Sir Arthur Rawden's Dragoons, were posted, who no sooner heard that
Tyrconnel's Army had entered the Newry, but they retired in such confusion,
that the whole Country seemed struck with the Retreat. The Enemy making the
right use of this accident, immediately possessed themselves of Loughbrickland,
and soon afterward advanced toward Drummore, which was Garrisoned by 300
Horse, and some Foot, under the Command of Sir Arthur Rawden, and Mr. W --, who
having notice of their March, posted a Detachment of Horse at the 2 Mile
Bridge, with strict Orders to Skirmish the Enemies Scouts, and to give what
other diversion they could to their Main Body; but having engaged too far,
several of them were cut off, and the rest obliged to a hasty Retreat. Sir
Arther Rawden continued in the Town,' very minute, expecting to be enforced
with a considerable Supply, but was much surprised to receive the General's
Orders to Retreat to Hilsburgh, which was three Miles behind Drummore. This
sudden disappointment made him resolve upon his own Methods; and instead of
Retreating to Hilsburgh, he marched his men within view of the Enemy, whom he
discovered to be very numerous, and advancing in great haste, but excellent
Order; which made Sir Arthur halt, and consulting with his Officers what was
fit to be done, he found his Right Wing surrounded; and concluding the Enemy
designed to hem in his Party, they all agreed upon a Retreat; and the only
doubt that remained was, who should be foremost. Lieut. Price, and two others,
after the Retreat of the rest, bravely charged the Enemy, and Price having shot
Col. Sheldon's Horse, by which he very much endangered his Life, was
afterward, by the failure of his own, exposed to the Revenge of the Irish.

The bold Attempt of these three men, gave a considerable diversion to the
whole Army; so that in pursuit of the Protestant Party, which hasted full
Gallop to Hilsburgh; there were not above 20 men killed; but if the Fort had
not put a stop to the Irish Career, they had certainly cut off the rest, who
under that shelter made good their escape, some to Colrain, others to
Portferry, every one steering such a Course as he judged farthest from the
present Danger.

The General and Council had hitherto resided in Hilsburgh, which was the place
appointed for the heart of the North, from whence the several Counties were to
have derived their Principles of Motion; and yet they were so careless of
defending a Post so considerable, that the day before this Rout, it had not the
ordinary Provision of a Garrison; for on that day Mr. West, (Major to Mr. H --
ton of T -- was commanded to advance with such of his men as were fit for
service, who in pursuance of their Orders, enforced the Town with 120 men, and
proposing the Defense of it with the only addition of 500 more, at least till
such time as the scattered Forces of the North might be drawn together, who
might have been able to have raised the Siege,) had his offer resisted, tho
there were at this time in Lisburn 2000 Soldiers sent from the County of
Antrim; and the only reason given by the General and Council for rejecting
West's Proposal, was the want of necessary Provisions for so great a body: The
Major not being well satisfied with the Measures taken by the Council, was
however resolved to use his best Endeavors toward securing the Town, and only
desired to be furnished with such Instruments as might serve to scour the
Trenches; and that the Trees which grew nearest the Town, might be cut down,
lest they might prove serviceable to the Enemy, in case they should attempt to
Scale the Walls; but these requests were also rejected, the first for want of
Money to buy such Necessaries as were desired, and the other for fear of
disobliging the Owners; these slight Excuses made the Gentlemen of the Country
suspect some other Designs; which were soon afterward plainly discovered by the
Resolutions taken in the next Council: The General having declared the Town not
tenable, turned every man over to his own shifts. The Soldiers were so much
surprised with this sudden opinion, that they would not be induced to a belief
of it 'till their General left the Garrison exposed to the rage of the Enemy,
and in great haste posted toward Portferry, where he met with the convenience
of being transported out of all danger. Mr. H -- ton of T -- having
particularly recommended the care of his Regiment to their own Conduct, hasted
toward Belfast in such a hurry, that he left behind him a Portmantue of the
public Papers, and 150 l. of the Counties Stock, tho he refused the day before
to advance so much Money as would have brought the Forces together. This, with
much more Plunder of a considerable value, besides 15 Barrels of Powder, and a
brass Field-piece, were left as a prey to the Irish, who have since made use of
the Papers as a public Testimony against the persons concerned in the
Association, upon which has been grounded the corruption of our Blood, and
forfeiture of our Estates.

Tho H -- ton of T -- had been thus careless of what concerned the Public, yet
he showed more prudence in the preservation of his private Fortune: For, very
well knowing what would happen, he engaged his Brother the night before the
Break at Drummore, to hasten home, and provide against the Storm that was then
gathering.

Hilsburgh being wholly deserted by the General and Council, Major West, who
had earnestly pressed them to other measures, was still resolved to sell the
Place at as dear a price as he could; and therefore proposed the Defense of it
to such of the Soldiers as yet remained in the Fort, assuring them of his firm
adherence to their endeavors, and urging the many difficulties that would
necessarily attend their retreat. But all these Arguments could not engage them
to stand the test of an Irish Attack; for the Example of their General, and the
Advice of the Council, so far influenced their wonted Courage, that only Sixty
of them could be prevailed with to run the Major's Fate; who disposed of them
in such order, as made the Irish believe they were many times that number; upon
which they sent a Trumpeter to summon the Town; and a Parley being agreed on
both sides, Capt. Kirk was dispatched with Conditions of Surrender, importing a
free Pardon for what was past, and a Protection for the future; which being
embraced by the Garrison, and confirmed by the Lieutenant General, the Irish
were admitted into the Town; and finding the Gates only shut with a Half-Pike,
admired the Majors courage, and condemned the General and Council for making no
better preparations toward the defense of a place so considerable. Major West
and his Soldiers notwithstanding their Articles, were for the first night kept
close prisoners, under the pretense of protecting them from the insolence of
the Soldiers; tho the true reason was to prevent a discovery of the ill
circumstances the Irish Army was under, from the fatigue of their tedious
Winter March, which was so harassed, that it is believed a very little
opposition would have obliged them to a retreat.

The melancholy news of this Rout coming to Lisburn, and the dismal accounts
given in by the Runaways from Hilsburgh, struck the Soldiers of that Garrison,
with such terrible apprehensions of the Irish Force, that they unanimously
agreed to follow the example of their General, and Mr. H --. of T. after he had
for some time condol'd the misfortunes of the Country with the People of
Belfast, he assured all such as had any dependence on him, that would retreat
to Colrain, that he had resolved either to repair the distressed Condition of
the Country, or to permit the the Attempt. This Resolution encouraged several
of his Friends to march toward Colrain, but Mr. H -- ton taking a private Path
to the Seaside, met with a Vessel purposely prepared to Transport him for
Scotland.

The Irish Rabble of the whole Country were now employed by Public Authority
to plunder and destroy the Lives and Fortunes of the Protestants; which they
performed with such Cruelty, that the Insolences of the Standing Army seemed
favors, when compared with the bloody Outrages of those barbarous Cannibals;
and now the public Cries of such as had escaped the Irish Fury for the loss of
their dearest Friends, and the naked Appearances of those who had been most
inhumanly stripped, cast the whole Country under such a general Consternation,
that it was impossible to revive the hearts of the dejected Protestants; so
that no hopes were left to rally the broken pieces of the English Army; and the
Enemy by this means became absolute Masters of the whole Country, without the
expense of many drops of Blood; for the Counties of Down and Antrim being the
only Inlets to the Northern Province, we may very well date the loss of Vlster
(at that time the only remaining terror to the Irish) from the evil Success
that followed the Councels of that Country.

I shall now refer the remaining Series of this Affair, to the relation of
others, who by being Witnesses to the Truth thereof, are only fit for so
public a Work; having in this Treatise with all Sincerity and Justice
imaginable, given the Reader the whole matter of Fact, which to my own knowledge
occurred in the^e Counties. And that he may have nothing from me by hearsay, I
shall now leave him to judge by whom and in what manner Ulster has been exposed
to the Fury of the Irish, whose Mercies are Cruelties: And how all the Nobility
and Gentry thereof have suffered as well in their Reputations, as in the loss
of their Estates, for the Miscarriages of a few.

FINIS.

