Mr. Fuller's Letter To the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR: BEING AN ANSWER To
a Late Scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, Fuller' s Plain Proof of the True Mother
of the Pretended Pr. of Wales; Made out to be no Proof, etc. With that Part of
His Majesty's Declaration, Relating to that IMPOSTURE, Published in December,
1688.

LONDON: Printed for the Author; and to be Sold by Eliz. Harris, at the Harrow
in Little-Britain. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
WHoever shall meet with this following Letter, I do assure them, it is the
Contents of a Letter I carried to the present Lord Mayor; and forasmuch as what
is contained in my former Books, will be shortly made as apparent, as the
Nature of the Subject can possibly afford, or be reasonably required, by a
sufficient Number of Witnesses, and a large Number of Letters, proved
Authentic; I desire all impartial Persons to take Notice, That the true Copy
of my last Book has been much abused by being printed only in part, in a single
Sheet, which had not the Testimony of several material Passages, nor the
Observations, which renders the Truth most apparent; so I have ordered the true
Book, entitled, A Plain Proof of the True Father and Mother of the Pretended
Prince of Wales, by several Letters, etc. Printed for my self, to be Sold with
this Letter only by Mrs. Eliz. Harris, Bookseller, at the Harrow, in
Little-Britain: And my former Books, published in 1696. are only truly to be
had at Mrs. Ann Baldwin's, in Warwick Lane.

W. F.

Mr. Fuller's Letter To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc.
SIR,
THERE having been lately spread abroad a most scurrilous and scandalous
Pamphlet, entitled ( Fuller's Plain Proof of the True Mother of the Pretended
Prince of Wales; made out to be no Proof:) I think my self much obliged, in
Duty to my present King and Country, to make a short Reply to the base
Suggestions of that malicious Author who makes bold grossly to reflect on the
Government under a false Notion of a Well-wisher to his Country, and a specious
Pretense of vindicating Truth (as he terms it) whereas his main Intention is to
vindicate the Legitimacy of that horrid Impostor the Pretended Prince of Wales:
For were this Gentleman, what he pretends to be, a Friend to Truth and Honesty,
or a Well-wisher to the Protestant Religion, certain I am, he would not take
such Pains to expose his Folly and ill Nature with worse Breeding, by bantering
Truth with scandalous Reports and forged Imaginations of his own inventing;
like that most wicked lying Book, entitled, My Life, printed some Years since
by A. Ropper, and writ by Elcanah Settle, the latter of which has many times
before Witness begged my Pardon for it, and owned that the greatest Part of
that Book was the Invention of his and the Printer's Brain to get Money: And
this Book is that Life of mine which this late scribbling Author takes notice
of, saying, I have read his Life too late to be in Love with his manner of
Living; and what he next charges me with, of a Design of getting Money from
your Lordship for my Dedication, I do humbly assure your Lordship is false; the
only Ambition I had next to the Public Service, was the Honor your Lordship's
and your Worthy Brethren, the Right Worshipful, the Aldermen of this City would
do me, in favoring me with the Reading of my said Book. And though the present
Government has no Occasion at this time to fear any Danger from that Pretended
Prince or his highly bigoted Party; yet, surely, it cannot be amiss to let the
World know from whence that Imposture sprung: That this Information was no
sooner given, is an Inquiry easily enough resolved by asserting the true Cause,
which is our present Government's gracious Disposition and Readiness to pass by
the greatest Affronts and Injuries, as our Great and Good King has so bravely
done, even to the Admiration of his very Enemies. And in this Case, I am very
sure, His Majesty knew the Management of this Suposititious Birth long before I
came into his Majesty's Service, and had both the Letters and Informations of a
great many Persons of Note, plainly discovering the same, as witness His
Majesty's Declaration, when Prince of Orange, in December, 1688.

But to Crown all, there are great and violent Presumptions, inducing us to
believe, that those evil Counselors, in order to the carrying on of their ill
Designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more Time for the effecting of
them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
good Subjects, have published, That the Queen has brought forth a Son; though
there have appeared, both during the Queen's pretended Bigness, and in the
Manner in which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible Grounds of
Suspicion, that not only we our selves, but all the good Subjects of this
Kingdom, do vehemently suspect, that the Pretended Prince of Wales was not born
by the Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the World, that many both
doubted of the Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there
was not any one Thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.

And several Persons have been examined upon the same, as Captain Wright and
others, I formerly mentioned, as is very well known to the* Greatest Men at
Court; which is so apparent, that no less than the Insolent Assurance of a very
scandalous Noble --, or a most infamous Non-juring Parson (one of which we
suspect our late Author to be) could so openly dare presume to assert, that
there is no Proof but mine; whereas it is evident, that there is a greater
Number of Witnesses by far, to prove almost every Particular, which I have set
down, than there was to prove the pretended Prince's Birth. And I hope it will
not be long e're those Witnesses are called, that the World may see how much my
Adversaries are in the Wrong: But I shall beg your Lordship's Patience, whilst
I further answer briefly his chief Objections against my Testimony, and the
Truth of the Letters.

As to the First, He tries to invallidate my Assertions, by saying, I am a
notorious Liar, and was discredited by the House of Lords and Commons; whereas
my Business was never yet in debate in the House of Lords: And it is evident,
that I never was Sentenced by them, nor my Testimony refused: And as for the
Displeasure that I incurred from the House of Commons, the Occasion is
manifestly known to have proceeded from a Stratagem contrived at the Court of
St. Germains, to work my Ruin, and was managed by Col. Dalleval and Mr. Hays,
Two Agents of that Court, who pretending to serve the present Government,
easily prevailed on the Immaturity of my Judgment, so that I foolishly engaged
to the House of Commons for their Appearance: And I have sufficiently proved
they came to England accordingly, and were in the Lobby of the House of
Commons, on Monday the 22d of Febr. 1692. at 9 a Clock in the Morning, and
being called for a short time after, were not to be found; though since it is
demonstrated by many Witnesses how they got off to France, and continue there.
And this is the true Cause of my lying under the Censure of the House of
Commons, for which I suffered, which has given the Enemies of the Government
occasion basely to magnify the Matter, and to make this Oversight of mine
(occasioned merely by want of cautionary Advertency) appear as the highest
Crime imaginable. But Thanks be to God, there is already landed, or hourly
expected a Gentleman from Holland, who served in the Court of St. Germains at
that time, and was privy to the whole Matter; and I shall speedily convince the
World, how far I was from endeavoring to impose any Falsities on the
Government; nor did I ever in my Life make Oath against Person or Persons, who
was not fairly convicted, and afterward of his, or their own accord, did
frankly confess all that I alleged against them to be truth. And to prove this
my Assertion, I do humbly appeal to the King's most Excellent Majesty, to the
Lords and others of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and the Judges
of this Land, who sat in the Courts where my Testimony was given. And if what I
affirm in my own behalf be not really and substantially true, I desire to be
punished with the uttermost Severity imaginable. Only thus much I do own, that
after the Delivery of my own positive Information to the House of Commons, upon
my being a third time called in, I did deliver a List of Names of several Great
Persons, which I took from a pretended Address at St. Germains, as I had it
from the late Queen's own Hand; but I never did directly, nor indirectly charge
any of those Noble Persons or others with the Knowledge of, or the Signing of
the said Address: For I do solemnly declare before God and Man, that I do
believe that Address was forged in England by Mr. Ashton, and two or three more
of the late King's Friends, and sent into France, in order to impose on the
French Court, by endeavoring to make their Interest in England seem much
Greater than it was (as through God's great Mercy) Experience has shown them.

But to return to our unknown Author, he charges me next with Forgery, and
would insinuate as if those Letters were of my own Invention; but, to his
Confusion be it known, the Originals are yet in the Hands of the Government,
and above 200 more, which will be suddenly exposed also, and the greatest Part
of them I never saw until after they had been in the King's and the late
Queen's (of ever blessed Memory) Custody some time, nor did I, to my Knowledge,
ever know or see the Gentlemen that sent them to their Majesty's: And as for
their being truly writ by the late King James his Queen and Ministers of State,
I dare affirm to all the World, that there is not a more infallible Judge, nor
do they better know their own Writing, than his present Majesty does; so that
he has no need of Forgery, or any other base Stratagems (as used in the late
Reign) to mantain his Truth and Glorious Cause, neither is it possible to
deceive His Majesty's Judgment in such Matters. And as for that Letter of Mr.
Carrell's, which our Author takes most Notice of, that is still in being with
the rest, and was in the Hands of the Government some time before the King ever
saw my Information, and was sent by Persons of Honor that took it out of the
Duchess of Tyrconnell's Trunk, as is plainly proved beyond any Pretense or
Question. As for my being guilty of Forgery, I am verily persuaded, that every
one that converses with me, and with humble Submission I may say, what several
Ministers of State have observed, that I could neither alter my Handwriting,
nor spell tolerable English, such a Blockhead I freely own my self: And for
what he suspects, that I put the Letters into the D. of Tyrconnel's Trunk, it
must needs be false; for I was at that Time in England, it being not many Days
after Mr. Crone's Trial; that the said Letters were taken out of the Trunk in a
Day or two after the Fight of the Boyne. But this Gentleman cannot pretend to
disprove me; and as he will say something to oblige his charitable Benefactors
the Jacobites, I can easily forgive his scandalous Aspertions fo far as they
extend only to my own Personal Concern; for I am as ready to confess and
forsake my unhappy Folly in the Immature Management of my private Concerns, as
he is to accuse me. And as I have served the Government, which this Author
(though saucily) cannot but own, by reason one of the best and worthiest of Men
His Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury has certified it, and the most intelligible
Part of the Nation knows it; so I will never endeavor, either publicly or
privately, to impose any Untruths on any Man; and however he ridicules my
Depositions, I am ready to make Oath, that all I have affirmed in my late Book,
entitled ( A Plain Proof of the True Father and Mother of the Pretended Prince
of Wales, etc.) to the best of my Knowledge, is Truth; and I declare also, that
I will freely offer my self to the severest Death that can be invented,
provided I prove not the Contents of the said Book to be Truth by many
Witnesses, whenever the great Wisdom of the Nation thinks fit to require it,
and more sure cannot be desired.

This Author is not only content to invalidate me, but he basely reflects on
Two Gentlemen in Ireland, of noble Families, and known Honor and Integrity; as
also on their Ladies, who are by all esteemed Ladies of unblemished Reputation;
on these, I say, he, without any Ground, casts his insolent Suggestions, by
reason they honestly attest what they know concerning that Part of the
Management of this Imposture, which was managed in Ireland. I wonder much he
does not (if his Printers dare put it to the Press) invent some new Aspersions
against the King and his Ministers, which, if I am not misinformed, is no new
thing either to the said Author, his Printer B -- ll, the Bookseller in
Fleetstreet, and the Publisher.

I humbly beg your Lordship's Pardon for detaining you so long, which I have
done to convince the World, that what I have dedicated to your Lordship is
worthy your taking notice of; and as that scandalous Pamphlet against the
Government and my self, is published by Mr. Nutt, and printed by the most
famous Jacobite Printer of the City, I wish them no other Punishment but the
true Mark of what they are. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant,
October. 19, 1700. W. Fuller.

POSTSCRIPT.
BEfore and since my publishing the last Book, I have had several Letters sent
me from unknown Hands, warning me to desist from this Subject, threatening a
severe Punishment that shall otherwise speedily fall on me: And though I little
regard them, yet I cannot omit taking Notice of a Letter sent, as we have
several Reasons to believe, from the Author I have been just now answering, to
Mrs. Snowden, who prints the Flying-Post, upon her Advertisement of my Book in
the said News-Paper, which put the poor Woman into no small Fright; and the
other News-Mungers were fearful to mention my said Book, for fear of being
thought Williamites, or as they frankly owned, to disoblige the Jacobites. The
Letter is as olloweth:

Mrs. Snowden,
YOU may assure your self to be very well whipped, if not hanged, between this
and May next, for your great Care in inserting the Advertisement concerning His
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales; and this is only that you may timely
persuade the Rascal Fuller to be ready to stand your Friend. I pity you, that
at this Time, when neither Knave nor Fool doubt the Birth of His Royal
Highness, you and your Rogues should; and I will now certify you, that your
unfortunate Rogues could never have taken such a Time to abuse that Prince,
that not only all the Princes in Europe acknowledge Legitimate, but our Great
Council never doubted it; for if they had, it would be a Thing of great Moment.
Can you or your Fools and Rogues charge the Parliament with so great Neglect in
so great Points? And you may know Fuller, a perjured Rogue, who expects Bread
from abusing the Weakest; it is too late, the Eyes of the People are open, and
see better than that poor Wretch your Husband did, when he swore Anderton's
Letter to the Murder of an honest Man, when afterward it appeared to be Mr.
Newbolt and Mr. Butler that printed the Paper. Lament your poor lost Husband
and encourage no such Villainy; and consider it is forbidden to slander your
Neighbor, much more your Prince. You may with your perjured Rogues expect your
Reward here. After God forgive

Oct. 8. 1700. Your Monitor, D. B. --
I am in Haste, for I am sending your Advertisement to His Royal Highness his
Father and Mother, as well as to his Highness, who will with Laughter pronounce
your Reward.

FINIS.

