A further and more particular ACCOUNT Of the Cruel Desperate and Bloody Fight
and Uproar, That happened in Ireland on Monday the 6th of May 1700, between the
Weavers and Butchers.
As also the great Number of Men that were Wounded and Killed on both sides,
some having their Heads, Arms, Backs, and Legs Broke, in a Cruel and Terriable
manner; with other Dreadful Circumstances that occasioned it.
WE have an Account from Dublin, that on Monday the 6th instant, a strange and
disorderly Uproar happened in that City, between the Butchers and Weavers,
about a Quarrel that arose between them, which was to been ended by a Match at
Football, but the Butchers not being willing to hazard their Persons in such
Exercise, the Weavers who are very Courageous Fellows Dared them to it in a
very insolent manner, insomuch that at last by Consent both Parties agreed, to
put an end to the said Difference by a set Battle on Stevens-Green, where they
Assembled and met each other in a Warlike manner (being Forty on each side)
with Clubbs, Pikes, Stones, Cleavers, and some Guns, at which time the Weavers
giving the Butchers such a sharp Onset, that the Butchers after an Obstinate
Ressistance, was forced to give way, which the Weavers perceiving renewed the
Fight, with such Fury, and Violence, that the Butchers were put into great
Confusion and Disorder, and thereupon Fled in great Consternation through the
City, to St. Patrick's- street among their chief Shambles, where tho having
Fortified themselves, the Weavers again Asaulted them with such desperate
Courage and Resolution, that they were forced, to take to their Heels a second
time, and in fine were totally Defeated, tho their Wives at the same time much
Discomoded the Weavers, by throwing Stones, pices of Iron, etc. out at the
Windows, and from off the Houses, which Enraged them to that degree that in
Revenge they pulled Down their Signs and part of some Houses; and in a little
time, with the Coming in of the Mobb, they were Increased to a vast Body,
insomuch that the Lord Mayor, and most of the the Aldermen, and several
Companys of Soldiers, were forced to come to Disperss them, which was done
with much Difficulty.

About Threescore and Twelve Persons were Wounded in this Hurliburly, besides
6 or 7 that were Killed out right upon the Spot, most of them being Butchers
that were Wounded; some having their Heads broke, others their Arms, Backs, and
Legs in a terrible manner, and it is thought many of them will Die of their
Wounds. Six of the Chi^f Ring Leaders are since Apprehended and sent to Newgate
under a strict Guard, The whole City was so much amazed at this sudden Uproar
and disorder, that most of the Chiefest Citizens durst not go to Bed that
Night, but went about the City with part of the Army to prevent further
Insurections and Tumults. It was observed that both Butchers and Weavers did
more Mischief with Stons than with their other Weapons, there being great
Numbers on the Green where they Fought: There were abundance of Mobb that came
in during this terrible Encounter, who began in a desprate manner to divid
themselves some for the Weavers, and some for the Butchers so that had not the
Magistrates with part of the Army suppressed them as they did, this Riotous
Tumult might have had very ill Effects, and the rather because a Proclamation
lately Published has allowed Corn to be Transported which has caused much
Murmering among the Poorer sort, by the sudden advancement of the price of
Bread, and consequently of all sorts of Grain, many Persons of Note are very
much blamed for promoting the same, and it is said that the Mobb has publicly
threatened some particular Persons who had Petitioned the Lord Chief Justices
for the said Proclamation.

London, Printed for W. J. near Temple Bar. 1700.


