A SERMON PREACHED Upon the 29th of MAY, In the Parish Church of St. MARGARET,
IN Lyn-Regis, IN NORFOLK, In a Great Presence.

By THO. FYSH, A. M.

LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden, for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

To the most High, Puissant, and Noble Prince, Henry Duke of Norfolk; Earl
Marshal of England; Earl of Arundel, Surrey, Norfolk and Norwich; Baron Howard,
Mowbray, Segrave, Brews of Gower, Fitz-Alan, Warren, Clun, Oswaldestre,
Matravers, Scales, Graystock, Furneval of Sheffield, and Howard of
Castle-Rising; Constable and Governor of His Majesty's Royal Castle and Honor
of Windsor; Lord Warden of the Forest of Windsor; Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk,
Surrey and Berks, and of the City, and County of the City, of Norwich, etc.
High Steward of Lyn-Regis in Norfolk.
May it please Your Grace,
THis Discourse was designed to attend and cherish the Public Devotions of a
very Loyal and Worthy Corporation; to which Your Grace has lately vouchsafed to
own a Relation, and whose Interests You are pleased to Espouse: But it had the
Fortune to wait upon Your Grace, likewise, in the same Solemnity, at the Head
of an Illustrious Assembly of Persons of Great Honor and Quality; All full of
most Dutiful Affections to His Majesty, and Honorable Thoughts and Veneration
of Your Grace. Coming into the World under such kindly Aspects, and honestly
(however weakly) endeavoring to speak out upon an agreeable Argument; it met
with a Favor from Your Grace, bigger than it did aspire to, or could deserve:
Which was, to have Your Repeated Commands for its Publication. After this, Duty
was to govern and control my Inclination; and it became me, on the first
fitting Occasion, to lay It and my Self at Your Grace's Feet. This I now do in
all Humility: Beseeching Your Pardon of my Presumption Herein; Which I am the
more encouraged to hope for, when I reflect upon that Great Goodness, and
Sweetness of Temper, which in Your Grace is as Eminent, as Your High Authority
and most Noble Descent. I am,

My LORD, Your GRACE'S THO. FYSH.

Zechariah, 12. 8. In that day the Lord shall defend the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and
the House of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them.
THis day was this Scripture fulfilled to these Nations; and he that comes
prepared, as he ought, to celebrate this Solemnity, will presently discern,
what an easy Accommodation thereof may be made to the state of our own
Affairs; and that the words afford a seasonable Theme for an holy Panegyric,
and are fit to remind us of those Mercies we here are met to commemorate and
acknowledge. Your selves, I know, can well transfer them, and make the
Application: But if I may contribute any help to this, be pleased that we
reflect a while on their Ground and Occasion; which having done with any
tolerable Attention, we shall grow doubtful (perhaps) whether in Palestine or
Britain, the Scene might be more fitly laid.

God had now brought again the Captivity of Sion, and redeemed his chosen
Nation from Vassallage under haughty Tyrants: and the Mercy was so great, and
the Joy so transporting, that it almost astonished and overwhelmed their Sense.
They were tempted to disbelieve their Eyes, and to suspect it was a Dream of
the Night, and not a Vision of the Day, that entertained them. For the
Revolution and Turn of Affairs was so wonderfully surprising and great, so
unexpected a Face of things did appear, and yet so calmly accomplished, and
smoothly brought to pass, that (like St. Peter, when his Chains Act. 12. 9.
dropped off at the Angel's Voice) at first they thought their Deliverance but an
imaginary thing, fine wrought in the Shop of Fancy, and that (surely) it could
not be a real Event of things, or a solid and substantial Change.

But when they found that it was a public and palpable Blessing that had
befallen them; a Blessing, the happy influence whereof every awakned Eye might
see, and every well affected Heart might feel; what Gladsom Passions then
thronged in their enlarged Breasts, and warmed and actuated every Part? How was
their Mind ravished with the Joy, and how was their Countenance adorned with a
pleasing Grace? How did the wasted Kingdom erect its drooping Head, and the
Church new string her Harp, which had so long hung upon the Willows in the
times of her Desolations? How did their Mouths sing out the Praises of Him who
rules in all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and how did their Hearts glow with Love
and Loyal Veneration to Zerubbabel, and other Princes of ancient Race? How did
all the Sorrows of their past Captivity disband and vanish, till scarce any
other Remembrance was left of former Miseries, than what might heighten the
Relish of present Enjoyments? Nay further, How did the Fame of this spread into
distant Countries, and Foreign Lands: And whether they did envy or congratulate
Judah's Happiness, yet still how were they obliged to say, The Lord had done
great things for them?

And what happy Consequents did attend and wait upon this Revolution, cannot be
better described, than in our Prophet's Language; The Temple was rebuilt, and
the solemn Chapter 6. 13.
Worship restored; Sanctuaries rescued from shameful Profanation, and the
places of God's Feet made glorious: The Hierarchy Chapter 3. 5.
was restored, and the Mitre placed upon the High Priest's Head, and Plenty was
poured down from the Stores of Heaven: The Vine gave her Fruit, and the Ground
Chapter 8. 12.
her Increase, and the Heavens their Dew; and instead of Monthly Fasts, God was
to Chapter 8. 19.
the House of Judah, Joy and Gladness, and cheerful Feasts.

And now nothing could be added to the greatness of their Happiness, but
Continuance and Perpetuity, and a wise Provision for its lasting and
uninterrupted Enjoyment. For Religion would soon be lost, without an
established Defender of the Faith (successively) to maintain, protect and
support it. Peace would be dishonorable, or short-lived, without an Head of
Counsel, a Scepter of Justice, and a Sword of War to secure and guard it.
Plenty would expose a Nation to be the fatter Prey for Rapine or Ambition from
abroad, or incline them to be wanton, or desirous of Change at home; without
the Force of Government to repel the one, and the Wisdom and Authority of it,
to check and to curb the other.

And therefore, that Religion, and Peace, and Plenty might be continued to them
and their Posterity, and that God might crown all his other Favors in their
Restoration, and that no Oppressor might go through them any more; God resolved
to settle the Government in the hands of a meek and righteous Prince, and to
entail the Succession upon his House; and so to secure them in the Enjoyment of
all the Interests that could be dear unto them; and by that means, as formerly
by the Ministry of Angels, to dispense and convey to them the various Issues
and Fruits of his Providence and Care. And thus Zerubbabel and his House are
brought in (as Adam was) to govern a World, from which Chaos and Confusion were
but lately fled; and to cultivate that Garden of God, whose Fences and Walls
were now rebuilt and repaired. And this gives us a View of the main Intendment
of the words, and also of the Interest and Share our selves may challenge in
them. In that day the Lord shall defend, etc.

In my prosecuting of which, and the business of the day, I crave leave to
insist upon these four following Observables.

First, That it was a Special Act of Providence that brought about this Change
in the Jewish, and our Affairs: In that day the Lord shall defend the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Secondly, That thereby the State of a Kingdom, and of
a Prince, from feeble and weak, became as David. Thirdly, That hereby the
Government was established, not only in a single Prince, but in his Lineage and
House: The House of David shall be as God. Fourthly, The happy Influences this
Government should have upon the Subjects of it; and this illustrated by the
gracious Conduct of the Angel (of old) that went before the Camp of Israel.
First, That it was a Special Act of Providence, etc. Ut supra.

Providence chiefly exercises it self about Humane Affairs in three ways.

1. Permissively. 2. Directively. 3. By way of Energy, and Efficacy.
1. In the way of Sufferance and bare Permission. This I the rather remark,
because we have been sadly sensible, how perversely and impiously some have
alleged the Argument of Providence: when God was said to vouch the things
which he abhorred, and Heaven was forced to father the wicked and the monstrous
Brats of Earth: when Proceedings were justified, as the Great Turk does his,
purely by the Success. As if Crimes ceased to be such, when they once grew
great, prosperous and incorrigible; As if Good and Ill, Right and Wrong, Just
and Unjust, were to be measured by the length of the Sword, or the strength of
a Party; not by the eternal and unchangeable Standards of Equity and Reason,
and the Obligation of Divine and Humane Laws; As if God's secret Inspirations
could whisper Contradictions to his revealed Will; and the same pure, heavenly
Source and Fountain could send forth sweet Waters and Bitter; As if God
approved every thing, which he does not forthwith punish; and to suspend his
Thunderbolts, were a full Evidence of his Love.

No doubt can be made, but that whatever Evil or Calamity there is in a City,
it is permitted by the wise Ruler of the World, in order to reform the Guilts,
or improve the Graces of those it is inflicted on, or to revenge God's just
Quarrel on an ungrateful Nation. But then it would be considered, that an
Executioner is oft-times not the least of Criminals, and that the very Office
is so vile and ignoble, that generous and good Natures disdain and abhor it.
Thence it was, that God suffered the Venomous Tail of a Nation to lash and
scourge the Head, and the more noble parts of it, and did not forcibly
interpose, to stop that Malice and Treachery, which he grievously hates, and
has severely forbidden: for thus Man, in his lower Dominion over the Works of
God's Hands, admits of the Savage Cruelty, or Brutal Rage of one Creature, to
tame, or to subdue another. Nor can this in any wise be colourably proved, to
stamp the Divine Allowance on unrighteous practices, though it do demonstrate
the Divine Wisdom, in making the worst things (some way or other) subservient
to its own holy Purposes, and great Designs.

2. Again; The Providence of God, with a watchful Care, directs and
superintends all Events below; and (especially) with a concerned and jealous
Eye, applies it self to the Rise and Fall of Kingdoms and Empires, the
Advancement or Decay of States or Commonwealths: Insomuch, that they who have
been let into the Secrets of God's Counsels (as Daniel, and the Prophets of
old) have there seen the exact and fatal Schemes of their flourishing or
declining Estate, and the most considerable Periods of their Fortune in
following Ages and Generations.

And this is of mighty Use to the great Purposes of Religion; for it impresses
upon Men awful Apprehensions concerning God; it engages them to look up beyond
the Sphere and Activity of second Causes (which ever moving in a lower and
circumscribed Orb, must follow the Sway and Revolution of the great first
Mover,) it assures them that they are not abandoned to the Casualties of blind
Fortune, or the Violences of unreasonable Men; but are still (in their greatest
Extremities) under the wise Disposals of a gracious God. This, finally, in the
Success even of lawful Enterprises, calls upon Men, to give unto God the Honor
due to his Name; not to sacrifice to their Net, or burn Incense to their Dragg,
or ascribe happy Events wholly to the reach of their Counsels, or the puissance
of their Arms.

3. But then, above and beyond both these, there is in some Revolutions, a
signal and efficacious Interposal of Providence, bringing about things in so
surprising ways, as that they are not only above the visible Power, but against
the Tendency of lower and second Causes.

Upon which Score we may warrantably affirm, that they bear the Marks and
Signatures of a Contrivance and Production Divine; and as a Child sometimes
challenges the Father by uncommon Features and Resemblances, so these speak
themselves the Offspring and Issue of Heavenly Power and Love. For thus the
Beauty, or wonderful Greatness of a Work, and the strange way of effecting it;
the disproportion of it to second Causes, or its Contrariety to the Springs and
Principles of their accustomed Motions; The universal Good it sheds around,
beyond all humane Hopes and Expectations: These, and such as these, I take to
be Characters of Divine Interposals in Energetical Ways, or else it seems hard
to me to prove that God does specially interest himself in the Management of
Humane Affairs, since Miracles ceased, and Immediate Revelations were of no
longer use and necessity.

Now thus it happened to Judah, and to us, in our happy Restoration; and we (as
they) must own that God himself was on our side, and has done great things for
us, whereof we rejoice.

In their Case, it is well known, that Cyrus issued out an unaccountable
Proclamation for the Jews to return to their own Land, and to rebuild their
Temple, and to fortify their City, and bestowed on them Wealth, and enabled
them with Commissions to carry on the Work.

What now would his Statesmen say? What strange Counsel (shall we call it,) or
rather, What Frenzy is this that now governs the King? thus against all Rules
of Interest and Honor, to dismiss a People inured to his Service, by seventy
years Captivity: A People too, of Religion and Rites different from, and
reproachful to, the Persian Worship; while many conquered Nations of our own
Religion are yet detained in hard Subjection. But if the Slaves must go, let
them first be squeezed of their Wealth, and deprived of Opportunities to
revolt: Let their City remain Dismantled, and their Walls in Ruins; and then,
if they prove slippery, they may easily be reduced. But shall they who ought to
be Slaves for ever, or to purchase their Freedom at vast Rates, be cheaply
dismissed, and sent home laden with Persian Wealth, and so be put into a
Capacity to fight us with our own Weapons? Thou great Cyrus! Surely thy wonted
Conduct has forsaken thee, and a long Course of prosperous Success has rendered
thee forgetful of the common Rules of Policy.

No, no! God had the Heart of this mighty Prince in his Hand, and inspired him
with kind Thoughts to a Captive People: He who dissolves the Snowy Mountains
into kindly Rivers (from the South) to enrich the barren Land, brooded upon the
Spirit of this Persian Monarch, and melted down his Rigours into warm
Affections to his ancient People; And thence our Prophet says, that They
returned not by Might, nor by Power, but by the Chapter 4. 6.
Spirit of the Lord.

As we have heard, so have we seen, in the City of our God, in the Jerusalem of
our Israel, God upholdeth the same for ever. He calmed the Rage of a Mutinous
and Fanatic Army, and sent a Spirit of Division among the Leaders and Chiefs
of prosperous Usurpation, as of old he did between Abimelech Jud. 9. 23.
and the Men of Sichem; and at that Breach, made way for his Anointed to enter.
He made a little Cloud from the North (of despised and neglected Beginnings)
grow and increase to vast and formidable Dimensions, and, after it had hovered
a while over a doubtful Nation, made it to disclose from its darksome Womb, a
happy Shower that blessed and enriched all the Land. He confounded the Subtilty
of the Crafty, and broke the Forces of the Strong, and dissolved the
Combinations and Confederacies of those, whom Interest, and Ambition, and
common Guilts, and Fears had long cemented together. He charmed the Passions of
an Headstrong and Tumultuous People, till those very daring Factions, which,
with Armed Legions, had broke into the Quarters of well-intrenched Monarchy,
were all subdued under the Feet of an Unarmed, and a Peaceful King. He gave him
a Triumph, without a Fight; and a complete Victory, without Resistance or
Engagement: And thus (as anciently) the Mountains before Zerubbabel were made
plain, and no Road but was passable, when God and Angels led the way.

Thus were Judah, and We, led out of sad Bondage, to Freedom and to Peace, to
Laws and Religion in our Native Land: And by the greatness of the Work, and the
littleness of the Humane Helps instrumental in it, we safely may conclude, it
was God's Doing, and that God in that day did defend the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

Secondly, That thereby the State of a Kingdom, and the Condition of a Prince,
from feeble, became as David.

1. As to the state of the Kingdom. And here (without any Figures or
Aggravations) it may be justly affirmed, that the Lamentations, Jeremy made to
condole the Jewish Captivity, suited us in almost every part; and where we fell
short in the exactness of the Parallel, we out-vyed them in the bitterness of
our Misery.

They were carried Captives into a strange Land, but it was by the Chance of an
Open and Generous War; and however, they were in Servitude under a mighty
Monarch, who was the Terror of the whole World: But we, by unnatural Discord
and seditious Insurrection, became Slaves to our Servants and Mercenaries, as
the Egyptians were once enslaved by their own Mamalukes. We had the Vexation to
see that loathsome Plague renewed, Frogs croaking in our King's Palaces, and
Creatures of a low and degenerous Race infesting the Seats of Majesty and
Honor.

That hateful and unseemly thing was our sad Portion, which, Solomon says,
disquiets the Prove. 30. 21, 22.
whole Earth, and which it cannot bear, A Servant when he reigns, and a Fool
when he is filled with Meat: And our Kingdom underwent St. Peter's way of
Crucifixion, with its Head downwards, and the Heels aloft. Mechanics set up
for Rulers and Chiefs, and Mushromes grew up to Majestic Pride, as if we were
to be, not only the Mark of Fortune's Malice, but the Matter of her Merriment
and Scorn. We needed not then a Foreign Country to be Captives in, our own was
worse than Babylon, a Stage of greater Misery and Confusion: and wherever then
you cast your Eyes, they were met with a sad and a dismal Prospect.

The Beauty of Holiness was all sullied and besmeared, and the more rash and
neglectful Addresses to God were, by so much more religious was the Worship
esteemed. Cruelty was taken to be Zeal, and Sacrilege and Villainy were listed
under the Colors of Reformation. The Remnant of the Royal Party that was left,
(at length) began to envy those that fell in the High Places of the Field,
rather than thus survive, to see Faction rampant, and Rebellion prosperous;
God's Prophets persecuted, and his Service abolished, and his Temples
profaned, and his Sacred Vicegerent, by Impious Hands, barbarously slain. Had
Babylon and Miseries comparable to the Arbitrary Tyrannies of Select
Committees, and High Courts of Justice, and Pretense of Martial Law? What a
hard Bondage was this, when but to question the Justice of their Proceedings
was turned into a Plot against the State; and to debate the Legality of a Tax,
did merit a Decimation? Whatever Treasures, or precious Vessels were carried
away from Jerusalem, as the Spoils of War, fell far short, in value, of the
prodigious Fruits of the long Rapine, Plundering and Sacrilege, which were
exercised Here: For, upon fair Calculation, it was computed that, before ever
the Usurper came to sway, in eight Years time, forty Millions had been raised
by the Grandees of Parliament; which was judged more Money than had been levied
on the Subject, in all the Monarchs Reigns, since the Norman Conquest, till
that time. Were the Jews compelled to speak a strange Language? So were we.
Miscreants of the blackest Hew, we were taught to call Saints and Precious
Ones; a Cabal of Arbitrary Grandees, were now styled Keepers of our Liberties;
Juncto's of Bloody and Cruel Men, a Committee of Safety; the common Boutefeau's
and Incendiaries of State, Assertors of our Laws, and Patriots of our Country;
Demure Cant, and Hypocritical Jargon, went by the name of powerful and
awakening Gospelling. Were Attempts made to enslave them in their Consciences,
as well as Bodies? So it was here, and severe things threatened and inflicted on
all that would not fall down and worship the Idol of Liberty and Reformation
which they had set up; and which were as much what they pretended to be, as
Nebuchadnezzar's Image was a true God. However, to establish their Iniquity and
Usurpation as sure as they could, they imposed Impious Engagements, and Oaths
of Abjuration of the Royal Line, as if they were resolved to push fair for
Men's Eternal Ruin, as well as Temporal.

And now the Affairs and Interests of the Royal Party were at a very low Ebb,
and no Glimpse of Hope appeared from any Quarter or Region round about. Even
those that were most Loyally inclined, found that, by struggling in the Toyls,
they were more fatally entangled; and while they played on the Game with an
Unfortunate Hand, instead of retrieving what was lost, they only made new
Additions to the Power and Courage of the Adversary. All therefore they could
do, was, to sit down and weep by the Waters of their Captivity, when they
remembered Sion, and to join with the Guardian-Angel of the Land, who doubtless
(as it is in the 1st Chapter of this Prophecy at the 12th Verse) sympathized
with the piteous Calamities of its Charge, and would solicit Heaven in some
such Pious Expostulation as this. How long, O Lord of Hosts! How long will thou
not have Mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou
have had Indignation this twenty Years? Look down from Heaven, and behold thy
Church in Ruins, and thy Vicegerent hunted as a Partridge on the Mountains, and
thy Gospel prostituted to the Lusts of Wretched Hypocrites, or Ambitious Men;
and the whole Land over flown with Guilt, or Fears, or Blood. How long will thou be wroth with thy People that prays, and hide thy Face in an angry Cloud
from Judah thy Sanctuary, and Israel thy Possession? Thou, indeed, have been
justly displeased at us; But what are these Usurpers that are at Ease, that
they thus help forward, and aggravate our Affliction? Up then, Lord, and let
not Man have the Upper Hand; Let not the Sword devour for ever, nor Violence
and Confusion be entailed on us and our Heirs for evermore. Remember, that the
Wrongs done to thy Anointed below, take Heaven at their Rebound; and that he
cannot be innocent to his God, who is an Offender against his King. Pity a
Nation that has no Pity upon it self, and scatter the People that delight in
War; and do Thou, Lord, help in Trouble, for Vain is the Help of Man. It Is a
Cause now fit for thee to appear in; and since all other Medicines fail,
dispense to us out of the Treasures of Thy own Goodness and Benignity. None now
can Rival Thee in any Part of the Glory of the Work; and Thou will thereby
signalize thy Power, no less than thy Pity and Compassion. Let thy Hand be upon
the Man of thy Right Hand, and on that Royal Person, whom thou so miraculously
preservedst for thy own Self. Make good the Happy Omens and Glorious Presages
at his Birth, and convince the World, that the Heavens did not then smile on
him in vain; Settle us again upon the old Foundations, and let not a Nation,
whom thou have formerly signalized by a Train of Illustrious Mercies and
Protections, become the Scorn and Derision of our Enemies round about us.



Such were the sorrowful Accents, and pious Breathings of God's Angels, and
Godly Men; and at length, to show the prevalency of those Christian Weapons,
Prayers and Tears, kind Heaven graciously was pleased to hearken; and on the
sudden, removed all our Misery, and took away our Reproach; and, as David, by
an unexpected Unction, was taken from following the Ewes great with Young, to
feed Jacob God's People, and Israel his Inheritance; so here, a new, and far
more glorious Scene did presently open* and disclose; and the Royal Interest,
from feeble, and almost forlorn, became as David; and God, by a mighty, but
gentle Spirit, turned our Captivity as the Rivers in the South: And (as in the
World's first Creation) out of a Mass of Matter, dark and disorderly, blended
and confused, of jarring and disagreeing Natures, he produced a comely and well
compacted Fabric of Government, in Church and State, which should move
orderly, and minister to the Good of each particular Being.

2. As to the Condition of our Prince: None ever so like David as He, in
Dangers, and Deliverances, and unexpected Advancement. What though he was
destined to a Crown, by Divine Appointment and Decree; who would not yet have
preferred any private Station, with Security, before it? rather than for ever
(on the Account of that Eminence) be persecuted by the jealous Rage of Saul,
and the virulent Calumnies of Doeg, and the fierce Insurrections of Sheba, and
the unnatural Rebellion of Absalom. Unravel the History of both those Royal
Persons, and tell me if any two Characters do so justly agree: How were Both
couped up one while in such a Cave, another in such a Wood; forced hastily to
flee to Moab, and to Gath, and (thanks to that Providence that takes care of
Kings) found more Kindness and Shelter among uncircumcised Philistines, than
their own Subjects, in their Rightful Dominions? How did both receive in
themselves, each Moment, the Sentence of Death, by new Dangers, and frightful
Alarms? And how were both sometimes in the greatest Perplexity and Doubt, which
they ought most to be jealous of, the Violence of implacable Enemies, or the
Treachery of pretended Friends.

But why do I thus lay open the Distresses of Sacred Majesty, to our own great
Dishonor? Let dark Shades for ever be drawn over the Visage of those Times;
let them never see the Light: Let us no longer see such Misfortunes displayed,
as upbraid our Guilts no less than move our Pity; but let us turn our Eyes on
David, Crowned in Hebron, from his Exile in Gath. He asked Life of God, and He,
with Life, bestowed the Possession of a Crown in Peace: He subdued the People
under him, and the Nations under his Feet, and there remained no Strife at all,
but a Dutiful and Loyal Emulation, who should be the First in bringing back the
King. And now the Daughter of Sion might well rejoice greatly, when her King
came in such a meek and peaceful way; not in confused Noises of War, not in
Garments rolled in Blood: He came as the Rain into a Fleece of Wool, and the
Gentleness of his Entrance was, at once, an Earnest, and a Shadow of the future
Grace and Goodness of his Government. And thus it appears, that the State of
our Kingdom, and the Condition of our Prince, From feeble, became as David,
Which was the second Thing.

Thirdly, The next is, That hereby the Government was established, not only in
a Single Person, but in his Lineage and House; The House of David shall be as
God.

What Aspect this may have upon the Spiritual Kingdom of the Messiah, and what
the Mystical Intendment and Sense in that regard may be, I will not now
enquire; but with an Eye to the Temporal Government of the House of David, I
must consider wherein they so resemble God, as that it may be accommodated to
Sovereign and Hereditary Princes at large.

Now here I must first premise, that Scriptures themselves do ascribe to them
some Shadows of Divine Excellencies and Perfections, and so also do the Sages
of our Municipal Laws; lest any should pertly here object, that this Divinity
is broached only by Court-Chaplains, or Pensioners to Prerogative.

The Inspired Writings say, that it is God whom Sovereign Powers do represent,
that it is by the Beams of his Majesty they shine, that He has said They are
Gods, that he puts the Sword of Justice in their Hands, that it is his Throne
they fill, and that Obedience to them is enforced upon their Subjects by virtue
of a Divine Authority and Command.

And the Skilful in our Laws say, That the Common Law, by way of Similitude,
attributes to the King a Shadow of Divine Excellencies, because he represents
the Person of God, and bears his Image. As (for instance) Sovereignty, all
Lands being held of him; Power, he commanding his Subjects to go out of the
Realm to War, or making Foreign Coin Current by his Proclamation; Majesty, he
neither taking, nor parting with any Thing, without Matter of Record, except
Chattels, or such like, below the Regard of Law; Infiniteness, after a certain
manner, being present in all his Courts, and, as it were, in all places of his
Dominions; Perpetuity, having perpetual Succession, and being not subject to
dye; Perfection, for no Laches, Folly, Infancy, or Corruption of Blood can be
judged in him; Truth, he cannot be estopped; Justice, He cannot be a Disseizor,
or do any Wrong.

These things I find vouched from such Authorities, as that they seem to me, to
be Essential to our Constitution, and to be as good a Comment, as one would
wish, on that Branch of the Text, now under Consideration, that The House of
David should be as God; intimating many high and excellent Prerogatives, they
were invested in, and encircled withal.

But I must confine my Discourse to narrower Bounds, and therefore shall insist
only on these two things.

1. That in the Monarchy, resembling God, the Persons in Power were truly
Supreme, (...), unaccountable to any, as God can be compelled by none, nor be
made accountable to them.

2. That they resembled him in a kind of Immortality; The King never died, the
Monarchy was Successive and Hereditary.

1. They resemble God in being, (...), truly Supreme and Unaccountable. Some
learned Men will have this to have been the main difference betwixt the Judges
that governed Israel, and the Kings of the House of David, That the former were
to render an Account to the State, of the Administration of their Government,
which the latter were not to do, but to God only. The very nature of the thing
(indeed) proves it self sufficiently: For, wherever Sovereign Power is once
lodged (because for the Spartan Shadows of a King, and the Dukes of Venice, I
am not concerned to account here) there is evidently vested a Freedom from all
forcible Control or Coertion: And if David and his Race were Kings over all
Israel, they had the eminent controlling Authority over the scattered, or
united Power of the Body-Politick; and so no Sanhedrim, no Assembly, no Consent
of the People, no Officers of State, can be above them, in the way of proper
Rule or Jurisdiction; and violently to touch them in the very Skirts of their
Mantle, is hugely culpable and criminal.

On the account of this Eminence, they are fenced and immured by the Laws, both
of Earth and Heaven, from the undutiful Thought, and the saucy Tongue, as well
as the rebellious and assassinating Hand. We are not to curse the King, so much
as in Thought, and we are not to revile the Gods, or speak Evil of the Rulers
of the People: And blaspheming God, and the King, were Crimes that went
coupled, and hand in hand; and St. Paul recanted a rash Word spoken against a
Person in Power, though horribly abusing it: And it is supposed that the old War
of the Giants against the Gods, meant no more than Insurrections of mighty
Subjects against their Kings: Sure we are, that, in a Divine Sense, it is no
less than Resisting the Ordinance of God, to resist them; and They that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation.

And the Christian Duty of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, has unshaken
Foundations, and inviolable Grounds, in the Eternal Laws of Nature and Equity;
in the Essential Frame and Subordination of Politic Societies to some Supreme;
in the Inspired Writings of the Old and New Testament; in the Examples of the
Holy Jesus, and his meek Disciples; in the Canons of the Church, and the
Statutes of the Realm; in the Monuments of Primitive Christianity, and the
Sufferings of the most celebrated Martyrs.

As to this last, I confess, some have gone about to blast the Martyrs Laurels,
and represent them to have undergone their Sufferings, because they were weak
in their Force, or in their Understandings; and so they foolishly, or helplesly
submitted to what could not be redrest.

And thus their Memories are Martyred, as their Bodies were before, and those
illustrious passive Graces of Meekness and Resignation, of Christian Patience
and Taking up the Cross, which are the bright Enamel of their Heavenly Crowns,
which are the just Imitation of our Suffering Lord, which are the Eternal Theme
of our Wonder and our Praise, which (in the Opinion of truly Good Men) do
embalm their Names below; and which above have preferred them to the highest
Seats in the Church Triumphant. These, I say, are made to dwindle into mere
politic Compliance with a helpless Necessity; or are arraigned, as Arguments
of the Weakness of their Party, or their Ignorance of their Rights and
Privileges: which Modern Professors (it seems) pretend now far better to
understand, in these Days of New-Light, and by those extraordinary late
Discoveries that have been made to the Kingdom of the Saints.

Suffice it us, that we know the ancient Channel, wherein Christianity ran; how
it was propagated, and prevailed in the World, when it went forth conquering,
and to conquer; and yet knew nothing of making its Way by Violence or Armies;
by deposing of Kings, or fighting for Privileges; by Alterations of
Governments, or Dis-inherison of Princes; that is, in plain English, when it
was not acquainted with advancing Christ's Cause, by reproaching his Religion,
or breaking any of his Commandments.

As for us, who adhere to the Establishment in the Church of England: It has
hitherto been our just Glory (of which, none hereafter, I hope, shall deprive
us) that, like the Wisdom from above, our Doctrines are pure, and our
Principles and Practices peaceable; opposite to Idolatry against God, and
Sedition against the King: And as this Church has hitherto been, so may it for
ever stand, the just Dread and Envy of our Enemies on either hand, and be a
lasting Monument of the true Temper and Genius of the Christian Religion, till
Time shall be no more.

But now, because we have exempted Sovereigns from being justly obnoxious to
Outward Force or Violence, have we therefore cancelled all Obligations upon
them? Have we made mere Power to be Right, or Passion to be Law; or left
Appetite to range, without either Rule or Bounds; and so put them into such a
State, as is proper to none but the Great Leviathan; who, with full and
Arbitrary Liberty, rowls and sports himself in his Watery Kingdom, and at
pleasure Preys upon all the Lesser, and Defenseless Fry.

Surely it is not reasonable, thus to understand us. May not their Consciences
be bound, though their Hands cannot? Is not every lower Orb limited and
circumscribed by that which is above it; and though they be higher than the
highest on Earth, yet still in Heaven is there not one higher than they?
Seneca, of old, has wisely and gravely told them, Quicquid a vobis minor
extimescit, major hoc vobis Dominus minatur; Omne sub Regno graviore Regnum
est. However they have no Peer on Earth, in their own Dominions, they are
nevertheless Subjects of Heaven: and therefore they may, on that Score, lie
under the the Obligation of public Promises, and solemn Acts of Condescension:
They may be tied by sacred Vows and Oaths, by the Sense of Honor and Religion;
by the prudent Care of their Temporal, and an awful Regard to their Eternal,
Interests; by the Engagements of Justice, and Wisdom, and Tenderness, and
Humanity: for even God himself, the great Potentate of the whole Universe, is
not Arbitrary in any Exorbitant way; but he forms the Awful Decrees and
Resolves of his Almighty Will and Pleasure, by the Eternal Laws and Measures,
of Rectitude, and Goodness, and Holiness, and Compassion.

2. The House of David resembled God, in a kind of Immortality: The King never
dyed, the Monarchy being Successive and Hereditary.

As Monarchy is the best of Governments, for Order, Peace, Strength, Steadiness
and Fixation, so the Descent of this high Office, in the way of an Inheritance,
is the best of Monarchies. And therefore, when God established a Government
among his own People, he settled it in David's House for many future Years, and
a great while to come: he promised, that when his own Days were fulfilled and
he should sleep with his Fathers, yet he would set up of the Royal Progeny and
Seed after him, and establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever; and this that
holy Prince 2 Samuel 7. per tot.
magnifies very much in the Favor of God toward him, that he had not only
brought him to the Crown, that was but a small thing, in comparison of
establishing the Kingdom in his Line, and his House, in longinquum, for many
succeeding Ages and Generations. And thence it is, that we meet so often with
the mention of the Blood Royal, the Seed, the Progeny, and the Race of Kings,
in the Historical Books of the Old Testament.

Hereby God wisely prevents a Vacuum, or Gap in Government, which in Polities
and Societies, does oftimes breed as preposterous and violent Changes, as it
does in Nature, and at which, much Disorder and Confusion is too apt to enter:
Which must be confessed by all, who remember the many Tumults, dangerous
Ferments, and Convulsions, that inseparably wait upon the Intervals of
Government in Elective Kingdoms or Principalities.

So that if, on one hand, there be a hazard of personal Insufficiency for the
high Charge, on the other, there is almost a Certainty of lasting Mischiefs, by
the high Animosities of clashing Factions, and different Pretenders; and the
notorious Sway, and mighty Ascendant, that Interest and partial Affections have
in the Management of Elections, and free Choices, do balance, at least, the
personal Defects or Inconveniences in the way of Descent and Succession. And
when the Trees went out to choose their King, the Bramble carried it from the
fat Olive, the sweet Fig Tree, and the gladsom Vine.

But further, It ought to be considered, that if Children, and the Fruit of the
Womb be (in general) a Gift and Heritage that comes of the Lord, that then it
seems utterly unlikely, that God should abandon to Nature, and the fickle Laws
of Generation, the Disposal of, and Succession into that high Office, which is
the Instrument of so many of his Providence to this lower World, and of so
mighty Importance and Concernment to the Affairs of his Church and his Religion.

So that, if by such special Direction and Superintendence of Providence, it
may be rationally concluded, that the Matter is from God, then we may be
confident it will be more blessed, than the wisest of Men's Expedients or
Inventions without, or against him. And there must surely be somewhat
extraordinary in it, that when God threatens his severest Vengeance against the
Nation of the Philistines, one part of it should be, to have Zech. 9. 5, 6.
the King perish from Gaza, and a Bastard to dwell in Ashdod.

They who set up the Spuriout Abimelech, rejoiced in him for a while, and
Abimelech rejoiced in them; but this Sunshine ended in very foul Weather, and
the Matter had a sad and Tragical Period and Catastrophe; for a Fire was
enkindled in short time between Judge. 9. 19, 20.
them, and devoured and consumed them both, and revenged the Injuries they had
done, by their wicked Combination against Jerubbaal and his House, with whom
they had dealt untruly and unsincerely.

How much better then is it, when God takes the Matter into his own Hand, and,
together with Inherent Blood and Birthright, conveys and entails the Right to a
Crown; and the same Providence that designs the Being, assigns the Station, he
must hold, and the great Character he must sustain and manage. This, of old, I
am sure, was frankly owned and recognized by St. Ambrose and St. Augustine,
Learned, as well as Good, Men; Cujus jussu nascuntur Homines, ejus jussu
constituuntur Principes, inde illis Potestas unde Spiritus. They thought that
God, not only instituted the Office, and was the Fountain of the Authority, but
was interessed too in the Designation of the Person, in whom it should be
invested. Nor did they think it such a horrid Impeachment of a wise and
gracious Providence, that Princes were sometimes sent to fill the Throne, who
in Piety, or Gentleness, or other Princely Virtues, fell far short of the
Perfections of a Constantine, or a Theodosius.

But the great Iniquity in the canvasing Questions of this sort, seems to be,
That Men consider only the present Advantage or Security they propose; not the
lasting Settlement, or true Right of things; for if those were searched into,
(methinks) it is palpable and plain, that Foundations can neither be safely nor
justly altered: Not Safely, because they who new model Kingdoms, must first
force them, and crumble them into pieces, ere they can fit and dispose them for
a new Fabric; and this will bring in such dreadful Shakings and Convulsions,
as may endanger the very Being of the Body Politic; and raise such violent
Fermentations, as may go near to dissipate and destroy the whole. Not Justly,
because Fundamental Laws that concern the Rights of Empire, and that relate to
the Original Constitution of Things, and that fix and cut out the Channels,
wherein for ever they were to run; These, I say, cannot be altered without the
Violation of those Grounds and Laws of Reason, and Equity, and Social Life,
which support and protect all Public Establishments and Intercourses of Men.
And if this might be attempted at the Instigation of any number of
Fellow Members of the same Society, against the Band of Union or Government,
which secures the Whole, it is plain, all Original Conventions or Rights are
laid by, as Insignificant and Invalid, and then Matters come to Force and the
Hostilities of Anarchy; and Conscience, and Moral Honesty, will be lost, as
well as Order and public Peace.

To obviate, if possible, this intolerable Evil, Oaths of Succession, and
sacred Ties of Allegiance, have been imposed upon Subjects, to Kings and their
Heirs; and then all Lawful Rights and Titles are adopted into a Religious
Sacredness and Obligation; and the Duty is then enforced by a Supervening Awe
and Dread of the Avenging Justice of that God, who would have Caesar's Rights
rendered to Caesar, as well as his own to himself.

But, to conclude this Point; If we would find sure Expedients to engage the
Divine Favor, let us not grow distrustful of his Providence, nor run counter
to his Will; and, because we apprehend the Ark of God does totter or threaten
to fall, in a rash, unwarrantable Zeal, stretch out our bold, unconsecrated
Hands upon the visible Symbol of the Divine Presence, And so I go to

The Fourth and Last Observable in the Words. The happy Influences, this
Government should have upon the Subjects of it; and this illustrated by the
Gracious Conduct of the Angel of Old, that went before the Camp of Israel;
which is called, The Angel of the Divine Presence, and which conducted the
Israelites out of Egypt, into the Promised Land.



This hovered over, and overshadowed Vide Dr. Hammond, in 1 Cor. 10. 1.
them like a Tent: Sometimes it appeared as a Pillar of a Cloud, for it was
dusky and dark, when mastered and out-shined by the Sun's more powerful Rays;
and sometimes as a Pillar of Fire, when, like the Stars, it recovered its Light
in the Absence of the Sun. The Angel, that was in this Cloud, was their Guide
to lead them in the tedious Wanderings of their Way, and was their Guard against
the Dangers that might annoy or infest them. God's Name was upon it, and it
moved by his Authority, and was a Symbol, and Visible Means, as well as a
Representment, of his constant Watchfulness and Care over them. By its Coolness
and Shade, they were sheltered from the scorching Heats of the Arabian Deserts;
and by its environing them round, they were secured from the Pursuits of the
enraged Egyptians, and the Annoyance of all other Enemies whatsoever.

I must leave your own Thoughts and Experiences, to accommodate all this to the
kindly Influences of that Government, under which we live; under whose
Protection, and comfortable Shade, we sit safe and easy, and enjoy every thing
that can sweeten our Passage through the Wilderness of this, or open us a
hopeful Prospect into the other, World; by which we have a blessed Opportunity,
if we will gratefully improve it, to lead peaceable and quiet Lives in all
Godliness and Honesty.

For, though it be true in the General, that since God left off to converse
with Men, by the visible Intercourse of Angels, there can be no fitter
Representment of his constant Presence than by a Sovereign Magistrate; by whom
God rules, though in more Humane Ways, and who is the Ordinary Means of
conveying many of his public Blessings to this lower World. Yet this We, of
this Nation, have special Obligations to appropriate to our selves, and to
esteem him that now fills the Throne, as the Angel, or Minister, of God to us
for Good.

We shall grow unworthy of Blessings which we refuse to own, and in vain do we
expect that Heaven should smile on us afresh, if we continue Clouded under
sullen and ungrateful Passions. Remember we that the murmuring and discontented
Israelites did blast their own growing Happiness; and their mutinous Designs,
of choosing new Captains, cut them short of their Happiness in the Promised Land.

Let Israel then rejoice in Him that made Him, and let the Children of Sion be
joyful in their King.

A Prince, who is Great and Free, as ever Monarch on the English Throne; but
yet Great and Free, as those good Angels are, that preside over Humane Affairs,
who cannot bend their Power to do Mischief, or Annoy.

A Prince, so far from affecting Arbitrary Power, that He is just beyond the
Impeachment of Malice, and merciful, beyond either Merit or Example; and who
out-does the Excellency and Goodness of the English Constitution, by His
singular Temper in the Administration of it.

A Prince, who, like an Angel of God, is wise, to discern between Good and
Evil; and can judge truly what Intrigues or Designs are carried on, by demure
Pretenders, to an Oak of Reformation, a Pilgrimage of Grace, or a True
Protestant League or Association; Who distinguishes easily and exactly between
the Sacred and Genuine Gospel of Christ, and the Evangelium Armatum of the
Jesuits, the Republicans, or the Leviathan; and whose Senses are so well
exercised in the Manage of His Authority, as to tell, with wonderful Sagacity,
when Tenderness of Conscience is a pityable Infirmity, and when it is a
stubborn and naughty Disease.

A Prince Who is Patient, almost beyond Provocation, and Generous, beyond
Desert; and Who can deny us nothing, but a Liberty to undo our selves; and Who
seems resolved that, even in spite of our selves, He will make us Happy.

A Prince Who, like Moses, was preserved, amidst wondrous Providence, to
rescue us from the Slavery and Misery under which we groaned; and Who, like him
too, is as meek as any upon Earth; And when He returned from Exile to Empire,
happily defeated Vide Sueton. in Tiberio, and Casaubon in locum, p. 404.
an old Prophecy of bad Portent,

-- Regnabit Sanguine multo
Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab Exilio.
And did neither enter, nor reign in Blood.

Such is the Prince, whom God, This Day, first brought into the World, and,
This Day, brought back to His own, and His Father's Throne; and such it was fit
That Prince should be, Who was sent, and designed by God, to calm a stormy
World, and to restore Peace and Plenty, Laws and Religion, to these distracted
Nations. Talem esse oportuit, Plin. in Pan.
Quem non Bella Civilia, non Armis oppressa Respublica, sed Pax and Adoptatio,
and tandem exorata terris numina dedissent. Such it was fit He should be Whom,
not the fatal Skirmishes of Civil War, not a Mutinous and Fanatic Army, not
popular Violence, or partial Election, but Peace and Justice, and Sacred
Inherent Right, and the Mercies of Heaven, at length, listening to its pious
Votaries on Earth, did advance to a Throne.

And what now remains, but That we all bless the Lord, and walk so worthy of
his Divine Favor and Love, that he may still rejoice over us, to do us good;
And That, for the sake and according to the Precepts of that God, we obey and
heartily reverence the King; and That, in warm Duty and Gratitude to the Crown,
we cheerfully come in, and zealously take part with it, against all Hands that
would shake its Stability, or Tongues that would darken or diminish its Luster;
That we be forward and ready, upon all occasions, not only to support and
guard, but to ease and oblige, the Throne, and to sweeten (what we may) the
Burden of that Royal and Gracious Government, under whose Shadow we rejoice.

And Thou, O Father of Lights! Grant that, as this Day twice eminently did, so
this, and all his Days, for long and many Years, may rise prosperous and happy
to our David, and his House, that He, and They, and We, all may gratefully
rehearse thy Mercy, and declare thy Goodness, and ever rejoice in thy
Salvation. Amen.

FINIS.

