A Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE Taking the Bridge. And Beating Down, the Irish Town
of Athlone, Which stands on The other side of the SHANNON. WITH A Perfect DIARY
of every Days several Actions, before the said Irish Town, etc. AS ALSO, The
Welcome News from Kinsaile: Giving an Impartial Account of the Safe, and Happy
Arrival OF THE Smirna, and Turkey Fleets. 4. July. 1691
LICENSED, July the 3 d.1691. J. FRAISER.

Camp at ATHLONE, 25th. past, (Two in the Afternoon.)
SINCE my last, it is said, The Drum that came to the General, was an Answer to
a Message, sent by the General, about Exchange of Prisoners on the 24th. This
Morning about the Hour of Six, the Drum returned from the Enemies Quarters; all
our Hands (that can any ways possibly be spared from other Duty,) are mending
the Tin Boats; and our Men are working, with all diligence, in raising of three
New Batteries, one below the Bridge, another above it; and the third without
the Town-Wall, by the Riverside, opposite to a large Bastion, the Enemy have
erected, on the other side the River Shannon, which is there not so broad as
the River of Thames, between Westminster Horse Ferry, and Lambeth at Low Water.

About Seven of the Clock this Evening, one of the Granadeers belonging to the
Lord Lisburn's Regiment going under some Arches of the Bridge of Athlone, to
look for Plunder amongst the Enemies Dead, found a pair of Colors, belonging
to a Company of the Earl of Clanrickard's Regiment; which were on the Breach
when we Stormed the Town, and brought them off flying to the General; and
though, I believe, 100 Shot were made at him, yet none hurt him: The Lord Baron
Ginkle, our General, very generously Rewarded him with Five Guineas. The 25th.
yesterday the Enemy were very hard at work, in raising two new Batteries above
the Castle; the one close by the River side, the other on a rising ground, a
distance from it; and about Eight of the Clock last Night they were finished,
one of them are of four, the other of three, six Pounders, with the latter of
which, they have played briskly on the old Walls of the Town, where our Men
are, (but without killing, or wounding any;) with the other, they shot into
some of our Regiments, who lay Encamped on the Bank of the River, which obliged
our Men to Decamp, and remove farther off.

About this Morning, our Battery (below the Bridge) was finished, and 26 four
Pounders planted thereon, which has ever since Six this Morning, played
incessantly on the Enemies Breast-work, on the other side, by which, most of
the said Breast-work is beat down and levelled with the ground; as also, most
of the Houses that stood on the other side the Town; by which means, the
Enemies Works are so much exposed to our view, that they are forced to quit the
Town, a great part or them retiring to S^'s Camp, others retiring behind the
Castle, and in the Work over the Bridge, which in a few hours, from our upper
Battery, will be soon likewise ruined, and it is not doubted, but that very soon
we may acquaint you, that we are Masters of the River, and Ruined Town of
Athlone: Our Guns are now firing very furiously from all our Batteries, with
very good success.

26th. At Noon.
Yesterday our Guns and Mortars played incessantly against the Enemies Works,
etc. The Tin-Boats are all mended, and all things in a readiness to attempt our
Passage over the River Shannon, etc. which will be at three several places,
both above, and below the Bridge of Athlone; and I am certainly informed, that
to Morrow will be the Day. A Deserter that came into our Camp this Morning,
says The Enemies Army hourly expects our going over the Shannon.

27th. At Seven of the Clock in the Evening.
Just now we have possessed our selves of the whole Bridge of Athlone, to the
very Works of the Irissi Town; two Arches of the Bridge were broke down by the
Enemies Troops, one of which we have mended, and the other is to be mended this
Night; and to morrow Morning, by Break of Day, there is Eight fresh Regiments
appointed to Storm the Town.

Kinsaile the 26 th.
This Day is seen off of our Hills, a great Fleet, consisting, as near as we
can tell them, of between Sixty and Seventy Sail, which we are assured, is the
Smirna, and Turkey Fleet.

Advertisement.
An Exact Description of the Roads of Connaught, and part of Mu^^^^^, at
present possessed by the (...), Rebels;) giving the True Distances of the
Several Cities, Towns, Passes and Places of Strength, each from the other; with
their due Distances from Their Majesty's Frontier Towns. Also, an Exact Account
of the Situation of the Enemies Chief Fortified Places, viz. LYMERICK, Athlone,
GALWAY, and SLEGOE, their present Fortifications; with the Additional Works
lately made by the French and Irish. Very necessary for all Gentlemen and
others, now our Army are Marched into the Enemies Quarters. Price One Penny.

An Exact Description of the Roads of Flanders, (according to the last and best
Survey) giving the True Distances of all the Cities, Towns, Castles, and Places
of Strength (each from the other) in the Ten Provinces. And the most possable
Roads for the Confederate Army (Commanded by the King of England) to March to
any Place. And the passable Ways, by which the Confederate Army may enter into
the very Heart of France. With distinguishing Characters; Showing What Part of
Flanders is possessed by the Spaniards; What by the Dutch; What by the Bishop of
Liege; What by the French; and What by the Duke of Juliers. Very necessary for
Accomodating all Gentlemen and others (during the War in Flanders) in Reaning
the English and Foreign Gazatts, and other Intelligences, of the Movements and
Actions of the Confederate and French Armies. Price, Two Pence.

Both Printed for, and are to be Sold by Robert Hayhurst, at the Axe in
Little-Britain.

London, Printed for Robert Hayhurst, at the Axe in Little-Britain, 1691.


