A Faithful ACCOUNT OF A Great Engagement Which happened On Good Friday the
18th Instant, BEFORE THE City of Dublin, The Late King James Being Himself in
Person, at the Head of His Troops.
With a Relation of The Taking His Admiral, Routing His Forces, and other
particulars.
Licensed, April 25. 1690.

James Fraser, Entered according to Order.

THE joyful News of Sir Clowdsley Shovel's Success at Dublin-Harbour, has much
Elevated the deprest Spirits of our poor Friends here; and I doubt not but it
will meet with the like joyful acceptance wherever it comes, which has much
induced me to send you this Letter, which will give you an account of a notable
Engagement.

THe beforementioned Worthy Commander, with the Squadron of Ships mentioned in
my last, Arrived safe on Good Friday last, in the Bay of Dublin, where he spyed
in the Harbor, the Irish Admiral (a Scoth Ship taken from Captain Hammilton,
and now Commanded by one Patrick Bennet) with about Twenty other Vessels of
smaller Burden, Laden with Hides, Tallow, and Butter, riding at Anchor in
Polebeg, within the Bar. Whereupon the Captain quitted his own Ship (She being
of too great a Burden to enter the Harbor,) and went on Board the
Monmouth-Yatch, and with That, and Two more, he went over the Bar, Steering his
Course directly toward the Irish-Admiral, who cut her Cables, and endeavored
to run up to Kingsend-Point (as the other Vessels did, during the Engagement,)
but Sir Clowdsley Shovel being under Sail, approached so fast, that he forced
an Engagement; and the Fight lasted an hour, being closely followed on both
sides; after which, Captain Bennet seeing little hopes of Victory, and
perceiving many of his Men to lie dead on the Decks, he run the Ship on ground,
on the South Strand, and the Capt. and what Men he had left alive, made their
Escape, and got on Shore, leaving his Ship a Prize to that Worthy Commander,
our English Captain. The Firing so briskly in the Harbor, soon Allarmed the
City, whereupon King James, and his small Army, being Two Regiments of Foot,
and One of Horse, came down on the Strand, by Andrew Cave's House (about half a
Mile from Ringsend) dreading an Invasion, and fearing the business would have
gone farther than the loss of his Ships. Sir Clowdsley Manned out some long
Boats, and by the help of the Tide, brought off the Vessel: King James himself
being a Spectator, and Eyewitness of this our Commanders Bravery, and his own
great loss: And I believe was glad it proceeded no farther. All the Opposition
his gazing Soldiers gave, was, Two French Troops rid into the Water, and shot
their Pistols against the side of the Ship: In recompense whereof, a Shot was
sent from the Ship, which brought one of the Troopers into the Water, his Horse
being shot under him.

Two Boys ran from the Shore (being Protestants) up to their Necks in Water,
desiring help from the Seamen, and were taken up by one of the long Boats.

In this Action we lost not a Man, neither had we any but one Wounded, though
there were found in the Enemies Vessels Twenty Dead, besides others, which in
the Fight, undoubtedly dropped Overboard.

On Monday last came in here Forty Five Wagons, belonging to the Train of
Artillery; and yesterday Morning they went down to Highlake.

Yesterday came in here Count Nassaw's Regiment of Foot: And to Morrow comes in
another Regiment of Foot.

We hear from Lisburne, of the 14th Instant, That the Forces Shipped off at
Bristol, are safely Arrived there, consisting of Three Thousand Men: And that
Fifty Thousand Pounds Sterling came thither that day: And that our Men are
Hearty, and the Weather good; so that we suddenly expect to hear of further
Action.

LONDON, Printed for R. Hayhurst in Little-Brittain, 1690.


