A FAITHFUL COMPENDIUM, OF THE Birth, Education, Heroic Exploits and Victories
OF His Royal Highness The Illustrious PRINCE JAMES, Duke of York.
AS ALSO The full and just Account of his kind Reception, and high
Entertainment by the Scotch Nobility at Edinburgh, the Metropolitan City of
SCOTLAND.
THe Illustrious Prince, James Duke of York Born on the 14 of October, in the
Year of Man's redemption, 1633 and in the Eleventh Year of the Reign of his
Royal Father Charles the First, of ever glorious Memory, but no sooner did this
brance of Honor begin to flourish in the peaceful Court: and raise his tender
Virtues to such good esteeem, as made the wonder spread into the utmost Corners
of the Frozen North, but envy pearch'd upon our glorious Isle, and fate began
to work three Kingdoms ruins; prompted on by those ungrateful men, whom sacred
Oaths had bound with Lives and Fortunes, to defend what they endeavored to
destroy, for sure it is both Heavens Laws, and those of Princes here below,
that are compact and regulated by the same, ought to be held more sacred: then
be thrown back into the Face of all preserving justice, such affronts are to
omnipotence as well as to his sacred Vicegerents that command for him the
Nations here on Earth, but to return his Royal Highness though in his tender
years sustained a feeling part of Grief, and danger in those dire callamities
raise high, with tides of plebean rage; the which so many years over flowed the
surface of our Albion with a Crimson stream, whilst those infernal Nimrods
hunted after Royal Blood: until at last (oh fatal to declare) the best of Kings
fell by the worst of Men, whilst Heaven and Earth stood both amazed at such
impiety, and Natures mighty hinges Groaned, and weeping Clouds declared the
spreading sorrow, which since almighty vengeance has conffirmed how sacred
Kings lives ought to be held, after which his Highness miraculously escaping
their Barbarous hands was obliged for his safety to forego his Native Land; and
Cross the swelling Floods: to seek adventure in the Neighboring Kingdoms;
where though but a stanger as to his person, yet the Royal accents of his Noble
Soul had given Breath unto the loudest Trump of Fame, that welcomed such great
virtues, equal to the greatness of his Birth, for treacherous Fortune has not
power to make a conquest over Candid Virtue: it still mounts above her reach,
and like to the Victorious Palm; though Laden round and pressed with ponderous
waights; yet dares the worst, and still ascends to weave its Top among the
Clouds; whilst storms beneath its branches loudly roar, and all the littel
streams of malice leave their Channels dry, witness Spain, what worthy Praises
there his Valliour won, his very name made haughty France to tremble and had
his Royal courage been but backed with Soldiers equal to its brave desert the
black Princes bold Atcheivements that procured the name of thunderbolt in War,
must have given place to his, and Blush to be out done; whilst with his Sword
he had cut out a lasting name in Charecters of Blood, but as it was, Fame owns
him for her Son: for like to Mars. he fought even in the Mouth of slaughter;
whilst heaps of slain like ramparts hemed him in* and yet the power of France,
nor English Rebels (for at that time they could be termed no less) there in
league durst brave his noble fury, or once so much as hinder his retreat, but
to come nearer home, after the thrice Blessed restoration of his Royal Brother,
and our most sacred King; whose days be as the days of Heaven, and boundless
Blessing shower upon his Head, whilst flaming Cherubims with joy and peace
surround his Guarded Throne the Dutch having took breath after, their dreadful
overthrow began again to put their former Indignities in use, and by base
pretended privileges, they so exasperated the Nation that has so long rod
empress of the Flood; that it was the Royal pleasure to proclaim a War, thereby
to Curb the Insolences of the late destressed Hogen Mogens, in which his Royal
Highness did command in chief, whose conduct on the roaling Seas, in known unto
the utmost limits of the yet known World, how bravely he behaved himself
amongst a Thousand Fates: though dres'd in their most dreadful guises, and for
his Kings his own and Countries Honor, undauntedly fought whilst swift Winged
Death Sung round his Royal Head, and Climbing Fires made all the Ocian seem to
Blaze, whilst Peals of Thundering Cannons from each quarter Belched distructive
Flame, and ruin seemed to cover all whose force the Dutch no longer being able
to resist hoisted their Sails; and with the remnant of their shattered naxy
stood amain to shore leaving behind a number of their vessels swallowed in the
deep, besides the number that were Captive made, these were brave causes
worthy, English Valor at the highest, but it is observed, that envies Snakes
Lurk too often beneath the wreaths of Laurels, that adorn the Conquering Brow,
and yet true Worth in spite of those, will find deserved Praise; Fate has not
power to tumble down, the structure Fame has raised, 'twas in those times that
high applaunses rung, and no Ecclipses screen'd the luster of his rays but all
showed bright as the meriddian Sun, and oh, that Heaven would so Unite all
hearts in peace and concord; that love and joy might run down much like a
mighty stream, then would our Golden days appear, and shovvers of Blessings
would avvaight our Morning dauns and we might rest secure beneath the
Everlasting Gospels Wings; then Hell in vain might try to make a separation,
all would turn to Paradise again, and the reformed Church might justly Glory
in her sacred Beauty; when all Endeavored to promote her interest, no
animosities would then arise, but Calm would all the blustering Storms of
State appear, and smiling mercy would conduct us safe to the blessed mansions
of our Everlasting habitations there, to sing Ozanas with the Glorious Quiers
of Saints above, these and such like wishes ought to be the delight of all well
affected subjects and with continual prayers should implor Heaven conffirm the
same, but that Scotland should out do our Nation in gratitude and kindness
seems most strange, a people rough by nature and contemning art, under a frozen
clime, which should by consequence make People harsh, and more uncivil? in
respect wherefore it will not be a miss here to incert the manner of his
Highness reception, there more fully then hither to it has been published for
the satisfaction of the curious.

His Royal Highness after his returning from beyond the Seas, was pleased,
accompined with her Royal Highness, to take a progress into the North, to view,
his Royal Grandfathers ancient Kingdom, (viz) Scotland where after much respect
and gratitude showed to them through all the English Countries as they passed,
they arrived at the famous Town of Barwick, where after some short stay their
Royal Highnesses on the 22 of November, about 7 of the Clock in the Morning
parted in their Coach with their attendance, and a little distance on the
borders, his Majesty's standing forces of that Kingdom, commanded by the
honorable Marquess Montross, were drawn up to receive them, with all imaginary
expressions of joy and respect; their Royal Highnesses having no sooner passed
through them, but were met and salluted by the Lord Chancellor, and 38 of the
Lords of the privy council, with about 6 more of the chief nobility of
Scotland, who came attended with several hundreds of eminent Gentry, besides
freeholders and other, making in all a Body of about 2000 Horse bravely
accutered, the Nobility being on foot came up to their Royal Highnesses Coach,
to pay their respect whereupon his Royal Highness was pleased to alight and
receive their compliements, which were that they conceived an unfeigned joy in
his Royal highnesses presance, and with all respect welcomed him in that
Kingdom, the which his Royal Highness most kindly resented by many expressions,
and was pleased to stand uncovered, until they had most of them kissed his
hand, and paid the like to her Royal Highness in her Coach, after which his
Royal Highness, nobly attended passed on to the Duke of Lawderdales House, at
Lethington some distance thence, where their Royal Hignesses with most of the
nobility were highly entertained for several days and to conclude a general
joy spread every where, through all that Northern Kingdom, the which they were
not wanting to express with all the Pompous shows imaginable.

So may our peace and union still grow great,
And Albion flourish in dispite of fate.


