A further Inquiry FOR TRVTH, For the better satisfaction of scruplous
CONSCIENCES.

Read and Judge:

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1642.

WHether may the King be disobeyed, and his commands withstood, or not? Whether
He is to be opposed in his proceedings by any command of the Parliament? Or
whether are we now to obey King or Parliament?

Answ. 1. First, some Princes think, that they may lawfully do, whatsoever they
have power to do, or can do; but the contrary seems truer (both by light of
Reason, Religion, and all power entrusted by Law in the hands of any) viz. that
Princes have no power to do, but what is lawful, and fit to be done.

Answ. 2. Secondly, personal actions of superiors be disobeyed. The
Gramarians say, Rex regis, a rego, the word King comes from Governing, because
Kings are no other, but more high, and supreme Governors, and Magistrates. Now
some hold (and I think warrantably that if any Magistrate, or Judge, do pursue
a man, not judicially, and by order of Law, but invade him by violence, without
any just cause against all Law, that then in so doing he is to be held as a
private person, and as such we may defend our selves against him. As for
example, a woman may defend her own body against an adulterer, though a
Magistrate A servant may hold his masters hands, if he seek to kill wife or
children in his rage. Mariners, and Passengers may resist him who stands an
helm, if they see that he would run the ship against a rock; yea they might
hold the Princes hands, if being at the helm he misgoverns the ship, to their
certain shipwreck, without prevention; because by his so governing thereof, he
hazards both his own life, and theirs, and they by holding of his hands,
prevent both his, and their own ruin (which seem^ to be our present ease) and
therefore, much more may the whole Body defend it self against any such unjust
and unlawful invasion, as will endan ger the safety and welfare of all.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, the Kings personal, that is, verbal commands without any
stamp of his authority upon them, and against the Order o both Houses of
Parliament, I imagine may be disobeyed. For I do conceiv that no Lawyer will
say, that suppose the King should take the Broad Sea of England from the Lord
Keeper, into his own hands, that all the Writ whatsoever he should issue forth
signed with his own hand, and sealed there with, ought to be obeyed: for it is
not the stamp and impression of the Seal which makes a thing lawful, but the
Keeper thereof ought to be a Lawyer, and (by his place) should not for fear, or
favor, sign any Writs therewith, but such as are legal; and if he do
otherwise, he is liable to be questioned, and censured by a Parliament. And
therefore doubtless, when Writs and Precepts are issued forth without the broad
Seal, or without a regal, that is, legal, authority (as all the Writs and
Commissions, for executing the Commission of Array, are, as is proved both by
the Parliament and others) they may be disobeyed, and withstood, especially
when they are destructive to the Commonwealth.

Answ. 4. Fourthly, Princes by Parliaments may be withstood, when they desire,
or endeavor those things, which tend to the envassalling of their people.
Kings (we know) sometimes have loved their enemies more then their friends, and
have marched forth amongst their enemies, to encounter with their friends. As
for example, Richard the 2. thought Spencer and his confederates his best
friends, though they were base sycophants, and bainfull foes, and conceited
that his Peers (who were his loyallest Subjects) were the truest Traitors; And
hence Princes being abused by the flattery of private persons (for some wicked
ends of their own) have followed their private perverse counsels, before the
grave, loyal and faithful advice of their s^ge Senate. Now that it is lawful
for Parli^ments to withstand Princes, who make unlawful war upon their people,
is so evidently proved, by the Author of that lately come forth, and learned
and pious Treatise, called, A sovereign Antidote to prevent Civil Wars, page 6,
7, 8, 9, etc. that at present I wholly silence it.

Answ. 5. Fifthly, the matter with us is quite and generally mistaken, and the
Question altogether wrong stated, viz. Whether we should obey the King, or
Parliament? for the King and Parliament are not like two parallel lines, which
can never meet, nor like two incompatible qualities, which cannot be both in
one subject, nor like the Ark and Dagon, whom one house will not hold, nor like
God and Mammon, which one man cannot serve; for by siding with, and assisting
of the Parliament, in those things which are according to Law, we side with,
and serve the King.

Two things are here distinguishable, to wit,

1. In our obeying of the Parliament according to Law, we obey the King. That
his Majesty grants, commands and commends, yea professes, that he requires no
obedience of us to himself, farther then he enjoynes that which is Law,
lawful and just, And,

2. In our obeying of the Parliament in this present Military and Martial
design, we stand for the King, not against him: that is, for the good of his
soul, person, estate, honor and posterity; of which a word or two severally. 1.
They stand for the soul of their Sovereign, who withstand him (having a lawful
call, and warrant thereunto) from doing those things which (if he do) he can
never justify in the court of conscience, nor at the great chancery day of
judgment, but must sink under the sentence of condemnation, for those
unlawful and unjustifiable facts. And therefore the Parliament (and we in
obedience unto them) are friends unto the soul of our dread Sovereign, in not
obeying, aiding and assisting of him, to make unnatural, unlawful and
unwarrantable Wars, upon his Parliament and people, which can never be
defended, or justified, before or unto God, to whom the Mightiest as well as the
meanest, must give a strict account of all their actions at the last day. And
2. They stand for the Kings Person, who obey, join, and side with the
Parliament. His Majesty's person is now environed by those, who carry him, (as
far as the eye of humane probability can see) upon his own ruin, and the
destruction of all his good people: which the Parliament seeing, they labor to
free him from such false hands, by this twofold means, viz. 1. By persuading,
beseeching, and most humbly soliciting his Majesty to foresake them, and to
rejoice and make glad the hearts of his Parliament and people, by conjoyning
himself with them. But this request, suit and supplication will not yet be
granted, though with much importunity and many loyal expressions desired. And
2. By laboring to take his evil Counselors from him: they being confidently
assured, and piously persuaded of the Kings sweet disposition and readiness to
comply with them, in any thing which might conduce to the good, either of
Church or Commonwealth; if he were not over swayed and deluded by the fained
flattering and crafty counsel of those about him, who look with a sinister eye
upon our State. Now this seems to me to be all that is aimed at, in this
present Military and Martial design: for the Parliament do not purposely, and
in their first intentions, intend by their soldiers to cut off any (for if any
be slain by them, it is by accident) but to preserve and keep the peace of the
Kingdom, to maintain the privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the Land, the
free course of justice, the Protestant Religion, the Kings authority and person
in his royal dignity, and to attach, arrest, and bring such as are accused, or
imagined, to be the disturbers, and firebrarnds of the Kingdom, unto a fair,
just, equal and legal trial, which no man can think unlawful in our
Lawmakers. And therefore both Senators and Subjects in the prosecution of this
design, stand for the safety of their Princes person. And

3. They stand for his State, Wealth, honor, and reputation, for I conjoyn all
these together. Kings acquire and accumulate more honor, respect, wealth and
power, by their meekness toward, tender love of, and vigilant care for their
Subjects, and their safety (as we see in Queen Elizabeth and Tiberius, so long
as he was such) then by tyrannizing over and cruelly oppressing and handling of
them, as we see in Caligula. If our gracious Sovereign, would be but pleased,
to consider the honor and prosperity which his Predecessors have enjoyed, by
following the advice of their Parliaments, and the dishonor our Nation has in
diverse designs received abroad, and the grievous troubles, vexation and discord
we have had at home, since Parliaments have bin disused, and laid asleep, he
would then certainly see, that they seek his wealth, honor, reputation and
welfare, who desire to reconcile and conjoyn him unto his Parliament, and
advise him to govern his people by Parliaments, and endeavor to free him from
the power, and hands of those, who being in themselves, desire likewise to make
him an enemy unto Parliaments. And

4. They stand for his Posterity: For as evil gotten goods slip and wast away,
and seldom continue to the third generation: so Kings cannot be sure that
their posterity shall peaceably and successively enjoy their Crowns, except
themselves rule and govern according to Law, righteousness only establishing
the Crown and Throne, both upon Princes and their posterity. And therefore
they who assist not the King in those things, waye^ and courses, which are
illegal, grievous, yea distructive to the Commonwealth, are his Childrens and
posterities best friends.

I conclude this Question with this Argument.

Argu. Those who labor with their lives and estates, to defend and maintain
the Kings Soul, Honor, Reputation, Wealth, person and posterity, obey and
stand for Him.

Quest. But the Parliament, and all those who side with them in this present
design, labor with their lives and estates, to maintain and defend the Kings
Soul, Honor, Reputation, Wealth, Person and posterity.

Therefore the Parliament, and all those who side with them in this present
design, in so doing, obey and stand for Him.

It should seem by what has been spoken, That neither the Parliament nor
People, does intend the least indignity, dishonor or disloyalty to the King:
and it is most perspicuously and clearly to be seen, in all the Kings gracious
Messages and Declarations, That he has no design upon his people or
Parliament, neither inteuds any harm, opposition of oppression unto them, but
professes to rule them according to Law and equity: How then comes it to
pass, that either the Parliament will not or dare not confide in the King?

Answ. 1. First, it is because they see that some about the King, are potent
with Him, who affect not the Parliament, nor their proceedings, have that
inflnence in his Counsels, and are so predominant and prevalent with Him, that
they have often varyed and altered him, from his words and promises. It is a
Maxim in Law; The King can do no wrong: for if any evil act be committed in
matter of State, his Counsel, if in matters of Justice, his Judges must answer
for it: and therefore I will not lay any fault upon the King, but rather impute
the faults which have been of late obvious to many, unto some about him, or in
great favor with him. Great discouragements (I grant) the Parliament in their
proceedings have had from the King, but I dare not imagine that they came
originally and primarily from Him, but from some about him, in regard of that
vast diffe^ence which is between his words spoken to his Parliament with his
own mouth, when he was with them, and the Messages sent unto, and the heavy
charges laid upon them, in his Letters and Declarations, now when he is absent
from them. He said once, That in the word of a King, and as He was a Gentleman,
he would redress the grievances of his People, as well out of the Parliament
as in it. Again, That He was resolved to put Himself freely and clearly upon
the Love and affection of his English Subjects. Again, We do engage unto you
solemnly the word of a King, that the security of all, and every one of you
from violence, is, and ever shall be as much our care, as the preservation of
us and our children: And yet what actions and passages have of late fallen out,
quite contrary to all those expressions? the Parliament and all who side with
it, assist it, or obey it, in any of the commissions or Orders thereof, being
assaulted, opposed, yea now at last proclaimed Traitors. Again, His Majesty
does profess the detestation of a civil war, and abhorres (as he says) the
very apprehension of it. But this mind seemed neither to be in them, who came
with his Majesty to the House of Commons, nor who accompanied him to
Hampton Court, and appeared in a warlike manner at Kingston, nor in diverse of
those who have been with him and employed by him at York, Hull,
Liecester-shire, Lancashire, Sommerset-shire, Northamptonshire, and other
places. And therefore we must needs conceive, that the King is put upon these
courses and ways by his evil counselors, and consequently, that the
Parliament cannot confide in his words and promises, until those counselors
be put from him, or forsaken by him. And

Answ. 2. Secondly, because of that trust which is reposed in them. I dare
boldly say, That if the King should take, or make those protestations, which he
makes in his messages and Declarations, unto any one of the Parliament House,
for the performance of any promise either unto them or theirs, which did simply
and soly concern themselves, they would believe and obey him, and without any
further question confide in him, but they cannot do this in the case, and
place, wherein they are. The trust reposed by the people in the Parliament, is
as well to preserve the kingdom by making of new Laws, when and where there
shall be need, as byobserving and putting the Laws already made in execution: And
therefore in regard of this trust, they dare not hazard the safety,
preservation, and sole mannaging of the Land to his Majesty alone, upon his
bare word, because if after such confiding of theirs in the King, upon his
faithful promise unto them, he should be over-swayed, and seduced by some
wicked counselors, to lay some illegal impositions, taxations and burdens
upon his people (as he did soon after the granting of the Petition of Right
unto the Subject) the kingdom then would (and might justly) blame them as the
authors of their grievances, that had so lightly given away their liberties and
freedom, by subjecting them to an arbitrary power. And indeed, if we will but
consider it without passion and partiality, the case is no other but this, if
the Parliament should wholly confide in the Kings words and promises, then there
were no more requisite in them, then this, to make a Declaration unto his
Majest of the grievances, burdens, annoyances and illegal proceedings in all,
or such and such courts or persons, to the great oppression and heart-break of
the Subject, and having so done, to obtain some serious promise and
protestation from the King to take off all those pressures, and to be careful
for the future, that no such shall be imposed upon them, and then to confide in
the King, and to break up the Parliament, and repair every one to his own
house. Now if Sense, Reason, Experience and knowledge will tell us that this is
far from, or comes far short of the true nature, and duty of a Parliament, then
let us think that it is reason (as the case now stands) that the Parliament
should not confide in the King. And

Answ. 3. Thirdly, because it were very dangerous for the time to come.
Admitting our present Sovereign were as prudent as Solomon, yea as pious as
David (yea like him, a man after Gods own heart) yet it were dangerous for the
Parliament so to confide in him, that they should trust the mannaging of all
the great and weighty affairs of this kingdom wholly and solely unto him, and
consequently granting him an arbitrary power, to rule us, according to the
dictates of his own conscience, or as the Lord should move and persuade his
heart. This (I say) is not safe, because if they grant, give or settle this
power upon him, as King of England, then all other succeeding Kings will
challenge and claim it as due; (or think they are not respected as their
predecessors) whence if any of them prove Tyrants or tyrannous oppressors, we
shall be most miserable and wretched slaves.

Ob. Some perhaps may here object, that although Princes should not use their
absolute power by doing always what they list, yet they ought not to be
circumscribed, limited, or restrained in their government, by any tie or
obligation of Law.

Answ. 1. First, it is much better (considering the corruption of our nature)
to be withheld by some restraints of Law and covenant, from that which is
evil, and which we cannot justisie before God in the court of conscience, then
to be boundless, law less, and left to live as we list, and to do whatsoever
seems good in our own eyes.

Answ. 2. Secondly, this also is better for others: for as the Crane had better
to keep his head out of the Wolves mouth, then to put it into his mouth, and
then stand at his mercy, whether he will bite off his neck or not, so it is
better for every wise man, rather to keep and preserve those immunities,
freedoms, prerogatives, and privileges, which God and nature has given unto
him, for the preservation, prosperity and peace of his posterity, person and
estate, then to disenfranchize himself and to relinquish and resign all into
the hands of another, and to give him power either to impoverish or enrich,
either to kill him, or keep him alive.

FINIS.

