THE SOCINIAN Controversy TOUCHING The Son of God, REDUCED.

In a brief Essay, To prove the SON one in Essence with the FATHER, upon
Socinian Principles, Concessions and Reason.

CONCLUDED With an Humble and Serious Caution to the Friends of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND, against the Approaches of Socinianism.

By F. F. D. D.

Quomodo Pater genuit Filium, nolo discutias: expete primo, si potes, quomodo
men's quae intra se est generet verbum quomodo coelestis ignis generet ex seipso
splendorem Lucis. St. Hieron. Sempiternus Deus sapiens, Sempiternam secum habet
sapientiam. St. Aug. IMPRIMATUR.

Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
December the 9th. 1692.


LONDON: Printed for A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
near Amen-Corner, 1693.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARVM.
May it please your Lordship,
YOU cannot but remember in how difficult a Post I stood, when you came to Exon
with the Prince of O. (our now most Gracious King) I being, with some of my
Brethren, the first Clergymen that were summoned to appear before him. And I
cannot forget, but shall ever, with all due Gratitude, acknowledge your
Lordships then great Tenderness and Care of us, when in those new and strange
Circumstances, we did not readily observe the Orders sent us.

But seeing I soon afterward (perhaps the First that in Print) endeavored to
persuade my Brethren to recognize this Happy Government, may I not with the
more Freedom observe the Prejudices it yet labors with, and that the least of
them are not the Fears of too many among us, that the Church of England may
suffer under it.

I have read over your Lordships late Excellent Treatise, called, The Pastoral
Care, with no small Satisfaction, and presume to take this Occasion to give you
my particular humble Thanks for the same* verily believing, that if the Rules
therein given us, were in any good measure observed and put in practice, it
would Cure most of those Fears.

Since your Lordships greater Wisdom saw no necessity, in a Treatise of that
nature, of taking much notice of the Socinian Leven, it is not fit for me to
wish you had done so; yet if I may have leave to judge by my own Experience, I
fear, not the least of our Danger is threatened from that Quarter: However, I
doubt not, but in the Exercise of The Pastoral Care, your Lordship, with the
rest of our Venerable Fathers, will, by the Blessing of God, timely prevent it,
after the Example of the Ancients.

I know your Lordship will pardon this Boldness of,

My LORD, Your Lordships much obliged and humbly-devoted Servant, Fr. Fullwood*
Litton, near Dorcester* October. 14. 1692.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Crude Notions of Cerinthus, Ebion, the Currier, Artemon, and Samosatenus,
about our Savior, which were more Jewish and Blasphemous, were at last
digested and refined by Photinus, with the help of his Master Marcellus, into
that which is now pure Socinianism, viz That our Savior had no Being before,
or but ex Maria, from the Virgin Mary: For which very Doctrine, as appears by
the Sentences of the Councils, (so strange and horrid it then was to all
Christian Ears) the said Photinus, though Bishop of Sirmium, was condemned in a
Synod in his own City, both by the Arrians, Semi-Arrians, and the Catholics.

Photinus, and this his Heresy, were condemned in six several Councils;
probably, first, as Bishop Pearson observes, with his Master Marcellus, by a
Synod at Constantinople. 2. By the second Synod at Antioch. 3. By a Council at
Sardes. 4. By a Council at Milan. 5. In a Synod at Sirmium he was deposed by
the Western Bishops. 6. He was again condemned and deposed by the Eastern
Bishops in the same City. He was so generally condemned too afterward, that
his Opinion was soon worn out of the World; So suddenly, says Epiphanius, was
this Opinion rejected by all Christians, applauded by none but Julian the
Apostate, who railed at St. John for making Christ to be GOD, and commending
Photinus for denying it. Vid. Pearson on the Creed, new Ed. p. 119, 120.

Now we heard no more of this Doctrine, except one P. Elebardus stumbled upon
it in the 12th Century, until the Reformation; when the blasphemous Servetus,
and some others not unlike him, began to revive it; and at last by Faustus
Socinus it was formed and perfected into the Body of Socinianism, as now it is.
The said Socinus died about 88 years agone; such is the Pedigree and Antiquity
of Socinianism.

THE Socinian Controversy TOUCHING The SON of GOD, Reduced, etc.
WHEN we have to deal with men that allow no other Principles but those of
their own Sect, we may endeavor to fetch our Weapons out of the Adversaries
Store. Whence I propose these Arguments following.

ARG. I. JESUS CHRIST is to be Adored.
THE Only GOD which brought Israel out of Egypt, that is, the only God of
Israel, or the only, true and chief God, is to be Religiously adored and
worshipped; Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

But Jesus Christ is to be religiously adored and worshipped; therefore Jesus
Christ is the only God which brought Israel out of Egypt; that is, the only God
of Israel, or true and chief God.

This is David, a very strict Socinian's Argument against Socinus himself: Not
that he approved, but hereby intended to destroy the minor, by showing its
absurdity in the Consequence of it; That if Jesus Christ was so to be adored,
he was the true and chief God which they both denied.

It Is besides my design to enter upon the Proof of either of these
Propositions, but I observe and pronounce, that Socinus and his Followers have
so plainly proved the second [That Jesus Christ ought to be Religiously Adored]
out of the Holy Scriptures, that his two great Opponents in that Point, namely,
Frankin and that David, nor any of their Followers, have, or can, or ever will
be able to answer them.

On the other side, these Adversaries of Socinus have as irrefragably and
invincibly maintained, That the Only God which brought Israel out of Egypt,
etc. ought to be Religiously Adored. And it is David's own (otherwise Socinian)
Reason against Socinus, That we cannot adore the Son, unless we suppose Christ
to be in the Father, and the Father in Christ, Vnitate Essentiae, by unity of
Essence.

The Arguments of both sides you have at large in the Vol. of the Fratres Pol.
where you may see how these Learned Socinians fight, and conquer each other,
and make way for this Orthodox Truth, that Jesus Christ is that only God that
brought Israel out of Egypt, etc.

And methinks Schlectingius comes very near it, in those remarkable words in
Romans 1. 15. If GOD, says he, give Man Divinity, so as that He may be
religiously worshipped, that man, ratione divini and religiosi cultus, is not
diverse, and another from God himself, but ought to be esteemed unus idemque
cum Deo, one and the same with God.

II. Christ is True God.
GOD the Father is the only True God, Jesus Christ is true God, therefore Jesus
Christ and God the Father are one and the same God, otherwise there would be
two true Gods, which would be repugnant to the only true God. That God the
Father is the only true God, is expressly the Doctrine of our Savior, Joh. 17.
3. That Jesus Christ is true God, is so plain in the Holy Scripture, that
Socinus and his Followers frequently (they say an hundred times) assert and
maintain it. The Argument therefore is as strong as our Savior and Socinus can
make it.

1 Note. To obviate some trisling Evasions, when we say Jesus Christ is true
God, we consider him not strictly under those Denominations; for his Name Jesus
was given him as the Son of Mary, and he is Christ as anointed to his Office by
the Holy Ghost. We do not say, that in either of these senses Jesus Christ is
true God; but he is so, as he is the Son by eternal Generation, as he existed
before his Incarnation, as he was with God, and was God in the beginning of
Time, and consequently from Eternity, the Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last, Rev. 1.

2 Note. 2dly, Jesus Christ, as Man and Mediator, may be distinguished, though
never divided, from the Eternal Son of God: So the Scripture speaks of him
here, as Jesus Christ sent by God, and as he in 1 Cor. 8, was that one great
Lord of Christians, distinguished from One God the Father; which sufficiently
solves the Difficulties which Socinians raise from these two Texts especially
considering, that so many other Scriptures unanswerably prove the Deity of our
Savior.

3. It must be noted 3dly, and consess'd, that the Socinians distinguish
betwixt the true God by, Nature, and a true God by Office, and that God the
Father is the true God by Nature, and our Savior a true God by Office.

But the Text destroys the distinction; for if God the Father be the only true
God, though so by Nature, there is no room left for another true God by Office,
or any other way. Who sees not the Term is exclusive, sees nothing

2dly, The Scripture is express, that it is Idolatry to worship those that by
Nature are no Gods; but it is no Idolatry to worship our Savior, as Socinus
himself desends, therefore our Savior is true God by Nature.

3dly I must challenge Proof either from Reason or Scripture that a God by
Office only is, or ever was said to be true God, as our Savior is consessed ot
be. And seeing the Text before us speaks not of the Supreme, God, but of the
only true God, and makes them all one, I must further challenge the great
Distinction, and only Refuge of the Socinians in this Controversy, namely, of
the Supreme God, and a true God, and if neither Scripture asserts it, nor
Reason owns it, as certainly they do not, the Foundation of Socinianism is
evidently subverted.

III. Cheist made the World.
The words were made by the Supreme God only: This the Socinians generally
assert, and strenuously prove: but the Son of God made the Worlds; and this the
Arrians unanimously maintain, as and unndoubted Truth, accordin to the
Scriptures. From these two Propositions, so acknowledged and proved by our
Adversaries, what Conclusion can be more natural than this, That the Son of God
is one God with the Father, i. e. the Supreme God?

It Is confessed, that the Arrians say, that God first made his Son, and then by
him made the Worlds.

Sol. But who told them so? So fundamental a Point should have some ground
either in Scripture or Reason; the Scripture is silent in it, and plain Reason
abhors it. Why should the great and wise God make one Creature to make the
rest? Was not his own Fiat sufficient to make an hundred Worlds? Does any Cause
else appear at the Creation? Let the Arrians prove, (as they do unanswerably)
that the Son of God did exist at the Creation of the World, and the Socinians
will acknowledge his Eternal Generation: By their Reasons put together; the
Orthodox Truth is established.

Indeed, if all things were made by the Son of God, himself is excluded, he is
not Deus factus, but Deus natus; and if he did exist in the Beginning, as
before, he must exist from Eternity: Nothing was behind the beginning of Time
but Eternity.

IV. Christ Equal to his Father.
He that is not only like, but equal to God in Power Knowledge, and Wisdom,
must have the same Essence or Nature with God.

But the Socinians generally assert, That Jesus Christ is not only like, but
equal to God, in Power, Wisdom, and Knowledge; therefore by this Reason Jesus
Christ must have the same Essence or Nature with God. I know they will not
grant the first Proposition, but these men of Reason, methinks, should nor deny
it. They say indeed, that this equal Power, Knowledge, and Wisdom is
communicated by God to his Son; But must there not be a Capacity and Faculty
equal to God's, to admit such equal Power, etc. and to exercise the same? And
consequently the Essence of God must be communicated, which only has Capacity
and Faculty to hold and exercise Power, Knowledge, and Wisdom, truly divine, or
equal to God's. Is it not more agreeable to the Apprehension of a Man, to
conceive, that the Root of all Power, etc. viz. the Divine Nature, is
communicated to the Son of God, and with that all Power, etc. is communicated?
Can equal Power be in any Subject but God himself? Will there not then be two
Omnipotents, and two Supremes? Who can understand the Mystery, or dare defend
it from senceless Contradiction?

Minor. But perhaps it may be doubted, whether the Socinians do allow or
affirm, that Jesus Christ has Equal Power, Knowledge, and Wisdom with God
himself; which is the second Proposition in this Argument; I shall therefore
prove it by some pertinent Instances.

Christ was made in Empire and Supreme Power in all things, like to God, immo
aequalem, yea, rather equal to him, says one: And they generally acknowledge,
that the Father has communicated to Christ his own Divine Power and Divine
Wisdom. See Crell. in To. 1. 15. Rac. Cat. c. 1. sect. 4. p. 47. Stegman, in
Joh. 10. 32. Wolzogenius, in Mat. 4. Schect, in 1 Cor. 4* 5. Volkelius tells
us, the Apostle, Phil. 3. 21. attributes to Christ that most efficacious Power,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Ver. Relig. 63. c. 34* and
that, He that can subdue all things to himself omnia potest, i. e. est Deus
omnipotens, or Almighty as he is expressly called, Rev. 1. and therefore true
and supreme God, or one with his Father* in Power, and consequently in Nature;
as our Savior himself concludes, I and my Father are One. Not in Will and
Consent only, as they would gloss it, directly contrary to the Context, but in
Power, which is inseparable from his Essence: None shall pluck them out my
Hand, or John 10. 28, 29, 30.
my Fathers; I and my Father are one. Accordingly Wolzogenius acknowledges,
that God made Christ in Authority, Power and Wisdom, like and equal to himself,
that he, even equally as God, might be omnipresent, and be able to do what he
will, by his own Power and Spirit upon Earth: So that he is omnipotent,
omniscient, and omnipresent, equally with God the Father; which necessarily
infers the Communication of the Divine Essence or Nature, as the Subject or
Seat of such Supreme and Divine Attributes or Qualifications.

It Is confessed, that Wolzog. in Mat. 28. 20. adds, That though Christ be
omnipresent, as is said before, it is not necessary that we should understand it
of his Essential Presence. But we want a new Philosophy to prove that any
thing, yea, God himself, can act physically, where he is not essentially
present; and hence we have a new Argument of our Savior's Deity. He is
essentially present every where, and therefore true God; he is essentially
present every where, because he can do what he pleases every where.

I conclude this Argument with this note; That the Socinians must dash and
break upon one or both of these two hard Rocks, that a mere man, who is
circumscribed, is essentially present every where* or really omnipresent; or,
that a mere Man is able to do what he pleases by his own Power, as Wolzeg.
affirms, (though communicated) where he is not essentially, that is, really
present; which is one of the Phylosophical Mysteries of Socinianism.

V. Christ has the Father's Glory.
He to whom the Father has given his own Glory, is the same God in Essence
with the Father; for God the Father protests he will not give his Glory to
another. But the Father has given his own Glory to Christ; this the Socinians
generally acknowledge: The Conclusion is necessary, therefore Christ is the
same in Essence with God the Father.

They tell us in answer, that by [ another] is meant, an Idol or a false God.

Sol. Where the Law does not distinguish in a Point of so great concernment,
who shall dare to do it? Besides, is not an Idol a Creature, as well as they
say our Savior is? And why should God give his Glory to one Creature rather
than another? What Scripture or Reason will warrant it? Is it not Idolatry, to
give GOD's Glory to a Creature? Or, will God dispense with Idolatry in himself*
and not in us? Or, lastly, how can we in reason imagine, that God will
frustrate his own ultimate End (to glorify himself above all) by giving his
own Glory to any Creature?

VI. Reason is Truth.
That which is most agreeable to Reason is the Truth: This is the admired
Maxim* of the Socinians. But that the Father communicates his Divine Nature
with his Divine Attributes to his Son, is more agreeable to Reason, i. e. more
conceivable, than that he should communicate them separately* without or
divided from his Nature.

Let us reflect upon their former Assertions, that the Father has communicated
his own Wisdom, his own Power, his own Honor, his own Glory, and thereby made
his Son not only like, but equal to himself; and let the Masters of Reason tell
us any thing more absurd and inconsonant to Reason, than to conceive such
Qualities, which are acknowledged by themselves to be truly and properly
Divined, to be actually separated from the Divine Substance: seeing they also
acknowledge, that there is nothing in God that is not God himself; and his
Proprieties can only ratione and inadaequato conceptu, be distinguished from his
Essence. Is it not more agreeable to Reason, to conceive, that seeing the
Father has communicated his own Wisdom, etc. to his Son, he has also
communicated his own Nature to him, forasmuch as we cannot conceive how they*
should be actually divided, for his Attributes and Nature are really one, and
God's own Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, Presence and Glory, are nothing really but
himself.

Thus it is, if we consider the nature of God, but more grossly absurd and
unreasonable it appears, if we consider the nature of Man; which they would
make the Subject of these Divine Qualities.

How monstrous is it to imagine, that a mere Man, as they say our Savior is,
should be wise as God* powerful as God, omnipresent as God, have equal Worship,
and the same Glory with God himself, and be a mere Man still! where is the
Capacity, the Powers, the Seat of these Divine Excellencies of a true God, as
they acknowledge our Savior to be, in mere Man, as they say he is? Activity
beyond the proper Sphere of the Agent, Qualities and Endowments without a
capable Subject, are as fit for men of Reach and Reason to conceive, as to
imagine Reason and Religion in a Brute, with all the Attributes of the Humane
Nature, and yet to be a Brute still.

Let them follow Reason but one step farther, and acknowledge, that what the
Father communicates to his Son carries the Essence of God with it, according
to Reason, as well as the Scripture; and we are agreed in a great Point.

And now, what should put a stop to them, seeing their Principles bring them so
near us, and so much Reason invites them home? They acknowledge the necessity
of believing Christ to be true God, according to the Scriptures. They say, he
is equal to God the Father; and Socinus is angry that it should be doubted,
whether they believed so, or not* his words are remarkable.

Falsissimum est, etc. He says, It is most false, that we do not affirm Christ
to be true God, yea, we profess the contrary publicly, and in our own, both in
the Latin and Polonian Tongue, in not a few public Writings: And again, as if
we did deny Jesus Christ, though he is Man, yet to be God. and equal to God, or
the proper Son of God, and equal to his Father. According to Smalcius, our God,
and the true God, summo jure, he is so to be called, and is so indeed. They do
generally own his Title To. 9. God over all, blessed for ever. Schlectingius,
in Joh. 4. 23. says, We must understand by it, that Christ is Lord and God,
not over some things only, but over all; God and Lord of Heaven and Earth, as
Stigmannus adds, in Joh. 10. 33. I confess Schlect. his gloss hereupon is, He
is true God, as true is opposed to false, not as it is opposed to non summo, or
the Supreme God; but if the Text be well considered, and its proper sense
allowed, I see not how he can be better signified to be the God of Israel, than
by the usual appellation of the God of Israel, as the Learned note, God blessed
for ever; or how the Supreme God can in other words be more fitly expressed, than
by these words, God over all blessed for ever; especially seeing, as we have
noted before, that there is no ground, either in Reason or Religion, for the
distinction of the chief or supreme God, and a true God,

These Advances seriously weighed, methinks, while we grant and acknowledge the
subordination of the Son to the Father, as his Original and Beginning* with the
unanimous Consent of the Ancients, as Dr. Bull and Bishop Pearson have
observed, and that the Divine Perfections of the Father and the Son, are in the
Son not co-ordinately but subordinately, and communicated to him from the
Father; and in that sense the Father may be said to be greater than the Son, in
that he is the Origo and Principal. Methinks, I say, they should see reason
enough to meet us, and acknowledge the Son, with the Nicene Fathers and the
Catholic Church, to be God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God.

I shall conclude this Argument with the pertinent and forcible Reasoning of
Dr. B. in his Second Edition.

If we consider, says he, the thing it self, it appears much more credible,
that the Eternal Son of God should descend to the nature of Man, than that a
Man should be made God, endued with a new Omnipresence to hear, and
Omnipotence, to grant the Prayers of all the Supplicants, that in all places of
the World should invoke him. Again, says he, if we regard the Dignity of his
Person, it is plainly more Honorable, to believe him God the Creator, than a
Creature Deified: If we consider the Fruits, our Thankfulness must be greater,
etc. So that, upon all accounts, were the Scriptures doubtful, we ought rather
to carry our Bias toward our Lord's Eternal Divinity, than against it.

VII. Authority, the Ground of Faith.
That Belief, which has no Authority, but is against all Authority competent
in that Case, ought not only to be suspected, but to be rejected, as groundless
and false. This is not to be questioned, for seeing Authority is the only
Reason and Ground of Faith, that Belief that has no competent Authority, is
groundless; and that which is against such Authority, must needs be false: But
the Socinian Belief, that the Son of God had no Existence or Being before he
was conceived, and born of the Virgin Mary, has no Authority, and is against
all Authority competent in that Case; therefore such Belief is groundless and
false.

Now, that such Belief, that our Savior had no Being before he was conceived
and born of the Virgin Mary, is without and against all competent Authority in
the Case, will easily appear, by considering what is such Authority, and the
Socinian Concessions about it, and the Evidence of the thing* itself.

1. What can be supposed competent Authority to ground the Christian Faith
upon, but the Holy Scriptures, as they are in themselves, or as they are
expounded and understood by the Primitive Fathers, Ecclesiastical Councils, or
the Universal Church.

2. Now, that the said Belief of Socinus and his Followers is without and
against all this Authority, it is not my province to argue here, (which has
been done an hundred times invincibly by others) only from the Socinians own
Concessions, and the Evidence of the thing itself.

1. For the Holy Scriptures, as they are in themselves, though the Socinians make
great Pretenses that they are of their side, yet it is plain, they dare not
trust to them; yea, by two Observations it is very apparent, that they more than
suspect they are against them.

The first Observation is, That they pre-judge, and indeed enervate all the
Authority of the Holy Scripture, by their bold and dear Proposition, which they
resolve shall serve them as an Asylum and Refuge; where they cannot otherwise
escape the Light and Force of the Text. The Proposition I mean is to this
purpose; That though the Holy Scripture speak a thing never so plainly, i. e.
that the true and proper sense cannot be evaded, yet if the Matter thereof be
contrary to their Sentiments, or cannot be apprehended by them, they are not
bound to believe it, but their own Reason. To this purpose it is generally
observed, that Socinus and his Followers (as particularly a late Socinian
Pamphlet boldly consents) declare themselves; which, if they were not jealous,
at least, that the Scripture is plain against some of their Opinions, such
cunning Gamesters would not affirm, to so great Reproach of their Profession,
and Scandal of the Christian Religion.

My other Observation is, their playing and trisling with the Holy Scripture,
their straining their Wits, and wracking their Fancies (of which it is confessed
they have good store) to coin new and unheard of Glosses for the wresting and
bending of the Text to their new Hypothesis, so strange to the plain Letter and
Sense of the Text, so impertinent to the Context, so contrary to all ancient
and other modern Expositions, that we cannot have so much Charity for them, as
to think they believe themselves, or have any Veneration or Respect to Divine
Revelation. Not here to dispute the Particulars, or to enumerate all their
finenesses of Criticism, Wit, and Fancy, I shall only remark some Instances
that carry a Confutation in their Foreheads.

When they tell us, That (in Joh. 1.) in the Beginning is not in the Beginning
of the World, but of the Gospel: When they interpret, the Word was made Flesh,
it was so, in the Infirmities, i. e. Qualities of the Flesh, not in the
Substance. When in the words following he is said to dwell among us, they say,
it was after his Resurrection. When upon the Text [ Before Abraham was, I am]
they comment thus; Before the Gentiles were actually called, and became
Abraham's Children. When they observe, that the words of St. Thomas, My Lord
and my God, were spoken by way of admiration to God the Father, and not to our
Savior; when by Thrones, Principalities in Heaven, they would have us
understand Men on Earth, though the Text says they are Invisible, Col. 1. 16.
When it is so frequently and plainly written, That the Son of God made the
Worlds, and that all things are upheld and subsist by him, they will have it
meant, only of Regeneration, or the new Creation. When our Savior affirms, I
and my Father are one, they say, he meant so only in Will and Consent; contrary
directly to the scope and sense of the Context, which speaks of their Power to
keep his Disciples from Violence: When upon that famous Scripture, In him
dwells all the fullness of the Scripture bodily, they restrain it to his
Doctrine, and exclude his Person: When by the Mystery of Godliness God
manifested in the Flesh, upon a Criticism, they will have it, the Gospel
manifested in the Flesh; which makes brave sense, especially if you consider
the words following. And lastly, to crown all, when Socinus was puzzled with
the frequent and plain Assertions that our Savior came down from Heaven, into
the World, he becomes Enthusiast, and dreams of a Revelation he had, That
Christ, after his Incarnation, was taken up into Heaven, to learn his Father's
Will. When, I say, we revolve and weigh these and suchlike wild and
unreasonable, unaccountable Figments of theirs, to avoid Scripture Arguments,
we cannot imagine, either that the Scripture should favor them, or they the
Scriptures; or, in plain English, that they allow the Holy Scriptures to be the
Rule. or Foundation of their Faith.

2ly, As their Belief, that our Savior had not a Being before his Incarnation,
is without and against the Authority of the Scriptures, so they confess, and
seem to glory, that all the Ancient Fathers (though some of them were
contemporary with the Apostles) and Councils were against them in this great
and fundamental Point. Accordingly Socinus enters his Protestation against them
all, The heap of Authorities and Testimonies out of the Fathers and Councils,
have no force, especially against us, that are not diffident to dissent from
them, 5 Tom. 2 Resp. ad 2 C. Wick. p. 618.

3ly, As for the Catholic Church, it in no Age, in the Times of, or since the
Apostles, ever received this Opinion [That our Savior did not exist before he
was born of the Virgin Mary] but has in all Ages rejected and exploded it, as
the Madness of Heresy.

For Fifteen Hundred Years together the Catholic Church stood quiet in the
possession of the contrary Truth. Indeed, the Arrians vexed Her a considerable
time, about the Eternal Generation, and Consubstantiality of the Son with the
Father; but at last, the truth of those Points, by diligent search into the
Holy Scriptures; was so well settled by Fathers and Councils, that the Church
continued quiet and free from those Arrian Disputes, for Twelve or Thirteen
Hundred years together.

But what was this to our upstart Socinianism? The Arrians never dreamt of this
Conceit; they believed, that the Son of God was made a God before, and was the
great God's Instrument in making the Worlds, joined, as the Learned Bishop
Pearson has noted, with the Orthodox in Council, to pass an Anathema against
one or two that in that Age vented that Point, [That our Savior had no Being
before he was born of the Virgin] and it being so early knocked in the Head, we
never read it took Life or stirred again (except one Abelardus hit upon it)
before Servetus's Time.

Whence should this new Light spring in Polonia so late, to the disturbance of
the Church, the reproach of the Fathers and Councils, and the weakening or
nulling the Authority of the Holy Scriptures? Who can choose but reflect hence
upon the Presumption, Pride, Confidence and Impudence of this Novel-Attempt to
ridicule the Christian Faith, and to subvert the Foundation of the Christian
Religion? If we have any deferrence to the Word of God, to the Primitive
Fathers, and the whole Church, we must conclude Socinianism is intolerable.

Indeed, two Arguments render it hardly Christian; 1. That they are gone out of
the Catholic or Christian Church, which is founded in the Trinity, both for
her Faith and Worship. 2. That it makes another Foundation for her Faith, viz.
her own corrupted Reason, besides and contrary to the only Doctrinal Foundation
of the Christian Religion, viz. the Holy Scriptures; as we noted before.

Have they Doubting, or something like Faith in this Matter, why do they not
follow the Apostle's Rule, and keep it to themselves? They do not think that
all are in a damnable state that are not of their Opinions: Is there then no
Regard to be had to Peace? I fear, neither their Charity nor Prudence is better
than their Faith. Why must the World feel that they are Firebrands as well as
Heretics? If we may judge by their modern Writing, as they exceed their
Fathers the Arrians in their Principles, so they succeed them in their
Fierceness.

VIII. Faith intelligible.
Obj. But I must not neglect the great Obstacle. They say, they are against
Mysteries and things unintelligible: God has given us Faculties of Reason and
Understandings, and by these only we conceive and judge of things to be
believed; and God cannot expect we should believe without Reason, or act beyond
our proper Sphere, or believe we know not what, or what we cannot conceive or
apprehend.

Sol. I am not against Aquinas's Description of Faith, Fides est actus animae
rationalis, quatenus rationalis; I know Reason is the Form of Man, and the very
Principle of Human Actions, as such; and we must in some measure conceive and
apprehend by our Reason, both what and why we believe: But though Ratio be Judex,
Scriptura est Norma, and the Scripture, as the Rule of Faith, presents us with
due Objects to be apprehended by our Understanding, and with sufficient reason
from God's own Word why we should believe them.

Hence let us take occasion to enquire, what it is these Gentlemen mean when
they say, they cannot conceive or apprehend the Objects of our Faith; Do they
not understand the state of the Controversy? Do they not know themselves what
we would have them, and what they refuse to consent to? Could any man more
distinctly and plainly express the Orthodox Faith about the Son of God than
Socinus himself, to this purpose?

All the Fathers dissent from them, (says he) as they would have Christ exist
of the Substance of his Father before the World was made; and, That he often
appeared to the Fathers under the Old Testament; yea, and the One God, his
Father, made the World and all things by him; and whatever he would have us
know, he has revealed by him.

Now, did not Socinus understand and conceive what he wrote? Did he not then
know what we believe? And is yet this great Object of our Faith an
unconceivable Mystery?

Again, the Rule of our Faith is as conceivable as the Matter of it. If the
Text propose such a thing to be believed, these men of Apprehension are
sagacious enough to search into the meaning of the Words, and the coherence
with the Context, and to conceive the true Sense, and how to avoid it, as any
men living. And thus also they may understand why we believe, as well as what.

What Is the matter then? Where lies the Mystery? O they cannot apprehend how it
should be, that the Son of God should be eternally begotten of, and One in
Essence with the Father. And, what if they cannot? I think it is no great
matter, as to their Salvation, whether they do or not; believe what is
revealed, and leave the Mystery some Objects of Faith here, are reserved for
Objects of Vision hereafter. If we are to believe nothing but what we know of
the manner of their Being or Working, we must be Infidels in Nature, as well as
in Religion.

But to come a little closer to them, there are two unconceivable Points, (they
say, which cannot go down with them, the Trinity and the Unity of our Savior,
or his having the same Essence with the Father. I shall consider both of them.

As for the Trinity, what is there in it that they cannot conceive, either as
to the Object, or the Rule of our Faith about it?

Cannot they conceive what the Scripture reveals, That there is the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; that these are Three; and that the Father is the God
of Christians, the Son is the God of Christians, and the Holy Ghost is the God
of Christians? Certainly the Socinians, as well as the Arrians, may apprehend
the matter so far. And further, That they are all True God; for we are not
baptized in the Name, to the worship of any false God. And lastly, That, as the
Apostle says, To us (Christians) there is but one (true) God.

Yes, all this they can apprehend as it is revealed, but they know not how to
understand three in one, and one in three: Here I cannot give them better
Advice, than not to lean to their own Understandings, but to believe the
Revelation, and with Modesty and Humllity to adore the Mystery, Quomodo Pater
genuit Filium, nolo discutias. St. Hierom.

Yet I must remark, that the Mystery, as to the Matter of it, was conceivable,
and upon a plain Text (not then disputed) believed too, before the Council of
Nice; and though I know such Authorities weigh little with our Adversaries, and
Dr. Bull and Dr. Whitby might have spared their Excellent Pains in evincing
such Authorities, seeing they protest against them, (I mean, as to them) yet I
have some reason to mention Two of them.

The first is that of Tertullian, Ex Conscientia scimus, etc. Of Conscience we
know, that the Name of God, and Father, and Son, and Spirit do agree, so as the
Connection of the Father in the Son, and of the Son in the Paraclete, makes
Three cohering, alterum ex altero, which Three are One; Vnum non unus, as it is
said, I and my Father are One for Unity of Substance, not for Singularity of
Number, De anima, c. 14.

The other is St. Cyprian, De Vnitate, etc. The Lord said, I and my Father are
One. And again; Of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, it is written,
And these Three are One; Hanc unitatem, Those that hold not this Unity, hold
not the Truth to Salvation.

These I have noted to shame the Scoffer, that shall say, We had but two Gods
before the Council of Nice; as well as to show, that wise and good men, of old,
understood the Object and Rule of our Christian Faith in this great Article,
and what was then thought of the Oppugners of it.

Obj. So much for the Trinity; but the Eternity of the Son of God, and his
Co-essentiality with the Father, they say, is unintelligible.

But, can they conceive how God should be a Father from Eternity without a Son?
Can they not conceive that which their Brethren the Arrians believed, according
to abundance of Scriptures, that our Savior did exist before his Incarnation?
And then, that being supposed, their own Reason assures them, that He must,
from Eternity; as before was observed. Can they not conceive, that if all
things were made by him, and without him nothing was made, that was made, that
he existed before any thing was made, and therefore was a God born, and not
made? Can they not apprehend, that seeing whatsoever is in God is God, and
therefore the Wisdom and Power in God is the Divine Nature, and that if God
communicate his own Wisdom, etc. to his Son, he communicates with it his Divine
Nature? Can they conceive, that God was ever without his Wisdom? Can they not
conceive, that Thought is the proper issue of a Mind, and that God's Mind is
eternal, and Thought or Wisdom, and (...), or the Son of God, are eternally
begotten of him?

Have these men peculiar and distinct Faculties from all Mankind? The World is
divided into Jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics, and the Church of God.

1. As to our Savior's Eternal Divinity, the Apprehension and Faith of the
Church of God is sufficiently manifest, for Fifteen hundred years after our
Savior, before Socinianism was formed. And it is well observed, that those
supersine Colors that Socinus and his Followers put upon those Texts, by which
the Catholic Church ever defended the Eternal Divinity of our Savior, were at
least most of them never thought on by the Ancient Heretics, and never heard
of before Socinus's time.

2. The Jewish Doctors hold, that the Messiah is the (...), that Jehovah is a
Name given to him, that he is the Eternal Character of God; therefore the
Eternal Divinity of our Savior was no inconceivable Mystery to them.

3. As for the wiser Heathen Philosophers, they speak a great deal plainer,
though it is fairly supposed they had their Light from the Jews. The
Indefatigable and Learned Dr. Whitby, after the famous Dr. Cudworth, has given
us a great deal to this purpose, and observes (what Socinus himself insinuates,
when he tells us we have our Doctrine out of Plato's School) That the words of
St. John, c. 1. taken in their familiar and proper sense, do exactly agree with
the Sayings of the Platonists and Pythagoreans, and other Philosophers, (...),
about the Word.

1. The Philosophers acknowledge a Second Hypostasis, which they call (...),
the Mind, Word, and Son of the First.

2. That this Second Hypostasis did exist from Eternity, and declared him to be
(...), the Sempiternal Word, Men's temporis expers, and sempiterna.

3. They pronounced this Word to be a Second God, to denote his dependence upon
the First.

4. They asserted him to be the Cause, Principal, and Maker of all things; such
Conceits had these great Philosophers, who, we may imagine, were Masters of as
much Reason as the men we deal with.

Thus our Faith in our Savior's Divinity was not abhorrent from the Reason of
the learned Jews and wisest Philosophers.

3. What Apprehension has the Mahumetan part of the World in this mysterious
Article? Indeed, I was much taken with some Passages in The Turkish Spy, when I
first saw his Letters, which I shall transcribe out of his 31st Letter of Vol.
2. to the Mufti: 'Tell me, says he, why it is Blasphemy to say, that God has
already taken Flesh, since our holy Prophet avoucheth, that GOD shall assume a
Body at the Resurrection. If a Body be competible with the Divine Essence, it
seems not to me a Blasphemy to assert the Incarnation of the Word, whom our
Prophet calls the Breath of God. If this Breath or Word of God be not of the
Essence of the Divinity, why is that part of the Christian Gospel had in such
reverence by the faithful Mussulman, In the beginning was the word and the Word
was with God, and God was the Word? If the Word be of the Essence of God, then
it will necessarily follow, that God has taken a human Body; since our holy
Prophet calls him the Word of God, whom the Christians adore for God Incarnate.

Thus we have the sense of the Turkish Religion itself, not the Authority of
the Spy, whoever he was, but Reason grounded upon the very Alcoran.

Now, seeing there is nothing in the Point of our Savior's Eternal Divinity,
that is jarring or dissonant to the Reason of Mankind, either among Jews,
Infidels, Turks, or the Church of God; if the Socinian yet say he will not
believe it, because he cannot apprehend it, what remains, but that another
would be tempted to number him with the last sort of men in the enumeration,
that is, with unreasonable and singular Heretics.

IX. The Conclusion; a Caveat against Socinianism.
1. To the Laiety.
I crave Leave to conclude with some serious Advice to the Friends of our own
Church, both the Laiety and Clergy, that they would beware of entangling
themselves in the Socinian (though seemingly Silken) Net.

I beseech them to consider, and take a Prospect of the Consequences, whether
its now brisk Efforts obtain, or not.

1. Suppose it should not prevail among us, but dwindle away, as it has hither
to done, blessed be God, yet let our Friends of the Laiety consider the danger
they run upon, in their own particulars, by tampering with this intricate
Controversy, and tempting God beyond their Calling. Methinks you should have
deference to the Church wherein you were born, baptized, and educated, and in
whose Faith and Worship you may undoubtedly be saved, especially in those great
and fundamental Points of which She has kept possession ever since her first
Conversion to Christianity, and wherein She has had Communion with the
Catholic Church in all Ages. Methinks a Gentleman should have a reluctance,
and abhor from Novelty in Faith, and a Religion that was born but yesterday.

Besides, by prying into Socinian Books, you will find a great many Points of
our established Faith, as well as these we have discoursed of, such fundamental
things as our Redemption by Christ, Santification by the Holy Ghost, the Nature
and Efficacy of the Christian Sacraments, and almost every thing that is
Evangelical, is struck at, undermined, and endeavored to be altered, yea,
utterly subverted by Socinian Attacks. And if you like not, as I know you do
not, Anabaptism and Independency in others, you will be sure to meet these in
most of the renowned Socinian Authors, who with subtilty and spite enough
endeavor to ruin our Ecclesiastical as well as Spiritual state, the external
form of our Church in Baptism and Episcopacy, as well as our internal state,
which with the whole Catholic Church is founded in the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and the Deity of our Savior, etc. both for Faith and Worship.

Consider then what Tools you have to deal with, before you cut your Fingers
and ensnare your Souls: What Advantage can you expect to reap by these
intricate Disputes? They may stagger, unsettle, disorder your Faith, distract
and confound your Worship, of which you may repent, but never recover to a
settled and comfortable. state, as it was before. I have no more to add here,
but to tell you a sad Story, which I had from a person of singular Learning and
Probity, and the Truth of it is not to be doubted; it is this:

This worthy Gentleman met with his Friend in Paris, and observing him to be
very melancholy, to look sadly, and much disordered, who used before to be of a
pleasant and brisk Behavior, asked him what was the matter that he found such
an Alteration in him; besides, you were constant at our Prayers heretofore, and
of late I have found you wanting. 'O that Hobs, that vile, damned Hobs, said
he! O that I had never seen his Face! He has so spoiled my Faith, by his
Discourses about our Savior, that I am undone as to my former religious course
of Life: I know not what to do, or how to pray; what would I give, that I could
go to Church, and say my Prayers, as you do, and I have done formerly. To this
purpose that poor Gentleman complained of the Mischief he received from Hobs's
Socinian Insinuations. Pray God our Gentlemen may escape the Danger, by
avoiding, not running into, the Labyrinth.

2ly, To my Brethren of the Clergy, I must speak more plainly.
Give me leave to admonish you, that if you should be so unhappy, as to suck in
the Socinian Venom, and it should not generally diffuse it self, as I hope in
God it never will, yet what a case are you in? You have gained Principles
contrary to your Obligations, and what work will they make both in your
Consciences and Practice, both as Members and Ministers of this Church!

1. Let us reflect a little upon our Obligations, as we are Members of the
Church of England; and the rather, because some are bold to say, that we are
let in and out of this Church at our Baptism and Death, only with the single
Creed, called the Apostle's; and are therefore not concerned in the Faith
against Socinus.

Sol. But it ought to be well considered, that we are baptized in the Name, i.
e. into the Faith, Doctrine, and Worship of the Trinity, in the sense of the
Church, into which we are admitted by Baptism.

At our Baptism we vow, and promise by our Sureties, (which when we come of Age
we are bound to perform) to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith:
And in her Exposition of the very same Creed, she tells us, That we believe in
God the Father, and in God the Son, and in God the Holy Ghost; and when we were
catechized, we profess, and say directly, that we so believe.

And as often as we are present at the Prayers of the Church, especially upon
Sundays and Holy days, we either join with the Creed, and Public Worship, or
we do not; if we do, the Matter is clear; if we do not, we dissemble with God
in our Faith and Prayers, and while we openly profess we secretly Renounce our
Interest in the COVENANT of GOD.

Lastly, Though the Articles may be thought only Articles of Peace and Concord
to those that Subscribe them, yet nothing is more plain, than that they are
Articles of Religion, as they are called, and contain and express the Faith of
the CHURCH of ENGLAND most emphatically and directly against the Socinians; the
first positively asserts her Faith in the Holy Divinity; the second, the
Eternal Generation of the Son of God, and his being one Substance with the
Father; the third, That the Three Creeds ought thoroughly to be received and
believed, because they may be proved by most certain warrant of Holy Scripture.
Now, of whom does this Church intend these Creeds should be received and
believed, if not of her own Members?

Obj. But I know it is frequently objected, that there are such hard and damning
Sayings in Athanasius's Creed, that we cannot assent to it in Faith or Charity,
especially in the Conclusion; that this is the Catholic Faith, which except a
man faithfully believe, he cannot be saved.

Answ. It Is true, this Sentence seems very severe, but may it admit of no
Qualification? He cannot be saved, according to the ordinary terms or way of
Salvation, because, as the Fathers say, they are out of the Catholic Faith;
not but that they may be within the Mercy of God, in some secret or
extraordinary way.

I see no reason to take the Sentence so strictly, (whatever Athanasius
thought) as to damn every one that believes not every word in his Creed: There
is a large and lax-sence, that may be admitted, to save the Charity of our
Church from denouncing Damnation against the Greek Church, for want of the word
Filioque; He that does not believe faithfully, he does not say literally, or
every Word or Saying in it, but rather the Substance of our Christian Faith
touching the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God. This seems to be
better allowed us, because though it bear the Name of Athanasius's Creed, yet
it is no formal Creed, as the other Creeds are, which begin thus, I believe,
etc. but only a Declaration or Exposition of those two great Articles: In which
sense our Church may be supposed to say, this Creed may be proved by the Holy
Scripture. In this large sense, I doubt not, but as we are bound to repeat it,
so we ought to believe it.

2dly, As Ministers,
Let it be well considered, that Socinian Principles being once sucked in, how
trouble some and uneasy they will be, and what inward Gripes they will cause,
as so much Poison in our Bowels, as inconsistent and repugnant to the
Obligations that lie upon us.

Not here to insist upon the 39 Articles which we have read before our People,
and subscribed ex animo, which some take to be only Articles of Peace and
Concord. though that Consideration should be a Bridle to the loose and
extravagant Railery of some among us; Did not we declare our unfeigned assent
and consent to the use of every thing contained in the Book of Common Prayer,
at our Institution? Were we not admitted into our Office, and unto the Profits
of our Places, upon these Terms? Is not the Common Prayer the Rule and Measure
of our public Duties?

Now let it be considered how agreeable such Principles as we have discoursed
of are with our necessary public Offices in the Book of Common Prayer; how a
Socinian can satisfy himself with so frequent a Repetition of Gloria Patri,
etc. how he can in Conscience say the Nicene Creed, which he, if a Minister of
our Church, is bound to do every Lord's Day, etc. how he can then also, with
any Peace in himself, say the Letany, wherein he is to call upon God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as Three Persons and One God; how he can give
Thanks upon TrinitySunday, for Grace by confession of a true Faith to
acknowledge the Glory of the Eternal Trinity, and to worship the Unity, and
pray that God would keep us steadfast in this Faith; or administer the Holy
Communion upon that day, when we are commanded to say, Everlasting God, who art
one God, one Lord, not one only Person, but three Persons in one Substance,
etc. Besides, I have noted above Twenty Collects, that occur to us in their
proper turns, that conclude with express mention and Honor of the Holy
Trinity, that we are bound to read as they come in their courses: Yea, lastly,
how shall such Principles suffer us to do our Duty to Children, whom we are
bound to teach, that by the Common Creed they believe in God the Father, and in
God the Son, and in God the Holy Ghost.

Now, my Brethren, if we are, or hereafter shall be tainted with such
Principles as are light with our Offices and Obligations, we see our Case; for
while we continue in our Places, and under the Obligations of our Ministry, we
must either read the Creeds, Catechize our People according to the Form
prescribed, and say the Prayers according to the Rubricks, or we must refuse to
do so.

If we refuse (I do not here censure many men's too frequent Omissions of some
parts of our Service, for which they think they have some necessity) but if we
constantly refuse to discharge our Duty upon Principle, especially in the great
Parts or Members of it, as we have instanced before, I must pronounce, this is
a plain Neglect of our Duty, a horrid Schism in our Church, a great Scandal and
Temptation to our People and Neighborhood, and an unaccountable breach of our
Trust, and the Vows, Promises and Obligations formally made by us, and
resulting from the nature of our Offices, a forfeiture of all the Profits of
our Places, into which we were inducted, upon Conditions of Conformity, and
cannot consist with a quiet or good Conscience.

On the other side, if we do continue to perform all the Offices of our
Ministry outwardly, contrary to our inward Principles, we prevaricate with
Heaven: We cannot justify what some men dare to say, that we read the Service
as we would read an Act of Parliament, or as the Burden of our Places; for we
are at our Devotion in solemn Applications and Addresses to the Divine Majesty;
and God and Angels, and Men are Witnesses of our Hypocrisy and Dissimulation.

Thus we are entangled in a Snare, and how we should break it and deliver our
selves, I know not, but either by a voluntary leaving our Places, or by being
deprived of them by Authority, as Criminals, Dissenters, Apostates, or
Nonconformists.

Hitherto we have proceeded to caution you upon a Supposition, that the
Attempts of Socinians may prove ineffectual, or not gain much ground among us;
but if they should, which the good God avert, the Consequences thereof give a
sad Prospect to all the true Friends of this Church, though Her Enemies may
please themselves with the premeditation of it.

What Alterations, Distractions, Confusions would Socinianism bring with it?
This duly pondered, I hope, will provoke all good men to Watch and Guard
against all approaches of it. Who sees not, as this Novel-Heresie advances, our
Faith, our Worship, and Ecclesiastical Government is in danger? If this
prevail, we must have new Articles of Religion, new Creeds, and our Prayers and
Common Service must be almost all new; and our Church must be quite another
thing than now it is (if it shall then deserve that Name) when its Pillars are
shaken, and its Foundation rased, which is laid in the Doctrine of the Trinity,
upon which it stood firm in Communion with the Catholic, as before I observed,
ever since it was a Christian Church.

But that Good GOD, who by his wise and watchful Providence has hitherto so
wonderfully preserved this Church of Ours from all the subtle Designs and
violent Attacks of Her other Enemies, and does yet preserve it; I hope, will
never suffer us to be swallowed up in the bottomless Gulf of Socinianism, for
the sake of his Dear Son, and our Blessed Savior, JESUS CHRIST, to whom with
thee, O Father, and the H. Ghost, Three Persons and One God, be Honor and
Glory in all the Churches, World without End.

FINIS.

