A FAITHFUL ACCOUNT OF The Renewed Persecution OF THE CHURCHES OF Lower
Aquitaine in France.

In the YEAR 1692.

To which is prefixed, A Parallel between the Ancient and New Persecutors; or
the Portraicture of LEWIS XIV. in some of his Cruelties and Barbarities.

With some Reflections upon the unreasonable Fondness of a certain Party
amongst us, for the French King.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms, in Warwick Lane.
1692.

A PARALLEL Between the Ancient and New Persecutors, OR THE Portraicture of
LEWIS XIV. In some of his CRUELTIES and BARBARITIES.
IT was in the heat of the Persecution of the Protestant Churches of France,
that I first read Lactantius's Relation of the Death of the Primitive
Persecutors. The Cruelties practiced in his Age upon the Christians, and
revived in ours with so much inhumanity upon our Brethren in France, put me
upon the thoughts of making a Parallel between the Ancient Persecutors
Lactantius speaks of, and our worse Modern ones under Lewis XIV. And indeed I
was the more tempted to it, by the great likeness I found there was between
them and the French King's Cruel Instruments; but having read over the
ingenious Preface to that Book, written by the now Learned Bishop of Sarum, I
then altered my Design, because I thought such a Parallel was sufficiently done
already, very concisely in that Preface. And I had continued still in the same
mind, but that an Account of the new Barbarities committed in France, upon the
Protestants of the Lower Aquitaine, being come to my hand, and being so
earnestly solicited to publish it, I think it will not be amiss to prefix to it
a much larger Comparison between those Tyrants, that we may see how like the
French King is to the Ancient Persecutors, and that he follows their steps not
only in the Persecution, but also in all their other Vices, if he does not far
exceed them. I have been so much the more induced to this, by the strange
proceedings of a certain Party amongst us, who yet pretending to be
Protestants, are yet nevertheless eager to fall down and Worship the Golden
Image of such a Monster as this, and forgetting what they owe to their God, to
Their Majesty's, under whom they lead quiet and peaceable Lives, and to their
Country, are fond of having for their King, the Enemy of Mankind, the Invader
of the Liberties of Europe, and the greatest Persecutor of the Christian
Religion that ever was in the World. I intend in the first place to set the
Characters Lactantius gives of the Persecutors of the Primitive Church, with
the Method they made use of in their Persecution, and afterward I Will show that
those Characters do perfectly agree with the French King, and that he has taken
the very same Measures to destroy the Christian Religion in his Kingdom, as the
former took to abolish it in the Roman Empire. But because the World tends
always to a greater perfection; I Will show also that this French King has
exceeded Maximian, Valerian, and other Persecutors in Barbarity.

The Characters Lactantius gives of his Persecutors, are these; 1. That they
were addicted to the Brutalities of several Pleasures. 2. That they ruined
their Subjects by severe Impositions, and heavy Taxes for maintaining vast
Armies. 3. That they showed in their Wars some Pusilanimity, or at least more
care than was decent for preserving themselves from all danger. 4. That they
were so weak as to be fondly pleased with the most excessive Flatteries could
be made them, and assumed undeservedly the most glorious Titles, even some to
Blasphemy it self. 5. That they were profuse in the raising of costly
Buildings. 6. That they were successful for many Years together in their
undertakings. And Lastly, That they had Fearful, Superstitious, and Cruel
Tempers. These are the Characters of those Ancient Persecutors: I must observe
now what was the pretense of their persecutions, and the method they made use
of to compass their horrid design.

What the pretense of their Persecutions was, we may read in an Edict of
Maximian himself quoted by Lactantius and Evsebius in his Ecclesiastical
History, Lib. 8. Chap. 1. in which it is said, That the Christians having
forsaken the Religion of their Forefathers, and framed new Laws to govern
themselves by, the Emperors thought themselves obliged to Publish their Edicts
to force them to return to their first Institutions. The measures they took to
compass their Design were these: 1. They pulled down the Christian Churches. 2.
They declared the Christians incapable of all Honors, Trusts, or Offices,
either Civil or Military. 3. They put them out of the protection of the Law,
insomuch that they could not sue for any injuries done them. 4. Afterward they
commanded all the Christians to abjure their Religion. 5. But seeing that they
stood firm to their Rules, they practiced all the Cruelties imaginable upon
them. 6thly. and Lastly. All the Books of the Sacred Scripture, they could
find, were burnt by their Orders. Having thus observed the Characters of those
Primitive Persecutors; the pretense of their Persecution, and the method they
made use of to destroy the Christian Religion, I must give you now a plain Idea
of this French King, and show what has been his pretense in Persecuting, with
so much Inhumanity, his Protestant Subjects; and what measures he has taken to
abolish the Protestant Religion in his Kingdom.

1. I think it will be very needless to show, how that the French King has
delivered himself up to the Brutalities of sensual Pleasures; For who is
unacquainted with his many Adulteries? And who has not heard of the famous
Ladies, La Valiere, Fontange, and Montespan, and of the many Children he has
got by them? But I cannot pass over this Subject without observing, That the
Lady Montespan being Married to a Noble French man, and the French King Married
too, he has committed the blackest of all Adulteries. I do not read in History,
that those Monsters Lactantius speaks of, have been guilty of such a Crime as
this: But supposing they had, they were less Criminal than the French King,
because they could plead in their defense the examples of their Gods: Whereas
Lewis the XIVth. cannot have such an excuse, living under the seeming
Profession of a Christian Religion; which though very much corrupted, yet
informs him, that Adultery is one of the horridst Crimes in the sight of God;
and that it is in express terms forbidden in his Law. I hope this is enough,
without being obliged to speak of the Lady Maintenon, some believing that she
is really his Wife.

2. I am next to prove, That the Fremch King has ruined his Subjects by Severe
Impositions, and heavy Taxes for maintaining his vast Armies; and this I can
make out with as much ease, as I have done his Vices. Though Charles the great
was Emperor of Germany, King of Italy, and of France, yet he never maintained
in time of Peace near Four hundred thousand men, as this French King has done.
Every body knows how vast a charge such an Army must needs be to the French
People; for their King having not as yet (as ever I heard of) found the
Philosopher's Stone, it is their Blood, and the sweat of their Brows, I mean,
their Money, that must maintain this prodigious Number of Soldiers, the Tools
used for their Slavery, and the unconfined Ambition of their Prince. The bare
List of the Taxes imposed upon them by this present King, is enough to make a
Volume, therefore I must forbear a particular Relation of them; but to give you
a true Idea of the number and heaviness of those Impositions, Let me only
observe to you, what was the Annual Revenue of Lewis the XIth. who sufficiently
invaded the Liberties of his People; and that of Lewis the XIIIth. and
afterward we shall see what that of the present French King amounts to. The
Annual Revenue of Lewis the XIth. was Four millions, and Seven hundred thousand
Livers; but that Sum being found too heavy upon the Nation, in his Son King
Charles the VIIIth. his Reign, his Revenue at the desire of the States of
Parliament Assembled at Tours, was reduced to Two millions, five hundred
thousand Livers. But since that time the Revenues of the Kings of France have
prodigiously increased, as those Prince's insatiable thirst after the Slavery
of their People, insomuch that the late King Lewis the XIIIth. his Revenue
amounted to Five and fifty millions of Livers. But that Sum being then thought,
with a great deal of Reason, to be highly exorbitant, the French Nation
complained very much of the hard usage they received from their King: But what
would they give now to have such a one, since even his Exorbitance was
tolerable, nay, easy and gentle, in comparison with that of their present
Oppressor? For as the world is said to refine every day upon us, and much to
exceed the Ancient; so this French King, finding such a Sum too little for his
vast Projects and Designs, has, through a most transcendent refinedness in
Politics, contrived a thousand ways to drain his Peoples Purses, and has
attained to such a singular and masterly perfection in this Art, that now his
Annual Revenue, according to the state of the Royal Treasures, Amounts to near
a Hundred and fifty millions. And if we take into consideration this prodigious
Sum, together with what comes to the Clergy, we shall not be surprised at the
miserable condition of the French Nation (especially in this time of War) for
want of Trade.

3. I hope the French King is very like to the Persecutors of Lactantius, as to
the two preceding Characters. Let us see now if he comes short of them in the
Third, viz. In want of Courage, or at least in showing more care than is decent
to preserve himself from all danger. I must confess, the Parallel is not very
exact in this particular, for this French King goes beyond them all in
Baseness, and downright Cowardice. I read in the Roman History, that
Dioclesian, though Vicious, and a Persecutor, showed nevertheless some Courage
in a Battle against Carinus his Competitor; and in reducing Aquileus one of his
Generals, who had caused himself to be Proclaimed Emperor in in Egypt. That
Maximian, surnamed the Herculian, has been present in several Battles and
Rencounters; and that Galerius Maximian routed Narseus King of the Persians in
a Bloody Battle in Armenia. And yet notwithstanding those Actions, if they have
been taxed with Baseness and Pusillanimity by Lactantius, and other Writers,
What must we say of the French King? He that never had the Courage to Command
his Army in a day of Battle, and who has never Besieged any Town, till after he
had made the Bargain sure for it.

4. I have said, That the Primitive Persecutors were so weak, as to be fondly
pleased with the most excessive flatteries could be made them, and assumed
undeservedly the most Glorious Titles, even some to Blasphemy it self. And I am
to prove in this place, that the French King will by no means be inferior to
them in this point, no more than in the former. He has assumed the Title of
Great, which never man before him did in his own life time; he has taken the
Sun for his Emblem, with this proud Motto, nec pluribus impar, to signify that
he is the Phaeniz of the world, and truly he is in the right on it, not however
in his opinion, but only in mine: For I steadfastly believe there is not a man
in the world that can equal him in so many bad qualities. He has suffered his
Statue to be set up in public Places, and to be harangued by Academies, and
Corpse de ville, which is their Common Council, and to be represented as Lording
it over the Earth and the Sea. But the most Blasphemous of all, is that of the
place called des Victoirs, where one may see him crowned by Victory, trampling
Heresy under his feet, and the Four Parts of the Earth represented by Four
Slaves, chained to the Pedastal, with this impious Motto, VIRO IMMORTALI, the
Immortal Man. This has been thought so Blasphemous, even to Father Menestrier,
tho a most egregious Flatterer himself, that in his History of this French King
by the Medals, he has been ashamed to relate this Motto in the description he
gives of that place. I could quote a Thousand other instances of this nature,
but I must forbear, for fear of being too tedious: However, I hope the Reader
will not take it amiss if I show him how Monsieur Pelisson (one of the Academy
of Paris) speaks of his Master in a Panegyric pronounced by him, and which is
Printed in the last Edition of the Transactions of that Academy. Antiquity,
says he, had a great and noble reward in store for Heroes, viz. their
Apotheosis, or Translation of them into the number of the Gods. At the Funeral
of one of the greatest of their Emperors, there was one of the Patrician
Family, who Swore, That he saw the Emperors Soul fly up to Heaven in a most
splendid Triumph. The same Ancients imagined, That the Souls or Genii of these
Heroes did oversee and influence the great Actions here below, and were of the
swiftest agility in going about this their charge: But sure I am, if ever any
Prince deserved such an Apotheosis, or Translation into the Number of the Gods,
our Invincible and August Monarch merits it in a transcendent degree; all his
actions are Godlike, and his influence on the whole Affairs of Europe are so
universal, that he seems to participate of the Nature and Power of that
Universal Intelligence that rules all sublunary things: Such expressions are
certainly impious, but yet they are very modest in comparison of these which
follow a little after in the same Panegyric. If these Pagans, who fondly would
have sacrificed to the Two Apostles, and said of them, the Gods are come down
among us, had been the eye witnesses of the mighty Actions of Lewis le Grand,
which contain so many Lineaments of a Deity, they would have had more reason to
have erected Altars to this Divinity of France, than to all those of Antiquity.
If this be not Blasphemy, I am then to learn where it may be found, or what it
is that we call Impiety: And sure I am, that Diocletian himself was not so
guilty in assuming the Title of God; since he had the examples of Caligula and
Domitian, to justify him in that shameful piece of vanity, by the like in
those his Two Predecessors: It Is said also of that Heathen Prince, that to
appear more like God to the People, he was wont to wear a Suit set thick with
Precious Stones; And has not this vanity too been imitated by the present
French King when he gave Audience to the Ambassadors of Siam?

5. Lactantius says, That the Primitive Persecutors were profuse in the raising
of costly Buildings, and so is this French King. That ingenious Writer
observes, That Diocletian laid many Taxes on several Provinces, to build in
Nicomedia fine Palaces for himself, for his Wife, and for his Daughters, and an
Hippodrome, an Arsenal, and a Mint-house: But what were those Buildings in
comparison with those of this French King, if we consider that the very Lead
alone employed at Versailles, cost near Above Two Millions Sterling.
Thirty Millions? He observes also, That no sooner were those Buildings
finished, but he found some fault or other in them, and then he caused them to
be all pulled down again, to rebuild after another manner, according to a new
Caprice that came in his head, though even then they were not secured from
other Alterations. And is not this a lively Picture of the madness of this
French King? Have not the Louvre, Versailles and Triennon, been built and
pulled down, and afterward rebuilt, and then levelled with the ground several
times over? So like is Lewis the XIVth. to that Ancient Persecutor. I have done
with this Subject when I have related a passage which proves how profuse the
French King has been for the beautifying his Palaces. The proposal made to him
for this Machine which draws the Water from the River Seine near Marly, to the
Water-spouts of Versailles; was looked upon at first as that made formerly to
Alexander about Mount Athos, not however so much for the difficulty of that
Machine, as for the prodigious Sums of Money which were demanded to bring it to
its perfection; and thereupon his Wise Counselors endeavored to dissuade him
from so costly a design; but he asked them, Whether they believed the thing was
possible? And upon their Answering, That they thought it might be so in it
self, but not in the circumstances his Exchequer was in; Well then, said the
King, since that Machine is possible, I will have it, and it shall be done, if
there be any Money in France. It cost at first above 6000 l. and since above
15000. every Year.


6. Lactantius observes, That the Primitive Persecutors were successful for
many Years together, but their end was deplorable: Upon which, though I do not
pretend to determine what will be the End of this French King, yet I say, he is
so like those Ancient Monsters, as well in his Successes, as in all the other
preceding Characters, that it will not be so impertinent as it may seem at
first, to believe that the Exit of his Impious Life may be in a very Tragical
manner, as well as theirs were, who were the Primitive Persecutors. That he has
been succeseful for these many Years, I think no body can deny; and if we but
cast our eyes upon his prodigious Conquests, we must confess, that considering
the circumstances of the present times, they are more considerable, than those
of the Persecutors we speak of: All things have smiled upon him near these
Thirty years last, and it is upon that account his Flatterers have said, that he
is the Sovereign disposer of the Fate of the World.

7. I come now to the last Character Lactantius gives of his Persecutors, viz.
That they had Fearful, Superstitious, and Cruel Tempers; and I am to show that
this French King is of the like Complexion too: But having already proved that
he wants Courage, I have at the same time showed how Fearful his Temper was,
and how little he deserved the Title of a Warlike Prince. As to his
Superstition, I hope I need not to say any thing upon that Topic, for who is
ignorant of it? Truly he must be Superstitious to the last degree, and wholly
unacquainted with God's Mercy, who believes or hopes to obtain the forgiveness
of his many repeated Adulteries, and other Sins, by committing new Crimes under
the false pretenses of Converting Heretics. Though Nero, Domitian, and
Maximian have been so Cruel, that it seems their Successors must yield to them
in Inhumanity; yet here is a new Competiter who is like to win the prize from
them all: This Rival is Lewis the XIVth. for if we compare his Cruelties
(without exagerating the matter in the least) with those of the Primitive
Persecutors, we shall find that he is far superior to them. I must set aside at
present the Cruelties practiced under pretense of Religion, to consider of
those committed upon other accounts. Indeed I read in History, That those
execrable Monsters put to Death a great many of their Subjects upon frivolous
pretenses, and that one of them had a mind to set Rome on Fire; but I do not
find any Tracts of their Inhumanity so frightful as the Rubbish and Ashes of
Frankendal, Manh^i^, Spire, and Worms. But perhaps it will be objected, That
this is not a good proof of this French King's Cruelties, for those Places
belonging to his Enemies, the Military Law allows such severe Treatment. To
this I Answer, That the Military Law allows no such Actions among Christians,
nor has it ever been allowed to destroy a Country by Fire and Sword in that
Inhuman manner this French King has destroyed the Palatinate; where so many
People of all Ages and conditions have been Murdered; where so many Towns have
been Plundered and Burnt, notwithstanding the Words and Assurances given them
by the Dolphin himself at their Capitulations; and where so many fine Churches
and Religious Houses, as well as the Prince's Palaces have been destroyed, and
levelled with the ground, and all this almost without any Declaration of War.

What I have said is sufficient, I hope, to make a true Parallel between the
Persecutors of the Primitive Church, and one of this Age, and to convince all
the world, that there is an extreme likeness betwixt them. I shall therefore
now proceed to inquire, into what have been the French King's pretenses to this
Bloody Persecution of the Protestants of his own Country. I have already
observed in the beginning of this Parallel, That the first Christians were
Persecuted under pretense that they had forsaken the Religion of their
forefathers, and framed new Assemblies, and new Laws; whereby the Emperors had
been forced to publish their Edicts, to oblige them to return to their first
Institutions: And I must desire you to observe here, That it is upon the very
same account that the French Hugonots have been so Cruelly Persecuted in our
Days. Are we not accused for having forsaken the Religion of our forefathers,
and to have rejected the precepts of our dear Mother the Church? Are we not
charged with having framed new Laws, and new Assemblies to govern our selves
by, and to break the Union of the Church? And is it not upon this account that
the Tyrant of France has Published likewise his Edicts to oblige the
Protestants of his Kingdom, to return to their first Institutions; that is to
say, to the Profession of the Roman Catholic Religion, from which he supposed
they were wilfully, and without any ground, separated? But let us hear what the
French King says himself in the Preface of that famous Edict given in October
1685. to repeal that of Nants. He says, That Henry the IV. his Grandfather had
no other design in putting forth the Edict, called de Nantes, than to lessen
the Aversion which was between the Protestants and the Catholics, to be
thereby enabled to effect more successfully the Reunion of the said Protestants
to the Church of Rome, from which they had departed upon such slight pretenses.
That his Father Lewis XIII. had the same design, and that he himself since his
coming to the Throne, had endeavored the same thing, but with that good
effect, that the greatest and the most considerable part of his Subjects were
dutifully returned to the Profession of the Religion of their Forefathers.
Having thus observed that the Characters of the Ancient Persecutors, and that
of the Modern, are so like; and that the pretense of their Persecution is the
same; I intend to consider in this place the Method the French King has taken
to compass his design, that we may see if the Parallel between them is exact in
all its parts.

1. We have seen in the first place, that the Persecutors began their
Persecution against the Christians by pulling down their Churches; and here we
must again observe, that this French King began to persecute the Hugonots by
the very same method. It Is true it was not with such Rage as the Heathens
showed on this occasion; it was with some colorable appearance of Justice,
which was still worse than an open Violence, because the Protestants were
obliged to be at vast Charges to make good their Titles, and yet for all that
they were afterward Condemned, and it is no wonder indeed, since their Enemies
were their Judges. In fine then, the most part of the Protestant Churches were
pulled down under a frivolous pretense, viz. That they were established against
the Disposition of the Edicts, or because some Mahometans had been present in
the Assemblies, which was prohibited by an Edict given in 1680.

2. The Christians were declared during the Primitive Persecutions, incapable
of all Honors, and Public Trusts, and Offices, as well Civil as Military; and
the French Protestants have been treated with the same Inhumanity by their
Prince, which I am now to prove. Les Chambres de l'Edict, which were Sovereign
Courts, composed of an equal number of Protestants, and Romanists, and to which
the Causes of the Protestants were referred, were suppressed, and afterward
all the Inferior Judges of the Kingdom. In a word, all Civil Officers and
Magistrates, that were Protestants, were turned by force out of their
Employments. The Military Officers were not, I confess, used with so much
severity, for there was no Declaration come forth against them; but however
they were obliged to leave their Service, because they could not hope to come
to any great Preferment; the Office of a Captain being their greatest reward,
notwithstanding their long, faithful, continued Services. To all those
Vexations, they added another no less cruel and unjust, the Protestants were
forbidden in several Parts of the Kingdom to Exercise any Trade or Art, in
order to take away from them all means of getting their Livelihood, and induce
them to turn Papists. The King himself by a Declaration in 1680, prohibited all
the Protestants to practice the Art of Midwifry. What can be imagined more
unjust and cruel than the Persecurion of France? What, I say, more cruel and
unjust can be imagined, than to deprive so many Magistrates of their Offices?
What more cruel than to prohibit Protestants the Exercise of the Natural Gifts
God had endowed them with to get their Livelihood? And what more unjust and
opposite to the Christian Charity, than to throw so many Men into the lowest
Poverty, and force them to beg their Bread? And all this against the express
terms of the Edict of Nantes, where one may read the following words in the
27th Article, We declare the Protestants capable of all Employments, Dignities,
Offices, and Charges, whatever they be, etc. and against the very Oath and
Promise given by this French King.

3. Lactantius has observed, That the Christians were put out of the Protection
of the Laws, that they might not sue for Wrongs and Injuries done to them; and
have not the Protestant, in France received the like Treatment from their King;
their Judges and Magistrates being forced out of their places? So that they
seldom obtained Justice; and the strongest Argument their Parties used against
them, was, That they were Hugonots, which was sufficient to make them lose
their Cause.

4. After all these Vexations and Persecutions, which acquired them but very
few Proselites; the Persecutors began at last to take off their Mask, and the
Intendants of the Provinces at the head of the Booted Missionaries, required in
the Kings Name, all the Protestants to abjure their Religion, as the old
Persecutor, commanded all the Christians to return to their Ancient
Institution. I will not trouble my Reader with a thousand instances of this
nature, which I could give, but I cannot forbear mentioning what happened at
Bergerac in Perigord, where I was by chance at that very time. It Is a pretty
considerable Town, situated upon the River Dordoigne, and the most part of its
Inhabitants were Protestants; they had suffered in 1682, a great Persecution,
and with so much Courage and steady Resolution, that only two Hugonots, as I
was informed, did forsake their Religion; and that Church was looked upon by
the Persecutors, as a nest of Heretics, and which was likely to make the
gr^at^st Resistance, therefore they designed to attack it in an extraordinary
manner. The Marquis de Boufflers, Commander in chief of the French Kings Forces
in Aquitaine, went with the Intendant, and two Bishops, at the head of five or
six thousand Men; they set out Guards round about the Town, and in the Streets,
and no body was suffered to come out; and aftewards they called together the
inhabitants into the Townhouse, where the Intendant made them a fine Speech.
Because the thing seemed to me very extraordinary, I went in among the Crowd,
and I heard the Intendant tell them among other things, That the King his
Master being persuaded of their obstinacy in continuing their Separation from
the Church without any grounds, he was resolved out of his Royal Mercy to
reconcile them to her Holy Communion; and that therefore they must either
voluntarily renounce their Heresy, or they should be compelled to do it
according to the precept of the Gospel. One may easily guess what a cruel Stab
these words were to the hearts of these poor Inhabitants; and yet with a noble
Bravery they returned him this Answer, That their Estates and Lives being in
the power of the King, they were resolved to undergo all manner of hardships as
to them; but God alone being the Master of their Consciences, they would rather
suffer a thousand Deaths, than renounce his true Religion which they professed.

5. I have observed how the Primitive Persecutors, seeing that notwithstanding
all their Persecutions, the Christians still stood firm to their Rules,
practiced more and more upon them all manner of Cruelties; and Lactantius gives
this following Description of the horrid Punishments they condemned many
Christians to. They were, says he, first chained to a Post, then there was a
gentle Fire set under the Soles of their Feet, by which all the Callus of the
Foot was shrivel'd up, till at last it fell off from the Bones; then Flambeaux
were lighted and put out, and while they were not, clapped to all the parts of
their Bodies, that so they might be tortured all over; and care was taken to
keep them alive as long as was possible, by throwing cold Water on their Faces,
and every now and then giving them somewhat to cool and refresh their Mouths,
lest otherwise the Violence of the Misery they suffered, should quite dry up
their Throats, and so choke them. Thus their Sufferings were lengthned out
whole days, till at last their Skin being quite consumed by the Fire, it
reached their Vitals, and then a great Fire was kindled, into which they were
thrown, and so their Bodies were burnt to Ashes, and their Bones that were not
wholly destroyed, were gathered and grounded to Powder, and then thrown into
some River, or else into the Sea. Truly the lively Picture of this horrid
Torment is very dismal and hideous. And were I as Eloquent as Lactantius, or at
least, capable of putting what Monsieur Claude has said of the Sufferings of
the French Protestants into a graceful Turn in English. I would undertake to
make as frightful a Portraicture as this of that famous Writer.

The Infernal Missionnaries set on foot, says he, to convert the French
Protestants did with a thousand Blasphemies, and execrable Oaths, hang up Men
and Women by their Hairs of their Head, or downwards by their Feet in the smoke
of wet Hay, where they were almost choked to Death; and when they had taken
them down, and let them come a little to themselves, if they would not then
turn Papists, they hung them up again.

They pinched their Beards off, and their Hairs of their Heads, till they had
made an absolute Depilation.

They threw them into great Fires, and when they were half roasted, took them
up again, and tying them under the Armpits, dipped them in cold Water again
and again, till they had made them promise to renounce their Heresy. They tied
up some others (like Criminals, who were to suffer the Rack) and then with a
Funnel poured strong Wines down their Throats, till its Vapors getting up into
their heads had almost drowned their Reason, and then they asked them to be
reconciled to the Church. They stripped them stark naked, and after a thousand
horrid Indignities, they stuck all their Bodies with Pins. They mangled others
in a most strange manner with Pen-knives; and their Inhumanity went so far, as
to take them by the Nose with hot Tongs, till they forced them to a compliance.
They struck others with Sticks, and when they were almost dead, carried them
into the Churches, where their bare Presence was taken for a formal Abjuration.
They kept them from sleeping for seven or eight days together, either by
throwing fresh Water on their Faces, or by making a horrid Noise with Drums or
Kettles. If they could find any Sick, they caused the Drums to be beat round
their Beds, and so obliged those miserable Creatures to renounce their
Religion. Sometimes they tied Parents and Husbands to Bed-posts, and then would
attempt to Ravish their Daughters, and their Wives, before their faces. They
pulled their Nails off their hands and Feet, which is the most acute and
sensible Pain imaginable; and if any of them died, they were drawn to the
common Lay-stalls, and there eaten up by Dogs, and other Beasts.

I should never have done, if I were to give in Retail an Account of all the
Barbarities committed on the French Protestants; therefore I will content my
self with these particulars, which I hope are sufficient to prove, that I could
make as ghastly a Picture of the Persecution of our Age, as Lactantius has done
of that of the Primitive Christians. But if this be not enough, I refer my
Reader to a Book, called, The Complaints of the persecuted Protestants in
France, at which the French King was so offended, that at the desire of his
Minister here at our Court, it was publikly burnt in the late King's time.

6. To make an exact Parallel between the Modern and Ancient Persecutors, it
remains only to inquire further, whether the Books of the Holy Scripture have
not been burnt by the French King's orders, as well as by Maximians: But this I
think will be out of question, since we have here so many thousand Witnesses,
who can all attest the truth of that horrid Impiety; for tho I have seen it
with my own Eyes, yet I do not desire to be believed upon my single Word or
Testimony.

I have sufficiently made out the Parallel I promised between the French King,
and the Persecutors of the Primitive Church. I have showed that they were alike
in their Tempers, and in their Actions; that the pretenses of their Persecution
have been the same, and that they have made use of the like Methods to compass
their design. I must nevertheless observe, that those Ancient Monsters cannot
pretend to come up to the late heights of Cruelty, but must yield therein to
the French King; they persecuted the Christians, because they denied their Gods
to be Gods, and maintained that some of them had never been, and that the
others were vicious Men, and dead long ago: We know, says Tertullian to them,
where some of your Gods are buried. Besides, they were not prohibited by the
Laws of their Gods to be cruel toward the Christians; but on the contrary,
Lactantius observes, That Apollo being consulted by Dioclesian, advised him to
persecute them with the last Severity, which makes their Persecution a little
excusable: But what can excuse the French King's Cruelty? Do the Protestants
deny the God the Papists worship, I mean the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, to be the true God? If they say with them, That the Son is dead for our
Sins; do not they say also, That he rose again from the dead? Had the French
King been so canticus as Dioclesian, that is, had he consulted the holy Word of
his God, he would have seen how contrary the Meekness and Charity of that, is
to his Cruelty and Persuecution. And I dare say, that if he had consulted
Innocent the XI. who was to have been his God upon Earth; I doubt very much,
whether he would have advised him to be so barbarous toward his own Subjects.
I Will add but a Reflection about the Books of the Holy Scripture which have been
burnt by the Ancient and Modern Persecutorss; and I say, that the Maximians,
the Dioclesians, etc. looking upon those Books as Impious and Blasphemous
against their Gods, they were less criminal in condemning them to the fire,
than the French King, who, if he be a Christian, cannot look upon the
Protestant Bibles without some Respect and Reverence, being the Law, and the
Will of his God, notwithstanding the few in considerable Alterations they
pretend we have made in our Translation.

The Persecution of the French Protestants having been so violent as we have
seen, according to this Vulgar Axiom, Nihil violentum est diuturnum; it should
not have lasted a very long time, and yet it has continued some five and
twenty years, or more, (but especially since the late King Charles's Death)
without abating any thing of its Rigor and Cruelty. It was thought also, that
the French King being so taken up in defending himself against so many Enemies,
might have cooled his Anger for a while; but we were mightily mistaken, for he
every day increases his Rage and Fury against them, because he looks upon them
as his nearest, and so worst Enemies, believing that after the many
Persecutions and Hardships he has made them suffer, they would soon join with
the English in case of any Descent. Every new year affords new Barbarities, and
especially this; for the Protestants have been dealt with more severely in all
parts of France this last, than they had been the three or four years before.
It seems however that the Lower Aquitaine has been the Scene of their greatest
Inhumanities; and a true Relation thereof being come into my hands, I am
desired to publish it, and as willing to gratisy so reasonable a Request. The
Account is as follows.

A Faithful Account of the Renewed Persecution of the Protestants in Lower
Aquitaine: Collected out of several Letters, written by known Persons from that
Province; and taken from the Deposition made by a Gentleman newly arrived from
those Parts, who for his Religion sake has had his House pulled down, and razed
to the Ground, and himself hung up in Effigy.
SAintefoy and Gensac are Two Towns situated upon the River Dordoigne, and
Duras upon the little River Drot. This last is not so considerable as the other
Two, for the Number of the Inhabitants, but it is no less in all other points,
being a Duchy, and the principal seat of the Duke of Duras, Brother to the
Earl of Feversham. Saintefoy had, before the repealing of the Edict of Nants, a
Church of about Three thousand Communicants, Gensac Two thousand, and Duras
only but Five hundred, but these were the most considerable of the Town. Those
Churches, with the others, fell under the Merciless violence of the Dragoons;
and for three or four Years together, showed a very weak fearfulness; but since
that time, it has pleased God, they have recovered their Spirits, as many
others have done in that Province, and have denied going to Mass. Being however
unsatisfied in their Consciences, and weary of being longer withhold from their
spiritual Devotions of praying to God together, they made the last Year several
Assemblies in some private Houses; where they performed all the exercises of
their Religion, with one of those courageous Ministers that were sent thither
to Preach under the Cross. And they continued their Meetings for some time, but
in a very peaceful way, and with a mind as far from all sedition, as the
Witnesses against them have since testified and declar^d; though after this
discovery they have been dealt with as Criminals of State. The Assembly of
Duras was the first discovered; whereupon Mr. 'Duquesne Lieutenant Criminal of
N^^as was sent thither by the Intendant of the Province. Many Informations were
brought in before that Magistrate, and Warrants Issued out against the most
considerable Inhabitants; who wisely foreseeing what was like then to besal
them, endeavored to make their escape: Three men however were unhappily taken,
viz. Messieurs Constans, Bescete, and la Roche, who was formerly the Reader and
Schoolmaster of the said Church, with Three Gentlewomen, viz. Mrs. Elizabeth
and Mary Gentillot, Sisters, and one Mrs. Barbote.

These Six Prisoners were brought into the Prison of the Townhouse of
Bordeaux, and thence into the Gaol of the Parliament; where that la Roche,
being a fearful man in his Temper, was easily frighted by the Judges, insomuch,
that under promise of Pardon, he was prevailed with to discover all those who
had been in those Meetings: Whereupon so many Warrants were issued out, that
the Town of Duras was almost become a Desert by the flight of the Protestants
who were to be seized. The Intendant, with the Seneschal of Aquitaine,
Condemned the said Constans and Bescete to the Galleys; the first for his Life,
and the last for Five Years only: But before both of them were to make, as they
call it, L'amende honnorable; the Three Women were Condemned to this last
Punishment, To be shaven by the Hangman, and afterward shut up for their Lives
in the Manufacture, which is a kind of Bridewell. Messieurs Constans, and
Bescete, made their Honorable Amend at Bordeance; but because this Punishment
is unknown here in England, I think it not amiss to relate the manner of it.
These poor Gentlemen bare headed and bare feeted, and almost Naked, having but
a course linen Shirt upon their back, having besides a Halter on their necks,
a burning Torch in their hands, the Hangman at their heels, were lead in that
Garb from the Jail of the Palace through the streets as far as the Square of
St. Andrews Church, which is as far, as from Charing Cross to Ludgate; the
Hangman telling them, that he was to Hang them at his return. Notwithstanding
these hard usages, and the rigors of the Season; they showed nevertheless an
humble, modest, and cheerful Constancy and Patience; which made so great an
impression upon the very Enemies of their Religion, that they could not for
bear their Tears, and some of them said, they are called to Glorify God by
their Martyrdom. Mr. Constans seemed still more firm than his Fellow-sufferer;
for being asked by the Judges, Whether he had not been in those unlawful
Assemblies? He did not deny it, but answered undauntedly, That he had been
there many times, and that he would go again if he could, which was the
occasion of one increasing of his Punishment. I have said, that the Judges had
promised la Roche his pardon, and therefore he was dismissed.

A little while after the taking of these Prisoners at Duras, several Persons
of Saintefoy and Gensac were seized for the same account, and the 21st. of
February last they were removed from the Prisons of those places into the Jail
at Bordeaux. Amongst them were Monsieur Pages de Margueyron, and his Lady. He
was a Gentleman very Judicious, Pious, and Charitable, mightily beloved by the
People, and by the Persons of Quality with whom he lived very honorably; he
had but one Son, who being escaped from the Dragoons, was killed in Ireland in
Their Majesty's Service, being an Officer in one of the French Regiments of
Foot, Commanded by Brigadeer la Meloniere. His Lady had a great deal of Wit,
Piety, Zeal, and Charity, and they were a mutual comfort one to the other, as
long as they were together in the same Prison; but though they were separated
about the time of their Jugment, that sad affliction did not lessen their
Constancy. Nothing was forgotten to shake them, and they were tried both with
promises and threatenings, but always in main. This obliged their Persecutors to
fall upon other methods, and knowing how dear Monsieur Margueyron was to his
Wife, they endeavored to abuse her tenderness to win him. Therefore they
promised her the life of her Husband, if she would solli^it^ him to renounce
his Religion; but instead of doing it, she sent a Friend to animate him to
stand out firm, and not to belly the Character of a Christian; adding withal,
that she should certainly dye with Grief, if he had any weakness. A Roman
Catholic, her Friend, being present, did blame her for so desperately advising
her H^^^^nd; but she answered him That she would rather see her Husband (tho
very dear to her) burning in a fire, than hear that he had been so weak, as to
change his Religion. As soon as her Husband was condemned, she was told of it,
and that he likewise had notice to prepare for it; thereupon she inquired only,
how he had received that advice; and hearing that it was with a great deal of
Courage, and with an undaunted sirmness, she showed an extreme Joy, and falling
on her Knees, returned her thanks to the Almighty, beseeching him with a
Christian fervency, to inflame more and more his Resignation and Courage to the
very end of his Life. She declared besides. That her Tears did not proceed from
any natural Weakness, (...) only from a deep Sorrow, that God had not thought
her worthy to suffer for his Glory unto Blood, and to be the Fellow sufferer of
her Husband, that she would have lodged on it as a great happiness to her, had
we been to dye with him, for the Glory of him who had given his Life for their
Salvation; that nevertheless she was satisfied to gives the Savior of her
Soul the Life of the Husband he ha^ given her for the comfort of her own;
knowing that if they were separated for a while, they should be rejoyned for
ever in the fellowship of the Glory, where they should neither have Enemies to
four, nor Tribulation to undergo.

The Husband on his side s^ewed the Constancy and the Resignation of a Marter,
and answered stoutly, That with God's Grace he (...) to fight, and to stand
(...).

The Judges were not a little perplexed at this Gentleman's Trial, because they
were told, that he was not to dye, the King's Declaration condemning to death
only those that were taken in the Fact, that is, in the Assemblies, and not
those who, as Monsieur Margueyron, were indicted for having been there. The
matter was plain, and the Judges had nothing to say against it, but on the
contrary they confessed, That according to the Written-law be was not to dye;
but that according to the Oral Order they had received thereupon, and which was
stronger than the Law it self, he ought to suffer death. Truly the Judges were
in the right, to speak of that Oral Order, for we are certainly informed, that
he was condemned by an express Order of the King's Council.

The very morning he was removed from Bordeaux to Saintefoy, the place of his
Execution, all devout Persons gave him a visit in the Prison, and we are told,
that many Letters could hardly contain the good things he told them, as to the
Profession of the Christian Religion, and as to his Resignation to the Will of
God. They were so much affected with his admirable Discourses, and so
passionately moved by his smiling Countenance, that none could speak a word to
comfort or encourage him; but truly he had no need of it, having had the Holy
Ghost for his Comforter to his end. When he was brought out of the Prison of
Bordeaux, there was above two thousand Persons about him, some weeping, some
admiring his firm and cheerful Countenance, and some others saying, See how he
out-braves the King with his smiling Face. A Priest observing his placid looks
under the heaviness of his Chains, could not forbear his Tears, nor saying to
those that were about him, The Hugonots can boast that they have a Martyr in
him. And indeed, had not that Gentleman and his Lady showed such Constancy and
Patience, they would have degenerated from the Piety of their Ancestors, who
have been always zealous^ for their Religion, and of whom two have suffered
Martyrdom formerly, as may be seen in the French Martyrology.

That Glorious Confessor going out of his Prison, gave his Blessing to all he
met in his way, saying to those he saw compassionately weeping for his
Sufferings, Don't weep for me, but Weep for your selves, and take care to live
better hereafter, than you have done hitherto; adding, That his life was not at
all dear to him, provided he could run out his Race with Joy, as he hoped he
should do. Tho his Chains were exceeding heavy, yet one might see in his face a
pleasant cheerfulness, like that we may observe in other men when they are
advanced to some high and noble Dignity. The Three Gentlewomen of Duras, we
before spoke of, who were Condemned to make their Honorable Amand in their own
Town, and in the sight of their Relations; (that so their Punishment might
appear the more infamous) were brought out of Jail, at the same time with
Monsieur Margueyron, being fastened one to another, and sent along with him to
Saintefoy, attended by several Bailiffs, and the Hangman: Their design in this
was to frighten those Gallant and Christian Souls from their first Constancy,
by making them spectators of the Death and Sufferings of that Gracious Martyr;
but God be praised, they were rather the more strengthened by what those
Miscreants thought would be so frightful a spectacle to them, than any ways
terrified, as we shall see in the sequel of this Relation.

Several Persons went from Bordeaux to Saintefoy, to be witnesses of the
undaunted Courage and Constancy of our n^w-going to be glorysied Saint, and to
strengthen themselves by his holy Exhortations, as well as by his Example.
About an hour before his Death, he sent for his Daughters and near Relations,
and acquainted them with several things they knew not of; he commanded them
above all things, to bestow as much of his Estate as they could to the Poor; he
exhorted them to stand in the profession of the Truth, for which he was
joyfully going to resign his life; and afterward he desired an acquaintance of
his to let his Informer know, that he did heartily forgive him, and would dye
his Friend. He was Executed at Saintefoy in the public place, on Saturday the
26th. of April last, New-stile. Though it was the Market Day, the Shops and the
Windows were shut up, and there was no body to be seen in the Streets but a
crowd of poor sorrowful People, saying, What shall we do? What will become of
us? We lose in this Great Good man our Protector and Father. The Gallows was
encompassed round with a Troop of Horse, and a Company of Foot, yet even those
could not hinder a crowd of Poor people getting near it, (and amongst them two
Gentltmen of Bordeaux in disguise) on purpose to hear the last dying Speech of
our Martyr, who was brought thither with the three beforementioned
Gentle-women; and no sooner was he got upon the Ladder, than he said, This is
Jacob's ladder, by which I am ascending to Heaven. He had a mind to make a
Speech to the People, but no sooner did he begin to open his Mouth, but the
Trumpets and Drums began to sound, that his words might not be heard: Thereupen
he desired a short cessation, wherein to make his Prayers to God, but was
allowed none, but was immediately turned off the Ladder, pronouncing these
words of the Royal Psalmist, Into thine hands I commit my spirit; for thou have
redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, Psalm. 31. v. 5. His Body was left upon the
Gallows till the Sunday following at Night, and then at the request of the
Inhabitants, delivered to one of his Farmers, who Buried it in a private place.
The same day he was Executed, his house was Levelled to the ground, and the
materials of it given to the Priest of the Parish to enlarge his Church with,
and his several Estates have been seized for the paying of 6000. Livers, to
which the charges or Penalties of his Trial amounted. Thus died that Brave and
Religious Martyr, without showing any weakness, or so much as Anger at his
Persecutors; but on the contrary, such a meekness and unshaken constancy, that
the Papists themselves were heard to say, That if any man of their Religion had
led so Pious a life, as Monsieur Margueyron had done, and had dyed in so
Christian a manner, he would be infallibly Canonized.

When the sad News of his death was brought to his Wife, she showed somewhat
more than a manly Courage, it being without any sign at all of Human weakness.
She immediately returned her devout Thanks to God, for the great steadiness of
Resolution he had given to her Husband, and said to those about her, He is now
very happy, for he rests from his Labors. She was Condemned likewise to
assist at her Husband's Execution, to be shaven by the Hangman, and afterward
confined for her life in the Manufacture of Bordeaux; but either they thought
it would be too Cruel in them to let her see the Tragical end of her Husband,
or rather they seared by her Bravery of Soul she would encourage him the more,
and too much work upon the Peoples affections; they left her in the Prison of
Bordeaux till the Execution of her Husband was over.

The three Gentlewomen that came along with him, having seen Monsieur
Margueyron's Death without being in the least shaken, contrary to their
Persecutor's expectation, were brought from Saintefoy to Duras, where they made
their Honorable Amand on the 28th. of the said Month of April, being the
Market Day at that place: They had never appeared in their lives so cheerful,
nor had their faces ever been so charming, as they seemed then in that
frightful Garb; the moanful beams of the burning Torch they carried in their
hands, did as it were increase the natural brightness of their Eyes; and the
wretched Halter they had on their necks, was a much more fine and glorious
sight, than a Pearl or Diamond Necklace. We have told you in the beginning of
this Relation, that several Persons of Duras who had been Indicted, had made
their Escapes; they were Summoned, but not having appeared, they were Condemned
by Out-lawry to be Hanged, and to be Hanged immediately in Effigy, till they
could be found; insomuch, that on that very day those Gentlewomen Glorified God
by their Sufferings at Duras, Four Gentlemen and a Gentlewoman were Hanged up
in Effigy, viz. Monsieur Fontanote and his Wife, Monsieur Peynau, Advocate in
the Court of Parliament, Monsieur Micheau a Merchant, and Monsieur de Peyferier
Gentleman, who is newly arrived here in England, and from whom we have some
particulars of this Relation; and the same day also his house, in which they
used to have their Religious Assemblies, was pulled down. The Three Gentlewomen
were brought back to Bordeaux, and being shaven by the Hangman, they were shut
up in the Manufacture, where they show the like Patience, Constancy, and
Cheerfulness, as they did in their former Sufferings.

The Persecutors have been no less rigorous to the Church of Gensac, than to
the two former. Many Persons were Indicted, and one of them called John de
Land, being taken, has been sent to the Galleys for Three Years. Seven others
that are sled, have been Condemned by Out-lawry to be hanged, amongst whom are
these Gentlemen, Messieurs Belleveue de Durege, de Bellefonds, de Vialle, and
Peyriere de Gentillot, whose Houses have been pulled down.

Every Age of Christianity has found by experience, that the Blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church; and we hear also that comfortable truth upon
this occasion: We are told that the Death of Monsieur Margueyron, together with
the generous Sufferings of those Confessors we have already spoken of, has
awakened and enlivened the sleeping zeal of many People, insomuch that we are
assured, that several other Persons would joyfully Sacrifice their lives,
rather than fall again into their former weakness. Several Persons of Nerac,
and of Lygoules near Bergerac are also Persecuted, and some taken, though
sentence has not been pronounced against them, for ought we can yet learn; and
we are informed by the last public accounts, that the Persecution continneth
there with a very great fury, as well as in all other Provinces of France.

I would here put an end to this Discourse, but that I promised to make some
few Reflections upon the unreasonable fondness of a certain hot Party amongst
us for the French King; tho they at the same time pretend to be both true
Englishmen and good Protestants. Indeed their proceedings are so odd and
extravagant, that future Ages will hardly believe what we see with our own
Eyes. These Gentlemen would fain persuade the World, that the Persecutions in
France have not been so violent as we have been informed, and that the French
King has now changed his mind, and is become another man: But what can be more
idle, ridiculous, and impertinent, than this stuff of theirs? Would they with a
Brazen brow, give the lie to so many Thousands of Witnesses, and to our own
eyes too? But what new varnish can they find to put upon this last Persecution?
Truly if the French King has now changed his mind, he must have been exceeding
violent indeed, since the very dregs of his Fury are still so terrible; For
what more Cruel can be imagined, than to put a Gentleman to a vile and infamous
death; to send so many others to the Galleys, and to condemn others to shameful
Punishment, upon the bare pretense that they have met together to Pray to God,
notwithstanding his prohibition? If so hard treatment may not be called a
Persecution, I do not know then what may deserve that name: and on the
contrary, if this be meekness and gentleness, I cannot imagine what that is
which we call Inhumanity.

I would beg leave to ask our Murmurers only two questions. 1. How is it
possible that a Tyrant, who has so cruelly persecuted the Protestants in his
own Kingdom; who has pulled down so many of their Churches, put to death so
many men upon account of Religion only; who, further yet, boasts, That he
himself has almost rooted out the Heresy; and who still continues his Rage
and Fury against all the Protestants that are found in his Dominions; I say,
How is it possible, that such a man can ever be the Protector of the Church of
England, as our Grumbling Crew call him? Perhaps they will answer, That the
French Hugonots have not been used with so much severity upon the account of
their Religion merely, but because the French King found them dangerous to his
Grandeur and his State, having strong suspicions of their Fidelity; but let
them prove what they say: I would fain know what Public Act or Declaration
they can instance in; and whether they have any Witnesses that will say, the
Booted-Missionaries have ever required from the Hugonots a greater Test of
their Fidelity, than they had before, but only their forcing them to go to
Mass. Every body knows, that this French King owes his Crown to those very
Protestants he has so cruelly used; and consequently, that their Fidelity could
not be in the least called into question. But if the French King aimed not at
the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, why does he say in his Letters and
Memorials against the Emperor and the King of Spain, that it was his intention?
Why has he destroyed the Churches of Orange, and forced his Majesty's
Subjects, as well as his own, to forsake their Religion, and to go to Mass? And
why has he compelled the Duke of Savoy 10 destroy the Vaudcis, as his Royal
Highness has publicly declared? The French King having then declared War
against all the Protestants of the World, I thought the Church of England had
not been excepted; and I was induced to that belief, by the Measures the late
King had taken with him, effectually to destroy it; but being now assured by
some, that he is the Protector of it, I am surprised at such a wonderful
Change; and this is the first Phoenomenon, the Solution of which I humbly
desire of our Learned Mutmurers.

I ask, 2dly. If it be possible, that a true Englishman, that is, one living
free under Their Majesty's most Gracious Government, and making use of his
right Reason, can wish a Tyrant for his King; an Oppressor, who has made his
Subjects the most miserable Wretches and Slaves in the world, tho Inhabitants
of one of the most plentiful Countries of the earth; who sucks their very blood
and marrow from them, to satisfy his vast Ambition, or his impure Lusts and
Pleasures, and who sacrifices them to his least Interest or Vanity: The Enemy
of Mankind, the Invader of his Neighbors: A Prince, if I may call him so, who
has ever yet scorned to be a slave to his Oaths or Treaties; and on whom, the
Religion be professes, and all that is sacred amongst men, has no manner of
Force or Power; to use the very words of the King of Spain, in his Letter to
the Pope. In a word, If it be possible for an Englishman, who loves the
Interest of his Nation, to wish for a man of the Character of this French King,
to be his Absolute Lord and Master?

Till these Gentlemen will be pleased to answer me these two questions, I shall
make bold to deliver my own thoughts upon them: And as to the first, I say,
That the French King is not the Protector of the Church of England, and that
his Idolaters who give him that magnificent Title, prevaricate, and make use of
some equivocation; for they must mean another Church far different from that
here established by the Laws of this Kingdom. Ours needs no other Protection,
than that of Their Majesty's; and sure I am, the Gentlemen I speak of, are
Papists in their hearts, notwithstanding their so much affected outward show of
Protestantism, if they have any Religion at all. As to the second Query, If it
be possible for an Englishman who loves the true Interest of his Nation, to
wish his Master might be a man of the Character of this French King? I answer,
No: And therefore by the reasons contained in the Query, I conclude, That the
Murmurers are either Fools, or Enemies of this Country: Now to say they are
the former, I confess it would seem a little too hard a Censure, and I should
wrong several of them, whom I know to be men of Parts. They are so fond of
themselves, that sure I am, they would much rather be called Enemies to this
Nation. And tho Complaisance is opposite to my temper, yet for their sakes I
must upon this occasion force my natural inclination, and agree with them, that
this last Character is more suitable to their proceedings, than that of Fools.

Having given an exact Parallel between the Ancient and Modern Persecutors, my
Design would be imperfect, should I omit saying something of the Tragic Death
that commonly attends the Enemies of the Church. God has in all ages made
manifest the severe Judgments he exercises upon them. The Relation of the
Deaths of the Primitive Persecutors, written by Lactantius, which I have so
often quoted, is so frightful, that the consideration of their miserable end,
ought, one would think, to deter any man from Persecuting for the future; and
had the French King but reflected upon their Fate, and the Tragic Deaths of
his own Ancestors, I doubt very much whether he would have taken so dangerous a
course. King Henry the 2d. who had sworn to see Ann Dubourg a Protestant,
burning at the stake, received a mortal wound in one of his eyes a few days
before, from the Earl of Montgomery, of which he dyed 11 days after. Francis
the 2d. who was very severe upon the Hugonots, dyed suddenly. Charles the 9th.
who caused the said Hugonots to be so barbarously murdered at the Bloody and
Memorable Massacre at Paris, at last drowned himself in his own blood. Henry
the 3d. no less cruel than his Brother, was killed by a Monk. Henry the 4th.
who renounced the Protestant Religion, to turn Papist, and withal a Bigot, was
first wounded by a Disciple of the Jesuits, and afterward murdered in his own
Coach, and in his chief City. And Lewis the 13th. having endeavored to
extirpate the Protestants, died miserably, (as some say), being eaten up by
Vermin. Lewis the 14th. is not yet dead, and so I cannot tell what will be his
sat; but I would advise him to consider the dreadful Death of Galerius
Maximian; he was visited by God with an Ulcer in his secret Parts, and dyed
afterward in a most miserable manner. The French King is extremely like to
that Ancient Persecutor, let him fear lest his Fistula does not presage to him
the same Fate.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Richard Baldwin.
EUrope's Chains Broke; Or, a Sure and Speedy Project to Rescue Her from the
Present Usurpations of the Tyrant of France.

Christianissimus Christianandus. Or, Reason for the Reduction of France to a
more Christian State in Europe, By Marchimam Needham.

Truth brought to Light. Or, the History of the first Fourteen Years of King
James the I. In Four Parts. I. The Happy State of England ^t His Majesty's
Entrance; The Corruption of it afterward. With the Rise of Particular
Favorites, and the Divisions between This and other States abroad. II. The
Divorce betwixt the Lady Frances Howard and Robert Earl of Essex, before the
King's Delegates, authorized under the King's Broad Seal. As also the
Arraignment of Sir Jervis Yelvis, Lieutenant of the Tower, etc. about the
Murder of Sir. Thomas Overbury, with all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's
Graceous Pardon and Favor to the Countess. III. A Declaration of His Majesty's
Revenue since he came to the Crown of England. With the Annual Issues, Gifts,
Pensions, and Extraordinary Disbursments, IV. The Commissions and Warrants for
the Burning of two Heretics, newly revived, with two Pardons, one for
Theophilus Higgons, the other for Sir Eustate Heart.

A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French, upon the
English Prisoners of War; being a Journal of their Travels from Dinant in
Britany, to Thoulon in Provence: And back again. With a Description of the
Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their
Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the Number of the Men that died
under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the Places of their
Deaths and Burials: With an Account of the great Charity and Sufferings of the
Poor Protestants of France: And other Material Things that happened upon the Way.
Fathfully and Impartially performed by Richard Strutton, being an Eyewitness,
and a Fellow Sufferer.

A Project of a Descent upon France, by a Person of Quality.

A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar; whereby the
Learner may attain in few Months to Speak and Write French Correctly, as they
do now in the Court of France, and wherein all that is Dark, Superfluous, and
Deficient in other Grammars, is Plain, Short and Methodically supplied. Also
very useful to Strangers, that are desirous to learn the English Tongue; For
whose sake is added a short, but very exact English Grammar. The Second
Edition, by Peter Berault.


