FURTHER PROPOSALS FOR Amending and Settling THE COIN.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by M. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

Further Proposals, etc.
THere are but Two Ways of Redressing the Disorder of our Coin.

The One by calling in all the Old that is Clipped, and Coining it New into
Milled Money.

The other of giving all the Old Money course, for at least one Year longer,
but with Denominations different from what they bear at present, and more
proportioned to their Weight or intrinsic Value.

Of these Two, that is to be chosen which has the fewest Inconveniences attend
it, for some, nay, many perhaps, there will be in both.

In the first Remedy the Inconveniences are,

First, The great dimunition of the current Species of Money in the Kingdom,
computed to amount to at least Two Millions, by which there will come to be in
proportion, so many fewer pieces of Crowns, half Crowns, Shillings, and Six
Pences, than were before in common use, to the great Prejudice of common
Markets, as well as other greater Payments, public or private. Secondly, If
all Clipped Money be called in, and new Coined, and by the Ancient Standard, as
to Weight and Denomination, our Money will still be carried abroad, rather than
our Commodities, whilst Traders can get more by Exporting one than the other.
For though the Plenty or Scarcity of Money in a Country, depend upon the
Proportion or Balance betwixt Exportation and Importation; yet, the better our
Money is, the more in Specie will be Exported, and the worse it is, the more
will be Exported in Commodities, which has evidently occasioned the quick vent,
and thereby dearness of all Commodities for these Years past, since our Money
has been so generally Clipped. The Third Inconvenience will be from the
necessity of the Time to he taken up in Calling in all the bad Money, and
Coining Good, which will occasion great Disorders in all Markets and Payments,
till both be finished; and for this I see no Remedy. Fourthly, Though the loss
of what is paid into the King's Exchequer, be borne by the Public, yet that
will not indemnifie Men in private Payments, so as many will still lose by this
Remedy in their particular Stocks, as well as the Nation in their General
Stock, and no one Particular will make any Gain.
On the other side, and upon the Second Expedient, Suppose that every Crown, or
half Crown Milled, or not Clipped, should be raised in Denomination and current
Payment, the one to Six, the other to Three Shillings, every such Shilling to
Fifteen Pence; and Six Pence to Seven Pence half Penny. Every half Crown
Clipped, but not within the Ring, remain at its common Value: and so likewise
Shillings and Six-Pences: But every half Crown Clipped within the Ring, be
cried down to Twenty Pence; every Shilling so Cliped to Eight Pence, and every
such Sixpence to a Groat, or Four Pence.

In the first Place, all the old, broad, and milled Money, which now lies
hoarded up in Bankers, and Rich Private Hands, would immediately come out into
common use, by reason of the Gains would be made upon the increase of its
value, or at least current use and Denomination. So that as a great many would
be losers by crying down the current Price of the Clipped Money, so a great
many would be Gainers by crying up the Good; and those that lose, would lose
but little, because every Body has paid off, for some time, all Clipped Money
as fast as it came in. Secondly, By this the General Stock of Money current,
would perhaps not at all be lessened in the Denomination, considering how much
of the old, or weighty Money may be presumed to be hoarded up. And more Money
would fall into Commerce than does at present, because that it would come into
common Payments, which is now kept close, and by the vast number of Guinea's
which have appeared of King Charles, and King James's Coin, it may be guest how
much of old, or milled Money would soon appear, if the Price were raised.
Thirdly, By crying up our good Money, Traders would be tempted to Export less
abroad, and turn as much as they could, to Export our Commodities, which would
make Trade quick, and encourage both common Labor, and Manufactures among us.
And our Money so Coined, and Guinea's fixed to go at Six and Twenty Shillings,
would bring our Coin in the Intrinsic, and the Denomination to that of our
Neighbors, as can well be contrived; without which the Temptation will still
be great, to carry our Money abroad. Fourthly, All the Denominations will run
easily into common Accounts and Reckonings, and the several Species of our
Money will be augmented by so many Groats, Eight Pences; Twenty Pences; whereas
there seem to be now too few left for common use, since no more Nine-Pences,
Groats, Four-Pence-Half-Pennys, are in use, nor any Pieces of Silver under
Sixpence. Fifthly, The Money to be given by the Parliament, to make up the
loss of Clipped Money, will be saved the Nation, at a time when so great Sums
are like to be raised for other uses, and this may be left for a better season.
Lastly, No stop will be made in any common Payments, either Public or Private,
but every Man content for once only, to fit down with the loss of the Clipped
Money he shall have by him, in proportion, as it shall be debased in common
value, whilst others will have reason to be pleased with the Gains they shall
make by producing their milled, or old, unclipp'd Money.
Now for the Inconveniences to be found in this, I see none of weight, besides
the Disputes that may be occasioned between Man and Man, about the Clipped
Money, whether it be within, or without the Ring, and thereby what current
Price it ought to hold.

The Description seems to be so plain, that the Disputes will not be such as
the force of Commerce will not easily break thorough.

Or else the Clerk of every Market may be made the present Judge, or where
there is none, the Parson of every Parish: besides, Stamps may be made, and
every Letter-Office, to ascertain the Value of every Piece, as there received,
which might otherwise fall into Dispute.

If this will not do, I know nothing else, but for all Clipped Money to go by
weight.

I say nothing here of false Money, because that will not pass, when and where
it is plainly found out, and in all Countries, and at all times, there will be
of it current, so much as is not easily discovered. The Remedy both of this and
Clipping (though the last will be discouraged, by the rise and fall, proposed
in our Coin) must be endeavored by such Punishments as will deter more, than
what is at present, and yet will not prevail with Juries to be too easy and
compassionate in Acquitting Clippers, rather than bringing to Death for such a
Crime, how cruelly soever punished in other Countries; such a Punishment might
be for every Clipper or Coiner, to stand one Hour in the Pillory, then to have
one half of his Nose cut off; and after, to be either sold to the Plantations
for Seven Years, or employed in Workhouses at home; which would deter English
Men more than Death, and save the labor of so many Men, as well as so many
Lives.

After all, the ways of Increasing the Coin and Wealth of the Nation, at such a
time as this, and preserve it from being too much Exhausted, must be found out,
by Reducing the Balance of our Trade, by Sumptuary Laws, Exrceating Labor and
Manufacture, discouraging Luxury and Expense, or at least Reducing it to our
own Native Commodities.

FINIS.

