TOLERATION Not to be ABUSED By the Independents.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, and are to be Sold by Abisha Brocas,
Bookseller in Exeter, 1672.

TOLERATION Not to be abused by the Independents.
THE following Discourse shall consist of Four particulars.

First, The lawfulness of Communicating with our Churches by the Confessions
and Arguments of the Congregational Divines.

2. The same proved by demonstrating the Apostolical Churches more vitiated
than Ours, from whom a Separation is made by the Independents; and yet a
Separation from those Primitive Churches, utterly discountenanced by the
Apostles.

3. The same Proposition proved by demonstrating that we have not given them
the like, or any just Cause, as the Church of Rome gave them and us. Which is
the first particular to be proved.

Secondly, I shall show the sinfulness of erecting Altar against Altar, of
gathering Churches out of Churches.

Thirdly, That the Independents are averse in their Principles to Toleration as
well as the Presbyterians, and so equally obliged not to abuse the present
gracious Indulgence.

Fourthly, I shall show, that by His Majesty's late Declaration the Church of
England is still established as the Basis, and the bare suspension of the
poenal Laws, does indeed take off the Obligation, upon the account of wrath,
that lay before upon Dissenters; but does not cancel the Obligation of
Conscience, by which the Independents, and all Indulged parties, are still to
avoid all Causless and groundless Separations from this Best of Reformed
Churches.

First, The Lawfulness of Communicating with our Churches, by the Arguments and
Concessions even of the Independents themselves. Our Parochial Churches are
owned to have the Essentials of true Churches by all sober Congregational men:
(For there is the pure Word of GOD Preached, the true Sacraments Administered,
and an implicit Covenant between Pastor and People in joining together.) All
that is pleaded is Corruption and Defect in the outward Exercise and
Administration of Church Order, and Discipline. Now that it is Lawful
(supposing, but not granting this bar lies against the Church of England) to
join with Churches so defective and corrupt, is not only acknowledged, but
fully proved by Reverend Mr. Norton, of the Congregational way in his Answer to
Apolsius (as Dr. Stilling fleet in his Irenicum quotes it to the present
purpose) which I desire the Brethren to consider, whom it chiefly concerns, and
to lay seriously to their hearts: and, without a reply to his Arguments, they
cannot justify their Separation from us.

1. A Believer may Lawfully join in Communion with such a Church, where he
cannot enjoy all the Ordinancies of GOD, as in the Jewish Church, in our
Savior's time, which refused the Gospel of Christ, and the Baptism of John,
and yet our Savior commands us to hear the Scribes and Pharisees (sitting in
Moses's Chair;) which hearing implies Conjunctionem Ecclesiae Judaicae, A
joining with the Jewish Church. So with Churches rejecting an Article of Faith;
as the Church of Corinth, the Doctrine of the Resurrection; the Churches of
Galatia rejecting the Doctrine of Justification by Faith: yet the Apostle no
where requires, on that account, a Separation from them.

2. A Believer may Lawfully join in Communion with such a Church, in which some
Corruption is tolerated in the Worship of GOD, without Reformation; as the
Offering upon High places, from Solomon to Hezekiah, in the Church of Judah;
the observation of Circumcision and the Law Ceremonial in the Churches of
Galatia.

3. A Believer may Lawfully join himself in Communion with such a Church, in
which such are admitted to Sacraments who give no evident signs of Grace, but
seem to be Lovers of the World; this he proves, because it is every man's Duty
to Examine himself, and another sin hurts not me, and so is no argument
against my Duty. And besides, by men's coming unworthily, Non polluitur
Communio, licet minuitur Consolatio, The Communion is not defiled, though the
comfort of it be diminished: This he proves also from the Church of Corinth,
amongst whom were many scandalous that had not Repented, 2 Cor. 12. 20, etc.
and in the Church of the Jews, which lay under great Corruptions when Christ
and His Apostles communicated with it.

4. Although a Believer joins with such a Church, he is not therefore bound
with the Guilt, nor defiled with the pollutions of others that Communicate. It
is his Duty incumbent, and in doing his Duty, he contracts no Guilt upon
himself.

5. A Believer which has joined himself to such a Church is not bound to
withdraw and separate under pain of Guilt if he does it not: for to be lawful
to join, and unlawful to continue the Communion implies a contradiction; for
the first speaks it to be a Church, and the second to be no Church; and so it
is not Lawful to separate from a Church true, as to Essentials (and such the
Independents own in their Apologetical Narration, our Parochial Churches)
though guilty of Corruptions; for the ground of Communicating is its being a
Church, not a corrupt or defective Church. And that men are not guilty by
partaking with those that are guilty of Corruptions in a Church, appears from
the Church of the Jews in the case of Ely's Sons, and the Christian Churches of
Asia and Corinth; where we read of many Corruptions by S. Paul reproved, but no
Mandate to separate, which had certainly by the Holy Ghost been given, and S.
Paul would not have omitted, had it been a sin to communicate while those
Corruptions were in the Churches of Asia and Corinth. Thus far their own
Reverend Norton. Now I desire these Congregational Leaders, who gather Churches
out of our Churches, to reply to this Learned Divine of their own persuasion,
or to consider what Answer is to be given to the searcher of all Hearts, for
resisting that light of Conviction that shines in upon their Consciences.

Again, not granting but supposing only; that in this Church from which these
separate, Church Discipline were neglected, Worship defiled, Manners corrupted,
or Tyranny exercised: suppose we grant all this, which we need not, this will
not justify a Separation from the Church of England. My reason is, because
there were greater Corruptions in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship (and no
Separations countenanced by the Apostles) in the first Apostolical Christian
Churches, then in Ours, or any other Reformed Churches, from whom a Separation
is made in these times. As for instance; to begin with Doctrine; In what Church
of ours is the Resurrection of the Dead denied, an Article of that importance
that all our Christianity, in effect, depends upon it? It was denied by many in
the Church of Corinth. In what Churches of ours is the Doctrine of
Justification by the Law, or any Doctrine so destructive of the Merit of
Christ, generally maintained, as in the Galatian Churches? Again, for Worship;
Do ours partake of the Lord's Table and the Table of Devils, as among the
Corinthians? Are our Ecclesiastical Assemblies so confused, that whosoever
comes in must presently take us for Mad? Do ours come to the Communion drunk,
as at Corinth? Then for Manners, and Life; We acknowledge our selves heinous
Offenders (which, I suppose, those that call themselves the Saints, and
separate from us Publicans) do (unless frantic) confess true of themselves:
But what then? have we worse than Incest, Fornication, Covetousness, Malice,
Contentions unrepented of, as is the Church of Corinth? Or, biting and
devouring one another, permitters of Idolaters, boasters of Gifts, as in the
Church of Galatia? As touching neglect of Discipline; First in the Apostles own
company, the Ministers that should exercise Discipline, they all sought there
own, and none the things of Jesus Christ; and the grossest Vices winked
(...)mented, as we saw before in the Church of Corinth; and should have been so
still, had not the Apostle been Living, and exciting them to their Duty.

Lastly, concerning Tyranny; Ye see what Oppression the false Apostles used, 2
Cor. 11. 20. Ye suffer, says the Apostle, if a man take of you, if a man bring
you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man exalt himself, etc. by which
words he touches the Tyranny, though out of malice against the Apostle,
willingly submitted to, by the Church of Corinth: and we know that Dyotrephes
exercised his Government with such Insolency, that he cast out whom he would,
admitted whom he would, opposed S. John himself; yet no news of Separation.

Now let these men consider, that separate from us, the Apostolical Church was
a Virgin newly espoused to Christ, in the midst of the Heathen, under the Rod
of Persecution, the great Apostle then living, and yet vitiated more then the
Churches that these depart from; and yet the then Separatists branded with the
Characters of Schism and Sedition by the Blessed Apostles. And here I desire
the men of this way seriously to consider, that Separation being
discountenanced, from Churches more vitiated than ours, by the Holy Apostles;
how these men, owning our Parochial Churches true as to Essentials, can ever
justify their Separation from us? It would certainly be duly weighed by such
as desire to appear tender Consciences, and so capable of a right in the
present gracious Indulgence. That they do so acknowledge our Parochial
Churches, their Apologetical Narration declares sufficiently in these following
words; We have always professed (and that in these times, wherein the Churches
of England were most, either actually overspread with defilements, or in the
greatest danger thereof) that we both did, and would hold Communion with them,
as true Churches of Christ; and that our Parochial Churches were the very Body
of Christ: which is in effect to approve and forsake at the same time, and
gives occasion, too great, of applying a Sentence in S. Austin against
Parmenian (Lib. 1. cap. 8. against these Dissenters:) Et adversum nos
loquuntur, and nobiscum loquuntur, and cum eos obmutescere compellat veritas,
silere non permittit iniquitas: They speak against us, and they speak for us;
and when Truth constrains them silence, their Iniquity will not let them hold
their peace.

There are three things that I would humbly offer to all sober men of the
Congregational persuasion; and I beseech them to consider them seriously, as
from one that equally wishes their Salvation with his own.

1. That they would cautiously distinguish between corruptions in Doctrine, and
corruptions in the practice of a Church.

2. That they would Conscientiously distinguish between corruptions, whether in
Doctrine or Practice, professed and avowed by a Church, and required as the
absolute conditions of Communion from all its members; and corruptions only
crept in and merely tolerated in a Church, and not any way required as the
conditions of

3. To distinguish carefully between Noncommunicating as to the abuses of a
Church, and a positive and total Separation from a (...) as it is a Church.
These three (the second (...) duly weighed and considered, would (...) a period
to their Separation (...) of England; or tend at least to (...)ening of the
Breach too sadly occasioned, for want of a due reflection upon the Premises
aforesaid.

Again, We of the Church of England have not given them the like, or any just
cause of Separating, as the Church of Rome gave them and us: For where do we
urge any Doctrines as Articles of Faith, which we offer not to a trial by
Scripture, and the Four first General Councils, which all Christians reverence
(and were Anciently honored next to the Four Gospels:) and if the Church
should teach any other Propositions, she protests against their being Articles
of Faith and of Necessity to Salvation, and for this reason imposes not Her
^^^IX, Articles, as Articles of Faith, but of Peace and Communion: nor does the
Church of England censure other Churches for their different Confessions, but
allows them the liberty she her self takes, to establish more or less
conditions of Communion, as the Governors of the Church shall deem most
expedient for Unity and Peace. She only requires of such as are admitted to any
Office or Employment in the Church, to subscribe to her Articles as certain
Theological Verityes not repugnant to GOD's Word, particularly culled out and
selected to be taught, and maintained within her Communion, as highly conducive
to the preservation of Truth, and prevention of Schism. And for this reason
She passes no other censure upon the Impugners of her Articles, then against
the Impugners of Her Government, Liturgy, and Rites; because all intended by
her for the same end, The avoiding of all Disorders, and Confusions. But as for
the absolute Articles of the Church of England, they were not of Her own
Inventing, but such as She found established in the best Ages of the Church,
nearest the Primitive and Apostolical simplicity: Here She fixes the bounds of
Her Faith, to prevent the danger of endless Additions, and Innovations. And
because in smaller matters somewhat may escape the greatest caution and
prudence, She has reserved Just power to her self to reform what is really
amiss, and finds so abused, that the use of them cannot stand with Piety and
Holiness; allowing the same Liberty to all her Sister Churches, and all Church
Governors within the sphere of their respective Jurisdictions. This is the
true state of the Reformation of this Church, as has been apparently evidenced
by her Regular Sons against all Opposers.

Now let the Independents consider, whether this be not (though a brief) yet a
True account of the Moderation and Prudence of this Church; and then let them
reflect at the same time upon the second especially, of the Three aforesaid
Propositions: and upon the whole examine their Tender Consciences, whether it
does not Justify our Separation from the Romanists, and at the same time prove
them guilty by departing from us. We both agree, that where any Church is
guilty of Corruptions in Doctrine and practice, which it owns and requires as
absolute conditions of Her Communion, there to Separate is no Schism, but
Lawful and Convenient. Let them make the Church of England appear thus guilty
they are acquitted: If they cannot prove it as they have not done as yet (and
doubtless they have Zeal enough to set them forward, if it could be
demonstrated) what hinders their Return to the Church of England, unless the
Conscience, which they call Tender, be sullen and obstinate? Not to prove any
thing that justifies a Separation against the Church which they forsake, and
yet continue to keep up their Altars against it, is not so much allied to
tenderness of Conscience, as to hardness of Heart, incapable of being reclaimed
by the greatest and most generous condescensions in the World.

So much of the First particular, The Lawfulness of Communicating with our
Parochial Churches, from the Arguments and Concessions of the Independents
themselves; from the Primitive Apostolical Churches more vitiated than Ours,
and yet all manner of Separation discountenanced by the Apostles, and we not
having given the Independents any just cause as the Church of Rome gave them
and us. That is the first Proposition I engaged to defend, The Lawfulness of
communicating with our Churches.

Secondly, I am to show the sinfulness and danger of erecting Altar against
Altar, and gathering Churches out of our Churches: The Sin is the sin of
Schism, severely branded by Ancient Fathers and Orthodox Councils (as well as
in the Apostolical Writings) as the height of Pride and Wickedness. That the
Independents are guilty of this Sin is clearly deducible from what I have said
already; From their own Arguments, and Concessions; from the Instances of the
Apostolical and Primitive Churches, more vitiated than Ours, yet Separation
discountenanced by the Apostles; and by a comparison between our withdrawing
from Rome, and their Separation from us. These things already proved, speaks
them Causlesly to Separate from us; and that causless Separation speaks them
Schismatics. They themselves allow our Parochial Churches True, as to
Essentials; and, what if we suppose spots and pollutions, as to the outward
Administration of Order and Discipline; this, if we should grant them, only
infers a lawful desire and endeavor of Reformation, but it warrants no
Schismatical Separation; for no Corruptions in a Church can give occasion, or
allowance of going out of it, but such as strike at the Foundation of Christian
Doctrine and Worship; which, setting Calumny and railing aside (which we are
not obliged to take for Reason and Argument) they never yet attempted to prove
against the Church of England, so far they are inexcusable before GOD, and so
far from appearing Men of tender Consciences to the World.

Where are those Corruptions in Doctrine or Practice, which the Church of
England does Impose upon her Members, as the absolute Conditions of Her
Communion. Let them lay aside Wrath and Darkness, and give us a pregnant
Demonstration; or like Men of Candor and Ingenuity plead Guilty, and Return.
Let them in short prove these two things: 1. That our Episcopal Ordination and
Jurisdiction, Our mixed Communion, Our Rites of Order imposed, not out of any
Necessity, but Uniformity and Peace, and some other things by them inveighed
against, to be indeed Superstitious, and (as they call them). Antichristian
Abominations. When that difficult Task is over (if it can be ever accomplished)
let them prove that we urge Disputable things, or known Errors with such
severity, as the Church of Rome does Purgatory, Indulgences, Supererogation,
and other notorious palbable Errors; for which, justly condemned by the
Reformed Churches. The very Cock of the Congregation is here nonplust (the most
daring of all their Undertakers) unless you will take Noise, and Clamor, and
Confidence for Demonstrations.

Thirdly, The Independents are equally Enemies to Toleration with the
Presbyterians; and from the same very Principles, and by consequence equally
obliged not to use (however not to abuse) the Gracious Indulgence. Nothing in
Conjunction with, or addition to, what is prescribed in the Word of GOD (as to
Worship, and Government) is to be admitted or Tolerated. Upon this Principle
the Independents in particular (as well as Non-conformists in general,) for so
their greatest and most forward Champion tells us, They do, and will adhere to,
and stand upon as to the Differences, between them and us. The plain meaning of
which, applied to the Church of England, is briefly this, That the Independent
way of Worship, and Government, is only prescribed in the Word of GOD; and Ours
not, but repugnant: And by this Principle they exclude as well their Brethren
that lent them the Principle, as well as the Inferior Sectarists, and are at
defiance with them, as well as the Church of England; for Independency being
only prescribed in the Word by this Principle. if they will adhere to it, no
other way can be Indulged or admitted. With these Men (as well as the
Disciplinarians) there is but One only true way of Worship and Government
prescribed in the Word. Nothing, secondly, that is unlawful may be Tolerated by
the Civil Magistrate; and, nothing is lawful but what is prescribed in the Word
(and you may be confident, that is the Independent way of Worship and
Government.) These three things resolved, whence should Toleration proceed, or
an Indulgence be expected from the Independents to differing persuasions,
unless he plays fast and loose, and as he pleases, owns and renounceth the
Jus divinum of Independency in the same Oracles.

Every Sect (the Independent especially) allows no Worship, but their own way
established in the Word. This is not only pleaded against the Church of
England, but every Faction bandyes against every Faction for the Divine Right.
The Presbyterian Discipline is the only Scepter of JESUS CHRIST for all
Churches Government to the End of the World: He can neither Indulge himself,
nor accept an Indulgence where other Parties are not excluded. The Independent
allows only his own Way of Worship, and excludes all Dissenters from
Worshipping GOD aright; and from the beauty and purity of Gospel Ordinances;
which is a Principle Sir John Presbyter lent him: And how can an Indulgence
hence proceed?

By this Principle the Presbyterian first assaulted the Church of England. By
the same Principle the Congregational Hector takes Sir John to task, and beats
him out of the field: By the same the Anabaptist attempted the Independent; and
all the under- Sects the Anabaptists: And so if they had crumbled into a
thousand sub-divisions, still as every Sect gathers strength enough, he
persecutes all Opposers. And, How should the Independent be more merciful than
the Presbyterian, or any other Sect, whose Enmity to Toleration does equally
arise from the same common Principle of the Divine Right, only of their own way
of Worship and Government, from which all the Sects are excluded, as well as
the Church of England? There is One only way of Worshipping GOD aright, and
that way is the Independent way of Worship. Where is Toleration then? It is
excluded. By what Law? By Divine Right: And so Every plant that my Father has
not planted must be rooted out; and so only Independency is to be Tolerated,
unless Kings and Princes who Rule for GOD, may Indulge men in an Open violation
of the Law of GOD? And if you look a little backwards, it may admit a Dispute,
Whether the Scepter of JESUS CHRIST were more an Iron Rod under the Kirk, or
the tender hearted Tryers? It may indeed sometimes consist with Carnal prudence
(supposing the Independents to have power in their hands) to connive at, and
Indulge the Lesser Factions, the better to hold out the Flag of Defiance
against the Royalists, and the Presbyterians their most considerable
Competitors. Or they may (as the Usurpers tender-Conscien'd Army once did)
offer the taking away even the Poenal Laws from the very Papists, to collogue
with Foreign Princes, and so have the greater security in their Villainous
Designs against the King, and the Church; but this is a State Juggle for the
advancement of the Good Old Cause: But then as soon as the fear is over from
abroad, then they spared nothing that Sacrilege could devour.

And now, Can any Man, that looks back upon Independent mercy and forbearance,
believe that Men of such Principles and practices (who are now pleased that
Episcopacy is established, and Poenal Laws removed from Papists, only because
Indulged themselves) would Tolerate either Popery or Episcopacy if they had
Power in their hands, and not rather Lord it with the Insolence of Usurpers?
Credat Judaeus Apella, non Ego.

So that as a late Treatise demonstrates, the Presbyterian has no cause of
joy, because others are Indulged as well as himself; whereas his Doctors,
Elders, and Deacons are the perpetual Scepter of CHRIST to the end of the World
for all Churches Government; and therefore, Down with the Colors of the
Dragon; advance the Standard of CHRIST.

The Independents have no cause of Joy, because the Church of England, and the
Presbyterian Limb too, of the Antichristian Leviathan, are included, as well as
the rest of the Parties among us: His Way being only laid down in the WORD, and
all others repugnant to the Holy Scriptures. Yet they take the advantage, both
out of a hatred to a third Party, the Church of England, and the next thing is
to fight one with another for the Government: and then the only Scepter of
Christ is the Conquerours worship; the longest Sword is the Divine Right; the
Pike and Gun declare the Cause of GOD; and infallible Artillery decides all the
Controversies relating to the Gospel Truth. And thus the Presbyterian (who
thought to have erected his Discipline upon the sad Eclipse of the Church of
England) was powerfully baffled and confuted, by such Arguments as the
Independent Man of War carried in his Snapsack.

Do not the Independents, when most cool and moderate, look upon all other
Churches and People, as all Revolters from the purity and beauty of
Gospel Ordinances, introducers of Will Worship and Superstition, instead of
Disciples of the Lord JESUS; not allowing any Dissenters the least share or
degree of Wisdom, or Godliness? And men of such Principles of this forehead and
complexion, must needs carry tender bowels to Men of differing Persuasions.
Certainly, unless where the rules and maxims of carnal Policy interpose and
plead for mercy to Dissenters, their Clemency is the same with the
Presbyterian, who first lent him the Principle, of not admitting any thing not
expressly delivered in the Sacred Scriptures: by which Principle they are
engaged in a War with one another, as well as against their common Antagonists.
So that the Tables are now turned. It is not the Question, whether all Parties
may be Tolerated; but, whether Independents only: for there is but One true way
of Worship, and that is Theirs. Theirs only has the Divinum Jus, and Princes
may not Indulge Men in an open violation of Scripture Precepts, and Directions.
And so every Sect is engaged to root out all the rest, as Enemies to the
Scepter of the Lord JESUS.

Fourthly, The Execution of the Poenal Laws being suspended, by the late
Declaration in Favor of Dissenters, does only take off the Obligation, upon
the account of Wrath, to Obedience; but the Conscience is still obliged, to
avoid all causless and groundless Separations from our Churches. This will be
manifest enough to any one that seriously reads the Declaration it self, and a
late Treatise, Toleration not to be Abused, which will extend as well to the
Independents as the Presbyterians, whose aversion to Toleration is built upon
the same common Principle, the Divine Right of their one only way of Worship
and Government, in the Sacred Oracles; and so I refer them to that part of the
Discourse before mentioned, That they are obliged (as before the Declaration)
to avoid all groundless Separations. For the Church of England is, as before,
established as the Basis, and so the Obligation of Conscience still Obligatory
upon all the Indulged Parties to avoid Schisms, and all causless departure
from us. The Obligation upon the account of Wrath is removed indeed; but if
they would appear tender Consciences to the World, the King's suspension of the
Punishment should make them the more Obedient for Conscience sake; and a
Gracious Indulgence rather abate, than heighten their Opposition against the
Church of England, still established.

I shall now conclude all, by desiring them to consider, what they themselves
acknowledge in the Declaration of the Faith and Order of the Congregational
Churches, in Chap. 26. Of the Church, etc. The purest Churches under Heaven are
subject both to Mixture and Error. And in their Institution of Churches;
Persons that are joined in Church Fellowship, ought not lightly to withdraw
themselves from the Communion of the Church, to which they are so joined. To
these two let them add the Four particulars in this Discourse mentioned: and
upon the result of all consider, Whether Ambition and Pride, rather then a
Conscientious tenderness keep not up their departure from, and opposition to
the Church of England. I am not as this Publican, Come not near me, for I am
holier then thou. An overvalluing of our own worth, and a Pharisaical contempt
of others, is the usual rise of Schism; for only by Pride comes Contention;
so the best of Kings and Preachers.

Thus the Valentinians looked on themselves as the only spiritual Men. The
Pharisees the only Separati, separate Persons. The Sadducees, Justi, the only
Righteous. The Novatians, (...), the only Puritans: And none Men of Knowledge
but the Gnostics, and the acute Tertullian, when Montanist. All others were
Psysici, and he was come to his Nos spirituales. And if (out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks) spiritual Pride is the original of your
Schism. For you only are GOD's Israel, his Elect and precious ones. You only
have Communion with GOD in pure Ordinance* All the World fallen short of GOD's
Truth, but your selves: And none is Orthodox out of the Pale of your own
Church. Not only Pap^sts, Prelatists and Arminians, but even your dear
Brethren, the Presbyterians, are Limbs of the Antichristian Leviathan. All
revolted from the Lord JESUS, and to be treated as members of the Whore, whom
the Saints hate, and shall make desolate and naked, eat her flesh, and drink
her blood. This is the Canting Dialect of your Independent Leaders.

To Conclude. If it be not Ambition, but Conscience; Let it so appear by your
Charity to Dissenters, by a serious and impartial Enquiry into the Grounds upon
which you separate from us, without prejudice or passion; and do not so far
Idolize a Sect, or an Opinion, as to prefer it before the Peace and Settlement
of a Church, and Nation.

FINIS.

