The Portraiture of Edward the Second KING of ENGLAND, Lord of Ireland. Having
Raig. 19. Years and 7. Months, was Murdered at BARKLEY-CASTLE at 43. Years of
Age.


THE HISTORY OF The LIFE, REIGN, and DEATH OF EDWARD II. King of England, AND
LORD of IRELAND. WITH The Rise and Fall of (...) great Favorites, GAVESTON and
the SPENCERS.

Written by E. F. in the year 1627. And Printed verbatim from the Original.

Qui nescit Dissimulare, nequit vivere, perire, melius. LONDON: Printed by J.
C. for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce in Fleet Street; Samuel Crouch, at
the Princes Arms in Popes-head-Alley in Cornhil; and Thomas Fox, at the Angel
in Westminster Hall. 1680.

THE PUBLISHER To the READER.
READER,
THou have here presented to thy View the Life and Death of Edward the Second,
one of the most Unfortunate Princes that ever swayed the English Scepter. What
it was that made him so, is left to thee to judge, when thou have read his
Story. But certainly the Falsness of his Queen, and the Flattery of those
Court-Parasites, Gaveston and the Spencers, did contribute not a little thereto.

As for the Gentleman that wrote this History, his own following Preface to the
Reader will give some short Account, as also of the Work it self, together with
the Design and Time of its writing, which was above Fifty years since. And
this we think we may say, (and persuade our selves that upon the perusal thou will be of the same opinion) that he was every every way qualified for an
Historian. And 'bating a few obsolete words, (which show the Antiquity of the
Work) we are apt to believe those days produced very few who were able to
express their Conceptions in so Masculine a Style.

We might easily enlarge in our Commendations of this Excellent History; but it
needs not; and therefore we leave it to thee to read and judge.

The AUTHOR's PREFACE To the READER.
TO outrun those weary hours of a deep and sad Passion, my melancholy Pen fell
accidentally on this Historical Relation; which speaks a King, our own, though
one of the most Unfortunate; and shows the Pride and Fall of his Inglorious
Minions.

I have not herein followed the dull Character of our Historians, nor amplified
more than they infer, by Circumstance. I strive to please the Truth, not Time;
nor fear I Censure, since at the worst, 'twas but one Month mis-spended; which
cannot promise ought in right Perfection.

If so you hap to view it, tax not my Errors; I my self confess them.

20. Feb. 1627. E. F.

THE REIGN and DEATH OF Edward the Second.
EDWARD the Second, eldest Son of Edward the First and Elenor the virtuous
Sister of the Castilian King, was born at Carnarvan April 25. 1284.
; and in the most resplendant pride of his age, immediately after the decease
of his noble Father, crowned King of England July 1307.
. The principal Leaders of the Rebellious Welshmen, Fluellen and Meredith,
being taken and executed, the Combustions of the Cambro-Britains were quieted
and settled in an uniform Obedience. The Scots, by the resignation of Baliol,
the execution of Wallis, and the expulsion of Bruce their pretended King, were
reduced to their first Monarchy, and brought to an absolute subjection, at such
time as he took upon him the Regiment of this then glorious Kingdom. If we may
credit the most ancient Historians that speak of the Princes and Passages of
those times, this Royal Branch was of an Aspect fair and lovely, carrying in
his outward appearance many promising Predictions of a singular expectation.
But the judgment, not the eye, must have the pre-eminence in point of
Calculation and Censure. The smoothest waters are for the most part most deep
and dangerous; and the goodliest Blossoms nipt by an unkindly Frost, wither, or
produce their fruit sour or unwholesome: which may properly imply, That the
visible Calendar is not the true Character of inward Perfection; evidently
proved in the Life, Reign, and Death of this unfortunate Monarch. His Story
speaks the Morning fair, the Noontide eclipsed, and the sad Evening of his
Life more memorable by his untimely Death and Ruin. He could not have been so
unworthy a Son of so noble a Father, nor so inglorious a Father of so excellent
a Son, if either Virtue or Vice had been hereditary. Our Chronicles, as they
parallel not him in his licentious Errors, so do they rarely equal the Wisdom
and Valor of the one that went before, and the other that immediately
succeeded him. Neither was this degenerate Corruption in him transcendent from
the womb that bare him, since all Writers agree his Mother to be one of the
most pious and illustrious pieces of Female-goodness that is registered in those
memorable Stories of all our Royal Wedlocks. But the divine Ordinances are
inscrutable, and not to be questioned; it may else seem justly worthy
admiration, how so crooked a Plant should spring from a Tree so great and
glorious. His younger years discovered a softly, sweet, and mild temper,
pliable enough to the impressions of Virtue; when he came to write Man, he was
believed over-liberally wanton, but not extremely vicious. The Royal honor of
his Birthright was scarcely invested in his person, when Time (the Touchstone
of Truth) shows him to the world a mere Imposture; in Conversation light, in
Condition wayward, in Will violent, and in Passion furious and irreconciliable.

Edw. 1's care in educating his Son.
Edward, his valiant and prudent Father, had, by the glory of his victorious
Arms, and the excellency of his Wisdom and Providence, laid him the sure
foundation of a happy Monarchy; making it his last and greatest care to
continue it so in his succession. This caused him to employ his best
understanding and labor for the enabling of his Son, that he might be
powerful, fit, and worthy to perfect this great Work, and preserve it. And from
this Consideration he leads him to the Scotch Wars, to teach him the right use
of Arms, which are to be managed as well by discretion as valor, and the
advantage of time and opportunity, which lead humane Actions by the hand to
their perfection. Here he likewise instructs him with those more excellent
Rules of Knowledge and Discipline, that he might exactly know what it was, and
how to obey before he came to command. Lastly, he unlocks the Closet of his
heart, and lays before him those same Arcana Imperii and secret mysteries of
State, which are only proper to the Royal Operations, and lie not in the road
of Vulgar knowledge; yet letting him withal know, that all these were too weak
to support the burden of a Crown, if there be not a correspondent worth in him
that wears it. With these grave Principles the prudent Father opening the way,
soon perceives he had a remaining task of a much harder temper; with an
unwilling eye he beholds in his Son many sad remonstrances which intimate
rather a natural vicious inclination, than the corruption of time, or want of
ability to command it. Unless these might be taken off and cleansed, he
imagines all his other Cautions would be useless and to little purpose. The
pruning of the Branches would improve the Fruit little, where the Tree was
tainted in the root with so foul a Canker. Too well he knew how difficult a
thing it was to invert the course of Nature, especially being confirmed by
continuance of practice, and made habituary by custom: yet he leaves no means
unattempted; being confident that Wedlock, or the sad weight of a Crown, would
in the sense of Honor call him in time off to thoughts more innocent and
noble. Tenderness of Fatherly affection abused somewhat his belief, and made
him give his disorderly actions the best construction, which suggests their
progression to flow from heat of Youth, want of Experience, and the wickedness
of those that fed him with so base impressions; which, with all those sweet and
mild entreaties that spring from the heart of an essential love, he strives to
reclaim, intermixing withal as great a paternal severity as might properly suit
the condition of a judicious Father, and the dignity of the Heir apparent of so
great and glorious a Kingdom. And to make him more apt and fit to receive and
follow his instructions, he takes from him those tainted humors of his
Leprosy, that seduced the easiness of his nature, and misled his unripe
knowledge, too green to master such sweet and bewitching temptations. Banishes
Gaveston.
Gaveston his Ganymede, a man as base in Birth as in Condition, he commands
to perpetual Exile. Gaveston's Original and Character.
This Siren (as some write) came out of Gascoign; but the Author whom I most
credit and follow, speaks him an Italian; not guilty of any drop of Noble
blood; neither could he from the height of his Hereditary hope, challenge more
than a bare ability to live; yet his thoughts were above measure ambitious and
aspiring, and his confidence far greater than became his Birthright. Nature in
his outward parts had curiously expressed her workmanship, giving him in shape
and Beauty so perfect an excellence, that the most curious eye could not
discover any manifest error, unless it were in his Sex alone, since he had too
much for a man, and Perfection enough to have equaled the fairest Female
splendor that breathed within the Confines of this Kingdom. Though in the
abilities of the Brain he were short of a deep and solid Knowledge, yet he had
Understanding enough to manage his ways to their best advantage; having a
smooth Tongue, an humble Look, and a winning Behavior, which he could at all
times fashion and vary according to the condition of time and circumstance for
the most advantage. The youthful Prince having fixed his wandering eye upon this
pleasing Object, and finding his amorous Glances entertained with so gentle and
well-becoming a modesty, begins dearly to cherish the growing Affections of
this new Foreign Acquaintance; who applies himself wholly to win him to a
deeper Engagement. A short passage of time had so cemented their hearts, that
they seemed to beat with one and the self-same motion; so that the one seemed
without the other, like a Body without a Soul, or a Shadow without a Substance.
Gaveston, the more to assure so gracious a Master, strives to fit his humor,
leaving his Honor to his own protection, seconding his wanton disposition with
all those bewitching Vanities of licentious and unbridled Youth, which in short
time, by the frequencie of practice, begets such a confidence, that they fall
from that reserved secrecy which should shadow actions so unworthy, professing
freely a debaucht and dissolute kind of behavior, to the shame and sorrow of
the grieved King and Kingdom. This hastened on the Sentence of his Banishment,
that thought himself then most secure in the assurance of the Princes favor.
The melancholy apparitions of their parting, gave the world a firm belief that
this enchanting Mountebank had in the Cabinet of his Masters heart, too dear a
room and being. The King knowing such impressions are easily won, but hardly
lost, strives to take him off by degrees, and labors to make him wave the
memory of that dotage which with a divining Spirit he foresaw in time would be
his ruin. But death overtakes him before he could bring this so good a Work to
full perfection. The time was come that exacts the Tribute of Nature,
commanding him to resign both his Estate and Kingdom. When he felt those cold
fore-running Harbingers of his nearly-approaching End, he thus entreats his Son
and Lords, whose watery eyes ingirt his glorious Deathbed.

Edw. 1's Dying-Speech to the Prince and Barons.
Edward, the time draws near that calls^ me to my Grave, you to enjoy this
Kingdom. If you prove good, with happiness it is yours, and you will so preserve
it; if otherwise, my Pains and Glory will be your Dishonor. To be a King, it
is the gift of Nature; and Fortune makes him so that is by Conquest; but Royal
Goodness is the gift of Heaven, that blesses Crowns with an Immortal Glory.
Believe not vainly that so great a Calling is given to man to warrant his
disorder. It is a Blessing, yet a weighty Burden, which (if abused) breaks his
back that bears it. Your former Errors, now continued, are no more yours, they
are the Kings, which will betray the Kingdom. The Sovereigns Vice begets the
Subjects Error, who practice good or ill by his Example. Can you in Justice
punish them for that whereof your self are guilty? But you, perhaps, may think
your self exempt, that are above the Law. Alas, mistake not; there are
Injunctions higher far than are your own, will crave a Reckoning. To be
beloved, secures a sweet Obedience; but fear betrays the heart of true
Subjection, and makes your People yours but by Compulsion. Majestic thoughts,
like Elemental fire, should tend still upwards; when they sink lower than their
Sphere, they win Contempt and Hatred. Advance and cherish those of ancient
Blood and Greatness: Vpstarts are raised with Envy, kept with Danger. You must
preserve a well-respected distance, as far from Pride, as from too loose a
Baseness. Master your Passions with a noble temper; such Triumphs makes the
Victor conquer others. See here the Ruins of a dying Scepter, that once was,
as you are, a youthful Blossom. I had not lived to see this snowy Winter, but
that I weau'd my heart from vain Temptations; my Judgment, not my Eye, did
steer my Compass, which gave my Youth this Age that ends in Glory. I will not
say, you too too long have wandered, though my sad heart has droopt to see
your Error. The time now fitly calls you home; embrace it: for this advantage
lost, is after hopeless. Your First-fruit must make good your Worth; if that
miscarry, you wound your Subjects Hopes and your own Glory. Those wanton
Pleasures of wild Youth unmaster'd, may no more touch the verge of your
affections. The Royal Actions must be grave and steady, since lesser Lights are
fed by their Example: so great a Glory must be pure transparent, that hand to
hand encounters Time and Envy. Cast off your former Consorts; if they sway you,
such an unnoble President will shake your Peace, and wound your Honor. Your
wanton Minion I so lately banished, call you not back, I charge you on my
Blessing: for his return will hasten your destruction. Such Cankers may not
taste your ear or favor, but in a modest and chaste proportion. Let true-born
Greatness manage great Employments; they are most fit that have a native
goodness. Mushroms in State that are preferred by dotage, open the Gap to Hate
and Civil Tumult. You cannot justly blame the Great ones Murmur, if they
command that are scarce fit to serve them; such sudden leaps must break his
neck that ventures, and shake that Crown which gives his Wings their motion.
And you, my Lords, that witness this last Summons, you in whose Loyal hearts
your Sovereign flourisht, continue still a sweet and virtuous Concord; temper
the heat of my youthful Successor, that he may prove as good, as great in
Title. Maintain the Sentence was by me pronounced; keep still that Viper hence
that harbors mischief: if he return, I fear 'twill be your Ruin. It is my
last Request; I, dying, make it, which I do firmly hope you will not blemish. I
would say more, but, ah, my Spirits fail me. With this, he fainting, swoons; at
length recovers, and sadly silent, longs to hear their Answer. His weeping Son
and heavy drooping Barons, do mutually protest a strict Observance, and vow to
keep, with truth, this grave Injunction. His jealous Spirit is not yet
contented, They swear not to recall Gaveston.
until they bind it with an Oath, and swear performance. Scarce was it ended,
when he mildly leaves the world more confident than he had cause; as a short
passage of time made plain and evident. Dead men's Prescriptions seldom tie the
living, where Conscience awes not those that are entrusted. Mortui non mordent,
which gives to humane frailty a seeming uncontrouled power of such Injustice.
To trust to Vows or Oaths, is equal hazard; he that will wound his Soul with
one, can wave the other. If Virtue, Goodness, and Religion tie not, a Deathbed
Charge and solemn Oaths are fruitless. Here you may see it instanced: This
great King, as wise as fortunate, living, had the Obedience of a Father and a
Sovereign; who, scarcely cold in his Mother Earth, was soon lost in the memory
both of Son and Subject. His Funeral-tears (the fruits of form rather than
truth) newly dried up, and his Ceremonial Rites ended, his Heir assumes the
Crown and Scepter; while all men's eyes were fixed to behold the first
Virgin-works of his Greatness: so many glorious and brave victorious Conquests
having given this Warlike Nation life and spirit fit for present Action. The
youthful King being in the bravery of his years, won a belief in the active
Soldier, that so apt a Scholar as he had showed himself in the Art Military
during the Scottish Wars, would handsel the Maidenhead of his Crown with some
Out-ringing Larum that might waken the Neighbor-provinces, and make them know
his Power. But his inglorious Aims were bent another way; neither to settle his
own, or conquer others. He had within his breast an unnatural Civil War which
gains the first pre-eminence in his Resolution. His care is to quiet these in a
Course wholly unjust, and most unworthy his proper goodness. Seeing himself now
free and absolute, he thinks it not enough, unless his Will as well as his
Power, were equally obeyed. Being a Son and a Subject, his Conformity had
witnessed his Obedience; being now a Sovereign and a King, he expects a
Correspondence of the self-same nature. The young King troubled at his Oath.
The sad Restrictions of his dying Father, so contrarious to his aims, trouble
his unquiet thoughts; where the Idea of his absent love did hold so firm a
footing. With ease he can dispense with his own engagement; but fears the
Lords, whom he conceits too firmly fixed to waver. He dares not Communicate the
depth of his Resolution, being a secret of too great weight to be divulged; he
thinks entreaty an act too much beneath him; and to attempt at random, full of
hazard. In these his restless passions, he out-runs the Honey-month of his
Empire; looking asquint upon the necessary Actions of State, that required his
more vigilant care and foresight. This kind of reclus'd behavior makes him
unpleasant to his Lords, and nothing plausible to the inferior sort of
Subjects, who expect the beginning Acts of a Crown to be affable and gracious;
which wins ground by degrees on vulgar Affections, making the way sure to a
willing Obedience. But he esteems this as a work of Supererogation, believing
the bare Tie of Duty was enough, without confirmation: all his thoughts are
entirely fixed upon his Gaveston; without him he cannot be, yet how to get him
handsomely, without a Scar, is quite without his knowledge. He concludes it in
his secret Revolutions, too great an Injustice, that confines the King from the
free use and possession of his nearest and dearest Affection; and cannot
imagine it to be reason, that his private Appetite should subscribe to public
necessity. Falls into the height of melancholy.
In these kind of imaginary Disputations, he brings himself to the height of
such an inward agitation, that he falls into a sad retired Melancholy; while
all men (as they justly might) wondered, but few did know the reason: Amongst
these, a Page of his Chamber, one that had an oily tongue (a fit instrument for
such a Physician) adventures the care of this diseased Passion. This green
Statesman, with a foreright look, strives rather to please, than to advise;
caring not what succeeds, so he may make it the Stair of his Preferment. The
Character and danger of Court-Parasites.
The Court-corruption ingenders a world of these Caterpillars, that, to work
their own ends, value not at one blow to hazard both the King and Kingdom. The
Error is not so properly theirs, as their Masters, who do countenance and
advance such Sycophants; leaving the integrity of hearts more honest (that
would sacrifice themselves in his Service in the true way of Honor) wholly
contemned and neglected: which has begotten so many desperate Convulsions,
that have (as we may find in our own Stories) deposed diverse glorious Kings
from their proper Dignity, and lawful Inheritance. There are too many frequent
Examples what mischief such Parasitical Minions have wrought to those several
States they lived in; and certainly such Revolutions succeed by a necessary and
inevitable Justice: for where the Royal Ear is so guided, there ensues a
general Subversion of all Law and Goodness; as you may behold here evidently in
this unfortunate King, who willingly entertains this fawning Orator, that thus
presents his Counsel.

A Courtiers Speech to the King, to recall Gaveston.
Are you a King (Great Sir) and yet a Subject? can you Command, and yet must
yield Obedience? Then leave your Scepter. The Law of Nature gives the poorest
their Affections; are you restrained? It is your own Injustice that makes your
Will admit this separation: if you command, who dares control your Actions,
which ought to be obeyed, and not disputed? Say that your wayward Lords do
frown, or murmur, will you for this forbear your own Contentment? One rough
Majestic glaunce will charm their anger. Admit great Edward did command
Obedience, he then was King, your Sovereign, and your Father; he now is dead,
and you enjoy his Power; will you yet still obey and serve his shadow? His
Vigor dulled with Age, could not give Laws to suit your Youth and Spirit; nor
is it proper that the Regal Power be made a stranger to his own Contentment, or
be debarred from inward Peace and Quiet. Did you but truly know what it is to
be a Monarch, you would be so to your self as well as others. What do you fear, or
what is it restrains you? A seeming Danger, more in show than substance. Wise
men that find their aims confined to hazard, secure the worst before they give
them action. You have a Kingdoms Power to back, a Will to guide it; Can private
fear suggest to shake it? Alas, they cannot, if your self were constant: Who
dares oppose, if you command Obedience? I deny not, if you be faint or stagger,
you may be crossed and curbed by that advantage, that gives their moving-heart
show of Justice. You understand your self, and feel your Passions; if they be
such as will not brook denial, why do you dally, or delay to right them? The
more you paise your doubts, the more they double, and make things worse than
they or are, or can be: appearing like your self, these clouds will vanish, and
then you will see and know your proper error. Will you vouchsafe my trust, I Will
fetch him hither, whose absence gives you such a sad distraction: You may the
while secure his entertainment with such a strength, may warrant your
proceedings. 'Twere madness to ask leave to act Transgressions, where Pardon
may be had when they are acted. If you do seek consent from your great Barons,
they will dare deny; which is nor fault, nor Treason; and in that act you foil
your hopes and action, which gives their opposition show of Justice. But it is
in vain to plead the grounds of Reason, since it is your Will must give the
resolution: If that be fixed, there needs no more disputing, but such as best
may bring it to perfection. When this smooth Physician had prescribed so fit a
Balsamum for so foul a Wound, the King seems infinitely pleased in his
relation; he had hit his desires in the Master-vein, and struck his former
Jealousy between wind and water, so that it sunk in the instant: his lovesick
Heart became more free and frolic; which sudden mutation begat as great a
wonder. The Operations of the Fancy transport sometimes our Imagination to
believe an actual possession of those things we most desire and hope for; which
gives such a life to the dejected Spirits of the Body, that in the instant they
seem clothed in a new Habit. Such was the condition of this wanton King, that
in this bare overture, conceits the fruition of his beloved Damon, and
apprehends this Golden Dream to be an essential part of his fantastique
Happiness. He heaps a world of promises and thanks on the Relator, letting him
know, he waits but a fitting opportunity to give this project life and action.
It is a politic part of Court-wisdome, to insinuate and lay hold of all the
befitting opportunities, that may claw the Prince's humor that is naturally
vainglorious or vicious; there is not a more ready and certain way of
advancement, if it do shake hands with Modesty, and appear with an undaunted,
impudent boldness. He that will be a Courtier, and contains himself within the
modest temperance of pure Honesty, and not intrude himself before he be called,
may like a Seamark serve to teach other men to steer their Course, while he
himself sticks fast, unmoved, unpitied. All the Abilities of Nature, Art,
Education, are useless, if they be tied to the links of Honesty, which has
little or no society in the Rules of State or Pleasure, which as they are
unlimited, walk in the by-way from all that is good or virtuous.

If this Butterfly had truly laid before his unhappy Master, what it had been
to break the Injunctions of a dying Father, to falsify such Vows and Oaths so
solemnly sworn, and to irritate the greatest Peers of the Kingdom with so
unworthy an action, (which had been the Duty of a Servant of his Masters Honor
truly careful) he had felt the Reward of such plain dealing, either with
Scorn, Contempt, or Passion; whose flattering falsehood wins him special Grace
and Favor, and gains the title of an able Agent.

Some few days pass, which seemed over long, before the King exacts a second
trial. In the interim, to take away all jealousy, he enters into the business
of the Kingdom, and with a seeming serious care surveys each passage, and not
so much as sighs, or names his Gavaston; doubting if in his way he were
discovered, there might be some cross-work might blast his project: He knew how
easy 'twas (if once suspected) to take away the Cause might breed a
difference: What could so poor a stranger do that might protect him against or
public Force, or private Mischief, either of which he knew would be attempted,
before the Lords would suffer his reprisal? The King sends for Gaveston.
When all was whisht and quiet, and all men's eyes were fixed upon the present,
he calls his trusty Roger to his private presence, and after some Instructions
throws him his Purse, and bids him haste; he knew his Errand. The wily Servant
knows his Masters meaning, and leaves the Court, pretending just occasion,
proud of employment posting on his Journey. The King having thus far gone, must
now go onward; he knew that long it could not be concealed; such actions cannot
rest in sleepy silence; which made him think it fit to be the first Reporter.
This makes him send and call his Council, who soon are ready, and attend his
Summons; Acquaints his Council therewith; who labor to divert him.
where he makes known the fury of his Passions, and tells the way that he had
taken to ease them. So strange an act begets as great a wonder; they una voce
labor to divert him, and humbly plead his Fathers last Injunction, to which
their Faiths were tied by deep Engagement. They urge the Law that could not be
dispensed with, without a public breach of his prescription. They speak the
Vows and Oaths they all had taken, which in consenting would make them false
and perjured. This working nothing, they entreat him he would a while adjourn
his resolution; time might happily find out a way might give him content, and
yet might save their Honors. His jealous fear suspects this modest answer; a
temporizing must increase his sorrow, while they so warned might work a sure
prevention. Being thus at plunge, he strives to make it sure, and win his Will,
or loose his Jurisdiction. Though he were naturally of a suspicious and
timorous Nature, yet seeing now the interest of his Power at stake on the
success of this Overture, he lays aside his effeminate disposition, and with
angry Brow, and stern Majesty, does thus discourse his pleasure.

His angry Reply.
Am I your King? If so, why then obey me; lest while you teach me Law, I learn
you Duty. Know, I am firmly bent, and will not vary. If you and all the
Kingdom frown, I care not: You must enjoy your own affections, I not so much
as question or control them; but I that am your Sovereign, must be tutored to
love and like alone by your discretion. Do not mistake, I am not now in
Wardship, nor will be chalkt out ways to guide my fancy. Tend you the Kingdoms
and the public Errors; I can prevent mine own without Protection. I should be
loath to let you feel my Power; but must and will, if you too much enforce me.
If not Obedience, yet your Loves might tender a kind consent, when it is your
King that seeks it. But you perhaps conceit you share my Power; you neither do
nor shall, while I command it; I will be still my self, or less than nothing.
These words, and the manner of their delivery, bred a strange distraction, in
which he flings away with a kind of loose scorn; for their refusal his valiant
heart had yet his proper motions, which tossed it to and fro with doubtful
hazard. They sadly silent sit, and view each other, wishing some one would show
undaunted Valor, to tie the Bell about the Cats neck that frights them; but
none appears. They yet were strangers to their own party, and the Kings
conditions. Their late dead Master's ways were smooth and harmless, as free
from private Wrongs as public Grievance; which had extinguished all pretense of
Faction, and made them meet as Friends without assurance; this wrought them
with more ease to treat the business; each one does first survey his own
condition, which single could do little, and yet expressed might cause his proper
ruin: next they measure the Kings Will and Power, with his Command; against
which in vain were contestation, where wants united strength to make it sure.
Lastly, they examine what could at worst ensue in their consenting, since it
was as possible to remove him being here, as stop his coming. The King
advertised by a private Intelligencer (a fit instrument in the body of a State,
in the Society and Body of a Council) of their staggering irresolution, and
finding his Pills had so kind an Operation, lays hold of the advantage, and
would not let the iron cool before he wrought it. This brings him back with a
more familiar and mild look, and begets a discourse less passionate, but more
prevailing. Temperately he lays before them the extremity of his inward
trouble, which had so engrost his private thoughts, that he had been thereby
enforced to estrange himself from them, and neglected the Rights due to his
Crown and Dignity. He lets them know the depth of his engagement, which had no
aim repugnant to the Public Good, nor intention hurtful to their proper
Honors; and to conclude, he entreats them, (if any of them had been truly
touched with a disease of the same quality) that they would indifferently
measure his Condition by their own Sufferings. The Council consent to recall
Gaveston.
So fair a Sunshine following at the heels of so sharp a Tempest, wrought a
sudden innovation; their yielding hearts seek to win Grace, rather than hazard
his Displeasure: yet to color so apparent a breach of Faith to their dead
Master, they capitulate certain Conditions, which might seem to extenuate (if
not take off) the stain of their dishonor; as if matter of circumstance had
been a sufficient motive for the breach of an Oath so solemnly and
authentically sworn. The King resolved to purchase his peace, (whose price was
but verbal) is nothing sparing to promise all and more than was demanded; which
they credit over-hastily, though they could not be so light of belief as to
imagine, that he would keep his Word with the Subject, that wilfully incurs a
Perjury against his own Father; yet in case of necessity it was by general
consent agreed, rather to subscribe, than to endanger the Peace of the Kingdom,
by so unkind and unnatural a division. The King giving to each of them
particular thanks, (having thus played his Masters prize) departs wondrously
content and jocund: they seem outwardly not displeased, that had obtained as
much as they could desire; and hoped the end would be fair, if not fortunate.
The eye of the world may be blinded, and the severity of humane Constitutions
removed; but so great a Perjury seldom escapes unpunished by the Divine
Justice, who admits no dalliance with Oaths, even in the Case of Necessity, as
it evidently appears in the sequel of this Story; where you may behold the
miserable ruin that his principal and efficient cause had from this beginning.
It had been far more honorable and advantageous to the State, if this young
wanton King had point blank found a flat denial, and been brought to have
tugged at the arms end; the injustice of the quarrel, which might in time have
recollected his senses, and brought him to the true knowledge what a madness it
was, for the loose affection of so unworthy an Object, to hazard his own
Dignity, and alien the Love of the whole Kingdom. But it is the general Disease
of Greatness, and a kind of Royal Fever, when they fall upon an indulgent
Dotage, to patronize and advance the corrupt ends of their Minions, though the
whole Society of State and Body of the Kingdom run in a direct opposition;
neither is Reason, Law, Religion, or the imminency of succeeding danger, weight
enough to divert the stream of such inordinate Affections, until a miserable
Conclusion give it a fatal and just Repentance. It were much better, if with a
provident foresight they would fear and prevent the blow before they feel it.
But such melancholy Meditations are deemed a fit food for Penitentials, rather
than a necessary reflection for the full stomach of Regal Authority. The black
clouds of former Suspicion being thus vanished, nothing now wants to make
perfect the Royal Desires, but the fruition of this long-expected purchase. The
smooth Servant that had so pleasingly advised, was not less careful in the
execution of his promise. He knew haste would advance the opinion of his Merit;
this makes him soon outrun his Journey, and find the Star of his directions,
to whom he liberally relates the occasion of his coming, which he confirms by
the delivery of his Masters Letter, wherein was drawn to the life the character
of his Affection, and the assurance of his safety and intended promotion.
Gaveston being ravished with so sweet and welcome a relation, entertains it
with as much joy, as the condemned Prisoner receives his Pardon at the place
and hour of Execution. His long-dejected Spirits apprehend the advantage of so
hopeful an opportunity, and spur him on with that haste, that he hardly
consents to one nights intermission for the repose of this weary Messenger. No
sooner had the Mornings-Watchman given his shrill summons of the approaching
Daylight, but he forsakes his weary Bed, and hastens straight to Horseback;
and being not well assured of his reception in the Kingdom, being a banished
man by so Juridical a Sentence, he esteems it too weak an Adventure to expose
himself to the hazard of the Road-way, where he might with ease be intercepted.
This leads him to disguise himself, and seek a secret passage; which he as
readily finds; all things concurring to improve his happiness, if he had had
judgment and temper enough to have given it a right use. Every minute he
esteems ill lost, till he might again be re-enfoulded in the sweet and dear
embraces of his Royal Master.

Gaveston returns.
Time, that out-runs proud Fate, brings him at last to the end of his desires,
where the interview was accompanied with as many mutual expressions, as might
flow from the tongues, eyes, and hearts of long-divided Lovers. This pair thus
again reunited, the Court puts on a general face of Gladness, while wiser
heads with cause suspect the issue. They esteem it full of danger, to have one
man alone so fully possess the Kings Affections, who if he be not truly good,
and deep enough to advise soundly, must often be the cause of Error and
Disorder. This strange piece had neither Nobility of Birth, Ability of Brain,
or any Moral Goodness, whereby they might justly hope he would be a stay to the
unbridled youth of their Sovereign. A precedent experience during the
Government of their dead Master, had given them a perfect knowledge, that he was
more properly a fit instrument for a Brothel, than to be the Steersman of the
Royal actions: yet there was now no prevention; they must hope the best, and
attend the issue.

The King flights his Barons.
Edward having thus regained his beloved Favorite, could not shadow or
dissemble his Affection, but makes it eminent by the neglects of the
State Affairs, and the forgetfulness of the civil and ordinary Respect due to
his great Barons. They wait contemned, and cannot gain the threshold, while
this new Upstart's courted in the Royal Chamber. This kind of usage won a
sudden murmur, which calls them off to close and private Meetings; there they
discourse their Griefs, and means to right them; they sift each way might break
this fond enchantment, or lessen this great light obscured their luster. When
they had canvast all the Stratagems of State, and private workings, they deemed
it the most innocent and fair way, to win the King to marry; the interest of a
Wife was thought the most hopeful inducement to reclaim these loose affections
that were prostituted without or sense or honor; she might become a fit
counterpoise to qualify the Pride of such a swelling greatness.

They persuade him to marry.
The major part soon jump in this opinion; the rest are quickly won, that feared
the sequel. On this they all together present themselves and their request, and
show the reasons, but touch not the true ground why they desired it. After some
pawse the King approves their motion, yet bids them well consider it was the
greatest Action of his life, which as it principally concerned his particular
Contentment, so did equally reflect on the general Interest of the whole
Kingdom. If they could find him out such a Wedlock as might add Strength and
Honor to the Crown, and be withal suitable to his liking, he would readily
embrace it, and value it as a blessing. So fair a beginning encourages them to
move for Isabel the French Kings Daughter, one of the goodliest and fairest
Ladies of that time. The King readily inclines to have it treated; on which an
honorable Embassage is sent to make the motion. They are nobly received and
willingly heard that bare this Message, and the Conditions easily reconciled to
a full Agreement. This brings them home with a like noble Company, fully
authorized to receive the Kings consent and approbation.

The King marries;
This Conclusion thus made, sends our new Lover into France, to fetch his
Mistress; where he is received like himself, feasted, and married with a great
deal of Joy and Pleasure. The Solemnity ended, and a Farewell taken, he hastens
homewards, returning seized of a Jewel, which not being rightly valued, wrought
his ruin. Infinite was the joy of the Kingdom, evident in those many goodly
expressions of her Welcome. The excellency of so rare a Beauty could not so
surprise the heart of this Royal Bridegroom, but that he was still troubled
with the pangs of his old Infirmity: It was in the first Praeludium of his
Nuptials a very disputable Question, whether the Interest of the Wife, or
Favorite, were most predominant in his Affections; but a short time discovers
that Gaveston had the sole possession of his Heart, and Power to keep it. and
marries Gaveston to Margaret, Daughter of Gilb. de Clare, Earl of Gloucester,
by his Wife Joan of Acres, Daughter to Edw. I. Creates him Earl of Cornwall.
To level their conditions, and make the terms betwixt them more even, he ties
this fair bullock in a yoke of the same nature, marrying him to a lovely branch
of the house of Gloucester, whose noble heart struggled infinitely, yet durst
not contradict the Kings Injustice. He holds his blood disparaged by so base
commixtion. To take away that doubt, the new-married man is advanced to the
Earldom of Cornwall, and has in his Gift the goodly Castle and Lordship of
Wallingford; so that now in Title he had no just exception; and for conditions,
it must be thought enough his Master loved him. To show himself thankful, and
to seem worthy of such gracious favor, Gaveston applies himself wholly to the
Kings humor, feeding it with the variety of his proper appetite, without so
much as question or contradiction: Not a word fell from his Sovereign's tongue,
but he applauds it as an Oracle, and makes it as a Law to guide his actions.
This kind of juggling behavior had so glewed him to his Master, that their
Affections, nay their very Intentions seemed to go hand in hand; insomuch that
the Injustice of the one, never found rub in the consent of the other. If the
King maintained the party, the servant was ever fortunate, his voice was ever
concurrent, and sung the same Tune to a Crochet. The discourse being in the
commendation of Arms, the echo styles it an Heroic Virtue; if Peace, it was
an Heavenly Blessing; unlawful Pleasures, a noble Recreation; and Actions most
unjust, a Royal Goodness. These parasitical Gloses so betrayed the itching ear
that heard them, that no Honor or Preferment is conceited great and good
enough for the Relator. And makes him chief Minister of State.
A short time invests in his person or disposure all the principal Offices and
Dignities of the Kingdom; the Command of War, and all Military Provisions, were
committed solely to his care and custody; all Treaties foreign and domestic,
had, by his direction, success or ruin; nothing is concluded touching the
Government or Royal Prerogative, but by his consent and approbation. In the
view of these strange passages, the King appeared so little himself, that the
Subjects thought him a Royal Shadow without a Real Substance. This Pageant, too
weak a Jade for so weighty a burden, had not a brain in it self able enough to
manage such great Actions; neither would he entertain those of ability to guide
him, whose honest freedom might have made him go through-stitch with more
reputation. He esteems it a gross oversight, and too deep a disparagement, to
have any creature of his own thought wiser than himself; he had rather his
Greatness (than hazard such a blemish) should lie open to the malice of time
and fortune. This made him choose his Servants as his Master chose him, of a
smooth fawning temper, such as might cry aim, and approve his actions, but not
dispute them. Hence flew a world of wild disorder; the sacred Rules of Justice
were subverted, the Laws integrity abused, the Judge corrupted or enforced, and
all the Types of Honor due to Virtue, Valor, Goodness, were like the Pedlers
pack, made Ware for Chapmen. Neither was it conceived enough thus to advance
him beyond proportion, or his birth and merit, but he must carry all without
disputing. No one may stand in his way, but tastes his power. Old Quarrels are
ripped up, to make his spleen more extant.

Gaveston imprisons the Bishop of Chester.
The grave Bishop of Chester, a man reverend for years, and eminent for his
Profession and Dignity, is committed, and could be neither indifferently heard
or released, upon the mere supposition that he had been the cause of his first
Banishment. The Kingdom resent it.
These insolences, carried with so great a height, and expressed with so
malicious a liberty, were accompanied with all the remonstrances of a
justly-grieved Kingdom. The ancient Nobility, that disdained such an equal,
accuse the injustice of the time that makes him their Superior. The grave
Senators are grieved to see the places, due to their worths, possessed by those
unworthy and unable. The angry Soldier, that with his blood had purchased his
experience, beholds with sorrow, Buffoons preferred; while he, like the ruins
of some goodly Building, is left to the wide world, without use or reparation.
The Commons, in a more intemperate fashion, make known their griefs, and
exclaim against so many great and foul Oppressions. The new-made Earl both saw
and knew the general discontent and hatred, yet seeks not how to cure or stop
this mischief; his proud heart would not stoop or sink: his greatness, which
might perhaps have qualified the fury, with an ill-advised confidence out-dares
the worst of his approaching danger, and is not squeamish to let the Kingdom
know it. The slumbring Barons, startled with the murmur that ecchoed naught but
fear and quick confusion, at length awake, and change their drowsy temper,
condemning their long patience, that was so far unfit their Blood and
Greatness. Lincoln, Warwick, and Pembrooke, whose noble hearts disdained to
suffer basely, resolve to cure the State, or make the Quarrel fatal. This
Mushrome must be cropped, or Arms must right the Kingdom. Yet before they will
attempt by force, they will feel their Sovereign's pulses; who, drowned in
sensual pleasure, dreams not of their practice. This Resolution leads them to
the Court, where with some suit they gain admittance; where to the King brave
Lincoln thus discoursed their Grievance.

Lincoln's Speech to the King.
See here (my Liege) your faithful though dejected servants, that have too long
cried aim to our Afflictions; we know you in your self are good, though now
seduced; the height is such, we fear a coming Ruin. Let it not taint your ear
to hear our sorrow, which is not ours alone, but all the Kingdoms, that groan
and languish under this sad burden. One man alone occasions all this mischief;
it is one man's pride and vice that crusheth thousands: we hope you will not
boulster such a foul disorder, and for one poor worthless piece, betray a
Kingdom. The Heavens forbid so great and fond injustice. You are your own, yet
we believe you ours; if so, we may what you forget, remember. Kings that are
born so, should preserve their Greatness; which Goodness makes, not all their
other Titles. Your noble Father dying, bound our Honors; yet we subscribed a
breach at your entreaty: You promised then a fair and grave proceeding; but
what succeeds? the worst of base Oppression. So long as we had hope, our
tongues were silent; we sat and sighed out our peculiar Sufferings: But when
we see so fond and lewd progression, that seems to threaten You and all your
Subjects, you cannot blame us if we seek to right it. Would your unpartial eye
survey the present State of this late glorious Kingdom, you there shall see the
Face of Shame and Sorrow. No place is free; both Court and Country languish;
all men complain, but none find help or comfort. Will you for him, not worth
your meanest favor, consent the Ruin of so brave a Nation? Alas, Sir, if you
would, we may not bear it; our Arms that guard your Life, shall keep your
Honor. It Is not unjust, if you your self enforce it; the time admits no
respite: For God's sake, Sir, resolve us; since you must part with him, or us,
then choose you whether. The King amazed with this strange Petition, believes it
backed with some more secret practice: He knew their Griefs were just, yet loath
to right them; He hoped this Tempest would o'reblow, he might advise his
Answer: But when he saw them fixed to know his pleasure, he then believes it was
in vain to struggle. He knew their strength that had combined to seek it, and
saw he was too weak for contradiction. This made him yield he should be once
more banished. Though his wretchless improvidence had laid him open to this
advantage, yet he was still Master of his ancient King-craft, which made him
smoothly seem to pass it over, as if he well approved this Sequestration, which
he resolves to alter as he pleased, when he had made the party sure might back
his actions; till then, he slubbers over his private Passion. The Lords, whose
innocent aims had no end but Reformation, depart content, yet wait upon the
issue. Gaveston banished the second time, and sent into Ireland.
A second time this Monster is sent packing, and leaves the Kingdom free from
his Infection. Ireland is made the Cage must mewe this Haggard, whither he goes
as if to Execution. With a sad heart he leaves his great Protector, vowing
revenge if he may live to act it. This weak Statesman here gives a sure
testimony of the poverty of his Brain, that in the time of his Prosperity and
Height had not made sure one foreign Friend, to whom he might have had a
welcome access in time of his expulsion. But he had handled matters so, that he
was alike hateful here and abroad, insomuch that he believes this barbarous
Climate his surest refuge. But he being gone, all things seemed well
reconciled; the State was quiet, and men's hopes were suitable to their desires,
which seemed to promise a quick and speedy Reformation. But the vanity of this
belief vanished away like a shadow, and the intermission was little less
intemperate than the former agitation. This wily Serpent continues so his
foreign Correspondence, that the King was little bettered by his absence;
which made it evident, that Death alone would end his practiced mischief. Their
Bodies were divided, but their Affections meet with a higher Inflammation. The
intervacuum of their absence has many reciprocal passages, which
interchangeably fly betwixt them. The King receives not a Syllable, but
straight returns with golden interest. Infinitely are they both troubled with
their division, but far more with the affront of the presuming Barons, that had
extorted it by force, yet with entreaty. The King esteemed this kind of
proceeding too great an indignity to be pocketted; yet since it had the
pretense of his Safety and the general Good, there was not apparent Justice
enough to call it to an after-reckoning. But alas, that needed not; for his
effeminate weakness had left him naked of that Royal resolution, that dares
question the least disorderly moving of the greatest Subject. He was constant
in nothing but his Passions, which led him to study more the return of his
left handed Servant, than how to make it good, effected. He lays aside the
Majesty of a King, and thinks his Power too slender; his Sword sleeps like a
quiet harmless Beast, while his Tongue proves his better Champion. He sends for
those that had been the principal Agents in the last Sentence, and treats with
them severally; knowing that Hairs are plucked up one by one, that are not moved
by handfuls; encountering them thus single, hand to hand, what with his
hypocritical Entreaties and mildew'd Promises, he soon gets from their
relenting hearts a several Consent answerable to his desires. When by untying
the Bundle he had disunited the strength of their Confederacy, he then with
confidence makes it a general Proposition; Again recalled.
which takes so, that the repeal of Gaveston's banishment passed current without
exception.

The Kings intent and the approbation of the Lords is scarcely known, before
(like an Irish Hubbub, that needs nothing but noise to carry it) it arrived in
Ireland. Upon the wings of Passion, made proud by the hope of Revenge and a
second Greatness, he flies swiftly back to the Fountain of his first
Preferment. Once more the breach is foder'd, and this True-loves Knot enjoys
his first Possession. But there wanted yet that deep reach and provident
foresight that should have given it assurance. The King had neither enabled
himself to carry things in their former height by main strength, neither had he
wrought his disordered Affections to a conformity, or a more stayed temper. His
female Mercury lessens not his former Ambition, but returns the self-same man;
only improved with the desire of revenge, which was naked of the means to act
it: so that it was quickly perceived that the Kingdom must feel another fit of
her Convulsion. The mutual Corruptions of these two, went with an equal
improvidence; which gave the Lords their advantage, and them too late a cause
of repentance.

Immediately on his reception, the King falls into a more dangerous Relapse of
his former Dotage; which so fully engrossed him, that all Discourse and Company
seemed harsh and unpleasant, but such as came from the mellow tongue of his
Minion, who invents many new Enchantments to feed and more engage his frenzy.
All the dissolute Actions of licentious Youth are acted Cum Privilegio. This
bred such a Grief and Distemper in the sorrowing heart of the Subject, that a
general Cloud of Sadness seemed to shadow the whole Kingdom. Those former
strict Admonitions were not powerful enough to bridle this Distemper, not so
much as for a fair in-come; the one becomes at the first dash more fond, the
other more insolent: those whom before he only scorned, he now affronts with
public hatred, letting them know his spleen waits but advantage. He fills his
Sovereigns ears with new suspicion, and whets him on to act in blood and
mischief.

It is a Dispute variously believed, what Climate hatched this Vulture. I
cannot credit him to be an Italian, when I observe the map of his Actions so
far different from the disposition and practice of that politic Nation: They
use not to vent publicly their spleens, till they do act them. He that will
work in State, and thrive, must be reserved; a downright way that has not
strength to warrant it, is crushed and breaks with his own weight, without
discretion. Those that are in this trade held their Crafts-masters, do speak
those fairest whom they mean to ruin, and rather trust close work than public
practice. Wise men made great, disguise their aims with Vizards, which see and
are not seen, while they are plotting. Judge not by their smooth looks or
words, which has no kindred with the hearts of Machiavilian Statesmen. Who
trusts more to his will than wit, may act his Passion; but this man's malice is
within protection. Where mischief harbors close and undiscovered, it ruins
all her Rubs without suspicion; a Pill or Potion makes him sure, that by plain
force might have outlived an Army: such ends thus wrought, if once suspected, a
neat State-lye can parget o'r with Justice. But those ancient times were more
innocent, or this great Favorite more ignorant. He went on the plain way of
corrupted flesh and blood, seeking to enchant his Master, in which he was a
perfect Workman; and the contempt of his Competitors, in which he was as
wilful as fearless: but in the managing of his proper greatness, there he
appears like himself, a mere Imposture, going on with a full carreer, not so
much as viewing the ground he went on.

Abuses the King and Kingdom.
The Royal Treasure he exhausts in Pride and Riot; the Jewels of the Crown are
in the Lumbard; that same goodly Golden Table and Tressles of so great and rich
a value, he surreptitiously embezzles; and nothing almost left, that might
either make Money, or improve his Glory. No man may now have the Kings ear,
hand, or Purse, but he is the Mediator; his Creatures are advanced, his Agents
flourish, and poorest Grooms become great Men of Worship. The King has nothing
but the name, while his Vicegerent has the benefit and execution. All that
appertains unto the Crown and Royal Dignity are wholly in his Power, so that he
might justly be thought the Lessee, if not the Inheritor of the Prerogative and
Revenue. The sense of Grief and Duty that had long contested in the Lion-hearts
of the Nobility, are now reconciled. These strange presumptions had banished
all possibility of a longer sufferance; They vow to make this Monster shrink,
and let his Master know it. On this, well and strongly attended, they wait upon
the King, and not with mild or fair Entreaties, they boldly now make known
their Wrongs, and call for present Justice. Edward with a steady eye beholds
their looks, where he sees registered the Characters of a just Indignation, and
the threatening furrows of ensuing danger. He stands not to dispute the quarrel,
lest they should tear the object of their anger from his elbow: without all
show of inward motion, he tells themselves had power to act what was most
fitting, to whom he had assigned the care should keep his Person, and assure
the Kingdom. Gaveston banished the third time; goes into Flanders.
They beyond their expectation finding the wind in that door, give not his
inconstant thoughts time to vary, but command their Antagonist off to a third
Banishment. He deprived of heart and strength, is enforced to obey, having not
so much liberty, as to take a solemn Farewell. Now is he sent for Flanders; the
Jurisdiction of the Kings Dominions are esteemed no fit Sanctuary to protect so
loose a Liver. They leave him to prey and practice on the Dutch, whose Caps
steeled with Liquour, had reeling Craft enough to make him quiet.

This passage bred a supposition that he was now for ever lost: the King made
show as he were well contented; and men were glad to see this storm appeased,
that seemed to threaten an intestine ruin. This Happiness was but imaginary,
but it is made perfect by one more real; Edward of Windsor, afterward Edw. the
3. Born, 13 Oct. 1312.
Windsor presents the King an Heir apparent; which happy News flies swiftly
through the Kingdom, which gives it welcome with a brave expression. The Royal
Father did not taste this Blessing with such a sense of Joy as it deserved:
Whether 'twas his misgiving Spirit, or the absence of his lost Jewel, he sadly
silent sighs out the relation; such a deserving Joy could not win so much as a
smile from his melancholy Brow, grown old with trouble. The appearance of his
inward agitation was such, that the greatest enemies of his Dotage were the
most compassionate of his Sufferings. Such a masculine Affection and rapture
was in those times without president, where Love went in the natural strain,
fully as firm, yet far less violent. If the circumstances of this passionate
Humor, so predominant in this unfortunate King, be maturely considered, we
shall find them as far short of possibility as reason; which have made many
believe, that they had a supernatural operation and working, enforced by Art or
Witchcraft. But let their beginning be what it will, never was man more
immoderately transported, which took from him in this little time of his third
absence, the benefit of his Understanding and Spirits so fully, that he seems
rather distracted than enamored, more properly without Reason, than ability to
command it. In the circumference of his Brain he cannot find a way to lead him
out of this Labyrinth, but that which depended more of Power than Wisdom.
Bridle his Affections he could not, which were but bare embryons without
possession; alter them he cannot, where his eye meets not with a subject
powerful enough to engage him: what then rests to settle this civil discord,
but restitution? which he attempts in spite of opposition. Gaveston again
returns.
Gaveston comes back; the King avows, and bids them stir that durst, He would
protect him. Princes that falsify their Faiths, more by proper inclination
than a necessary impulsion, grow not more hateful to foreign Nations, than
fearful and suspected to their own Subjects. If they be tainted with a known
Guilt, and justify it, it is a shrewd presumption of a sick State, where the
Head is so diseased. A habit of doing ill, and a daring Impudence to maintain
it, makes all things in a Politic Wisdom lawful. This Position in the end
cosens the professor, and leaves him in the field open to shame and infamy: And
it stands with reason; for if Virtue be the Road-way to Perfection, the
corruption of a false Heart must certainly be the path to an unpitied ruin.

The Barons take up Arms.
The enraged Barons seeing great Cornwall return, are sensible of their
dishonor, and think it too great a wrong to be dispensed with; yet they will
have the fruit of their revenge through-ripe, before they taste it. He appears
no Changeling, but still pursues the strains of his presumption. The actions of
Injustice seldom lessen. Progression is believed a moral Virtue. He that has a
Will to do ill, and does it, cannot look back but on the Crown of mischief.
This makes him not disguise his conceptions, but show them fully; having withal
this excellent Virtue, that would be never reconciled where he once hated. The
Lords observing his behavior, think time ill lost in so weighty a business;
they draw their forces together, before the King could have a time to prevent,
or his abuser to shun it.

The gathering together of so many threatening Clouds presaged the Storm was a
coming: Gaveston labors to provide a shelter, but 'twas too late; the time was
lost that should assure the danger: All that he could effect by his own
strength, or the Royal Authority, he calls to his assistance, (but such was the
general distaste of the Kingdom, he could not gain a strength might seem a
party.) The Court he knew would be a weak Protection against their Arms, whose
Tongues had twice expelled him. Seize Gaveston at Scarborough-Castle;
This made him leave it, and with such Provision as so short a time could
tender, commit himself to Scarborough-Castle. This Piece was strong, and pretty
well provided, but proved too weak against so just a Quarrel. His noble Enemies
being informed where they should find him, follow the track, and soon begirt
this Fortress. He seeks a Treaty; they despise Conditions, knowing he none
would keep, that all had broken. All hope thus lost, he falls into their power
from whom he had no cause could hope for mercy. The Butterflies, companions of
his Sunshine, that were his fortunes friends, not his, forsake his Winter, and
basely leave him in his greatest troubles. The tide of Greatness gained him
many Servants; they were but hangers on, and mere Retainers, like Rats that
left the house when it was falling. The Spring adorned him with a world of
Blossoms, which dropped away when first they felt this Tempest. Forsaken thus,
this Cedar is surpised, and brought to know the end of such ambition. The Prey
thus taken, short work concludes his story, left that a Countermand might come
to stop their Verdict: and behead him.
Gaverseed is made the fatal place that sacrificed his life to quench their
fury.

Thus fell the first glorious Minion of Edward the Second; which appearing for
a time like a Blazing-star, filled the world with admiration, and gave the
English cause to blame his fortune, that lived and died, nor loved, excused, or
pitied. In the wanton Smiles of his lovely Mistress, he remembers not that she
was blind, a ^iglet, and a Changeling; nor did he make himself in time a
Refuge might be his Safeguard. If she had proved unconstant, constant, such a
Providence had made the End as fair as the Beginning. But these same towering
Summer-birds fear not the Winter, till they feel it; and then benumbed, they do
confess their Error. Height of Promotion breeds Self-love; Self-love, Opinion;
which undervalues all that are beneath it. Hence it proceeds, that few men,
truly honest, can hold firm Correspondence with so great a Minion; his ends go
not their ways, but with Cross-capers, which cares not how, so these attain
perfection. Servants that are confined to truth and goodness, may be in show,
but not in trust, their Agents. He that will act what Pride and Lust imposes,
is a fit Page to serve so loose a Master. Hence it proceeds, that still they
fall unpitied; and those they choose for Friends, do most supplant them. To
secure an ill-acquired Greatness that is begot with envy, grows in hatred; as
it requires judgment, claims a goodness to keep it right, and grave direction.
Those that are truly wise, discreet, and virtuous, will make him so that
pursues their counsel; upon which Rock he rests secure untainted. But this is
Country-Doctrine Courts resent not, where it is no way to thrive, for them are
honest. A Champion-Conscience without bound or limit, a Tongue as smooth as Jet
that sings in season, a bloudless Face that buries guilt in boldness; these
Ornaments are fit to cloth a Courtier: he that wants these, still wants a
means to live, if he must make his Service his Revenue. He that a Child in
Court grows old, a Servant expecting years or merit should prefer him, and does
not by some by-way make his fortune, gains but a Beard for all his pains and
travel; unless he will take a Purse, and for reward, a Pardon. Though many rise,
it is not yet concluded they all are of so base corruption which would produce
a sudden Ruin. The greater Peers by birth inherit fit place in this Election.
The Kings favor, or their intercession, may advance a deserving Friend or
Kinsman; extraordinary Gifts of Nature, or some Excellency in knowledge may
prefer him that enjoys them; all these beams may shine on men that are honest.
But if you cast your eye upon the gross body of the Court, and examine the
ordinary course of their gradation, it will plainly appear, that twenty creep
in by the back-gate, while one walks up by the street-door. But leaving those
to their fortune, and that cunning conveyance must guide their Destiny; when
the sad tidings of this unhappy Tragedy came to the Kings ears, his vexations
were as infinite as hopeless, and his Passion transports him beyond the height
of sorrow, which leads him to this bitter Exclamation.

The King's Exclamation on the news; vowing revenge.
Could they not spare his Life, O cruel Tigers? What had he done, or how so much
offended? He never shed one drop of harmless blood, but saved thousands. Must
he be sacrificed to calm their anger? 'Twas not his fault, but my affection
caused it; which I Will revenge, and not dispute my sorrow. They, if I live,
shall taste my just displeasure, and dearly pay for this their cruel error.
Till now I kept my hand from blood and fatal actions; but henceforth I will act
my Passions freely, and make them know I am too much provoked. Blood must have
blood, and I will spend it fully, till they have paid his wandering Ghost their
forfeit. And thou, O sweet Friend, whom living I so loved, from thy sad Vrn
shall see thy wrong requited. Thy Life as I mine own did dearly value, which I
will loose, but I Will repay their rigor. This said, he withdraws him to his
melancholy Chamber, and makes himself a Recluse from the Daylight. His manly
tears bewray his inward sorrow, and make him seem to melt with height of
Passion; He could not sleep, nor scarce would eat, or speak but faintly; which
makes him living dye with restless torment. His lovely Queen (not sorry that
this bar was taken away, which stopped the passage betwixt her Husbands Love and
her Affections) is truly pensive at this strange distraction, which seemed
without the hope of reconcilement. His nearer Friends amazed to see his
Passion, resolve to set him free, or loose his favor; boldly they press into
his Cell of darkness, and freely let him know his proper error. They lay
before him, how vain a thing it was to mourn or sorrow for things past help, or
hope of all redemption: His greatness would be lost in such fond actions, and
might endanger him and eke the Kingdom: If he but truly knew what desperate
murmurs were daily whispered by his vain distemper, he would himself appear to
stay the danger, and to excuse the Barons act, so hateful: they touch upon the
Earls intemperate carriage, which threatened them and all the Kingdoms ruin:
they show his insolence and misbehaviour, which having Honor so far above his
birth, and Wealth above his merit, was never contented. Lastly, they tell him
plainly, unless he would resume more life and spirit, they feared the Subject
would make choice of one more able.

The unworthy touches of his Minion, though but sparingly given, nipt him to
the Soul; but when he heard the Tenor of their last Conclusion, it roused him
up, for fear of Deposition. This brings him forth in show and look transformed,
but yet resolved not to forget this Trespass. The Operations in his heart were
not so great and weighty, but that his Lords were full as close and wary. So
fair a warning-piece gave them their Summons, in time to make a strength might
keep them sure. They cannot now recoyl, or hope for favor; their Arms must
make their Peace, or they must perish. These circumstances made them preserve
so well a respected distance, that well the King might bark, but durst not bite
them: He was resolved, it is true, but not provided, and therefore holds it
wisdom to be silent; the time he hoped would change, and they grow careless;
when they should know such wrongs are not forgotten. Henry Laey, Earl of
Lincoln, dies, 1310.
But now brave Lincoln, one of the principal Pillars of the Barons Faction,
follows his adversary to the grave, but with a mild and fairer fortune. This
reverend piece of true Nobility was in Speech and Conversation sweet and
affable, in resolution grave and weighty; his aged temper active and valiant
above belief, and his Wisdom more sound and excellent in inward depth than
outward appearance. When those pale Harbingers had seized his vital Spirits,
and he perceived the thought of Life was hopeless, he gives Thomas of
Lancaster, his Son-in-Law, this dying Legacy.

His dying-Speech to Tho. Earl of Lancaster, his Son-in-Law.
My Son, (quoth he) for so your Wedlock makes you, hear and observe these my
last dying Precepts. Trust not the King; his Anger sleeps, but dies not; he
waits but time, which you must likewise tender, else in the least neglect be
sure you perish. Make good my place among the Lords, and keep the Kingdom from
foul Oppression, which of late is frequent. Your Sovereign cares not how the
State be guided, so he may still enjoy his wanton Pleasures; have you an eye to
those that seek to wrong him: be not deceived with his sugared language; his
heart is false, and harbors Blood and Mischief. Keep your selves firm and
close; being well united you are secure, he will not dare to touch you. If he
again fall on a second Dotage, look to it in time, 'twill else be your
confusion. His Minions Death lies in his heart concealed, waiting but time to
act revenge and terror: he shadows over, but cannot hide his Malice, which
fain would vent it self, but yet it dares not. If I had lived, he must have
changed his copy, or one of us had felt a bitter trial; yet still beware you
take not light occasion, or make the public ends for private Passion. He is
your Sovereign, you must so obey him, unless the Cause be just enforced your
moving. If he himself do swerve or raise combustion, the Kingdoms good must
give your Arms their warrant: short time will let you know your own condition;
however, do not trust the sleepy Lion. I knew his ways, and could as well
forestal them; but now I must resign it to your wisdom. Of this be sure
(remember my Prediction) if he relapse, and make a new Vicegerent, which shall
leap over your heads, and you endure it, The King, You, or the Kingdom must
perish. My wearied Soul would fain embrace his freedom, and now my Spirits
yield to Death and Nature. Commend me to my noble Friends and Fellows, and say,
Old Lincoln lived and died their Servant. Lancaster, whose noble heart was
beforehand seasoned, receives willingly these grave Instructions, and like a
good Steward, locks them up in the closet of his heart, till time called upon
him to give them life and action; and yet he suffers not this goodly Tree to
fall, before assured: He vows observance, and as truly keeps it; but erring in
the time, it wrought his Downfall. Beginning Evils are easily suppressed, which
grown to strength, if cleans'd, are cured with danger: Twigs may be broken,
younger Plants removed; but if once they grow Trees, their Fall is fatal.
Things standing thus, and all men's minds in suspense what would be the issue
between the enraged King and jealous Lords, the indifferent friends of either
Party that feared this unkind Division would shake the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Kingdom, propounded diverse Overtures of reconcilement; which are neither
readily accepted, nor absolutely refused. The Kings Meditations were more fixed
on Revenge than Conference; yet seeing into the Quality of the time, and into
the suspected Affections of the Kingdom, is won at length to admit of a Treaty.

The Barons truly rellishing the Tickle-terms they stood on, which were pinned
to the mutability of popular Faction, were not estranged from the thoughts of
Peace, though they would not seek it. Intercession and importunacy of the
Mediators, brings it at length to the upshot; where there was such an
inveterate spleen, and so great an antipathy in Wills, it is not thought fit to
hazard this great Work on a private discussion, where Recapitulations of old
Wrongs, or the apprehension of new Indignities, might shake the Foundation. The
High Court of Parliament, the gravest Senate of the Kingdom, that had an
overruling Power to limit the King, and command the Subject, is deemed the
most Honorable place of this Enterview, where a business of so great weight
would be gravely discoursed; which might assure the end, and make it more
authentical. A Parliament called.
Whereupon it is immediately called, and in short space assembled at London;
where, after many interchangeable Expostulations diversely handled by the
pregnant Wits and nimble Tongues of either Party, a settled Agreement is
concluded, and many excellent Laws are enacted, which both the King and Peers
are sworn to maintain and keep inviolate. By these discreet means the violence
of this great Fire is raked up in the Embers, which in aftertimes breaks out
with greater rage and fury: whatsoever the hidden Resolutions were, the Kingdom
now seemed in a fair way to settle Peace and Quiet. But a new and unexpected
Accident varies this Conceit before it was cold, and calls them from private
Actions, to maintain the Honor and Revenue of the Kingdom.

Edward the First, that brave and valiant Monarch, had thrice with his
victorious Arms run through the Bowels of Scotland, and brought that stubborn
Nation (that denied him Fealty and Homage) into an absolute Subjection. The
Scots adhere to Bruce, 1313.
Their last precedent King, Robert le Bruce, had tried the height of his
fortune, and with a fruitless opposition won no more than the loss of his
Kingdom, and his own Expulsion. The Conqueror finding himself quitted of this
Obstacle, takes upon him the Regiment of this Kingdom, with a double string to
his Bow; the one of ancient Title, the other of Conquest. The Nobility of
Scotland, and all the inferior Ministers of State, seeing the great Effusion
of Blood spent in this Quarrel, which continued, seemed to threaten a general
devastation of their Country, submit themselves to the English Government, and
are all solemnly sworn to obey it. Edward thus in possession, confirms it, by
seizing the property of all the Royal Jurisdiction into his own hand, removing
such Officers as were not agreeable to his will and liking, and giving many
goodly Estates and Dignities to diverse of his faithful Servants that had
valiantly behaved themselves in this Service. The Form of Government by him
established, was peaceably obeyed, and continued during his Life; neither was
it questioned in the beginning Government of his unhappy Successor. But the
wary Scots, more naturally addicted to a Phoenix of their own Nation, seeing
into the present dissentions and disorders of the Kingdom, thought it now a fit
time to revolt to their old Master, who like a crafty Fox harbors himself
under the French Kings protection (the ancient receptacle and Patron for that
Nation.) No sooner is he advertised that the gate was open and unguarded, and
that his well-affected Subjects wished his return, but back he comes, and is
received with a full applause and welcome. All Oaths, Obligements, and
Courtesies of the English, are quite cancelled and forgotten; and this
long-lost Lion is again re-invested in the Royal Dignity. As-soon as he had
moored himself in a domestique assurance, he then like a provident Watchman
begins to raise a strength that might oppose all foreign Invasion, which he
foresaw would thunder from the Borders. This Martial Preparation flies swiftly
to the King and Council of England, where it appears like a great Body upon a
pair of Stilts, more in bulk than the proportion of the strength that bare it.
The Pillars of the State, which wisely foresaw how great an inconvenience it
would be to suffer such a Member to be dissever'd, that in the contestation
with France would make the War a Mattachine, or Song of three parts, persuade
their Sovereign it was not proper for his Greatness to suffer such an unworthy
subversion of his Fathers Constitutions, and to loose the advantage of so fair
a part of his Revenue.

Edward, that had outslept his native glory, had yet a just compunction of this
dishonor, which seemed to rob him of a portion of his Inheritance, purchased
at too dear a value. He lays by his private rancour, and settles himself to
suppress this sudden and unlookt-for Commotion, waking from that sensual Dream,
which had given him so large a cause of Sorrow. Scarcely would he give his
intentions such an intermission, as might attend the levy of his Army, which he
had summoned to be ready with all speed and expedition. The jealous Lords
startled with this Alarm, conceiting it but some trick of State to catch them
napping, they suspect these Forces, under pretense of public action, might be
prepared to plot a private mischief. The King they knew was crafty, close, and
cunning; and thought not fit to trust too far to Rumor. This makes them stand
upon their guard, and keep Assemblies, pleading for warrant the self-same
ground of rising. But when their Spies in Court had given them knowledge that
all was sure, they need not fear their danger, and that they daily heard the
Northern clamor that ecchoed loudly with the Scottish motions, they draw their
Forces to the King's; The King goes in person against the Scots, 1314.
who thus united, in person leads them to this hopeful Conquest. But
forehand-reckonings ever most miscarry; he had those hands, but not those
hearts which fought his Fathers fortune.

Scarce had he past and left the English Borders, but he beholds an Army ready
to affront him, not of dejected Souls, or Bodies fainting, but Men resolved to
win, or dye with Honor. Their valiant Leader heartens on their Courage, and
bids them fight for Life, Estate, and Freedom, all which were here at stake;
which this day gains, or makes hereafter hopeless. Edward, that expected rather
submission, or some honest Terms of agreement, finding a Check given by a Pawn,
unlooked for, plays the best of his game, and hopes to win it. He contemns
their condition and number, slighting their Power; and in the memory of his
Father's Conquests, thinks his own certain. But the success of Battles runs not
in a Blood, neither is gained by Confidence, but Discretion and Valor. No one
thing hurts more in a matter of Arms, than Presumption: a Coward that expects
no mercy, is desperate by compulsion; and the most contemptible Enemy proves
most dangerous, when he is too much undervalu'd. The King defeated at
Banocksbourn near Striveling.
You may see it here instanced, where a rabble multitude of despised Blue-caps,
encounter, rout, and break the Flower of England: Eastriveline does yet witness
the fatal memory of this so great Disaster. There fell brave Clare the Earl of
Gloucester, the valiant Clifford, and stout Mawle, with above Fifty Knights and
Barons. This bloody day, which had spilt so great a shower of Noble blood, and
cropped the bravest Blossoms of the Kingdom, sends the King back to Barwick with
a few straggling Horse, whose well-breathed speed outrun the pursuing danger.
So near a Neighborhood to so victorious an Enemy, is deemed indiscretion,
where the Prize was believed so richly worth the Venture. This sends away the
melancholy King jaded in his hopes, and dull with his misfortune. If we may
judge by the Event, the Condition of this man was truly miserable; all things
at home, under his Government, were out of rule and order; and nothing
successful that he undertook by foreign Employment: but where the Ground is
false, the Building cannot stand; He planted the foundation of his Monarchy on
Sycophants and Favorites, whose disorderly Proceedings dried up all that sap
that should have fostered up the springing Goodness of the Kingdom, and made
him a mere stranger to those Abilities that are proper to Rule and Government.
Kings ought to be their own Surveyors, and not to pass over the whole care of
their Affairs, by Letter of Attorney, to another man's Protection: such
inconsiderate actions beget a world of mischief, when there are more Kings than
one, in one and the self-same Kingdom; it eclipseth his Glory, and derogates
from his Greatness; making the Subject groan under the unjust Tyranny of an
insolent oppression. No man with such propriety can manage the griefs and
differences of the Subject, as the King, who by the Laws of God, Men, and
Nature, has an interest in their Heart, and a share in their Affections. When
they are guided by a second hand, or heard by a Relator, Money or Favor
corrupts the Integrity, and overrules the course of Justice, followed at the
heels with Complaint and Murmur, the Mother of Discontent and Mischief.

The unexpected return of the General of this ill-succeeding Enterprise, filled
the Kingdom with a well-deserved Sorrow, and is welcomed with a News as
strange, though not so full of danger. Poydras of Exeter pretends himself King,
and the King a Changling.
Poydras, a famous Impostor, a Tanners Son, and born at Exeter, pretends
himself, with a new strain of Lip-cousenage, to be the Heir of Edward the
First, by a false Nurse changed in his Cradle for the King now reigning. All
Novelties take in the itching ears of the Vulgar, and win either belief or
admiration. This Tale, as weak in truth as probability, was fortunate in
neither, only it exalts this imaginary King to his Instalment on
Northampton-Gallows, where he ends the hour of his melancholy Government with
as strange a Relation, His strange Confession.
which suggests, That for two years space, a Spirit, in the likeness of a Cat,
had attended him as the chief Groom of his Chamber, from whom in many secret
Conferences he had received the truth and information of this Mystery, with
assurance it would bring him to the Crown of England. It was as great a fault
in the Master to believe, as for the Servant to abuse; yet the desire of the
one to change his Tanfat for a Kingdom, was not much out of square; nor the
Lying of the other, since he continued but his trade which he had practiced
from the beginning. It is a foul offense and oversight in them that have not
Devils of their own, to hunt abroad and seek where they may gain them by
purchase. If it be a mystery of State to know things by Prediction of such
virtuous Ministers, methinks they were much better kept, as this Tanner kept
his, rather as an houshold-Servant, than a Retainer; which may in time bring
them to a like Preferment: Such Agents may seem Lambs, but in the end they will
be found as savage as Tigers, and as false as the Camelions. Till now our
wanton King had never felt the true touch of a just grief; but men's misfortunes
alter their impressions; he inwardly and heartily laments his own dishonor,
yet strives to hide and conceal his Sorrow, lest those about him might be quite
dejected. It was a bitter Corrosive to think, how often his Royal Father had
displaid his victorious Colors, which knew not how to fight unless to conquer:
How often had he overrun this Neighbour-Nation, and made them take such Laws
as he imposed? How many times had he overthrown their greatest Armies, and made
them sue they might become his Subjects? The memory of this does vex his
Spirits, and makes him vow Revenge and utter Ruin. He calls to Council all his
Lords and Leaders, and lays before them ancient Glory of the Kingdom, the late
Misfortune, and his proper Errors, and lastly his desire to right his Honor.
They glad to hear the King in the sense of so general a disgrace touched with
so noble a strain, do spur it on before it cooled, or the Scots should grow too
proud of their new Glory. The former Loss had touched so near the quick, that
there is now a more wary Resolution: Dispatches are sent out for a more exact
and full provision; a mature Consideration is thought necessary before it come
to action: York is made the Cabinet for this grave Council, The King goes a
second time against the Scots.
there the King soon appears, attended by all the bravest and ablest Spirits of
the Kingdom. The act of the first conference tends to the security of Berwick,
the street-door of the North, and principal Key of the borders. Sir Peter
Spalden made Governor of Barwick.
This care with a full provision is committed to the Fidelity and Valor of Sir
Peter Spalden; who undertakes the charge, being plentifully furnished, and
promises defense against the united Power of Scotland. This unfortunate King
was as unhappy in Council as in Action. A short time shows this unworthy Knight
to the world false and perfidious. Robert le Bruce, that had this Strength as a
mote in his eye, conceived it by force almost impregnable; Who betrays it to
the Scots, 1318.
this made him seek to undermine it by corruption, and aloof off to taste the
palate of this new Governor. The Hook was no sooner baited, but the Trout
falls a nibbling; ready Money, and a specious promise of an expectant
Preferment, makes this Conspiracy perfect, which at one blow sells the Town,
with all its warlike Provisions, and the treacherous Keeper's Reputation and
Honor. The Pope sends over two Cardinals, to mediate a Peace.
The Pope, who with a pious and a truly compassionate eye beheld the misery of
this Dissension, and the unnatural effusion of so much Christian Blood, seeks
to reform it; and to this effect, sends over two of his Cardinals to mediate a
Peace, and to compose, if it might be, the differences in question. They being
arrived in England, come down into the North to the King, by whom they are with
great Ceremony, according to the fashion of those Religious Times, received and
welcomed. They discourse to him the occasion of their Employment, and incline
him with many excellent and virtuous motives to embrace a Peace with Scotland.
The greenness of the Disgrace, and the late Wound yet bleeding new, kept him in
a long demurrer. Yet the holy and mild prosecution of these holy Fathers won
him at length to their Mediation, with a proviso that he were not too far
prejudiced in Interest and Honor. With this Answer they take their leave, and
prosecute their Journey for Scotland; Who are robbed at Derlington.
but with an example full of barbarous Inhumanity, they are in the way surpised
and robbed. Infinitely is the King incensed with this audacious act, which
threw so foul a stain upon the whole Nation; which causes a strict inquisition
for the discovery of these Malefactors, which are soon known and taken. Sir
Gilbert de Middleton and Sir Walter de Selby executed for the same.
Middleton and Selby, both Knights, expiate the offense with their shameful
Execution. The persons of Ambassadors amongst the most savage Nations are free
from rapine; but being clothed in the habit of Religion and such a Greatness,
and going in a work so good and glorious, certainly it was an act deserved so
severe a punishment. Immediately at the heels of this, follows another Example
less infamous, but far more full of danger. Sir Josline Denvile with certain
Ruffians infest the North.
Sir Josline Denvile, having wasted his estate, and not able to lessen the
height of his former expenses, gets into his society a Regiment of Ruffians,
terming themselves Outlaws: with these he infests the North with many
outrageous Riots; insomuch that no man that had any thing to loose, could be
secure in his own house from Murder, Theft and Rapine. A little time had
brought this little Army, rolling like a Snow-ball, to the number of 200; all
the diseased flux of the corrupted humors of those parts fly to this
Imposthume. An Attempt so impudent and daring flies swiftly to the Kings
knowledge. Report, that seldom lessens, makes the danger far greater than it
deserved: The Royal ear conceits it little better than a flat Rebellion, whose
apprehension felt it self guilty of matter enough to work on. This made an
instant levy, and as ready a dispatch for the suppression of the flame, while
it but burnt the suburbs. Experience soon returns, the Fear is found greater
than the Cause; the principal Heads and Props of this Commotion are surprised,
and fall under the severity of that Law, whose protection they in this
enterprise had absolutely disclaimed. Those that more narrowly examined the
depth of this Convention, believed it but a masque for a design more
perilous. The intemperate and indiscreet Government had alien'd the hearts of
this People; there was a general face of Discontent over the whole Kingdom;
the Ulcers fester'd daily more and more; the Scottish disaster is ascribed to
the Regal weakness, and all things seemed to tend to quick confusion. If this
unadvised and ill-grounded disorder had tasted the general inclination in a
more innocent and justifiable way, it was constantly believed the King had
sooner felt the public Revolt of the whole Kingdom: But this work was reserved
till a farther time, and the operation of those that had the opportunity of
effecting it with more power, and a fairer pretense of Justice. It is a very
dangerous thing when the Head is ill, and all the Members suffer by his
infirmity. Kings are but men, and Man is prone to Error; yet if they manage
their distempers with Wisdom or Discretion, so that they lie not open to
public view and censure, they may be counted faults, but not predictions: but
when the heart is gangrened, and the world perceives it, it is the fatal mark
of that infection, which does betoken ruin and destruction. The Cardinals
return.
The Cardinals are now come back, the hopes of Peace are desperate; the Scots
are on the Sunnyside of the hedge, and will have no Conditions but such as may
not be with Honor granted. Edward inflamed, will have no farther Treaty; this
makes them take their leave, and hasten homeward. Their Losses liberally are
requited, and many goodly Gifts bestowed at parting. The Pope Excommunicates
the Scotch King and Kingdom.
Being come to Rome, they inform his Holiness of the success of their journey;
who takes ill the contumacy of the perfidious Scots, and excommunicates both
that King and Kingdom. But this thunderbolt wrought a small effect; where
Honesty had so little an acquaintance, Religion must needs be a great stranger.
The loss of Barwick, and the disgrace of his first Overthrow, calls the King to
adventure a Revenge, which he thinks he had too long adjourned. He makes it a
disputable question, whether he should besiege Barwick, or invade Scotland; but
the consideration thereof is referred till the moving of the Army, which is
advanced with all speed possible. Men, Arms, and Money, with all such other
Provisions as were as well fit to continue the War as begin it, are suddenly
ready in full proportion. The Army attends nothing but the King's Person, or
some more lucky General to lead it. King Edw. besieges Barwick.
In the knowledge he loses no time, but appears in the Head of his Troops, and
leads them on, making an armed hedge about Barwick, before his enemies had full
knowledge of his moving. The Council of War thought it not expedient to leave
such a thorn in the heel of so glorious an Army. The Scots thought it too great
a hazard to attempt the breach of so strong a body, so excellently intrencht
and guarded; the memory of former passages made them entertain this War with
less heat, but with a more solid judgment. Barwick they knew was strong by Art
and Nature, and fully provided to hold the English play, till Want and the
Season of the Year did make them weary. This made them leave the roadway, and
continue the War more by Discretion than Valor. A great Dearth, which lasted
three years.
But during these passages, the Divine Justice sends down the other three fatal
executioners of his wrath, Plague, Dearth, and Famine; no part is free, but
has his portion of one or all of these so cruel Sisters. The Scotch overrun
the Borders.
To make this misery more perfect, the wily Scots taking the advantage of the
King's fruitless encamping before Barwick, like a land-flood overrun the naked
Borders, and boldly march forward into the Country, with Fury, Blood, and
Rapine. The stuff that should stop this breach, was absent with the King, so
that they find no rub in their eruption. The Archbishop of York opposes them.
The Archbishop of York, a Reverend Old man, but a young Soldier; able enough
in his element, but ignorant in the Rules of Martial Discipline, resolves to
oppose this unruly devastation; he straightways musters up his Congregations,
and gives them Arms, that knew scarce use of Iron. Soon had his example
collected up a multitude, in number hopeful; but it was composed of men fitter
to pray for the success of a Battle, than to fight it. and is beaten at Milton
upon Swale.
With these, and an undaunted Spirit, he affronts his Enemies, and gives them an
encounter, making Milton upon Swale more memorable by the blood of this
Disaster. His Victorious and Triumphing Enemies christened this unhappy Conflict
in derision, The white Battle. Many Religious-men, with loss of their Lives,
purchased here their first Apprentiship in Arms, and found that there was a
dangerous difference betwixt fighting and praying. The intent of this grave
Bishop was certainly noble and worthy; but the act was inconsiderate, weak, and
ill-advised. It was not proper to his Profession, to undertake a Military
Function, in which his hope in reason answered his experience; neither did it
agree with the Innocence and Piety of his Calling, to be an actor in the
effusion of Blood, though the quarrel were defensive, but by compulsion. But
questionless he meant well, which must excuse his action. Too great a care
improperly expressed, does often loose the cause it strives to advantage. In all
deliberations of this nature, where so many Lives are at stake, there should be
a deep foresight even in matter of circumstance; and the quality as well of our
own, as of our adversaries, duly considered; else with a dangerous error we
leave the success to the will of Fortune, who in nothing is more tickle and
wanton, than in the event of Battles, which are seldom gained by multitude, the
Mother of Confusion. To be a General, is an act of greatness, and does require
a great and perfect Knowledge, ripe by Experience, and made full by Practice.
It is not enough to dare to fight, which is but Valor; but to know how and
when, which makes it perfect. Discretion and Judgment sometimes teach
advantage, which make (the weight being light) the scale more even. I will not
deny, but the most expert Leader may have all these, and yet may loose a
Battle; since (as all things are) this great design is guided by a Divine
Providence; and many Accidents may happen betwixt the Cup and the Lip, while
things are in action. But he that has a well-grounded and warrantable reason
for his Engagement, may lose the day, and yet preserve his Honor. Wisemen do
censure Errors, not Events of Actions, which show them good or bad, as they be
grounded. The News of the Defeat of this Spiritual Army, like the voice of a
Night-raven, had no sooner croakt his sad echo in the King's ear, but he
straight raises his Army, weakened with Famine, and lessened with Sickness.
The King leaves Barwick.
The prigging Scots seeing his going off, judge his Retreat little better than a
plain flight; which gave them heart to set upon the fag-end of his Troops,
which they rout and break, to the astonishment of the whole Army. This done,
they return, and think it honor enough they had done the work they came for.
The King doubles his pace homewards; instead of Triumph, glad he had got loose
from so imminent a danger. This blank return filled the Kingdom with a fretting
murmur, and foreign Nations thought their Valor changed, who had so often
before overcome this Nation. Mated with grief, oppressed with shame and sorrow,
Edward exclaims against his wayward Fortune, that made his Greatness, like the
Crab, go backward; while he seeks to improve, the opinion of his worth he
impairs, and grows still leaner; and when he shuns a taint, he finds a
mischief. Sadly he now resolves no more to tempt her; he lays aside his Arms,
for harms to feed his humor. His Vanities (companions of his Greatness) had
slept out the night of these combustions; he now awakes them, with a new
assurance they should possess their former mansion. His wandering eyes now
ravage through the confines of his great Court, made loose by his example. King
seeks a new Favorite.
Here he seeks out some Piece, or Coppermetal, whom by his Royal stamp he might
make current. He finds a spacious choice, being well-attended, but 'twas by
such as made their tongues their fortunes; Vainglory here found none to cure
it, and the sick heart never felt the touch of Wormwood. The Agents were
composed of the just temper, as was the spring that gave their tongues their
motion; such an harmonious Consort fits the Organ, that loved no flats nor
sharps, or forced division. No language pleased the King, (the Servants know
it) but that which was as smooth as Gold new burnisht. Old ancient truth was,
like a threadbare Garment, esteemed a foul disgrace to cloth a Courtier.
Sincerity was no fit Master for these Revels, nor honest Plainness for a seat
in Council. This made this King, this Court, and glorious Kingdom, fall by
degrees into a strange confusion. The Infidelity of Servants clothed in
hypocrisy, betrays the Master, and makes his misery greater or less
dangerous, according to the qualities of their employments. It is an excellent
consideration for the Majesty of a King, in election, to reflect on Goodness,
Truth, and Ability, for his attendance, more than the natural parts, or those
that are by Art and Cunning made pliable to his Disposition. The first prove
the props of Greatness, the other the instruments of Danger and Disorder; which
makes the Master at best pitied, but most commonly hated and suspected. Neither
is it safe for the Royal ear to be principally open to one man's information, or
to rely solely on his judgment. Multiplicity of able Servants that are
indifferently (if not equally) countenanced, are the strength and safety of a
Crown, which gives it glory and luster. When one man alone acts all parts, it
begets a world of error, and endangers not only the Head, but all the Members.

Edward could not but know, that a new President over his Royal actions, must
make his Subjects his but at a second hand; yet he is resolved of a new choice,
of such a Favorite as might supply and make good the room of his lost beloved
Gaveston; hence sprung that fatal fire which scorcht the Kingdom with intestine
Ruin. He was put to no great trouble to seek a foreign Climate; he had
variety of his own, that might be easily made capable enough for such a loose
employment. He had a swarm of Sycophants that gaped after greatness, and cared
not to pawn their Souls to gain promotion; Spencer taken into favor.
amongst these his eye fixed on Spencer, a man till then believed a naked
Statesman; he was young, and had a pleasing aspect; a personage though not
super-excellent, yet well enough to make a formal Minion.

The Ladder by which he made his ascent, was principally thus: he had been
always conformable to the King's Will, and never denied to serve his appetite
in every his ways and occasions; which was virtue enough to give him wealth and
title. Some others think this feat was wrought by Witchcraft, and by the Spells
of a grave Matron, that was suspected to have a Journeyman Devil to be her
Loadstone: which is not altogether improbable, if we behold the progression;
for never was Servant more insolently fortunate, nor Master unreasonably
indulgent. Their passages are as much beyond belief, as contrary to the Rules
of Reason. But leaving the discourse of the Cause, the King applauds his own
Workmanship, and doats infinitely on the Nonage of this Imposture, which
seeing the advantage, labors to advance it; and though in his own nature he
were proud, harsh, and tyrannous, yet he clothes himself in the habit of
Humility, as obsequious to his Master, as smooth and winning to his
Acquaintance; knowing that a Rub might make the Bowl fall short while it was
running: Heat of Blood, and height of Spirit, consult more with Passion than
Judgment; where all sides are agreed, quick ends the bargain. Spencer must
rise, the King himself avows it; and who was there durst cross their Sovereigns
pleasure? The resolution known, like flocks of Wild-geese, the spawn of
Court-corruption fly to claw him. The great ones that till now scarce knew his
Offspring, think it an honor to become his Kinsmen: The Officers of State, to
win his favor, forget their Oaths, and make his Will their Justice. Lord, how
the Vermin creep to this warm Sunshine, and count each Beam of his a special
Favor! Such a thing is the Prologue of a beginning Greatness, that it can
Metamorphose all but those that hate it.

The King, though he were pleased with this new structure, yet his inward
revolutions were not altogether free from agitation. He beheld the Lords and
Kingdom now quiet, and the Scotch Tragedy worn out of memory; he was not
without cause doubtful, whether this new Act might not cause a new Distraction:
He calls to mind the ground of his first troubles, and found it had with this
a near resemblance; He looks upon the sullied State scarce cleansed, and feared
this leap might cause a new pollution. These thoughts, like misty vapors, soon
dissolved, and seemed too dull to feed his Lovesick fancy. His hatred to the
Barons bids him freely venture; that in their moving he might so oppress them,
which on cool blood might seem too great Injustice. Gaveston's Death lay in his
heart impostum'd, not to be cured, but by a bloody issue. From this false
ground he draws his proper ruin, making Phantasms seem as deeds were acted.
Such Castles in the Air are poor Conceptions, that sell the Skin before the
Beast be killed. The Barons were no Children, he well knew it; the hope was
little might be got with striving, where all the Kingdom was so much distasted;
but he prized high his own, contemning theirs, which wrought their Death, and
after his Misfortune. Being resolved to countenance his Will with more haste
than advisement, He honors the subject of his choice with the Lord
Chamberlain's place, professing freely he thought him worthy, and would
maintain him in it. This foreright jump going so high, made all men wonder, and
soon suspect him guilty of some secret virtue. Scarce had this new great Lord
possession of the White-staff, but he forgets his former being, and sings the
right Night-crow's tune of upstart Greatness, and follows his Predecessors
pattern to the life, but with a far more strength and cunning. He was not born
a stranger or an alien, but had his Birth and breeding here, where he is
exalted; and though he had not so much depth to know the Secrets, yet
understands the plain-Song of the State, and her progressions, which taught him
his first Lesson, That Infant-greatness falls where none support it: Spencers
policy.
From this principle, his first work is employed to win and to preserve an able
party. To work this sure, he makes a Monopoly of the Kings ear, no man may gain
it but by his permission; establishing a sure intelligence within the Royal
Chamber; not trusting one, but having sundry Agents, who must successively
attend all motions. By this he wedgeth in his Sentinels at such a distance,
that none can move, but he receives the Larum. The first request he makes his
Sovereign (who never denied him) was, that he would not pass a Grant, till he
surveyed it; for this he makes a zealous care the cover, left by such Gift the
Subject might be grieved, the King abused. This stratagem unmaskt, gave perfect
knowledge, who ever leapt the Horse he held the Bridle, which rein'd his foes
up short, while friends unhors'd them; and raised as he pleased all such as
bribed or sought him. To mix these serious strains with lighter objects, he
feeds the current of his Sovereign's Vices with store of full delights, to keep
him busied, whilst he might act his part with more attention. He quarrels those
whom he suspects too honest, or at the least not his more than their Masters,
and quickly puts them off, that there may be entry for such as he prefers, his
proper creatures; so that a short time makes the Court all of a piece at his
Commandment. Those whom he feared in State would cross his workings, he seeks
to win by favor or alliance; if they both fail, he tenders fairly to lift them
higher by some new promotion, so he may have them sure on all occasions; and
with these baits he caught the hungry Planets. Such as he finds too faithful
for surprisal, these he sequesters, mounting his Kindred up to fill their
places. The Queen, that had no great cause to like those Sirens, that caused
her grief, and did seduce her Husband, he yet presumes to court with strong
professions, vowing to serve her as a faithful Servant. She seeing into the
quality of the time, where he was powerful, and she in name a Wife, in truth a
Handmaid, does not oppose, but more increase his Greatness, by letting all men
know that she received him. To win a nearer place in her opinion, he gains his
Kindred places next her person; and those that were her own, he bribes to back
him. The Court thus fashioned, he levels at the Country, whence he must gain
his strength, if need enforced it. Here he must have an estate, and some sure
refuge; this he contrives, by begging the Custody of diverse of the principal
Honors and Strength of the Kingdom. But these were no inheritance which might
perpetuate his Memory, or continue his Succession. He makes a Salve for this
Sore; and to be able to be a fit Purchaser of Lands, by the benefit of the
Prerogative he falls a selling of Titles, in which it was believed he thrived
well, though he sold many more Lordships than he bought Manors; by this means
yet he got many pretty retiring places for a younger Brother, within the most
fertile Counties of the Kingdom. This for the Private, now to the Public; he
makes sure the principal Heads of Justice, that by them his credit might
pleasure an old Friend, or make a new at his pleasure. If in this number any
one held him at too smart a distance, prizing his integrity and honor before
so base a traffic, he was an ill Member of State, and either silenced, or
sent to an Irish or Welsh Employment. It is enough to be believed faulty, where
a disputation is not admitted. The Hare knows her ears be not horns, yet dares
not venture a Trial, where things must not be sentenced as they are, but as
they are taken. The Commanders that sway most in Popular Faction, as far as he
durst or might without combustion, he causes to be conferred o^ his Friends
and Kindred; and above all things, he settles a sure Correspondence of
Intelligence in all the quarters of the Kingdom, as a necessary leading
president: he fills the peoples ears with rumor of foreign danger, to busy
their brains from discoursing Domestic Errors; and sends out a rabble of
spying Mercuries, who are instructed to talk liberally, to taste other men's
inclinanations, and feel the pulses of those that had most cause to be
discontented. For the ancient Nobility, which was a more difficult work to
reduce to conformity, laying aside the punctilio's of his greatness, he strives
to gain them as he won his Master; but when he found them shy and nice to make
his party, he slights them more and more, to show his Power, and make them seek
to entertain his favor. And to eclipse their Power by birth and number, he
finds the means to make a new Creation, which gave the Rabble-Gentry upstart
Honors, as Children do give Nuts away by handfuls; yet still he has some
feeling of the business. Lastly, he wins the King to call his Father to the
Court, who with the shoal of all his Kin are soon exalted, while he makes all
things lawful that correspond his Will, or Masters Humor. The Barons incensed.
He thus assuming the administration of the Royal affairs, his Master giving way
to all his actions, the incensed Lords grown out of patience, appoint the
rendevouz of a secret Meeting at Sharborough, where they might descant their
griefs with more freedom, yet with such a cautelous Secrecy, that this Harpy
with his Lyncean eyes could not perceive their anger. As Soon as they were met,
Thomas of Lancaster, the most eminent of this Confederacy, in a grave discourse
lays before them the Iniquity of the time, the Insolency of this new Ganymede,
and the Kings intemperate wretchlesness, which made the Kingdom a prey to all
manner of Injustice. Hereford advises, that they should all together petition
the King, that he would be pleased to look into the Disorders, and grant a
Reformation. Mowbray, Mortimer, and the rest, soar a higher pitch, which
Clifford thus expresses.

Clifford's Speech.
My Lords, It is not now as when brave Lincoln lived, whom Edward feared, and
all the Kingdom honored. Nor is this new Lord a Gaveston, or naked Stranger,
that only talked, and durst not act his Passions. We now must have to do with
one of our own Country, which knows our ways, and how to intercept them: See
you not how he weaves his webs in Court and Country, leaving no means untryed
may fence his greatness? And can you think a verbal Blast will shake him, or a
set Speech will sink his daring Spirit? No, he is no fantastic Frenchman, but
knows as well as we where we can hurt him: his Pride is such, he will never go
less a farding; but he must fall a key, or we must ruin. Women and Children
make their tongues their Weapons; true Valor needs no words, our wrongs no
wrangling. Say this unconstant King hear our Petition, admit he promise to
redress our Grievance; this sends us home secure and well-contented, until the
Plot be ripe for our destruction. If you will needs discourse your cause of
Grievance, be yet provided to make good your error; a wise man gets his guard,
then treats Conditions, which works a Peace with ease and more assurance. All
Treaties vain, our Swords must be our warrant, which we may draw by such a just
compulsion: those ready, then attempt your pleasure, and see if words can work
a Reformation. I am no tongue-man, nor can move with language; but if we come
to act, I Will not be idle: Then let us fall to Arms without disputing; We'll
make this Minion stoop, or dye with honor. The Barons take Arms.
This rough Speech, uttered with a Souldier-like liberty, by one so truly noble
and valiant, inflamed the hearts of such as heard them. They concur all in a
general approbation, and thereupon they fall to present Levies. Mortimer, a
brave young active Spirit, with his Retinue, gains the maidenhead of this
great Action. Mortimer spoils Spencer's Possession.
He enters furiously upon the possession of the Spencers, spoiling and wasting
like a professed enemy. This outrage flies swiftly to the owners, and appears
before them like Scoggins crow, multiplied in carriage. They as soon make the
King the sharer of their intelligence, and increase it to their best advantage.
Edward sensible of so audacious an affront, thought it did yet rather proceed
from private spleen than public practice; The Kings Proclamatition thereon.
which made him in the tenderness of the one, and malice to the other, by
Proclamation thus make known his pleasure, That the Actors of this misdemeanour
should immediately appear personally, and show cause, whereby they might
justify their Actions, or forthwith to depart the Kingdom, and not to return
without his special License. When the tenor of this Sentence was divulged, and
come to the knowledge of the Confederate Lords, they saw their interest was too
deeply at stake to be long shadowed. In the obedience of such a doom, the
primitiae of their Plot must receive a desperate blemish. They therefore
resolve, as they had begun, so to make good and maintain the quarrel; they
reinforce their Forces, and draw them into a body strong enough to boulster out
their doings, and to bid a base to the irresolute wanton King and his
inglorious Favorite, whose Platforms were not yet so complete, as that they
durst adventure the Trial of so strong a Battery. Yet the more to justify
their Arms (which in the best construction seemed to smatch of Rebellion) they
send unto the King a fair and humble Message, the Tenor whereof lets him know,
that The Barons Message to the King.
Their intentions were fair and honest; and that the Arms thus levied, were to
defend his Honor, and not offend his Person. The Sufferings of the Kingdom
were so deep and weighty, that all was like to run to present ruin, unless he
would be pleased to cure this Fever. In all humility they desire he would
sequester from his presence, and their usurpt authority, those Instruments
which acted this disorder, and that their doings might receive a test by a fair
Trial. To this if he give way, they would attend him with all the expressions
of a Loyal Duty; but if his heart were hardened for denial, they then entreat
his pardon that would not be Spectators of the general mischief which drew too
swiftly on by this Distemper. The King receiving so peremptory a Message,
thinks this fair gloss a kind of By-your-leave in spite of your teeth. He saw
readily how the Game went, and was loath to strike the Hive, for fear the Swarm
should sting him. Dearly he doted on his Minion, yet conceived it fitter he
should a little suffer, than they both should ruin, which probably might soon
ensue if they prevailed. He had no power provided to withstand them, nor was he
sure that time would make it stronger; the Lords were well beloved, their
quarrel pleasing, while he had nothing but the name of King, might hope
assistance. Now he condemns bitterly his improvidence, that had not secured his
work before he acts it. Spencer, that saw himself thus quite forestalled, and
his great foresight in a manner useless, since those whom he had made were but
a handful, and those of the poorer sort of weaker spirits, that stow themselves
in tempests under Hatches, knew 'twas too late to think of opposition; and
therefore persuades his irresolute Master to subscribe to the present
necessity: yet so, that these angry Hornets might not be their own Carvers. He
knew, or at least believed, his faults were not yet Capital, yet could not tell
what construction might be given, if those which were his enemies were admitted
to be his sole Judges; and therefore made rather choice to be at the mercy of a
Parliament, than at their disposing. He was not without hope to be able to make
an able party in this Assembly, where at worst he knew he should be sentenced,
rather by spleen than fury. This resolution by the King approved, an answer is
returned to the Lords: The Kings Answer.
That his Majesty having examined the contents of their Petition, found therein
a fair pretext of Justice and reason; and that if their allegations were such
as were by them pretended, himself would with as much willingness as they could
desire, join in the act of Reformation. But for as much as private Passion
maskt it self sometimes under the vail of public grievance, and particular
ends had the pretext of general Reformation, he thought it expedient to make
this rather a Parliamentary work than the act of his Prerogative, or their
inforcement; which was more for their proper Honors, and the good of the whole
Kingdom: which resolution if they thought fit to entertain, he wished them to
lay down their Arms, which were the marks rather of an intended violence, than
a real desire of Justice; that done, in the knowledge of their approbation, he
would speedily cause his Summons to be sent out for the calling together of
this great Assembly. The reception of this answer was not displeasing to the
Barons, who desired those might be the Judges that had equally smarted with the
stripes of this affliction; yet they conceived it not wisdom to disband their
Forces on a bare supposition; which could not be yet continued, without too
much charge, and too great jealousy. To reconcile this, they divide
themselves, every one retaining to himself a guard sufficient to assure his
Person; and so dispose the rest, that they might be ready on the least Item.
Things standing thus, the Writs and Proclamations for Election are sent out, in
which there was as much time won as might be taken without suspicion. Now is
there stiff laboring on all sides (though not visibly, yet with underhand
working) to cause a major part in this Election; which the Lords wisely
foreseeing (as the main spring that must keep all the wheels in their right
motion) had beforehand so provided for, that the engines of the adverse Party
served rather to fright, than make a breach in the rule and truth of this
Election. The subjects sensible of the disorders of the Kingdom, and seeing
into the advantage which promised a liberty of Reformation, make choice of such
as for their wisdom and integrity deserved it; rejecting such as fought it by
corruption, or might be in reason suspected. This made the undertakers fall
short and wide of the Bow-hand.

The Barons appear with a strong Guard.
The day of appearance being come, the jealous Lords would not rely so much on
the King's good Nature, but that they come up like themselves, bravely attended
with several Crews of lusty Yeomen, that knew no other way to win their
Landlords favor, but with Fidelity and Valor. These, for distinction, and
that they might be known all Birds of a feather, are suited in Cassocks with a
white guard athwart; which gave this the name of the Parliament of white Bends.
Spencer seeing the Retinue of his Adversaries, makes himself a Rampire of all
his Servants, Friends and Kindred. The jealous Citizens, that sometime look
beyond their Shop-board, seeing such a confluence from all parts of the
Kingdom, and so ill-inclin'd, had a kind of shivering fantasy, lest while
these strong Workmen fell a hammering, the Corporation might become the Anvil.
The Mayor, to prevent the worst, doubleth the Guards, and plants a strong Watch
to keep the Gates and Suburbs. Now according to the usual Custom, the Speaker
is presented, and the King himself does thus discourse his pleasure, which they
attend e're they begun this Session.

The King's Speech to the Parliament.
My Lords, and you the Commons of the Nether-House! I have at this time called
you hither, to crave your aid, advice, and best assistance. I am informed my
Subjects are abused, and that the Kingdoms welfare daily suffers; such actions
I maintain not, nor will suffer. Sift out the depth of this, and find the
Authors; which found, I Will punish as your selves think fitting. A Kingdoms
weight depresseth so his Owner, that many faults may escape his eye
unquestioned; your Body is the Perspicil that shows him what errors be, and
how he may prevent them; which leads both King and Subject to a settled quiet.
Be not too curious in your inquisition, which wastes but time, and feeds
diseased Passion; nor may you make those faults that are not, which savours
more of Envy than of Justice. Actions of State you may not touch but nicely,
they walk not in the Road of vulgar Knowledge; these are high Mysteries of
private workings, which fore-right eyes can never see exactly: You cannot
blindfold judge their form or substance. As all times are believed, these may
be guilty; yet let your Judgments make them so, not private Fancy, which is the
Nurse that suckles up confusion. So grave a Senate should not be the meeting
where men do hunt for News to feed their malice. Nor may you trench too near
your Sovereigns actions, if they be such as not concern the Public: You would
not be restrained that proper freedom, which all men challenge in their private
dwellings: My Servants are mine own, I Will sift their errors, and in your just
complaint correct their Vices. Seek not to bar me of a free election, since
that alone does fully speak my Power: I may in that endure no touch or cavil,
which makes a King seem lesser than a Subject. I know those I affect are more
observed, and Envy waits their actions, if not Hatred; 'twere yet Injustice
they for this should suffer, or for my Love, not their own Errors, perish.
What one among you would not be exalted, or be to me as he whom now you aim at?
Reason and Nature tie me to their limits, else might you share it in a like
proportion.

Ambition, that betrays poor Man's Affections, stares always upwards, sees
nothing beneath it, till striving to overthrow some lofty Steeple, it stumbling
falls in some foul Saw-pit. Perhaps the Court is guilty of some Errors, the
Country is not free from worse Oppressions; yet these are waved, as acts unfit
your knowledge, which rob and tear the poor distressed Commons, who must be
still possessed; my greater Agents are the contrivers of this public mischief,
while you by these make good your proper greatness. This should not be, if you
conceit it rightly; it is far from Justice and a due Proportion, one man should
fall, and thousands stay unpunisht, that are more guilty far of foul
transgression. If you would sift, and with unpartial dealing sweep from the
Kingdom such unjust Oppressors, it were a work of goodness worth your labor,
would leave to aftertimes a brave Example. But these Assemblies think those
acts improper, which may reflect upon the proper freehold of those that are
most nice, and apt to censure. I now desire (it is your Sovereign speaks it)
you will reform this kind of strange proceeding; prejudicate not any till you
find him faulty, nor shoot your darts at one, where more are guilty. In such a
number diversely affected, there are, I fear, too many thus affected, that this
advantage fits their private rancour, making the Public Good the stale and
subject, which aims unvailed at naught but Innovation. These busie-brains,
unfit to be Lawmakers, let graver Heads restrain by their discretions; else I
must make them know and feel my Power. I will support and still assist your
Justice, but may not suffer such a fond distemper. Your Privilege gives
warrant, speak in freedom; yet let your words be such as may become you; if
they fly out to taint my Peace or Honor, this Sanctuary may not serve to give
Protection; if so, some discontent, or ill-affected Spirit may challenge Power
to vent a Covert Treason. But your own Wisdoms, I presume, will guide you to
make this such, that I may often call you. What more is fit, or does remain
untouched, you still shall understand in your progression, wherein let Virtue
lead, and Wisdom rule your temper.

The King having ended, the several Members of this goodly Body draw together;
where notwithstanding this grave admonition full of implicit direction, they
fall roundly to their business. For forms-sake, they a while discourse the
petty Misdemeanors of the Kingdom, to make a fairer introduction into the main
end of their Assembly. A few Balls being tossed and bandied to and fro, they
begin to crack the Nut where the Worm lay that eat the Kernel. No sooner was
the Vote of the House discovered, but informations fly in like Points, by
dozens; no business is discoursed which touched the dishonor of the King, the
grief of the Kingdom, or the oppression of the Subject, but straight flies
upward, and makes a noise that all had one beginning. The Commons Charge
against Spencer.
The general thus far questioned, the particulars come to a reckoning, wherein
Spencer is pointblanck charged with Insolency, Injustice, Corruption,
Oppression, neglect of the public and immoderate advancement of his own
particular. Those few faint friends he had gotten into this number, more to
express their own abilities, than with a hope of prevailing, hearing these
thundering aspersions, rise up to justify, or if that fall short, to extenuate
the faults of their glorious Patron; but their Oratory proved, just like the
Cause they strive to defend, full of apparent falsehood. Those nimbler spirits
that haunt the Ghosts of corrupted greatness, seek not to Undermine this great
Building, whose structure had so hasty and rotten a Foundation, but prove in
reason, justice, and necessity, that it ought to be Demolished, since it was
the Spring that polluted all the lesser Fountains. The places of Judicature
being still marted, the Purchaser must sell his Judgments; which was a
commerce fit for those that had the worst, and were most diffident. The
Simoniacal trading for Spiritual promotions, as it dishonored the dignity, so
it must exalt such as knew better how to share their Flocks than feed them.
Bartring of Honor for private lucre, would ruin the glory of antiquity in
blood, and in another age, as prodigal as this, make Lords as common as
Drovers. Possession of so many great Offices, as it was an injury to those of
more deserving, so might it in time become a Monopoly for every new-made
Vpstart. Settling the strengths and Military Provision in the command of One so
much insufficient, must open the way to foraign loss, or domestic mischief.
Planting of the principal Officers of the Commonwealth by one man's corrupt
distribution, must bring all to his guidance, and the Kingdom to confusion.
Admission of the Royal ear to one Tongue only, ties all the rest, and resembles
the Councel-chamber to a School where Boys repeat their Lessons. These passages
discoursed and Aphorism'd at large in the House; at the private Committee,
diverse fouler suspicions and aggravations are treated with a greater freedom;
which being again with their several proofs reported before the whole Body, by
the general doom he is pronunced guilty. This daring favorite seeing the
violence of the Tide, begins to fear it; and letting his Anchor fall, hulls out
the full Sea in the Royal Harbor; he strikes his top-sail, yet contemns the
Winds that cause the Tempest, and quarrels with their Power must be his Judges.
This takes away all hope of reconcilement, and more inflamed their hearts that
did pursue him. They know he now must fall, or they must ruin. Lions may not
be touched, till they be sure, lest breaking loose, they tear those Gins that
catch them. This consideration begets a solemn Messenger, well attended with
diverse Seconds, to make a full relation both of their Verdict and whole
Proceedings.

The Spencers banished.
The Lords being prepossest by their own knowledge, of all the actions of this
false Impostor, after a Conference and grave discussion, pronounce their
Sentence, That the Spencers, Father and Son, should both be forthwith sent to
live in Exile. This done, a grave Declaration is made by both Houses, and
presented to the King, expressing the Tenor of their doom, and reasons moved
them to it. The King, as weak in his distractions, as wilful in advantage, sees
now there was no striving, unless he would adventure his own hazard by such
denial. No time is now left for dispute; he ratifies the Sentence, and present
execution swiftly follows Judgment. Immediately are these two great Courtiers
carried with more attendants than they cared for, unto the Port of Dover, and
straightways shipped, to seek some other Fortune. The Son is no whit dejected,
but bears up bravely: He knew his Master's Love, and scorned their Malice.
Parting, he takes a silent farewell full of rancour, which vows revenge, and
hopes to live to act it. The aged Father, whose Guilt was less, and sorrow
greater, deserved in Justice Pity and Compassion; his snowie Winter melts in
tears, and shows his inward grievance; bitterly he taxes his Sons Pride, and
his own Vanity, exclaiming against the rigor of his fortune, that had in the
last act of his age cast him so cruelly from his Inheritance, and at the very
brink of the grave estranged him from his Birthright. He confesses the
improvidence of his error, which being raised by by-ways, sought to keep it.
Lastly, he wishes his behavior had been such, that in this change might give
him help or pity; but it is the inseparable companion of Greatness fraudulently
gotten, not by Desert or Virtue, it prefers falsehood, and a kind of shifting
juggling, before a winning truth or goodness, which draws with it a firm
assurance. Of all others, it is the most erroneous fond opinion, which conceits
Affections may be won and continued in a subordinate way. They are the proper
Operations of the Soul, which move alone in their own course, without a forced
compulsion. Other ways may serve as temporary provisions, but he that by a just
desert, and credit of his own worth, has won the Love of good men, has laid
himself a sure foundation: This makes his Honor his own, and the Succession
permanent to his continuing praise and glory. These imperious Servants thus
removed, the elder, in obedience of his Doom, makes a foreign Climate witness
his Submission. The Son turns Pirate.
The younger, of a more impatient and turbulent spirit, makes the spacious Sea
the center of his dwelling. He would not trust to any other Nation, since his
own Climate so unkindly left him. The King, yet scarcely weaned from his
sorrow, makes yet fair weather to the parting Barons; He thanks them for their
care and great discretion, which he would still acknowledge and remember. Thus
Kings can play their parts, and hide their Secrets, making the Tongue the
instrument of sweetness, when that the Heart is full of bitter Gall and
Wormwood. They knew he juggled, yet applaud his Goodness, and give him back an
Answer justly suiting; their Tongues seemed twins, their Hearts had both one
temper, which at the length occasioned all their ruin. And thus with the
Enacting of some few ragged Laws, He dissolves this Meeting. Now is the lost
Chamberlain furrowing up the watery sides of angry Neptune, wafting about the
skirts of his first dwelling: falling short in the possibility of revenge of
those he hated, he vows to make the harmless Merchant feel it. What by
surprise, and what by purchase, he had made himself strong at Sea, and well
provided; with which he scowres the Coast, and robs all comers, making a prize
of all he rifled. Sometimes he slips into the private Harbors, and thence
brings out the Ships were newly laden: such work to those that trade by Sea,
breeds strange amazement. A Piracy so strong and daring, soon makes the terror
great, the clamor greater: the Councel-table's covered with Petitions, the
Royal ear is cloyed with exclamations; all still enforce that Trade must sink
and founder, unless the King the sooner did prevent it. Edward well knew their
griefs, and did believe them; but saw withal it was his Spencer caused them,
whom he too well affected to pursue with danger. He thinks it reason to ease
his grievance ere he right the Subject; let them expect and bite upon the
bridle, that they may taste the error of their Judgment. Necessity in time
would make them seek their quiet, the means whereof he thinks not fit to
motion; yet still he thunders out his show of anger, and gives directions that
shipping should be rigged and manned, well-furnish'd to bang this Pyrate off
from his oppression, whom he would take, or lose the Royal Navy; yet underhand
he countermands these Precepts, pretending present want for such provision as
might make good at full this Expedition; which should be done securely, though
delayed. While thus the rage grows out of this disorder, all Plaints prove
fruitless, there was no provision. The flock of Merchants all appear before
him, letting him know the state they stood in; The Merchants petition the King
against him.
Their Stocks, his Custom must impair and minish, unless some present course
repress this Pyrate. The King gave Answer, The Kings Answer.
He laments and pitied their Loss, his Wants, and private Dangers, which in the
instant was of such a nature, that he had cause to fear his proper safety. The
Malcontents, that fish in troubled waters, were plotting new Combustions to
act their malice; he understood their workings strong and cunning, which he was
forced to stop with haste, or loose the Garland. This was the cause he could
not yet go onward to help their griefs, which shortly he intended; till which,
he wished their grave Deliberations could fall upon some way might stop the
current, and take off Spencer from so cursed proceeding, which he believed he
acted by enforcement, rather than Will to wrong his Fellow Subjects. The
Citizens, as naturally talkative as suspicious, parting from the King forget
their Losses, and fall to a liberal discoursing upon the King's words, what the
Plot of this great Treason might be. They were not without a kind of jealous
suspicion, lest the City might share in the sufferance, if it came to be acted.
A little time brought this news to be the common discourse of every Barbers
shop and Conduit. To make the suspicion more authentical, the King makes a
strong Guard about his Person, sending forth directions to his friends and all
his well-affected subjects, that they should enable themselves with the best
strength they could, and to be ready on occasion upon an hours warning. The
King writes to the Lords.
To lull the watchful Lords asleep, he addresses unto them his particular
Letters, full of humanity and gentleness, desiring as he most reposed on their
loves and fidelity, so that they would (if the necessity required) be ready to
assist him against a crew of disordered persons, who were secretly contriving
both the ruin of Himself, the ancient Nobility, and the Kingdom; their Plot
was not yet ripe, and he conceived it in the reason of State, fit to have the
Birds flush before he caught them. The Lords, that in the first rumor
suspected it had some reflection on their particular, or a mere noise without
ground or substance; on the receipt of this Letter alter their opinion, and
believe there was some real cause of this suspicion. They knew the King was
wretchless, dull, and sleepy, and did not use to wake but when it thundered;
they think him short in depth of so much judgment, as with a Jigg of State
might catch them naked. His Letter seemed a character of truth, but not of
cunning; this kept them free from boubt, but not from danger.

The Barons Answer.
They send back an answer graciously received; themselves, their strengths and
states should wait his Pleasure. These passages thus spent, the Citizens, that
like no laws but those of profit, do lay their heads together, to find out a
way how to dispose things, so that they might trade with safety. A cunning
Enginier (one of the Kings own making) avows there was no means but one to make
things sure, which was, to move the King to call the Spencers home, and
reconcile them. The sequel was not fearful, since this Trial would make them
know themselves, and be more quiet; if not, they yet might be in distance where
they might be surpised if they offended. This Proposition finds consent and
liking in the grave Brain of the deep Corporation: in stead of punishment so
well deserved, the Thief must be preferred, to free the passage; The Londoners
Petition for Spencers return.
yet to excuse their error, they saw the King had an itching inclination that
way, and were not without a hope that Spencer being by their means recalled,
would, of a professed enemy, become a sure friend to the City. This gave them
heart to draw up their Petition, and immediately to present it to the King; who
having that he looked for, in outward show seemed nothing well contented. He
bids them examine well the nature of their Petition, which run in a direct line
in opposition against a Parliamental sentence, and would incense the reconciled
Barons, against whose strength he could not well oppose, but it must hazard him
and all the Kingdom. Yet if their wisdoms did think fit, in their assured
assistance he would venture, since he preferred their good before his private.
Though Spencer had transgrest his will and pleasure, yet their entreaty should
dispense his error, in hope he would become a new-made Subject. They cry God
bless your Grace; revoke your Judgment, you shall command our lives to back
your goodness. Edward thus far on his way, causes a Declaration to be made,
containing the request of his faithful subjects, and beloved Royal Chamber of
London, at whose importunate entreaty he thought fit, out of his grace, and
tenderness of the general good, to recall the Spencers, who had given sufficient
caution for their future good abearing. The Spencers return.
This known, soon brings them back to grace and favor: their petty thefts at
Sea must have a sure way to trade in; they must return to shave and rob the
Kingdom, 'twas thought more fit, than they should rob the Merchants. It Is
strange to see what shift this poor King made to work his own undoing. But when
Religion's lost, and Virtue banished, and men begin to trade with slights and
falsehood, the end proves fatal, and does lead them blindfold into the ways that
work their own destrustion. The actions of a Crown are exemplar, and must be
perfect, clean, upright, and honest; their errors die not with them, but are
registered in the story of their Lives with Infamy or Honor: which
consideration may in justice beget a sincerity and cautelous respect from
acting under the pretense of policy, those stratagems which seem, but are not
fruit of Royal goodness. A like care must be had in the limitation of
affections, so that they enforce him not to those ways, which at one blow take
from him his Judgment and his Honor. The power Majestic is or should be
bounded; and there is a reciprocal correspondence, which gives the King the
obedience, the subject equal right and perfect justice, by which they claim a
property in his actions; if either of these fall short, or prove defective by
wilful error, or by secret practice, the State's in danger of a following
mischief. The Spencers thus returned, are reinvested into their former high and
wonted greatness: the burnt Child fears the Fire; they know their danger, and
not attend the Storm until they feel it. Their Masters Plot they second, and
closely gain a strength for present Action: That done, they appear with
confidence, and by main strength seek to crush those of the adverse faction.
Sir Barthol. Baldsmere's Castle seized.
Sir Bartholomew Baldsmere is the first that tastes the Prologue; they seize upon
his Castle of Leedes without or Law or Title; he sues to have his own, but is
rejected. Their peremptory return, and the abrogation of that Law that sent
them packing, was provocation enough; there needed not a second motive to
inflame the angry Barons: but when they understood the unjust oppression of
their confederate, and the daily levies that were underhand made, they then
conceive it time to look about them. They find the fruit of dalliance, and
visibly see into the Kings Plot, which had abused them; condemning their
credulity and coldness, that had not spoiled the brood while it was hatching.
The King, who had so often been caught, was now more wary; and resolving to be
aforehand with his business, prepares his Forces. He knew his Arms, not Tongue,
must plead his Quarrel; another error in his Guard, he suspects, would make
him liable to a more cursed proceeding. His Favorite, that had his Spies in
every corner, is soon informed the Potion was a brewing would give him Physic,
if he did not prevent it: the gathering Clouds portend a sudden Darkness, which
threaten showers of Blood and Civil Mischief. He thinks his Guilt above the
Rate of Favor, and vows to wade in Blood, or die, or vanquish. To suffer
still, and not to act, he counts it weakness; which makes him strive to be the
first Invader. The King takes Arms.
He wins the King to march with those strong Forces their foresight had
prepared, being soon united. Seizes the two Mortimers.
The first Exploit seizes the two Mortimers, that with an unadvised security
had played over their old Game anew on his Possessions. Their Strength was great
enough for an Incursion, but far too weak to cope with such an Army. Their
Resolution was to give the Larum, and then retreat to knit with their
Confederates; but they were intercepted ere they feared it, and made the Tower
the Prize of their Adventure.

Thus sometimes it falls out, who acts Injustice, is caught in the same Net
himself was weaving. The Lords with this Report are strangely startled; they
see themselves forestalled in their own Working; Arms now they know must be
their Warrant, or else their Lives must pay a bitter Forfeit. The Barons rise.
Their Forces were not yet fully ready, yet they march on, resolved to wait the
Kings approach at Burton. Time, that runs swift to Mischief, slow to Goodness,
at length conjoyns their Strength and several Levies; which were not great, and
yet believed sufficient to give a Canvas to the Royal Army; which, as their
Curriers told them, was not mighty. Soon are they brought to view each others
Countenance; where Friend against Friend, and Son against the Father, Brother
against the Brother, stood embattl'd: such mischief follows still a Civil
Discord. The Kings Force far exceeds in strength and number, which made the
Terms of hazard far unequal. The adverse part perceiving well the danger which
they were in, if they abide the Trial, condemn their own belief, and Servants
falsehood, who had so far fallen short in their discovery. But now a second
Deliberation is entertained, which advises them to decline the Battle, and to
make a Retreat, till they were re-enforced. This Resolution taken from the
present suspicion, was not more dishonorable than dangerous: it gave
confidence to their Enemies, and dejected their own Party, willing rather to
try their hands than their heels, where the peril seemed indifferent: But the
Reasons given in excuse were grave and weighty. The Earl of Lancaster had sent
Sir Thomas Holland to raise his Northern Friends and Tenants; who was marching
up strongly and well provided; so that if they could have adjourned the Battle
off to his arrival, it would have made the Terms more hopeful, if not equal. It
is in the Rule of War esteemed a weakness to affront an Enemy for a set Battle,
with too great disproportion in number; but to recoyl without a marvelous,
discreet, and orderly proceeding, is no more than laying the disheartened Troops
to a present slaughter; the Experiment whereof was here apparent. The Lords
rise, but ill, and in disorder, more like a Flight than a discreet Retiring.
Valence Earl of Pembrooke, that did command in chief under the King, sees this
Confusion, and straight lays hold of such a fair advantage. He charge hotly
on the Rear, which straight was routed; the Barons make a head, but are
forsaken; which makes them fly to seek their proper safeguard: The Barons
beaten, fly to Pontfrect.
With much ado they get to Pontefret, whither the broken Troops at length repair
for succor. Holland entrusted, performs the work he went for, and marched with
speed, hoping to give a Rescue; but when he saw that their Affairs were
desperate, rate, he thinks it his best play to change his Master, and leads his
Troops to get the Kings Protection. As it deserved, it gains a gracious
welcome. Thus all things tend to their Confusion; one mischief seldom comes,
but many thunder. The despairing Barons finding themselves hotly pursued,
repair to Council, where many ways are moved, and none embraced, save that same
fatal one which wrought their Ruin. They leap, like Fishes, from the Pan that
scorcht them, into the raging Flames that soon consumed them. The Castle of
Donstanborough was believed a strength tenable, until their Friends do raise a
second Army, or they at worst might treat some fair Conditions: they march to
gain this hold, but are prevented. Sir Andrew Harcklaye meets them at
Borough-briggs, and guards the Passage; Hereford and Clifford seek to force it,
and like enraged Lions here act Wonders: twice had their angry Swords made the
way open, but fresh Supplies oppressed them still with number, till wearied, not
overcome, they yield to Fortune, and by a glorious Death preserve their Honor.
When these brave Arches fell, the Building tottered; though Mowbray made a
while a brave resistance, till his Heroic Blood, not Valor, failed him. The
surprizal of Lancaster, and many other noble Knights and Barons, perfects this
Overthrow, and ends these Civil Tumults.

The Prey thus seized, the Spencers long to taste it; and, like to furious
Tigers, act their Passions: They give not their incensed Master time to
deliberate on that Work which was so weighty, which had the Lives of such great
Peers in balance. They whet on, and exasperate the Kings Revenge, that needs no
instigation. Soon is the Work resolved, where deep Revenge has mastered humane
Judgment, and Reason does subscribe to private Malice.

Valens' Speech in favor of the Lords.
Valence, a stout and noble Gentleman, hating such a barbarous Cruelty, seeks
to divert it, and mildly thus entreats the Royal favor.

To win a Battle (Sir) it is glory; to use it well, a far more glorious
Blessing. In heat of Blood to kill, may taste of Valor, which yet on cooler
terms may touch of Murder. Laws were not made to catch offenses, but to judge
them; which are dispensed with where the cause is weighty, else none may live
where many are delinquent.

Celestial Powers have blessed you with a Conquest, and do expect to see how you
will use it. For your own Goodness sake, make known your Virtue; be like to him
that gave you this great Blessing, and then your Mercy will exceed your
Justice. The savage beasts, but kill, to kill their hunger; and will you act in
blood to please your fancy? The Heavens forbid the Royal Heart should harbor a
thought that justly may be deemed cruel. Your Sword victorious is imbrew'd with
Honor, let it not ravage where is no resistance: to spill where you may save,
obscures your Glory; to save where you may spill, proclaims your Goodness. I Will
not excuse their faults, or plead their merits, which both are lesser far than
is your Mercy; let not such branches so untimely wither, which may in time be
your defense and shelter. Kings are but men, that have their fates attend them,
which measure out to them, what they to others. Blood is a crying Sin that
cries for vengeance, which follows swiftly those that vainly shed it. Black
Apparitions, fearful Dreams, affright them whose guilty Souls are stained with
deeds of darkness. Oh let your purer thoughts be unpolluted, that they may live
to show your Grace and Virtue, and After-ages speak your worth in Glory.

The King had scarce the patience to hear out the Conclusion of a Theme so
contrarious to his resolution and humor; yet weighing the Integrity and
well-deserving of the man that spoke it, to justify himself, and to give him
satisfaction, with an angry brow he makes this sudden Answer. The Kings Reply.
Valence, but that I know you truly love me, your words do touch too near your
Sovereigns Honor. Shall I, seduced by a female pity, compassion those that do
attempt my ruin? such actions may be goodness, no discretion: how many times
have I declined my Power, to win them home by mercy, not by justice? what has
my mildness won but flat Rebellion, which had it took, where then had been
their virtue? Say I should spare their Lives and give them freedom, each slight
occasion colors new eruption, and I may then too late repent my kindness. When
my poor Gaveston was taken, where was their mercy? They made their Arms their
Law, their Swords their Justice. He had no guilt of Treason or Rebellion, his
greatest fault was this, his Sovereign loved him; and shall I spare those that
for my sake wrought his ruin? No, blood must have blood, their own Law be
their Trial; let justice take her course, I Will not oppose it. The deeds of
Charity must so be acted, that he that gives be not abused by giving. Who saves
a Viper that attempts to sting him, if after stung deserves nor help nor pity.
What could they more have done than they have acted, unless to kill the King
they so much hated; and shall I pardon these sought my destruction, and make
them fit to act a new Rebellion? If it be virtue, it is a poor discretion. No, I
will make them sure, that their example may others teach the just reward of
Treason. Dead men do neither bark nor bite the Living.

Instantly he flings away, and to the general grief of the whole Army signeth a
dispatch for present execution, without so much as the exception of any one
particular of all the great ones whom this last conflict had thrown at his
mercy. Lancaster beheaded, and 22 more.
Lancaster is beheaded at Pontefret, and two and twenty others, of noble blood
and great eminency, in other places of the Kingdom; so that there was scarce a
City of any note, but was guilty of this bloody Massacre. So many excellent
lives, so ingloriously lost, had been able to have commanded a victorious Army
while it had triumphed in some foreign conquest. Thomas of Lancaster, a man good
and virtuous, though unfortunate, kept faithfully the deathbed promise he made
his father Lincoln; but erring in the time and manner, he tasted his
prediction. The King, that was before so apparently guilty of many puny vices,
by this act loses all their memory, and dies himself in grain with the true
color of a cruel Tyrant. The reaking blood of so many brave subjects so
untimely spilt, had a quick and bitter reckoning, to the final destruction of
him and all the Actors. In the operations of so great a weight, though the
color of justice seem a Warranty, yet mercy should have preceded rigor, since
they were not all alike guilty. In point of extremity, it is more safe and
Honorable to do less than we may, rather than all we may; the one makes known
our goodness, the other the cruelty of our nature, which with a loathed fear
thrusts a zealous and true love out of possession in the hearts of those that
behold and observe our actions. Had these Lords been of a disposition equally
cruel, Spencer had not lived to triumph in their misery, nor they to taste his
malice; for it is clear, when they had him at their mercy, that they sought not
blood, but reformation; and assuredly in this their last act, which was rather
defensive than otherways, their intentions toward the Crown were innocent. In
all respects (saving the levy of their Arms, which was done only to support it
with more Honor) as things fell out afterward, it had been happy for the King
if he had lost this Battle, and they had prevailed; for winning it was the
beginning of all his ensuing misery, of which the fundamental cause (as
appears in the sequel) originally sprung; that this bridle being taken away,
he fell to those dissolute actions, and injurious kind of oppression, that his
Government became hateful, and his Name odious; which wrought in time the
general revolt of the whole Kingdom. Fear, and the suspicion of the following
danger, kept both him and his familiars in a better temper: for though they
were fully as vicious, yet they were less confident, and more reserved; which,
this barricado taken off, finds neither bound nor limit.

Good Policy to maintain a divided Faction in Court and Council.
Certainly, in the Regiment of a Kingdom, it is a discreet and wise
consideration in Court and Council to maintain a divided faction, yea, and
interchangeably so to countenance them, that the one may be still a fit
Counterpoise to the other. The King by this means shall be served with more
sincerity and diligence, and informed with more truth and plainness. Where one
particular man or faction is alone exalted and only trusted, his words, be
they never so erroneous, find seldom contradiction, and his unjust actions
pass unquestioned; all men under him seeking to rise by him, sing the same
tune; the Flock ever bleats after the voice of the Bell-weather; which stands
with a politic wisdom, since in opposition they purchase but disgrace and
ruin. By these means the Royal ear is abused, and the Minions acts are more
daring and insolent, who cares ever more how to conceal cleanly, than to be
sparing in doing the actions of injustice; by this the judgment of the King is
impaired, the Honor of the Crown abused, the Commonwealth suffers daily more
and more, which by degrees aliens and estrangeth the heart of the subject. The
greater the height is, the stronger is the working to preserve it, which for
the most part is attended with those same State-actions of impiety and
injustice; hence spring murmur and hatred, exasperated by a continuing
Oppression which ends for the most part in a desperate conclusion. Though the
fury of this victorious King had so fully acted his Tragedy, yet the Mortimers
were spared; but it was rather out of forgetfulness than pity, whose deaths had
been more available than all those which in so great haste had tasted his fury.
Some think that the Queens intercession got the respite of their execution,
mainly followed by Spencer, who in that act irreconciliably lost her favor; by
the subsequent effect it seems probable enough; but howsoever it was wrought,
it appears he was reserved to be one of the fatal executioners of the divine
justice, which taught his persecutor that same ancient Roman Law of Talionis,
and gave his unfortunate Master so sad a cause of a just Repentance. The
Kingdom after these bloody Hurly-burlies and strong Convulsions, begins now to
be a little settled, only it was filled with grief and expectation where these
aims would end that ran on with such violence. The principal Pillars of the
common good being taken away, and those that remained being frighted and
disheartened, gave such a liberty to the now great Officers, that the whole
interest of the State was believed little better than the fruits of an absolute
Conquest. All men suffer basely, yet no man dares oppose or question't. The
King secured, approves his Spencers actions, and makes the Regal Power the
Servants warrant: Hence springs the insolency of unjust oppressions, and those
unlawful ways to drain the subject, which leave no means might fill the Royal
Coffers. The grieved Kingdom languisht with these burdens; the great Ones
suffer basely, courting his vices, which like a tree oregrown, of immense
greatness, shadowed their growth, and did suppress their merit. They fawn upon
the time, and view each other as Ships salute at Sea, whose Voyage differs;
they were become strangers to themselves and to their fellows, which stop the
passage to so just a quarrel. The private end was now the thing in fashion, the
public was forsaken as a monster. The Commons, whose homebred looks are the
true Index of all that dwells within, and honest plainness, do more than
murmr out these oppressions. They gape to catch the turning tide, and would
have moved, but find no one would give them heart or leading. Often do they make
attempts, but yet discreetly, to try if they could find a staff to lean to;
but 'twas in vain, the Law was such a terror, that he that stirs and sticks
was sure of drowning. Now do the Learned Sages see their error, that hung
themselves in Chains so great and many, making a Lime-twig for each several
feather; now do they blame those Laws themselves enacted, not like a Watch, but
as a Paper-Army, to keep the good still in the worst condition; as if the
multiplicity had been the glory, where Laws are made to catch, not ease the
subject. If that great volume of the Law draw forth his engines, what subject
can untoucht escape his rigor?

Spencer, that knew himself thus hated, and that the general cry proclaimed his
baseness, sinks not his height, nor would go less a farding; but makes his
mischief like himself, still foul, but greater; with reason yet suspects and
fears the sequel. His Mistress sat on thorns, which made her startle; he knows
the Wheel would turn, almost with touching. This calls his Wits together, and
puts them on the rack for a Confession, what was the way might best assure this
danger. Spencer's Policy.
The King's weak humor, naturally wanton, he makes more vicious, and apparent
guilty, hoping to make him alike hateful, that in the Change they both might
run one fortune. A pretty Policy, that makes it lawful to wound his Master,
that thereby he may escape the hand of justice, or at the least may make the
hazard equal! The King he knew was too indulgent, but not tender, or of a heart
enough to work the safety of his Servants, as he observed in the Case of his
Predecessor Gaveston, and his own late experience. To give him a more real
engagement, and pin himself fast by necessity, he eggs him on to all those
actions that were more than most odious in practice, and hateful in the eye of
the subject; feeding him in the mean time with a vain belief that the Kingdom
was generally ill-affected, and sought his deposition; which there was no
better way to repress, than by holding them short, and making severity rather
than paternal love the Handmaid of his Scepter. In all the actions of State,
whatsoever carried a fair gloss, or proved well, he takes it upon his proper
care and diligence; if the success were ill, or not prosperous, it must be
esteemed either the will, weak advice, or fortune of his Master; in all
complaints that spoke unjust oppression, he seemed to share the grief, but made
the cause the Kings, not his which must obey him; he guilds his proper actions
over with shows of kindness, fullying the Royal with his grossest errors, who
sat and slept, or winkt at these disorders. This was the substance of his first
conceptions; but yet this was too weak to make a groundwork on which he might
rely his false proceedings. Time daily changed, and new occurrents happen might
win another faction to pursue him; for to prevent this fear, he fetched a
Compass, and leaves the beaten way of blood and malice; such of the great ones
as were yet remaining, and out of reason might be most suspected, or did but
cross his way, by private practice he sends to feed the Worms and kiss their
Mother, who knew not her own Children so transformed. When that the Blossoms
dropped away (the Gardens glory) the season being sweet, and mildly pleasant, all
men admired, but quickly knew the reason; some unkind hand had tainted that
which fed them. This was too much, but yet he wades in deeper. His Brain is
subtle, cunning, wary; an active stirring Wit, a quick invention, an heart
grown proud in mischief, full of falsehood, that dwelt within a conscience knew
no bounder; from these he hammers out another project that works upon the King
as well as subject. This has two forms, though of a different temper, yet both
resembl'd nearly in dependence. The first must keep the Crown in fear, the
Kingdom busied with foreign danger or domestic trouble; The second holds it
still in want, the Coffers empty, to keep the subject poor as they supply it;
security in one might keep him careless, and peace with plenty make the other
wanton. From these, being marshaled with a sound discretion, he thinks the way
was easy to assure his greatness; within his breast alone was locked the secrets
of the prime Plots of State and weighty business; the Counselors, that were
but merely Ciphers, knew but the strains of slight and vulgar motions; he sat
alone at Helm, and steered the Compass, which fancies in his thoughts a vain
impulsion; he must be still employed, or all would ruin; if in the agitations
of the King or Kingdom puzzled with motions of the present danger, he could
assure each party from these Harpyes, it needs must add much to his faith and
wisdom, and make his station far more strong and sure; the resty minds that
kick at present greatness, may then turn Craven, and approve his judgment: he
that conceits he could command the Planets, doubts not to make such trifles
light and easy. His principles thus laid, he falls to action; with a loose
scorn he continues the French correspondence, slighting their Treaties and
desire of Friendship; the Marriage of a Sister was not powerful to set things
right betwixt these Warlike Nations; there was no open War, but private
grudges, which made the State uncertain, robbed the Merchant; heart-burning on
all sides, while both strain courtesy who should begin to set the balance
even. The Scots that were not sure, but yet were quiet, he irritates afresh for
new combustions; but this was done with such a neat conveyance, that all men
see the Smoke, yet feel no Fire. And to the Lords at home that stood
spectators, he pares off from his greatness some few chippings, and gives them
here and there to feed their longings; that they might thus be still, if not
contented, he gives away his female Kindred for new Friendship, and makes the
Portion great, though nothing yet in Title; which turned the world backward in
appearance, while January and June were dancing Trenchmore. Those fixed stars
that moved not with this Comet, but kept aloof, and did preserve their
distance, these he contemns and scorns with such proud usage, that they may
seek his grace, or seem to threaten some jealous danger to his fearful Master.

Great Impositions daily are divulged, and some imposed are not fully levied,
to make the Commons fear, not feel their ruin. No circumstance is left, that
but induced, to make the Sovereign fear, the subject hate him. The King, whose
Arms never thrived but in the conflict which winning lost his Honor, caused
his downfall, was in the memory of his former unfortunate proceedings
sufficiently awed; and being now given over to the sensuality of his delights,
entertains quickly the least apprehension of fear, if his supervisor did
present it so that this part of his work was no great difficulty; and the
second was not more uneasy. The Royal Treasure is profusely spent without
Account or Honor, being but the fountain that served to water the drought of
himself, his herd of hungry Kindred, and the swarm of Flesh-flies that became
his creatures. The ancient Plate is without the art of Arithmetic multiplied
into a world of little pieces; the Jewels of the Crown do leap beyond the Sea,
and are ta'n Prisoners till they pay their ransom; the Revenue Royal being now
grown weary, by Proclamation would exchange his Landlord; the Prerogative, the
type of Sovereignty, forgets his Patron, and cleaves to the fingers of some
musty Farmor. This want was great in show, but more in substance; which made
the Surgeon seek to gain a plaster: the Poverty of these Institutions answer
not the Work-mans expectation, for the Remedy began to seem as fearful as the
Disease; These profuse prodigalities, in stead of a counterfeit, brought in
such a real necessity of such a height, that without a speedy supply it must
beget a desperate hazard. Many several projections are made, but they fall
wholly short, and like Pistols charged with Powder, make a noise, but hit not
that they aim at; the hope was dead, unless the old and right way Parliamental
did give it life and spirit. Spencer knew well enough that such Assemblies was
like a Ringworm on the neck of greatness; a Court that in the bulk of high
Corruption would breed a Palsy, or a Hectic Fever; the subject here he knew
would see his inside, which single durst not quinch, much less encounter. He
doubts the King would hardly be supplied, unless he were exposed to try their
mercy; yet there is no other means, he must adventure. This thus resolved, he
leaves it not at random, or does resign his state alone to Fortune, but wisely
makes the way before he run it. With a reserved secrecy he hides the Platform,
till that his practice might receive perfection. He hurries forth strange news
of foreign dangers, to draw the peoples eyes from private workings; he makes a
show as if all things went current, and shadows over the Royal wants with
plenty, yet closely wills his friends and those his creatures to get them place
betimes in this great Meeting. All such as were the Kings entirely, these he
instructs with the self-same Counsel, and courts all such as he believes are
Powerful to advance his ends, or else procure him danger; and to let all the
world know he stood right in his Masters affections, he gets his Father,
himself, and Sir Andrew Harclay, a Chip of the same Block, made Earls of
Winchester, Bristow, and Carlisle; Baldock a mean man altogether unworthy,
unless it were for being a disciple of so virtuous a Patron, is made Lord
Chancellor of England. The solemnity of this goodly Creation ended, and the
Plot now ripe for execution.

A Parliament called.
The bruit of a Parliament flies through the Kingdom, and is followed at the
heels with Writs for present Election. The time limited for appearance was
short, which speedily drew this great Body together, bleeding with the fresh
memory of the loss of so many of his brave and glorious Members. All Ceremonies
are laid aside, or handled briefly, so that the time now serves to fall upon
the business. Their pulses being felt aloof off, and their temper tried, there
was a full discovery that the major part was sure, the rest were heartless.
Then comes the King's Demand, with fair pretenses, which pleads the greatness
of his charge and present uses; and shows he had on the strength of his Revenue
maintained the Scottish Wars without assistance, which had exhausted so the
Royal Treasure, that now He is enforced to try his Subjects. This motion is
soon seconded by such apt Scholars as learnt to get the King's or Spencer's
favor; others that had a hope to share the booty, speak it great reason to
assist their Sovereign. The Commons justly grieved with their Oppressions,
would fain have made a head to stop this current; but 'twas in vain, here was
too weak a Party, and wants a heart to put it to a trial; They give the King
the sixth Penny.
this swayed the King the sixth penny of the Temporalty, and ends this Meeting.
When the knowledge of this Grant came into the Country, it bred a general
Murmur, and quite estranged their loves from their subjection, cursing those
times that caused so sad a burden. Prodigious Sights.
Upon the neck of this (if we may give credit to those Historians, that all
agree and publish this relation) were many fearful and prodigious Sights, which
mazed the people; amongst which this one was most remarkable; the Sun for six
hours space showed himself in perfect Blood, and sanguin'd over. The ensuing
times that retained it in their Memory, and applied it as a Prediction of the
sequel, believed it did foreshew the King's destruction, which followed
swiftly; others conceit it as a Wonder showed from Heaven, as a sure Token of
the just Displeasure for the loss of the Noble Earl of Lancaster and his
Adherents, whose Blood implored Justice and sharp Vengeance. Thus in amazement
Man becomes a Prophet.

The Scotch invade the English Borders and Ireland.
The Scots, that love not rest, delight in prigging; and considering the
Distractions of the English, thought it a fit time to fall to action, and with
a double blow to vent their malice; one strikes upon the Borders, which they
boldly enter, but are repulsed with little loss or damage; Are repulst.
the other does invade their Neighbor- Irish, where they receive with grief a
worser welcome. Their General slain.
Bruce, the Kings Brother, General of this Army, and all his Troops, are killed
and broken; scarce one was left to carry back the News of this Disaster. The
King, resenting this new provocation, and all the former mischiefs they had
wrought him, resolves once more to tempt his froward Fortune; but 'twas not his
own Valor, Spencer moved it, that had his aim beyond his Master's meaning; he
knew this was the way to waste that Treasure, which else might breed a fearless
fullness: if it succeeded well, the gain and honor would be his share, as well
as his that won it, since his advice had fathered first the action: admit it
should prove ill, he then was guiltless, it must be deemed alone his
Sovereign's Fortune, whose Destiny was such to be still luckless; however yet,
't would keep him so in action, he might at all times yield the groaning
Subjects a short account how he had spent their Money. Upon this, a Summons is
sent out to call together all the Captains and Men of war; Provisions are daily
made to wait upon so constantly a resolved Journey: The former Misfortune had
taught him to undertake this action strong and soundly; the black Ox had trod
upon his foot, that well he knew the danger. The King's intentions known,
brings him together all the remaining bravery of the Kingdom; they knew that
there was Money store to pay the Soldier, which gives him life to fight, and
seek occasion. The cream of all this strength must guard his Person, the other
fill the Rere, and make the Vantguard; The King invades Scotland.
with these he marches forward and invadeth Scotland, making that Nation justly
fear the sequel. But whether it were the Infidelity of those about him, the
Will of him that is the Guide of Battles, or the proper destiny of this
unfortunate King, this great Preparation produced no effect answerable to the
general expectation; he is enforced to retire without doing any one act worthy
his Memory, or the greatness of such an Expedition. The Scotch seize the K.
Treasure.
The wary Scots, that had kept themselves in their Strengths and places of
Advantage, seeing the Storm almost past, follow aloof off, and in a watched
opportunity set upon the tail of his Army, surprising all his Stuff and
Treasure. This loss sends him home to entertain a defensive War, which came
from the Coast he least expected; whether justly, or to transfer the guilt of
his own unhappiness upon the treachery or falsehood of another. Earl of Carlisle
Executed.
The new-made Earl of Carlisle is accused, condemned, and put to a shameful
execution. The grounds against him were probable, not certain; howsoever, he
was believed to have attempted, like Judas, the sale of his Master, which must
be taken a sole motive of the inglorious retreat of this so brave an Army. The
principal reason that may lead us to the opinion that he was guilty, may be
taken from the solemnity of his Trial, and the severity of the Sentence, which
upon so grave and full a hearing deprived him both of Life and Honor in a
ceremonious way, whereof till this there appears no former president. His old
friend Spencer, whose ends he had faithfully served, left him at plunge, being
as it seems well content now he had (as he thought) rooted his own greatness,
to be free of his Ambition, which he feared might rather supplant than support
it. A common course of such as rise by their own or other men's corruption; they
love a while their props, but after fear them; when with some Dog-trick they
pick some feigned occasion, private or public, for to send them packing. If you
survey it well, it stands with reason: for such as to serve their ends would
act in baseness, in the least change may do so for another that in appearance
must succeed his fortune: besides, where the reward seems shorter than the
merit, fills one with grief, the other with suspicion; which two can never long
hold correspondence; and Kings themselves that do abet the Treason, do seldom
love, but always fear the Traitor. But now old quarrels sleep, here comes a
new one that ushered on the way to Edwards ruin.

The French King Lewis being dead, John next succeeds him; a Prince youthful
and hot, full ripe for action. He privately informed of the ill usage of his
Sister, and that the King was wholly led by his proud Minion, whose actions
witnessed he was ill-affected to hold firm Peace but with his own conditions,
thinks it fit time to break the League which had so weak assurance. The French
King breaks his Peace with England.
On this he makes an attempt upon the Frontiers of Guien, and sends a solemn
Message he would no more continue Peace with England. Edward, that had not yet
digested his Scottish Pills, was much displeased to hear so cursed a Declaration
from a Brother. Spencer, the spring that gave this difference motion, did
little dream it would be his destruction; he wished these Princes might fall out
and quarrel, but yet not so, that it should come to action. He deemed it not
amiss his Sovereign Master should hear of War from France, but not to feel it.
The French were of another mind; they saw us beaten, and discontent within our
selves, full of confusion; which gave them hope the time would fitly serve them
to reunite this Piece to her first Honor. Thus Kings play fast and loose with
their advantage; affinity and Oaths are weak restrictions; where Profit holds
the Plough, Ambition drives it.

Edward piercing narrowly into the danger, taxes bitterly the infidelity of
his Brother, and begins to examine his own condition, whereby he might
accordingly order his affairs, either to entertain the War, or embrace Peace,
the hopes whereof were not yet desperate. He finds himself in the affections
of his own feared and hated; his Coffers emptied by the Scottish surprizal, and
the sinews of his late Parliamentary supplying shrunk in his Provision and
prodigality; a second supply, unless conditional, was doubtful; the Kingdom was
grown too wise, to be again anticipated in election: and lastly, he calls to
mind the severity of that misfortune that waited so his Military actions, that
the subjects were diffident of success where he was either General, or a party.
In this distraction, while he remains irresolute, he seeks the advice of his
Cabinet Council, the Closet of his secrets; he thinks him alone worthy to
communicate the depth of his misery, and to give the resolution. The King
advises with Spencer.
Spencer, that had his underhand aims, out of a virtuous modesty appears not
till he is called; Spencer's Answer.
which succeeding as he knew out of course and necessity it must, pleads his own
disability in an affair so great and weighty, desiring his Majesty that his
Father and the Chancellor might be admitted into this deliberation, whose
maturity of years and ripeness in knowledge might be relied on with more
assurance. The reason of this reply, in show full of wisdom and care, had a
Plot with two faces, like the old description of Janus; the one looked upon his
father and faithful Friend, whom by this means he thought to advance in credit;
the other was more to countenance his own particular, which had a part to play,
that must be (as he thought) his Masterpiece. No word of his sounds harshly,
nor sound contradiction in his Sovereigns ear, who made his tongue a guide to
lead his actions; they are freely admited, and fall to consultation, where the
condition of the present affairs is fully opened, and sundry propositions made
to reconcile them: but these all prove defective in some material point or
other, that according to the pack, Spencer might hit the nail on the head, and
by their applause make his project more solid and authentical.

Ever since the breach that happened between him and the Queen concerning
Mortimer, there had been a strong heart-burning, and many distastful
expressions of the ill inclination she bare him. He knew her to be a Woman of a
strong Brain, and stout Stomach, apt on all occasions to trip up his heels, if
once she found him reeling; and was not without some discreet suspicion, that
she was as well contriving inward practice, as she had been closely forward in
the instigation of her Brother. To make her sure, and to pare her nails before
she scratcht him, he thinks occasion had presented him with a fit opportunity,
which he intended not to loose without a trial; from which ground he thus
expresses his conceptions.

He advises the Queen be sent to France.
Things standing as they do (Royal Sir) there is but one way left to right them;
but how that way may like you, that I know not. You are not fit for War, if you
consider your proper weakness, bare of Strength or Money: to seek not sue for
Peace, is no dishonor, but shows a pious Will to perfect Goodness. A Servants
care, I not deny, may work it; but this will ask Instruction, Time and Leisure,
which your condition cannot fitly limit. Such Treaties, for the most part, so
are settled; but it is with long dispute, and many windings, by which we must
grow worse, and they still stronger. If they once find that we pursue it
hotly, they will raise their height to win their own conditions, which may be far
unfit your state and greatness. I know you love the Queen too much to spare
her, and I am loath to touch the string should cause it: But since great Works
are fittest for great Actors, I wish to her alone this brave employment: her
Wisdom and her Love so well united, will work (I doubt not) Peace as you
desire; so fair a Pleader cannot be denied in that request, which chiefly made
her Wedlock. And since I am all yours, vouchsafe your Pardon, if I in reason
discourse it farther: Admit that he deny, her journey sort not, you still are
where you were, with some advantage: If he refuse your Love, you may his
Sister, which is then with him, where he so may keep her till things are
reconciled, and quarrels ended. Reason of State must master your Affections,
which in this act will tell you, it is unfitting she should be here, that may
inform her Brother from time to time of all your secret Counsels. Say that your
Love and her Obedience tie her, and keep the Scale still even, it is a hazard
which wise men dare not trust in female weakness: admitting that her Goodness
do assure it, this cannot warrant yet her silent Servants, who may be sent with
her perhaps of purpose, or after bribed to sift and show your workings.
Councels are seldom so reserved, but that they glimmer some little light that
leads to their intentions; which if they fly to those they touch unacted, find
swift prevention, ere their worth be valued. These things considered, I do
speak it freely, it is fit the Queen alone should undertake it; which lessens
well the charge of your great Household, and brings you Peace, or makes you else
a Freeman from those domestic Cares that shake your quiet. This Act ended,
Baldocke the Chorus, who equally hated the Queen, seconds it with a learned
approbation; and the old Roost-cock in his Country-language, which was the only
tongue he was guilty of, tells the King briefly, he should be sure of Peace at
home or abroad. The King with an attentive ear hears this relation, and could
not but believe his Spencer spoke it; nor did he dote so much upon his Wedlock,
but he could be contented well to spare her, whose eyes did look too far into
his Pleasures. But yet his wandering Soul had strange impressions, which struck
him deeply with a sad prediction, and made him faintly yield, but yet delay it.

This Overture being come to the Queens ear, and withal the knowledge how this
Gypsy had marshalled his cunning practice, and had prescribed the way for her
escape, which she herself intended, and in her private thoughts had labored
with the best powers of her understanding; She offers to go.
she seemed wondrously well-pleased, and offers to undertake, and to assure the
business. Their several ends, far wide of one another, do kindly meet and knit
in the first Prologue; where Craft encounters Cunning, it sometimes happens one
and the self-same Hood does fit the headpiece of diverse Actors, diversely
affected; hence it proceeds the Plot's more surely acted, when each side does
believe his proper issue: There is not such a Cutthroat for a Coz'ner, as that
which in his own trade does cross-bite him: The Be gets Honey where the Spider
Poison; and that may kill Physicians, cures their Patients. Such are the
qualities of Statesmens actions, that labor to contrive another mischief, and
in their own way find their own destruction. Love and Jealousy, that equally
possessed the Queen, being intermixed with a stronger desire of Revenge, spurs
her on to hasten on this Journey. She saw the King a stranger to her bed, and
revelling in the wanton embraces of his stolen pleasures, without a glance on
her deserving Beauty. This contempt had begot a like change in her, though in a
more modest nature, her youthful Affections wanting a fit subject to work on,
and being debarred of that warmth that should have still preserved their
temper, she had cast her wandering eye upon the gallant Mortimer, She casts a
wandering eye on Mortimer.
a piece of masculine Bravery without exception; had those his inward Gifts
been like his outside, he had not been behinde-hand in reception, but with a
Courtly, brave respect, full meets her Glances. A silent Rhetoric, sparkling
Love, finds quick admittance; such private trading needs few words or brokage:
Mortimer in the Tower.
but his last Act had mewed him in the Tower, where he was fast from sight of
his great Mistress Love, that makes some men fools, makes others wary: Had
Mortimer's design been known, his head had paid for it; which Spencer's malice
long and strongly aimed at, but that the Queen had begged a solemn respite,
which Edward would not break at his entreaty. The Cage of his restraint was
strong, and guarded; yet 'twas too weak to cloister his Ambition, which did
suspect, but never feared his Freedom; which he attempts, but yet was not so
sure, that he durst trust it. In the mean time, with a sweet Correspondencie,
and the interchange of many amorous Letters, their hearts are brought together,
and their several intents perfectly known; hers, to prosecute her Journey; his,
to purchase his Freedom, and to wait upon her, or else to loose his Life if it
miscarry. It was a strange Adventure in the Queen, in this inquisitive and
dangerous time, to hazard her Honor under the fidelity of a Messenger; but she
was well beloved, paid liberally, and was not more careful in her election,
than wary in the employment; which makes things difficult in themselves, prove
facile and easy. No sooner had she knowledge of the Plot for his escape, but by
all her best means she confirms and strengthens it, and in the mean time
advances her own affairs by all ways possible: She courts her Adversary with
all the shows of perfect reconcilement. But new delays interpose; the King had
certainly some inward motive that presaged his ruin, and that this Wife of his
must be the Actor; which brought him slowly on to set her forward. Spencer,
that by his own could judge her Cunning, suspects her plea of haste and sudden
kindness, and now begins to grow a little colder, till he had better sounded
her intentions; which by his Spies he could not so discover, but that she
seemed as pure and clear as Crystal.

The King will not consent to her going.
Yet Edward would not give consent she should be a gadding; time past away; she
labors hard, but fruitless, till at length she found she was abused. Guien
must be rather lost, than she should wander. Her heart so strongly fixed upon
this Journey, was torn as much with anger as with sorrow: Reason at length
o'recame her Sexes weakness, and bids her rather cure, than vent her Passion.
The opportunity thus snatched from her hopes, she seems well pleased, and glad
to stay at home; no inward motion seemed to appear, that might beget suspicion.
Spencer, that was as cunning as a Serpent, finds here a female Wit that went
beyond him, one that with his own Weapons wounds his Wisdom, and taught him
not to trust a Woman's Lip-salve, when that he knew her breast was filled with
rancour. Pretending a Journey of Devotion,
When the nap of this Project was fallen off, and Spencer with the King were
seeking for some other bush to stop this gap, her judgment was so fortunate as
to pretend a Journey of Devotion to St Thomas of Canterbury; which by her
jealous Overseers (being a Work of Piety) is wholly unsuspected. All things
prepared, by a faithful Messenger she gives her beloved Servant Mortimer
knowledge of the time, and her intention. Then, with the Prince her Son and
Comfort, that must be made the Stale of this great action, she fearless
ventures on this holy Journey. The King was well content that she should be
absent, and pray to whom she would within the Kingdom; Her jealous eyes so
watchful, had enforced him to take by stealth, what now he gets in freedom.
Spencer is not displeased, but well contented, that wished she would remain an
absent Pilgrim. A short time bringing her to the Shrine of her pretensions, she
makes as short a stay, but hastes forward. Mortimer informed the Plot was now
in action, puts on his practice for a present trial. Some say that with a
Sleeping-drink he charmed his Keepers; I rather think it Drink that made them
sleepy: Whatever 'twas, by this he stole his Freedom, and slily scapes away
unseen, untaken. At the Seaside he finds his Royal Mistress and the young
Prince prepared to go a Shipboard; the Earl of Cane and Bishop of Hereford
ready to attend them; and he now comes, to make the Consort perfect. She
embarques for France with Mortimer.
All things succeeding thus fortunately, they loose no time, but embarque, and
weigh their Anchor. Winchelsey had the honor of their last farewell, that did
provide them shipping. Their Sails hoist up, the Heavens they find propitious,
the blustering winds were quiet, and Neptune bears them without a rugged brow
of angry billows; a pleasing foreright Gale (as kept of purpose) fills up their
Sails, and brings them safe to Bulloigne. Thus did our Pilgrims escape the pride
and malice of him which little dreamed of this Adventure: his Craft and Care,
that taught him all those lessons of Cunning Greatness, here fell apparent
short of all Discretion, to be thus over-reached by one weak Woman. For her
Escape, it skilled not, nor could hurt him: it was the rising Son with cause he
feared; which who would have trusted with a Mother, justly moved by their
disorder? Where now were all his Spies, his fawning Agents that fed his ear
with every little motion that did but crack within the Kingdom? Now it
Thundered, they were asleep, as was their Minion-Master, else he would sure
have seen, and soon prevented so lame a Project, that paced afoot so long a
walk, so softly. But when the glorious power of Heaven is pleased to punish Man
for his transgression, he takes away the sense and proper power by which he
should foresee and stop his danger.

The King sad at the News.
This news flies swiftly to the King, who entertains it with a sad heart, as
justly it deserved. The Spencers, with the Crew of their dependants, are
nettl'd with a tale that starts their greatness; they think the Plot was surely
laid, that took so rightly; and in the makers Wit, condemn their Judgment, that
led them by the hand to what they acted. Mortimer, whom Spencer deadly hated,
was well allied, and strong in Friends and Kindred; he had a Cause in hand
would win assistance, when that a Queen and an heir apparent backed it. But now
'twas past prevention; it is a virtue to make the best of that we cannot fly
from.

Edward, whose yielding heart at first misgave him, grows sadly dull, and seems
to read his Fortune; his melancholy thoughts have no impressions but such as
were engraved within his conscience. To take him off, Spencer contemns the
danger, extenuating their best hopes, which were but fixed upon the French, a
nation light and inconstant, whom Money would take off, if Force should fail
him: Spencer encourages him.
he tells him he had cause to smile, not mourn, that was so freed of such a
Chamber-mischief, that was more to be feared at home, than with her Brother.
Lastly, he prays him to be like himself, a Monarch, that well might bend, and
yet not yield to Fortune; 'twas now high time to order so his business, that
there might be no farther fear of danger. Baldock the Chancellor sets to a
helping hand to revive his Spirits, which seemed so much dejected; and briefly
thus discoursed his better judgment.

Sir, If you now should droop, or show a faintness, when your occasions do
expect your Valor, your subjects will believe you know more danger than they
or see or fear; which must be followed with a dull coldness over the whole
Kingdom; which what it may enforce, you may consider. It Is easy to overcome a
weak resistance, which yielding, fears the stroke before it is coming; but
nobler hearts are ever most triumphant, when they are round beset with greatest
perils. Alas, what can the Queen a wandering Woman compass, that has nor Arms,
nor Means, nor Men, nor Money? Think you her Brother will so back her passion,
as to expose himself to such a hazard? France knows our Arms too well, too
much, to tempt them, or come within our distance in our dwellings: admit he
should, what can he do to England, which has a wooden wall will wet his
courage? Lewis, that had made him a sure Party within the Kingdom long before
he landed, when civil tumults had embroiled our Forces, found here so sharp and
hotly cursed a welcome, as left your Predecessor soon his first possession: he
came in his own right, and yet forsook it; can you then fear they will venture
for another, or hazard War that look for no advantage? Put case they do, have
you your Forces ready, you need not fear the French or any other: but you must
then by your own sprightful carriage give life and courage to the Valiant
Soldier, that fights your Quarrel, and his proper Honor; like to a careful
Steward, still provided to give the new-come Guest a handsome Welcome. And, if
I err not, it is not much improper you let the Kingdom know the Queens
departure, how far it swerves from duty, love, or reason. Dangers that be far
off, may be prevented, with time, advice, and with a better leisure; yet it is
discretion to catch the foretop of a growing evil: look to your Ports: your
Navy well provided, no foreign Force can wrong your Peace or Quiet. For those
within-door that may breed suspicion, the ways are easy to secure their
moving. Yet all this is too little, if you stagger, or with a drowzie coldness
seem disheartened: it is life and action gives your People metal. For Gods sake
then (great Sir) leave off this Passion, which wrongs your Greatness, and does
maze your servants, that see no cause but merely your Opinion. This Speech thus
ended, the King forces himself against his disposition, and clothes his cheeks
with smiles, his brow with gladness: with a more freedom he discourses plainly
the present state of his entangled business: The Queen is tainted. The Ports
are stopped,
a Declaration is sent out to all the Kingdom, that taints the Honor of the
Queen, but more his Judgment. The Ports are all stopped up, that none should
follow: a Medicine much too late; a help improper, to shut the Stable-door, the
Steed being stolen: but it is the nature of a bought Experience, to come a day
too late, the Market ended. the Navy sent out, and Watch and Ward every where.
The Navy is sent out to guard the Frontier, and Watch and Ward is kept
throughout the Kingdom. These and many other grave Instructions are recommended
to the Spencers wisdom, whom it concerned as deeply as their welfare: they
think not fit to trust the Care to others, but do become themselves the
Supervisors; which for a time of force enforced their absence; in which short
intermiss, the King relapseth to his former error, which gave him many sad and
deep impressions: he thinks the breach of Wedlock a foul trespass; but to
contemn her he so much had wronged, deserved as much as they could lay upon
him: But he was guilty in a higher nature; he had upheld his Parasites to brave
her with too too fond a base presumptuous daring: he feared his cruel actions,
stained with blood, would challenge a quick and sad requital, equal vengeance:
he saw the Subjects full of grief and passion, apt and desirous to embrace
Rebellion; and few or none declared themselves to aid him, unless 'twere such
as stirred by mere compulsion, or private interest of their own safety. Such
dull conceits did so ingross his fancy, that he almost despaired of his own
fortune. His Minions, now returned from their employment, had much ado to level
these deep reckonings, which lay so heavy on his guilty Conscience: yet at the
length he gained his wonted temper, and acts over afresh his former Errors.

The customary habit of transgression is like a Corn that does infest his
owner; though it be pared and cut, yet it renews, unless the Core be rooted
out that feeds his tumor. The guilty Conscience feels some inward motions,
which flashing lightly, shave the hair of Mischief; the scalp being naked, yet
the roots remaining, they soon grow up again, and hide their baldness: the
operations of the soul of true Repentance, grubs up the very depth of such vile
Monsters, and leaves alone the scars of their abuses.

The Queen entertained in France with seeming gladness.
The French King having notice of his Sister's arrival, entertains it with a
wondrous plausible and seeming show of gladness. After she had well refreshed
her self and her little Son, (as yet a stranger to the riding of so long a
journey upon a wooden horse) with an Honorable attendance, befitting more her
Estate, Birth and Dignity, than the present miserable condition she was in, she
is waited on to Paris: all the great ones and Bravery of that Kingdom are sent
to give her welcome, and to bring her to the King's presence. When she beheld
the Sanctuary of her hopes, her dearest Refuge, she falls upon her knee, and
with a sweetly-becoming modesty, she thus begins her Story. Her Royal Brother
unwilling to suffer such an Idolatry from her, that had a Father, Brother,
Husband, so great and glorious, takes her up in his arms, when thus she speaks
her sorrow.

The Queens Address.
Behold in me (dear Sir) your most unhappie Sister, the true picture of a
dejected Greatness, that bears the grief of a despised Wedlock, which makes me
fly to you for help and succor. I have, with a sufferance beyond the belief
of my Sex, outrun a world of trials: time lessens not, but adds to my
afflictions; my burden is grown greater than my patience: yet it is not I alone
unjustly suffer; my tears speak those of a distressed Kingdom, which, long time
glorious, now is almost ruined. My blushing cheek may give a silent knowledge,
I too much love and honor the cause of my afflictions, to express it. Yet this
in modesty I may discover; my Royal Husband is too much abused; his will, his
ear, his heart is too too open to those which make his errors their advantage:
the hope of his return is lost; he still must wander, while such bewitching
Sirens are his leaders. But why do I include them as a number? it is only one;
the rest are but his creatures. How many of his brave and nobler Subjects have
sold their lives to purchase him his Freedom? All expectation fails; domestic
Quarrels have taken away their lives, that strove to help it: unless you please
your Arms shall disinchant him, he still must be abused, his Kingdom grieved. I
had not else thus stolen to crave your favor. Made to your hand, you have a way
is glorious, to let the world behold and know your virtue; Fortune presents you
with a just occasion to crown your Glory with an equal Goodness: would you
dispute it, can there be a motive more weighty, than to succor these poor
Ruins which else must lose their portions, being Birthright? See here, and
view but with a just compassion, two Royal Plants depressed, and like to
wither, both Branches of the Flower-de-luce, the Root you sprang from; which,
but in you, have neither hope nor comfort. Would your impartial wisdom but
consider how good a work it is to help distresses, a wronged Sister cannot be
forsaken, and an Heir of such a Crown be left unpitied. In such an act of
Goodness and of Justice, both heaven and earth will witness your true Valor,
and your poor Handmaid joy in such a Brother. Let it not breed suspicion, that
I seek you with such a weak, forsaken, poor attendance: I was enforced to steal
away at random, and durst not by my number be distrusted, by those with Argus
eyes observed my actions. Though I am here, and those behind that love me,
besides the Justice of my Cause, the strongest motive, I bring the hearts of a
distressed Kingdom, that, if you set me right, will fight my Quarrel: their
Truth needs no suspect; you have for Warrant their Queen and Mistress, with
their King that must be. Then, gracious Sir, extend your Royal virtue. I
challenge by that purer Blood, assistance, whereof my Birthright gives me
equal portion: let not succeeding Ages in your Story read such a taint, that
you forsook a Sister, a Sister justly grieved, that sought your Succor. Her
willing tongue would fain have moved farther; but here the fountain of her eyes
poured forth their treasure; a shower of Crystal tears enforced her silence;
which kind of Rhetoric won a Noble pity: the Passions of the mind being
sweetly moved, the heart grows great, and seems to sympathize their agitations;
which produces a ready willingness, that calls to action the foot, the hand,
the eye, the tongue, the body, till that the Engines slack that cause this
vigor; and then they all revert to their first temper. The King and his Peers
moved at her discourse.
The Queens discourse and tears so far prevailed, the King and all his Peers are
deeply moved; their longing hearts beat strongly for expression, which might
assure her, they embraced her quarrel, and with their Lives would venture soon
a trial: Her Brother bids her cast her cares to his Protection, which would
make Edward know and feel his errors; his greater Subjects offer her their
Service, and vow to be Companions of her fortune. The general voice of France
proclaimed a fury strained to the height, to punish her Oppressors. This
overture for a while is so hotly pursued, that she (poor Queen) with an abused
confidence believed things as they seemed in show, true, perfect, real. It Is
not alone her error, but a disease all flesh and blood embraces; with ease we
credit what we wish and hope for: yet where so great a Consequence waits on the
action, there is just cause to fear and doubt the sequel. Though that our aims
be just, discreet, and hopeful, yet if they be confined to certain hazard, or
do reflect upon the private danger; of that same second hand that is engaged,
reason in justice strengthens the suspicion. To right the Queen, and to restore
her Heir; to ease the Subject, punish the Oppressor; all these are works thus
far seem good and easy: but these, not Will, but Power and Strength must
compass, against a potent King in his own Kingdom; which if it fell out well,
returned with honor; if ill; endangered France with an Invasion, which might
perhaps prove fatal and unhappie. Wise men are moved in Passion, not in
Judgment, which sifts the depth and core of such great actions, weighing the
danger and advantage, with the hazard and dependence; which if they turn the
Scale, or make them even, takes off the edge of their propense affections,
which Cause asswag'd the heat of this employment.

Spencer eyes the French,
Spencer, whose watchful eye was fixed on Paris, by his Perspectives sees the
glorious welcome that waits upon the Queen and her attendants; he hears no
other News, but what provisions were made in France to serve for War in
England: but fears them not.
he is not frighted, or a whit distempered; he knew the French were giddy,
light, inconstant, apter for Civil Broyls than Foreign Triumphs; beginning
more than Men, but in conclusion weaker and more uncertain far than Women: he
taxes yet his own improvidence, that gave the angry Queen so fair advantage;
'twas not the Power of France he feared, nor all their threatenings, but the
intestine danger, which seemed fearful: He knew the Subjects hearts were quite
estranged, which did expecting long for some Combustion: severity of Laws had
kept them under; 'twas not in duty, but by mere compulsion, which backed by
Foreign aid, and such brave Leaders, would break their Chains upon the least
Alarm.

To take off France, he straight select his Agents, such as well knew the ways
of these employments, and lades them over with Gold, and sound Instructions; He
bribes them.
bidding them freely bribe, and promise mountains, till they had undermined and
crossed the Queens proceedings: he bids them charily observe the quality of
time, and place, and person, proportioning their Rates with such discretion,
that those which most could hurt were deepest laden. These Pinaces of State
thus fraighted, arrive at Paris, where the heat was almost cooled before their
coming; yet they go on to make the business surer: they set upon the Pillars of
the State, and feel their Pulses; who wrought like Wax against the glorious
Sunshine of brighter Angels, which came showring downwards, and struck them
dumb and deaf for opposition: Gold in an instant changed the Council's temper,
and conquered without blows their valiant anger. The Queens distressed tears
are now forgotten; they gave impressions, these a real feeling: words are but
wind, but here is a solid substance, that pierced not the ear, but hearts of her
assistants.

The Plot full-ripe, to make it yet more perfect, they set upon the King, and
show the danger. To force by Sea a passage into England, was a design as
truly weak as hopeless, where wants a Navy, and the full provision might give
a sure Retreat, or certain Landing. To cope at home with such a potent Kingdom,
required an Army full of strength, and mighty, which must be still supplied
with Men and Money; which not ready here in such abundance, a Woman's passion
was too weak a motive to levy Arms alone on that occasion, which brings no
other gains but merely Honor. The English Nation were not so affected unto
their Mistress Quarrel, as to venture legal revenge, or else intestine rapine;
which they must hazard, if they loose, or vanquish. Lastly, a bare relation of
a female passion enforced the Cause; which whether true or false, was yet in
question; the Plaintiff had been heard, but no Defendant. These were the
Reasons which are daily tendered to take the French King off from his
intentions; which loved to talk of War, but not to act it. A small persuasion
quickly fills his stomach, that could not well digest a War with England. Young
Kings that want Experience, have not Judgment to touch the marrow of their
proper business, and sound the depths of Councels: For Advisers may be abused,
and bought and sold to mischief, while Servants raise their gain from their
dishonor. This being so frequent, it is a Royal Virtue, that hears, and sees,
but gives no resolution in things of weight, till he have reconciled his own
with judgment to the Councils reasons: if that it be above his reach that is in
question, let him not so rely upon the great ones, that their words prove a
Law, which have their workings, that aim more at their ends, than his
advancement. As Kings have Counselors of State to ease their Burden, so should
they have a second help to guard their Honor; a lesser body of selected good
ones, whose wisdoms privately inform him rightly of what in goodness is most
fit his judgment. State-actions fill the Purse, but foul the Conscience; and
Policy may bloom the Profit, blights the Honor, which Kings should keep as
tender as their Eyesight.

Though thus the squares that fed her hopes were altered, the Queen is still
led on with promised Succors, which at the upshot meet with new excuses. She
seeing these delays, and vain protractions, begins to doubt and fear there was
some juggling; yet bears it strongly with a noble Patience, showing no
Discontent or least Suspicion; hoping at worst that here in safety she and her
Son might anchor out their troubles. The Posts that daily fly 'twixt France and
England, had liberally informed the state of French Occurrents. Spencer
informed the gap was stopped on that side, provides to quiet all at home if he
could work it: he sets upon the discontented Barons, that hated him, and envied
more his Fortunes: he courts their favor, and imparts Promotions that might
betray them, more with show than profit: he makes the Gentry proud, by giving
Titles that feed ambitious minds, but not content them; and takes off from the
People light Oppressions, but keeps afoot the greatest Grievance, that kept
them down from hope to shake his Greatness. All sides do entertain it with a
seeming gladness, though well they knew it was enforced kindness.

While each part thus dissembles their intentions, the Navy was called home; a
Charge was useless, where was no fear might cause a foreign danger: the Ports
were opened, and the Watch surceased that day and night attended on the
Frontier. This haste, as 'twas too sudden, wants assurance: the rising Son was
absent, and still looked for, while the declining dipped his cheeks in darkness.
To ease this care, the Queen is strongly tempted by such as seemed her friends,
but were his Agents, to reconcile her self unto her Husband, whom henceforth
she might rule as she thought fitting. When this fell short, she is at least
entreated to send back her young Son, the Kingdoms comfort; which took it ill
he should be made a Stranger, or in the power of a foreign Nation. These sweet
enchantments move no whit her yielding, that too well knew the Serpent that
begat them; her Son sent back, they had the prey they looked for, and she must
lack the prop must keep her upright.

This Project failing, they fall upon a new one. King Edward complains to the
Pope.
The King frames a Letter to his Holiness, full of humility and fair obedience,
yet craving help, and bitterly complaining that Isabel his Wife had fled his
Kingdom, pretending a mere Voyage of Devotion, and had stolen away his Son, his
only comfort, attended by a Crew of traiterous Rebels, that strove to break the
Peace of Christian Princes; amongst which one being taken in actual Treason, had
escaped his Prison by a lewd Enchantment, whom he had cause to fear abused his
Wedlock. Lastly, the French King, his Alley and Brother, received and kept
them, being often summoned to desist and leave them. The Pack of this complaint
so well contrived, was not opposed by the French King's Council, who could be
well content, that by commandment, their importuning Guests were fairly
quitted; Necessity would color actions of unkindness, if Houshold-Laws were
broke, or those of Nature. This Letter runs from hence to Paris, from thence to
Rome, by that same practick Agent, that in this Interlude had won the Garland;
he bears a Picklock with him, that must open the gates that were fast shut to
guard the Conclave: his first Arrival finds a fair reception: Where Money makes
the Mart, the Market's easy. These goodly gloses gilded over with shadows,
must win belief where there was none to answer: Had they been just and true,
the fact was odious, and might in Justice challenge reformation; it was enough
that here it is believed so, the Fact was fully proved, the Reason smothered.
The Cardinals, that freely felt the English Bounty, persuade the Pope it was
both just and pious, so great a Misdemeanour should be questioned, that gave
the Christian word so lewd Example. The Pope admonishes the French King to quit
the Queen.
On this flies out a present Admonition to the French King, that straight he
free his Kingdom of this his Sister-Queen and her Adherents, on pain of
disobedience, Interdiction.

She is enticed to return into England.
While this Device was moulding, out of England the Queen receives a large, but
secret Summons, that all her friends were ready to attend her with all things
fitting on her first arrival: more than the plagues of Egypt did oppress them,
which they nor could nor would endure longer: they bid her hasten her return;
though her provision were not enough, their Swords should fight her Quarrel.
She with a joyful heart receives this offer, which like a precious Balm, closed
up the wounds of her sad thoughts, made dull with her suspicion. She tells the
French King.
More to advance this weighty work declining, she tells the King the tenor of
this tender. His clouded brow, the character of Passion, discovered soon the
signs of alteration, which yet seemed more of Pity than of Anger: He shows
her the Popes Sentence.
he had but then read his Italian Summons, which he plucks forth, and casts his
drooping Sister, bidding her view, and wisely there consider, what danger he
was in by her protection. The amazed Queen, when she beheld the Sentence, in
stead of help, would rob her of her refuge, she falls upon her knee imploring
pity, if not to give her Aid, to right her Honor, which was eclipsed with so
foul a Slander. A shower of mellow tears, as mild as April's, thrill down her
lovely cheeks, made red with anger: dearly she begs at least but so much
respite until his Holiness might be informed, her innocence was such sought no
favor, but that the Law should give upon full hearing. She does implore him
that he would compare her adversaries malice with his cunning, who not
contented with her deep oppression, sought to betray at once her Hope and
Honor, wrought with such art, and such a close conveyance, that here her
Judgment had outrun her Trial.

He nothing sorry for so fair a warrant that took him off from charge and
future hazard, and yet withal would cover such Unkindness, seems to lament the
cause, and his condition, that of necessity must yield obedience: he could not
for her sake at one blow hazard the danger of himself and his whole Kingdom.
Persuades her to Peace.
Not to forsake her wholly, he persuades her to entertain a Peace; the King her
Husband should yield to her Conditions: he will effect it, that had a power to
force it in his denial; which he would venture, if the World gainsaid it. Let
him (quoth he) then use you ill, or not receive you, I Will make him know I can
and will revenge it: small time is left you to consider or dispute it; advise
with speed, and let me know your answer.

She relates it to the Bishop, Cane, and Mortimer.
The amazed Queen abandoned and forsaken, relates at full this far unlookt-for
passage unto the Bishop, Cane, and Mortimer: their valiant hearts make good
their Mistress sorrows, and tell her they would set her right without the
Frenchmen; Who advise her not to return.
bidding her not consent to her returning, though it were soder'd up with
showers of kindness: she well enough did know her Husbands humor, which would
observe no Vow, no Oath, no Promise: if Spencer once more seized her in his
clutches, she should be surely mewed, and kept from Gadding. Mortimer storms.
Mortimer contains not in this strain his Passion, but breaks into the
bitterness of Anger, taxing the French as base, unkind, persidious, that knew
not what belonged to love, or valor. The Queen moderates.
The Queen, that knew the danger, mildly calms him, letting him truly
understand his weakness, that in such provocation might beget surprisal, when
they must be sent back without prevention. Though that her heart were fired,
and swollen with anger, she temporizeth so, 'twas undiscovered: a whispering
murmur, muttered from the Courtiers, says, that she should be sent with speed
for England: she feigns to make provision for her Journey, yet unresolved which
way to escape, or whither; yet with this preparation she beguiled the French
that had cozened her; for they had bargained to see her safe at home, and
re-deliver'd. Being thus irresolute, of means, of friends, of succor
unprovided; the Master failing, she attempts the Servants, who sing their
Masters tune by rote verbatim; they cannot give her single help or comfort.
Declining misery that once is sinking, finds it self shunned like some
infectious Fever, and goes alone in shades and silent darkness. Fortune's
bright Sunshine walks with more professors, than her resplendence has or
beams or streamers; but if her glory sink, or be eclipsed, they shun her fall,
as children do a Serpent: and yet such trials guide not wretched Man's
election. Affection, (that forsakes in choice the Judgment) is led alone by
form, and not by substance; which does betray with ease where it is trusted: if
Virtue guide the chooser, the beginning is mutual goodness, which still ends in
glory. The very height and depth of all Affliction cannot corrupt the worth of
such a Friendship, that loves the Man more than it loves his Fortunes. The
raging Storms and Winds may blow and batter, yet still this goodly Rock makes
good his Station. The correspondencie of firm Affections is purely innocent,
sincerely grounded: if Private ends or Worldly aims o'er-weigh them, they then
are but a mere Commerce and Traffic, which hold no longer than the Bargain is
driving. Where Truth apparently does warrant Love and Friendship, it lives and
dies, but never changes Color. But to proceed: the Queen in this Distraction
finds, past her hope, an unexpected Comfort; this Heaven can do, when flesh
and bloud's at weakest. Robert of Artois.
Robert of Arthois, a man both wise and valiant, that loved Goodness for her
own sake, not for fashion, at her first coming tendered her his Service: he was
a well-resolved steady Statesman, not led by Complement, or feigned
professions: he had been absent during all this passage; returning, hears and
pities her Condition, blaming her Nations falsehood, and her misfortune, which
he resolves to help out with his best Counsel: he seeks and finds the Queen,
whom, sadly musing, he interrupts, and thus revives her spirits.

His Speech.
Great Queen, It is the more excellent part of Wisdom, with an equal Virtue to
entertain the different kinds of Fortune; this Peregrination of ours is a mere
composition of Troubles, which seem greater or less, as is the quality of that
heart that bears them: I must confess, you have too great a portion, the
Justice of your Grief does truly speak it; but Tears and Sorrow are not means
to right them. Just Heaven does graciously behold and pity those that do with
an active Hope implore it, and work as well as pray, the deeds of Goodness:
your tender Sex, and former great Condition, have been a stranger to these
bitter trials; a little time will make them more familiar, and then you will
confess your Passions error. They soonest perish yield to their Afflictions,
and see no journeys end that tire with burden. For your own Virtues sake,
resume your spirits; your Sorrows are not such as you believe them. Behold in
me, your true and faithful Servant, a resolution fixed to run your fortune; you
may no longer hazard your abode or being in this unworthy and unthank-ful
Climate, paved over and closely made to your destruction. Wherefore if my
advice may sway your judgment, let speed and care prevent so sure and great a
danger. Near to this place the Empire has his Confines, where many Princes are
may yield you Succor; at worst, you there may find a sure Protection, which
in your Native Soil is more than doubtful. I will not yet presume to teach your
judgment, that can much better sway your own Condition: Only I lay before you
truly my Conceptions, which have no other aim than for your Safety. Your
Wisdom may direct your best advantage, which I will second with my Life and
Fortunes. Which infinitely joys the Queen.
Infinitely was the Queen joy'd with his Relation, which weighing the quality of
the man that spoke it, seemed justly worth embracing: She finds it was
sincere, not light or verbal, which makes it self a partner of her Sorrows; she
doubles many Thanks, and gentle Proffers of true requital, which her Son
performed when he himself was forced to leave his Country. Straight she
provides to follow his directions, and with a wary and secret carriage, settles
her self for her intended Journey; yet still gives out she meant to go for
England, whither she sends a Post to treat Conditions, with Letters smoothly
writ in all submission; and courting Spencer with a world of kindness, she lets
him know that she relied solely upon his Love to be the Mediator. Unto her
Royal Brother she discourses, that now she understood the Peace was finished,
which made her first a stranger to her Husband, who now would hasten home to
make it perfect. And to the Council, which well she knew were bribed to send
her back perforce, if she denied it, she more and more extols and praises
Spencer, as if 'twere he alone had wrought her Welfare. The English thus
abused, the French deluded, both are secure; she was providing homewards, which
made the one remiss, the other careless; else she, forestalled, had found her
Project harder. In this her course she sees but small appearance, and few such
Hopes as might induce Assurance; yet she resolves to hazard all, and wander,
rather than to return thus unprovided. Could she in reason look for any
Assistance from Strangers, when her Brother had denied it? or could she think
the Germans would be faithful, when her own Birthright had for gain betrayed
her? Alas, she could not; yet enforced, must venture that in her Hopes, could
find no other Refuge. Necessity, the Law of laws, makes Cowards valiant, and
him content that has no Choice to guide him; which from the Barren'st ground
expects some Harvest, that else in danger would despair and perish. All things
prepared, and her Attendants ready, she takes a solemn Leave, and thanks her
Brother, assuring him she nothing more desired, than that she might but live to
quite his Kindness. His Answer, like his Gifts, was short and little. And thus
she leaves the Court, in show contented: with a sad heart, a watery eye, a
passion highly inflamed, she journeys forward till she came nearer where the
Bounders parted. The limits of ungrateful France she then forsaking, gives them
this parting Blow, to ease her Sorrow.

Her Farewell to France.
Farewell (quoth she) farewell, thou glorious Climate, where I first saw the
World, and first did hate it; thou gave me Birth, and yet denyest me Being;
and Royal Kindred, but no Friends were real. Would I had never sought thy Help
or Succor, I might have still believed thee kind, not cruel: but thou to me
art like a graceless mother, that suckles not, but basely sells her children.
Alas! what have I done, or how offended, thou should deny my life her native
Harbor? Was It not enough for thee in my Distresses to yield no Comfort, but
thou must Expel me, and, which was worse, Betray me to my Ruin? The poorest
soul that claims in thee a dwelling, is far more happy than thy Royal Issue:
but time will come thou will repent this Error, if thou remember this my just
Prediction; my Offspring will revenge a Mothers Quarrel, a Mothers Quarrel
just and fit for Vengeance. Then shall thou seek and sue, yet find more favor
from him thy Foe, than I could win, a Sister. With this she weeping ends, and
paceth forward, the Wheel of Fortune turning: Grief grown greater, few real
Friends attend it, false forsake it: Infidelity, the Plague of Greatness, is
commonly at full, when Hope does lessen; and strives to make the Tide of Sorrow
greater. The Bishop of Exeter forsakes the Queen.
Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, who till now had faithfully followed the Queens
party, and made himself a sharer of her action, with an unnoble president does
now forsake her, seeing the French hopes vanished, and those remaining
hopeless; examining the grounds of her adventure, almost as short in hope as in
assurance, he slily steals away to his old Master, which wins him Grace, but
lost his Life and Honor. Some think him from the first not sound or real, but
a mere stalking-horse for Spencer's Cunning: but this has no congruity with
Reason. The Queens departure unknown and unsuspected, in which he was a prime
and private Actor, had he at first been false, had been prevented, at least the
Prince's; which had marred the project. Neither can I believe so mean or basely
of that same Reverend Honor of his Calling, that it would be a Conduit-pipe to
feed the stomach of such a tainted, foul, polluted Cistern. By this Treachery
the resolutions of the Queen are fully discovered; the Landscape of her Travels
soon surveyed, begets a more ontempt than fear of danger. The coldness of the
French King being understood, their flat denial yet contents not Spencer, who
did expect his bargain for his Money: Had he had but the Prince, they had dealt
fairly, while he was being in their proper power. But they, to justify
themselves, profess it freely the Queen had gone beyond them with their
Cunning; They thought she had been homeward bound, as she divulged. Thus Women's
Wit sometimes can cozen Statesmen. Now are the German Natures sifted, and their
Motions, who fight but ill for words, and worse for nothing. Their
Constitutions dull and slow, were fitter to guard a Fort, than to invade a
Kingdom. The Queen was bare of Money, void of Credit; which might beget them
Valor, her assistance. These were conceptions pleased our Minions fancy.

Time, that at length outstrips the longest journey, has brought our English
Pilgrims into Henault. Is bravely welcomed by the Earl.
The Earl, a man was truly good and noble, resolved so Royal Guests deserved as
brave a Welcome, esteeming it a Virtue fit his greatness, to be the Patron of
Majestic Ruins: He had a Brother youthful, strong, and valiant, one that
loved Arms, and made them his profession; His Brother pities the Queen,
this man observed the Queen, and sees her sorrow, which deeply sunk, and moved
a swift Compassion: when he beheld a Misery so great and glorious, a structure
of such worth, so fair and lovely, forsaken, unfrequented, and unfurnisht, by
the cursed hand of an unworthy Landlord, he vows within himself to help repair
it: He tells her, he pitied her Misfortune; his heart as well as eye did bear
him witness: and promises his Service.
He promised her his Service and Assistance, which he would both engage in this
her quarrel; and seems right glad of such a fair occasion to show his Valor in
so brave a Quarrel.

So fair a Morning made the Evening hopeful: By those sweet looks of her
distressed Beauty, and the best language of so rich a Pleader, she does confirm
his well-disposed Affection, whose willing offer seemed more than Courtship. He
makes preparation.
The gallant Henaulder engaged, makes preparation to set upon this glorious
Work, this great Employment. Pity, that strains the Nerves of virtuous
Passions, moves faster far, when that which gives it motion does relish Beauty,
Justice, Goodness. The Tongue that harshly pleads his own compassion, is for
the most part entertained with like respondence; when humble Sweetness,
clothed in truth and plainness, invites the ear to hear, the heart to pity.
Who by a crooked fortune is forced to try and to implore the help of Strangers,
must file his words to such a winning Smoothness, that they betray not him that
hears or speaks them; yet must they not be varnisht over with Falsehood, or
painted with the terms of Art or Rhetoric; this bait may catch some Gudgeons,
but hardly him that has a solid Judgment. It Is more improper where we sue for
favor, to russle boysterously, or grumbling murmur some unsavory Prayers;
which seems to threaten rather a kind of force, than hope of pity: So begging
Soldiers fright a Country-Farmer.

The Earl condemns his haste.
The Earl being a man well broken in the affairs of State, having a knowledge of
this his Brothers resolution, thinks it tasted more of Heat than sound
Discretion; he condemns his haste, and blames his promise; and sending for him,
with a grave, yet mild discourse, does thus present the danger:

To undertake a War, is far more weighty, than hand to hand to fight a single
Combat; the one needs many strengths, the other skill and valor. Who thinks
with his own arm to gain a Conquest, may sell his Life, and yet not purchase
Honor. I pity, as you do, this Royal Lady, and would assist her too, if I were
able; but to attempt where is no hope to vanquish, makes Foes of Friends, and
Friends far more unhappy. France has refused, a strong and warlike Nation; that
King, a Brother, wisely waves the quarrel; he knows the English Strength, and
so digests it, that he will not undertake a War so hopeless. Think you your self
more prudent, strong, or able, than is the Power and Strength of France united?
Or can you dream the English may be conquered by a few forward Youths that long
for action? Do not mistake the work of your Adventure, which is too sad and
great for greater Princes. I do commend your forward Valor, noble Pity; it
shows a virtuous Zeal and Will to Goodness: but measure well the act ere you
begin it; your Valor else must have a lame Repentance. Where is the Sinew of
the War that must maintain it? Nor she nor you have Arms, or Means, or Money;
and sure Words will not conquer such a Kingdom. Yet if you will be fixed, on
God's Name venture, I Will help you what I can: I Will be no Party. True Valor
dwells not with an overdaring, but lives with those that fight by just
discretion, where there is Hope at least, if not Advantage. Could you but
credit the beginning, that in reason the world might think it had a touch of
Judgment, I must confess I should approve your Valor; but you can only
countenance your first motion with confidence beyond the Moon or Planets: Then
leave betimes, before you be engaged, which after must much more impair your
Honor. We'll both assist her with our Purse and Forces, yet do it so, the
quarrel seem not ours. Sir John with a quiet and attentive patience hears out
his Brother, knowing his admonitions sprung from an honest Heart and grave
Experience, yet thinks robbed by Age of youthful Vigor; from which belief he
draws this sudden Answer.

His Answer.
Sir, If all the world forsake this Noble Lady, my single arm alone shall fight
her quarrel; I have engaged my Faith, and will preserve it, or leave my Bones
within the Bed of Honor: No After-age shall taint me with such baseness, I
gave a Queen my Vows, and after broke them. Such presidents as these we seldom
meet with, nor should they be so slenderly regarded. The Mother and her Son,
the Heir apparent of such a Kingdom, plead in Justice Pity; Nor shall She
basely be by me forsaken. Reasons of State I know, not your own Nature, do take
you off from such a glorious Action, which your own Virtue tells you is full of
Goodness. Then sit you still, cry aim: I Will do the business. Inglorious France
may shame in his refusal; nor will I follow such a strain of baseness. Although
no Sister, it is a Queen that seeks it; a Queen that justly merits Love and
Pity. I have some Followers, Means, and some Friends and State to stick too;
I Will pawn them all ere she shall be forsaken. I know I can in safety bring her
thither, and she has there her Friends will bid her welcome. That King has
lost his Subjects hearts, grown sore with grievance; his Minions hatred will be
our advantage: Admit the worst, her expectations fail her, we then can make
retreat without dishonor. But Edward then may chance revenge the quarrel; we
have those pawns will make our own Conditions; the King in the remainder being
ours, they will buy our Peace, and not incense our Anger. I Will not deny, it is
good to weigh the hazard; but he that fears each danger, shall do nothing,
since every humane Action has Suspicion. I am resolved your Love shall still
command me; yet give me leave to be mine own elector. I cannot blaunch this act
which I am tied to, without the taint of shame and foul dishonor, which I will
rather dye than once consent to, although your self and all the world persuade
me. These words spoken so full home, with such a brave resolution, stopped all
reply, and farther contradiction. The Queen jealous of Treachery.
The Queen, who had already a French and an Italian trick, was jealous lest she
here should taste a Flemish one. The Earl's Speech had given her a doubtful
belief that he had been tampered withal, seeing his first temper so much
cooled: She knew well enough, if Money could prevail, it would be tendered
freely; and she must then be bought and sold to mischief. Many of her Domestic
Spies were here attending, as she well knew and saw, to work her ruin.
Spencer's Agents frustrated.
Spencer it is true had sent his Agents hither with like Instructions, and their
Bills of lading; but here they find their pains and labor fruitless. The Earl
was himself, not led by Counsel; and had a heart of steel against corruption,
though he was loath to back alone this quarrel; which did proceed from Want,
not Will to help her: yet he abhorred the very thought of selling his Fame and
Honor by so foul Injustice. Yet those that had the charge were not so
hopeless, but that a little time might hap to work it: As all Courts have, his
had a kind of people, and these were great ones too, that boldly warrant and
undertake to undermine their Master; which daily fed them more and more with
Money, while they give only words instead of payment. The Briber trades but on
poor advantage, that buys but Hope, and that at best uncertain; which often
fails, although it is dearly purchased: And reason good, since this may be a
Maxim; Corrupted minds, that to do the actions of Injustice will prejudice
the Soul and Conscience, by the contracting of a wicked enterprise for gain or
lucre, will never refuse, in hope of a greater advantage, to sell themselves to
a second mischief.

The Queens doubts increasing, she importunes the hastening her journey:
But now the Queens doubts increasing, and her longing grown to the height of
her expectation, she is enforced with more importunity to hasten on the
advancement of her Journey: she makes her winning looks (the handmaids of her
Hopes) express their best ability, more to inflame the heart of her Protector.
But without need.
But alas! these motives need not; ambition of Glory, the natural operations of
Pity, and the honest care of his engagement, had made him so truly hers, and
careful of this design, that he leaves no means or opportunity unattempted,
that might set it forward. Already had he gotten together Three hundred
well-resolved Gallants, that vow to live and dye in this fair Quarrel. Here was
the body of this preparation, the pillar that this Enterprise must stick to.
Confidence is certainly, in the actions of this nature, a singular Virtue, and
can work Wonders; else we cannot but believe this little Army scarce strong
enough to conquer such a Kingdom. The Queens hopes must in reason have been
very desperate, if her Domestic expectation had not been greater than her
foreign Levy: But more could not be had, without some doubt, more hazard, and
a longer protraction; and these are believed sufficient to try their fortune,
if not to master it. They stay not therefore to attend the gaining of a
multitude, which might at their arrival rather beget suspicion, than win
assistance. If the intelligence kept touch, they were sure of Men enough, and
they had Leaders.

Spencer's purloyning Brokers seeing the flood coming, which yet would, as they
thought, at best prove but a Neap-tide, since they failed in the deepest
Mystery of their employment (for here was room for no corruption) resolve yet
not to make their labor altogether fruitless, but to give their great Master a
true touch of their willingness and ability; the remainder of that Money which
fell short in the Masterpiece, they employ to gain a true and full
understanding of the height and quality of this Army, and principally to what
part it was directed. Gold, that makes all things easy, fails not in this his
forcible Operation; which brings unto them the informati^n of the Men, Arms,
and number, with the quality o^ the Navy that was to waft them, and the very
Haven intended for their place of landing. Though, the Circumstances duly
considered, the bulk of this Enterprise was in it self contemptible enough; yet
to improve their own diligence, they extenuate and lessen it in their
advertisement; they send away a forerunning Post, to anticipate the doubt, and
forestal the danger. But now all provisions are ready, and attend the moving of
these hopeful Adventurers. The Queen with a lively look, the Presager of her
future fortune, takes a solemn leave of her kind Host with many hearty thanks,
which must stand for payment till she had recovered the ability to free the
reckoning; which after she as truly performed, by matching the King her Son to
a Daughter of the House of Heinault.

The Queen embarques at Dort.
At Dordrecht the Prince and She with their Retinue are led a shipboard, whence
they depart and steer their Course for Dongport-haven, which was the place
resolved on for their Landing; that part being held the fittest and the
readiest to give them succor. The Heaven, that favored their design, was
more propitious, and from their present Fear procures their Safety. Spencer
being largely informed of their intentions, had made a sound provision, to give
them a hotter welcome than they could withstand or look for, had their
directions held as they had meant them. Scarce had they run the Mornings-Watch,
the Skies grew cloudy, a fullen darkness spread all over the Welkin; the
blustering Winds break loose with hollow roaring, and angry Neptune makes his
Level Mountains: The warry Element had no Green Sickness, but curled banks of
snow that sparkle fury. These Callenders at once assail the Vessel, whose
Lading was the Hope and Glory of a Kingdom; the wooden House does like a Mew
triumphing, bestride the angry Billow; and as a Horse well-mannag'd, does ^eat
his Corvet bravely, without the hazard of his careful Rider.

She is frighted at Sea.
The Queen, that knew no Floods, no Tempests, but those which sprung from Sighs
and Tears of Passion, grows deeply frighted, and amazed with danger: The little
Prince, that never had felt such motions as made him deadly sick without
disorder, takes it unkindly, and with sick tears laments the hansel of his
first profession to be a Soldier. All are confused; the Mariners dejected, do
speak their tears in language seemed to conjure. Three days together tossed and
tumbled, they float it out in hope without assurance; in all which time the
poor distressed Vessel durst neither wear a Band, or bear a Bonnet. The
violence at length being somewhat swaged, and the bright Sun appearing, smiling
sweetly, they find themselves in view of Land, but where they knew not, nor
thought it fit by landing to discover. While thus irresolute they rest
debating, a second doubt enforced their resolution; their Victual was too short
to feed their number till they could tack about for some new Harbor; a fault
without excuse in such employments; this made them venture forth at Harwich to
try their fortune: She lands at Harwich.
Unshipping of their Men, their Arms, their Luggage, was long in action, and
with much disorder; three days are spent in this, while they are forced to make
the naked Sands their strength and bulwark. This made great Spencer's error
most apparent; the least resistance here, or show, or larum, had sent them back
to Sea, or else surpised them; a little strength at Sea had stopped their
passage, or made them lawful prize by such a purchase: But After-wits can help
precedent Errors, if they may be undone, and then new acted. Yet to excuse
this oversight, in show so wretchless, 'twas his Intelligence, not Judgment
failed him: knowing the weakness, he esteemed his vantage in suffering them to
land secure and certain: He would not blaunch the Deer, the Toil so near, which
he was confident would give possession of those he had so long pursued and
sought for. To raise a Guard to wait upon each quarter, if it were Wisdom,
might be no Discretion, as his affairs then stood; such motions promised rather
a Guard to bid them welcome, than resist them: as it would cause a fear, so
'twas a Summons to such as were resolved to back their Party: He made that
place alone secure, where he expected, and they themselves resolved to make
their landing; the rest he leaves at random, and to Fortune, rather than make
things worse by more Commotion.

But now this weather-beaten Troop marched boldly forward, finding as yet few
friends, but no resistance: Whosoever had seen their Body, might have deemed they
had been come to rob some Neighbour-Village, rather than bent to bid the King
to such a Breakfast. Marching forward. She is refreshed at St. Hamonds Abbey.
St. Hamondes, an Abbey of black Monks, had the honor to give their long-lost
Mistress the first Welcome: Here She receives a fair and free refreshing, and
yet but a faint hope of present succor, without the which she knew her case
was desperate. The bruit of this strange Novelty was here divulged; which like
a Thunder-shower, or some Land-water that had drowned the Marshes, and
o'reflown the Level, does make the Cattle run to seek for succor: But when
they knew the bent of her intentions not fixed to rifle, but reform the Kingdom,
they come like Pigeons by whole flock^ to her assistance. Soon flew the News
unto the grieved Barons, whose itching ears attentive, longed to meet it: It
doubled as it flew; and ere it touched them, three hundred Henaults were ten
thousand Soldiers. They lose no time, for fear of some prevention. Lancaster
first joins her.
Henry of Lancaster, whose Brothers Death and proper grievance inflamed his
heart with Grief, his hand for Vengeance, with a strong troop of Friends and
stout Attendants, was the first great one that increased her Party; while many
other brave and noble Spirits do second him themselves, and all their Forces.
By these Supplies the Queen and her great Strangers are quickly cured, and
freed from their first Quartane that shak'd their hopes with so much agitation.

The slumbring King had slept out all the Prologue of this sad Tragedy, which
he suspects would end in blood and mischief: As in his pleasures, in this
weighty business he had relied secure on Spencer's Wisdom; The King is
despairingly sorrowful: his Council startled.
but now the hollow murmur of his danger thundered so loud, that he enforced,
awakes, and sees naught but the face of a despairing Sorrow: each day brings
news of new revolt, each hour a Larum, that threatened guilty Souls with Blood
and Vengeance: His startled Council frighted, fainting, hopeless, fall to
survey the strength of their pursuers; but while they are a registring their
Forces, they are informed the Storm grows strong and greater, and like a Ball
of Snow increased by motion. Their proper Weakness, and the Ill-affection of
those which should defend their Sovereigns quarrel, makes action doubtful, and
the end as hopeless; so that no certain way remained to stop the current. Now
is the Error taxed, and Judgment blamed, that neither barred the Gates, nor
stopped the Entry, since in the House itself was no assurance. Now is the Cruelty
that judged the Barons dearly repented, which was come for vengeance. Now is
the Tyranny of all that Grievance which had abused the King, and robbed the
Kingdom, condemned by his own Actors, as a motive in Justice fit to be reformed
and punished. Lastly, the purchase gained by such corruption as sold
Promotions, Places, Justice, Honor, yields no assistance, but does prove a
burden, which bruised the hearts and thoughts of them that bare it. Affliction,
fittest Physic, sole Commandress for all diseased Minds, polluted Bodies, when
she does sharply touch the sense of our transgressions, begets a Sorrow, and a
sad Repentance; making us know our selves and our own weakness, which were mere
strangers to our own Conditions: This she effects in all; though full
Repentance be a work proper to a true Contrition, which by amendment makes her
Power more perfect. A Mind that is prepossest, by Custom hardened, with a
resolved Will that acts Injustice, observes the first part of her Precepts;
sadly sorry, yet it is not for his actions, but those errors laid him open to
so cursed a trial: The point of Satisfaction or Amendment it thinks too deep a
ransom, hard a sentence, which eases not, but adds to his misfortune. If
here might end the end of man's Creation, this had some color for such crafty
Wisdom; but where Eternity of Bliss or Torment does wait upon the Soul, that
leaves the Body a prey to Death, and to a base Corruption, it is an act of
madness to betray it with humane Policy, without Religion. Actions of goodness
must be truly acted; not sacrificing part, but all the Offering, observing
every point that is required to make up a Repentance full and perfect. This
Lesson is too hard for those great Babies that suck the milk of Greatness, not
Religion. The Fundamental part being fixed to get unjustly, believes a
restitution more improper, which makes their cares and former labors
fruitless, and in an instant blights an age of gleanings: These be the
Meditations of a Statesman, grown plump and fat from other men's Oppressions;
they live in doubtful pleasures, dye in terror; what follows after, they do
feel for ever.

Our Counselors, though they were deeply touched with cause, had yet no leisure
but to deliberate their proper safety, which finds a poor protection, dull,
and hopeless. Their Enemies rejoice, their Friends turn craven, and all forsake
the pit before the battle. Necessity, that treads upon their heels, admits no
respite; they must resolve to fight, or fly, or suffer: This makes them choose
that course which seemed most hopeful, to temporize, which might beget
advantage; the fury of this storm in time would lessen; the giddy motions of
the Vulgar seldom lasted, which throng to all that tends to Innovation: A
Kings distress once truly known, would win him succor, since those which
break his peace not seek his ruin. With these vain hopes he seeks to guard the
City, and make the Tower strong of all Provision; knowing that he which has
but London sure, though all the rest be lost, may yet recover.

The King suspects the City of London.
But Edward will not hear to keep the City; their multitude he feared would
first betray him: He knew they were a crew of weaker Spirits, for fear would
sell their fathers, or for profit; they never sift the Justice, or the quarrel;
but still adhere and stick to him that is strongest: had he still kept this
Hold, and took the Tower, but with the strength he had, and might have levied,
he then had bridled up the wavering City, and kept his Adversaries at a bay too
long and doubtful for their affairs, which were but yet uncertain. The guard of
this place he commends to Stapleton Bishop of Exeter: This Charge did not
properly suit with his profession, unless 'twere thought his tongue could charm
Obedience: but he already had been false, betrayed his Mistress, and with more
reason might be now suspected. It seems they had no choice, and strong
presumptions the City would not long remain obedient: if so, the fact was worse
and more unworthy, to leave so good a friend in such a hazard. Betakes himself
to Bristow.
The King, with Arundel and both the Spencers, with small attendance get them
hence to Bristow: His Army was much less in his own Kingdom, than those the
Queen had raised by foreign pity. This Town was strong and able, well
provided, and had a Haven, whence in occasion they might venture further: But
yet the King might have the same suspicion, which made him leave and quit the
strength of London. Arundel and Winchester do undertake the City, Edward and
Bristow would make good the Castle; here was the refuge they resolve to stick
to, which in the Citizens assurance seemed defensive.

The Queen understanding the Royal Chamber was forsaken, and left to the
custody of the Bishop her old Servant, that had given her the slip in her
Travels, quickly apprehends the advantage; The Queen sends a mandatory Letter
to the Mayor of London, to keep the City for her and the Prince.
addressing a fair, but mandatory Letter from her self and her Son to Chickwell,
then Lord Mayor, to charge him so to reserve and keep the City to their use, as
he expected favor, or would answer the contrary at his peril. Upon the receipt
of this Letter, he assembles the Common Council; and by a cunning-couch'd
Oration, the Recorder makes known the Contents; which is no sooner understood,
but the general Cry, that observed the Tide turning, proclaim it reason to
embrace the Queens Party, who was so strongly provided to reform the Disorders
of the Kingdom. Stapleton having gotten the knowledge of this passage, sends to
the Mayor for the keys of the Gates, for the Kings assurance, and his proper
safety; Bishop Stapleton beheaded by the Multitude.
who being incensed with the affront of this inconsiderate Bishop, apprehends
him, and delivers him to the fury of the enraged multitude; who neither
respecting the Gravity of his Years, or the Dignity of his Profession, strike
off his Head, without either Arraignment, Trial, or Condemnation: This
brainsick and heady act had too far engaged them to reconcile them; they must
now either adhere solely to the Queen, or to taste a bitter Penance. The King
had an ill Memory in point of desert; but the actions of so unjust a Disorder
he kept registered in brass, until he gained the opportunity of Revenge; then he
never failed it. It was a mad part, on so poor an occasion, to act so bloody a
Tragedy, which took away all hope of Reconciliation, if the Wheel had turned:
However the squares had went, they were upon terms good enough, so long as they
contained themselves in any temperate condition: But this was a way which
incensed the one part, and not assured the other. But the actions of this same
heady monster Multitude never examine the Justice, or the dependence, but are
led by Passion and Opinion; which in fury leaves no Disorder unacted, and no
Villainy unattempted. But certainly this was a mere cunning practice of the
Mayor, who being underhand made sure to the adverse Party, resolved to make it
of a double use; the one, to help on the opinion of his devotion to the Queen,
in the punishment of him that betrayed her; the other, by this action to make
the Citizens desperate of favor, and so more resolute; who else, being mutable
as Weather-cocks, might alter on the least occasion. Let the consideration be
what it will, the Fact was inhumane and barbarous, that spilt, without Desert
or Justice, the Blood of such a Reverend Prelate; who yet had so much
happiness, as to leave to his Honor in the University of Oxford, a remarkable
Memorial of his Charity and Goodness. But now to seek out the reward of this
virtuous Service, four of the principal and most eminent Burghers are selected
to make known their proceedings and devotion; who are graciously received,
entertained, and highly thanked, for their lawless bloody Fact, which was
styled an excellent piece of Justice. Though the deed had been countenanced, in
that it ran with the sway of the time, and the Queens humor; yet certainly no
great cause of commendation appears; which is so more properly due to the
Hangman, which performs the grave Ceremonies of his Office by Warrant, and
the actual part on none but such as the Law has made ready for his Fingers.

The Queen sets out for Bristol.
Now is the Queen settling her remove for Bristow, where the Prey remained her
Haggard-fancy longed for: She was unwilling to give them so much advantage,
though she believed it almost impossible, as to hazard the raising of an Army,
or so to enable their Provisions and Defenses, that it might adjourn the hope
of making her Victory perfect. She saw she had a great and Royal Army, well
provided; but how long it would hold so, she knew not; the principal strength
and number consisting of the giddy Commons, who like Land-stoods, rise and fall
in an instant: they had never yet seen the face of an Enemy, nor did rightly
understand what it was to bear Arms against the King, whom they must here
behold a party. These considerations hasten her on with more expedition. All
the way as she went, she is entertained with joyful Acclamations: Her Army
still grows greater, like a beginning Cloud that does fore-run a Shower. Whence
a hot Salley upon her.
When she was come before this goodly City, and saw his strength, and the
Maiden-Bravery of their opposition, which gave her by a hot Salley, led by the
valiant Arundel, a testimony of her Welcome, she then thinks that in the Art of
War there was somewhat more than mere Imagination; and justly feared lest the
Royal Misery would beget a swift Compassion; which was more to be doubted of
him in his own Kingdom, since she herself had found it in a foreign Country.
But smiling Fortune, now become her Servant, scarce gives her time to think she
might be hindered. The Townsmen, that knew no Wars but at their Musters, seeing
themselves begirt, the Market hindered, which was their chiefest and best
Revenue, begin among themselves to examine the business; They saw no likelihood
of any to relieve them, and daily in danger of some sad surprizal. They saw
their Lives, Wives, Children and state at stake for the defense of those that
had oppressed them, and wronged the Kingdom by their foul Injustice: they
measured the event of an unruly Conquest, where many look for Booty, all for
Pillage. A Treaty desired by that City:
This did so cramp their valiant hearts, that the Convulsion seeks a present
Treaty. The Queen seeing a Pusillanimity beyond her hopes, and a taint unlooked
for, makes the use, and hits them on the blind side, and answers plainly, She
will have no Imparleance, no discoursing; if they desired their own Peace, and
her assured Favor, they then must entertain and follow her Conditions: which
if they but delayed, the next day following they should abide their Chance, she
would her Fortune. Which being rejected, the Queen gives them a peremptory
Summons.
This doom (as it sounds harshly) was deemed too heavy; but no entreaty could
prevail, she would not alter. They yet desire to know what she required; and
that she grants, and thus unfoldeth: Your Lives and Goods (quoth she) shall
rest untouched, nor shall you taste your selves the least Affliction, so you
deliver up with speed your Captains, and in the time prefixed resign the City. A
choice so short, so sharp, so peremptory, being related in the staggering City,
breeds straight a supposition, not without reason, she had some certain
practiced Plot within them, or else some way assured for to force the City.
They could have been content she had their Captains, since it would set them
free from fear and danger; but to be Actors in so foul a Treason, or sacrifice
their Guests that came for succor, this they conceit too false and poor a
baseness. No more Imparleance is allowed, or will be heard, no second motion;
the breach in their faint hearts is so well known, that nothing is allowed but
present Answer: This smart proceeding melts their leaden Valor, which at the
first had made so brave a flourish, It is yielded.
and brings Arundel, Winchester, and the Town to her possession.

When man's own proper portion is in question, and all he has at stake, be it
but doubtful, his eye does more reflect on his own danger, than on the Laws of
Justice, Friendship, Honor. Charity, it is true, begins at home; but she is a
Virtue has no society with Fraud or Falsehood; neither is the breach of Faith,
or touch of Treason, allowed within the verge of her rich Precepts. I do
confess, Necessity may drive him to such a bitter choice, that one must perish;
but this should be, when things are so near hopeless, that there be more than
words to give it justice. A wise and noble mind advises soundly upon the act,
before it is engaged; but being so, it rather sleeps with Honor, than lives to
be the map of his thus tainted Conscience. The interest of Friends, of Guests,
of poor oppressed, (though diversely they touch the Patrons credit) yet all
agree in this one point of Virtue, Not to betray, where they have vowed
assistance. Had these faint Citizens not given assurance, had they not vowed to
keep their Faiths untainted, the other had not trusted nor enclosed themselves
within so weak and false a Safeguard. But they were most to blame, that would
so venture their Lives within the power of such a Berry, where they might know
were none but suckling Rabbets, that would suspect each Mouse to be a Ferret.
Had they but had a guard, secured their persons, they might have awed them, or
themselves have escaped.

Part of the prey thus gotten, no time is lost to call them to a reckoning. Sir
Thomas Wage, Marshal of the Army, draws up a short Information of many large
offenses, which are solemnly read to the attentive Army, with a Comment of all
the harsh aggravations might make them more odious. The confused clamor of the
Multitude, serves for Judge, Jury, and Verdict; which brings them to a sharp
Sentence to be forthwith hanged, and their Bodies to remain upon the Gallows.
Revenge brooks no delay, no leisure Malice. Old Spencer Executed.
Old Spencer feels instantly the rigor of this Judgment: The Green before the
Castle is made the place of Execution. Nature that gave him Life, had almost
left him; her Vigor was near spent, her Beauty withered; he could not long
have lived, if they had spared him. Ninety cold Winters he had past in freedom,
and finds untimely Death to end his Story: He parts without complaint or long
discoursing; he speaks these few words only, free from passion: God grant the
Queen may find a milder Sentence, when in the other world she makes her Audit.
The King and young Spencer amazed.
The King, and his unhappy Son, the sad Spectators of this Heart-bleeding
Tragedy so full of horror, are with his dying farewell so amazed, that scarcely
they had speech, or breath, or motion; so bitter a Preludium made them censure
their own conditions were as nearly fatal. The King, a Sovereign, Father, and a
Husband, did hope these Titles would be yet sufficient to guard his Life, if
not preserve his Greatness; but these proved all too weak: Where Crowns are
gained by Blood and Treason, they are so secured. Spencer had not a grain of
hope for mercy: the Barons Deaths prejudged his coming fortune. The Queen used
not to jest where she was angry; his Fathers end assured her inclination, and
bade him rather venture any hazard, than that which must rely on female pity.
With a world of Melancholy thoughts he casts the danger, yet could not find a
way that might prevent it. The Castle in it self was strong, but weakly
furnished. Time now he sees could promise no assistance; their Adversaries were
full bent to work their ruin, either by public Force, or private Famine; so
that in their abode was sure destruction. The King in this declared himself a
Noble Master; he prized his Servants Life as his own Safety, which won them
both to try their utmost hazard.

The Queen batters the Castle.
The Queen impatient to surprise this Fortress, does batter, undermine, and
still assail it; but these were all in vain, and proved fruitless; the Rampires
were too strong, too well defended: She threatens and entreats, but to small
purpose; here were no Citizens that might betray it: Alas, there needed none,
as it succeeded; the proper Owners wrought their own confusion; The King and
Spencer betake to a Bark, but are beaten back by Weather.
they leave their strength, and closely try their fortune, which made them board
a Bark rode in the Harbor, in hope to get away undescryed: This was the Plot,
or none, must work their freedom. But all things thrive alike with him that is
falling. The Gale averse, they softly tide her onwards; the Wind will not
consent to give them passage, but rudely hurls them back to their first
Harbor. Thrice had they past St. Vincents Rock, famous for Bristow Diamonds;
but in that Reach are hurryed back with fury: The Elements of Earth, of Air, of
Water, conspired all at once to make them hopeless.

Sir Henry Beaumonde quartered next the Haven, being informed that this gadding
Pinnace had often attempted passage without reason, the wind contrarious, and
the weather doubtful, suspects that her design was great and hasty; The Bark
seized.
on this he seized her, and surveys her lading, which proved a prize beyond his
expectation: within her hollow bulk, a Cell of darkness, he finds this pair
obscured, not undiscovered. The King has gracious words, and all due
reverence; but Spencer is contemned, and used with rigor. This ends the War,
and gave the work perfection. Fortune, that triumphs in the Fall of Princes,
like a Stepmother, rests not where she frowneth, till she have wholly ruined
and overthrown their Power, that do precede or else oppose her Darlings.

The Queen having thus attained to the full of her desire, resolves to use it
to the best advantage: Ambition seized her strongly, yet resigneth to her
incensed Passion the precedence; her own good nature (though she might
adventure) she would not trust so far, to see her Husband; nor did she think it
fit those valiant strangers begun the work, should view or see the Captive;
such sights sometimes beget as strange impressions; The King sent to Berkly
Castle.
instantly he is conveyed to Berklay-Castle, there to remain restrained, but
well attended. Spencer insulted over.
Spencer is hardly kept, but often visited; 'twas not with pity, which befits a
Prisoner, but with insulting joy, and base derision. Their eyes with sight, and
tongues with railing glutted, the act must follow that may stop the rancour,
which gives him to the Marshal locked in Irons: He here receives the self-same
entertainment his aged Father found; alone the difference, he had a longer
time, and sharper Sentence. All things thus ordered, the Queen removes for
London, meaning to make Hereford her way, and the last Journey of her condemned
Prisoner, that attends her each place she passes by. A world of people do
strain their wider throats to bid her welcome, with yelping cries that ecchoed
with confusion. While She thus passes on with a kind of insulting Tyranny,
far short of the belief of her former Virtue and Goodness, she makes this poor
unhappy man attend her Progress, not as the ancient Romans did their vanquished
Prisoners, for ostentation, to increase their Triumph; but merely for Revenge,
Despite, and private Rancour; mounted upon a poor, lean, ugly Jade, as basely
furnished; clothed in a painted Taberd, which was then a Garment worn by
condemned Thieves alone; and tattered rascally, he is led through each Town
behind the Carriage, with Reeds and Pipes that sound the summons to call the
wondering Crew together might abuse him; all the bitter'st actions of disgrace
were thrown upon him. Certainly this man was infinitely vicious, and deserved
as much as could be laid upon him, for those many great and insolent
Oppressions, acted with Injustice, Cruely, and Blood; yet it had been much more
to the Queens Honor, if she had given him a quicker Death, and a more
honorable Trial, free from these opprobrious and barbarous Disgraces, which
savored more of a savage, tyrannical disposition, than a judgment fit to
command, or sway the Sword of Justice.

Though not by Birth, yet by Creation he was a Peer of the Kingdom, and by the
Dignity of his place one of the most eminent; which might (if not to him in his
particular, yet in the Rights due to Nobility and Greatness) have found some
more honorable a distinction, than to be made more infamous and contemptible
than the basest Rogue, or most notorious Cutpurse. The Queens Cruelty.
It is assuredly (give it what title you will) an argument of a Villainous
Disposition, and a Devilish Nature, to tyrannize and abuse those wretched
ruins which are under the Mercy of the Law, whose Severity is bitter enough
without aggravation. A Noble Mind does out of native Goodness show a kind of
Sweetness in the disposition, which, if not the Man, does pity his Misfortune;
but never does increase his sorrow by baser usage than becomes his Justice. In
Christian Piety, which is the Day Star that should direct and guide all humane
Actions, the heart should be as free from all that is cruel, as being too remiss
in point of Justice. The Life of Man is all that can be taken; it is that must
expiate his worst Offenses; the Law must guide the way; Justice, not Fury, must
be his Judge; so far there is no Error. But when a flux of Torment follows
Judgment, which may be done in Speech as well as Action, it gives too many
Deaths to one Offender, and stains the Actors with a foul dishonor. To see
such a Monster so monstrously used, no question pleased the giddy Multitude,
who scarcely know the civil grounds of Reason: the recollected Judgment that
beheld it, censured it was at best too great and deep a blemish to suit a
Queen, a Woman, and a Victor. Spencer hanged.
Whether her Imposition, or his patient Suffering were greater, or became first
weary, he now is brought to give them both an ending, upon a Gallows highly
built of purpose; he now receives the end of all his Torments; the Cruelty was
such, unfit to be recorded. Whether it were the greatness of his heart, or it
were broken, he leaves the world with such a constant parting, as seemed as
free from fear, as fruitless plaining.

Arundel the like.
Four days are scarcely ended, ere Arundel does taste the self-same fortune.
Until the last Combustion, I find no mention in the Story of this Noble
Gentleman, neither could I ever read any just cause why his Life was thus taken
from him, unless it were a Capital Offense not to forsake his Master: It was
then a very hard case, if it must be adjudged Treason to labor to defend his
King and Sovereign, to whom he had sworn Faith and Obedience, suffering for
preserving that Truth and Oath, which they had all treacherously broken, that
were his Judges. If it were deemed a fault deep enough to be taken in company
with those that were corrupt and wicked, I see yet no reason why he alone
should suffer, and those their other Creatures were permitted many of them
unquestioned, some preferred, and none executed. But we may not properly expect
Reason in Women's actions: It was enough the incensed Queen would have it so,
against which was no disputing.

The Queen comes to London.
Her business thus dispatched, she comes to London, where she has all the Royal
Entertainment due to her Greatness. The Citizens do run and crowd to see her,
that if the Wheel should turn, would be as forward to make the self-same speed
to see her ruin. She calls a Parliament.
As Soon as here she had settled her affairs, and made things ready, she calls a
Parliament, and sends forth Summons for the appearance, which as soon ensued;
herein she makes her Husband seal the Warrant, who God knows scarcely knew what
she was doing, but lived a Recluse, well and surely guarded. When this grave
Assembly was come together, the Errors and the Abuses of the Kingdom are laid
full open; which touched the King with a more insolent liberty than might well
become the tongues of those which must yet be his Subjects. Many ways of
Reformation for forms sake are discussed, but the intended course was fully
before resolved; yet it was fit there should be a handsome Introduction. The
issue at length falls upon the point of Necessity, showing, that Edward, by the
imbecility of his judgment, and the corruption of his nature, was unfit longer
to continue the Government, which was so diseased and sick, that it required a
King more careful and active: as if the conferring it upon a green Youth,
little more than an Infant, had been Warranty enough for these Allegations; but
they served turn well enough, where all were agreed; and there was not so much
as a just fear of opposition: It never was touched or expressed by what Law,
Divine or Humane, the Subject might Depose, not an Elective King, but one that
Lineally and Justly had inherited, and so long enjoyed it: this was too deep a
Mystery, and altogether improper for their resolution. A short time at length
brings them all to one Mind, which in a true construction was no more than a
mere Politic Treason, not more dangerous in the Act than in the Example. They
conclude to depose the King.
The three Estates una voce conclude the Father must be Deposed, and his unripe
Son must be Invested in the Royal Dignity. Not a Lord, Bishop, Knight, Judge,
or Burgess, but that day left his Memory behind him; they could not else so
generally have forgot the Oaths of their Allegiance, so solemnly sworn to their
old Master, whom they had just cause to restrain from his Errors, but no
ground or color to deprive him of his Kingdom; who that day found neither
Kinsman, Friend, Servant, or Subject to defend his Interest. It is probable he
could not be so generally forsaken, and not unlikely but that he had some in
this Assembly well-affected, which seeing the violence and strength of the
Current, knew their contestation might endanger themselves, and not advantage
him in his possession. But this justifies them not, neither in their Oaths,
Love, or Duty, which should have been sincere and eminent: He that had here
really expressed himself, had left to Posterity an honorable Memorial of his
Faith, Worth, and Valor. Never will the remembrance of that stout and reverend
Bishop dye, who in the Case of Richard the Second expressed himself so honestly
and bravely. Civil respects, though they deeply touch in particular, warrant
not the breach of public engagements; neither is it properly Wisdom, but
Craft, infringeth the Laws of Duty or Honesty: If that may be admitted, what
Perjury may not find an excuse, what Rebellion not a justifiable answer? But
it is clear, there may not be a wilful violation of Oaths, though it tend
deeply to our own loss and prejudice.

The Resolution being now fully concluded, that must uncrown this unhappy King,
diverse of both Houses are sent unto him to make the Declaration; The Speaker
makes a resignation of Homage, and reads the Sentence.
who being come into his presence, Trussel the Speaker of the lower House, in
the Name of the whole Kingdom, makes a Resignation of all Homage and Fealty,
and then does read the Sentence. Edward, that had been aforehand informed, the
better to prepare him, had armed himself with as much Patience, as his
Necessity could give him; with an attentive ear hears all full out; The King
answers not a word.
which done, he turns away without answering a word. He knew it was in vain to
spend time in Discourse or Contestation, which must be the ready way to
endanger his Life; and in his consenting with a dangerous example to his
Successors, he had both their Power and his own Guilt made evident to
Posterity; which might have made the practice more frequent and familiar. He
had still a kind of Hope that his Adversaries would run themselves out of
breath, when there would be both room and time to alter his condition. Thus
this unfortunate King, after he had with a perpetual agitation governed this
Kingdom eighteen years, odd months and days, lost it partly by his own
Disorder and Improvidence, but principally by the treacherous Infidelity of his
Wife, Servants, and Subjects. And it is most memorable, an Army of three
hundred Strangers entered his Dominion, and took from him the Rule and
Governance, without so much as blow given, or the loss of any one man, more
than such as perished by the hand of Justice.

Though in a sinking Greatness all things conspire to work a fatal ruin, yet
in our Story this is the first president of this nature, or where a King fell
with so little Honor, and so great an Infidelity, that found neither Sword or
Tongue to plead his quarrel. But what could be expected, when for his own
private Vanities and Passion, he had been a continual lover and a better of
unjust actions, and had consented to the Oppression of the whole Kingdom, and
the untimely Death of so many Noble Subjects? It is certainly no less
honorable than just, that the Majesty of a King have that same full and free
use of his Affections, without Envy or Hatred, which every private man has in
his oeconomick Government: Yet as his Calling is the greatest, such must his
Care be, to square them out by those same sacred Rules of Equity and Justice;
if they once transcend, or exceed, falling upon an extremity of Dotage or
Indulgence, it then occasions those Errors that are the certain Predictions of
an ensuing Trouble, which many times proves fatal and dangerous. Let the
Favorite taste the King's Bounty, not devour it; let him enjoy his ear, but
not ingross it; let him participate his love, but not enchant it. In the eye of
the Commonwealth if he must be a Moat, let him not be a Monster. And lastly, if
he must practice on the Subject, let it be with moderation, and not with
rapine. If in either of these there be an excess, which makes the King a
Monarchy to his Will, and the Kingdom a prey to his Passion, and the world take
notice it be done by the Royal Indulgencie, it begets not more hatred than
multiplicity of error, which draw with them dangerous Convulsions, if not a
desperate ruin to that State where it has his allowance and practice. As
there ought to be a limitation in the Affection of the one, so ought there to
be a like Curiosity in the quality of the other: Persons of meaner condition
and birth exalted above proportion, as it taxes the Kings Judgment, impaireth
both his Safety and Honor. Neither is it proper, that the principal Strengths
and Dignities should be committed to the care and fidelity of one man only;
such unworthy and unequal distribution wins a discontent from the more capable
in ability and blood, and carries with it a kind of necessary impulsion still
to continue his greatness; else having the keys of the Kingdom in his hand, he
may at all times open the gates to a domestic Danger, or a foreign Mischief.
The number of Servants is the Masters honor; their truth and faculties his
glory and safety; which being severally employed and countenanced, make it at
one and the self-same time perspicuous in many; and being indifferently heard,
do, both in advice and action, give a more secure, discreet, and safe form of
proceeding. Kings in their deliberations should be served with a Council of
State, and a Council of particular Interest and Honor; the one to survey the
Policy, the other the Goodness of all matters in question; both composed out of
Integrity, not Corruption: these delivering truly their Opinions and
Judgments, it is more easy for him to reconcile and elect: But when one man
alone supplies both these places in private and public, all the rest follow
the voice of the Drone, though it be against their own Conscience and Judgment.
The Royal Glory should be pure, and yet transparent, suffering not the least
eclipse or shadow; which appears visibly defective, when it is wholly led by a
single advice never so grave and weighty: let the projection, if it be
entertained, have the test of a Council; but let the act and glory be solely
the Kings, which adds to the belief of his ability, and more assures his
greatness. If the heart of Majesty be given over to the sensuality of Pleasure,
or betrayed by his proper Weakness, or the cunning of him he trusts; yet let
him not neglect the necessary affairs of a Kingdom, or pass them over by Bills
of Exchange to the providence of another: In such an act he loses the
Prerogative of an absolute King, and is but so at secondhand and by direction.
It is the Practique, not the Theorique of State, that wins and assures the
Subject: If the ability of that be confined or doubtful, it estrangeth the will
of Obedience, and gives a belief of liberty to the actions of Disorder and
Injustice. Such an Error is not more prejudicial in the Imbecility, than in
the Example. Royal Vanities find a ready imitation, so that it becomes a
hazard that a careless King makes a dissolute Kingdom. Man's nature is
propensive to the worser part; which it embraces with more facility and
willingness, when it wins the advantage of the time, and is led by so eminent a
president. From this consideration, natural Weakness, or temporary
Imperfection, should be always masked, and never appear in public, since the
Court, State, and Kingdom, practice generally by his Example. As in Affection,
so in Passion, there are many things equally considerable. I must confess, and
do believe, that King worthy of an Angelical Title, that could master these
rebellious Monsters, which rob him of his Peace and Happiness: But this in a
true perfection, is to Flesh and Blood most impossible; yet both in Divinity
and Moral Wisdom, t is the most excellent Masterpiece of this our
peregrination, so to dispose them, that they wait upon the Operations of the
Soul rather as obedient Servants, than loose and uncontrouled Vagabonds. Where
the Royal Passions are rebellious and masterless, having so unlimited a Power,
his Will becomes the Law; his hand the executioner of actions unjust and
disorderly, which end sometimes in Blood, commonly in Oppression, and evermore
in a confused perturbation of the Kingdom. The Warranty of the Law wrought to
his temper, not that it is so, but that he must have it so, justifies him not,
though he make a Legal Proceeding the justification of his Tyranny; since the
Innocence of the Subject seldom finds protection, where the fury of a King
resolves his ruin. The rigor of humane Constitutions are to the Delinquent
weighty enough; let them not be wrested or inverted; which makes the King
equally guilty, and the actor of his own Passions, rather than those of Justice
or Integrity. He should on earth order his proceedings in imitation after the
Divine Nature, which evermore inclines more to Mercy than Justice. Lives
cannot, being taken away, be redeemed; there ought then to be a tender
consideration how they be taken, lest the Injustice of the act, challenge a
Vengeance of the same nature. As the quality of the act, so is the condition of
the agent considerable in point of Judicature; wherein there may be sometimes
those dependencies, that it may be more honorable and advantageous to pardon,
or delay execution, than to advance and hasten it: howsoever, it is the more
excellent and innocent way, to fall short of the better hand, and to suffer the
Severity of the Law rather seem defective, than an apparent taint in the
suffering disposition and goodness. The actions of Repentance are registered in
the table of our Transgressions, where none to the guilty Conscience appears
more horrid and fearful, than those which by an inconsiderate haste or
corruption of the Will have been acted in Blood and Passion. So great a height
as the Majesty of a King, should be clothed with as sweet a temper, neither
too precipitate, or too slow; neither too violent, or too remiss; but like the
beating of a healthy Pulse, with a steady and well-advised motion, which
preserves a just Obedience and Fear in those which are vicious, and begets a
Love and Admiration in all, especially such as so graciously taste his Goodness.

I have dwelt too long in this digression; yet I must (though it a little delay
the concluding part of this History) speak somewhat that is no less proper for
him that shall have the happiness to enjoy so fair and large a room in the
Royal affections. There must be in him a correspondent worth, as well of
Wisdom and Obedience, as of Sincerity and Truth; which makes no other use of
this so great a blessing, but to his Sovereigns Honor, and his own credit; and
not to advantage himself by the oppression of others, or improving the
particular by the ruin of a Kingdom. If the Masters actions be never so pure
and innocent, yet if out of affection he become the Patron of the Servants
misdemeanors and insolences, by protecting or not punishing, he makes himself
guilty, and shares both in the grievance and hatred of the poor distressed
Subject. The general cry seeing the stream polluted, ascribe it to the
Fountainhead, where is the Spring that may reform and cleanse it. By this one
particular error of Protection; he that will read the History of our own, or
those of Foreign Nations, shall find a number of memorable Examples, which
have produced Deposition of Kings, Ruin of Kingdoms, the Effusion of Christian
Blood, and the general Distemper of that part of the world, all grounded on
this occasion. Let him then that out of his Masters Love, more than his own
Desert, has made himself a fortune, be precisely careful, that by his disorder
he endanger not the stair and prop of his Preferment; which he shall make firm
and permanent, in making Humility and Goodness the Adamant to draw the love
both of his equals and inferiors: Such a winning Sweetness assures their
hearts, which in the least contempt or insolence are apt and ready to receive
the impressions of Envy and Hatred; which if they once take root, end not in
Speculation, but Actions either publicly violent, or privately malicious; both
tending to his ruin and confusion. If he stray from this Principle, striving
to make an imperious height beget fear, and the opinion of that fear the rock
whereon he builds his Greatness; let him then know, that the first is the
Companion of Trust and Safety, the other a Slave, that will break loose with
opportunity and advantage. Neither has it any touch of Discretion, or Society
with Wisdom, or Moral Policy, to glorify his new-acquired Greatness with
unnecessary amplifications, either in multiplicity of Attendants, vanity of
Apparel, superfluity of Diet, sumptuousness of Structures, or any other
ridiculous eminency, that may demonstrate his Pride or Ambition: Wise men
deride it, Fools applaud it, his Equals envy it, and his Inferiors hate it.
All jumping at length in one conclusion, that his Fortune is above his Merit,
and his Pride much greater than his Worth and Judgment. But this presuming
Impudence ends not here: Kings themselves may suffer for a time, but in the end
they will rather change their Affections, than to be dazzled and outshin'd in
their own Sphere and Element.

The young King crowned.
Now is this young King Crowned with a great deal of Triumphant Honor, but with
a more expectation of what would become of this giddy world, which seemed to
run upon wheels, by reason of so sudden and so great a revolution. The Queen
and Mortimer bear sway.
The Queen and Mortimer in this his Minority take upon them the whole Sway and
Government of the Kingdom. The Act wherein they expressed themselves and their
new Authority first, was the Commitment of Baldock, the quondam Lord
Chancellor, who has the Great Seal taken from him, They commit Baldock to
Newgate.
and was sent to Newgate. It may be wondered why he was so long spared; they had
use of his Place, though not of his Person; and had no Power, if they had
thrust him out, to have brought in another, or to have executed it by
Commission, unless they would admit it as an act of the old King, until the new
were Crowned. This Cage was fit for such a Coysterel; but yet his place being
so eminent, it was believed somewhat unworthy; Tresilian Lord Chief Justice
hanged.
yet succeeding time made it not much out of square, when Trisilian Lord Chief
Justice was hanged, for interpreting the Law against Law and his own
Conscience, for the Kings advantage. Now the recollected spirits begin to
parallel time present with that precedent, and to meditate upon that act which
had disrobed and put down an anointed King, that had so long swayed the
Scepter, to whom they had so solemnly sworn Faith and Obedience: They find the
State little altered, only things are thought more handsomely carried, and the
Actors were somewhat more warrantable; yet the Multitude, according to the
vanity of their changeable hearts, begin already to be crop-sick, wishing for
their old Master, and ready to attempt any new Innovation: such is the
mutability of the inconstant Vulgar, desirous of new things, but never
contented; despising the time being, extolling that of their Forefathers, and
ready to act any mischief to try by alteration the succedent; like Aesops
Frogs, if they might have their own fancy, each Week should give them a new
King, though it were to their own destruction. This occasions many unpleasing
Petitions and Suits tendered to the new King and his Protectors, for the
releasement of Edward's Imprisonment, or at least for more freedom, or a more
noble usage. But these touch too near the quick, to beget a sudden answer. As
things stood, they neither grant nor deny, either of them carrying with it so
dangerous a hazard: If he were free, they must shake hands with their
greatness; and a flat denial would have endangered a sudden tumult. They give
good words, and promise more than ever they meant to perform, yielding many
reasons why they could not yet give a definitive resolution; this for the
present satisfies.

The black Monks impatient of the King's restraint.
The black Monks are more importunate, and take not this delay for an answer;
but being still adjourned over with protraction, they labor to bring that
about by Conspiracy, which they could not do by Entreaty: in their public
Exhortations they inveigh against the severity of the King's usage, and invite
their Auditory to set to a helping hand to the procurement of his Freedom; they
extenuate his Faults, and transfer them to them that had the guidance of his
affairs, and not to his own natural Disposition; they tax the impropriety of
the time, when the Kingdom was under the Government of a Child and a Woman; and
spare no point that might advance compassion for the one, or procure a dislike
of the other. They not only incite the people, but make Donhead their Captain;
Neither are they content with a verbal incitation, but fall to matter of fact,
that others might move by their example: They make one of their number, named
Donhead, their Captain; a good, stout, bold, and factious Fellow; one that was
daring enough, but knew better what belonged to Church-Ornaments, than the
handsome carriage of a Conspiracy, that was to be managed by Arms, and not by
the liberty of the Tongue; Who is clapped by the heels, and dies.
whose liberality claps him by the heels, where he not long after dies, before
he had so much as mustered his Covent.

This gathering Cloud thus dispersed without a shower, the Queen and Mortimer,
to take off the people from harping farther upon this string, send forth diverse
plausible Proclamations, intimating a strict charge for the reformation of
diverse petty Grievances; and withal are divulged sundry probabilities of
Foreign dangers from France and Scotland: which were presently understood to
be but mere fictions, in respect at the same instant she frees herself of her
foreign Aid, which in such an occasion might have as well served to defend the
Kingdom, as to invade it. They made, it is true, an earnest suit to be gone,
having well feathered their nests; but if the fear had been such as was
bruited, I think the Queen both might and would have retained them. It may be
their addiction to Arms was weary of so long a Vacation, or they were desirous
to show themselves at home with honor, whence they had parted with so poor an
expectation; and peradventure she was unwilling they should be witness of that
unnatural Tragedy, which she saw then broyling in Mortimer's breast, though not
resolved on; which must have wounded her reputation in that Climate, where she
had won so great a belief of her Wisdom, Virtue, and Goodness. Liberally and
nobly she requites every man, according to his Merit and Condition; Sir John of
Heynault and the rest rewarded.
but to Sir John of Heynault, whose Heroic Spirit gave the first life to this
action; and to the Oracle of her recovery, and all those of the better sort,
she presents many rich Jewels, and Annuities of yearly Revenue, according to
the quality of the time in being. They hold themselves Royally requited; They
depart the Kingdom.
and taking a solemn leave, are honorably accompanied to Dover, where they take
their Farwell of the Kingdom, with a much merrier eye than when they first
beheld it.

Whosoever shall wisely consider the desperate attempt of this little handful of
Adventurers, and their fortunate issue, may justly esteem it one of the most
memorable Passages of our time, since it was merely guided by pity and
compassion; without pay, without provision, to attempt an act not more
dangerous than hopeless; yet they gave it perfection, without so much as the
loss of any one man; and returned home glorious in honor, rich in purchase;
not gained by pillage, robbery, or unjust rapine (the hope and revenue of a
War;) but by the just reward due to their Valor and Virtue. The cause of so
fair a progression, and so successful an end, may have diverse probabilities
likely enough to ground our judgment; As the sincerity of the Intention, the
goodness of the Work, and many other, which may be alleged: but the most
essential may be drawn from this; they were (though but a small one) yet an
entire body, composed of such as knew what appertained to Arms and Breeding;
Men that were virtuously inclined, and awed with the true sense of Religion (in
the Wars of late years become a mere stranger) where no Victory is esteemed
dishonorable, no Purchase unlawful. Certainly our Wars and our Plantations
nearly resemble, being both used as a Broom to sweep the Kingdom, rather than
an enterprise to adorn it; which makes the event so unfortunate in War; which
alone falls properly within the compass of this Treaty, it being the greatest
and most weighty work, that either gives honor or safety to a Kingdom: They
should be begun with Justice, and managed as well with Wisdom as Valor; their
beginning should be with a choice care, which makes the ending fortunate. The
number of bodies is not the Strength, their fury not the Bulwork; it is the
Piety and true Valor of an Army, which gives them Heart and Victory; which how
it can be expected out of Ruffians and Goal-birds, that are the scum of the
Commonwealth, I leave to your consideration. I commend his Curiosity, that
would not buy a piece of Plate stolen from Orphans, though he might have had it
at an under-value, lawfully enough; but more his reason, which would not commix
it with his own, for fear lest it might occasion a punishment upon his which
were innocent, and not touched with a Guilt that might in Justice challenge
Vengeance. But in the Military Practice it is believed, so a man have shape and
limbs, it is no matter though he have murdered his own Father, or committed
Incest with his Mother; it is his metal, not his conditions, gives him
admittance: Hence spring Treachery, that forsakes his Colors; Treason, that
betrays the Captain; and at the best, those actions of Blood and Murder, that
cry rather for Vengeance, than promise Victory. A General, it is true, that
has his Army made to his hand, cannot distinguish their conditions; the first
act is the error of those entrusted; yet if he in the knowledge continue, and
not punish the practice of so barbarous actions, though it be against an enemy,
it must wound his Honor, and endanger his Safety, liable to the account of
those transgressions, which are acted by those that are under his charge
without a just punishment. It is an Observation remarkable, that a Press coming
into the Country, there is a great deal of shift made in every Town and Village
to lay hold of all the most notorious debauched Rascals, to fill up the number;
these clear the Coast, and are believed fit Champions to fight for their
Sovereigns Honor, and the Kingdoms Safety; and the rather, because in want of
Pay (the ruin of an Army) they are best able to live by their Trade. But what
follows? They are either led to the Slaughter, or by the Divine Justice prove
the ruin of the Enterprise; or returning, practice private Villainies with more
confidence; or public Mutinies, under pretense of want of Wages.

The King taken from the Earl of Lancaster, and delivered to Sir Morris
Berkley and Sir John Matravas.
But I will leave them to a reformation, and proceed to the Tragedy of this
unfortunate King, who is now taken from the Earl of Lancaster, and delivered
over by Indenture to Sir Morris Berkley and Sir John Matravas. They lead him
back to the Cage of his first Imprisonment; carrying him closely, and with a
reserved Secrecy, lest his Friends in the knowledge of his Remove might attempt
his Freedom. They remove him in disguise.
And to make his Discovery more difficult, they disfigure him, by cutting off
his Hair, and shaving of his Beard. Edward, that had been formerly honorably
used, and tenderly served, The King grieved with Indignities.
is bitterly grieved with this Indignity; and one day among the rest, when they
came to shave him, which was attempted without fire, and a cold liquor, his
eyes pour forth a stream of Tears in sense of his Misfortune, which to the
inquisitive Actors gives this answer, He would have some warm water, in spite
of all their malice. Another time, in the presence of two or three of those
that were as well set to be Spies over him, as to guard him, in a deep
Melancholy Passion he thus discoursed his Sorrow. His Complaint.
Is mine offense (quoth he) so great and grievous, that it deserves nor pity nor
assistance? Is Christian Charity, all Goodness lost; and nothing left in
Subject, Child, or Servant, that tastes of Duty? Is Wedlock-love forgotten so
fully, all at once forsake me? Admit my errors fit for reformation; I will not
justify my self, or censure others: Is It not enough that it has taken from me
my Crown, the Glory of my former being, but it must leave me void of native
comfort? I yet remain a Father, and a Husband; a Sovereign and a Master lost,
cannot deprive me of that which is mine own, till Death dissolve me: Where then
is filial Love? Where that Affection that waits upon the Laws of God and
Nature? My wretched Cares have not so much transformed a me, that I am turned
to Basilisk, or Monster. What can they fear, that they refuse to see me? unless
they doubt mine eyes can dart destruction. I have no other Weapons that may
fright them; and these (God wot) have only tears to drown them. Can they
believe or once suspect a danger in visit of a poor distressed Captive? Their
hardened hearts I know are not so noble, or apt to take a gentler mild
impression, by seeing these poor ruins thus forsaken; What then occasions this
so great a strangeness, or makes them jealous of so poor a venture? Are they
not yet content in the possession of all that once was mine, now theirs? But by
what title, their Arms can better tell, than can their Conscience. My misled
harmless Children are not guilty; my Wife betrays them, and false Mortimer; who
else I know would run to see their Father. Justly I pay the price of former
folly, that let him escape to work mine own confusion: Had he had his desert,
the price of Treason, he had not lived to work me this dishonor. But time will
come my wrongs will be revenged, when he shall fall with his own weight
unpitied. Thou wretched state of Greatness, painted Glory, that falling find'st
thine own the most perfidious; must thou still live, and yet not worthy of one
poor look? It is a mere Injustice: Would they would take my Life, it is that
they aim at. I will esteem it as an act of pity, that, as I live, but hate mine
own Condition.

Here with a deep sigh of scalding Passions, his tears break loose afresh, to
cool their fury. All sadly silent while he rests perplexed, a stander by makes
this uncivil answer, whom Mortimer had placed to increase his sorrow. The King
is uncivilly upbraided.
Most gracious Sir, the Queen your Wife, and Children, are justly jealous of
your cruel nature; they know too well your heat and former fury, to come too
near so great and sure a danger; besides, they are assured that your intentions
are bent to work them hurt, or some foul mischief, if they adventure to
approach your presence.

His Answer.
The Queen my Wife (quoth he) has she that Title, while I that made her so am
less than nothing? Alas poor wretched woman, can her invention, apt for
mischief, fashion no one excuse but this so void of reason? Is there a
possibility in her Suspicion? Can I, being so resolved, act a Murder, or can
their false hearts dream me so ill-minded? I am, thou see, a poor forsaken
Prisoner, as far from such a Power, as Will to act it; they too well know it,
to suspect my nature. But let them wonder on, and scorn my sorrow; I must
endure, and they will taste their error. But fellow, thou that take such
saucy boldness to character and speak thy Sovereigns errors, which thou
should cover, not presume to question; Know, Edward's heart is as free from
thine aspersions, as thou or they from Truth or Moral Goodness.When he had
ended these words, he retires himself to his Chamber, sad and melancholy;
thinking his Case was hard and desperate, when such a paultry Groom durst so
affront him.

The Queen and Mortimer revelling in the height of their Ambition, had yet a
wary eye to the main, which they knew principally consisted in the sure keeping
of their Prisoner. They see their plausible income was but dully continued,
there being a whispering murmur not so closely muttered, but that it came to
their ears, which showed an absolute dislike of the manner of their
proceedings: The Queen and Mortimer unquiet still.
Though they had all the marks and essential parts of Sovereignty, the name
alone excepted, yet they had unquiet and troubled thoughts: What they wished
they had obtained, yet there was still something wanting to give it perfection.
Such is the vanity of our imagination, which fashions out a period to our
desires, that being obtained, are yet as loose and restless. Ambition has no
end, but still goes upward, never content or fully satisfied. If man had all
that Earth could give, and were sole Monarch of the world, he yet would
farther; and as the Giants did make War with Heaven, rather than lose those
Symptoms of his Nature. Fear to preserve what is unjustly gotten, does give
the new-made great one agitation, which something limits his immense
affections, that do believe he must still mount up higher, and else would
swallow all within his compass. This made this pair stop here a while, to
strengthen and more assure what was already gotten: They know the people giddy,
false, inconstant; a feather wagg'd would blow them to commotion. They see the
Lords, that were their prime Supporters, seeming content, in heart not
satisfied; the bough was lopt that shadowed ore their greatness; another was
sprung up as large and fearful; which though more noble, yet no less aspiring.
The drooping tongue of the dejected Kingdom does grumble out his expectations
cozened.

The Grievance still continues great and heavy, not changed in substance, but
alone in habit; a just compassion aggravates the clamor, to see their former
King so hardly used, short of his Honor, Merit, Birth, and Calling. Mortimer's
ears tingle.
These passages related, tingled the ears of our great Mortimer; he knew that
all was now at stake, which unprevented must hurl them back again with worse
conditions. He tells the Queen, the King must die.
No longer can he mince his own Conceptions, but plainly tells the Queen the
cause must perish, Edward must dye; this is the only refuge must make all sure,
and cleanse this sad suspicion; so long as he remained, their fear continues,
as would the hope of them attempt their ruin. The Warranty of Arms had a fair
color; that should be levied to attempt his rescue, which had a Royal stamp to
raise and make them current. If such a Project should be once in action, it
would be then too late to seek to cross it. All men are apt to pity so great a
King oppressed; and not so much look on what he had been, as what he is, and
being restored he might be.

She seems discontented.
The Queen, whose heart was yet believed innocent of such foul Murder, is, or
at least seems, highly discontented; She acknowledges his present Sufferings
greater than his Offenses, or might become the King, her Lord and Husband; and
holds this act of too too foul Injustice, which styles her Son a Homicide, and
her a Monster: The crimson Guilt of such a crying action could not escape the
cruel hand of Vengeance: If it might be concealed from humane Knowledge, the
All-knowing Power of Heaven would lay it open. She thinks it more than an act
of Blood, to kill a Husband, and a King, that sometimes loved her: She thinks
her Son not of so ill a nature, as to slip over his Fathers Death untouched,
unpunished, when that he was grown up in power to sift it. These motives made
her thus return her Answer.

She returns her Answer.
Let us resolve (dear Friend) to run all hazards, rather than this that is so
foul and cruel; let us not stain our Souls with Royal Blood and Murder, which
seldom scapes unseen, but never unpunished, especially for such a fear as is
but casual: while we are innocent, at worst our danger is but privation of this
glorious shadow, which Death can take, when we believe it surest; but if we
taint the inward part with such a tincture, our proper Guilt will bring
continual terror, a fear that never dies, but lives still dying. If Edward do
get loose, what need we fear him, that pulled him down when he was great, at
highest? Why should we then resolve his Death or Murder? this Help may serve
when we are desperate of other Remedies, which yet appears not. To act so great
a sin without compulsion, adds to the deed, and makes it far more odious; nor
can it plead excuse if after questioned, that has no cause but merely
Supposition. Say that he were a dead man, gone and hopeless, neither our fears
or dangers are more lessened; we are still subject to the self same hazard, and
have to boot our proper Guilt to cause it. Those that do hate or envy us, can
fashion other pretexts, as fair as this, to shake us; which we shall better
crush, while we are guiltless. Then think upon some other course as sure, more
harmless; never can my heart consent to kill my Husband. Mortimer nettled.
Mortimer being nettled with this Reply, so far wide of the aim which in his
bloody thoughts he had so constantly resolved on, thought he would return the
Queen as bitter a Pill, as she had given him to bite on; which makes him thus
reply in anger.

His Reply.
Madam, who has the time to friend, and does neglect it, is justly falling
scorned, and sinks unpitied. Have you for this endured so bitter trials, to be
at length a foe to your own safety? Did you outrun your Troubles, suffering
meanly, but to return unto your first condition? If it be so, I must approve
your Reasons, and say your grounds were like your project, hopeful; You see
your glorious Morning now turned cloudy; the Kingdom does repine to see our
Greatness, yet have no hope but in the King deposed; who taken away, what fear
can justly move us? Your youthful Son we'll rule till he grows older, and in
that time establish such a Greatness, as he shall hardly touch or dare to
question. To cast a world of doubts is vain and senseless, where we enforced
must either act or perish; and to be nice in that has no election, does waste
out time, and not prevent the error: If you stick fast in this your tender
pity, I must in justice then accuse my fortune, that gave my heart to such a
female Weakness. Is there a disproportion in this action, to keep the Crown
with blood, that was so gotten? Is there a more restraint to keep than get by
Treason? If so, I yield, and will sit still and ruin. Had Edward known or
feared, he had prevented, nor you nor I had had the Power to hurt him: But he
neglected time, and now repents it; and so must we, if we embrace his error.
Fear is far less in sense than apparition, and makes the shadow greater than
the subject, which makes a faintness as the Fancy leads it, where is small
reason to be so affected. You urge it cannot be concealed or hidden. I not deny
but it may be discovered; such deeds may yet be so contrived and acted, that
they prevent all proof, if not suspicion. But why do I spend time in this
persuasion? let him get free, whom we so much have wronged, let him examine our
proceedings, sift our actions, perhaps he will forget, forgive, be reeonciled:
and spare your tears, left that your mighty Brother should chance grow angry:
if you lose your Greatness, you may if you be pleased abide the trial.
Mortimer's resolved, since you refuse his judgment, you neither prize his
safety, nor his service; and therefore he will seek some other refuge before it
be too late, and too far hopeless. Mortimer flings away.
With this he flings away in coffeehouse, as if he meant with speed to quit
the Kingdom. The amazed Queen pursues and overtakes him, who seemed unwilling
to prolong the treaty: The Queens expostulation.
Stay, gentle Mortimer, (quoth she) I am a Woman, fitter to hear and take
advice, than give it; think not I prize thee in so mean a fashion, as to
despise thy Safety or thy Council. Must Edward dye, and is there no prevention?
Oh wretched state of Greatness, frail Condition, that is preserved by Blood,
secured by Murder! She unwillingly consents to the Kings Death.
I dare not say I yield, or yet deny it; Shame stops the one, the other Fear
forbids: only I beg I be not made partaker, or privy to the time, the means,
the manner.With this she weeps, and fain would have recanted, but she saw in
that course a double danger.

Mortimer, that had now what he looked for, assures her he would undergo the act
and hazard; which would not have moved, if not enforced by those strong motives
of their certain danger. The Kings Keepers changed.
He requests alone the King might seal a Warrant, that he may change anew his
former Keepers. Sir Morice Barcklaye, as it seems, had been aloof off treated
with, but was not pliable, or apt to fasten; he was both careful of his Charge,
and Masters Safety; this takes him suddenly from his custody. Sir Thomas
Towurlie supplies his place, with his old partner; He is removed to Corf Castle.
they having received their new Warrant, and their Royal Prisoner, carry him by
sudden and hasty Journeys to Cork-Castle, the place that in all the world he
most hated. Some say that he was foretold by a certain Magician, who as it
seems was his Craftsmaster, that this place was to him both fatal and ominous.
'Twas ill in him to seek by such ill and unlawful means the knowledge of that,
which being known did but augment his sorrow. Whatsoever the cause was, his
arrival here makes him deeply heavy, sad and melancholy: his Keepers, to repel
this humor, and to take him off from all fear and suspicion, feed him with new
hopes and pleasant discourse, improving his former entertainment both in his
Diet and Attendance; while his misgiving spirit suspects the issue: Though he
would fain have fashioned his belief to give them credit, yet he had such a
dull cloud about his heart, it could receive no comfort.

The fatal Night in which he suffered shipwreck, he eats a hearty Supper, but
stays not to digest it; immediately he goes to Bed, with sorrow heavy; as soon
he takes his Rest, and sleeps securely, not dreaming of his end so near
approaching. He is murdered.
Midnight the Patron of this horrid Murder being newly come, this Crew of
perjured Traitors steal softly to his Chamber, finding him in a sweet and quiet
Sleep, taking away his Life in that advantage.

The Historians of these Times differ both in the time, place, and manner of
his Death; yet all agree, that he was foully and inhumanly murdered, yet so,
that there was no visible or apparent sign which way 'twas acted. A small
tract of time discovers the Actors, and shows evidently that it was done by an
extremity of Violence: they long escape not: though Mortimer's greatness for
the present time keep them both from question and puishment, yet by the Divine
Justice they all meet with a miserable and unpitied Death; and the
Master-work-man himself in a few years after suffered an ignominious Execution.

The Queen, who was guilty but in circumstance, and but an accessory to the
Intention, not the Fact, tasted with a bitter time of Repentance, what it was
but to be quoted in the Margent of such a Story; the several relations so
variously expressed of their Confessions, that were the Actors and Consenters to
this deed, differ so mainly, that it may be better past over in silence, than
so much as touched; especially since if it were in that cruel manner, as is by
the major part agreed on, it was one of the most inhumane and barbarous acts
that ever fell within the expression of all our English Stories; fitter rather
to be passed over in silence, than to be discoursed, since it both dishonors
our Nation, and is in the Example so dangerous. It seems Mortimer was yet a
Novice to Spencer's Art, of that same Italian trick of Poisoning, which
questionless had wrought this work as surely, with a less noise, and fewer
agents: It had been happy if such a Villainy had never gained knowledge or
imitation in the World: since it came to be entertained as a necessary servant
of State, no man that runs in opposition, or stands in the way of Greatness, is
almost secure in his own house, or among his Friends or Servants. I would to
God we had not fresh in our Memory so many bleeding Examples, or that this
Diabolical Practice might stop his career with the Mischief it has already
done: But so long as the close conveyance is deemed a Politic Virtue, and the
Instruments by Power and Favor are protected, what can be expected, but that
in short time it must fall under the compass of a Trade or Mystery, as fit for
private Murderers as Statesmen?

But leaving the professors of this execrable practice to their deserts, and
that guilt which still torments them; Thus fell that unfortunate King Edward
the Second, who by the course of Age and Nature might have outrun many years,
had not his own Disorder, the Infidelity of his Subjects, and the Treachery of
those that had deprived him of his Kingdom, sent him to an untimely Death and
Ruin. Many Reasons are given, probable enough, to instance the necessity of
his Fall, which questionless may be the secondary means; but his Doom was
registered by the inscrutable Providence of Heaven, which with the self-same
Sentence punished both him and Richard the Second his great Grandchild, who was
coequally guilty of the same Errors, that both betrayed them and the Peace of
their Kingdom. Henry the Sixth, though he tasted of the same Cup of
Deposition, yet there was more reason to induce it: Henry the Fourth his
Grandfather was an Usurper, and had unjustly got the Crown by pulling down the
House of York, and exalting that of Lancaster, which in Justice brings it back
again to the right Inheritour; yet were not those times innocent of those
enormities which occasioned their confusion. It is most true, that Henry
himself was a sweet harmless conditioned Man, religious, and full of Moral
Goodness; but he was fitter for a Cloister than a Crown, being transported with
a Divine Rapture of Contemplation, that took him off from the care of all
Worldly Affairs; while Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Reynard that styled
himself King of Naples and Jerusalem, acted her part with a like imitation;
though she had not a Gaveston, a Spencer, or a Duke of Ireland, yet she had a
Suffolk, and a Somerset, that could teach the same way to the Destruction and
Deposition of her Husband.

These three sympathized in their Royal Inheritance, in their Depositions,
Deaths, and Fortunes; and these alone, since the Conquest of the Normans,
unless we rank into the number Edward the Fifth, which must be with an
impropriety, since he was by Richard his Tyrannical Uncle murdered before he
was Crowned: If we example him with them, we may it is true conclude his case
most miserable, that lost the Crown before he enjoyed it, or had the perfection
of years to make known his Inclination. The event that followed the others,
especially the two precedent, may be fitly a Caution and Admonition to
Posterity, and teach them what it is to hazard a Kingdom, and their own Lives,
by the continuing of a wilful Error. Certainly we have had other Kings fully
as vicious, that have outlived their Vices, not dying by a violent hand, but
by the ordinary and easy course of Nature; they were more cautelous and
flexible, and were content in the more moderate use of their own Vices.

The Condition of this our Edward, the subject of this Story, was not in it
self more hurtful, than dangerous to the Peace and Tranquillity of the whole
Kingdom. If by Heat of Youth, Height of Fortune, or the Corruptions of Nature,
the Royal Affections fly loosely and at random; yet if it extend no farther
than the satisfaction of the private Appetite, it may obscure the glory, but
not supplant the strength and safety of a Scepter. But when it is not only
vicious in it self, but does patronize it in others, not blushing or shrinking
in the justification, it is a fore-running and presaging Evidence, that
threatens danger, if not destruction. It is much in a King, that has so great
a Charge delivered over to his care and custody, to be himself dissolute,
licentious, and ill-affected; but when he falls into a second error, making
more delinquents Kings, where one is too much, he brings all into disorder, and
makes his Kingdom rather a Stage of Oppression, than the Theater of Justice,
which opens the ready way to an ensuing Misery. The heart of the Subject as it
is obliged, so it is continued by the Majesty and Goodness of the King: if
either prove prostitute, it unties the links of Affection; those lost, the
breach of Duty succeeds, which hunts after nothing but Change and Innovation.
The bridle of the Laws is too weak a restriction, especially when it is
infringed by him, that is most bound to protect it. Neither can the King in
Justice blame or punish the breach, when he himself goes the way of subversion
of those Precepts, which should preserve his Peace and Obedience. It is so
singular and so weighty a Consideration, that a Burden should never be imposed
upon the Subject by extent of the Prerogative; that may beget a just Grievance,
besides the grief in payment; the novelty of the act, incites to a tumultuous
opposition. Where there is neither Law to warrant, nor fit president to induce
the Injustice of the demand, such actions begin in Complaint, which unredressed
fall into an extremity, which draws with it a desperate hazard. If the tie of
Duty and Allegiance preserve the Obedience to the Crown inviolate, let him
beware that is the Prime Instrument, or Seducer; for he must be persecuted with
implacable hatred, which ends not until he be made a Sacrifice to expiate and
quench the fury, or the endangering of his Master by his unjust Protection. It
is no less proper for the Majesty and Goodness of a King, in case of a general
Complaint, to leave those great Cedars to the trial of the Law, and their own
purgation; this makes known the integrity and equality of his Justice, which
should not be extended to the grubbing up of Brambles and Shrubs, while
monstrous Enormities of a greater height and danger escape unlopped. The
accumulation of his Favor, though it be a property of his own Power, yet ought
it in some measure to be satisfactory, as well in the present worth of him
elected, as in his future progression; else in the continuance he winds
himself into the danger of participating his hatred, as well as protection of
his Error. The eye of the Subject waits curiously upon their Sovereigns
actions, which if they seem to degenerate from his Wisdom and Greatness, and
preferring a private Inconvenience before the redress of a public Grievance,
it by degrees varies the integrity of the heart, and begets a liberty of
Speech; which fall often on the actions of Revolt and Tumult. Neither is it
proper (if there must be a Dotage in the Royal Affections) that the object of
their weakness should sway and manage the Affairs of State; such an
Intermixture begets Confusion, and Disorder, accompanied with Envy, Hatred, and
a world of Errors: If the King be never so innocent, yet in this course he
cannot avoid the actions of Injustice. Experience tells the right use of a
Favorite. A good Cause in the integrity of time warrants it self, and needs no
supporter: But Imperfection, Fraud, Dishonesty, and Weakness in true Worth, fly
to his protection, that by his strength they may prevail, which in Equity and
Justice are merely corrupt and counterfeit: Money, Friends, or Favor engages
him, and he his Master; hence proceed all manner of Oppression and Disorder.
Let the Springhead be never so pure and unpolluted, yet such a Diver makes it
foul and muddy. A smooth Tongue finding a favorable hearing, sets a fair gloss
upon the blackest Overture; Love and a seeming Goodness leads, where all seems
current; which hatches daily broods of grief and mischief: Thus does the
Kingdom suffer, so misguided. Had this unhappy subject of this Story not been
thus abused, had he been worser far, he had subsisted; but when for his
inglorious Minions, Gaveston and Spencer, who successively enjoyed him, he made
the Kingdom a prey to their Insolence, he found both Heaven and Earth
conspired his ruin. So great a Fall these latter times produce not; a King in
a potent Kingdom of his own, deposed by a handful of Strangers, who
principally occasioned it, without so much as any Kinsman, Friend, or Subject
that either with his Tongue or Sword declared himself in his Quarrel. But you
may object, He fell by Infidelity and Treason, as have many other that went
before and followed him. It Is true; but yet withal observe, here was no second
Pretendents, but those of his own, a Wife, and a Son, which were the greatest
Traitors; had he not indeed been a Traitor to himself, they could not all have
wronged him. But my weary Pen does now desire a respite; wherefore leaving the
perfection of this, to those better Abilities that are worthy to give it a more
full expression; I rest, until some more fortunate Subject invite a new
Relation.

AN Alphabetical TABLE.
A.
RObert of Artois his Character. Page 105 His speech. 106
Arundel Hanged 130
B.
Barons, the Kings Speech to them 5 They swear not to recall Gaveston 7 Are
slighted by the King 18 Persuade him to Marry Ibid. Take up Arms 29 Seize
Gaveston, and Behead him 30 They are incensed 53 Take Arms again 55 Their
Message to the King 56 Appear with a Guard 58 King writes to them 66 Their
Answer Ibid. They rise 69 Are beaten, and fly to Pontfract 70 Are pursued, and
repair to Council 71 Speech in favor of them Ibid.
Bristol City desires a Treaty with the Queen 124 Is yielded to her 125
Barwick betrayed to the Scots 42 Besieged by the King 45 Deserted by him 47
Sir Barth. Baldesmere's Castle seized 68 Baldock's Speech 93 Is committed to
Newgate 143

C.
Carlisle Earl Executed 84 Cliffords Speech 54 Killed 71
Council labor to divert the King from re-calling Gaveston 13 They consent to
re-call him 15 Cautious Speech for Gaveston 10
Chester Bishop Imprisoned 21
D.
Sir Josline Denvil infests the North 43 A great Dearth 45
E.
Exeter forsakes the Queen 108
F.
French King breaks Peace with England 85 Receives the Queen of England 97
Threatens the King 98 Shows the Queen the Popes Sentence 103 Persuades her to
Peace 104

G.
Gaveston Banished 4 His Character Ibid. Re called home again 12 He returns 17
And is Married 19 Created Earl of Cornwall Ibid. Chief Minister of State 20
Imprisons the Bishop of Chester 21 Is Banished a second time 23 Re called again
25 Is Banished a third time 27 Returns again 29 Is seized by the Barons, and
Beheaded 30

H.
Sir Andrew Harcklay repulses the Barons 71 Hereford killed. Ibid. Earl of
Heynault welcomes the Queen 110 Reproves his Brother 111 His Brothers Answer
112 Rewarded, and departs the Kingdom 145

K.
King Edward I. his care in educating his Son 2 He Banishes Gaveston 4 He dies
5
King Edward II. his Birth and Character 1 Swears not to re-call Gaveston 7 Is
troubled at his Oath 8 Falls into Melancholy 9 Sends for Gaveston 12 Acquaints
his Council therewith 13 Their Answer Ibid. His angry Reply Ibid. His Marriage
19 His Son Edward of Windsor born 28 He vows revenge for the Death of Gaveston
32 His Speech to Lancaster 34 Calls a Parliament 36 Goes against the Scots 38
Is defeated 39 Goes against them again 42 Is angry they refuse a Peace 44
Requires two Cardinals, and sends them home Ibid. Besieges Barwick 45 Leaves it
again 47 Seeks a new Favorite 48 Takes Spencer 49 Barons take Arms against him
55 His Proclamation against Mortimer Ibid. Answers their Message 57 His Speech
to the Parliament 58 His Answer to the Merchants Petition against Spencer 65
Opposes the Barons 69 Seizes the two Mortimers Ibid. Beats the Barons 70 Kills
Hereford, Clifford and Mowbray 71 Takes Lancaster and others Ibid. Is moved for
revenge Ibid. His Reply upon it 72 Beheads Lancaster and twenty two more 73
Calls a Parliament 81 Repulses the Scots, and invades Scotland 83 Loses his
Treasure 84 Advises with Spencer 86 Will not consent to the Queens going 90 Sad
at her departure 92 Complains to the Pope 102 He suspects the City of London
120 Removes to Bristol 121 Gets into the Castle 127 Betakes to a Bark and is
seized Ibid. Sent to Berkley Castle 128 Is removed in Disguise 147 His
Complaint 148 Is upbraided 149 His Keepers changed 154 He is removed to Corf
Castle Ibid. He is Murdered 155 The young King Crowned 142
Kingdoms resentment of the Bishop of Chesters Imprisonment 21
L.
Lincolns Speech to the King 22 Death 34
Lancaster surprised 71 Beheaded with twenty two more 73

M.
Sir Gilbert de Middleton Executed 43 Mortimer spoils Spencer 55 Is committed
to the Tower 89 Is favored by the Queen 142 Moves the Kings Death 151 His
Answer to the Queen 152 He flings away 153
Merchants Petition 65 Mowbray killed 71 Black Monks incite the people 144
Their Captain is clapped by the heels and dies Ibid.

N.
Navy set out 94
P.
Parliament called 36 Called again 81 Give the sixth Penny 82 Called by the
Queen 130 They resolve to Depose the King 131 The Speaker reads the Sentence
132
Poydras of Exeter pretends himself King 40 Is Hanged at Northampton Ibid. His
strange Confession Ibid.
Pope sends two Cardinals to Mediate a Peace 42 They go for Scotland, and are
Robbed 43 Return. 44 Requited, and sent home Ibid. He Excommunicates the Scots
King and Kingdom Ibid. Admonishes the French King to quit the Queen. 103
Prodigious sights. Ibid. Ports stopped 94
Q.
Queen offers to go for France 88 Favors Mortimer 89 Pretends a journey of
Devotion 91 Embarks for France Ibid. Is Tainted 94 Entertained in France 95 Her
Address 96 Enticed to return 103 Tells the French King of it Ibid. Advises on
the same 104 Joyful at Artois Council 106 Her farewell to France 108 Her
welcome to Heynault 109 Jealous of Treachery 113 Embarks at Dort 115 Frighted
at Sea 116 Lands at Harwich Ibid. Joins Lancaster 118 Writes to the Mayor of
London 121 Is received into the City Ibid. She goes for Bristol 123 Refuses a
Treaty, and gives Summons 124 Takes that City 125 Batters the Castle 127 Takes
the King Ibid. Sends him to Berkley-Castle 128 Her Cruelty 129 Comes to London
130 Calls a Parliament Ibid. Her Speech to Mortimer 151 Her Expostulation 153
She unwillingly consents to the Kings death 154

S.
Scots adhere to Bruce 36 Refuse a Peace 44 Excommunicated Ibid. Overrun the
borders 45 Opposed Ibid. Beat A. B. York 46 Invade England and Ireland 82 Are
repulst, and Bruce slain 83 Seize the Kings Treasure 84
Scotland Invaded by the King 83 Bishop Stapleton Beheaded 121 Sir Walter de
Selby Executed 43 Sir Peter Spalden made Governor of Barwick 42 Betrays it to
the Scots Ibid.
Spencer taken into favor 49 His Policy 51 Commons Charge against him 61
Banished 62 His Son a Pyrate 64 They return 67 Move for Revenge 71 His Advice
to the King 86 Bribes the French 99 He is taken at Bristol 125 Executed by the
Multitude 126 His Son taken 127 Hanged 130

T.
Tresilian Hanged. 143
Y.
A. B. York opposes the Scots 45 Is beaten by them 46



FINIS.
Cottoni Posthuma: Diverse Choice Pieces, wherein are discussed several
Important Questions, concerning the Right and Power of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament. By the Renowned Antiquary Sir Robert Cotton Baronet. London:
Printed by M. C. for C. Harper, and are to be Sold in Fleet Street, the
Exchange, and Westminster.


