A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church at the Triennial VISITATION OF The
Right Reverend Father in God SETH, Lord Bishop of SARUM, Chancellor of the
GARTER.

By Samuel Fyler A. M. Rector of Stockton in the County of Willts, September. 13.
1680.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. For Thomas Flesher at the Angel and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

To the Right Reverend Father in God Seth, Lord Bishop of Sarum, Chancellor of
the Garter.
My Lord,
YOUR Command to Preach, and your Encouragement to Print this Sermon, have
given me the Confidence thereunto to prefix your Name, and more especially
yours, for that Respect you have to Truth, Loyalty, and Peace, the Promoting of
which is my sole Aim in casting this Mite into the Treasury of the Church.

I am fully satisfied, it will meet with a multitude of Enemies, because the
Church has many: but I look on it as a shame for that matter to concern my
self, after its Consecration by the Blood of so many Martyrs, especially that
Royal one, King Charles the First, who has given us an Example, not to be
Paralelled, but in one only, in that of our Blessed Savior.

I pray God grant (when his forty Years of Patience shall be expired, and so
long he waits to see if a People will Repent) this Nation may not suffer for
that Prodigious Wickedness (as we have just Cause to Fear) the like things that
Jerusalem did for Crucifying Him.

But my Hope is, it will not; and that for this Reason; because it was not the
Clergy of the Church of England, nor was it any thing in her Doctrine, or
Liturgy, that brought our most Gracious, and Religious King to the Block; but
Rebels, Murderers, Traitors, Spirited by Achitophel's Chaplains, who, if they
might have had Leave given 'em, would by this time near hand have Prayed all
Christianity out of this into another World.

God Almighty preserve his Sacred Majesty, that now is, from the Divinity and
Mercy of such Men; and then I doubt not, but he will ever, as he has done,
proceed to Protect that Liturgy joyfully, which directs us to Pray for him so
devoutly, showing it self in that Respect, as well as many others, to be truly
Apostolical.

My Lord, It would be Libellous for me to Recommend these things to your Wisdom
and Care, because it is to move you to that which you already eminently do I
shall only therefore Pray for your Lordships Health, and that God would be
pleased to continue his Blessings to the Church, and to this whole Nation, and
so give off: only begging the Honor to Subscribe my self,

Your Lordships Most Humble, And Obedient Servant, Samuel Fyler.

MATTHEW 6. 9. After this manner therefore Pray ye.
MAny are the Sins of England at this day, which have even shaken, and seem
still to threaten the Remotion of the Candlestick from us, which God avert.
Among the rest, one, and that a great one, that stands in need of an Elijah, a
St. John Baptist, another Word made Flesh to reform it; I think, I may truly
say in the general, and wretched Neglect, and Contempt of God's Worship and
Service: some in all places almost refusing to come to his House to Worship him
there, Atheists, and they that separate; others that come doing it ('it is to be
feared,) for Fashion's sake only, like the Jews (of whom God complains by his
Prophet) drawing nigh with their Lips, while their Hearts are far from him. And
I wish this were all to be said, but (the more's the Pity,) the Service bears
the Blame, Men are Schismatical, and Faulty; and then, that they may excuse
themselves, they are ready to say, God is not served after the right, and due
manner.

What an heavy Charge this is to our spotless Mother, which was once looked
upon as the Beauty, and Glory of all the Churches in Christendom, is easy to
say* but (the Mischief is) to wipe it off is not so easy. I question whether
the Spirit of Prophecy, or a Voice from Heaven will do the turn, such is the
Prejudice men have taken against so Excellent and Holy a thing as the ^hurches
Service is. For the Remotion of which, I wish the weight of so great a Task
were laid on abler Shoulders, of one that (...) sufficient for these things;
but however I shall offer to the Ch^^^^es Corban as I am able, as appearing
here pur^ly in Obedience and Duty; in Performance of which, if I do any thing
acceptably, I shall hold my self very well Content, as having no other Aim,
then to serve the interest of the Church, which I pray God continue unto us
with Truth, and Peace.

In pursuance of this Design now, as it is but rational that I should pitch on
some Words of Christ himself, he being the Churches Lawgiver, as well as
Savior, therefore called not only the High Priest, but also the great Apostle
of our Profession, so I have accordingly done. For these Words that I have read
are a part of that divine Law which he delivered on the Mount, Monti Sinaitico
superstructo, as Dr. Hamond in his Book against Dalleus about Confirmation
says, built not by* but upon the top of Mount Sinai; whereby he would intimate
that he intended not the Abolition of the Law of Moses, and of solemn Services
then in use, but only the Reformation and Perfection of them, as it is true he
did not. And here I take my rise, on which to build my ensuing Discourse. For
that this is the full design of our blessed Savior in this Sermon of his, not
to destroy (put aside Typicals) what was well set before, but to reform what
was amiss, by reason either of the false Glosses, or ungrounded Traditions, and
Practices of the Scribes and Pharisees, that sat at that time in Moses Chair,
will appear in all its parts, as you may see both in the precedent, and also in
the present Chapter.

In the precedent, when he speaks to the Letter of the Law; in this where he
speaks to the main parts of God's Worship; as particularly to Fasting,
Almsgiving, and Prayer. For it is not Fasting he Condemns in any, but doing it
as Hypocrites, for Ostentation, and Show; nor is Almsgiving blamed by him, but
g^v^ng of Alms with sound of Trump, and to be seen of men. So for Prayer, we
are to account that his end was at no hand to t^ke away a public Service, or
Liturgy-way used by them in those days in their Prayer-places, and Synagogues:
no, in that the Jews had a Liturgy, a set known manner of Service then,
consisting of Tehillim, and Tephillim, Praises, and Prayers, which that they
had Mr. Gregory makes appear too evidently to be denied, this he disapproves
not; there is nothing to that purpose to be gathered from this Prayer of his,
or any Circumstance therein, or thereabouts. It Is true: as it relates to the
Pharisees, so their Battologies, and their making long Prayers, and that openly
in the corners of the Streets for a show, and in pretext of Holiness are
condemned by it utterly: but consider it, as it relates to the Apostles, and
then it has another Aspect, for so it is to be looked upon as a perfect and
absolute Form of Prayer, given (I doubt not to say) to be like the Shekel in
the Sanctuary, a Standard to them: and whereas it is prefac'd with the Words I
have read, they are (I conceive) to be looked on as a Canon to warrant both the
Use of it, and also the making it a Pattern for the Church to compose her
Prayers by. For it is for such ends as these (we are to think) that our Savior
Christ directing his Apostles in the Duty of Praying, says unto them, After
this manner Pray ye.

In which Words there is an Act, and it is Modus, or an Injunction, and its
Qualification: Pray ye, and Pray ye after this manner.

Which two considered with what is premised, give ground for a double Quaere.

1. Whether there ought to be a Solemn public manner of Worship always in the
Church of Christ?

2. Whether, that being granted, we in our Church may be said to Pray after the
manner prescribed by him?

Of both which, while I speak Affirmatively, of the First as briefly as I may,
of the Second more amply; I crave the Patience of this Reverend and Learned
Auditory, and for my Defects Pardon.

The First is, Whether there ought to be a Solemn, and Public Worship always
in the Church of Christ, or not? And,

That there ought to be, I collect from the Injunction here, in the Word (...),
Pray ye: in regard it is spoken by our Savior in the Plural Number, as to
many; and for that the Prayer it self is in the Plural too, Our Father; and
then because it ends with Amen, which is a Note of public Use: but chiefly, in
regard these Words are a part of his Divine Law, (as I instanced before)
whereby he must be thought to establish God's Worship, if at all, or any where.
For we may not imagine that the Words of this great Lawgiver import so little,
as that this Prayer of his should serve only for the present Use of his
Disciples, and that it should be a Temporary thing: Nor can we conceive he
meant that the Christian Church should have a less Solemn Service than the
Jewish had. If so, why is this a part of this Sermon of his in the Mount, where
he is giving his Law? why does he deliver it with so much Solemnity, as he
does; with so much Majesty, and Authority? and why does he bring it in with
other substantial parts of the Law of Moses, of which he professes he came not
to Destroy the least Iota? Surely, a Solemn Service, or way of worshipping God
he meant by it should be in his Church, of which the Apostles to whom he speaks,
next to himself the prime Foundation Stones, and that perpetual: a known
Solemn, Public; and Perpetual Service which all Christian People should have
Recourse to, even as God's People the Jews had anciently at the Temple, and
their lesser Synagogues. Then it was so in those Days when the Prophet Haggai's
Glory appeared in the Second House; and is it not most rational that it should
be so in ours? Yea, is it not inferrible from this Rule and Precept manifestly?
Let who will imagine otherwise, it is what I may, and therefore shall express
Definitively, that so long as there shall be a Church upon the Face of the
Earth, this will authorize her to see that Prayers and Praises be rend'red to
Almighty God publicly, continually, and that they ascend up (like the Smoke of
the Morning and Evening Sacrifice at the Temple) as a due Homage to him. For it
the Arguments are very weighty, and momentous. For,

1. Had they a Priesthood? so have we, an Order of Men appointed to be for ever
in the Church by an unalterable Constitution. Therefore does the Apostle say of
our Savior Christ that he has a Priesthood that is unchangeable, or that
passes not away, Heb. 7. 24. As blessing us from Heaven by his Intercession,
on Earth by his Ministry: and to like effect is that Promise of his to his
Apostles, that he would be always with them unto the end of the World, Mat. 28.
20. Which Promise the Church has always understood, not of the Apostles
considered personally, but of Church Officers by an uninterrupted Succession. I
know, the Erastians of our Age wrest the Words another way, that thereby they
may evacuate Episcopal Ordination. For by (...) there (say they) is meant only
the End, or Consummation of the Jewish Economy, as it is taken Heb. 9. 26. But
however, grant it be so, it matters not; for, that things were to continue ever
after as they, even as the Apostles left them, is as undoubtedly true, as that
our Savior till then was always with them.

Again. Had they, the (Jews) a Day in which to serve God? so have we. We now
the Lord's Day, as they then the Sabbath. And why a Day, but for Holy Services
to be performed in it? Take away, These, by which the Day is Sanctified and
Hallowed, and ye will near-hand make the Day an idol, keeping the Day for the
Days sake, which is the Sabbath of the Ox, and the Ass. These two must go
together still. If Almighty God, who made all Days, be pleased above others
with a Seventh, or a First, it is for our sakes, that we may therein Devote our
selves to his Service, and that we may commemorate the great Benefits of our
Creation and Redemption.

3. What think we of the Celebration of the Eucharist, which is in lieu of
their Passover, in which we remember afresh, and anew the Death of our Savior
Christ, of Christ our Passover, as the Apostle styles him, who was Sacrificed
for us? is not that Solemnly to be Celebrated by us? And if so, can it be done
(I ask) without Prayers, and Hymns? how can that be? St. Mark says, that our
Savior, and his Apostles sung an Hymn at the Institution of it; the known, or
wonted Hymn, or Hallelujah, say the Critics, that was used at the Feast,
beginning Psalm the 113, and ending Psalm the 118; and that Prayer was ever a
Solemn Concomitant of this Grand Duty, is evident Act. 2. 42. Where it is said
of those First Fruits of the Apostles Preaching, that they continued in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, in Breaking Bread, and in Prayer.

4. Thus we have a Priesthood, a Day, a Duty, the Eucharist for one, to which I
might add more; and have we not an House too? Yes, ever was there, and must be
for the before specifyed Ends; of which I shall speak a little more largel^, as
making out to us the Publickness, and Perpetuity of God's Worship for
therefore. Mat. 21. 13. does our Savior say it is written. My House shall be
called an House of Prayer, and that, as Esaias says, (from whom that Text is
quoted,) for all People. A Pregnant and full Testimony for what I affirm. It is
apparent here, that an House belongs to God. which Christ calls his House,
therefore not a Private one; and likewise that it is not so much ^^ House of
Preaching, as of Prayer, to which his People are to that end to Resort, and
Congregate themselves, in Correspondence to which the Tabernacle of old was
styled (...), Ohel Mogned, the Tabernacle of the Congregation. My House, I
observe, it is called, that is, distinctly God's House; and why, but because
there we are to seek his Face? for that he is there present, and there his
Honor dwells. Most certain it is that there we have more than his Presence
of Essence, which is every where; for there we have his Presence of Grace, or
Habitation. For this Reason is he called among the Rabbis (...), Hashekijnah;
for his dwelling with us, I mean, his special Presence in Consecrated Places,
where he ingageth himself to be Attentive to the Prayers of his People; as for
his Nature, and Essence, he is Styled Jehova, a Name that imports the Eternity,
and Necessariness of his Existence: so that when we come to his own House,
conclude we may, that he is there, and that he will be in the midst of us.
True, he does not manifest himself now, as he did when the Temple stood,
sometimes in a Cloud, sometimes by a still Voice, sometimes by Angels, all
called the Glory at that time: Nor did he then always neither, but only upon
Occasion; yet acknowledge we must (as did they) even then, when they saw no
visible Appearance, that he is indeed present, tho invisibly, yet truly, by his
Holy Spirit, by his Angels, in his Word and Sacraments, which is his Face, that
is to say, his assumed Face, and that we are to seek it there, as the Jews did
at his Tabernacle of Old. The Truth is, 'twas ever so, ever was there a public
Place where God would be met withal. In Paradise it self, an assigned Place we
read of, even there; whether betwixt the Sacramental Trees, or somewhere near
the Tree of Life, I determine not; but I infer it from those Words, Genesis 3. 18.
where it is said, Adam, and Eve hid themselves from the Presence of the Lord
God. From his Omnipresence they could not, did not fly; 'twas from his
Presence therefore of Appearance, where they were wont to meet him, or where he
had met them before: the Phrase (...), Mippenc Jehovah, is taken (I find) in
that Sense, as the Talmud says. After the Fall, Cain and Abel had a peculiar
Place, where they offered Sacrifice, Genesis 4. After the Flood Abraham had an
Altar made. Genesis 12. 8. And afterward a ^^ove, Genesis 21. 32. Where he called
upon the Name of the Lord. Jacob laid the first Stone of an House for God, Genesis
28. 22. and Chapter 35. 7. He went up to Bethel, and finished his Purpose there,
calling the Place El-Bethel, as much as, the God of the House of God. After
this, in the Wilderness the Jews had an Ambulatory Sanctuary; in Solomon's Days
a fixed Temple. In David's time we read of many Houses of God in the Land; in
the Son of David's, besides the Temple, of many Synagogues, Hammidrasches,
Bethhakkeneseth's, and Prouseucha's, and Gnatyoth, or (...), all dedicated to
Holy Uses, and Offices. And let no Man Think that our Savior Christ did
discountenance these Places, or that his Holy Apostles did despise them; for it
is no such matter. How often is Christ found in the Temple, and in the
Synagogues? Wist ye not, said he, to his Father and Mother, when they sought
him, that I should be (...), that is, in my Father's House, if rightly
Interpreted, rather than about my Father's Business. Luc. 2. 49. And what of
his Apostles? St. Luke tells you, that they were after Christ's Death
continually in the Temple praising, and blessing God, Chapter 24. 53. and in the
beginning of the Acts, where he carries on the Story, he tells us, Chapter 1. 13.
that they went up into an upper Room, where they continued unanimously in
Prayer, and Supplication; which is to be understood doubtless of some Room
belonging to the Temple, of which were many for that end; as Beth-haeben, the
House of the Stone, and Beth-hattebijtah, the House of Washing, and several
more. I know, it is said, Act. 2. 46. that they continued with one Accord in
the Temple, and breaking Bread from House to House: but (as our Critics
observe) it is not so well Translated there; for, that they should not go from
House to House, was given in Charge before; and therefore (according to the
Hellenists Greek adapted to the Hebrew, where the Prepositions are few, and
signify differently) by (...), we are to understand rather (...), in the
House; and consequently it must relate to the Temple, or one of the Gnalijoth,
or (...) thereunto belonging. It is granted, that it is said of St. Paul, when
at Rome, that he dwelt two whole Years in an hired House, and received all that
came to him, preaching the Kingdom of God, Act. 28. 30. But what of that? I
cannot speak positively, it is true but in Probability, (methinks) he might not
stray from this Rule. For, why might there not be a Proseucha there, or a
Jewish Oratory near at hand? it is undoubted that there were many at that time
in all Places where the Jews did come; one at Neapolis, of which Josephus, and
Eusebius speak; and that there were diverse at Rome, we learn from Juvenal, a
Poet of theirs; so that for all we know he might place himself near one of
them. But, there is a place yet which may seem to Justify the
Field-Conventicles, it may be said, and that is Luke. 6. 12. Where we read of
our Savior himself, that he went into a Mountain to Pray, and continued all
Night in Prayer to God; what may be said to this? Truly consult we the
Original, and that, I presume, will help us out: For it is certain, that there
it is (...), not to God, but of God; and therefore by (...), we are to
understand rather Domus Orationis, as it is taken in other places of the New
Testament, an House of Prayer; and then the Translation will be, That he
continued all Night in a certain Prayer-Place, or Oratory, which were wont to
be built, some on Mountains, some on Rivers sides: and yet if he did spend the
Night in Prayer upon the Mountain, it was private Prayer, it is to be observed,
and so makes nothing at all for them. Indisputable it is, that there were at
that time Houses many, Synagogues, and Oratories, set apart to God's Service,
and that the Apostles, when they met together to Pray, and break Bread, usually
frequented, and made choice of them. And then who will question, but that they
would have the same practiced by the ensuing Churches, but that they would have
a Public, and Perpetual Service also? if not, why the Temple called an House
of Prayer, for all People, by our Savior himself, and by God's Prophet before
him?

And now does not this Justify, yea, does it not commend unto us the Wisdom
and Conseience of the Church we live in? it does exceedingly: In regard she
has taken Care that God should be so Worshipped, and Served as he ought to be;
Publicly Solemnly, Perpetually; with Confessions, and Prayers, with
Thanksgivings, and Hymns, as becomes the Majesty of him who dwells in the
highest Heavens, as to his Glory; and yet condescends to dwell in earthly
Houses, in respect of his gracious Presence, that there Sinners may seek his
Face, and find him. Did I say, justify? Surely the Church could not perform
its Trust else, if it did not so; if it left I mean, God's Worship to be
performed at Random, or otherwise then in the most Solemn Manner it could
imaginably be: If it did not propose him to be served by all People with most
perfect Prayers, and highest Praises, that we may do God's Will on Earth, as
they, viz. the Angels in Heaven do; as far as our Imperfections will permit us,
that is, as near as we can. For she is not only to look to the Duty, or the Act
of Prayer, but also to its Matter, and Form, and all its Circumstances; that
they be according to the Will of her Master. And for that she has done so, O!
that we could see our Happiness! That we have such a constant, public Service!
That we know whither to go that we may meet our God! whither to come that we
may seek his Face! where to be that we may have Fellowship with the Father, and
his Son Jesus Christ! that we may partake of his Presence, sit at Table, and
Eat, and Drink with him, even at his own House, which is an House of Prayer for
all People! And let us not be unthankful for so great a Blessing; the greatest
Blessing that we can wish to our selves, or that Heaven could possibly bestow
upon us, since our Savior Christ, and the Holy Ghost came down thence. As
Phinchas's Wife did by the Ark of the Testament; I may give it the Title of the
Glory of the Lord; and if it should be taken from us, as that was by the
Philistin's, how may we sigh out the same Words that she did at that time, and
say, The Glory of the Lord is departed from Israel? Without Stations (the
Jewish Proverb goes) that is, without Prayers, the World would not consist, nor
would it indeed. For these are those (...) Thimroth Gnashan, the
Incense-Clouds, or Piliars of Smoke in the Book of Canticl^s, that Christ is to
be seen in; the Saultie^, (...) to his Holy Cross which upholds the World with
its four Parts, it is true in the Spirit, tho not in the Letter, what the Jews
assume to themselves, as I have it from Buxtor^^ Tam nou (...) dus hic
subsist^re sine Israelitis, quam sine A^re, and (...) that the World can no
more subsist without (...), (...) as Pray as Jacob did, for which he was cal^^^
(...) with God, then with ^t the Element of (...). It is the Morning and
Evening Incense which (...) Heaven from our H^ly Places daily, that (...) all
we have: for the keeping off of (...); that the Sword is not made drunk with
(...) the (...) not look in at our Windows; that our Land is not made an
Akeldamah, or a plow'd-up Field. It is this that we owe our Plenty, and our
Peace to: which through Christ is the Cause of all the Gracious Appearances of
God to us. You Will find Luke 1. That the Angel appeared to Zacharias at
Incense-time, v. 10. and v. 11. standing at the right Hand of the Altar of
Incense; a Type that of our Prayers now being offered to God at the time
Accepted, which is at the time of the Public Congregation. For this is that
(...), Gneth Ratson, of which the Psalmist speaks, the accepted Time, or Time
of Acceptance. Therefore the Jews, if they saw a Man neglecting the Times of
Prayer at the Synagogues, they called him (...), Shochen rang, an ill Neighbor
it is rendered, but it has a further Significancy: for as Almighty ^od is called
by Esaias (...), Shoken Gnad, one that Inhabits Eternity, so did they understand
by it, that such a one was an Inhabitant of Wickedness, that his Shekinah was
Wickedness; as if he dwelt in Puddles, and Gutters, and Sinks, like that Essene
Mr, Godwin speaks of, that being fallen accidentally into a Jakes, rather then
be pulled out by the Christians, would keep his Sabbath there. And,

Let them consider this, who separate from the Service of the Church, that
refuse to be there at the acceptable Times where God is ready to hear, and is
night to all them that call upon him. For what I have said, as it justifies the
Church, so does it condemn them as much, that disregard, and decry its
Constitutions, and Appointments; that scoff at, and make light of its Prayers,
and Litanies; that choose their own way of serving God, as Micah in the Book of
Judges, who of his stolen Money made a graven Image, and a molten Image, an
Ephod, and a Teraphim, and got a sorry Levite to serve him for ten Shekels per
Annum, a suit of Apparel, and a little Victuals, and so had a Service of his
own in his own House. For so do they (in part at least) I mean, our Sectaries;
they will serve God their own way, the manner that likes them best, or not at
all. They will not frequent God's House, his Face they will not seek there; but
Worship their own Teraphim, preferring before the Churches Constitutions their
own Imaginations, and Fancies, as Michah his Graven, and Molten Images, all the
while pretending that they are wiser then their Teachers, those Spiritual
Guides to whom God has committed the Care of their Souls; as if God would not
soonest be heard in his own House, and in Forms of Prayer wisely, and
discreetly made after the Pattern that is here given us by Christ. And here,

My second Point comes to hand, the Modus of this Act, or the Qualification of
our Savior's Injunction, After this manner Pray ye.

What this Manner is, I shall not be long in declaring; it is plain, I need not.
The Pattern, as you well know, is our Lord's own Prayer, the Canon, that which
all our Prayers are to be ruled by: So that after this manner imports as much
as this comes to, that our Prayers be both for Matter, and Form such as that
is. That we may use a Form, St. Luke is positive for it, who says, when ye
Pray, say thus: and that the Matter be such as our Blessed Savior directs to,
will be denied, I suppose, by none that have their Wits about them. The sequel
of this is, that from a Church which does so Pray as is here prescribed, that
is to say, after the Pattern given us by Christ himself; no Man can pretend to
have a just Reason, or Ground of Separation. For why? it is the Command of our
Blessed Savior, it is the Lawgiver of the New Testaments own Injunction; he
says it, and that to his Apostles, after this manner Pray ye. Therefore, that
we may be satisfied in Point of Conscience, concerning our own Practice, and
that men may see what Church they ought rather to join themselves to, it will I
hope be worth our Discussion, and consequently I shall make it the subject
matter of my Inquiry, whether our Church does so, or not.

There are who say, it does not. They at Rome, or Dissenters at home: but that
they have little Reason for what they say, I hope sufficiently to Evidence;
which that I may do, I shall Endeavor to show, that neither of these do Pray
after this manner, and that our Church does assuredly.

Not they first. And, I begin with them of the Church of Rome, whose Council of
Trent has ordered, that the Manner in use with them be used in all Christian
Churches, and no other. For so has that Council defined; how rightly, when you
have heard my Exceptions, will easily be judged. I do not except against them,
that they Pray by way of Liturgy, God forbid I should: nor yet for giving a due
Honor to the Saints departed, their Memory is ever blessed with us: nor if
they receive the Eucharist with all possible Veneration, it is what we allow,
and Practice: nor if they worship God, and Christ at the Altar, so do we as
David at the Mercy-Seat, it is the Throne of Christ. But that which we are
justly offended at is, that in their Breviaries, and Missals we are obliged to
fall down to, and worship Images even as the Prototypes: that we are called
upon to Invocate, and to Pray to Saints, and Angels: that we are required to
Worship with Antiochus Epiphanes (...), Le-eloah Magnuzzim, (so are their
Relics called) strong Holds, or Munitions, together with the true God: that
we are commanded to adore the Sacrament with Divine Adoration, to give it
(...), and so to look upon a Wafer, or a piece of Bread as our God. How
contrary is all this to the Contents of this Prayer of our Lord, given us as a
Rule to go by? By his Rule we are to worship none but the God of Heaven only.
But, as to the last of these, (which I desire to insist a little on, because
it is what they maintain without making Shifts) They say it is Christ himself is
there his true real Body; and shall they not Worship him? Him? I answer, yes;
we must, but this we must be sure of, that it is he, and how shall we? For
suppose the Bread be Transubstantiated by the Consecration of an honest Priest;
yet if a perfidious Priest should not intend to Consecrate, I hope, it remains
Bread still; and if so, then it is not Christ, and to Worship it, must it not
be Idolatry, I ask, then? For this, the more wary of them are wont to say, If
thou be the Son of God, I Worship Thee. And good Reason. For if it be but
Bread, it is Idolatry by their own Confession: this their Rubric shows, which
orders the Priest not to let the People see the Host, lest they should
Idolatrare, till after Consecration; the Almighty part of the S^creta must
first be ended. But, when all is done, if the Bread be not at all
Transubstantiated, supposing there be a Concurrence of the Priest's Intention,
what then? I am sure we have reason to believe that it is not. For they
themselves call the Elements Dona, and Data after Consecration; and Pray to God
to accept of them, as the Offering of the Child Abell, and as the Sacrifice of
Abraham, (...) M^lchiz^deck, and withal that he would let his Angel carry it up
to the Heavenly Altar, and present it at the Throne of his Majesty. It seems
with them it is another Christ besides him that is already there, and till they
have interceded for their Intercessor, God is not well pleased with him.
Besides, I argue thus; If the Bread be Transubstantiated, then it loses its own
Suppositality, and gains a new Existence, it must have an Existence in the
Person of the Son of God, no less then so, a new Hypostatical Union made: which
being granted, Idemand, can it afterward Perish, Putrify, become Moldy? can
it breed Worms, or be eaten with Mice? So the Host may: how can this be? is not
Christ's Body Incorruptible? shall God's Holy One ever see Corruption? sure
enough, the Bread is not Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, and
therefore to Worship it, is not to Worship Him. For their Doings here they
appeal to Antiquity, and truly we very much Reverence Antiquity as well as
they. But if we search into the Canon of the Mass, we shall find, that this is
but a weak Plea. For, besides that Durand says the Apostles Consecrated with
the Lord's Prayer only, and the Words of Institution, it is manifest that the
Canon has been added to, and altered many times, since first composed, whether
by Gelasius, or Scholasticus I scan not. It was added to ( Chemintius says) by
Alexander the First; by Leo the First after him; by Gregory the Great; how
well, I shall not examine. But, that it is not come down to us the same it was
then, in those Days, but that it has been Corrupted since, is a Thing
worthily, and upon good Grounds to be suspected. For, (to let alone what was
said by that Dominican Friar Antonius of Valtelina, in the Council of Trent its
self, who minded them of the Ancient Ordo Romanus which they had departed from)
why was it, I pray, that St. Basil's Office in latter times was tolerated in
Italy it self, for the Sake of some Greeks there? and why did the Spaniards
Contend so hotly for the Mosarabique Liturgy used by Isidorus, and Hildefous^s,
one Bishop of Sevil, the other of Toledo? it was sure because they would not
admit of innovation. So, when the Gregorian Missal was designed to be or
Universal Use, and the Ambrosian to be laid aside in Pope Adrian's Days, what
was the reason of so much ado in the World? For, as Durand in his Rationale
tells us, to bring it on, he first made Use of the Power of King Pipin, and
Charlemain; when that prevailed not sufficiently, a Council is called; they too
are Dissolved, and do nothing in it. What follows? About three Days after comes
an Holy Man, by Name Eugenius; he desires the Council may sit again, they do:
and it was ordered by them that the two Missals should be laid upon the Altar
of St. Peter, being sealed with Episcopal Seals, that the Church Doors should
be shut fast, and they Pray to God all Night that he would show some Token,
which of the two he best accepted. This is done, and what is the Event? In the
Morning (forsooth) because the Gregorian Missal was taken in pieces, and
scattered, the Leaves of it, here, and there over the Church; and that of St.
Ambrose lay whole on the Altar, this (they conclude,) was Divinitus a Token,
that the one was to be used all the World over, and the other only at Millan. A
pleasant thing this, is it not? And why all this ado? what is the Reason? It Is
Conjectured only for the Sake of that one Word Figura in the Canon of St.
Ambrose; for that he calls the Scrament the Figure only of the Body and Blood
of our Lord. So that 'twas then, we conceive, and in Gregory the Seventh's
Days, (of late Date at least) that the Worshipping of the Host, as God, came
in: and together with it the Propitiatory Sacrifice instead of the
Eucharistical Oblation, and Invocation of Saints, in lieu of an honorable
Commemoration of them. If so, then Antiquity will not bear them out. Nor will
the great Boast of the Popes Infallibility neither; for, for that matter Mr.
Crackanthrop tells us with undeniable Evidence, that Vigilius in the fifth
General Council of Constantinople was cursed for Nestorianism. Much less will
the great Pretense of Universal Headship, since (besides this Story of
Vigilius) we are satisfied by S. Isidorus, that Petrus de Luna, alias Benedict
the thirteenth, was deposed by the Council of Constance, as Eugenius afterward
by the Council of Basil. We for our parts, know assuredly, that Christ is Head
of his Church, and we are well assured also, that he is Infallible truly; and
he has taught us other things, then they do, to give Divine Worship, and to
Pray to God only, to our Father which is in Heaven: and therefore the Council
of Trent must Pardon us, if we accept not of its Definitions, but separate from
the Church of Rome's Communion. For since they bind us to Pray otherwise then
our Savior does; to the Host, to Saints, and Angels, to the Virgin Mary, as a
Mediatrix betwixt God and Us, and the Queen of Heaven, I conclude that they
(tho for Form they may) yet for Matter, and Substance do not Pray after this
manner.

Next come we to our Dissenters at home, who deny all set Forms, and are for
Extemporay Effusion, as if that were it that our Savior would have by saying,
After this manner Pray ye; because no Form, or Book was to be seen before him;
are not these in the right? I answer, nor they neither, if we speak in
reference to the Public, and Solemn Service, and Worship of God.

1. Because Christ came not, as I have already said, to Abolish what was well
set before, but to Reform what was Faulty, and Manifest it is that the Jews
had set Forms of Prayer.

2. The more is it Confirmed, because this Pattern given by him is a Form it
self, and, as called by a Father, Breviarium Evangelii, an Epitomy of the
Gospel; so was it also a Collection or Epitomy of the Jewish Euchologue; as we
learn from Mr. Seldom, P. Fagius, and others. If we Consult the Critics, we
may find from whence every Petition was taken, viz. from Sepher-Hammustar, and
Sepher-Tephillim; their Books of Tradition and Prayers.

3. More yet, for that set Forms were used by the Appointment of God himself,
as we may see, Number. 6. 23. Where God says to Moses, speak unto Aron, and to his
Sons, saying, on this wise shall ye Bless the Children of Israel, saying unto
them; the Lord Bless thee and Keep thee, the Lord make his Face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee,
and give thee Peace, and they shall put my Name upon the Children of Israel,
and I will Bless them. So again, at the Removal of the Ark, Number. 10. 35. Where,
when the Ark set forward, the Prayer was, Rise up Lord, and let thine Enemies
be scattered; and when it rested again, Return, O Lord, unto the many Thousands
of Israel.

4. Yet more, because of our Savior's own Example, who in his Agony used the
same Words three times over, Let this Cup pass from me. Besides,

5. May I not justly argue from the Inconveniences and Absurdities of
Extemporary Prayers? why not? For they are great, and many, and such as may not
be endured in the Solemn Worship of God, in a public Congregation. For that,
which they which stand for it, are so much against, falls out unto them; the
stinting, I mean of the Spirit; they stint the People (say what they will) more
by much then they are stinted by a Form of Prayer, which they know before. They
are such also as leave the People to be imposed upon; by an Humorist, or a
Madman, or one that is Unorthodox, or Heretical. Yea, they are Obnoxious to
Nonsense, and Blasphemy; and in what can we hope to find Atonement, if our very
Prayers are Provocations? Finally, they are such as no Man present can assure
himself, that he can say Amen to, as becomes most certainly such Prayers, as we
offer up to the great Majesty of Heaven. Nor is it impertinent to question, how
all the Parishes in Christendom should be supplied (not to mention these
things) with Men of such rare, and singular Ability's. scarcely to be believed
to be in the Apostles themselves, but that they were endued with Inspiration
from above. And Inspiration, I know, no man but an absolute Fanatic will
pretend to. If any do, then what becomes of that Question of St. Paul; Are all
Apostles? sure enough, all are not Apostles; I shall demand from them that
pretend to that, that they show me their Credentials from Heaven; that they let
me see the Cloven Tongues sitting upon their Heads; that they let me hear them
speak all Languages: or make it appear that they have seen Christ out of
Heaven, as St. Paul did. But in vain may we expect such things as these, since
John's latter Days are past and gone. We are now an ordinary Ministry, and
Extraordinaries are put a Period to, even as the Star that conducted the Wise
Men, went out at Jerusalem; and as when the Children of Israel came to Canaan,
where they might Plow, and Sow, then did Mannah cease; it was in its Infancy
that the Church had the Teat put in her Mouth. So it is manifest, I think, that
neither they at Rome, nor our Dissenters at home do Pray after this manner. It
remains to be considered next, whether we in our Church do. And,

If I prove, that a way of Liturgy, such as we use, is to Christ's Meaning
agreeable; and that there is nothing Unorthodox, nothing Corrupt in ours; that
we do, I conceive, will not be denied. This therefore I shall endeavor to make
good. And,

For the first of these, I shall not scruple (to let alone what has been
already said) to Appeal to the Practice of the Apostles themselves, and also of
all Churches since, even to the precedent Century. For in the Apostles time,
that they had then Liturgies, known Offices, consisting of Prayers, and Praises
in use with them, is easily Discerned, from St Paul's Advice to the Romans, Chapter
15. 6. which is with one Mind, and one Mouth to Glorify God, by which Words
that a Form is meant, is more than intimated: from his reprehending the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Because in their public Assemblies they had every
one a Psalm, that is to say, a Manner, or Form of his own which hindered
Edification, and bred Confusion: and why not from that, Act. 13. 2. where we
read, As they Ministered unto the Lord, and Fasted the Holy Ghost said?
Minister'd, it is rendered, but the Words in the Greek, are (...), as they were
Liturgying; that is, because joined with Fasting, as they were performing
Divine Service, which it seems was this way. For it further, the Liturgy of St.
James, and the Liturgy of St. Mark used by the Cophti still, and that of St.
Peter used a long time in the Church of Rome, are a strong Inforcement, tho of
them we can produce only some Fragments, and broken Pieces. For had they not
had Offices, would it not have been known, and observed by after-Ages? but the
succeeding times give account of the contrary, that they had. 'Twas not 300
Years after the Apostle's Days that the Council of Nice was, and then there is
great mention of them; as you may see in Eusebius his fourth Book of the Life
of Constantine, who tells us there of Orationum Syngraphe, a Book of Prayers,
and Liturgia Mystica, so he calls it a Mystical Liturgy, which Constantine the
Emperor was present at. And what is more common then in Ecclesiastical Writers,
to hear of the Liturgy of St. Hierome, and of St. Ambrose; and so of St. Basil,
and St. Chrysostom? the last of which has left it upon Record, that in the
Primitive Church among the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit: one was the gift
of making Prayers, for the Church to use. It seems the Gift of Prayer was not
looked upon then as a Faculty of making long, and familiar Harangues to God, as
it has been of late Years without Sense or Reason. Look we moreover on the
Canons of the Councils, and we shall find them for us; that of Carthage, and
that of Melevis, so early. It is the 23 Canon of the third Council of Carthage,
Quascunque sibi preces, etc. Let no Man use any Prayers that he has made,
unless he first consult with the Brethren, i. e. Fellow-Officers of the Church,
who were learned, and well instructed. More ample is that of Melevis, which
says, as I find in Caranza, Placuit ut preces, quae probaetae fuerunt in Synodo
ab omnibus Celebrentur: It is our Will that Prayers only that are approved by a
Synod be celebrated by all, nec alia omnino dicentur in Ecclesia, and that no
other but those that are so approved by a Synod be said in the Church, lest by
chance any thing, either through Ignorance, or Carelessness be done against the
Faith. Well then, that thus it was in the first 4 or 5 Centuries of the Church,
besides the Glimpses for it in Scripture, Fathers, and Councils Testify. And
what? that, it has been so ever since, have we not the Consent of the Churches
of all Ages? we have, look we which way we will, either into the East or West.
Which being granted, can we imagine that the Church has continued so long,
even till these last Days, in so gross an Error? or can we think it fit to
throw aside the way of the Universal Church in all Ages for a few Men's Sake
that have Voluble Tongues? Or is not rather the Custom, and Practice of the
Church of all Ages in stead of a Rate, and perpetual Law? they are Saravia's
Words, speaking in reference to Episcopacy (which, and the Liturgy must Live,
and Dye together) Mos totius Ecclesiae est inviolabilis quaedam lex, the Custom
of the whole Church is an inviolable Law: and which at peradventure so it ought
to be esteemed, yea to be kept, and held inviolably by us. For, tho such a
Custom, or Constitution of the Church; in Mr. Weemes his Words, may not be Jus
Divinum Divine Divinum, a Law, that is properly, and purely Divine, as having
no plain positive Command for it in the Scriptures; yet it is Jus Divinum
humane Divinum; of like Force, and in a manner equally Divine with that for
which there is a positive Law, supposing still it be Universal. It is quodam
modo Divinum, as Forb^sius in his Ierenicum says, in some manner Divine, as
being founded in God's positive Law, which commands us to obey our Superiors,
as them also to see, that all things be done according to Rule, and with all
Decency and Order. And surely we have more reason to believe, that the
Primitive Fathers would not stray from the Apostical Practice, who could not
but see what was done before them, and would rather dye Martyrs then part with
the least Truth, then that the whole Church has all along been deceived unto
this present Day. On this Argument stands Infant Baptism, the Observation of
the Lord's Day, Episcopacy, and the like; and to me it is prevalent before all
that can be said against it by Novelists. Common Prayer spoken of in the
Epistles of Ignatius has more in it than a World of Arguments produced, against
what I affirm. (...), says he, (...): see that ye all come together in one
place, let there be one Common Prayer among you, one Mind, one Hope in Love,
and Faith that is spotless. I go upon such Grounds as these, and nothing seems
to me more Plain (putting all together) than that the use of Liturgy is not
only Ancient, but also Primitive, and Apostolical.

Now 2ly, that in ours there is no Spot, or Blemish, for which to be rejected,
I come next to prove. And had I need say any thing to that Matter? I know it is
accused of Popery. But, O ye holy Martyrs, how came you to be so mistaken then,
as to dye thus in Defense of Popery, and in Defiance of it at one, and the same
Instant? Mr. John Hullier, being burnt at the Stake with the Common Prayer Book
in his Bosom? But (Oh!) there is somewhat of the Mass Book in it. I confess it.
There are the Creeds, and some of the Hymns, and Collects that are used by
them, and they have a Litany too. But shall we abolish our Creeds, the Nicene,
Athanasian, and Apostolical, because they have them as well as we? and throw
away our Collects, and Litany, because they have also Collects, and a Litany?
Then away with the Christian Religion upon that like Score. A weak Argument;
and very inconsequent. Do we not know that if we reform Popery in what is
amiss, we do but as Christ did by the Jewish Euchologue? and that that is true
which Solomon says, Take away the Dross from the Silver, and there will come
forth a Vessel for the Refiner? But besides, it is all Scripture, or agreeable
thereto; (shall I tell you?) approved by Bucer, by P. Martyr, and other
Protestant Divines abroad; yea, Calvin himself not disapproving, the first
Founder of the Classical way, making the Jewish Sanhedrim his Pattern, in which
he erred, for that was a Civil Court. Certainly that which some Men condemn it
for, is its prime Excellency. Its Excellency lies in this, that our Reformers
took away, and pared off all that was truly amiss in their Prayer-Books, and
used no more but what was found in the Ancient Liturgies, or very agreeable
thereto; thereby giving no just Ground of Scandal, which otherwise could not be
avoided, yet must be avoided. There are petty Arguments made against it by
Dissenters, I know, which I might, had I time, make Reply to; but I shall
forbear at present, referring you to the Answers of the Excellent, and
judicious Mr. Hooker, of whom I may say, as has been said by some of Durand.

They knock, whoever shall against Hooker Warble,
But Fist of Glass against his Head of Marble.
And if any shall yet Rise up to speak against it, I doubt not, but there will
be a Mahanaim, an whole Host of God ready to March forth, and Encounter them. I
confess, for my part, what I can do is but little: but what I have said tho has
satisfied me, and I am the more satisfied, because I am fully Persuaded, that
those Godly, and Reverend Divines, who Composed our Liturgy at the Reformation,
did Tread as near as they could in the steps of our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles; following the Clue of the purest Times, and Ages; and had they, or
could they have fingered the Service Book that was used by Abbot Dinoth, and
the British Monks before St. Augustine set his Foot here, they would have
blessed God for so rare a Jewel, and took Direction thence, as soon as elsewhere.
The more again, because I fully believe, that that Speech of the Assembly of
Divines, in which they affirm they were Confident, that the Composers of our
Service Book, the Martyrs in Queen Marys days, would, if then alive, have
Consented with them in their Directory way, was very Injurious to the Ashes of
those dead Saints. For as they never gave any such Item in their Live-times, so
neither did the Learned, and the best of the Banished Clergy, when they
returned from Franckford, where they saw the Practice of those where Presbytery
was hatched, ever Endeavor, or Attempt any such thing. Nor can I think that
they would have brought in any manner whatsoever, (tho recommended by the Hand
of Angels) by the Sword, or Rebellion, or a Guisian League; but rather have
looked upon it with Abhorrence, and Detestati^n the sad Consequences of which
doings have been such that no Age ever knew the like, even the Death of our
most pious King, the Banishment of his (...) and all his Friends, Death, and
Ruin, to the (...) of the Protestant, but of the Christian Religion in (...)
which we have still Cause to Dread the hearing of (...) Woes in Josephus and
the Angel's (...).

You will not I hope blame the heat of my but (...) for our Church I speak, and
its Liturgy; the (...) things we have; which deserve not our Words only, (...)
Lives: If men should hold their Peace, even (...) would speak And truly,

Were I to speak any where; before Nobles, Statesmen and Senators; like
Neh^miah Tirshasha of the King of (...) (...) hold, I would mind Jerusalem in
my sayings, for (...) (...) I would not hold my Peace.

Were I to speak to the Angels of the Churches, or reverend Bishops, I would
move them in this behalf: but ^ (...) them methinks betwixt Rock, and Gulf,
and so lament them rather. God strengthen their Hearts, and Hands, and give
them Courage, and Wisdom, that (He being their Pilot) they may keep our Church
(like Noah's Ark) still going upon the Face of the Waters.

Were I to speak to the Worshipful Gentry of this Nation, I would take upon me
to mind them, how Honorable, and N^ble a thing it would be for them to stand
by, and Coumenance a Cause so good: the rather, because their Dwellings
perhaps, and E^^^tes will not be so secure, if a Change should come, which
(...) bid.

Were I to speak to Dissenters, I would also (...) to lay aside their Piques,
for they are no more but so (...) so Glorious a Church should be brought to
Ruin, and (...), is it not great Pity? O the Ah^lah, which boasts it is (...)
own Tabernacle, would come over once to Aholihab, ^he (...) of which is, God's
Tabernacle is in her! If s^, how (...) should we be? how glad would we? But,

I must Confine my self, to my Brethren; I mean, (...) Ministers first. And
then 2ly. To my present A^di^ors. (...) therefore.

1. Fathers, and Brethren, to you I crave Leave to direct my Speech. Not taking
on me to Rebuke any tho, far be it from me. I know no Reason for so doing. For
my part I presume only to admonish, and that not without Leave asked. What to
do? To read the Liturgy, and to read it fully, and Completely? Methinks I dare
not that neither, I cannot suspect you don't. It is too great a Fault for any
honest man to be Guilty of. Than an Anti-liturgical Consormist, in my Opinion,
nothing is more Odious. In adjecto it is a Contradiction, and seems to imply,
that, when we Subseribe ex animo, 'twere to be rendered, out of our Minds,
rather then, With all our Hearts. But, let me Admonish tho, (it s no
Accusation, where there is no Fault, but a Commendation)

1. To be, First, exact in the Particular before specified, and not to let
Preaching take up all the Time, so as to Neglect, or put aside any Part of this
Service, which is so Divine, and of the two most necessary. For to what end
Preaching, if God be not served as he ought to be? And to what end Taught our
Duty, if we do not Honor God with Praises, and Prayers which are our Christian
Sacrifices? Let me say that it is more to serve God one hour Faithfully, then to
hear as many do, an hundred Lectures in Divinity. If ye know these things, ye
know who has said, Happy are ye if ye do them.

2. To read the Service distinctly, Gravely, Reverendly, as becomes the
Worshippers of the true God whose Throne is in Heaven. Believe it, the want of
this is that which makes it Despicable with the undistinguishing People. For
the best of things being h^dled up, and handled slightly lose their just
Esteem. Then will men be engaged to be truly Devout, when their Pastor, or
Priest is so before them.

3. To let the People know that to hear Sermons is not the only Service (to say
no more) that they are to Pay to Al^ighty God. To Jews I confess, and Infidels
the Apostles were to Preach only; letting them know that Jesus was the Messiah,
they were not yet Capable of Church Comm^nion. But they did not so by Converts
and Proselytes: their way with them ye have in that forecited Place, where
it is said, They contin^ed in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayer But,

4. Chiefly, give me leave to Mind you to remember your Subscriptions, your
Assent, and Consent, and all your solemn Engagements, and so to be steadfast,
and hold fast your Profession, as becomes the Servants of Christ. Brethren, we
live in Evil days, in Perilous times: On the one side we are called Heretics
on the other hand Papists: for all that let us stand our Ground. It Is not as Men
will have. Act they may, as they think (...) ^roject secretly, but the Counsel
of the Lord, that must st^nd. Design they may, and lay Plots; but there is one
that sitterh in (...) Heavens, who will Laugh them to scorn. Ye know, what
(...) hashnerus's days he did by Haman who sought to destroy the (...) Haman
was hanged on his own Gibbet, and Mordeca^ the (...), (whom he hated) was
exalted. What in D^rius's d^yes, (...) he disappointed Tolna^, and Sh^sher
Bozn^i: They wrote Letters to Darius against the Jews about the rebuilding of
J^r^sal^^, and his Occasioned him to make a Decree for them which whosoever
should dare to alter, the Timber of his House should be pulled down, and set up
again, and he hanged thereon and his House be made a Dunghill. And, blessed be
God, have not we in our days seen with our Eyes, that Jehovah Jireh is his Name
still, that he who keeps Israel neither Slumbreth, nor Sleeps? Besides,
should we come to the Fiery Trial, and be made to Resist unto Blood; yet even
there he can Deliver us, if it please him. He did so by the three Children; the
Angel of the Lord came down into the Furnace, and beat out the Flame out of the
Furnace; and a moist whistling Wind came, and fanned their Bodies and cooled
them, and (...) Hair of their Head was singed. Theodorus will tell us the same,
who when he Agoniz'd, and was torn with Scourges, and Whips, being a little
respited said, that a little Boy stood by, and wiped off his Sweat, and Blood,
as with a Holland Hend-kerechief. So that should we suffer, he will be by to
assist, and upsiold But suppose the worst, that we lose our Lives in the Cause
of God King David says, his loving Kindness is better then Life, and is (...)
his Presence much more, in which is Fuliness of (...)? It Is but a short Life
lost, and the Martyrs Crown is gained. H^ar what that glorious Hicro-Martys St.
(...) said, when environed with his six Leopards, as he called his Keepers.
(...), (...), etc. Let Fire, a Cross, Wild Beasts, the Cr^s^ing of Bones,
Distortion of Limbs, the Contrition of the whole Body, and the Cuffs, and
Torments of Satan come upon me, so I may enjoy Christ after All. No matter tho
we be Ground betwixt the Teeth of wild Beasts, so we be pure Manchet for God at
last: and if we get to Heaven, (tho with Elijah in a Chariot of Fire) what
harm? Let us Fear God, and Honor the King, and Fear nothing else. Mind our
Duty, the (...) (to borrow a drop of Oil out of Epictetus his Lamp) and for the
(...) Leave them to God. Chrysostom says well to this Purpose (...).

2. With this I leave you, and turn me to the rest of my Auditors; whom I
beseech (by the Meekness, and Gentleness of Christ) that you would Consider
seriously, what it is you Contemn, or Despise in little setting by the Churches
Service: its Grave Confessions, its Comfortable Absolutions, its wholesome
Prayers, its Seraphick Hymns, its Angelical Doxologies, all made after Christ's
Pattern, without the least Mixture of that which is truly called Popery in it,
agreeable to Antiquity in its Doctrine, the truest, and most sound Body of
Theology, and Sealed to us with the Blood of Martyrs. I verily believe there is
not any thing in it that the Ancient Fathers, I may say, the Apostles
themselves, if they were Living, would not say Amen to. We do not Truckle under
the Church of Rome, but derive our Services, and Customs much beyond them. We
do not borrow of those Neighbors of ours, but search their Houses to see what
Jewels they have of ours. England that in other things is the Ape of Nations
confessedly in this has waited only on God, and Reason. What the Ancient Church
of Christ used Primitively is Ours, as well as Theirs. Who can be so simple as
to think that the Apostles Creed does not belong to him, because the Papists
have it as well as he? nor the Creed of Athanasius, because they too own the
Doctrine of the Trinity in Unity! These things belong to us as well as to them,
and it were very strange if there were nothing amongst them worthy our respect
and ^^^eration. Therefore this way be not deluded. Nor again let any thing
proved with you neither, to prefer men's Extempore (...), and Daily new made
Prayers, used by none that I read of An^^^^ly, but Achitophel, when in
Rebellion against King David, who to make Religion serviceable to his By ends
must have Prayers made him daily New, and fresh as Dr. Hammond out of the
Rabbis tells us: I say, to prefer them before the Churches Solemn Prayers (to
set them out again) taken for the most part out of Scripture, used by the best
of Saints, Composed by Martyr^, approved of, as to its Doctrine, and Manner, by
Councils, imposed by Authority, confirmed by Law, and that does not shun to
s^^w its Face in any Language whatsoever, being Translated into Greek and
Latin, that the East, and Western Churches may see how it is that we in
England do serve our God. Truly, not in the Churches Prayers, but in our selves
does the Fault lie; that think, if at any time we come to Church, it is no
matter when, or with what Devotion. Ye do God a Favor, ye think, to Tread his
Courts; tho ye neither Mind the Confession, nor yet Pray, nor hear the Word
read, nor yet give God Praise with what Devotion ye ought. Whereas, if ye
considered what Remission of sins is, what to have God's ^avour; and would but
come to the beginning, and Confess your selves humbly, and take the Absolution
with you, Pronounced by one standing in Priestly Garments, and so in God's
stead, and then would be hearty in your Prayers, and be Attentive to the
Lessons, together with the Epistles, and Gospels, and perform once the whole
Service Intelligently, and Devoutly, beginning with the Confession, and ending
with the Benediction, sure, you would quickly find your Hearts Transported with
the Love of it, and be ready to wonder with Elisha's man that your Eyes were no
sooner open; crying with Elisha himself at Elija's Rapture, My Father, my
Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horse men thereof! Could I see once a
Congregation of such Devout persons met together, as the Apostles were, in one
place, and with one Accord, in the Name of Christ, what a Blessed spectacle
would that be? How might I affirm that I had seen God there, the Angels
present. Christ himself in the midst. And how would all their Hearts, like the
Angel that appeared ^^ Manoah, ascend to Heaven in the ^lames of such (...)
Jacob's Vision again, methinks, it is another (...) Angels ascending, and
descending upon the Rounds of this Ladder. Sure enough, it is not (...)
Goodness in our Prayers, but want of Devotion in our selves (...) all.

Men will, I hope, be persuaded to (...) this (...), and learn to have a due
Regard to so Holy a thing as the Churches Service is. That all that hear me
may, I shall propound to your Consideration the Conducement hereof to the Peace
of the Church, and to the Peace of the Kingdom we live in, our Love to which,
next to God's Glory, and Honor, ought to outweigh in the Balance all other
things whatsoever. And indeed,

1. Highly will it make for the Peace of the Church, by putting a Bar to
Heresy, and Schism. For he that is for the Churches Prayers, cannot be an
Heretic. Whereas take away this Hedge, and Mound once, who may not Bless the
People? as St. Cyprian complained heavily, a Montanist, a Donatist, a Manichee,
I may add a Socinian, an Anti-trinitarian, and what not? Then that it is a Cure
of Schism, who does not see? for what is it else that Keeps our Wounds open,
but an Evil Opinion of the Churches Service? a Conceit with some that it is
Popish, with others that it is not according to the Manner prescribed by Christ?
And let me tell you, that Schism, as it is a prodigious Evil, having malign
Influences on the World, so it is a great Sin also, of the first Magnitude. St.
Cyprian equals it to offering Sacrifice to Idols, and well does he; for the
Church is the Body of Christ, and what a great Sin must that be to Rend, and
Tear in pieces his Holy, and Sacred Body? to Divide and Crumble into Factions
the best, and purest Societies that ever were, or can be but of Saints in
Heaven? For which a Divine of our Church has said, that it were better those
little things, about which our Differences are, were buried deep, in Eternal
Silence, at the very Bottom, and Center of the Earth, than that the Peace of
the Church should be disturbed by them. But, the Mischief is, Schism is like
Sheol, semper Petax, it is always Craving, never Satisfied. The best Cure of
this Malady that I know, is a due Obedience to our Superiors, together with a
general Conformity to, and Uniformity in the Worship, and Service of God.

Highly also will it make for the Peace of the Kingdom, of which we are all
Members; it being the main Expedient to bring back that Love, that Unity, that
Concord, and that Agreement that has been so long banished from us by this
Antecedent Difference in Opinion, and Judgment about matters of Worship. Whilst
one is for this Sect, another for that; one for Episcopacy, another for
Presbytery; some for a Liturgy, others for none; how can we expect that the
Blessing of Peace should remain in our Borders? Do we not rather make way by it
for the Abomination that makes Desolate to come upon us? I wish my Conjecture
may prove Abortive, but, that it will be so (unless God in Mercy by healing our
Breaches, and making up our Divisions put a stop to it) ^ may Predict, I think,
without a Spirit of Prophecy. It Is what fills the Enemies of our Church with
Hope, and all her Friends with Fear.

And do I not hear you now sighing out these Words of the Prophet, Is there no
Balm in Gilead? are there no Physicians there? wh^ th^^, is not the Health of
the Daughter of my People recovered? In my Conceit I do, and I say to it, that
there is Balm in Gilead, (blessed be God for it) and there are store of
Physicians there, But to little purpose is it, unless the Voice of Christ may
be heard, which calls upon the Sh^^^mite to return: unless they that Dissent,
and Separate, would see their Error once, and go back by the same Steps they
have gone astray, to the Church which they forsook without Cause. For tho I may
not be bold to say of her, as her Spouse of the Church invisible, There is no
Spot in her; yet this I may, and will say, that there is none in her so great,
as to justify a Separation from her Communion. O that Men would listen, and
give Ear! But what am I? I will leave the Church to speak for her self. I see
her, methinks, standing at the side of her Altar, with her Service Book in her
Hand, weeping bitterly, and taking on heavily, that her Children should depart,
and go away from her. And what does she further do? why, she Beseeches, she
Conjures them, for the Love they bear (if not to her self) to her Head, and
Husband; and that in the Words of her Litany: By the Mystery of his Holy
Incarnation; (...) Nativity, and Circum^^sion; By his Baptism, Fasting and
(...); by his Agony, and bloody (...) by his Cross, and (...) precious Death,
and (...); and by the Glorious (...) and Ascension, that they would walk
according to Rule and (...) same things. That Dissenters will not heard (...)
should be, how quickly would (...) again, even so as to give (...) Ezekiel,
which is Jehovah Shammah, the Lord (...) no more, only a Word, or two, by way
of Prayer, or Vote, that Almighty God would take the matter into his own Hand,
and work upon the Hearts of all the People of this Nation, that they may yet be
wise, and see, and understand what is for their own good; learning to serve him
one Way, and with one Mind, laying aside Division, and Schism; and
endeavoring, as they have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and
Father of all, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; God of his
infinite Mercy grant it, that so our Church may continue in Tranquillity, our
Nation abide in Quietness, God's Service remain in its Purity, God himself be
Glorified, and our Souls saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. To whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, be ascribed, as is most
due, by Angels and Men, by us, and all People, all Honor, and Glory both now,
and for evermore.

FINIS.

