THE Snake in the Grass Further Discovered: OR, THE QUAKERS No Christians.

Proving out of their own WRITINGS, that they Deny, I. The Scriptures to be the
Word of God. II. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. III. The Manhood of Christ,
etc.


With an Account of their Canons, Constitutions, Ecclesiastical Order and
Discipline.

LONDON, Printed for J. F. and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane.
School.

TO THE READER.
THE Proofs I have given (in this Book) of the Quakers Principles, being taken
out of diverse particular Authors of theirs; it may be objected, That it is not
reasonable, that what is Asserted by any one particular, or private Person,
should be imputed to a whole Party of Men, who go under the same Name.

To which I answer, That if we take not the Writings of particular Quakers for
the Quakers Principles in general, we must be altogether incapable of finding
them. The Quakers pretending all their Ministry to be Infallible, they
themselves own as well as their Writings and Declarations to be infallibly
true. Yea, they affirm them to speak and write by Divine Inspiration, as the
Prophets and Apostles in the Old and New Testament. Whatever is in their
Writings and Declarings, (though they may deny our Sense of them) they own the
Words as from the Lord.

J. F.

QVAKERISM NO CHRISTIANITY.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
The Explanation of the Title.


I need not trouble the Reader with any further Quakerism is no Christianity,
which if it be not only sufficiently proved, and clearly, but also abundantly,
I shall not doubt but all honest hearts who shall peruse this Discourse, will
be irreconcileably alienated from all appearances of so horrid an Imposture.
And I am not altogether out of hope, that many of those who have inclined, or
adhered to those woeful Tenets, or persons here discovered, with a design to
elevate their Christianity to a higher Standard of Purity, will be convinced,
that instead thereof they have but plunged themselves into the ditch of the
grossest delusions, and made work for Repentance.

For the term Christianity, we are not to understand Christianity is a large
and noble thing, which is not only a curious Garden, which has in it that
which common Fields, yea and common Enclosures are not furnished withal, but
also does take in, (beside what is peculiar to its self) all that is worthy in
those Religions which it has superseded and outstript; yea, whatever is good
and commendable among the very Heathen, according to that of the Apostle,
Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think on these things.

Christianity (in a full sense) consists of those principles of Faith and Life;
that Worship, Order, and those Ordinances; which have not only a respect to
Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and Man, in his lapsed state: but also
that frame of them which is proper to the Gospel or New
Testament-Administration; which was constituted by Christ while he was manifest
in the flesh,, and after he had actually finished the meritorious part of our
Reconciliation and Salvation, and as God-Man united in one Person, was invested
with all Power both in Heaven and Earth, according to that Scripture, All Power
is given unto me in Heaven Mat. 28. 18
and in Earth; and that full Text to this purpose, And being found in fashion
as a man, he humbled PhIl. 2. 10, 11.
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross:
wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above
every Name, etc. A Christian in the narrowest sense, is one that owns the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, to be the Lord and Savior.

That this account of Christianity may be understood

To know and acknowledge (in some way) the Heathens, who not only were
altogether ignorant of Christ, but also opposed him and the Christian name.

To come yet nearer, the Church of Israel under Moses's Administration; who had
not only the Moral Law, or Law of Nature, given forth by God himself; but also
the Promises, Descriptions, Types, and Shadows of Christ the Redeemer; through
the faith of whom, all them that were saved came by their salvation: yet their
state was not (in a strict sense) Christian, nor the Law and Administration
under which they lived, and to which they subjected Christianity: which I shall
confirm by some essential exc^ptions.

Christianity necessarily includes the faith and belief etc. Without
Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, believed on in the World, received up into Glory. 1 Timothy 3. 16. This was Christian Godliness. But we preach Christ crucified, to
the Jews a stumbling bloc^; this Christ as come and crucified, was the main
basis of the Gospel and Christianity.

Christianity necessarily includes the belief of that Particular, and numerical
man Christ Jesus; who Mary, and was of the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh, to be the Christ of God that was promised to come in due time. I said
therefore unto you, that you shall die in your sins, for if ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall die in your sins, John. 8. 24. Therefore let all the House of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified
both Lord and Christ. Acts 3. 6.

These were new Articles of their Creed, without the belief of which they were
such as had nothing to do with Christ, as their Mediator.

Again, the whole frame of the Administration was altered from Moses to Christ,
even the man Christ Jesus as well as God. Has in these last days spoken to us
by his Son, Heb. 1. 1. And Moses verily was faithful in all his House, as a
servant, for a Testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but
Christ as a Son over his own House, Heb. 3. 5. We have now nothing to do with
Moses Law as such* and also the manner of Administration, which is not in a
multitude of carnal observancies, types, and resebmlances, but in that way
which is more real and more purely spiritual. But the hour comes, and now is,
when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, John
4. 23. They were to worship him in spirit before; for where the heart was not
in the ^eremonial and typical worship they were not accepted; and God never
indulged hypocrisy. The meaning must therefore be, That spirit must be taken
in opposition to those carnal Ordinances, and the material Temple; and Truth,
in opposition to thofe Types, which were not a Lie, but were only the shadows
of good things to come.

I might enlarge to the Officers, Offices, and restrained For if that
[Ministration] which is done a way was glorious, much more that which remains
is glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 11.

Now to resume the intent of what I have said, of Heathen, nor the revealed
light, law, and practices Judaical were Christian (as such) though the latter
(a great part of them) had a respect to Christ, and the medicinal and remedying
part of Religion.

And the Jews, who were immediately before the Church of God; yet when the
Administration was changed, they were cut off from the Church, though they
retained their Morals and those Ceremonial Respects to an expected Messiah, if
they did not admit into their Creed or Faith the Articles aforesaid; viz. a
Christ come; That Jesus who was crucified was the Christ, and that he was the
Supreme Head and Administrator to the Church of God; and those who did so were
transmitted into the Christian Church, the other being dissolved.

Having expressed with what brevity I could, Quakerism.

I do not mean thereby, that all that are called and reputed Quakers, are no
Christians; for my charity is large enough to believe, That many of them would
abhor the Principles of their Leaders, did they but well understand them: for
whose sakes in part I have undertaken this Discovery.

Quakerism is a Heap of Tenets, with the usurped Names of true Christian
Principles, which are yet really no such things, but subverting both Foundation
and Fabric of Christianity. And I call him a Quaker that professes the Light
within every man to be the only Lord and Savior, and very God. So that when I
say, Quakerism is no Christianity, I do not say, that common Civility, Justice
among men, or whatever of their principles or practices which are morally good;
for these are generally owned as the principles of those Christians, whom they
separate from, and bitterly reproach as Antichristian. And it cannot be for
want of Instructions or Examples in such kind of goodness, that they withdraw
from the serious Professors, that are as far from their opinions as the East is
from the West.

CHAP. II.
The Beginning of Quakerism different from, and opposite to Christianity.
THe first Argument which I shall begin my attempt Quakerism; which I shall
take notice of under two Considerations.

First, The manner of the beginning of Quakerism.

Secondly, The time of its beginning.

Both of which I shall prove exceedingly to oppose, and differ from the
beginning of Christianity.

The Christian Religion or Christianity was first John the Baptist, and visible
to the bodily eyes of a multitude of beholders. The next day John sees Jesus
coming unto him; and says, of the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the
world. This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man which is preferred
before me, for he was before me.

But Quakerism was introduced by preaching a within every man, born within
every man, which was never seen with the bodily eyes of any man; and this
Testimony of John concerning the true Christ perverted, for the maintaining of
their feigned Christ.

And as you give up to that measure of light in your Morning-Watch. p. 41
own Consciences, and wait to be guided by it, and exercised in it, you will
know Christ revealed within you, whom you are looking for without you, and put
his day far off from you; and so you live in want of him, and know not how to
come to him, nor the place where to find him; but live in the dreamings, and
night-visions, and have a talk of him, and what he has done for you, and so
spend your precious time in slumbring and dreaming, etc.

This Quakers Text will bear a large Comment, but I will take notice of that
only which is to the present purpose. Here is preached a Christ within, in
opposition to, and contempt of a Christ without, which John preached, and that
faith and hope of the Saints, (which according to the Scripture are the
substance of things not seen, and the evidence of Heb. 11. 11.
things hoped for) reproached as a slumbring fancy, and a nocturnal dream. But
if you would infallibly be convinced of the gross darkness wherewith this sort
of men are benighted, or their palpable dishonesty in abusing the Holy
Scripture; weigh the following instance out of the preceding Author.

Then God sent him [John] to bear witness to the light, which in him was made
manifest, that all in Morning-Watch. p. 5.
the light might believe: and he called unto others to behold him, and said he
was the Lamb of God, and was to take away the sins of the world. Least you
should mistake him, and g^^ss that a man that could but write his name should
not have so little wit or modesty, as to expound that Text of Scripture after
this sort: he quotes chapter and verse, John 1. 9. and the next word is ( mark)
in a Parenthesis, lest his folly should not appear to all men, who should have
the hap to read him. And moreover, at the close of the period, after he had
made a further blind Comment on the Text, he glories in his shame, with a Weigh
this truth all ye Priests and P. 6.
Professors, and ponder it in your hearts: No words big enough to express its
madness!

Christianity made its way not only by the truth signs and wonders wrought
before multitudes, as were convincing to its most malicious and prejudiced
Adversaries, and that not only by Christ himself, but also by his Disciples and
servants, both before and after his death.

And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded
out of his mouth, Luke 22. 4. but men may speak many good words, and yet both
say and do at other times bad enough: but Christ appeals to the faces of his
worst Adversaries; If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, John 18.
23. But if forcible right words would not make way, Christ exhorts them to
believe for the very works sake; and these were not ordinary works or wonders,
and miracles neither: If I had not done among them the works which none other
man did, they had not had sin. And as himself, so his servants introduced
Christianity with the same holy pomp and state of the Mighty, and miraculous
works of the Power of God, bearing witness to the truth of their Doctrine. Long
time therefore abode they, speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave Testimony
unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their
hands, Acts 1. 3.

But Quakerism made its way by, and began in blasphemies against the Lord Jesus
Christ of Nazareth (whom the Apostles preached) by gratifying the pride,
idleness, and giddiness of both Professors and profane, as will appear
abundantly in the following discourse; and by decrying the Scripture of the Old
and New Testament, as a dead Letter, and altogether useless, if not
mischievous: Sword of the Lord drawn p. 5 Fox the younger Genesis epist. P. 4
Your imagined God beyond the Stars, a day of calamity will come upon them who
have worshipped and do worship an unknown God at a distance, and pretend the
worship of the true God. And if we will not believe the Quakers for their words
sake, (which swell big enough with vanity, folly, nonsense, and error) we are
like to continue in the truth still for all them. There have been some of them
who have been sensible of this defect, and have attempted to supply it, to the
cracking of their credit, some to the loss of their lives, George Fox has
found a plaster for this sore, which I shall produce: that you may give your
judgment whether it smell more of the Fox or of the Goose. FOX.


Which many prayed by the Spirit, and spoke by the Spirit, did not show
miracles at the Tempters Command; The great Mystery of the great Whore p. 3.
though among Believers there be miracles in Spirit which be signs and wonders
to the world, as Isaiah says; When I read this, I had much ado to keep my self
from laughing; but the weightiness of my thoughts on this imposture, soon
helped me to reduce it to a compassionate smile. Indeed, I think, him crafty
like the Fox, not to venture his carcass in attempting any miracle but in
spirit, and yet more a Goose to call them signs and wonders to the world,
which the world never saw, nor could have wondered at, if George Fox, and such
as he had not blabbed of them. But, I must not let pass his fathering his
absurdity on the Prophet Isaiah; the words he intends must be in Isa. 8. 18.
Behold I, and the Children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and for
wonders in Israel, I find not the word [ Signes] any where else in that
Prophecy He has a strange spirit of discerning, that can find in that
Scripture any thing of Miracles wrought in spirit: for indeed they themselves
were the wonders, that is, they were wondered at. So may the Quakers well be,
but in a far worse sense, or for a worse cause. I may the less wonder at
George's boldness with Isaiah, seeing a great Rabby of the Quakers has said
that he is as good a Prophet as Isaiah. Who would conceive that so blockish a
person as this, should be the Foreman and Chief in account among such a number
of such singularly discerning spirits as the Quakers? but as among wise men the
wisest are most highly esteemed, so among others the veriest --

Christianity entered into the world with ravishing Hatlelujahs of the Angels,
and heavenly Host, the Songs and Thanksgivings of Mary, Elizabeth, Zechariah,
Simeon, and others: with the healing of all sorts of diseases, casting out
devils out of the possessed, preaching the glad tidings of the Gospel of Peace,
and what might express the Sun of righteousness to be risen on the World, with
healing in his wings. I need not find you out the places of Scripture which
speak these things.

But Quakerism entered the world as if Hell were broke loose and possessions by
Satan were to make way, and fit souls for the Quakers spirit. Instead of that
serious compunction, that seized gross and black sinners upon their conviction;
and the consolation that was let into their souls by the joyful sound of
remission and salvation, throu^h a crucified Jesus: O the Hell-dark expressions
of the Quakers Preachers! the frightful and amazeing words, both for matter and
manner, where with they first attempted poor silly men and women; whom they
frighted almost out of their wits with their dismal noise; whose echo remained
in their ears, when their words were forgotten. What bitter Curses and
Execrations did they pour forth against all that made any opposition, (though
most mildly and rationally) against their unheard of innovation. What
disturbing of Congregations, and reviling the most serious and faithful
Pastors: while those, whose faults they have made use of to bespatter the
guiltless, might remain quiet enough, as not so dangerous and adverse to Satan's
interest and Kingdom. How generally were their Meetings, either silent, or
taken up with the sudden, and violent irruptions of dismal howling and horrible
roarings. Persons suddenly taken as with the falling sickness, shaking and
foaming at the Mouth; and some lying flat on the ground, as stark dead Some
such things as these I have seen and heard; and what there are undeniable
Testimonies of, are so numerous and notorious, that though they have now
almost, if not altogether left the latter sort of them, they dare not deny that
it was so And if they dare to challenge this with untruth, I may requite them,
with a good Part of a Volume of them, to keep alive their remembrance. I now
proceed to my second consideration of the beginning of Quakerism with respect
to time.

What I have already said in the opening the Israelites under Moses's
Administration to be (in a proper and strict sense) Christian: except some of
the Quakers, who date it from the reign of the light within (their only
Christ) and will needs have not only Jews, but Heathen (and especially Adam in
innocence to be) under that dispensation. Yet I doubt not to prove both from
Scripture, and also from their own Writings by necessary consequence, that
Christianity is not so old as the formentioned, nor yet so young as Q^akerism.

Some (though but few) date Christianity from the Matthew. 28. 18. All Power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.

But all agree (who make any distinction) that it began immediately upon the
abrogation and dissolution of the Mosaical Administration and Temple-Worship,
which was above sixteen hundred years since, although (as the Scripture speaks)
The Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch, Acts 11. 26. But the
thing Christianity might well be before the name Christian so short a space.
And that the Christian Name had about that time its Beginning, appears by the
reply of Agrippa to Paul, Almost thou preswad^st me to be a Christian, Acts 28.
8. which then, it seems was the common appellation of Believers and Professors
of the Fath of Christ. But if all this will not convince, I will add one Text
more to make downweight.

Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, 1 Pet. 4. 16.

Here Christianity is distinguished both from Heathenism and Judaism. Both the
Gentiles and the Jews were bitter enemies to the Christian Name; and that not
for the Name but the things sake; the Gentiles for their denying Idol-worship,
the Jews for their deserting the Mosaical Constitution; the Gentiles for their
only worshipping the only true God; the Jews for worshipping the true God by,
and through Jesus Christ the Mediator. And I, Brethren, if I yet preach
Ciroumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offense of the Cross
ceased, Gal. 5. 11.

Having adjusted the entrance of Christianity into Adam or Eternity. The first
is from Christ the Light who was in the Beginning with God. But if they make
the being of their Christianity commensurate with the being of Christ as God: I
confess, it is but folly for any other to number days with it. But besides the
notorious absurdity of this Fancy at first view, to those that dream not
waking: I have already proved, that Christianity had a beginning, and that long
since the Creation.

The other Argument is from Inspirations, and immediate teaching; which next to
the light within is the main principle of Quakerism.

To this I answer, by way of grant and concession; that there was immediate
teaching and revelation very early in the world: but that wherever and whenever
there was immediate teaching, then and there was Christianity: is a thing, that
men who have better skill in the Scriptures, and more use of their reason then
they, will be ashamed to attempt the proof of.

But if it were granted; That Inspirations divine and immediate, did constitute
Christianity; and that all who are, or were thereby conducted are to be
accounted Christians: it will be long enough ere the Quakers prove they are the
persons, and not long before I have proved that they are not; as will appear
when you come to that point handled at large in this Treatise.

But beside the notoriousness of the Quakers novelty, own Assertions; and if
they oppose one another, let them look to that, and agree among themselves as
well as they can. It is now about seven years since the Lord raised Mystery of
the great Whore Epist. 1659.
us up in the North of England, and opened our Mouths in this his spirit. By
the date of the Impression it should be about 51 that Quakerism brake forth in
this Nation, and England has this unhappiness, that it was the first Breeder
of this Sect, and the North of England the part first infected. I remember
there is an old Proverb, (I suppose grounded on manifold experiences) All evil
comes out of the North. But against this it may be objected, that although they
were the first in England, and of late generations, yet the Religion it self is
ancient. Let us therefore follow it to the root by their own direction.

After these things in the year 1648. God who had compassion on his people, did
cause a branch to Jo. Whithead small Treat. p, 4
spring forth of the root of David, which was filled with virtue: for the
Covenant of Life and Peace was with him, and he spread and shot forth many
branches; which did partake of the fatness of the Root, and the weary came to
rest under his branches: in him also was the Word of Reconcilation, which
turned the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient to the
Wisdom of the just.

Observe the blasphemy of these expressions, James Naylor, I cannot guess? and
follows immediately.

And in the Year 1655, I being a branch of this Ibid.
Tree, viz. the Branch aforesaid; the life of its Root caused me to blossom and
bring forth fruit; for the Spirit of the Lord come upon me, etc. So that
whatever was the Root, the first branch of this degenerate Vine sprung forth in
48.

And if the words immediately foregoing those for which the Lord was against
them, (the public Pastors) and brought night upon them, that their vision
ceased. Then those Pastors had sometime the Vision and presence of God with
them, who never preached the light within to be the only Rule, the only
Redeemer, nor pretended to minister from immediate Inspirations: but from the
Scriptures, by which they were directed, and which were the Treasury out of
which they brought forth whatever they handed (as from the Lord) to the people:
but about the year 48 or 50, that way of ministration was cried down, and those
principles called Quakerism by you inserted in their room and stead.

But let us hear another Witness, and he none of the Isaac Penington concerning
Unity, p 1.
meanest. Yea, my heart did truly unite with, and enjoy the Lord in what was
then [about the beginning of the late troubles] given forth, and I can never be
drawn to deny the truth and worth of that dispensation, though I know it was
swallowed up by a greater desolation, soon following after: and since, by the
breaking forth of a more lively dispensation. And a little after, p. 2. and
remained, fixing their mind on that [former dispensation] which the Lord had
departed from.

It is hereby as plain and clear, as the Sun shining Quakerism is a late
dispensation, taking its date since the beginning of the late troubles. But to
put all out of doubt, in page 3. he says, Is not this [Quakerism] the lowest
of all dispensations? Is not this common to all mankind? does not this fall
short (in it self, as I may say, and as it has formerly been dispensed by
young Countrey-Lads of no deep understanding, or ready expression; but very fit
to be despised every where by the Wisdom of Man) of the dispensation of the Law
of Moses to the Jews? much more of the dispensation by Christ and his Apostles?
who would have looked for the Lord here? And yet this has the Lord chosen to
gather his people by, and to appear to the World in, and has gathered the
life, virtue and substance of all former dispensations into it, etc.

So that this new despensation has swallowed up all others, yea, that of
Christ and his Apostles; and if so, it is not the dispensation of Christ and
his Apostles, but another accounted by the Quakers more excellent and complete;
and therefore is not Christianity, any more then Christianity is Judaism, by
their own account.

To shut up the proof of this (as owned by themselves, according to the most
plain Construction of their own words, or consequence not to be disowned by a
rational man) I will give you James Naylor's doctrine. But yours [Commands] in
the Letter, and Love to the Lost, p. 16.
so of another Administration, for the literal Ministration is done away in the
spiritual.

Well then, if Christianity began in a manner so vastly differing from, and a
time so long before Quakerism, which is not that but another Administration,
Quakerism is no Christianity; but the former has been proved to be true,
therefore the latter.

CHAP. III.
The Quakers deny the Scriptures.
Quakers pretend to own the Scriptures, I do not deny; but I shall prove it to
be one of the most naked and self-contradicted pretenses that ever peeped out
into the World, with such a noise and confidence. If mere pretenses were of
sufficient Authority It Is Satan's Masterpiece to betray with a kiss.
to command our faith, that portion of Scripture might be well spared, 1. These.
5. 21. Prove all things, etc. If they should deny the Scriptures in so many
words, they cannot but know, it would nip their designs in the bud, and in
stead of promoting their principles, render themselves odious; but Satan is not
so silly an Impostor, as to spoil his Market, by appearing so unseasonably, and
at first dash in so deformed a shape: he is not ignorant of that Text; Surely
in vain is the Not spread in the sight of any Bird.

I shall therefore wave pretenses on both sides, and bring my charge to a fair
trial, wherein their own Testimonies shall be their principal Judges.

I desire them not to accuse me of wounding their reputation, seeing the stabs
are given with their own daggers, and the Murder is no better nor worse then
felo de se, (as the Law phrases it) but in plain English, Self-murder; this I
shall prove by sufficient Argument;

The Quakers deny the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Word of
God.

This Charge, none of them that ever I read, heard, or heard of will deny; and
if you please to cast your eye on the instances, you may take it on their own
words; Blasphemy for any to say To all that would know, p. 4. Naylors answer to
the Jews p. 25 Cuffs, Ribands, Lace, and such other like things invented by the
devil. F. Howgill, one of Antichrists, etc. p. 2.
the Letter is the Word of God; It is the Devil that contends for the
Scriptures to be the Word of God. This error is by some reputed merely verbal,
and that in other words they allow the Scripture as much as this comes to. I
would it were true of this and all the rest of their errors, which they
trumpet out in the Scripture titles and dialect; upon that condition I would be
really content to Yea and Nay it, and Thee and Thou it; and moreover, forbid
Ribands, Lace and Cuffs, (though the most modest that were ever worn) to
pollute my Garments; and offend their unnecessary self-denial from that time
forward. But they have another opinion of it, or they would not call it
blasphemy to be otherwise minded; and we shall find it ere I have done, to be
their forelorn Hope; by which they attempt to make a breach on the Authority
and esteem the Scripture has justly obtained in the hearts of all serious
Christians; and thereby with more ease and security to enter the whole Army and
gross of their delusions; and therefore I shall encounter it first and in good
earnest.

It will be necessary before I proceed, to let you the Scriptures are the Word
of God: that you may know what we hold and contend for, though they know not
what they contend against: except the vain fictions of their own begetting.
Know therefore that we do not assert them to be the Son of God, the Christ and
Savior, nor the Spirit of God; neither do we say, that they are so
self-sufficient and all-powerful as to sanctify and enlighten savingly,
without the coagency, efficiency or assistance of the good Spirit of the Lord,
to open our understandings, and write them in our hearts. These things are too
high for them.

On the other hand, we dare not call them a dead letter, (who have felt them
sharper then any two-edged sword, and tasted them sweeter then then the honey
or the honeycomb) nor yet Ink and Paper-Divinity, or merely the words and
works of men: These are too low an opinion of them. But positively,

First, we intend the sense and matter by them expressed; etc. which God at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, revealed to and pake by his Son and
servants, inspired by God, or by inspiration of God.

Secondly, the sense and matter aforesaid, being Word of God, but with this
distinction, the written Word.

Now that the Scriptures are the Word of God in the Quakers. They have these
three Objections against this truth.

1. That it is improper so to call them, viz. The Word of God.

2. That many things or sayings contained in them were spoken by wicked men or
the devil.

3. That this Title is peculiar to Jesus Christ the Son of God.

First, they deny them to be the Word of God in the singular number. I must
therefore in dealing with this great Criticism, reconcile the plural number to
the singular.

I answer, to the first, it sounds methinks very harshly, one word in the
Scriptures should be the Word of God, because there are in them more words then
one. Surely, if the first, second, third, fourth, and so on, be the Word of
God, then every word in it is the Word of God: and never the less, but rather
the more for being united; for that there are few single words, which standing
alone will signify any thing, whereas diverse put together, have a sense and
signification. And the whole body of the Scripture considered together, does
signify the mind of God more completely, then if it were dismembered and
considered apart.

But I know they aim at more then a mere Grammar-nicety, at which kind of
failings they use not much to quarrel; but are rather affected with them, as if
the Spirit of God delighted in real nonsense; though I think the causes to be
three especially. First, that their first Authors could speak or write no
better; and they take it to be a perfection to write false English and nonsense
after such infallible persons. Secondly, because they have so few of those they
call their Ministry able to write true sense and English, that those who can if
they list will not, lest they should disgrace their Brethren; and rather then
that should be admitted, it shall become the fashion, and obtain in time to be
better English then sense. A third reason may be, their taking all, matter and
form, to be infallibly from the Spirit, and therefore dare not amend the sense
of the Spirit.

But to what is the Question I return, after this so And what an improper
speech were this, to call Fr. Howgil one of Antichrists Volunteers ^efeated. p.
26.
twenty thousand Sentences one word! and it is called a Declaration; and what a
Declaration would that be, which consisted but of one word! but where do we say
the Scripture is but one word? there is a great deal of difference between but
one word, and the Word. And if the Scriptures be a Declaration in the singular
number, it must take many Declarations into one; for it contains what was
declared from Moses time to the Apostles; and why not the word in the singular,
as well as a Declaration in the singular, seeing the Scripture contains many
Declarations? But he gives one kick backward more at what he pleads for; Pray
have the patience to read this man passing the sentence against himself, A Rod
for the fools back, Prove. 26. 3. And what a foolish man is this, to assert his
own imaginations, and then imagines the Scriptures will prove it! what an
improper speech is this! etc. I know not the person he brands with folly; but I
am sure the Cause, as laid down by Howgil himself, deserves it not. I am
confident he understands not what improper means; if he intend by improper that
it is figurative; he need not wonder and say, what a figurative speech is this?
Alas, the Scriptures and all Writings abound with figurative speeches; but if
he mean by improper, incongruous or unmeet, he offends greatly; (for then the
Scriptures are very guilty herein) as will appear by and by; and I know not
what else he should mean by proper, unless not peculiar or a tall speech; as we
call a tall man or woman a proper, and by improper a short speech; Let a
Prophet Naylors Love to the lost. p. 17.
of their own, and he none of the small Prophets neither, decide this
Controversy. Nay, who never yet came so far as Balaam, who had the Word of the
Lord from his own Mouth.

But to cast this Objection out of doors, we are to a collective sense, which
is very frequent in the Scripture. For instance, the Scriptures themselves are
sometimes expressed by a plural, sometimes by a singular word; Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures; Mat. 22. 23. Here it is plural: It is contained in the
Scripture, 1 Pet 2. 6. Here it is singular. A sentence is called a word, Where
the word of a King is there is Power. Eccles. 8. 3. They were astonished at his
doctrine, for his word was with Power. Either of these instances contain more
then one single word. The ten Commandments graven on the Tables of Stone, are
in the Hebr. ten words (...) which you have so rendered in the margin of some of
your Bibles. Deuteronomy. 10. 40. Now divide these Commandments into ten single ones,
and then each will have but one word come to its share to express it by; and
some It is too frequent with them to call the holy Scriptures dead Letter, and
a letter is somewhat less then a word.
one, viz. the fourth, has at least 60 single words in the Hebr. but many more
in the English, Romans 2. 9, 10. To the Jew [not Jews] and also to the Gentile
[not Gentiles:] can you suppose that one, and but one single Jew or Gentile is
hereby intended? read the sixth verse, and you shall have it explained; Who
will render to every man according to his deeds: so that under the single word
Jew, is expressed all the Jews from first to last, in every generation; and
under the word Gentile, all the world of mankind besides.

Take one Text more to conclude with, Isa. 8. 20. To No Morning (...) non ei
aurora: Montanus.
the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no light in them; not so much as the dawning of the day. Both
Law and Testimony are here rendered by Word in the singular number; in this one
Text there is enough, (not only to silence this petty cavil, but) to pluck up
both root and branch; all the principles of Quakerism: if they who profess them
had any regard to the Authority and verity of the eternal and Almighty God, and
a few grains of understanding at liberty to consult it.

2. Object. Many passages in the Scriptures contain the sayings of wicked men.
Yea, some have been so irreverent and irrational, as to say, some part of it is
the words of the devil; this expression has been frequent with them, and
uttered in contempt of the Scripture.

I answer, although the Scriptures make frequent mention of such Passages, it
is to a good and holy end; and hereby Satan's malice is discovered, whereby in a
good measure we are not ignorant of his devices; and hereby we understand his
snares, in which our first Parents were taken, and others both good and bad in
after-Ages; and Satan is also rendered the most wicked and hateful of all that
God created. But to speak close to the Objection, Those speeches of wicked
persons, such as Job's wife, the Pharisees, Jews, and Rabshakeh, and the
speeches of the Devil, are not the Word of God, or any part of holy Writ, (as
they were uttered by them) but far from it. We are to consider the Scripture,
as partly Historical; and all those passages being reported historically, there
is not the least stain upon the Scriptures thereby. What if I make a true
report of the Powder Plot, the Massacres in France, Ireland, etc. And that to
good ends and purposes? yea, if I report the blasphemous speeches by them
uttered against God, his Saints, and the holy Scriptures; am I therefore
blameable, as if I my self had been their Author? I know what has been said is
convincing. Now by the Inspiration and Guidance of the Holy Spirit these things
were written; and there is not only a truth, but also a divine truth of History
in them.

Object. 3. That this title, the Word of God, is peculiar to the Son of God,
the Lord Jesus Christ, whom they call the light within, the Scriptures within.
Here it is indeed that the shoe pinches, and they would fain put off the
honor, and put out the light of the Scriptures, because they stand in the
light of their fancy. (Pardon me the expression, for it is truth I shall prove
by the Lords assistance, ere I have done.) But what have they to say that the
Scripture should not be the Word of God, notwithstanding the Son of God is so
called? I will give you the best that ever I met with.

The first is, the Authority of their Leaders, who say, It is so, and it must
be so; He [Christ] is the Ja. Parnel, Christ exalted, p. 4.
Word, the Scripture is not. Why should it be doubted after such an evidence?
it is unreasonable and superfluous to expect, that infallible persons, (for so
the Quakers believe all their Ministry to be) should give a reason for what
they affirm; especially considering they are constrained to be infallible for
want of reason. And now seeing he can carry it so easily, he goes on like an
empty Cloud carried with the wind, He [Christ] is the light, the Scripture is
not; he is the Ruler, Guide, Teacher and Judge, and the Scripture is not. What
may not a man prove in one infallible breath? did he not prudently to make
haste, before that gale was spent? Well, but who can stand before a whirlwind?
one blast has torn from the Scripture no less then six of those glorious
Garments wherewith God has clothed it.

Let us hear G. F. if he do not amend the matter He did not say John 1. 1. the
Declaration was the Word, but said in his Declaration the Word was God: and he
who says the Latter Difference of Ministers p. 1.
is the Word, is a Deceiver, and erres, -- for the Scripture says, That in the
beginning was the Word. If you could have found where John said in his
Declaration (as you call it) that the Scriptures are not the Word of God, a
thousand to one but some or other of the Lords people would have found it out
long before Quakerism was in being, and have ceased to take that name in vain.

For the second Argument, he said the Word was God, what then? Why then the
Scriptures cannot be the Word unless they be God also. I am sure I have hit on
your Conclusion, and the best you can make of it: but let me tell you that the
Scripture may be the Word, and Christ the Word also, and yet though Christ be
the Word of God, the Scriptures the Word may be quite another thing.

Let me give you just such another place of Scripture, They drank of that
spiritual Rock that followed ^ Cor. 10. 4.
them, and that Rock was Christ. Will you conclude from hence that there is no
other Rock, but every Rock in the World must needs be Christ? or, that it is
sinful, yea, Blasphemy, to call any thing a Rock but Christ? but it may be you
will say, it is a spiritual Rock in that place; And I say it was spiritual, only
as it was mystical or typical of Christ; but in other respects it was a Rock as
others are, hard and stony. So I say of the Word that was God, it was the Word
that was in the beginning, that created all things. Show me any such Word and I
will call it God too: yea, I will say it is blasphemy to deny it to be so. But
the Scriptures which we call the Word of God, were not in the beginning, nor
did they create any thing, much less all things.

Pray let me ask you that are so stiff in this point; John 1. 9. to be Christ
and God? say nay, if you dare. Yea, and will you not say, that John says so in
his Declaration? I know you will, and I will say so too; what then? Is there
nothing called light, or that is truly so, but Christ or God? the Sun, Moon,
Day, are called Genesis 1. 5, 16. Mat. 5. 14.
Light also; yea, the Disciples are called by Christ himself, The Light of the
World. And must they be God too? or Christ be to blame for calling them the
Light of the World; a phrase so very near, that in John 1. 9. Christ is called
the Way, the Truth and the Life; but if you should make every such expression
to be meant of Christ and God; I am sure we should have Lords many, and Gods
many, in a far lower sense then the Magistrates, and great men of the world;
and Christ would be little beholden to us. I beseech you therefore, who are not
stark blind, and steel-hard; either to abandon such principles, or at least do
not pretend to Scripture for them, and abuse it after this manner; for the
Scriptures are no friend to your crooked, unholy principles, and that your
Leaders know well enough.

That I may blow the dust out of your eyes, I shall quodlibet ex quolibet, what
you will, and any how; and so you seem in the eyes of silly and credulous
souls, to make your rope of sand to hang finely together; and you are no more
happy here, for Christ the Word is the Word, but in a less proper sense,
whereas the Scriptures are the word of God in a much more proper sense; which I
shall plainly demonstrate: Only take one direction in the mean while.

That where any phrase or word may be taken in a The Word was God, in the
beginning, here it cannot be understood of the Word in a proper and ordinary
acceptance; because such words or word cannot be God, neither were in the
beginning. Besides, what is afterward spoken of the Word there is plainly and
only to be understood of Christ the Son of God, but if you consider the Word
expressed, Mark 4. 19. And the cares of this World, and the deceitfulness of
riches and the lusts of other things entering in* choke the Word, and it
becomes unfruitful. Here you must take it for the doctrinal Word, or Word of
Instruction, which is a proper sense of the Word; and if you should take it for
Christ the Word, you must read it Choke Christ: which how untrue and uncomely a
phrase it is, I leave your selves to judge.

Now I shall show you what is a word in a proper ordinary acceptance) is such.

A word in a proper sense, is either an articulate syllabical sound, which the
ear is receptive of, and by which somewhat may be understood as its
signification, in a commonly received acceptance.

Or alse a writing, impression or graving, which is such a disposing of letters
in their Order as does express and signify to the eye, what the other does to
the ear.

Now Christ is not, cannot be the Word, in neither I have already showed and
must refer you thither.

A figurative word, or word in a figurative construction,

For instance, God is called a Husbandman, John man (of any occupation
whatsoever) but there is some analogy, and similitude betwixt the Almighty and
a Husbandman, in his dealings with his people: for he takes care of them, he
waters them, purges, prunes, plows, digs, fences, feeds them in a spiritual
sense.

Christ is called the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Vine, the door: yet he is
none of these, but with respect to his relation, and usefulness to his people,
there is some similitude betwixt Christ, and these Figures and Emblems of him:
he is strong and courageous, fears none, overcomes all he encounters with, he
conveys sap, life and fruitfulness to his living branches; he is the mean by
which we may be reconciled to, and enjoy God; but enough of this.

And Christ who is God, is the Word, but by Analogy,

1. He is a great part of the substance and scope of the Scriptures the Word of
God, they testify of him, and direct to him in their doctrine, types, etc. To
him give all the Prophets witness. Acts. 10, 12*

2. He does also manifest and signify to us all the glorious attributes of God
in a splendid manner, but more especially his love, mercy and pity: and that
not only as a Prophet and Teacher; by the Word of his mouth; but also in all
his concerns as Mediator.

3. As he is the Executor of the good promised, and evils threatened in the
Scriptures. So Rev. 19. 13. he was employed in bloody work, executing the
vengeance of God against his Adversaries, threatened in the Word; and he
possesses his faithful ones of the happiness prepared for, and promised to
them. Thus I hope I have cleared my way hitherto. One thing only remains to
prove their error, which I have reserved as the last blow; and that is to show
that the Scriptures do call the Threatenings, Promises, etc. therein contained,
the Word of God, and the written Word. If I prove, that in any place of
Scripture the phrase cannot be taken in the sense the Quakers would have it,
that is, for Christ or God; and also, that it can be taken in no other sense
then for the matter contained in the Scripture; I have done enough, whether
they will be convinced or no; and they must deny the Scripture to be true, or
own their doctrine to be false.

He that regarded not the Word of the Lord, left Exodus 9. 1^ 20.
his servants and cattle in the field. He that feared the Word of the Lord,
made his cattle and servants to flee into houses. What color is here to
expound the Word of the Lord in these Texts of God or Christ? what more plain,
then that they feared the threatening, or regarded not the threatening, or
gracious Advice given from God for avoiding the blow, And Peter remembered the
Word of the Lord: what word! How Luke 22 61.
he said unto him, before the Cock crow, etc. and that it was the saying of
Christ which Peter remembered; Mark. 14. 72.
you have Marks word for it, or rather Gods, And Peter called to mind the Word
that Jesus said to him. I am against the Prophets that steal my Word, every one
from his Neighbor. Can Christ be stolen? or would Jer, 23. 30.
God be so much offended with them for obtaining Christ as to put the black
brand of theft upon it, while he charges it as the highest crime to reject
Christ?

Stand thou still a while, that I may show thee the 1 Samuel 9. 27
Word of God. This Word was, that God had chosen him King, and the Prophecy of
what should befall him in his return: if you will needs have the Word of God in
this place to be understood of Christ, you must read it with the Exposition
thus, Stand thou still a while, and I will show thee the Christ.

There are two words in the Greek which are Translated, And have tasted of the
good Word of Heb. 6. 5. Ephesians 6. 17. (...). Beza renders it, Gladium spiritualem,
the spiritual Sword.
God. And also, And the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.

A little skill in the Original would free them from this and many more
mistakes. What I have done here, will be to such as are willing to understand,
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over. As for those who
are of a perverse mind, until the Lord give them a better frame, I shall not
wonder if they wink out the Sun at noonday.

I shall next and briefly say somewhat of the written Word, which we are
greatly concerned to be satisfied in, to be the Word of God, for that we have
no other written or printed, which is all to a like purpose; the one being by
an impression of the Pen, the other of Stamps. This the Quakers deny, with the
addition of many absurdities, arising from so calling and owning it.

Where, says one of them, (and a Chief) read Ja. Naylor, Saul's Errand to
Damascus, p. 33.
thou in the Scriptures of a written Word? it will be no hard matter to find an
Answer to this Question. I have written to him the great things of my Law, but
they were accounted as a strange thing. A sharp rebuke to the Objectors. The
Ten Commands (or words, according to the Hebr. as I have already showed) were
written by the Finger of God himself: and Exo. 31. 18. John 5. 47. Thou have
printed my words. Naylor.
afterward by Moses. The Law of Moses is called his Writings, If ye believe not
his Writings. And if the matter and sense be the Word of God before, surely
when it is written, (which any word that ever I heard may be) it is a word
written, or a written word, which you will.

Some there are who have written against the Quakers Quakers will not admit of
this Appellation of the Scriptures, yet in other terms they allow them such
titles as amount to as much: and that the difference is rather verbal then
real. But let me tell such, that besides the imprudence and danger of removing
the ancient Landmarks, and not holding fast the form of sound words, there is
a wide difference and great shortness in the best titles they will afford them,
(yea, take them altogether) from this Appellation; and therefore I shall
examine the^, and discover their defects herein.

First, they will allow them to be of God.

So they affirm their own Writings and Sayings to Morning Watch. 52.
be also of God; (And let not this seem small in your eyes, -- ye shall you all
one day know that the Lord has spoken it) not only in some sense, but in a
higher then the Scriptures, at least with respect to them, and the times
wherein we live. But this phrase to be of God, is of so large an import, that
the silliest Worm, and the basest clod of Clay we tread on, may claim a share
in the Privilege: yea, nothing in the whole Creation but will bear this
expression, (sin only excepted in Romans 11. 36.
its obliquity) for of him are all things.

Secondly, the Scriptures of truth.

This is ground enough for us to deal with them by the Authority of the
Scriptures; but there are many other Writings that are true; and if you take
the Scriptures to be understood by way of Eminency, the Scriptures of truth; so
as no other Writings extant are so absolutely and divinely true, they will
utterly disclaim such a sense.

Thirdly, They are the Experiences of the Saints, and what they witnessed.

This is with them a very common phrase. Though A true Testimony of what the
Saints were made witnesses of. Smith Prim. p. 10.
this be true of some part of the Scriptures, (especially the Book of Psalms)
it is too narrow a title by far for the whole Body of the Scriptures. And for
that part of the Scriptures, which expresses the Experiences of the Saints, it
has somewhat more as its end then a mere witnessing, or expressing how it was
with them. But I do not wonder that they so much delight in this phrase, when I
consider that they themselves restrain almost all the Concerns of Religion to
their Experiences; yea, things Historically related, that were done without
them long ago, and are never again to be acted on the stage of this world: and
things Prophetically related in the Scriptures, which shall not have a being
until the end of the world. They experience the Birth, Righteousness,
Sufferings, Death, Burial Resurrection, Alcension and Exaltation of Christ.
They experience the downfall of Babylon, the Day of Judgment, Heaven, Hell, and
all within them: and not with respect to some effects, impressions and
similitudes of these things: but really, and almost (if not altogether)
exclusively of any other meaning: all of which you will find proved in the
following Discourse. But this is far short and wide of owning the Scriptures to
be the Word of God. There are no Saints but have their Experiences, both good
and bad; but he that should write them, and affirm them to be the Word of God,
as they are the Experiences of the Saints, will fall with Rev. 22. 18. 19. and
Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
a witness under that severe censure of that true and legitimate Word of God.

Fourthly, They call them a Declaration of the Mind of God. This (all things
considered) is the highest expression of their esteem of the Holy Scriptures
and Word of God; (for so I will call them whether they will or no) but so were
some part of the Writings of the Heathen-Idolaters, who knew not the true God.
Yea, many things which they spoke of, as the Duty of Man, and against many
immoral Vices. The Apostle says no less, when he quotes such Passages out of
such Heathen-Authors, Evil communications 1 Cor. 15. 33
corrupt good manners: This is found in the Comedy of Menander called Thadia.
For we are also his offspring, Acts 17. 28
is a Declaration of God, Jovis omnia plena. Virg. And some such things they
have not only dictated for the matter, but have also pressed them as the mind
of God, according to those notions they had of him. And much more may the large
and precious Sermons and Writings of the Servants and Ministers of Christ
(whose Discourses are grounded on the Holy Scriptures;) yet he that should call
them the Word of God in a strict sense, deserves correction. A man may declare
his mind, (yea, or some things of the mind of God) by gestures, nods, becks,
frowns, smiles, yet they are not to be equalled by the expression of his mind
by his Word, they being much more imperfect and unintelligible then words; the
holy conversations of the sound and godly do eminently and effectually declare
the mind of God; yet had we them in its stead we should be great losers.

Not only the Writings and Sayings of intelligent Psalm. 19. 1, 2. And those
Psalms wherein they are called upon, and are said to praise the Lord. Romans 1.
19, 20. Acts 14. 17
The Heathen were blamed for not learning the Lesson taught by them (after
their kind) no better: yet who will say, that the Declaration made by them is
of equal value with the Word of God, either for matter, style, manner, or
perspicuity?

Fifthly, They are a Declaration of the Word of God.

By the Word of God they mean Jesus Christ. This is a true Character of a
considerable part of the Scriptures, but not of all; and they often restrain
them to this, as if it were all the use were to be made of them. So much of
them [the Scriptures] as was given Smit^ Cat. p. 14.
forth by the Holy Men of God, through the Inspiration of the Almighty, they
testify of Christ, and that is only their service in their place. You may
observe what a skeleton they make of the Scriptures, so much of them, as if all
of them were not of the same divine Abstract. They say, the Letter is it [the
Word] which does but Morning-Watch. Farnworth, Light out of darkness.
declare of it; They do but testify of me. They testify of him, and it is
with a [ but] lest you should take them to have any more hand in conveying
Christ and his benefits to the souls, then a mere witness of who is, or what is
the Christ.

To clench the Nail I have been driving hitherto, Scriptures to be the Word of
God, is to deny the Scriptures, which I shall do three ways in few words.

First, to deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is to deny them that
title by which they are commonly known, and distinguished from, and lifted up
above all other Writings whatsoever.

I will ask any man who understands sense, and has but one grain of reason; if
to deny the Supreme Magistrate of Great Britain to be the King of England, were
not to deny the King? though he that does so should allow him to be entitled a
Man, a Gentleman, yea, a Nobleman or Duke, which are titles common to him with
others, or below him? sure I am, we Christians are else under an old musty
mistake, and guilty of great slander, for affirming the Turks to deny Christ,
because they will not own him to be greater then their Prophet Mahomet, or to
be the Savior of men's souls, while they own him to be not only a Man, but also
a great Prophet, and next to Mahomet himself. I suppose, a Quaker, whose Child
should own him to be a Man, and a good man too, and one that provides well for
him, and yet say, He is not his Father, and stand to it in earnest, would say
that Son denies him, and is a naughty wicked Child. It is said of the Jews,
they denied him in the Act. 13. 13*
presence of Pilate; verse. 14. they denied the Holy One and the just. Did they
deny him to be a man, or some common thing? No, they denied him to be Christ
the Savior, and loaded him with reproaches in stead of his glorious and
peculiar titles: and this the Holy Ghost calls denying him.

To deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, that Appellation on which their
Authority is grounded, and which puts an awe upon the Consciences of men.
Though all truths as such (so far as they are apprehended) carry with them the
countenance of Authority; yet how much more when a Command, Promise, Doctrine,
etc. comes with this written on its forehead, the Word of God, the Word of the
Lord! it is said, Where the Word of a King is Eccles 8. 4.
there is Power, and who shall say unto him, What do thou? it is natural to
men to despise the best, and most excellent things, under common and
contemptible titles.

It is all one in a plain and true construction, as to spoken by God.
Experience has sufficiently taught this, that no sooner this principle is
taken in, but the Scriptures become with such as weak as a burnt thread; and
whatever you may pretend to, we know and shall prove, that after this title is
put off, they become like Sampson when God was departed from him. The Papists,
who are the more subtle, will tell us, that in their Image Worship they
terminate their worship in God alone, but alas, the common people are for
downright language; and they, poor souls, being exhorted to worship the Images,
do it devoutly, and think no^ on God all the while. It is no otherwise in the
present case; people will understand after the common sense and acceptance of
words.

I have sometimes been amazed, and not without viz. The light within. For that
they do hereby rob the Scriptures of abundance of places, wherein that phrase,
The Word, and, The Word of the Lord is found, and deck their Idol with them.
And indeed so many are the excellent Characters given to the Scriptures under
that notion, that if they wear them and shine in their luster, the Quakers
Glowworm must sparkle nowhere but in the dark, and may still keep its Court
and Confines in the Heathen-world.

CHAP. IV.
The Quakers equal their own Writings and Sayings with the Scriptures, and
prefer them before the Scriptures.
I Need not spend time with those who are yet* in

First, This is to unhallow them, and make them common things, (or worse) with
the conceits of any who shall be so presumptuous, as to pretend to Inspirations
and Revelations, and of this sort there are a crowd among the Men and Women
also of the Quakers. If they declare, if they write, yea, whatever religious
Action they move in, they pretend all to be from the immediate Guidance and
Impulse of the Spirit of God; and that in as ample a manner as ever the
Apostles and Prophets could pretend unto. So that this principle being as
universally entertained as the name of Christ, it might be said without an
Hyperbole, that the whole World could not contain the Pamphlets that would be
written, and called, The Word, or Words of the Lord; and of what value the Holy
Scriptures would be in such a crowd of its pretended betters, it is not hard to
conclude. Naylor, Love to the Lost, Pref. W. D. printed in the year 1663.


Hear what James Naylor says, The things following which I have declared of,
are not the things of man, nor by man did I receive them, but by the Revelation
of Jesus Christ. The Word of the Lord to his beloved City, etc. This is the
Title; He concludes, Through your Brother and Companion in the Tribulation and
Kingdom of Patience in the Lord Jesus, imitating the words of John, in Rev. 1.
9. This I say in Parnel, shield of the Truth p. 41.
the Presence of the living God, and by the Spirit of the living God.

Give a most undeniable Exposition of a Scripture against their way, the Answer
is, thy carnal mind discerns not the things of God; Thou put thy meanings
to the Scriptures; the Scriptures must be judged of by the light, or the Spirit
from whence they came, but thou art in neither. If we bring a plain text in so
many words against their Tenets and practices; the Answer then is, Thou art in
the Letter.

And therefore Penington prays seriously, My Penington, qu. p. 12.
upright desire to the Lord for you is, -- That he would strip you of your
knowledge of the Scriptures according to the flesh; By Flesh their sense is,
the use of our understandings, (though sanctified) as will appear in the KEY at
the end of this Book, to which I must refer you for construing all such
ambiguous and Parnel, Christ exalted, p. 3.
hard words; and Parnel stigmatizes those who prize them, Doting on the
Scriptures with your dark minds.

That the Quakers do thus equal their Writings and

First, they pretend to Infallibility.

This they assert to be necessary in all their Ministers, who ordinarily
declare or write, and that without it, it were impossible to be fitted for that
work. Hear what the chiefest of their Apostles says, How can ye be Ministers
of the Spirit, and not of the Letter, G. Fox great mist. etc. p. 12.
if ye be not infallible? And how can they but delude people who are not
infallible? and George Whitehead in a Letter to me writes thus; Quest. Whether
Infallibility be attainable by any in these days? which we affirm is to true
believers: which if thou deniest, we question thy Call to the Ministry.

They pretend to speak and write by the immediate Inspiration of God; and this
is another part whereby they aspire to equality.

The Apostle Paul gives this Character of the Scripture, All Scripture is given
by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16:
etc. And the Apostle Peter, For the Prophecy came 2 Pet. 1. 21.
not in old time by the Will of Man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. Let us now compare Notes, and see how far in these
respects the Quakers will give the Scriptures the upper hand of their sayings
or Writings; And F. H. one of Antichrists Volunteers defeated. P. 18.
how should he do otherwise, seeing he has denied the infallible spirit, from
which all the Ministers ministered, and all the Prophets prophesied, and spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. He was here pleading for their Men's and
Women's prophesying: and concludes, that to deny the Infallible spirit to be*
and speak in the Quakers, was to deny the infallible spirit by which all the
Prophets prophesied, etc.

Therefore may I say, much more it is not in the Power Jo. Story short
Discovery in Answer to Christian Queries.
of that little Book, either to throw down self-will in any in whom it is not
yet subdued, or to exalt the truth in general: because its only Queries
gathered by the Author from the Letter of the Scriptures without, and no
Message of heavenly Prophecy, Doctrine or Exhortation received by the Author
from the Lord, through the divine Inspiration of his light and spirit within;
therefore I say it is a very vain and idolatrous Exhortation. The Writings of
the Quakers are full to this purpose; but my business in these instances being
to prove matter of Fact, only this may suffice.

Thirdly, they pretend the Spirit of God to be in

In this they arrogate to themselves and their expressions more then any of the
Prophets and Apostles durst once imagine. All they believe and declare, they
say is from the light within; yea, it is the light within that reveals it, and
not they; and therefore they will not call them their sayings (ordinarily) but
such as pass through them* as if God spoke through them as one may speak
through a Trunk, which is only a passage for the voice, but no proper Organ of
speech. Through your Brother and Companion, etc. The W. D. Conclusion.
Voice of the Son of God was uttered forth through him, by which the dead was
raised. And indeed this light within they pretend to be both Father, Son and
Life of Ed. Buroughs
Spirit, for they make no distinction. But this being matter of fact I shall
prove it out of their writings; yet you must not suppose that I shall find any
such words as essential, or properties in their Authors, for such words are too
proper for them, and expressive of the truth to such who understand them. yet I
shall find the things, as very God clothed with those Attributes which are
peculiar to him. And whoever reads what immediately follows, and considers the
Evidences to be but the Quakers own Confessions and shall not be touched with
horror and indignation against their principles: let that man or woman know,
that a Conscience seared with a hot iron is too soft a term for their
insensibleness. G. B. true says of the Gospel of Peace. p. 18.


Every man has that which is one in union, and like the Spirit of Christ, even
as good as the Spirit of Christ according to its measure.

Child. I am sensible that there is something in my Smith Prim. p. 14.
Conscience that lets me see my secret Thoughts, and the Intents of my heart,
etc.


Father. That is the true light of Christ within, that lets thee see the
thoughts and the intents of thy heart; and God has freely given in unto thee,
and requires thy obedience to it.


Chapter But if I should turn unto it, and obey it when it reproves me for sin, is
there Power in it to save me from my sin?


Answ. All Power in Heaven and Earth is in it.


To shut up this particular, hear one of their prime I will make you know, that
I the light which G. Fox jun. p. 53. p. 54. p. 55.
lights every man that comes into the World, (that all through me should
believe) am the true eternal God, which created all things; that by me the
light all things are upheld, and that there is not another besides me can save.
And I will purge out all your iniquities, and forgive all your trespasses, and
I will change your Natures, and I will make you new Creatures, if you will
bearken to me, and obey me the light in you. What I have here written is the
words which the Father, who is one with Christ the Son, gave me to write, in
which words the true Christ is renewed, and a Testimony given of him and no
other. But enough and too much of this Blasphemy. I need not take pains to
ravel into it, for its so plain, that none but those who shut their eyes, and
are wilfully blind, but may see it in an unexpressible deformity.

I now procced to the fourth proof of their equalling

The CHARACTERS of the Scriptures given by the Quakers. CHARACTERS of their own
Teachers Writings and Sayings given by them. Feeding Death with Death. The
Letter which kills. [Declaration from the Ministers of the Word, p. 7. The
Voice of the Son of God was uttered forth by him, by which the dead was raised.
[F. H. Life of E. B. p. 20. Paper, Ink, and Writing. [Declar. from the
Ministers of the Word, p. 2. A Shield of the Truth. [Title of James Parnel's
Book. A dead letter. The old letter. Seeking the living among the dead.
[Parnel, Shield to the Truth. Naylor, Love to the Lost.] His words ministered
Grace to the Hearers. [Fox jun. life of E. B. Forcible and very pleasant, as
apples of gold in pictures of silver. This in the freshness and quick sense of
life. [Penington quest. etc. 41. Leave men in the dark and confusion. [Frequent
Passage. A clear Discovery. [Title of Smiths Prim. O how certain a sound did
his Trumpet give! [Life of E. B. p. 2. Part of it the words of the Devil and
wicked men. Wisdom of words. Nayl. Love to the lost, etc. 21. Written from the
Spirit of the Lord. [Title page Parnel Shield of truth. The Voice of the Son of
God. [Life of E. B. 20. My upright desire to the Lord for you is, that he would
strip you of all your knowledge of the Scriptures according to the flesh.
Penington quest. p. 12. And now Child hear Instruction and be wise, -- Treasure
it up in thy heart, that thou may lay up for thy self a good foundation.
Smith Prim. p. 56. Shows you in a Glass your own faces, which the Scriptures
cannot do. Scorned Quakers Account, p. 20. A spiritual Glass opened. Title of
Smiths Cat. and part of the Title of his Morn. Watch. Precept, and Traditions
of men. Morning-Watch, p. 18. Truths Principles. Title of Crooks Book. That
light is in the Scriptures, prove that, or tell me what one Scripture has
light in it. Lip of truth, etc. p. 7. Light risen out of darkness. Title of
Farnworths Book. Natural. Lawson. Carnal Letter. Shield of the truth, p. 10.
God is at liberty to speak by them [the Scriptures] if he please, and where
they are given by Inspiration, he does so, and so he is at liberty to speak by
any other created thing, as to Balaam by his Ass. Ja. Naylor Light of Christ,
etc. p. 19. Earthly Root. Morning-Watch. 22. Worship and obedience as to its
direction, The Harlots Child. Morn. Watch, p. 23. Hagar and Ismael, Mother and
Child after the Letter. Penington Mysteries of the Kingdom, Preface. He
proclaimed liberty to the Captives in the Power and Authority of God. F. H. of
E. B. p. 15. Letter without. Swine feeding on the husk. The shadow. Parnel
Shield of Truth, p. 10. Let this be sent to be read in the fear of the Lord, in
the Holy Assemblies of the Church of the firstborn, where she is scattered to
the ends of the Earth. W. D. Doting on the Scriptures Parnel Christ exalted, p.
4. Betrayed into the words. Smith Prim. p. 30. Dangerous to feed on them. Sm.
Cat. 36.

I having sufficiently proved, that they equal their G. Fox the Ringleader of
the Sect: understands not what he says, nor whereof he affirms. It is one
thing not to fail, another to be infallible; for that is to be without all
possibility of falling or erring. Again, it is one thing to be infallible, with
a restriction to something, another to be universally infallible, and without
limitation.

If G. Fox understands so much, he is a Non-such How can ye be Ministers of the
Spirit and not of the Letter, if ye be not infallible? Here he puts Ministry of
the Spirit, and of the Letter, in opposition, which Christ and his Apostles
joined hand in hand, as loving companions and meet helps each to other. And
there was delivered unto him the Book of Luke 4. 17.
the Prophet Isaiah, and when he had opened the Book, he found the place where
it was written, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. verse 21. And he began
to say unto them, this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, and all
bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words, etc. was not Christ then a
Minister of the Spirit? it is by him said, this day this Scripture is fulfilled
in your ears, viz. the Spirit of the Lord is upon me; And was he not also a
Minister of the Letter? why he opened the Book, and found where it was written;
and no doubt read it out of the Book to his Auditors; or else it would have
been very impertinent to tell them, This Scripture is fulfilled, for they must
have divined, or not known what Scripture he intended. And I suppose none will
doubt whether that which is written in a Book be written in Letters. Well then,
either George Fox is fallible, yea, and has grossly failed, or Jesus Christ was
not a Minister of the Spirit; and which of these you who call your selves
infallible Ministers of the Spirit will admit of, I know not: but I am sure
every true Christian will abhor a Competition between Jesus Christ and G. Fox.
And what the Lord and Master did in this case, so did his servants the
Apostles, as I might instance abundantly. I will direct you only to Peter's
Sermons, Acts 2. I need not instance in any more. He that has read the
Scriptures may easily furnish himself. And who can doubt but they who made use
of the Letter of the Scriptures, for evidence of what in their Ministry they
preached or writ; were Ministers of the Letter as well as of the Spirit.

And moreover, if we consider the letter of the George Fox may be turned upon
himself thus; and how can ye be Ministers of the Spirit, if ye be not Ministers
of the Letter also?

The latter part of his Sentence is a higher Demonstration And how can they but
delude people who are not infallible? True indeed, if they did persuade people,
that they could not in any thing be mistaken, or be ignorant: but seeing only
the Quakers pretended Ministry, and the Pope of Rome do assume this to
themselves; they only are in a necessity of deluding the people; for our parts,
who live in all manner of pride, (as the Quakers by their spirit of
Infallibility do charge us) we are not yet come up to their Perfection, for we
freely acknowledge, that we may err in Doctrine, and do err in Practice,
which we bewail before God and men; and also that the people may not be deluded
by us, we desire them, and charge them not to pin their Faith on our sleeves;
but repair to the Law and to the Testimony, and search the Scriptures, try
whether the things we affirm be so or no: And if we speak contrary to the Mind
of God there expressed, to reject our Doctrine; and also that they follow our
Example no further then we follow Christ, even that Man Christ Jesus who was
for a time on Earth, but is now in Heaven.

But what do you think of the Holy Apostles? were Paul will convict you of
error, in his charging Peter, (none of the least of the Apostles) with erring,
and in something deluding the people, Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14. Peter dissembled the
truth in practicing the Mosaical distinction of Jews and Gentiles, and
separating from the believing Gentiles as unclean: And the other Jews, (yea,
and Barnabas also) was carried away with his dissimulation. But then you will
say, how can we be sure that what they wrote and taught was truth?

I answer, that although they might in some things be carried away by
temptation (as Peter was in that case) yet their doctrine, which they professed
to be from the Lord, and by the Inspiration of God, could not admit of erring
or fallibility: and that not because they had an habitual infallibility in all
things; but because of the love of God to his people, the regard of his honor,
and the firmness of his Promises which he made to them: those especially John
14. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, John 16. 13. Howbeit, when he the
Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak; and he will
show you things to come. Now these Promises being made to the Apostles for
furnishing them with ability for their work, as Apostles, they may be concluded
to be infallibly guided by the Spirit; but in other things, though by their
eminent habitual grace they were not likely to fail as others, who were not
clothed with such a measure and degree as they: yet it was more then possible
that they should fail, but according to G. Fox's infallibility, and without
limitation, the Apostles themselves could not but delude the People.

But to conclude this particular of Infallibility, We are accused that we judge
people; It is written, the Saints shall judge the world; an infallible proof,
as if it were a Command or Prophecy of the Saints, ( i. e. the Quakers) calling
men all to naught, how serious so ever: who are not professedly conducted and
saved by the light within; but he goes on more and more infallibly. And for
Judgment am I come into the World, says Christ. Parnel shield of the truth.
P. 33.
As if Christ's coming into the World sixteen hundred years ago, were to the end
that they might pass their rash Censures freely. But he grows still; And where
Christ rules in his Saints, he judges the world, as Paul witnessed, It is no
more I but Christ in me. Where Paul witnessed this, such a Spirit of discerning
as they tell us of must find out, for the Scripture has nothing like it; only
in two places; It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells Romans 7. 17.
in me. But I am sure, Sin and Christ are two things. Ye not I, but Christ
lives in me. But that was not Gal. 2. 20.
to censure others, but to comfort Paul under the hard censures and usages of
others. But the passage of coming into the World for Judgment, brings into my
mind one remarkable Expositor -- It is a right and sound doctrine to preach
him, as he is the light of Humphrey Smith the true and everlasting rule, etc. p
29. p. 32.
the World, and lights every man that comes into the world. But what world
is this -- This is the great Prophet who is come into the World, which is set
in the heart, Eccles 3. 11. which is in the midst, out of which Moses says,
the Lord would raise up a Prophet, Lev. 8. 15. which Prophet being come, he
says, I am come a Light into the World, John 1. 12. and 12. 35, 36, 46. The
World being set in the heart, there is the light of him, who says, I am the
light. So that (with him) the World is the heart; Christ's coming into the World
is his comeing into the heart; and as he came into the world [the heart] so he
is also raised up out of the world [the heart] but how like such a Prophet is
to Moses I should too much suspect your understanding if I should trouble you
with my sense; he that is declined as far as dotage may perceive it without a
Guide, as also the gross darkness of this Expositor in the rest.

Let us see what sound Exposition the great Lanthorn Quakers gives; for I must
not call him their Great Light, for that is in the Lanthorn. 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.
Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them
to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says the law:
And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it
is a shame for Women to speak in the Church. I have known some of them to break
the Bonds of this inhibition; by expounding the Women to be weakness, she being
called the weaker vessel; and so weakness must not speak. But let us hear G.
F's Exposition, it may be that may not be so weak. Now the woman here has a
husband to Mystery of The Great Whore, p. 86.
ask at home: this Note has some wit in it; but he proceeds, and not usurp
authority over the man; but Christ in the male as in the female, who redeems
from under the Law, and makes free from the Law, that man may speak. Now the
knot is untied, and the woman's tougue loosed beyond all question. But would any
man in his Wits expound this after this fashon? the Woman may not speak, but
the Man Christ in the Woman may, and what must their home be then? that must be
their Consciences within, where they say the light Christ is. And they are
directed to ask their Husbands in the plural number, then according to this
Exposition there must be as many Christ's as there are Women in the world (at
least) for every one has a husband at home. Also this home the Conscience must
needs be (when the women were there) in the Church.

Take but one more, though I could fill a Volume Ye have Moses and the Prophets
within, Fisher, velata quaedam revelata.
viz. This written, spoken, manifested in you, Quod tibi ne vis fieri, alteri
ne feceris, and ( retro) -- Whatever you would that men should do unto you, do
ye even so to them. This (says Christ) is the Law, or Moses and the Prophets;
but if ye will not be admonished nor persuaded by Moses and the Prophets,
neither will ye be persuaded by such of us who were once dead in sin with you,
but are now risen to life by the Power of God, which is his light; and in the
same, sent to speak unto you from the dead.

I will conclude this Chapter with some Inferences viz. That their writings and
sayings are equal with the Scriptures, and to be preferred before them.

First, it would follow that the Scriptures both are

Secondly, upon the same ground the tenets and Quakers do theirs, (whose
ungrounded Pretensions to Inspirations weigh nothing in the case) yea, the
bitter scoffs of Lucian and Julian the Apostate must be admitted into the same
Orders, for, if it be admitted they did not vilify and scorn, and deride
Christ, the Scripture, and Christianity, according to the dictates of their
Consciences; it cannot be denied, that they therein acted from the power
within, which whether it were the power of darkness or not, the Quakers having
no rule to judge it by but their own sentiments, it is left by them
undetermined: And I know not hardly any worse they said of Jesus of Nazareth,
the Scripture, and Christianity; then the Quakers have done under other Names.

The Quakers reduce their sentiments and motions But sink down from these Isaac
Penington concerning Unity p 1.
[the reasonings about things] and wait to feel that which lies beneath in the
free nature, virtue, life, power and motions, whereof al^ne is your souls
salvation) power and motion from within is all with them; and if this be truly
divine, and of equal Authority with the Scriptures, or accounted so; the
scornful and virulent invectives of some of late, against many worthy Ministers
of Christ, and multitudes of serious Christians, are not only not to be
rebuked, but to be reverenced as divine emanations and verities: for it could
be nothing but a power within with a witness that had such Productions.

It will absolve many of those from sin, whom the Paul, when a persecuting
Saul, dealt so hardly with the Cause and precious Saints of the Lord, from the
Conduct of what he took to be light, or the light in his Conscience. Christ
does also foretell us of such, who should think they did God good service in
killing his Servants; and if mere think so's, persuasions, impressions,
motions, without a demonstrable ground, may be taken for divine dictates on the
one part, why not on the other? and by consequence the Holy Spirit must be
entitled, Dux omnium malorum, and every evil, which is the fruit of ignorance
and conceit, fathered on it.

It will warrantize a great part of the Popish inventions

I remember a passage of a Romanist, who coming England, and observing the
multitude of S^cts here: he being asked which of them came nearest to the Roman
Church, he replied, The Quakers. And it the fundamental principles of Sects (as
such) agreeing together, do most exactly express their agrcement and likeness
each to other; the Quakers and Papists may claim Kindred upon more demonstrable
terms then any other Sects whatever.

The three main principles, Pillars of the Roman Scriptures, as insufficient to
determine in all Religious Concerns. Secondly, And therefore, a necessity of
some other infallible Judge, which may supply that defect. Thirdly, Immediate
Revelations, and divine Inspirations.

The first of these is so apparently and abundantly proved of both Papists and
Quakers, in the Parallel, in the close of the 12th. Chapter of this Book, and
other places here and there, that I need not agitate it in this place. See
Chap. 5.

The second, That the Romanists build their Faith Infallibility, is not doubted
by any who are in any degree acquainted with their Writings; yet I shall
furnish you with a few proofs.

In doubtful Controversies (if they were not doubtful (at least to some) they
would be no controversies Pighius. Controversia tertia.
at all) we must not go to the Scriptures for satisfaction, but to a lively
Judge, which (says he) as was Moses among the Israelites, the Roman Bishop is
among Christians. And Moses, whatever he determined and commanded, they ought
exactly to obey without further Enquiry. From whence he argues* that the Pope
is the Infallible and right Determiner of Controversies. Charranza is a little
beyound him: says he, the High Priest under the Law was a certain Rule in
things pertaining to God, but the Evangelical High Priest must much rather be
certain in such things; By the Evangelical High Priest he means the
Roman-Bishop.

Bellarmin (de verbo Dei lib. 4.) argues at large Infallibility; only restrains
it a little with an ex Cathedra docens to what he says out of the Chair, or as
Pope, which does more then a little suit with the Quakers, who if those persons
among them, accounted by them infallible, be manifestly proved to err in faith
or practice, so as they dare not deny it: their refuge then is, that they did
not follow the light; but if they had acted or believed according to the
teachings and m^tions of the light within, they had not erred. B^t as it is a
very h^rd matter, if the Pope were allowed to be infallible (in what he
determines ex Chathedra) to know what he does as Pope, and what as a fallible
man; so, it is no less difficult if the Quakers light were such as they
pretend, to know what comes from the light, and what from the foolish ignorant,
dark, corrupt, and fancy-full man. Isaac Penington's salve will cure the sore,
no more then the Papists; who say, the Pope is infallible, notwithstanding the
contradictions of one Pope to another, and one and the same Pope to himself;
the doing the same thing, the thinking the Penington concerning Unity* p. 13
same thing, the speaking the same thing, this does not unite here in this
state, in this nature: but the doing, or thinking, or speaking of it in the
same life; yea, though the doings, or thoughts, or words be diverse; yet if they
proceed from the same principle and nature, there is a true unity felt therein,
where the life alone is Judge; a strange reconciliation of certain and manifest
contradictions! and an ascribing that to the light within, which is impossible
to an Omnipotent God, who cannot deny or contradict himself, and yet be the
true God.

Carranza speaks boldly in the behalf of Papal Infallibility; In disputatione
Ratisbon.
The general Ordinary and lawful Judge of all Controversies whatsoever, which
may arise in the business of Religion, is the Roman Bishop, ( whether he define
any thing alone, or with a General Council, he is always an infallible Judge
when he does it ex Cathedra, or as Pope) as the chief Bishop liable to no
error.

The Quakers out go the Papists far, in this Fundamental Now he that is not
infallible Fox Great M^stery, c^. ^.
in his counsel and judgment, and advice, is not he in error? And are not the
Ministers of Christ the Ministers of the Spirit? -- And are they Ministers of
Christ that are fallible?

The Papists are herein more modest then the Quakers; for they acknowledge only
the Pope, or Pope with his Council, or the Church Catholic to be infallible;
but the Quakers affirm it of every one of their Ministry, both men and women;
yet he stops not here, but extends it to every Quaker. And you that p. ^.
have not that which is infal^ible to judge in you, know not the Spirit of
Christ; neither can you judge of persons or things, that have not the
infallible judgment; nor have the spiritual man, neither have you the Word of
God in your hearts, nor Christ which is eternal and infallible; all which the
Quakers have to judge persons and things. Thus I have showed you, that the
Papists and Quakers have pretended Infallibility for their Foundation. But if
the Quakers shall object, that they differ, in that the Roman Bishop subjects
all others to his sole Infallibility, but the Quakers are each one infallible
for themselves. I answer, the ground is the same, only every Quaker has a Pope
in him, or her self; and so there are among them more Pope John's and Pope Joans
then ever were at Rome. And it is apparent, that G. Fox has arrived by this
pretense, to a more absolute power over the Quakers in twenty odd years, then
the Bishops of Rome in some hundreds over professed Christians.

For the third Fundamental common to the Papists Quakers, viz. immediate
Revelations and divine Inspirations; Dr. Stillingfleet in his Fanaticism of the
Roman Church has abundance of instances, to whom I am beholden for the most of
what follows on this Head.

Revelations have been pleaded by them ( the Papists) p. 210.
in matters of doctrine; such I mean, which depend upon immediate impulses and
inspirations, since the Canon of Scripture and Apostolical Traditions --

Anselm mentions a divine Apparition to an Abbot Lu^. Wadding.
in a storm, whereby he was admonished to keep the Feast of the Conception of
the blessed Virgin. -- which Revelation Wadding tells us, is publicly received
in the Off^c^ for the day.

Another Revelation was made to Norbertus the p. 211.
Founder of the Praemonstratenses; in which the Virgin Mary appeared, and
commended her veneration to him, and gave him a white Garment in token of her
original innocence. Which Revelation is believed by all of that Order, and
taken as the reason of their habit. S. Brigit had not one or two, but many to
this purpose, and the latest were of Joanna a Cruce.

But S. Katherine of Siena had it revealed to her, p. 212.
as Antonius and Cajetan say, that she was conceived with original sin. How
often have visions and apparitions p. 218. Bellar. de Purg.
of souls been made use of to prove the doctrine of Purgatory? witness the
famous testimonies to this purpose out of S. Gregory's Dialogues, and Bede's
Hist. which latter is recited in the late great Legend of Mr. Cressy, (a Popish
Confessor) under the name of a Church History, etc. --

We need not go so far back as Gabriel Biel, to p. 219. Biel in Canon.
show that the doctrine of Transubstantiation has been proved by the appearnce
of a child in the Host.

Bellarmin very doughtily proves auricular Confession, Bellar. de Poen.
by a certain vision of a tall and terrible man, with his Book in his hand;
which blotted out presently all the sins the humble Thief confessed upon his
knees to the Priest.

Upon this ground of Revelations and Inspirations,

The Religious Orders were instituted among p. 227.
them by Enthusiastic persons, upon the credit of their visions and
revelations; the most celebrated Orders at this day in the Roman Church, are
the Bellar. de Pont. Romans l. 3. c. 18.
Benedictines, Carthusians, Dominicans, Franciscans, and Jesuits.

It is a very fair way toward the proof of it, that Bellarmin confesses
concerning the four first, and that of Romoaldus, that they were at first
instituted by S. Benedict, S. Romoaldus, S. Bruno, S. Dominick, S. Francis, by
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; and for Ignatius Loyola, if he do not appear
as great a Fanatic (i. e. Enthusiast) as ever has been in the World, we shall
be contented to be upbraided with the Charge of Fanaticism among us.

You may find the Doctor as good as his word in the p. 234. Bonaven. vita
Franc. c. 2.
following Pages. St. Francis is said by Bonaventure (a canonized Saint) to be
an illiterate man, had no Teacher but Christ, and learned all by Inspiration,
[for a long time, wherein he got his credit among the Papists] once casting
away his very breeches, and being stark naked before them all, he said thus to
his Father, Hitherto I called thee Father on Earth, but henceforward I can
securely say, Our Father which is in Heaven. I know not but the Quakers learned
their going naked, and denying to call any Father, (which was their practice at
first, but the light grows wiser and wiser) from St. Francis, rather then the
Prophet Isaiah.

Let us cite a little of the doctrine and phrases, some Juliana.

That the soul is so deep-grounded in God, and so endlesly p. 224.
treasured, that we may not come to the knowing thereof, till we have first
knowing of God, which is the Maker to whom it is oned. -- Our kindly substance
is beclosed in Jesu, with the blessed soul of Christ resting in the Godhead; --
for into the time that it [the soul] p. 285. Pref. to Sanct. Sophia.
is in the full mights, we may not be all holy. -- The only proper disposition
toward the receiving supernatural Irradia^ions from Gods Holy Spirit, is an
Abstraction of life, a sequestration from all business that concerns others,
and an attendance on God alone in the depth of the Spirit: And a little after,
the lights here prayed for and desired, are such as do expel all images of
Creatures, and do calm all manner of passions, to the end that the soul being
in a vacuity, may be more capable of receiving and entertaining God in the pure
fund of the spirit. -- But they seek rather to purify themselves, and inflame
their hearts to the love of God, by internal quiet, and pure actuations in
spirit; -- so disposing themselves to receive the influxes and inspirations of
God, whose Guidance chiefly they desire to follow in all things. -- Rejecting
and striving to forget all images and representations of him [God] or any thing
else; yea, transcending all Operations of the imagination, and all subtilty and
curiosity of reasoning. And lastly, seeking an union with Sanct. Sophia c. 3.
God, only by the most pure and intime affections of the Spirit, what
possibility of illusion or error can there be 289. The Approbations 519.
to such a soul? In which [passive unions] God after a wonderful and
unconceivable manner affords them interior illuminations and touches; yet far
more efficacious and divine [then active Exercises] in all which the soul is a
mere Patient, and only suffers God to work his divine pleasure in her. -- The
which unions though they last but even as it were a moment, yet do more
illuminate and pacify the soul, then many years spent in active exercises of
spiritual Prayer and Mortification could Treat 3. sect. 11. c. 1. 292. 215.
do. -- Yea, so far is the soul from reflecting on her own Existence, that it
seems to her God and she are not distinct, but only one thing. -- That God
only, by his holy Inspirations, is the Guide and Director of an internal and
contemplative life.

Reynaldus tells of Nerius the Father of the Oratorians, out of Bacius, the
Writer of his Life, that he was so offended with the sm^ll of filthy souls;
that he would desire the persons to empty the Jakes of their souls. Such a
divine Nose had this Saint among them! a degree of Enthusiasm above the
Quakers, who can but discern, not smell souls.

Some of you, called Quakers, pretend a great advantage John 2. 27. But the
anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is
truth and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. The
Anointing here cannot be understood of Christ, neither do we find the Anointing
any where to be understood of Father, Son, or Spirit, essentially considered,
and indeed the phrase is not fit to be applied to God, who is the Anointer, or
Christ who is the Anointed.

The teaching of the Anointing being understood of the Graces, and the habitual
and special Enlightnings of the Spirit; these devote and addict the soul under
the power of them, to adhere to the true Christ. For the all things, it is to
be considered as restrained to the matter agitated in the Chapter, which is
their adhering to the true Christ; and this is plain in the 26. ver. These
things have I written to you, concerning them that seduce you.

The sum then is this, they knowing certainly the true Christ from any
Antichrist, that which they were mainly to look after, was a heart cleaving to,
and improving him, which the Graces of God in their souls, actuated by the
Spirit of God, was sufficient in this matter, to make their knowledge of Christ
sanctifying and saving; As for the words in him, which render it Masc. in the
Gr. it may be rendered in any Gender.

These Considerations duly weighed, (if there to the pure truths of the Gospel,
to render the principles here detected and opposed, not only suspicious but
hateful. It is no little absurdity in the Quakers to make an outcry against
Popery, Babylon, false worship, forms that are not only unscriptural, but
also idolatrous; while in the mean time they plant and hug the root in their
own bosoms: from which all those evils, and more and worse naturally spring.
It were no hard matter to prove a symbolizing and agreement in a multitude of
particulars, between the Papists and Quakers in those things wherein they are
contrary to the Protestant Profession of Christianity, and the Scripture Rule;
but more especially in the spiritual part of their errors, which in the sight
of God are of all other the most sinful, and to men a sna^e most dangerous.

The Apostle speaks of more Antichrists then one, one as the Chief; of whose
Characters Quakerism has the blackest: I shall mention only two: the first
expressed in 1. Ep. of John, chap 2. ver. 22. Who is a lier, but he that
denies that Jesus is the Christ; he is Antichrist that denies the Father and
the Son. That you who are called Quakers deny Jesus to be the Christ. I prove
at large in a Chapter by its self: that you deny the Father and the Son, is no
less, true of you, who will admit no distinction between the Father and the
Son: so that the Father is (with you) as much the Son of the Father, as the Son
is the Son of the Father: and the Son is as much the Father (with you) of the
Son, as the Father is the Father of the Son, that by distroying these
distinctions you destroy the relation of Father and Son in the Godhead, which
the Scripture speaks of so plainly: and it is hereby apparent, that your
quarrel is not so much with the word Trinity, as with the thing thereby
expressed. The next black mark of Antichrist which is upon you, is that in 2
These. 2. 4. who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped: so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Do not you advance your light within above the Man
Christ Jesus, whom we worship as God, and who is so called in the Scriptures:
even that Man, whose being is above the visible Heavens? Do not you call your
light within you God eternal, Omnipotent, etc.? Yea, you say it is the light in
the Conscience, (which is the Temple of God) and there it does (as if it were
God) rule, govern, judge, execute, in contempt of the written and true Laws of
the divine being. I beseech you consider these things, and lay them to your
hearts.

CHAP. V.
The Quakers deny the Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and Life, or a Judge and
Determiner of Religious Controversies.
THat this is to deny the Scripture, is obvious and etc. if after all, a
conformity to their guidance and conduct, will render our belief and practice
never the less profane. I shall not further persuade my Reader, that to deny
the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith and Life, etc. is to deny the Scripture;
for if this suffice not, I know nothing will carry the Question; unless the
Scripture should be brought in begging some boon at the Quakers hands, and they
proved so hard-hearted as not to grant it. If this were necessary, I should not
fail in the proof notwithstanding.

For the proof of the Charge, I shall first call forth James Parnel, an early
and forward Quaker, and Parnels Shield of the Truth, p. 10.
much esteemed for his works sake. And he also that says the Letter is the
rule and guide of the people of God, is without, feeding upon the husk, and is
ignorant of the true Light, which was before the Letter was. By this man's
Verdict the Scripture is cast and condemned for husks, a false light, or but a
shadow; and its Observers charged with ignorance of Christ the true light for
so, doing: But it were well if they could come off so. Behold in the next
Accusation, a Charge of no less then the highest robbery and sacrilege. And if
thou look upon the Scripture to be for a rule Smiths Prim. p. 10.
and for trying* thou give that unto them which belongs unto Christ: for he
is the rule, and leads his people; and he alone searches the hearts and trys
the reins, and not the Scripture.

But if you will see a mouth full of blasphemy against the authority of the
Scripture, read with horror and amazement the following words. God is at
Naylors Light of Christ, etc. p. 19.
liberty to speak to his people by them [the Scripture] if he please, and where
they are given by inspiration he does so: but the sting is behind, in the tail
of this non-such sentence, and so he is at liberty to speak by any other
created thing, as to Balaam by his Ass.

Then such a thing as Balaams Ass may call up our expectations of Gods
teachings, guidance, and rebukes, as well as the Scriptures: for God is at
liberty to teach us by an Ass, and he has put no more authority* into the
Scripture, unless he shall please to hand them to us by renewed and immediate
inspiration. But I shall not rake into this Dunghill further, which of its self
gives forth so offensive a savor.

I intended to have given you upon this Head, the Romish Writers, who trample
on the neck of the Scripture with the same foot; only the difference betwixt
them and the Quakers lies in the aim and design: the Jesuits spurn at them to
advance the dictates of the Pope, and the Romish pretended Church, above the
Scriptures; but the Quakers to advance the conceit within above them all. Yet I
care not if I give you one instance at large.

Omnis Judex, praesertim supremus and generalis, ita debet dicere sententiam,
ut altera pars litigantium evidenter sciat se vicisse: altera pars evidenter
sciat se causam amisisse, quantum est ex part hujus judicis. At hoc neque
Scriptura Sacra, neque Spiritus Sanctus loquens per Scripturam potest facere.

Ergo neque Sacra Scriptura, nec Spiritus Sanctus Argumentum Jacobi Beccani,
item Gretseri Jesuitae, in Col* loquio Ratisbon.
loquens per Scripturam est talis judex. Et minorem illustrabat his totidem
verbis, Stamus ego and Collegae, and Domini adversarii, in conspectu hujus
judicis [Bibliorum] en contendimus, an sit judex Controversiarum. Jam ille
judex debet pronunciare sententiam, ut nobis constet evidenter. Sumus hic in
conspectu Sacrae Scripturae, and Spiritus Sancti; pronunciet sententiam, and
sic dicat, tu Jacobe Gretsere male sentis, cecidisti causa tua. Tu Jacobe
Hailbrunnere vicisti. Tunc ego statim transibo ad vestrum scamnum. Et paulo
post, Adsit jam Spiritus Sanctus, jam judicet, jam me condemnet. In English
thus,

Every Judge, especially who is supreme and general, ought so to give sentence,
that the one part of the contenders may plainly know they have overcome: and
the other that they have lost their cause, so far as it is in the Judge: But
this neither the holy Scriptures, nor the holy Spirit by the Scripture can do.

Therefore neither the holy Scripture, nor the holy Spirit speaking by the
Scripture, is such a Judge. The minor he illustrates in these very words; I and
my Colleagues, and the Lords Adversaries, stand before this Judge, [the
Scripture] behold we dispute whether it he a Judge of Controversies. Now this
Judge ought to give sentence, so as it may be evidently manifest to us. We are
here before the holy Scripture and the holy Spirit, let him pronounce sentence
and say thus; thou Jacob Gretserus believe not aright, thy cause is
overthrown; thou Jacob Hailbrunnerus have overcome: then I will quickly go over
to you. And a little after, Now let the Holy Ghost come, now let him judge me,
now let him condemn me. If he had not had the metaphorical word to have played
with, the world had not been troubled with so impertinent an Argument, and
language so ludicrous, abusive, and daring to the Holy Spirit. By this you may
see, that if the Quakers and Jesuits agreement in the same false Witness
against the Scripture will carry it, our cause is gon^, and the Scripture must
not determine Religious matters. But it is a bad step, that so well fits the
Popes Foot to mount his usurped and infallible Chair by, and which both Papists
and Quakers tug for as for life.

I remember, when I was a small Lad, I heard our against tug for the truth of
it (though under other terms) tooth and nail. And I have ceased wondering that
so many so easily turn Quakers, when I consider how natural it is to shake off
the Doctrine and Discipline even of God himself, that we alone may rule (if not
over the great world of all others, at least) over the little world, our
selves, without control.

For convicting the Quakers of gross error, and

First, That whatsoever is by the Lord affirmed in the Holy Scripture, it is
our duty to believe.

Secondly, That whatsoever is thereby or therein commanded of the Lord (not
being repealed by the coming of Christ) it is our duty to obey.

Thirdly, That the Holy Scriptures do (in their kind) determine or discover to
us, whether we believe and walk, or practice aright or not.

For the first of these I shall prove from our Saviors O fools! and slow of
heart to believe Luke 24. 25.
all that the Prophets have spoken, etc. If it had not been their duty to
believe according to the sayings of the Lord by the Prophets, (which were not
immediate to the Disciples) it had been neither their fault nor their folly not
to believe, or to have been so slow and unready to believe, even those
Prophesies which foretold the death and ill handling of the Messiah; which was
so much above their understandings, and so thwart to their affections. Yea the
innocent and compassionate Jesus would have been not a little faulty, for so
severely rebuking them for what was no crime at all.

But lest you should say, these Prophecies were within them; (as some of you
have said) know first, that they were ignorant of them, for as yet they John.
20. 9.
knew not the Scriptures. And it is said Luke 4. 27. Beginning at Moses and all
the Prophets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself. Thus much may suffice to prove it our duty, to believe what the
Scriptures speak, and that all and universally.

Secondly, What is therein commanded we ought etc.

Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God Deuteronomy 5. 32.
has commanded you; you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
If it be objected, this was obliging to them, not to us; who are not under
Moses's Administration. I answer, first, that the commands here chiefly
intended, were such as oblige all men in all Ages, for the matter of them,
which is always just and righteous. Secondly, the ground of their authority
being the Lord commanding, reaches to whatever he commands in hi^ written Word
in all Ages of the world. Thirdly, the Israelites had them not immediately by
inspiration, but by the hand of Moses; either from his mouth to that
Generation, or by Writing and Tradition to the Generations following. Who gave
Jacob for Hos. 12. 8.
a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did not the Lord? he against whom we have
sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient to his
Law.

Thirdly, the holy Scriptures determine according Jesuits and William Pen) that
because they do not express the sense contained in them, viva voce, or direct
it to thy conscience without any other help; and say, thou A. art in the right,
thou B. art amiss: therefore thou will not take them to be meet to determine
good and evil, right and wrong. We may as certainly determine by words written,
as by words spoken; and they are altogether as worthy of credit. Those who come
under the executive determination of Laws, do find that Process in writing does
not lose its force, for the decrees and sentence being put into that form. All
Scripture is given 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God maybe
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works: the words for correction here
are (...), for conviction.

And herein [all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets] do I
exercise my self, to have a Acts. 24.
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. What can be more
plain? the judgment whether he did righteously with respect to God and men, was
passed in his conscience by the Scriptures; and that not by immediate
inspiration only, (though he were an Apostle) but by the written Law, attained
by study and serious meditation. Herein I exercise myself, (...).
he labored by study and meditation therein (as the Greek imports) he was not
an idle Quaker, that must have knowledge dropped in his mouth, for dig he cannot,
and to ask of others he scorns it. But for all that I had rather be laborious,
rich and humble with Paul; than flothful, poor, proud, and merely in conceit
rich with them. To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20.
if they speak, not according to this word; it is because there is no light in
them.

G. Fox, the grand Quaker will needs have Christ to be the Law and the
Testimony: if so, I am as sure as can be, that they that are saved by Christ
are saved by the Law; and then farewell the Gospel, and the righteousness of
Faith, which the Apostle makes so much ado to bring people to embrace, and
disclaim justifying righteousness by the Law.

That the teachings, motions, and determinations of the Spirit of God by the
Scripture are more suitable to the nature, and present state and condition of
man; and more certain to his knowledge, than any immediate teaching, which any
enjoy in our days.

More suitable to the present condition of man.

I prove it first from its being that dispensation of God, which he has put an
eminent Character of mercy Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
upon. He shows his Word unto Jacob, and his judgments unto Israel: he has
not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not know them.
Praise ye the Lord. If it were not more suitable to man in his fallen state, and
tending to his good, it would hardly by the Spirit of God been expressed as a
mercy so singular, so excelling his dealings with any other people; and such
flourishing matter for the praises of the Lord. Never did any of the Saints of
old call it a carnal lettter, husks, and by such like scornful names.

The dispensations of the revealed and written Word, render God nigher to a
people, than to those who are without it. For what Nation is there so great,
who has God so Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8.
nigh unto them, etc. Read the Context, and you will find, that the means of
God being so nigh was (chiefly) his written Laws. And it is notorious, that the
Gentile Nations, who were without the Scripture, had lost sight of the true God
so far, that they worshipped the most despicable things in his stead: and as
the Apostle says, were without God in the world; for all their Ephesians. 2 12.
light within, which the Quakers say all men ever had.

The d^spensat^ons of God, in and to his Church, rise higher and higher in
excellency and glory.

His first after the fall, were some few revelations to some few persons; and
by them handed to others: which might be then much more easy than now, for
that men lived so long, that the days of Methuselah and Noah took hold of the
days of Adam and Abraham: But men increasing in number, and no less in
impiety, they quickly lost that little was committed to them. And before the
Law, and Covenants, and Scripture (in part) were written (notwithstanding
Creation, Providence and some revelation) the knowledge of God was very thin
and scant in the World Job. 26. 13, 14.
among good and holy men. And if you will not believe me, believe Holy Job. By
his spirit he has garnished the Heavens, his hand has formed the crooked
Serpent: lo, these are part of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of
him. He is speaking before of his works of Creation, yet they were but a part
of the ways, whereby God conveyed the knowledge of himself; but take all
together, even that of revelation with it; it was but a little of him that was
known: whereas, when his word was written, the Israel of God who enjoyed it,
it is said of them: In Psalm. 76. 1.
Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel. But the 2 Cor. 3. 11. Speaks
close and home to my argument. For if that which is done away was glorious much
more that which remains is glorious.

From the slipperyness of our memories.

Who among the sons and daughters of men, is able and bad Steward; and let slip
a great part, both matter and from; without a miracle to raise our faculty (not
only above the common course, or which is ordinary, but) above the faculty of
any man that breaths: whereas the word imparted by the Scripture abides, to
which as to an everlasting Record we may have recourse, and supply that defect.

More certain to the knowledge of man.

Since man was corrupted, and so long as there remains either corruption or
defect in him; the inward motions, and notions of the soul will be affected
therewith: the first risings and bubling up of thoughts, and imaginations,
which present themselves to the understanding, judgment, and conscience; will
abundantly vary from, and be opposite each to other: and the sentiments or
apprehensions of them, be warring, and contending like pleaders at the bar of
judgment, and conscience. And those who know and are concerned in the affairs
(and their management) on the secret stage of the Soul, must acknowledge (if
they will speak their consciences) that whatever be the question agitated in
the mind, there will not want the appearances of truth and goodness, offering
themselves on both the affirmative and negative part: and in matters of
religious concern, all pretend to the sanction, and allowance of God himself.
And as their pleas, so their importunities shall be so impetuously violent,
that many times the poor creature is on the rack, and which way soever its
judgment and resolution inclines, the adverse thoughts will attend it with
their Checks, and clamours. In the multitude of my thoughts within me. (...) my
anxious, perplexed, careful, troubled thoughts; beating against Psalm. 94. 19.
one another like the boughs of a tree agitated with a fierce wind.

This was not only David's case, but the Saints which are now upon the earth.
And if it were David's, so good a man, and a man so frequently under the power
of special divine inspirations; much more may it be ours* Well, in such cases
what course should we take? if we expect, and depend upon immediate teachings
from the spirit, how shall we know they are such? and not the delusions of
Satan, or a vision of our own fancifull brains? we can give testimonies enough
to convince a Heathen or Atheist, (if he will not abandon the use of reason)
that the Scriptures are the word and mind of the Spirit of God: and therefore
what that speaks, is the voice of the Spirit, but it will be long enough ere
the Quakers, and those that plead for a sole dependence on the Spirits
immediate teachings, will be able to give such proofs of theirs.

Moreover, the Quakers who pretend to these

We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope Isa. 59. 10.
as if we had no eyes; we stumble at noonday as in the night. One of the
severest curses for disobedience, threatened against Israel was, and thou shall
grope at Deu. 28. 29.
noonday as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shall not prosper in thy
ways. And what is this principle of the Quakers, but to turn us again into the
darkness, and Chaos of Gentilism; instead of beholding, as in a Glass, with
open face the glory of the Lord, to be feeling after him, by the corrupt and
half senseless touches of a natural conscience, acting on the narrow, and
uncertain indications of Creation, and providence: which though they may teach
something concerning God, and our original duty to him: will be as far from
acquainting us with Gospel truths, or such as concern Christ, and our
redemption by him; as a stone or tree is from discerning, and expressing the
secret and bosom counsels of God, or man.

I would not yet have you think, that we deny,

CHAP. VI.
The Quakers take men off from reading the Scripture, and looking into them for
instruction and comfort.
IT is no matter of wonder at all, that they who are And this is the Smith Ca^.
p. 95.
meaning of our Doctrine, to bring people to the everlasting Word of God in
themselves. Whereby they steal away their esteem and use of the Scriptures
insensibly: and they are shut up and lost in another Book [ viz. The light
within] before they are aware: whereas if they should in so many words forbid
them to read the Scriptures, it would make their hearts recoil. Alas, that men
are such Children, who suspect not a design to rob them of their Gold; when a
Counter, a trifle is commended to them, and imposed upon them, that they may
not think of, or mind that which is a Treasure! By this means the Scriptures
are forgotten, 'till the love and esteem of them be lost, by doting on the new
and gay fancy of a divine and perfect light within. But to the proof, further.

But turn your ears inward to the measure of light in Morning Watch, Epist.
you, which is without guile. So to that of God in thee -- I will direct thee.
Their Pamphlets are stuffed so full with expressions of this nature, that I
should but show you their great road in citing their words: neither will any of
them deny what they are brought to prove. But if they intended the judgment and
conscience enlightened, and that this ought to be minded in its place, we should
not condemn for such directions: but when it is made a God of, and by
consequence an Idol; and those beams of Divine light shining in the Scripture
excluded, as if they had the body of the Sun within themselves: it is the
highest instance of folly, and proof of taking men off from reading the
Scriptures for instruction and comfort.

Yet take their minds in express words; And by the Parnel' s Shield of she
truth, p. 10.
same light do we discern, and testify against him to be in darkness and
blindness, and is a deceiver, who puts the letter for the light, and so draw
peoples minds from the light within them, to the light without them: seeking
the living among the dead. You may here discern the confidence they have in
their light within, that they dare oppose it to the Scripture, yea and take its
false witness which it bears against the Scripture: and with what a black coal
he marks those who put the letter [ i. e. the Scriptures] for the light? and
this he construes to be a drawing peoples minds from the light within them, to
the light without them: so that by his own way of reasoning, I have authority
to say, that putting the light within them for the Scripture the light without
them, they draw peoples minds from the Scripture. But the close of this
sentence is no less than a murderer of the holy Scripture, ( seeking the
living among the dead) yea a strangling the Scripture with one of its own
silver Cords: Why seek ye the living among the dead! as if the Scripture Luke
24. 5.
were a very Grave and Charnel-house, from which the living Jesus is for ever
departed; or which is more congruous to their sense, they are no more able to
minister instruction and comfort, than a dead Carcass rotting in the Grave.

Hear one more of their Trumpets sounding to the John Story short discovery,
etc. p. 2.
same purpose: And although the holy Scripture without, and the Saints
practices are as lights in the world, yet far be it from all true Christian men
so to idolize them, as to set them in esteem above the light which is
sufficient to guide: or to esteem them equal with the light and Spirit of
Christ within. The Scriptures are as lights, but they will not right them so
far as to call the Scripture a light: and the commendations of that Idol the
light within are such, as, if they were true, he were a stark fool who would
direct his eyes to the Scripture, having such an excelling light in his own
bosom. But lest after all these allurings they should not be understood, and
people should be so silly as to attempt to light their Candle at the Scripture
Taper, they will tell you in plain English the vanity of such an undertaking.
For he Smith Prim. p. 12.
[ Christ the light within] alone searches the hearts -- and not the Scripture.
So that to draw people from attending to the Scripture, they do not only
commend the light within (being silent concerning the Scripture in the mean
while) but tell you in plain words, the Scriptures are in this matter of no
service at all; as Parnel before cited, he is the light and guide, etc. the
Scriptures are not.

They assert the light within to be sufficient, yea all-sufficient. England.
Alas! it must then (if this be true) be but a piece of wantonness, and the
itching disease to read the Scriptures, to which we must take a few steps,
though they lie open in the next room; while we have enough in our own bosoms;
yea, which we can be no farther from than from our selves; to the use of which
we may pass as quick as thought: it is but look inward, (not outward, nor
upward) turn the ear inward, and the turn is served. But that this Argument may
be heard, John Story and some other such Chapmen vouch for its truth. The light
which is sufficient to guide. Before cited. And if thou waitest in the measure
of Smiths Prim. p. 10.
the light of Christ [within] thou will be able to try all things.

Quest. But if I should turn to it and obey it when it reproves me for sin, is
there power in it to save me Smiths Prim. p. 14.
from sin? etc.

Answ. Yes Child, all power in Heaven and Earth is in it.

Reader, can thou withstand the astonishment wherewith a tender conscience of
the true God is wont to be surprised by such an open mouth of blasphemy? if
thou can, I must conclude thou art acquainted with this sort of people, and
so custom has made it no surprise; or thou art above half dead and benumbed
with the Opium of Quakerism. Yet this is as agreeable to their main principle,
as the same thing is to its self.

I wonder we hear it not more frequently from

Thirdly, They affirm the Scriptures to be within. Fisher, the best Scholar
that ever professed Velataqu^dam revelata, p. 4.
Quakerism, asserted this, Ye have Moses and the Prophets within you. Not in
Latin I dare be confident, neither had his Book (mentioned in the margin) been
so besprinkled with that Language of the Beast, for all his Inspirations, if it
had not been first knocked and whipped into him, it may be by some wicked
tyrannical Pedagogue.

Yet here by the way observe, that such a wicked Quakers divine Spirit must be
confined to speak in plain English, or be dumb. Another of the same mind is
Parnel, (of whom I must give this commendation, that he speaks his opinions
openly, and not in parables as the most of them; who are afraid or ashamed that
their opinions should behold the light, any further than the interest they have
obtained may secure their Authors, but of all men Hypocrites are Parnel' s
Shield of the truth, p. 11.
the most odious and dangerous) For the Scripture is within, and was read
within before it was read without.

I would not wrong the Quakers as bad as they are, i. e. not only known and
readily produced out of the heart, as a good man brings forth from thence good
things, but also esteemed loved with understanding; I am sure they would be no
Quakers. It is a blessed thing to have this Word hid in the heart as David
practiced, and as God commands: but if by the Scripture they mean the dead
Letter, Ink, and Paper (as they call them* when they list) they would be but a
bad and troublesome Inmate.

I do acknowledge with all my soul, that to have Timothy, and eloquent Apollos
were crowned with: and few of the Saints* there are who have not the Scripture
within in some good measure; but alas! memory is so weak and frail it will not
hold all: and so confused ever and anon, that it is necessary to go to the
Scripture without not only to get in more, but also to repair decayed and
broken notions of them, and to be sure that our crazy imaginations by brooding
upon the frame of them within, have not hatched something of its own, and
adopted it Scripture: which the Quakers are not a little guilty in.

But while I am commending the first part of their viz. that the Scripture is
within; supposing it taken in as good a sense as it may be; I must not forget
the latter part which has the dregs and poison, viz. and was read within
before it was read without. If by reading it within before without, they
intended it only of the Penmen of the Scriptures, I would join with them, and
say so too: but they intend nothing less; but, that in the light which every
man has within him, there is the Scripture all and every part, (at least that
may be of use) if it had never been without. I would willingly be resolved of a
few things by those that are of this mind. Wherefore did the gracious God
expose the Prophets and Apostles to so many difficulties, dangers, and deaths
for declaring the matters contained in the Scriptures, if they were read, and
might be read by all men within? Why did God with his own finger write the Ten
words or Commands, and cause other of his Servants to write both them and the
other parts of the Scripture? Why does he command to read the Scriptures, and
by reading and studying them to get them into the heart, memory, understanding?
And it shall be with Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words of this law, and these statutes to
do them. It was not to be with him as you commonly phrase it [in him] their is
no such it in the Text, but the Relative it, has for its Antecedent in the
Verse next before, he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book out of that
which is before the Priests, the Levites: it shall be with him, etc.

Why did Christ himself read out of the Book if it were within them? Why did
not God chide Josiah for not doing according to the Law (as being guilty of
wilful neglect) before he found it in the Book? why did God commend and reward
his tenderness of heart in fearing, when the Law was read out of the Book, if
he were so hard-hearted as not to hear the Law within? Why did Jesus Christ
never rebuke the Jews for not heeding the Scripture within, while he often
rebuked them for not heeding and believing the Scripture without? these are
enough and to spare, to discover the vanity of this conceit. The truth is, the
Scriptures were written (with respect to us) first without, then within.

I would gladly hear any of the Quakers make heard or read without: or that you
could all agree without conferring together in a Narrative of those Traditions
which the Thessalonians were taught by word, and of those many other things
which Jesus 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
did (or some of them) spoken of John. 21. 25. which were not written: this
would be somewhat of conviction to us. But you are unworthy beyond all men of
the holy Scriptures, who by such means as these not only take off others from
reading them for their instruction, but also deny the mediate and visible
instruments and means of those notions you make such a noise and jingling with
in the ears of men, as if they were but home-born things.

They affirm that there is no light in the Scriptures.

That light is in the Scriptures, prove that, or tell Lip of truth opened, p.
7. Ephesians. 5. 8.
me what one Scripture has light in it? If the Scriptures gives us a true
description of light, for whatsoever does make manifest is light: this is not
only an error of the first magnitude, but also one of the greatest
discouragements imaginable of looking into the Scriptures for instruction and
comfort: for if they manifest or signify nothing to us it will be but lost
labor. I am apt to believe they may hold it for very Orthodox Doctrine,
intending thereby that there is no light in the Scriptures more than they have
or may have without them; and that the Scriptures can add no more to them than
the boasting Galatians who were false Brethren (though they Gal. 2. 6.
seemed to be somewhat) added to Paul; or that there is no Scripture has
Christ the light in it, he being (in their opinion) no where but within as a
light.

I shall only prove that the Scripture is a light, or

O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead Psalm. 43. 3.
me, let them bring me to thy holy hill. By which we are to understand the
promises made to David. He knew the way to Gods holy hill, as well as most, but
his Adversaries had barred it up; and therefore he prays that God would preform
his promises, which were not only the light of comfort to him, but a guide to
his faith and hope, as they were truth and good: and such light the Scriptures
are replenished with and adorned, as the Firmament with Stars and
Constellations. But lest they should say this is but my meaning put to the
Scriptures, take one Text that tells its own meaning in so Prove. 6. 23.
many words: For the Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is light.

A fifth Argument may be raised out of those dirty and disparaging Titles and
Characters which they give of the Scriptures. Of this you have enough before.

CHAP. VII.
The Quakers affirm the Doctrines, Commands, Promises, holy Examples, expressed
in the Scriptures (as such) not at all to be binding to us.
THis is a denying of the Scriptures, and the authority of the God of the
Scriptures at once, and with a witness. If any shall be furnished with so small
a measure of reason, as not to be able to apprehend that such an affirmation is
a denying of the Scriptures, I have little hope to convince them. Yet I shall
not leave them altogether without some Scripture evidence of the strength of
this Argument.

Lest I be full and deny thee; and say, who is the Lord? To say, who is the
Lord? or what has the prove. 30. 9.
Lord to do with us, to command or bear rule over us? is to deny the Lord: and
to say of the Scriptures, what are they to us? is as plainly to deny them. What
is self-denial but rejecting and denying what it would oblige us to, and impose
upon us? to relinquish and abandon its authority? To deal so by the Scriptures
must needs then be a denying of them. But why do I burn day light? the Argument
shines bright enough in its own light and evidence.

The greatest expectation will be of the proving Quakers and their principles
(except the rank Quakers themselves) have had a suspicion that they are so
grossly wicked: but I shall blow the dust out of their eyes, by as strong a
proof as their own confessions. And it was the rule unto them that gave forth
the Scripture* -- and they spoke the words as the Spirit moved; so that the
Spirit was before the Smith prim. p. 10.
words, and was their rule that spoke the words, and it changes not, but is the
same for ever. This he writes to prove that the Scriptures are not a rule, and
does hereby affirm that they had been no rule to the Penmen of the Scriptures
themselves, had they not been moved so to take them by the Spirit: and that
this way of obligation is unchangeable and abides for ever. He that shall read
the foregoing and following words in the Piece quoted, will no more doubt what
I have said, than that two and two make four.

For all the Saints have their commands in Spirit, Naylors love to the lost, p.
1^.
but yours is in the Letter; and so of another ministration. By the phrase [in
Spirit] they intend not that only which r^aches the heart, but that which has
its original immediately from the Spirit of God in them. That Naylor intends no
other in this place, than its being from the Spirit immediately, he tells you
plainly: for that it is a different ministration from that of the Letter, by
which words [the Letter] they always intend the Scripture.

But more plain yet, if more plain may be: that is no command of God to me,
what he commanded to Buroughs answer to choice experiences, p. 6, 7.
another. Neither did any of the Saints which we read of in Scripture act by
that command which was to another, not having the command to themselves^: I
challenge to find an example to it, E. D. A bold Challenger, who shall be
answered in good time: but let us hear a few more first -- Because it is only
queries gathered by the Author from the letter of the Scriptures without, and
no message of heavenly prophecy, doctrine, or exhortation received by the
Auth^r from the Lord, through the divine John Story Short discovery, p. 1.
inspiration of his light and Spirit within: therefore may I say it is a very
vain and Idolatrous exhortation which J. A. has given to J. B. his little
Book: But further.

And J. A. further says, let light without be guide to light within.

Reply, If by this exhortation J A. means that light without should guide the
true light within, which shines in the hearts of the Saints: then I must needs
say it is a very absurd and foolish exhortation; and being spoken upon a divine
account, it is full of Idolatry and evil, and greatly contrary to the Gospel,
and exhortation of Gods Ambassadors to the Saints on earth, which was, that
they should abide in the light or anointing that was in them, 1 John. 2. 27.
Hear one more and I have done.

And this is your work who at this day set up an James Naylor. p. 16.
imitation from the letter, of what other men have done; but have not received
your command and power in Spirit from the Lord; and to you it will be said, who
has required these things at your hands? for all the Saints have their
commands in Spirit, but yours is in the letter. -- But in your vain
imaginations are judging you know p. 31.
not what, and limiting the spiritual Covenant of God to the literal. -- Not in
spirit but in the old letter, or tradition p. 40.
from men.

I suppose that by this time my Reader is past doubting whether they are guilty
or no of this charge: it must not be expected that I should take up all these
citations, and deal with them in all their parts; if I should, I should often
actum agere, and give you one thing more than twice. The falsehood of this
Doctrine I shall prove by Scripture, and rational evidence, and answering what
they pretend for the grounds of it.

The Laws that were given by Moses, and the Israel, And afterward all the
Children Exodus 34. 32.
of Israel came nigh, and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord had
spoken with him in Mount Sinai. Who will say these commands were not binding to
them? These are the words which the Lord has commanded Exodus 35. 1.
that ye should do them. Will any one in his wits say, that in receiving the
command from God by Moses, they had it by immediate inspiration from God? to
say so is a contradiction in its self. Moses indeed had it immediately from
God, but the Israelites of that Generation mediately from Moses. For the Law
was given by Moses. And the Scriptures were John 1. 17.
given first immediately from God, and that is their authority with us, though
they are handed to us through many Generations, as the Books of the Law and the
Prophets were to the Jews.

And moreover it were a very superfluous thing for Moses, if they had them all
at as nigh and as good a hand as he. The like may be said of the New Testament
Commands and Doctrines, etc. 2 These. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and
hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or Epistle. Did
you ever hear of an Epistle come immediately from God? and all the Doctrines of
the Gospel were conveyed to others, except the Penmen or Prophets, Evangelists,
and Apostles, by Epistles; or what is of the same import in this matter.

But let us say a little about the obligation of examples Morning Watch.
of one error into another, I am willing to take some pains in this, as in the
other parts of this Tract.

To imitate all the Examples of the best of Saints would lead us into sin, and
therefore cannot be our duty. This I will not plead for, for then we ought to
murmur, murder, dissemble, and be proud, which at some time or other, some or
other of the eminentest Saints recorded in Scripture have been guilty of.

To imitate and take example by them from the mere authority of their Example,
is not a little as they are some discovery of the will of God to us, which we
knew not so well and clearly without them: or as they are a farther
encouragement to our faith and obedience.

Neither are we notwithstanding to follow their Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies;
with all those things which were Typical shadows, the substance and intendment
of which is performed and completed. These things premised, I shall prove that
their examples are binding to us, yea are a superadded engagement to duty; and
render a sin against a command so backed with examples, to be more sinful and
more deeply aggravated.

It is lawful, and a duty to imitate, and f^llow the examples of eminent
Saints.

Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which 3 Ep. of Jo. 11.
is good. This is spoken of evil and good actions and examples, as appears by
the 10th. verse. Leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. Whose
1 Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 13. 7 2 These. 3. 7. and 9. 1 Pet. 3. 5. 3 Phil. 15.
faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. For your selves know
how ye ought to follow us. But to make our selves an ensample unto you to
follow us. For after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who
trusted in God ad^rned themselves. Brethren be ye followers together of me and
Mark them which walk so, as ye have us f^r an ensample.

These Scriptures are so plain to the purpose, that they need not a comment.
And his sons walked not in his ways. It was an aggravation that they did not 1 Samuel 8. 3.
only sin against the Laws of God, but the example also o^ their Father.

Yea, in doubtful and difficult cases; wherein we cannot reach the knowledge of
our duty, and the way God would have us walk in, by the evidence of his Laws:
it is our duty to follow the examples of the greater number of the Saints,
especially when the most serious, and understanding are of the company. If thou
know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy Sol. Song. 1. 8.
way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy Kids beside the
Shepherds Tents.

It were well if young beginners in Christianity would

I conclude this Chapter with some consequences of

First, then all ministry by men is superfluous and vain; and that not only our
ministry, but that also which you call yours, who affirm this dangerous untruth.

Can you say your Ministers are the Spirit? if the Spirit teach by, or through
them, it teaches mediately; but I say not this as if I took it to be of bad
consequence that your Ministry should cease: but to show you how greatly
contradictory you are to your own principle. You say the light and the
anointing within you, is a sufficient, and only Teacher; and no other can
oblige, or move you: yet none make a greater noise in that you call teaching,
or declaring, or are so troublesome and importunate therein as your selves.

2. The consequence will be, that however the etc. yet in the intervals, and
mean whiles between inspirations, and motions from the Spirit within: we have
no obligation to any duty, nor can we commit any sin. For where there is no
Law, there is no transgression; take away the Scripture Precepts, and to you
there is none, but as inspirations drop in: and then I assure you, (for all
your pretenses) you may live lawlesly enough: inspirations being now so rare;
and when they were more plentiful, but one Balaam among the wicked was so
visited, as we read of.

3. Then the Scriptures signify just nothing, but a in Spirit (as you call it)
it is enough: though it never were in the Scriptures; yea, though it be
contrary to the Scripture, reason, and all modesty.

CHAP. VIII.
They deny the Scriptures to be any means, by which we may come to know God,
Christ, and our selves.
THis is a bold and strange assertion, from those i. e. Writings still; but
sure they do but mock them in calling them holy Scriptures, or they are greatly
ignorant what the word holy imports. If the Scriptures then were burned, it
would not be a halfpenny loss, and the world would be rid of a burden or a
snare, or both. I proceed to the proof of the Charge, and as I have done
hitherto, draw my Arrows out of their own Quiver.

Quest. Is there not another way by which we may come to know God? Answ. Nay
Child there is not Smith, Prim. p 24.
another way, for Christ is the way. The Scriptures (which are Christ's own
words) which say Christ is John 14. 6*
the way, are far from countenancing what this Author shelters under their
wing. Christ says, I am the way, -- no man can come to the Father but by me.
But he does not say, (nor is it in the least employed in the words as their
sense or consequence) that there is no coming to the knowledge of God but by
Christ; for some knowledge of God may be attained not only without Christ as
the means, but without the Scripture also.

So the Apostle Paul affirms, (whom we have reason Quakers in the world) For
the invisible things of him from the creation of Romans 1. 20.
the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made: even
his Eternal Power and Godhead. Either they never read this Scripture, or the
beam is in their eyes, who shall say there is no other way to know God but
Christ. If he had said, no other way to know God savingly without Christ, he
had saved his credit here, and hit the mark: but what will not men say that
have a mind the Scripture should be silent? The reason he grounds this upon is
of like strength to most, which they produce under that name or form: For
Christ is the way; now this Scripture does not speak of the knowledge of God,
but of coming to God; which is somewhat more than a bare knowledge of God;
which m^st have a being in us before we can come, or move toward him. But
suppose he had said there is no other way to come to God but Christ only, he
had spoken falsely. For,

Though there is no other way to come to God etc. these are all ways and means
by which we come to God. Add to these faith, love; yet who will say that any of
these are Christ? (except James Nayl^r, who says Christ is the Word and
Prayer:) but though we make these to be some ways and means of coming to God,
we make not any of them the way, as the most excellent and only way: nor do we
make them our Saviors, Mediators, and Intercessors with God for us: nor that
they by shedding their blood satisfied Gods Justice and appeased his anger, and
made reconciliation between God and man: and yet without these, any one of them
(at least such as are within their reach) no person can be saved or be re
united to God. I will give you a demonstration as easy as sense it self.

Suppose that over a great and deep River there

Quest. Does God manifest himself within man?

Answ. Yes, and man cannot know him by any other Smith's Catech. p. 2.
way but by the manifestation of himself in his light within him. Here he says
much more than in his former sentence; there he says there is not another way
to know God but by Christ, here but by his light [Christ] and that within him
too: lest we should mistake and suppose that the light of Christ also is to be
found in the Scripture. Hear him speak plainer, and yet more to the purpose.
Then he [John] Morning Watch, p. 6.
declared him as he knew him; not from any tradition or writing before him:
though then there was much written which did truly testify of him. This he
brings in to prove, that Christ is to be known and made known to others, not by
the Scripture but his own light, or he himself the light within: and that
though the Scriptures were then in being, he made no use of them to declare
Christ by, to the knowledge of those he preached to.

They are such people as tell the world that Matthew, Paper sent out into the
world. p. 2.
Mark, Luke, and John are the Gospel; they are but the Letter. The Gospel is as
much as to say a good message, or glad tidings, (...). Strange! that they
should not be glad tidings, because they are the Letter! as if a good message
or glad tidings were never written in this world: And the Scripture brings no
tidings of Christ, because they are tidings in the most ample form, viz. in
writing or printing; which will abide much longer than a breath or sound, and
may be better considered.

Take another to couple with him, as very a Wiseaker as he. And the knowledge
of the Languages John Higgins warning, etc. p. 7.
of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin (which they call the Original) is nothing worth,
as pertaining to the knowledge of God, This Author did certainly lose the
light, or the light lose him, when he wrote this: I never heard the Latin
called the Original of the Scripture Translations before. Sure he believed that
the Scriptures peept first out of Rome, in that their Original Copy should be
in the Roman Language; as others of them, that the Lords Supper and Baptism
were from Rome and the Pope. But however we have been hitherto of this mind,
the Quakers infallible monitor, the Light within (by which I am persuaded he
wrote this) will have it otherwise. I dare assure this learned person if he be
alive, and can but prove the Latin to be the Original, the Pope of Rome will
willingly give him a Cardinals Hat for his pains.

But this is not his original error, though an error concerning the Original.
He says the Original is nothing worth pertaining to the knowledge of God. If
so, our Translations which we had from thence are less worth than nothing: for
they must give the upper hand to the Original.

I have sufficiently proved their denial of the Scritures viz. of our selves,
and I shall call in no more of them for the proof of this Charge. Christ by his
Scorned Quakers account. p. 20.
light within shows you in a glass your own faces, which the Scriptures cannot
do.

Here I find them in love, yea so in love with a little Rhetoric, that rather
than go on plain ground, they will kick their own shins, and trip up their own
heels. Truly friends you have here gone on Glass or Ice, which you will. You
teach or declare in almost all your Writings, which concern teachings in a
religious sense, that you are taught immediately by the light within. Was ever
any thing in this world shown in a Glass immediately? that Glass may more
congruously be called a Mirror (the ancient name of a Loking-Glass) than any I
ever saw or heard of: however let whatever be the Glass or means by which or in
which we may see our faces, the Scriptures (by your leave) must not be it. But
whether you will or no, the Scriptures are a Glass, or as a Glass, wherein if
you or I will please to look with an honest mind, God will by it in a good
measure show us what we are: and they have one property above all the
Looking-Glasses in the world, viz. that we can see your faces in and by them,
though you should not look into them, nor suffer the Book wherein they are
contained to be in the same house where you are.

For the help of the unready in the Scriptures, I

That all the people of the earth might know the Josh 4. 24. 2.
hand of the Lord that it is mighty, that ye might fear the Lord your God for
ever. As the heathen Nations, so the Generations and Posterity of Israel, who
had not seen those works with their own eyes, were helped to the knowledge of
them, and of the Lord who wrought them, by the means of the Scripture History.
And it shall be when he sits on the throne of Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19.
his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that
which is before the Priests the Levites: and it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God. Here the Scriptures are not only a means to know God, but also to fear
God; which cannot be without knowledge of him, and is more than a mere notion of
God.

And for the knowledge of Christ, it is not possible etc. of Jesus Christ; and
yet no means for the knowledge of him. And according to your own common phrase,
a testimony, declaration and witness of Christ, and that they are some means,
though not the only means, that 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Text is enough to prove, And that from a Child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation; through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. And who will doubt but that which is a means to save
is a means to know God and Christ? I have met with such a silly cavil as this
in some of your Writings viz. that they are no such means to them who have no
faith, i. e. that obey not the light, and believe not in the light. True, if
you understood Christ aright; but yet they are a means of some kind, or it is
not true that they are able to make wise to salvation whatever else be in
conjunction with them: we never yet said that they alone can do it, if we
should say so, we should be like unto you, who deny they can contribute any
thing toward it.

Concerning the knowledge it gives of our selves These things have I written 1
John. 5. 13.
unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye
have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.
Surely if they are a means to know if we have eternal life, they thereby show
us our faces; that we have the faces of Children, not Swine; or Swine and not
Children; and those characters and marks by which one Saint may know it self,
may be a means by which another Saint may know it self, and so on the contrary.
Paul knew himself by the Law to be such Romans 7.
a sinner, as he knew not before. But I shall give you one Scripture which
answers the case in the 1 Jam. 23. 24.
Metaphor [a Glass] used by our Adversary. For if any man be a hearer of the
word and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a
Glass; for he beholds himself, etc.

I know you, who are called Quakers, will say I pervert this Text, which is to
be understood of the light within, not of the Scriptures without; and that it
makes directly against me. I hint this to let people know what need we have to
preserve that appellation of the Scriptures, the Word of God; which will
preserve the due reputation, and use of those holy and blessed writings. But I
would ask any Quaker, if it be not absurd and woeful lame language, to exhort a
man to be a doer of Christ? I must not dispute the same thing over and over,
but affirm this Text, and the particular Argument given just now, to be a full
and plain confirming the Doctrinal word to be a means by which we may know our
selves.

I shall express in the close of this Chapter those

The Scriptures have less in them of demonstration,

That no Writing whatsoever can be any such heavy upon you who are called
Quakers) all your scriblings neither has been, neither can be to any such good
purpose, as the knowledge of God, Christ, etc.

Experience and sense it self, and that not of

The incomparably greater number of those whom

Then God, Christ, Prophets, Apostles, are all to

You cast those Worthies who both disputed and

Then neither is Reading, Preaching, nor Instruction you: and I should blame
you the less if you would so far keep to this principle, as to keep your light
within, and your thundering too; into which (though a self contradiction) it
breaks forth with a noise without sense or truth: to the amusing of the
ignorant, who take them who show the greatest zeal or heat to be the most
sincere and intelligent.

CHAP. IX.
The Quakers affirm the Scriptures to be no means whereby to resist temptation;
and that they are dangerous to be read.
I Join these into one Argument, the latter being S^CT. I.
a high instance for the proof of the former; and both together engage against
the life of the Scriptures with a strong hand. What shall we say of those men's
owning the Scripture, who turn this standing Table of the Lord into a snare,
and render them not only no Weapens to resist Satan and Lust our grand Enemies;
but to be as Gunpowder to blow up our selves: yea, as if God himself who is the
Father of mercies, and who in his abundant goodness has afforded us this
Armor of light, did thereby rather set a trap for our souls, than a means to
deliver us from the snare of the Devil; who leads the blind and unarmed captive
at his will.

I shall not go about to give demonstrations, that

It Is not your flying to the Scripture that can save Martin Mason loving
invitation. p. 4.
you from the fire of his wrath -- nor overcome the least corruption for you;
no verily, nothing then but a Christ within you, etc. and the next sentence is,
come thou then, O come with boldness to Gods faithful Witness within you! If he
had said the Scriptures without the knowledge of them, or the notion of them
without the power, or without the Spirits concurrence; he had spoken truth.
But, to beat these Weapons out of their hands, to cry out with a vehemence to
throw down those Arms as useless, and run away to that second Antichrist the
light within; this is horrid. The true Christ is not so far from the
Scriptures, nor so disagreeing with them, but he can dwell in one heart with
them; and arms all his Soldiers with the weapons of the truths therein
contained: but Christ Jesus the Christ of God and Redeemer of his people, and
the Quakers Christ are nothing of kin.

But one would think this should be but a slip of Quakers Idol is good for any
thing. The Scriptures nor any other outward things Page 11.
are able to grapple with him [the Devil] you must put on the armor of light
[light within] and with that resist him, or be taken captive by him. What a
rapture of zeal is here for the thing within! though the Scriptures alone can
do little, yet sure if God Almighty undertake the combat, either with or
without the Scriptures, he will be too hard for all the Devils, or he had not
kept his Throne from being usurped by them: and if God be not without the
Quakers, or any other creature, as well as within them; he is not infinite as
we have taken him to be by the light of Reason, and more by the light of
Scripture. But what blasphemy will not men run into, who have changed their God
for that which is no God, and have turned their backs on the Lord Jesus, and
taken so gross a delusion in the room of him.

Again he goes on to the same purpose, least you Page 11.
should not understand him. If you use any other Weapons [than the light
within] in this spiritual war, y^u cannot prosper nor prevail against him. I
have lighted on a proof of the latter part of my Charge before I was aware,
viz. for then it is dangerous to read the Scriptures lest you should be tempted
to try some of those inviting Arms, which that Magazine is stored with, and so
spoil all your prosperity and prevalence in your spiritual Warfare.

However this shall not prevent the producing my Quakers say) that attend
reading the Scriptures. But seeing (as the Quakers say) we must try the Spirits
by the Spirit; let us try William Smith's spirit by Isaac Pennington's who
speaking of knowledge gained by the Pennington's quest. etc. P. 12.
Letter of the Scriptures, speaks thus; Making him wise and able there [in his
head] to oppose truth, and so bringing him into a state of condemnation, wrath,
and misery, beyond the Heathen: and making him harder to be wrought upon by the
light and power of truth than the very Heathen. By opposing truth, we must
needs understand it of the Quakers truth; and if reading the Scriptures, and
getting knowledge from or by them; puts us in to a bad condition both (as
rendering conversion difficult, and our misery and condemnation great) beyond
the Heathen; I scarce know what is more dangerous than reading the Scriptures.
But the comfort is, it does but render us harder to be wrought on to entertain
the pernicious Guide and Savior, the Quakers light within; and therefore is
exceeding safe and necessary.

It follows in the same Author, My upright desire to the Lord for you is, that
he would strip you of all your knowledge [or wisdom] of the Scriptures after
the flesh. Their meaning of [ after the flesh] is, that which comes not by
immediate inspiration. For those only are the Children of God, who are led by
the Spirit of Naylors love to the lost* p. 53.
God; to whom they, who were led by the Letter, were ever enemies. So Naylor
does as certainly say, it is dangerous to read the Scriptures to be led by them;
as it is truly dangerous and evil to be Enemies to the Children of God.

That this abominable Tenet is the Quakers, I know viz. we witness this and
that, but if you would know how they witness it, it is only their own
experience, which is a dumb kind of witness: while they can make no proof or
testimony of it to another, nor will ordinarily attempt it; and so their
witness is to themselves alone. But my witnessing of what I here charge them
with, shall have more light in it, that all that read it may be convinced of
its truth. Therefore take one instance more out of their famous Author W. P. or
William Pen.

But I will assure them, they shall yet grope in the dark, W. Pen's Spirit of
truth* etc. p. 23.
till they come into the daily obedience of the light, and there rest contented
to know only as they experience; and not from a ravening comprehending brain,
that would in its unregenerated state grasp at the clear mysteries of the
Kingdom: into which fleshly comprehensions and notions can never enter: but all
must be as unlearned from their first birth, education, and traditional read
knowledge; as he is unmanned, that is again become a little Child, before the
secrets of Gods Work come to be made known.

That W. P. (of all others) should talk at this rate is most ridiculous. What!
know only as they experience, know what God is no farther than they experience!
Can we experience his Omnipotency? his infiniteness, which is not within the
experience of all finite beings put together? What! know the death (by Spear
and Nails of Iron or Steel, and Cross of wood) of the man Christ Jesus, which
he suffered above 1600 years since, only by experience? What! know the life to
come, the judging of all men (that are, ever were, or shall be) by the Lord
Jesus; only by experience? where is faith all the while? what credit has God
with W. P.? that he will know him, nor any thing he says, no further than he
sees, feels in his experience. If none but Believers be Saints, such as W. P.
are professedly none: if he know not that objects of faith and experience (as
such) are contradistinct things; he is very unfit to assure who they are that
grope in the dark, and is very unlike to mend his confused scribbling. I shall
not comment on his ravening comprehending brain (a most affected phrase amongst
the Quakers) nor his clear mysteries, as clear a contradiction as it is; nor
fleshly comprehensions, as much untruth and nonsense as (according to their
meaning of it) it* comprehends; nor his little Child unmanned (as good
Philosophy as it is) for I have not room to spread all his rubbish.

What is to my present purpose is in the last part of his saying, all must be
as unlearned from their -- traditional read knowledge, as he is unmanned etc.
Sure the Scripture knowledge being read knowledge, or knowledge that comes by
reading (as one means) is a most hateful thing to God, that he will impart none
of his secrets to those, that will understand any thing by his written Word.
How came God to fall out (at such an irreconcilable rate) with his own
offspring, his expressions of his mind contianed in the holy Scriptures? how
can you have the face to call them holy Sciptures, and yet make knowledge
attained by reading them so nauseous to God, that they shall be none of his
Children, that learn any knowledge by that Book, or forgo it not all? Did God
write, and cause it to be written; and yet never intend we should read it? or
that reading it we should not believe a word on it, nor understand, nor be the
wiser for it? Shall they be judged ^^.
by the Law who lived under it, and yet the knowledge of God thereby be a sin
and hindrance to their salvation? To what a height of wickedness and folly do
they quickly grow, who are poisoned with that abomination of holding the light
in every man's conscience to be God, Father, Son, Spirit, Christ, Scripture, all?

But Mr. Pen what means your Latin and Greek, Ephesians. 5, 13.
would have us without the Armor of light (for whatsoever makes manifest is
light) that we may not Ephesians. 5. 13.
be able to defend our selves against the most ignorant nonsense, that the
meanest of your votaries can attempt us with. But the God above and the
Scripture without has taught us better things.

I am not unwilling (though I hope few need it) Romans 13. 12.
Put on the Armor of light, etc. the Scripture makes it day in the World (but
especially in and with the Saints) for it makes manifest abundantly. There is
your defensive Arms. The Word of God is quick Heb. 4. 12. Ephesians. 6. 16. 17.
and powerful, sharper than any two edged Sword, etc. There is an offensive
Weapon. Above all taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench, etc. 17. -- and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. A
Sword of the Spirits making, and is effectual when of the Spirits manageing.
Observe faith in the 16. ver. is preferred above the Word of God in the 17.
verse, therefore it is not Christ the Word, but the Scripture the Word: for
Faith is not above Christ.

Jesus Christ who had less need of the Scriptures than any of us all, resisted
Satan's temptations by the Math. 4.
Scriptures, it is written, it is written; and what was written, being opposed
to Satan's temptations, silenced and confounded him. But it seems, since then he
has gotten more confidence. Consider that the Quakers will allow the man
Christ to leave us a perfect example.

CHAP. X.
The Quakers deny the Scriptures to be read to any profit, any further than
they are before hand experienced by those that read them.
THey may as well say that hearing the word

Quest. But if there be not another way to God etc.

Answ. Why Child, all that are faithful to God in Smiths prim p. 29. 30.
what he makes known unto them, they are not judged. This is pretty charitable,
but hear farther, the reason he gives why they that read the Scriptures profit
not in the knowledge of God, etc. is, but they read in that book notionally,
before they have passed the judgment experimentally. Again p. 30. For people
wanting the life and power of Christ in themselves, they are betrayed into the
words, etc.

And such were the Scribes, who were ever scraping in Fisher. Velata quaedam
revelata.
the Scriptures to find God, and his life; yet never knew him at any time, nor
saw his shape, because they heard not his voice, nor heeded not his word within
themselves. John 5. 37. What a vile insinuation is here of the Scriptures, and
the study of them? as if the Scriptures were but a dunghill, and every
unregegenerate person at least (which all are with them wh^ adore not the Light
within as Christ) did but the part of a Brute (which scraping implies) in
searching the Scriptures to know the things of God. For his blasphemous
insinuation that God has a shape, and that they who heed his voice within
themselves see it; I am too sensible of the invisible Majesty of God, to work
my thoughts on such a horrid subject: yet, he dares quote John 5, 37. to
countenance it, which so far as it reaches it, does deny any such to be seen.

To reprove this evil Spirit of (worse than) error, 3. John 5. 39. 40.
read and understand this Scripture, wherein there is not any great difficulty.
Search the Scriptures, (for in them ye think ^e have eternal life) and they are
they which testify of me: and ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.
I have known more than a good many of the men of this controversy expound this
Scripture, as if Christ rebuked them for searching the Scripture, and having
such a fallacy in their opinion, as to think eternal life were to be had by
searching of them: and instead of and (which gives the absurdity of their
searching the Scriptures to find the true Christ, by their testimony; and its
testimony being so plain and clear, that Jesus of Nazareth, he that then talked
with them, was he) they have read it but you will not etc. as if the one were
exceeding opposite to the other; viz. searching the Scripture; whereas the true
sense is, it condemns you as irrational men; that you should think to have
eternal life in the Scriptures, and will not believe their testimony. I must
remember to tell you, that I do not take the Scriptures to be able to give
eternal life to all that have them in their houses or heads, or that do barely
search them, and not set th^^r hearts (according to its direction) to find
eternal life. It were ten to one if I had not said so much, some or other of
them would have had a fling at me, as making a Christ of the Scripture.

By what has been produced, you may be sure Timothy was bred up from a Child
in the Holy Scripture; and it was the commendation of his Mother, and
Grandmother for so educating him: but can you think he experienced all he read
before he read it? some of them are prophetical of things to come. Can any of
you all experience things that never yet had an existence or being? And should
the Gentiles and Jews have been reproved for hearing Paul, and Peter, and
Christ himself preach the Gospel, and the Mediator of it? because they did not
experience it in themselves. But why should I use many words about such a
cause? the willing to understand may see its grossness, and forthose that will
be ignorant, means signify little to their cure.

CHAP. XI.
The Quakers put, or render the Scriptures, and the Spirit of God in opposition
to each other.
I Could produce a thousand instances of this crime Quakers as their principle
and duty. This wickedness, is their open highway, and beaten road. If the
Scripture had not been the word of the Spirit of God, the revelation of his
mind and will; whose holiness and authority had its being from God its author;
the frame of it agreeing to the nature and will of God: we would not think it
worthy the name of Scripture, in that peculiar sense which it has obtained
among Christians. But if once we knew it opposite, and an adversary to the
Spirit (so far at least) that it must come to a parting: and they that cleave
to the teachings of the Spirit, must forsake being taught, comforted, etc. by
the Scriptures: and they that cleave to the Scripture teaching by the Spirit,
have forsaken the Spirit of God and his teachings: we would own our such
profession to be a denying the Scriptures, yea, should take our selves bound in
so many words to deny it; and send it as far out of the way as may be, as
dangerous to the just prerogative of the Spirit of God.

And if those who profess what I shall instance had any honesty in them; they
would tell the world they utterly deny the Scriptures to be, what the Christian
world has accounted them: and in plain and open words and testimonies, as far
as they can produce; exhort and move them to lay them aside, and have no more
to do with them: nor give them one good word, least the adversary to the Spirit
should in the hearts and lives of men be exalted against him.

For the proving of the Charge at the head of this Chapter, take the words of
James Naylor the For all the Saints have their commands in Spirit, but yours is
in the Letter; Naylor's love to the lost, p. 8.
and so of another ministration; for the literal ministration is done away in
the spiritual. Here you have the commands in Spirit, or by the Spirit put in
opposition to the Letter, which is with them the written Word, or the
Scripture: and so far in opposition, that as heat being opposite to coldness,
and light to darkness; the one (so far as it prevails) expels the other, by
its contrariety and opposite qualities: so the spiritual ministration, or
ministration of the Spirit banishes and expels that of the Letter, as its
enemy and contrary.

But if you will have a prodigious instance, a nonsuch for Blaspheming the
Spirit of God in the Scriptures* read what follows, out of a great Writer of
theirs William Smith. And reading in the Scriptures, that there were some who
met together and exhorted Morning Watch. p. 22, 23.
one another, and were edified and comforted one in another; they observe and
do as near (as they can) what they read of the Saints practice; and so
conceives a birth in the same Womb [the Scriptures] and brings it forth in the
same strength as others do -- and they make haste thither, and open their eyes
to look at the things which are seen [the Scriptures] and this is pleasing to
the carnal mind, etc. They [Worship, Order, Ordinances, Faith, Practice,
understood by the written Word] must all come under the severity of his
judgment, because they are Bastards and not Sons; for these adulterous births
have provoked the Lord and grieved his Spirit.

It would amaze a Christian and sound mind, to read Traditions Ib. 22* 23
of men, earthly root, darkness and confusion, Nebuchadnezzars Image,
putrefaction and corruption, rotten and deceitful, all out of the life and
power of God, Apostasy, the Whores Cup, the mark of the Beast, Babylon the
Mother of Harlots, Bastards brought f^rth of flesh and blood, the birth that
persecuts the Son and Heir, viz. [the Spirit of God or light within] Babylons
Brats and Children, Graven Images, contrary to him [the everlasting powerful
God] etc. If this be not opposing the Spirit of God to the Scripture, and
rendering them adverse to each other; the Devil himself must despair of
inventing words to express it by.

I conclude the proof of this Charge with the words Naylors love to the lost,
p. 30.
of Naylor. And of this sort are they who have their preaching to study and to
seek at other men's mouths, or from the Letter; and have it not from the mouth
of the Lord. Then with him, and the Quakers who are of his mind* what we have
from the Scriptures, we have not from the mouth of the Lord. I would know of
the Quakers, what they will make of the mouth of the Lord? Do they take it to
be some part of his body, which is like our mouths the Organs of speech? We
have thought hitherto that God being a Spirit has no mouth at all; only to
express things to our understandings, he speaks by similitudes taken from such
things we are acquainted withal: and so whatsoever God reveals his mind by,
may be called his mouth.

And it will follow that the Scriptures are his mouth, as eminently as any
thing, yea all things in the world, and more. For God spoke by them to us, more
than by all other things: he says to Jeremy, Jerem. 15. 19. Thou shall be as
my mouth. As thou spakest by the hand of Moses. 1 Kings. 8. 53 2 Samuel 23. 2.
The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. Hear the
rod. etc. Is it not a frequent phrase in the Scripture? As says the Scripture.
They believed the Scripture. And what is that? but God speaking by the
Scripture, and believing what God spoke by the Scripture. But now is made ^om.
16. 26.
manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets; according to the ^^mmand of
the everlasting God, made known unto all Nations for the obedience of faith.
What more plain that the Scriptures are the mouth of the Lord, or those means
by which the Lord does manifest his mind to men. But the Quakers will not have
it so, and therefore it must not be so. But they who ^nquire of, or at the
Scriptures for the mind of the Spirit, run another way than that the Spirit
walks and is to be found in; and sin against the Spirit of God. And that you
may see how they set the Spirit and Scripture together by the ears, Naylor
says further,

For those only are the Children of God, who are Love to lost etc. p. 25.
led by the Spirit of God; so far is true as truth it self; but as the old
Serpent, he never heads a saying with the Scripture, but he brings in a lie at
the end and tail of it, to whom they who are led by the Letter were ever
enemies,

Here you have two great Commanders or Leaders W. Pen Sp of truth, and^.
might W. P. say, We livingly witness, against all the dry cavelling
Letter-mongers in the world.

Having frequently met with that Scripture, Cor* 3, 6. By them produced to
prove the Scriptures to have a contrary tendency to the Spirit; I shall here
open it, and show their mistake. The words are, Who als^ has made us able
Ministers of 1 Cor. 3 6. opene^ 1.
the new Testament; not of the Letter but of the Spirit: for the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives ^ife.

Whereas they would have us by the Letter, to Sinai; and by the Spirit, the
Covenant of Grace; especially as expressed in the New Testament, under the
administration of the Reedemer.

But if the ministration of death, written and engraven Ver. 7. Ver 9.
one stones was glorious, etc. for if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, etc.

Th^se passages express and explain the same Moses said, I exceedingly fear
Heb. 12. 21.
and quake, and it was death for any to touch the Mountain; yea the Israelites
were ready to dye Exodus 20. 19.
with fear at the appearences of God on that Mount Sinai, at the giving forth
of the Law.

And, as the manner of giving it forth by God, so The Law works wrath. That
is, the Law of mere Romans 4. 15. Romans 7. 11. 12.
Commandments. And the Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be
unto death: for s^n taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me. Thus it is plain what is meant by the Letter; the Law of mere
Commandments as given forth on Mount Sinai.

That by the Spirit is to be understood the Covenant of the New Testament, not
of the Letter; that is, the Gospel, not the Law: and it is called the Spirit in
three respects;

First, As the New Testament or Covenant of promise, (especially in the hand of
Christ) promises and conveyeth soul quickening grace in a good measure to
sanctify and enable, and dispose the soul to keep the Laws of God.

Secondly, As by the New Testament or Covenant, life and spirit, comfort and
refreshment is put into the hearts of poor drooping sinners, under the sense of
the severity of the Law, and their liableness to the punish of it.

Thirdly, And chiefly, the intent and mind of

CHAP. XII.
The Quakers hold it is a sin, and the sin of Idolatry, to believe and live
according to the instructions and holy examples expressed in and by the
Scriptures; except we have them by imme iate inspiration, and at first hand as
the Apostles received them.
I Am now come to the highest round of their Samuel, whole rebuke to Saul for
his sin in the matter of the Amalekites, was expressed in the keenest and
highest terms; compared his sin but to Witchcraft, Iniquity, and Idolatry. And
if this charge against us were as true, as it is that they so charge us; it is
high time to serve the Scriptures, as Hezekiah served the brazen Serpent, And
brake in peioes the Brazen Serpent that Moses had made; 2 Kings* 18. 4.
for unto th^se days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he
called it Nehushtan, [that is Brass nothing of a Deity in it but a little piece
of Brass So it were fit the Scriptures should be demo^ished, as having nothing
of divine authority stamped upon them. When I have established this Charge by
the mouths of two or three Witnesses, it will be time to leave off pouring in
more, where the measure is already running over. W. D. discove^y of man's return
p. 21.


All people may search the Scriptures, and see how y^u have been deceived by
your Teachers; who have caused you to seek your lost God in carnal and dea^
observa^ions: which they have not any Scripture for^. Who this lost God should
be (except Jesus Christ who is ascended above the visible Heavens) is not to be
imagined by those who are acquainted with the Quakers Tenets and Phrases: as
will appear more plainly where I treat on their Idolatry. And if so, as there
is reason to believe; there are two grand parts of Idolatry we are charged
with, in complying with the Scripture Precepts and Institutions; as in
Preaching, Prayer, Church Order, Baptism, Lord's Supper.

The first is a false object of worship; which all Jerusalem.

The second is false worship for the matter, which is Idolatry, although it
were intended to the true God as the object; the sacrificing of Children was
intended ultimately to the true God, yet it was gross Idolatry, And they have
huilt the high places of Tophet, which is in the Valley of the son of Hinnom,
Jer. 31.
to burn their Sons and Daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not,
neither came it into my heart.

But you will say, how is this charge for walking

And this is Babylon the mother of Harlots, viz. Morning watch p 23.
[to read and practice as the Saints did and the Apostles in the Scripture of
the New Testament] and the abomination of all uncleanness; -- That many
Children have been brought forth of flesh and blood, and of the will of man
(that is, our choice and not passive obedience to the motions of the thing with
in) which is the birth that persecutes the Son and heir. -- And not one of them
must stand (though ever so seemingly glorious) f^r the day is come, and the
true birth is born (the light within) whose right it is to reign; and his glory
he will not give to another, nor his praise to Graven Images. If erecting and
worshipping God by graven Images be Idolatry, than the Quakers do charge us
with Idolatry, for walking according to Scripture instructions and examples.
He, who will take the pains to read this inspired Author (though by an evil
spirit) page 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. will find it his scope to prove all
Idolaers that ground their worship and order on the Scripture examples: and in
page 17. he likens all professions among Christians this day to
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, and though some are more shining and glorious in
appearance as the head of Gold was beyond his legs of Iron; yet he calls all,
part of the Image, and the Scriptures the Feet of Clay they had their standing
on. And in page 16. has these words, Then searches the Scripture for words to
prove their Image a lawful Son, and this is the bott^m and foundation of all
Religions this day.

I am even tired with searching these sulphurous

So amongst the words you find how the Saints in Morning watch p. 45.
some things walked, and what they practiced, and then y^u strive to make that
thing to your selves, and to observe it, and do it as near as you can; and here
you are found transgressors of the just Law of God; who says, thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Exodus 20. 4.
Image, nor the likeness of any thing. And it follows, now what difference is
there in the ground betwixt you and the Pope? though in the appearance there
seem to be such a great space.

The Quakers having thus stripped the holy Scrip

They who Deny the Scripture to be the word of God. Equal their own writings
and saying with the Scriptures, and prefer them before the Scriptures. Deny the
Scriptures to be a rule of faith and life, or a Judge and determiner in
religious controversies. Take men off from reading the Scriptuses, and looking
into them for instruction and comfort. Deny the Scriptures to be any means, by
which we may come to kn^w God, Christ, or our selves. Affirm the Scriptures t^
be no means, whereby to resi^t temptation, and that they are dangerous to be
read, Deny the Scriptures to be read to any profit, any farther then they are
beforehand experienced by them that read them. Put or render the Scriptures,
and the Spirit of God in opposition to each other. Affirm the doctrines,
commands, promises, holy examples expressed in the Scriptures (as such) to be
not at all binding to us. Hold it is a sin, and the sin of Idolatry; to believe
and live according to the instructions and holy examples expressed in, and by
the Scriptures: except we have them by immediate revelation as the Apostles.
They who do all these things mentioned in the foregoing particulars, deny the
Scriptures. But the Quakers do all these things mentioned in the foregoing
particulars therefore the Quakers deny the Scriptures.

If any one, or all these arguments together will prove what they are brought
to confirm; it is proved: if it be not I shall for ever despair to prove any
thing

For as much as the holy Scriptures being our Rome, as absolute in matters of
Religion. The other to set up the Pope within, as absolute, and more than he;
in the little world of every individual man. I shall within these following
parallel lines, give you a view (though but in part) how both these adversaries
do openly spit their venom, and discharge their shot against the holy
Scriptures. And considering how they in most things jump together, in the
contempt of, and detracting from the Scriptures, you may conclude, that
although the Jesuit was not the first contriver of the Quakers grand notion of
the Light within to be Christ: (which I am verily persuaded of to be true) yet
that he was a promoter of the building erected on that foundation, we may
easily guess by his mark on so many parcels of it; yet I must say that the
Romanists, were much more sound in their opinions of the Scriptures until about
Luther's time, wherein the Protestants were too hard for them at those weapons.
I give you the mind of the Spirit of God expressed in the middle collumn, the
Quakers Tenets on the left, and the Jesuits and Papists on the right hand.

The Quakers Opinions and Sayings of the Scriptures, and those that adhere to
them.

The Scriptures are not the rule of Faith and life.

Parnel Shield of the Truth.

The Spirit of God speaking by the Scriptures.

Thou shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left, viz. Gods Statutes
and Judgments, Deuteronomy. 5. 23, 32.

The Jesuists and Papists Tenets and Sayings of the Scriptures, and those that
adhere to them.

The Scripture is not the rule of Faith.

Greg. de Valentia Jesuita libro quarto analyseos.

Carranza in prima controver.

The Scriptures are not the judge and determiner of Controversies in religious
matters.

Smith Prim.

He mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly showing by the Scriptures
that Jesus was Christ. Acts 18. 28. -- He had put the Sadduces to silence. Mat.
22. 3. viz. by Scripture. Neither the holy Scripture, nor the holy Spirit,
speaking by the Scripture, is the supreme and general judge of matters of Faith.

Beccanus item Gretserus Jesuitae in Colloquia Ratisbon.

It is impossible for the Scripture to be judge of doubts concerning Faith and
the Christian Religion.

Lorichius Jesuita in fortalitio.

Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John The beginning of the Gospel of Christ The Gospel
is not Scripture, it was commanded is not the Gospel.

Paper sent into the World, page 2.

the Son of God, Mark. 1. 1. to be preached, but not to be written.

Carranza Jesuita in colloquio.

The light within every man is the rule and guide and not the Scriptures; and
this light is infallible and will teach you all things.

Smith Catechis.

If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness, Mat. 6.
23.

Vain man would be wise though man be born like a wild Asses Colt, Job. 11. 12.

The Tradition of the Church ( i. e. Roman) is the first chief, certain, and
infallible rule from which any thing, may be known to be true and certain to be
held in matters of faith and Christian Religion.

Carranza Jesuita in prima controversia.

The Tradition of the Church is the very rule of Faith and Piety.

Pighius.

The Spirit was before the Scripture, therefore we must be led by the Spirit,
not by the Scripture; the Spirit with the Quaker is the light within.

Smith Prim.

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
We say that the Church is a rule before the Scripture and more known than the
Scripture.

Carranza in secunda Controversia.

The Scriptures are the Traditions of men.

Naylor's love to the lost.

Holy men of God spoke [the Scriptures] as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2
Pet. 1. 21. Traditions of the Church to be preferred before the Scriptures.
Frequent among the Papists. Light without must be guided by light within.

John Story short discovery.

Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures. Mat. 22. 29.

I have hid the w^rd in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Psalm. 119.
11.

The Scripture is to be ruled by the Church, and not the Church by the
Scriptures.

Carranza in secunda Controversia.

The Scripture is a dead Letter, carnal Letter, Ink and Paper.

Parnel Shield of the Truth.

The words that I speak unto you are spirit and life. Joh. 6. 63.

For the Word of God is quick and powerful. Heb. 4. 12.

The Scripture has no voice, it cannot pass judgment viva voce.

Beccanus and Gretserus in Colloquio Ratisbon.

The Scriptures are but dumb Judges. Pighius controversia tertia.

The Scriptures may be burnt.

Frequent.

The Scriptures cannot be broken. John 10. 35.

Write this for a Memorial in a Book, etc. Exodus 17. 14.

All the Scriptures in the common and native Tongues are to be burnt by a Law.
The light within was the rule from the beginning, and not the Scriptures.

Smith Prim.

The Scriptures were a rule so soon as they had a beginning. The Fathers of the
Church were expert in the Traditions of the Church from the beginning, as being
more effectual than the Scriptures. Pighius Jesuita in Colloquio. Dry cavelling
Letter-mongers. Scraping in the Scriptures.

Will. Pen Spirit of Truth, etc. Fisher veluta quaedam, etc.

An eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18 24.

And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days
r^asoned ^ith them out of the Scriptures. Acts 17. 2.

These Lutherans and H^gonots are all for the Letter.

Frequent.

He that prefers the Scriptures before the light within, is blind in darkness.

Parnel Shield of the Truth.

To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because they have no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. He that shall say the
Scripture is to be believed rather than the Church, is to be condemned as a
Heathen, and a Publican, and a S^ranger to Gods people. Noguera libra sec^ndo
de Ecclesia. They are Idolaters that act by Whatever things were written were
They are Heretics, and to be condemned, who Scripture examples, not having
their rule by inspiration immediate from God.

Naylor's love to the lost.

Morning watch.

written for our examples.

Be ye followers of us and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an
example.

take the Scripture for their rule without the authority of the Church. The
Scriptures do not give light nor are they binding any further, than they come
by inspiration, and are recceived in Spirit.

James Naylors love to the lost.

Let us break his bands asunder, and cast his c^rds from us, Psalm. 2.

They that are under the Law, shall be judged by the Law.

The Scripture not being understood is no Scripture.

Lorinus Jesuita in Psalmum 119. 105.

The Scripture without the authority of the Church not binding. The Gospel of
Matthew, no more than the History of Titus Livius.

Surdisius Cardinalis in Catechismo.

No more to be valued than an Aesops Fable.

Papists, Prelates, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, all fly to the
Scriptures.

Morning watch.

To the Law and to the Testimony. Isa. 8. 20. Most of the Heretics, if not
all, take refuge in the Scriptures.

Gretserus Jesuita

All that are unconverted (that is not Quakers) must be shut out of the
Scriptures.

Naylors love, etc. Parn. Shield, etc.

I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they accounted them a
strange thing. The Scriptures are neither necessary, fit, nor profitable for
the common people to read

Harding Jesuita Petrus Lizetus.

Scriptures profaned by their Reading.

All the false Religions this day take their Rise from the Scriptures.

Morning Watch.

The words of the Lord are pure words, Psalm. 12. 6.

Every word of God is pure, Prove. 30. 5.

All the Heretics pretend to the Scriptures, and will seem thence to fetch the
venom of their Heresies.

Hardingus Jesuita. Bellarminus.



PART II.
CHAP. XIII
The Quakers deny, and subvert all the Ordinances of the Gospel.
THe Ordinances of God are those means, Isa. 64 5
commanded some things to be done by us, as means in order to our being so
blessed, and thereto annexed Deus non superstitione coli vult sed pietate. God
will not take superstition but piety for h^s worship. Cicero
many great and gracious promises of being so found of us: it is an affront of
no mean nature to the divine Majesty, and contempt of our own welfare; yea and
implicit denial of our dependence on him, to neglect, much more to deny, most
of all to disdain those his Ordinances, and to cast reproach and scorn upon
them. The eternal God who gives being to all things that are, and to whose
being and blessedness it is beyond the reach of any, or all together to make
the least ^ota or tittle of addition, owes us nothing, and whatever of his free
bounty* he shall please to reach us with, it is not only suitable to Scripture
revelation, but right reason also, that in order thereunto he should choose his
own ways.

And although many enjoy plenty, and prosperity (...). In the way which
pleases his own mind Socrat. in Plato Viz* God will be worshipped. Quicunque
Deum aut Numen non agnoscit, no ^an^um ratione caret sed etiam sensu. Avicen^a.
strangers to his worship; yet God will make them know one day, that they, not
coming into the possession of those good things by the right door of his holy
and religious Ordinances, they are but thieves and robbers. But for men to
attempt, or expect spiritual blessings from God out of his own ways, (so far
as they are capable of understanding what they are, and how to reach them) is
such a direct opposition, and contradiction to a soul, truly addicted and
disposed to spiritual blessings, as would fill up a volume to enumerate its
parts, and express its folly: except you will say, that spiritual blessings
have nothing, to do with a conformity to the will of God, and a holy
complacency, and delight resulting to our souls therein: and that they are made
up of nothing but a self pleasing conceit, and fancy, that we have brought God
to our own bow, and made him a subject and captive to our unbridled lusts; and
so our blessedness has been really Who acknowledges* not God* is void not
only of reason, but sense also.
to consist, not in our conformity to God, but his conformity to us.

Some of these Ordinances of the Lord have been written in natures Book, by the
light of which men have been led to prayer, and some kind of thankful and
reverend acknowledgments of God. More by revelation, which with respect to
Ordinances had three steps: the first what was revealed before Moses: the
second by Moses: the third at the beginning of Christ's administration. By
Gospel Ordinances therefore, I do not intend either those (with their
circumstances) that were known and practiced by the light of nature; nor those
which were under the Mosaical administrations, with their circumstances: but
those Ordinances which were commanded by precept, or prescribed by example in
the New Testament: or which being of natural obligation, are therein formed
with the substantial and additional respect to a Mediator already come in the
flesh, and ascended in his humane nature into heaven.

All those Gospel Ordinances, according to the beggarly Elements, Gal 4. 9 Heb.
9. 10
carnal Ordinances; how aggravated a rebellion must it needs be, to kick
against them, and not endure so easy and so becoming a yoke? beside its rich
and plentiful Incomes.

I shall first prove, that the Quakers deny Gospel Gospel Ordinances: but if I
prove they deny all the things that are truly such, it is as much as can be
reasonably expected. And we, say he, [Christ] has triumphed over the
Ordinances, and blotted them out; and they are George Fox great mystery. (...)
p 16.
not to be touched, and the Saints have Christ in them, who is the end of
outward forms: and thou art deceived who thinks to find the living among the
dead. This is the Quakers chief Apostle, to whom they have all regard, as the
first, among the first three of their Worthies. In the first place he abuses
the Scripture by a grossly false and directly contradictions Exposition. The
Scripture which most agrees with his words is in 2 Col. 14. blotting out the
handwriting of 2 Col. 14. opened.
Ordinances; (he might have added the next words, that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross) but
these words were not for his turn.

The true meaning of the Text is, that Jesus Christ Mosaical Dispensation,
entered his house [his Church] to undertake the administration of its affairs,
which he in all things disposed as was suitable to the gracious nature of the
Redeemer, and that glory of Gods goodness that now shines in the Face of Jesus
Christ. But will this great Prophet G. F. say, that the pure Gospel Ordinances
are against us? contrary to us? or as the Jewish, standing in the way of the
Conversion of the Gentiles through their burthensomness? Will he say, that
Christ by his death abolished his own proper Ordinances? Will he say, that he
nailed them to his Cross before they had a being, diverse of them not being
formed, till by his Apostles after his Resurrection? Will he say, that he
blotted out the Lords Supper, and nailed that to his Cross also, as soon as he
had instituted it? as if he delighted in a fickle humor, as the Quakers; and
to give life to an Ordinance, and within twenty four hours put it to death:
yea, to engage his Disciples thereby to remember his death as often as they did
it, and yet abolish the Ordinance by his death, and so take away all
opportunity of remembering his death thereby.

And that phrase of the Angel, (seeking the living viz. outward forms, they are
not to be touched; and his reason is an excellent one, the Saints have Christ
in them. At another time he will say, Moses, Abraham, and the Old Testament
Saints had Christ in them, and that in their own sense; and yet, I hope, he
will give us leave to believe, that it was their duty to observe Gods forms.
But I wonder not, that they that hold not fast the form of sound words, are so
easily persuaded to let go the forms of sound worship.

Let us hear another.

For this, I say, that the Father has given his Son James Naylo^, Love to
lost. p* 52.. 5.
for a Leader and Guide to all Ages, and into, and out of all forms at his
will, and in his way and time, in every Generation: and therefore it is, that
all who know his will herein, cannot endure that any visible thing should be
set up to limit his leadings in Spirit. Here you have the Tenet, and the
pretended reason of it; all that know his will herein [that is the Quakers]
cannot endure that any visible thing should be set up, etc. But what if Christ
have set them up? If they can prove as strongly that Christ has pulled them
down, and is departed from them, as we can that Christ did set them up, and is
present with, and in them, we will quickly in that point turn Quakers. But
alas! the proof that he has done so, is but this; they limit his leadings in
Spirit, that is, the Quakers fancies. But if he intended the Spirits leadings
in a true sense, it is very strange that the Gospel and Law of Works should be
both sick of one disease: That which was ordained to life, I found to be unto
death. The Ordinances of the Gospel were ordained to enlarge and raise the
spirits of the Saints, but quite contrary they are found to limit, and imprison
the spirit. Sure it must be Satan's spirit, and not Christ's, to whom the
Ordinances are such Chains.

That I may show you the Quakers Babel, let us Isaac Pennington's Light speak
contrary to the Light of G. Fox. When Israel was bent to seek after Isaac
Pennington concerning Unity p. 1.
the Lord, and applied their hearts to wait upon him in fasting and earnest
supplications, wherein my heart has often had the testimony that they were
accepted of him, and had many times the seal of his presence and power among
them; yea my heart did truly unite with, and enjoy the Lord in what was then
given forth, and I can never deny the truth and worth of that Dispensation,
though I know it was swallowed up by the breaking forth of a more lively
Dispensation. This he says he found about the beginning of the late troubles.
How does this agree to G. Fox's nailing all those forms to Christ's Cross at his
death, and then blotting out these Ordinances? P. 38. I deny that God did ever
or will ever reveal himself by any of those things thou call the means of
Grace. C. Atkinson.
But yet I. P. will needs have them swallowed up now, though he gave them leave
to live 1600 years, more mercifully however than G. who would have them stifled
in the womb, or crucified so soon as born. But Pennington is so cruel by that
time he arrives to p. 38. that he says, Such of the people of God -- as do not
follow the Lord perfectly out of the City of abomination, [visible worship] --
but be found in any part thereof when the Lord comes to judge her, the Lord
will not spare her, nor the spirits of his dearest people, who are found there,
etc.

Both by the Scripture, and their own confession, Christ did not long since
dwell in those Ordinances, which we call Gospel Ordinances, and the Quakers,
Babylons forms, and abominations. Until they show us better grounds for Christ's
remove, than the secret witness of the Spirit within them, which we can prove
to be a spirit of delusion, by Scripture, reason, and sense it self, let none
who follow not Christ blindfold, have the worse opinion of Ordinances for all
the Quakers talk. I now come to particulars, and begin with the Gospel Ministry.

They deny and subvert the Ministry of the Gospel, Smite the Shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered. Next to the Scripture, they lay not their batteries
against any thing so much as against the Ministers of the Gospel, and have so
little honesty as to take up all that is to be found on any one, or any that
pretend to be the Ministers of Christ, and cast it in the faces of all, without
distinction, as equally guilty. And for their more particular attempts, those
who are the most faithful and serious, are the objects of their greatest fury.
I shall not blot paper with their railing.

First, They deny all Ministry that has a mediate ^arn^l' s Shield etc. p. 16.
Call to that Office and Employment. And their Call to the Ministry we deny,
which is mediate.

But who can witness an immediate Call from God -- and speak it [the Gospel] as
they are moved by the Holy Ghost -- and such travel from place to place, and
have no certain dwelling place; this Ministry we own and witness. Thou art
corrected by the Scripture, and the Fox mystery etc. p. 48.
Apostle corrects thee, who says, I have not received it of man, nor by man,
and bid others look at Jesus the Author of their Faith. Their writings are
abounding with matter of this nature.

We acknowledge, that all the true Ministers of Quakers pretended immediate
Call, is far from the Apostles, as I have proved at large on the point of
Inspirations, neither are the Ministers of Christ now, Apostles, as they were.
But if we call for the Quakers proof of their immediate Call, hear what
Farnworth says: As for pretenses, Farnworth against Stalham, p. 22.
we do not pretend that we are immediately called, but we witness that we are.
And what is their Witness? their own fancy, and their own say-so; and we
witness, that such Witnesses will carry the Cause no where but in the fools
Court, who the wise man says, believes every word.

And G. Fox's proof is as much to the purpose, not of man, the call of the
Apostle, while we pretend not to be Apostles. And bid others look at Jesus the
Author of their Faith; as if that Text intended a a Faith that they were called
to be Apostles, which speaks of the faith of all believers, who received it by
the mediate Ministry of the Gospel. For being moved by the Holy Ghost, which is
by them made an Essential mark of a true Minister, we allow; but yet affirm,
That those who are moved by the Commands of the Spirit in the Scripture, are
moved by the Holy Ghost, especially when the Authority of God therein prevails
with them.

As for having no certain dwelling place, and leaving William Pen, and others
of their Ministers, for an Answer to it, who have large possessions, and brave
habitations, such as few Ministers* whom they disclaim (especially the poor
Non-Conformists) enjoy, and will not so easily (as Pen's phrase is) be fohb'd
out of them, as they fob others out of the truth of the Gospel.

But indeed will you deny that the Elders that were (...) 6.
ordained in every City by the appointment of Paul, T^ ^. ^.
and by the hand of Titus, had any mediate Call? or those spoken of, Acts 14.
23 And when they had ordained Acts 14. ^3
them Elders in every Church, and had: prayed with fasting, they commended them
to the Lord on whom they believed. If you will not believe these had a mediate
Call, I despair of your believing any thing but what you list.

Another ground of their denying our Ministry is, And the Word is immediate,
and all the Ministers of Christ preach the Fox mystery, ^ c. p 44.
immediate Word, and wait for it, and the outward written words with ink and
paper are mediate: So then, the written Word being preached from, makes a man
no Minister. And of this sort are they that have their W. D p. 30.
preaching to study, and to seek at other men's mouths, or from the letter, but
have it not from the mouth of the Lord. If the Scripture be not the mouth of
the Lord, there is no such thing as Gods mouth. And here is the difference of
the Ministers of the World, and the Parnel' s Shield of the Truth. p. 17.
Ministers of Christ, -- the one of the Letter, the other of the Spirit. -- For
they are mere Deceivers and Witches, bewitch people from the truth, holding
forth the shadow for the substance, and what is the Chaff to the Wheat?

Here is not a bare denial of those to be Christ's Ministers, holy Scriptures?
most horrid doctrined and yet these wretches will tell you, they honor the
Scriptures, and a Scripture Ministry. But this is not all, the tide rises yet
higher. And so he [the Devil] takes Scripture to maintain his kingdom, and this
he delivers by the mouth of Ministers, which he fonds abroad to deceive the
Nations, leading people in blindness, etc. These words are plain, and no
parable; therefore I leave you to behold, without a glass, the vileness of
these misleaders.

I have already proved, that not only we ought, etc. O but there is another
indictment against us, we are not infallible. How can ye be Fox Mystery, etc.
p. 72.
Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the Letter, if ye not infallible? There is
none but God alone absolutely infallibly. And for certainty of what we teach,
we dare weigh with the Quakers at any time. But sure I am, that I never met
with one of their Teachers yet, in Writing or otherwise, but I found him more
than fallible, even foolish, contradicting the Spirit of God speaking by the
Scripture, contrary to the clearest reason, and themselves also.

But more than all this, We are Hirelings, preach for Hire, and take Hire for
preaching. And a main question for a scrutiny into the truth of our Ministry
is, Whether is your Gospel free, and without Charge; yea Fruits of a Fast. p.
21.
or nay? This is the nail they find will drive: People love a Cheap Gospel,
they that will sell them such a one shall buy their souls into the bargain, and
vassalize their understandings to their most corrupt dictates.

To preach for Hire we call a Vile iniquity, to receive Hire for preaching we
dare not condemn: because Christ has said, The labourer is worthy of his 10
Luke. 7. 2 Cor. 11 8.
hire. And the Apostle said, He took wages of other Churches to serve them [the
Corinthians;] It is ordained, 1 Cor 9. 14.
that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And so has the
Lord ordained. So that a Ministers maintenance for preaching the Gospel, is
Gods Ordinance. The Apostle exhorts Timothy, To give himself to the work of
the Ministry, as it is the duty of every one-ordinarily employed therein. And
is God and Christ a hard Master, to oblige his Ministers to give up themselves
to that work, and let them and theirs starve for it?

But moreover, you may know (if you please) that there are thousands this day
in England, who

Another objection is, we study for our Sermons. Timothy (who had excellent 2 Timothy 2. 15
gifts, and was brought up from a child in the holy Scripture) study to show
thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of truth. Then it seems it is no idle task to preach like a
workman, and divide the Word of truth aright, and that we may be approved to
God, and free from shame among men, we must study.

But that which turns us all off hand-smooth is, That till we are taught by the
light within immediately, we cannot speak one word of truth, but all lies,
though the matter we deliver be the highest truth. And all be in the Satanical
delusions, Fox great mystery, p. 5. p. 62.
that be not in the immediate teachings from the Spirit. But the greatest
professors upon the earth are there of the Devil, that speaks the words of
truth, but not as they are in it; as so says Christ to the Jews, they were of
their Father the Devil, they speak of themselves -- they speak of themselves as
the Devil does, but abide not in the truth, but a liar from the beginning. The
Devil speaks a lie from himself, that is a truth, for no body need teach the
Devil to lie. But how will it follow, that whatever any man speaks of himself
is a lie? then it seems for a man to be first in telling any thing, true or
false, it is a lie, whereas we use most to suspect the truth of that which comes
by a second, or third hand, or more: but the conclusion is, what we have not by
immediate inspiration, and teach it, we speak it of our selves, and therefore
are devilish liars.

The learned Fisher will help the Fox at a dead Velata quaedam revelata, p. 7.
Jer. 5. 2.
lift, and piece his tale. And to such wise sayers and knowers as these -- God
says, though ye say God lives, yet as I live ye swear falsely; and why falsely?
was not that a truth that God lives? but not a truth truly testified unto by
them (^ any more than what is testified in foro hominum, in men's Courts, by
such as being not eye witnesses thereof, have it only by hearsay from others)
because they witnessed to it but in stolen words.

Here is then the proof, that we speak more than we know; and therefore lie.
This is indeed pretty near a lie; but that they who live in the light of the
Creation, and read, and believe, and know the Scripture to be the Word, or the
Words of God, and affirming no nicer a truth, than that God lives, should lie;
because they know it not by immediate Inspiration, is very strange: He that
lives, may know from thence that God lives, who holds every soul in life that
lives.

But the meaning of the Text may be (and I will trust the sober Readers
judgment to decide it betwixt us) that they did not believe the Lord lived, and
swearing what they thought untrue, or doubted of, they therein swear falsely, or
that they dared to swear to a falsehood, and yet abuse the Name and Ordinance of
God to confirm it. But I desire those who give credit to such Teachers as
infallible, and inspired immediately from God, to try by the instance I am now
upon, whether we are not likely to speak more rightly concerning God from the
Scripture, than their Teachers without book? In the Quotation of this Text,
Fisher has falsified (beside his Exposition) in three plain cases, for they
say, he writes ye say, for the Lord lives, God lives; there is both taking away
a word, and changing another, and makes God swear too, where there is not a
word or tittle of it in the Text, and so adds to the Word of the Lord these
words, yet as I live. This is ordinary from these inspired Teachers, and to
tell us God says so, lest we should take them to be his own words, adds to the
boldness of the perverting the Scripture. I could write a Catalogue of a
thousand such faults in the Quakers citing of Scripture, some adding, some
leaving a word or two out through carelessness, or wilfulness. I have, from what
is here evident, reason to say to you, as the Apostle to the Galatians, O
foolish [Quakers] who has bewitched you? Certainly Gal 3 1.
it must be a strong delusion that thus blinds you; He feeds on ashes, a
deceived heart has turned him aside, Isa. 44. 20.
that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand?

The next Ordinance I shall prove them to deny is, a Gospel Church. And the
Church so gathered into Naylor love to the lost. p. 17.
God, is the Pillar and ground of truth, where the Spirit alone is Teacher. The
Gospel Church is a Church which has other Teachers, and not the Spirit alone;
but such a Church is not James Naylor's, nor the Quakers. The Church wherein
the Apostles were, sure had some Teachers beside the Spirit; whereas the
Apostles gave themselves to preaching of the Word. And Elders were ordained in
every (particular) Acts 14. 23 1 Cor. 4. 17. 1 Cor 12. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Church. As I teach in every Church. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers. The Elders are exhorted to feed
the Flock of Christ which is among you.

Priest (that is the Minister) he brings in, saying, We utterly deny all their
ways and doctrines, who exclude Fox great mystery. p. 32.
all teachings of man. Answ. Contrary to the Prophets, who bid people cease
from man, whose breath was in their nostrils; a Text hugely to the purpose. But
most will conclude, that these Authors do not speak the minds of the Quakers,
for that they have more Teachers than all others. Men-Ministers,
Women-Ministers, and any one of them, when there is a motion to it.

It is confessed, that in point of fact it is so; but it Quakers. But Satan is
cunning, and can give a dispensation, where it may serve so greatly to the
promoting of his Kingdom. Sometimes they have silent meetings, as is known to
most; then they say they attend to the Teacher within, which is sufficient, and
by which they find more comfort often, than when there is speaking.

But at a Meeting, not far from my dwelling, there There declared, not a man,
but a woman, (that is ordinary) not an English woman, but a Dutch woman, (that
is not so frequent) not in English, but in Dutch, this was orderly, according
to the Popish Mass, and prayers in an unknown tongue to the people. But the
strangest thing of all was, he told me, that although not one of them
understood Dutch, nor could the Dutch woman interpret into English (at least
she did not) they knew she spoke by the Spirit. I asked him how? He told me,
because they all found refreshings. So have children many a time at
Puppet-plays. What a pass are these people come to, who yet deny all Teachings
by man?

But that you may not doubt the truth of the story, George Whitehead, the
Quakers Champion, I did before all the Audience charge them with this thing, my
Informer a Quaker being there, and many more Quakers who were at that Meeting:
but none dared to deny one word of the Charge, only George Whitehead said, it
may be there was some body there that understood Dutch.

But what have they to say, think you, to this contradiction of their
Principles in Teaching? Why, it is not they, but the Man Christ, or the Light,
or the Spirit that teaches; and if such light replies will not serve turn, you
may go somewhere else to be satisfied for them. But beyond all contradiction,
if the Churches, and Churches mentioned, and owned in the New Testament, be
Gospel Churches, the Quakers deny a Gospel Church; for all of them had men who
taught them, at least they did not deny any such helps.

But we will produce a testimony or two more, to see For the Church Parnel
Shield of the truth, p. 34.
is but one, and the Temple of God we own, which is at new Jerusalem, the City
of the living God. I have read of the Church at Jerusalem, before it was
destroyed by the Romans, and of the Churches at Corinth, in Thessalonica;
Ephesus; and many places more. And I have read of the Church called Jerusalem,
which is above, and the City of the living God; but never yet of the Church
which is at new Jerusalem: this is none of the Churches the Apostles ever
built, or set in order. But let it pass as a rumor till farther confirmation.

The holy Ghost made the Officers of the Church Overse^rs Great mystery. etc. p
8.
-- the Overseers to be invisible, for they saw with an invisible eye, and so
they was in the Spirit, which is invisible, and not in the flesh, Strange
Officers to as strange a Church.

Quest. Which is the fold of the sheep? Answ. The Isaac Penningtons Questions,
p. 49.
wisdom, life, and power of the Father, even the same that is the shepherd.

Object. Is not the Church the fold? Answ. This in the Church, or the Church in
this, is the fold; but not out of this.

Seeing this is the best account we can get, I must William Smith, who tells
us, That all we do according to Scripture patterns, is but building of Babylon,
and that I am sure is not Zi^n: and this is the scope of many pages in his
Morning Watch. Morning watch.
But I have proved them to deny all forms and visible things in Religion and
worship, upon the general head; but the Gospel Church is a form. In whom all
the building is fitly framed. I am sure that is a strange Ephesians 2. 21.
building without any form; but to be framed and and formed is one and the same
thing with being put into a form. For though I be absent in the flesh, Col. 2.
5, 19.
yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the
stedfastness of your faith in Christ. And not holding the head, from which (not
in which only) all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered
and knit together, increases with the increase of God.

So that a Gospel Church is a number (for (...) is a name of many gathered
together) united according to Christ's from, first to him, then one to another,
for mutual edification in the things of God. But this the Quakers utterly deny.

CHAP. XIV.
They deny the Ordinance of hearing the Word preached.
THey will allow a hearing the Word preached, G. For) we must not hear man; for
the Prophets bid, Cease from man. But having already so largely proved their
tenet to be, That only the light within must be attended to, I need not do the
same thing over and over* I will give you a Scripture or two to strengthen you
against this fancy-full teacher, the light within. And how shall they preach
except they be sent? as it is written, Romans 10. 15, 18.
How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the G^spel of peace? etc. But,
I say, have they not heard? yea verily, their sound went into all the earth,
and their words unto the ends of the world. Here are more preachers than one,
and these Texts explain what is meant by the word, nigh thee, in the 8th verse,
which the Quakers lay as a strong Foundation for their light within. This Word
must be heard, or they could not believe; and it could not preach it self, for
they could not hear without a Preacher; and these Preachers could not be the
Word Christ, for they had feet, which Christ, as within Believers, Christ as
the Eternal God, has not; and the Preachers were more than one, whereas Christ
the Word is but one, as appears by the Relatives plural, they, them, theirs.

But now I am upon the point of hearing the Word, Quakers comes into my mind,
and it is worth the revealing.

That is this: They hold it is the light that preaches, the light that is
preached, the light that hears or is preached to; and so the light, which with
them is God, Father, Son, and Spirit, is all concerned in the Gospel, and man
nothing at all, for it is the light that does all also. I think when I have
proved this, I have discovered that which will render the Quakers the most
absurd and blasphemous, that ever undertook to speak with man's voice.

Quest. Is there something of God in my conscience, Smith Prim. p. 2.
that will give me the knowledge of him? Answ. There is not any thing else that
can do it.

And man cannot know him [God] by any other way, Smith Cat. p. 12.
but by the manifestation of his light within him.

Now I shall prove, that the light is the main Quakers Tenets. Mind the light
of God which has convinced you.

And this is the meaning of our Doctrine, to bring people to the everlasting
Word of God in themselves.

And that this light within is also preached to, and the only Auditor of the
Doctrines which the Quakers say are preached, and taught by the light, is
proved by these instances. To the light of God in all your consciences I speak,
which is one in all. So I desire that Parnel' s Shield of the Truth, Epistle.
p. 42. Fox great mystery, etc. p. 15.
you may mind the light of God, to which I speak, which is my witness. Priest.
There is nothing in man to be spoken to, but man. Answ. How then ministered the
Apostle to the Spirit? And Christ spoke to the Spirits in prison: And Timothy
was to stir up the gift that was in him.

I must not ravel into these Texts now, as brought in by Fox; I shall say more
of it in the following 1 Pet 3. 19 opened.
pages* only take notice, that these Spirits were the souls of those men (and
so a part of them) with whom the Spirit of God did strive before the Flood, but
are now (as the Devils) under the irreversible sentence of damnation, which is
in part already executed on them. Over and above, George Fox is both out of the
humility, and the meekness, (as they phrase it) and out of the knowledge of
himself, and out of his wits also, in saying, That there is a proof to thee,
that the Quakers are sent of God, who speak to thee of the Fox great mystery. p
64.. 4.
Scriptures right as they are.

I am lastly to show you by good proof, that the light within is the obedient
subject also, to its own absolute and infallible dictates; and then I have
discharged a very fair Province. Now is the life, the faith, the obedience of
the Son, the thing which is of value Pennington quest. ^26.
in us. So that their obedience is the obedience of the Son, alias the light in
them; which is all one with the light in me obeys. And upon this conceit it is,
that they say they are saved by the righteousness of Christ, because they
account all the righteousness done by them, to be the pure and unmixt acts of
the light within.

We are accused that we judge people. Answ. Where Parnel Shield of the truth,
p. 3.
Christ rules in his Saints he judges, as Paul said, It is no more I, but
Christ in me. I forbear here to remark his forging of Scripture, or making Gods
stream to turn the Devils Mill: But, right or wrong (...) plain he would have
you believe, it is not their act, but Christ's act. And if you enquire of any of
them, (that have drunk in their principles, and are not Novice- Quakers)
whether any act of their obedience to the light, be their obedience? they will
answer, no, no, it is the obedience of Christ; the obedience is of the light.

The Quakers disown Gospel-Prayer.

I take Gospel Prayer to be the souls uttering its Quakers disown.

That they use not prayer (audibly at least) with After this manner Mat. 6. 9.
Luke 11. 2.
pray ye, etc. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. And in both, one Petition
is, Give us this day our daily bread; wherein two things are implied: First,
Prayer by more than one; Our Father give us. Secondly, Family Prayer; for that
the whole Family sharing in common in the plenty or scarcity of provision,
(especially for the Belly, which is the great spender) they are concerned to
put up their joint supplications to God for daily bread, and that daily; which
might have made a third Note, viz. That although we may pray every prayer we
offer up to the Lord, for provision to our lives end; yet we are to pray for it
every day and especially for the provision of the present day* But this the
Quakers wholly disuse, as a con(...) (...)tible form.

That they crave not Gods blessing, nor express And Jesus took the loaves, and
John 6, 9. Mark 6, 41. Acts 27, 35,
when he had given thanks, he distributed, etc. And when he had taken the five
loaves, and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, etc. So Paul,
He took bread, and gave thanks to God in the presence of them all; and when he
had broke it, he began to eat, etc.

All that ever I could learn of the Quakers acknowledgment

He lo^ked up to heaven; which implies, he did it for example sake at least,
(though all the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily) express the Divine
Being (especially, and in his more glorious Manifestations) to be above, or
beyond the visible boundaries of this little World. And as it is against
Christ's example, so against somewhat more than a Gospelprecept: For every
Creature of God is good, and nothing 1 Timothy, 4. ^. 5.
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by
the Word of God, and Prayer. So tha^ to omit this duty (which therefore Paul
would not when in a storm, and the company in a consternation w^^h s^ar of
death) renders the Creature no good to us, as being unsanctified by God.

But rather than this shall pass for a proof of what we assert, and for a
rebuke to the Quakers spirit of disobedience, James Naylor will engage his
Infallibility Naylor love to the lost. p. 57.
to bring them off clear. But where the pure is not (viz. the light) all things
are defiled, when they are not sanctified by the Word, and Prayer, and
therefore are to be received in fear, and therein remembering his death till he
come, who is the Word, and Prayer. And now soul take thine ease, eat and drink;
for if thou have the Quakers light within thee, thou need not frame thy self
to the serious employment of Prayer, and Thanksgiving at Meals; for the light
within (the Quakers only Christ) is not only the word that commands prayer, but
prayer also in the abstract; and they that have that, cannot at any time be
without prayer, though they are altogether silent.

They also deny public Ministerial prayer: for although ^. 5.
they have some who utter Petitions, they do it (as I am informed) always in
the first person singular, I pray thee, not We pray thee. So that although they
may pray for others, they pray not with them as their mouth, which is contrary
to Christ's Directory, and the Communion of Saints in the Ordinances of the
Gospel. And if uncontrolled Fame fa^l not, they give this reason for it, That
they both pray and declare for the sakes of others, not their own, who are
obedient to the light* for they need neither.

But there are three things that fully prove their So the same Wisdom may deny
Smith Cat p. 10^.
the prescribed way, as betng formal, and may invent something instead of it,
in a higher mystery of iniquity; and though they may not speak in such formal
words composed, yet in the same wisdom their words are formal: they can set
their own time to begin and end, and when they will they can utter words, and
when they will they can be silent; and this is the unclean part which offers to
God, which he does not accept, etc. What the wisdom is, intended by the Author,
you shall see by and by: but the main formality inveighed against is keeping of
set-times; but they may forgive us this error, it being so well known, that
they have set-times, and exceed their ordinary hours no more than we. And the
wisdom of the flesh is, that we do it in our own wills. If they mean not in
obedience to the will of God, it is more then they know: if it be according to
the will of God, and our wills comply with that, it is so much the better, for
God likes no service against, nor without the will. To choose the things that
please God, pleases God very well. But that conceived prayer (as such) should
be with iniquity, a mystery of iniquity, and that to so high a degree, is a
bold charge. It is well known, that many of them, when they come into our
Congregations, and are present when the minister is at prayer, they will sit
all Isa. 56. 4
the while in the midst, with their Hats on their heads, in contempt, which I
my self have experienced more than once.

Secondly, Owning no prayers that is not by immediate But as every creature is
moved by the Spirit Naylor Love to lost p. 13.
of the living God, who is that Spirit who will be served with his own alone,
not with any thing in man, which is come in since the fall; so the
imaginations, thinkings, and c^nceivings Smith Cat. p. 100.
are shut out. So all must come to the Spirit of God, by the Spirit to be
ordered, and cease from their own word, and from their own time, and learn to
be silent till the Spirit give them utterance.

That we ought to pray in the Spirit, and with the Spirit, is far from us to
deny: but he that prays according to the mind of the Spirit of God revealed in
the Scripture, (which is the Spirits Directory) and who, by the commands,
exhortations, and promises therein contained, is moved to pray: he prays in the
Spirit, and with the Spirit, although he have no immediate motions from the
Divine Being. He that obeys Gods commands in his written Word, does his duty,
and is through Christ accepted of him. But least you should mistake the Quakers
meaning of the phrase, traditions of men, take notice, That they hold the
written Word, and what is therein contained as its sense, to be but the
traditions of men, except it come to us by immediate inspiration, as to the
Prophets and Apostles, and not at second hand; which I have already proved, and
therefore need not do it over again.

By what I have here produced, you may learn, That all be done, as if man in
his faculties of conceiving, knowing, were not Gods? nor to be concerned in his
worship? Certainly, if nothing of man, soul or body, be active therein, man
does not worship God, nor pray at all, and so God worships himself; which is
the true result of the Quakers Tenets.

But let us consider a Text or two out of the Word Job 23. 4.
of God. I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.
The word Order, in the Heb. fignifies a marshalling his words. Prayer is not
only a Petition, but a humble pleading, wrestling with God: and sure there was
somewhat of Job in ordering his cause and he used his spiritual skill in it:
It Is rendered by Arias Montanus, disponerem, I would dispose my cause. Give ear
to my words, O Lord. What Psalm, 5, 1. 1 Cor, 14, 15.
is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also, etc. Here is Paul's will in prayer, I will: and here is
Paul's understanding also exercised in prayer, verse. 15. But my understanding
is unfruitful; which he blames as a companion of prayer, that being supposed.
Thus I have proved the Quakers denying Gospel-prayer in this respect above
mentioned, and reproved their Anti-Gospel-notions by the Scriptures.

Lastly, They own no prayer but what is by the light, and in the light within.
And the prayers of Smith Cat. p. 112.
such only are accepted, and not the prayers of those who think to be heard for
their much babbling, who have many words, but not in the life. So that their
prayers only are acceptable who pray in the life, (that is, with the Quakers,
by the motions of their light within) and although we are far from thinking to
be heard, for the sake of much better things than much babbling; yet all the
words of prayer that are not qualified by their principle, the light within, is
in their account but babbling.

For it is truth in the inward parts he seeks for, wherein Naylor Love to lost
p. 16.
none of you can worship, who know not the living Word in your hearts, to keep
them up to God in your worship; and that worship which is not in the will of
God, is the worshipping of Devils.

If you ask any of them, What is the truth in the inward parts? They will not
answer, it is sincerity, meanings suitable to our expressions, and appearances;
but it is Christ the light within, who is the truth. And for knowing the living
Word; it is of the same sense, it is all but the light within every man, the
Quakers Christ. And for the Will of God, that is nothing but the immediate life
and motions of the light within. I have said enough out of their Writings to
prove these things, neither will they deny them: but Naylor tells you (and it
is not for any Quaker to resist the Spirit by which he spoke) that worship not
thus qualified, is the worshipping of Devils.

It may be some of the Quakers, though they know in their consciences that I
speak but the very truth of their Tenets and Notions, will say, I put my
meanings to their words: but if they will but bate me speaking from their light
within, which they hold necessary to qualify a man to speak truly, I dare
undertake to expound, according to their meaning, their ill-meant phrases, as
well as the most of them, and their mystery is none to me at all. And although
they talk of praying in the Name of Christ, yet as Naylor phrases it, That is
done in the Name of Christ, which is done in his Light and Power. But when all
is done, this Christ, and Name, and Light, and Power, is but the light within,
and its teachings and motions.

It is to me reported on all hands, that they never pray in the Name of Christ
as their Mediator; much less then do they pray to God, in, or in the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary; or of that one Mediator between God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus; even that Jesus who was Crucified at Jerusalem
between two Thieves, above 1600 years since. I have put this to many of them,
and they denied not this Charge; neither can I see how they can pray to the
Father in the Name of Christ, seeing God the Father, and Christ (with them)
admit of no distinction; and for the Man Christ that was born of Mary, they
have nothing to do with him. The Apostle says, A Mediator is not of one, but
God is one. And whoever they are that deny and disown prayer in the Name of
Christ, are far from owning the Gospel-Ordinance of prayer.

Reading the Scriptures, and Meditation, which are Gospel Ordinances,

I need not tell you of the contempt they put upon the Scripture as a dead
Letter, the carnal Letter; and on those who attend to it, as dry
Letter-mongers. Take only one instance of William Pens; But all must W. P.
Spirit of truth.
be as unlearned as from their first Birth, Education, and Traditional read
knowledge, as he is unmanned; that is, again become a little child, before the
secrets of Gods work come to be made known. And Fisher calls studying the
Scripture, scraping in the Scripture. I wonder wherefore God ordered and
commanded them to be written, if they are not to be read and studied?

The Spirit of Christ within, is the end of the Tables, Great mystery, p. 32.
William Deusbuty Return, p. 7.
Law, Works, and Books, and the Law is now in the heart. Whatever thou be,
whether a Teacher of others, or a Professor of what thou comprehends to be
truth from the Letter of the Scripture, under what form, name, or title soever
thou be, thou art a dead man, and a dead woman, and the wrath of God abides on
thee, though thou see it not, Romans 7. 9. Miserable man! that talks at this
rate, and will father it on the Scripture too, and such a one as is directly
against him. But we have had enough of this smoke.

I shall say somewhat of their abundant scorn of

The Ordinances I have hitherto considered in particular, are called Moral,
from their natural obligation, although that substantial and Essential part,
and qualification of them, their respect to a Mediator, will require a
denomination more Evangelical, and without which we cannot call them Gospel, or
Christian-Ordinances. Those two Gospel Ordinances I come now to consider, are
purely and perfectly positive, and depend merely upon Divinely-revealed
Institution, without which they had never come within our notice, nor had they
been any way obliging to us.

Yet such is the Sanction that the Lord has put upon Cain and Abel: Yea, Adam
in his state of Innocence, (who then needed not any indication of Moral duties,
beyond what was within the reach of his natural, entire, and uncorrupted light,
and innate to his perfect frame, and holy disposition) had the obligation of a
positive duty from God, in the matter of the Tree in the midst of the Garden.
And to me the main ground of it was, that the absolute Sovereignty of the
Creator might be acknowledged, and man might learn to render obedience to God,
not only because the matter of it is just in its self, and would be so if God
had never explicitly commanded it, but also because it is the Will of God;
yea, where his Will obliges singly, without the respect of natural and
unchangeable Equity.

And God has so expressed his jealousy over this ^. 3.
right of his, that when sins against not only natural light, but superadded
Precepts to confirm and strengthen its doubtfulness and decays, have been
passed by without any special expressions of his provocations, sins committed
against his positive Laws, have been avenged with a high hand. Adam's and Eve's
transgression was against an Institution and positive Law, the Commission of
which so stirred up the displeasure of God, that he banished them out of
Paradise, and imposed that Curse, under which the World groans to this day. And
it is not below our notice, that although they were capable of sinning against
God in many other respects, yet God affixes the direful penalty to this
positive Law: In the day that thou 2, Gen, 17.
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

The case of Nadab and Ahihu, when God bare Vzzah was smitten, and died on the
spot, when he miscarried so little, as in sinning against a positive Law, by
putting forth his hand to save the Ark, the intention of it being good and
commendable. And as under the Old so under the New-Testament-Dispensation, God
has not left his positive Laws without the fence of his special displeasure
witnessed against the contemners and abusers of them: For this cause many are
weak and sickly 1, Cor, 11, 30,
among you, and many sleep; that is, are dead, turned into the grave. This was
inflicted on them for their disorder at the Lords Supper: although (especially
among the Corinthians) we read of many great sins against Moral Precepts, yet
the Spirit of God assigns not them, but this breach as the cause.

And if we consider the great inclination of man,

I shall begin with Baptism, it being the first in order of the two, both in
its Institution and Practice. The Quakers deny Water Baptism, to be now an
Ordinance or Christ. The Baptism we own, which Parnel' s Shield of the Truth,
p. 11.
is the Baptism of Christ with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, but we deny all
other. Here is Water Baptism plainly denied. But this will not serve the turn,
it must be stigmatized also, with all those who ever so conscientiously and
regularly practice it. And now I p. 12.
see the other [Water-Baptism] to be formal imitation, and the invention of
man, and so a mere delusion, and all are Heathens, and no Christians, who
cannot witness this Baptism, [the Baptism of the Quakers spirit of Delusion]
who can witness this, denies all other. Farnsworth against S^alham.


Your Brain-imaginations we deny.

Methinks they who have read the Scripture, should not call Water Baptism the
invention of men, that is too palpable an untruth; though to call it Quakers as
this, will call me not only injurious, but a Blasphemer also, for saying and
proving they are no Christians. But lies and confidence with them are
prerogativ'd things, while Truth must beg, and have nothing but by their good
leave and grace, and then it may starve, or flee where the Quakers rule the
roast.

They [Baptism, Bread, and Wine] rose from the Smith prim. p. 39.
Popes invention; and the whole practice of those things, as they use them, had
their institution from the Pope, etc. Without doubt the light within is
wonderfully learned in History, and (as some of the Quakers write) does declare
to them the Creation, the Fall, and what not, without the Scripture? This
regardful Prophet can tell you, that Baptism rose from the It was that which by
the Pope and Popish affected Priests was ordained, and by such it is upheld to
this day. Higgins Warning. p. 5.. 4. Parnel Shield of the truth. p. 11.
Pope, yea, and the Wine in the Sacrament too, which the Pope indeed took away
from the Laity, but never instituted it. And this Author, as I have before
cited him, tells the world, we call the Latin the Original: his mind is all on
Rome, and there I Will leave him. Yet that I may not imitate the Quakers, who
will not consider the weightiest reasons, and clearest against their Tenets, I
shall weigh theirs truly and justly, before I determine this point.

They who would have one Baptism inward, another outward, would have two
Baptisms, when the Scripture says, the Baptism is but one. I must tell him, by
the way, that he tells an untruth wilfully, and what that is he could tell
another. He uses (or rather abuses) the words of the Apostle just before
repeated, One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; and there he adds his but, which
the Text has not. And here the Scripture says, the Baptism is but one; let
him find such a Scripture, and I will be bound to turn Quaker: But there being
no such, I am sure he has not the Spirit of God, and is by it infallibly
guided, who thus forges Scripture. But to the Objection, take notice, that
Water Baptism is the sign, the Baptism of the Spirit the main thing (but not
all) signified: now to have the thing signifying, and the thing signified,
called by the same name, does not make them to be two of that name, no more
than there were two new Covenants, because the matter contained in the Covenant
is called the Covenant, Heb. 8. 10. And Circumcision, the sign of the Covenant,
is called the Covenant also, Genesis 17. 13. He that is born in thy house, and he
that is bought with thy money, must need be circumcised, and my Covenant shall
be in your flesh for an everlasting Covenant.

Moreover, Baptism with water is Baptism in a proper sense, Baptism of or with
the Spirit, but Analogically so called, as having in it something a likeness
to, or proportion with it. (...) from (...), signifies washing with water,
dipping into water properly; that of the Spirit, washing the soul but
improperly, for freeing it from sinful pollutions. Therefore this Objection is
a mere fancy, and they that will contemn the Deeds and Seal, because they are
Paper, and Ink, and Wax, and cast them away, may lose Land and all for their
contempt, and then they will pay for, and repent of their folly.

Another ground for denying it is, it was not laid Naylor Love to the lost. p.
on the Apostle of necessity, but as they found it of service, or dis-service.
This is to be understood only of Paul, who in his Call (which was out of due
time, and in an extraordinary manner) had not this of Baptizing mentioned, as
the rest had: therefore he said, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach
the 1 Cor. 1. 17
Gospel: Yet he did baptize, therefore it was an Ordinance; and that he
baptized so few in that Country, it was rather Providential than designed by
Paul: for he being so famous an Instrument of converting the Gentiles, they
began to cry him up as if he had not been Christ's Minister, but rather his
Competitor; and therefore he thanks God he baptized no more, lest they should
have said he baptized in his own name. But though he did not baptize, there
might be enough beside for that work; and we read not of one that omitted it,
when they understood of the Ordinance, and had any to administer it to them.

Object. It was to confer the Holy Ghost.

That was but one consequence, but not what Baptism* signified: Beside, the
giving the Holy Ghost was of a miraculous nature for the Confirmation of the
Disciples in the newness of the Christian Religion, and conviction of others:
and the friends of Cornelius had the Holy Ghost before Baptism.

Object. None were called to baptize, but those that were sent to preach to all
Nations.

Answ. Ananias baptized Paul, yet was not so sent. The ends of Baptism, which
was a sign and seal of what interest they had in Christ, and of Regeneration,
and the righteousness of Faith remain; and therefore that remains to be
dispensed by the ordinary and mediate Officers of the Church, who are Stewards
of the Mysteries of God, of which this is one. It being also a Cognizance of
Christianity, there is the same reason for it, and it is in vain to talk of
Ordinances abolished, without some proof, when, and why they are so. Naylor
says, Paul preached the Love to lost p. 41.
Baptism of the Spirit in its stead. Let that be proved, and something is said.

But John Higgins says, That Water Baptism was Warning, etc. p. 5.
but the administration of John, is known and confessed. I say no more to him,
but I perceive he is but little acquainted with Confessions.

I must bring in the sentence of the great Patriarch Geat mystery of great
Whore. p. 65.. 8.
George Fox to decide all; for, after his words, it is not fit any of his
inferiors should speak again: Where was Matthew, or Mark, or Luke, or John
baptized? and many more which the Apostle Paul thanked God he had not baptized?
Baptizing is making Disciples to the Lord Jesus, and baptizing them into his
Name, that is, his Power; -- but he [Paul] told of the Spirits Baptism, and
brought the Saints off from the things that are seen; and Water is seen, and
its Baptism.

Strange arguments! as if the Command, and abundant instances of its practice
had no force, unless we have an account where every Believer was baptized; and
because Paul did not baptize all, therefore they were not baptized at all. But
for Baptism being a making Disciples, if it be understood of Water Baptism, it
will be no small friend to Infant Baptism: if of the Baptism of the Spirit, I
suppose George Fox will eat his words again, and acknowledge that the Apostles
had not power to bestow the Spirit of God on persons, and make them new
Creatures, that was the mistake of Simon Magus, and now of George Fox.

But the last argument is such an one as never offered Quakers light (which
they say is Almighty) had the management of it, and so may make an effectual
instrument of any thing. Paul brought the Saints off from the things that are
seen, and Water is seen, and its Baptism. He 2 Cor. 4. 18.
that shall look into the Text to which his words refer, will admire his
sharp-piercing Genius, or his non-such ignorance, that could find such a
meaning of that Text, or tell the world it was there. But if all that is seen
must be cast away and rejected, I counsel the Quakers not to be such eager
pursuers of the world, and that I dare ground upon the Text: But (above all) to
reject their proud dreaming intolerable notions, the ignorance and delusion of
which is so gross, that it is not only seen, but may be felt also. But for all
this, the Quakers will affirm they own Baptism, and believe that George Fox is
sent of God, because he speaks of the Scripture right as they are.

The Quakers disown the Ordinance of the Lords Supper,

As of Baptism, so of the Lords Supper; they will say they own it, (at least
many of them) but they call quite another thing by that name, which is the way
they have to delude people in all other matters of the 1 Cor. 11. 23.
Christian Religion. If what the Apostle Paul says he received of the Lord, 1
Cor. 11. 23. do express the true Lords Supper, the Quakers deny it.

Feeding upon the husk and shadow, which is carnal. Parnel Shield of the truth,
p. 13.
For the bread which the World [all that are not Quakers] breaks, is natural
and carnal -- so also the Cup which they drink; and here is no communion but
natural, outward, and carnal.

They [Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper] are Smith prim p. 39.
the Popes invention. -- The Priest gives it to the people, and tells them, it
is the Blood of Christ which is shed for them, when it is Wine, and not Blood.
I will not trouble thee with so unnecessary a thing, as a reply to these silly
Cavils, and plain contradictions to the Scripture.

The main Objection the Quakers have against this That Christ is come, and his
Disciples were to do it in remembrance of him till he was come; but Christ is
come in the Spirit to them, and therefore this Precept does not bind them. But
who would think the Spirit, or Christ in the Spirit, was not come (either in
shedding it abroad miraculously, as in the 2 Acts) or as a Sanctifier (in the
hearts of his people) when the Disciples, and whole Church at Jerusalem, were
so frequent in this Ordinance; and when the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians,
The 1 Cor. 1^. 16.
Bread which we break, etc. But that none must be engaged by this Ordinance,
but those to whom Christ was not come by a Spirit of Sanctification, is
exceeding gross: For whereas the Ordinance is for the Saints, this renders it
to be peculiar to those in a state of sin, and unconverted to Christ; and they
are not ashamed to own it to be so.

Which was the thing Christ in tender love to his Disciples, Naylor love to the
lost. p. 58.
at his departure, warned them on, knowing that their nature would draw to the
Earth-ward, not yet being changed, nor having Christ born in them to keep them;
and for all this Warning, and leaving this as a Sign, etc. If Christ born in
the soul, be not till the light within be obeyed as Christ the Son of the
living God, we doubt not the truth of Nailor's speech: and that the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ were all strangers to such a Conversion.

Before I part with this Subject, it will not be unmeet

But if you eat in remembrance of him, and so come to die to that which slew
him, then do you show the Lords p. 57. Naylor Love to the lost.
death till he come; and when he comes, he shall not find you eating and
drinking with the drunken, etc. So that mortification to sin (taken in the best
sense) is with him the Lords Supper; but in his own sense, it is a dying to all
that does not obey the Christ of the Quakers, [The light within.]

At another turn it is somewhat else, and quite p. 56.
contrary: Which all know who come to his Supper, where the Father and the Son
are come in, and sup with the Creature, which all the Imitators and Observers
of times are ignorant of, whose contention is about outsides. In the words
cited before, it was a Fast, a Popish cruciating Fast: But this last cited a
Feast, a Spiritual Feast; and the Feast is constituted of the coming of the
Father and the Son supping with the Creature: whereas before his mind was, that
when Christ comes, the Supper is ended; but now it is no other but Christ
himself present. But the strangest Supper of the Lord is expressed by the same
Author, in these P. 54.
words: And this was to be done at all seasons, when they eat and drink; in
their eating and drinking they were to do it to the Lord, and therein to have
Communion with his Body and Blood; -- yea, when they were to eat with Gentiles,
they were to partake of the Table of the Lord, as is plain, 1 Cor. 10.

Thus has the Lord given up these people to confusion. Excess.

Then it is Spiritual and within, and Christ's coming makes the Supper. And last
of all, it is every meal you eat, and every draught you drink, you ought therein
to remember the Lords death till he come, at breakfast, dinner, supper, and
afternoons luncheons also. And yet this Wretch Nailor (to whom some of the
Quakers sang Hosanna, and worshipped him, and calle^ him the Son of God, The
Christ; and none of the Quakers now, that I can hear of, but own him as a great
Prophet, and highly honored and beloved of God) and yet he dared to say
concerning this false confused stuff, What I have received of the Lord, that p.
56.
I shall declare unto you. And again, And this is known from the Lord in the
Eternal, to be the true end of the p. 57.
Supper of the Lord, etc. If denying the Ordinances of Christ, after the manner
proved of the Quakers in this Chapter, be Christianity, or consistent with a
Christian, the holy Scriptures have given us a very unintelligible account of
Christianity, or a Christian: And that mouth (which said, I deny that God did
ever, Ch* Atkinson.
or will ever reveal himself, by any of those things thou call the means of
Grace) was not full of blasphemy, or in any fault against Scripture* Prayer,
Hearing, which were intended by it.

CHAP. XV.
The Quakers deny the transactions of Jesus Christ, when he was manifest in the
flesh in Judea, above sixteen hundred years since; or as he is now at the right
hand of God, to have any influence into our Justification before God, and our
Salvation.
All that are called Presbyterians Ed. Bur. Trumpet, etc. p. 17.
and Independents, with their feeding upon the report of a thing done many
hundred years ago. This he says, by way of reproach, against all that act
Faith on, and receive comfort from the blessed Effects of Christ's
Righteousness, and suffering^ by him wrought and suffered, when he was in the
world.

What Righteousness Christ performed without me, was Farnworth
not my Justification, neither was I saved by it. I believe it of himself, if
he died in the same mind. Can outward Blood cle^nse the Corscience? Can outward
Penningtons Questions, p. 25.
Water wash the Soul clean? A plain denial of the Efficacy of the Blood of
Christ shed on the Cross, to cleanse the Soul from the guilt of sin, by its
satisfaction to the Justice of God. Seeing the Apostle speaks Pennington.
of purifying the heavenly things themselves, Heb. 9. 23. it would seriously be
enquired into, and the Lord waitedon to know, what nature th^se Sacrifices must
be of, which cleanse the heavenly things? Whether, they must not of necessity
be heavenly? If so, then whether it was the flesh and blood of the Vail, or the
flesh and blood within the Vail? Whether was it the flesh and blood of the
outward earthly nature, or the flesh and blood of the inward spiritual nature?
Whether was it the flesh and blood which Christ took of the first Adam' s
nature, or the flesh and blood of the second Adam' s nature.

Heb. 9. 23. which is the Apostles most forcible and plain argument, to prove
the Efficacy of the offering of Christ's Flesh and Blood: For if the blood of
those Beasts, as they were shadows and types of Christ, were so effectual, how
much more the true Sacrifice, shadowed out by them. But we may with pity and
horror behold the woeful shifts men are put to, and bewildred in, who forsake
the plain paths of the Lord in his Word, and are resolved to lay hold on any
fancy, and foolish imagination, rather than let go the lie in their right hand.

And this we witness, who through the Lamb, our Savior, Parnel's Shield of the
truth. p. 30.
do reign above the World, Death, Hell, and the Devil; but none can witness
this, whose eye is outward, looking at a Redeemer afar off, and still live in
sin.

As for the qualification of living in sin, they frequently express it, to put
a blind before the Readers eyes, and are far from the true meaning of that
phrase in the Scripture: for whereas the Scripture intends it of the
unconverted, and those who are not sincere in their hatred of sin, and
obedience to God, the Quakers will needs have all to be such as live in sin,
who have any remains of sin in them, or whose lives are not totally free from
the stains of it. But nothing is more plain, than his utterly disowning the
Christ without, and Faith that looks at him; to have any thing to do in the
victory over Death and Hell, etc. and that the Man Christ Jesus, who lived and
died as far off as Jerusalem, is not the Lamb their Savior.

And conclude to themselves a belief in Christ, and apply Morning Watch, p. 21
his promises, what he did for them in the body that suffered without the gates
of Jerusalem; and by his death and offering all things is accomplished for
them, and no sin shall be imputed to them, though they live in it: And through
his mediation and intercession for thom, as he is at the right hand of God, at
a distance from them, they believe that they have access to God, and are
accepted of him, and yet they neither know God nor Christ, nor the place where
they say he sits at the right p. 22.
hand of God; and being in their mind persuaded that Christ has satisfied, and
has reconciled them to God, though they be yet sinners. Those he calls
sinners, and condemns, are all that repair not to the light within as their
Savior, by his teaching and power within them, as is the scope of his Book. I
should but cloy you to cite more for this purpose. It is their Opinion, that
Christ did what he did in the flesh which he took of the Virgin Mary, and what
he suffered therein also, as our Example, and no more.

The influence of Christ's transactions without us, above

I shall not need to be voluminous in the agitating this subject, many far more
able and worthy having wrote on it at large. And although amongst persons who
deserve not only the name of Christian, but Venerable in the Church of God,
there is not the same prospect into some of the more curious parts of it; yet
that the transactions of Christ without us, and before we were born, are the
merit of our Justification and Salvation, they are so firmly agreed in, that
they may as soon be persuaded to condemn and throw away their Bibles, as to be
of a contrary belief. I shall therefore consider Christ's Obedience as active
and passive; and prove them to have in them the efficacy denied by the Quakers,
and answer some Objections. And then show you what Righteousness they profess
Salvation and Justification by.

The righteousness of Christ's active Obedience without and before us
considered.

And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith
which he had yet being uncircumcised, Rom 4. 8. 11. opened.
that he might be the Father of all them that Believe, though they be not
circumcised, that rightousness might be imputed to them also. The righteousness
here spoken of is in a complete sense, and unlimited to this or that particular
case; it is a righteousness without stain of sin or unrighteousness. And indeed
there is no such thing as a complete righteounsess in the sight of God, that
has any the least crookedness, obliquity, or fault in it It Is that
rightcousness, of the Covenant of grace, or thereby expressed; for
Circumcision, the seal of this righteousness, was a seal of that Covenant.

The imputation of it is according to this Text, How was it then reckoned?
verse. 9. Faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness: not as James Naylor
says, And Love to the Lost, p. 7.
with him his righteousness is freely imputed, or put into the creature; as if
imputing were a putting in. It was imputed to James Nail^r that he was a
blasphemer; was it then, and thereby put into him to be a blasphemer? A very
fit Expositor of mysterious Scriptures! However he hit right of the Quakers
mind, and therefore it must be no more but put in, to this day.

But to return: it being reckoned, and that as a grace of the new Covenant, it
was not the righteousness Abraham by him wrought, or wrought in his own person,
as the subject of it; for then it had not been any grace or favor from God to
reckon it to him: therefore it was a righteousness of another that was reckoned
to him, not his own. Whose righteousness it was then, may be gathered by the
title of the imputed or reckoned righteousness, verse 11. A seal of the
righteousness of the faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised.

Well then, this consideration may lead us to the truth of imputed
righteousness; if we consider faith, as being an act of the soul, and therefore
not the righteousness imputed: for so far as that is righteousness in obeying
the command of God, it is our own act. The just shall live by his faith. His
faith Hab. 2, 4. Romans 4 5.
is accounted for righteousness. It must needs then be the object of faith, or
that which faith acts on or looks to, and this is no other, but the Lord our
righteousness, Jer. 23, 6.
the great subject of the promise and Covenant; and is therefore called. The
promise, the Covenant, and frequently, The righteousness of God, he being the
worker of that righteousness in his own person, which is of Gods appointment,
to justify a poor believer, which is not a believers, but as it is reckoned or
imputed to him.

A second ground of this Doctrine of imputed Romans 5. 21: 5.
righteousness, is in Romans 5. 21. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so
might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. That this righteousness of Christ is imputed to Justification, and
therein the abounding grace of God; is plain in the 17, 18, and 19 verses,
where the Apostle lays his argument for grace and righteousness through Christ,
in its similitude to the influence of Adam's sin by imputation. For if by one
man's offense death Rom 5: 17, 18, 19.
reigned by one, verse 17. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came
upon all men verse 18. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
verse 19. much m^re they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ, verse 17. so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men, to justification of
life, verse 18. so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, verse
19.

And further to clear this truth (if clearer evidence may be possible) the
consideration of verse 14. will 6*
contribute a good measure. Neverthel^ss death reigned from Adam to Moses even
over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, who
is the figure of him that was to come. There are two respects wherein (at least
many of) those over whom death reigned from Adam to Moses, did not sin after
the similitude of Adam's transgression.

First, They did not sin against a revealed Law, which Adam did, in eating the
forbidden fruit: and there was no revealed Law, or Covenant of life expressly
and explicitly given from God after Adam's time, before the fall, until Moses.

Secondly, They did not all sin actually, and in their own persons, as Adam
did; yet death reigned over Infants, who were in respect of actual sin,
Innocents. And by what Law did Infants suffer death? if not as they were
included in Adam the first man, and his offense becoming theirs thereby;
according to those words, 1 Cor. 15. 22. For as in Adam all die so 1 Cor. 15. 22
in Christ shall all be made alive. So that if it were not by the imputation of
Adam's sin, Children or Infants suffered a penalty without all Law; which is
contrary to the Apostles words, Romans 5. 13. But sin is not imputed when there
is no Law. But there was a Law then in force, viz. the penalty of Adam's sin,
which by imputation reached to his posterity. And in this very respect Adam was
the figure of him that was to come viz. Jesus Christ.

So that if the righteousness of Christ, of that one man Christ Jesus, be not
imputed to justification of all his children by faith, or that are considered
by God in Christ, the whole frame of the Apostle's arguing seems but trifling,
and to conclude nothing of what it seems to aim at.

There are four Objections (among others) I have

Object. 1. Christ was our example, and therein did answer to Adam as his
figure; for sin came into the world by Adam's example, and righteousness by
Christ's.

Answ. This is an old error; and what error so old and rotten, that the Quakers
will not embrace who live in error as their element? The Texts I have quoted,
have not the least appearance of sin entering the world by example; and the
Infants over whom death reigned, were not capable of sinning by example.

Object. 2. There might be a derivation of Adam's corrupted nature to all his
posterity, and so all of them might be guilty of sinful disposition, and
habits in their own persons; yet by generation from Adam, and not by imputation
of his sin committed in his own person: so the righteousness that justifies,
may be derived in spiritual regeneration, whereby the soul is disposed, and
enabled to work righteousness, by that spiritual life and vigor it receives
from him as its root.

Answ. That cannot be the meaning, frr then the condemnation spoken of would be
by all and every one; which though it be true, that dispositions to sin are
derived from Adam by natural generation, and dispositions to holiness by
regeneration from Christ, yet cannot be the meaning of these Texts: for the
emphatical word which as upon the hinge the whole argument turns, is the word
one; by one man's offense, by the obedience of one; whereas if the Objection did
hit the meaning, the Apostle must rather have said, So by all or every man's
offense, condemnation came upon all: But there is no mention of that middle
thing, man's corrupt disposition to knit condemnation to Adam's sin, as a more
original and remote cause. Also it should then be in or into all, and not upon
all.

Object. 3. The condemnation that came upon Adam to Moses, was but tempopal
death, and what is that to eternal; or to bear a prnportion with justification
to life, spirtual and eternal.

Answ. It is more than you prove, or can prove, that it was but corporal and
temporal death; and we can prove that it was the guilt of eternal death, if we
go no further to fetch the proof, than from what is opposed to it in the last
verse of the Chapter; righteousness to eternal life. And temporal death is not
remitted or discharged to those, who enjoy the benefit of the grace by the
second Adam Jesus Christ.

Object. 4. The Apostle James says, what does it Jam. 2. 14. opened. 21.
profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have no works? can
faith save him? Was not Abraham our Father justified by works? etc. Ye see then
how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only. To the first
Instance in the objection I answer, The saying

Secondly, A dogmatical or historical faith cannot justify, or so act on the
promise and Covenant, as to put us under the imputation of justifying
righteousness: for such a faith the Devils have; and there is a vast difference
between believing the History of the Gospel, and believing in Christ. And this
is the dead faith the Apostle speaks of verse 17.

To the second instance: Abraham's works though they justified his faith, yet
they did not justify his Now I know Gen 22. 12. Jam 2. 18.
that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son
from me* And I will show thee my faith by my works.

To the third Instance, which seems to join works 13.
with faith in justification, that is, our works: I answer, That although
justifying faith is not without works, yet faith justifies without works: as a
man cannot have seeing eyes, if he have not lungs, and heart, and brains, which
are essential to life, and the living motion of every member; yet the eye only
sees, and not the lungs, or brains, etc. but if you should pluck the eyes out
of the head, they would so alone be to little purpose. So works are essential
to the being of justifying faith; yet faith alone is in the act of justitying,
or so acts on Christ, as to justify the person in the sight of God, by
clothing the soul with Christ's righteousness. And although in the Text it is
translated, not by faith only, it may, and (I was going to say) ought to be
translated, alone; and then the sense is but this. That faith which is alone
without works does not justify a man in the sight of God. And I shall give two
good Reasons for it: The one, because it may be so without wrong to the
Original. Secondly, It must be so, because it will otherwise contradict the
Apostle Paul, and the truth also, as expressed abundantly in other Scriptures.

(...) does as well signify alone as only and is very 14.
often so rendered. as Joh. 8. 29. The Father has not left me alone, (...).
Joh. 16. 32. And shall leave me, (...) alone. Yea it is rendered, apart Mat, 14.
23. He went up into a mountain apart to pray. I could instance abundantly in
the like: Now whereas being rendered, only, it implies, that works also
justify; whereas if it were rendered, alone or apart, (which is as fair in the
Greek) it would amount but to this, a faith which has not, or is separate from
works, will not be a justifying faith.

And it must be so, because else it opposes the great Doctrine of the Gospel,
or at least looks like such a thing: Romans 4. 2, 5, 6. For if Abraham were
justified by works he has whereof to glory, etc. But to him that works not,
(that is, aiming at justification thereby) but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, -- The blessedness of the
man to whom God imputes righteousness without works, that is, without respect
to his works. But enough of this only take one Text, that needs no Comment to
raise up this truth out of it, viz. That the righteousness of Christ imputed,
is that alone or only which justifies by way of merit, and which true faith
looks to for this end. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we 2 Cor. 5* 2^.
might be made the righteousness of God in him.

I must not forget to do somewhat to satisfy the Mary, has influence into the
satisfaction of Gods justice, appeasing wrath, reconciling us to God, etc

Who his own self bear our sins in his own body on the tree. etc. And the Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Surely he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, etc. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he 1 Pet.
2. 24. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed.

That God was (not is, as George Fox* has quoted it, to lose the truth, and
save his error) in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing
their trespasses unto them. Having made peace by the blood of his Cross. And
without shedding of blood there is no remission. 2 Cor. 5. 19^ Col. 1, ^0. Heb.
9. 22. Rom 5. 9. Psalm. 85. 9, 10 11. opened.
Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may
dwell in our land; mercy and truth have met to gether, righteousness and peace
have kissed each others Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness
shall look down from heaven.

It Is generally agreed, these last verses respect Jesus For in the day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall Gen 2. 17.
surely die. Now whatever inclinations God might have to show mercy to man, and
bless him with peace, the truth and righteousness of God (he having that word
gone out of his mouth) seemed to oppose it, as not consisting with mercy and
peace toward man; and to have bound up those hands* and locked up those bowels,
from whence man's peace (through the Lords mercy) might reach him. But through
Christ (Gods salvation) and what he did and suffered in our nature, as our
public person, and in our stead, the mercy of God in reaching poor sinners is
set free, without any detriment to his truth; and the peace of a believing
sinner throws no scandal on the righteousness, and justice of a gracious God,
but these his glorious Attributes of mercy, truth, righteousness, are at a full
agreement, amity and union, not only in God, (as they always were and never
can be otherwise) but also in blessing man with a reconciliation with his
offended Creator. This Jesus arises like a divine Sun in his almighty strength,
with healing in his wings.

And this is no mean evidence of the satisfaction to the truth, justice and
righteousness of God, by what Christ transacted in the world, in the behalf of
lost and undone. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, Romans 3. 26.
that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

The second glorious effect of this salvation of God Jesus Christ, by his
transacting our redemption is, That righteousness shall look down from Heaven.
The righteousness in the 11th. verse (I suppose) is not the same with that in
the 10th. Verse: the former in the 10th. Verse being the essential
righteousness and Justice of God, which was to be reconciled to sinners; which
could not be done with a salvo to his Word, but by some means which might
answer to, and satisfi^ his justice. But the ighteousness in the 11th. Verse
(seems to me to be) that sinless state, who which Christ came down from Heaven
has clothed them with, by imputing to them, and putting upon them, that
divine and glorious righteousness, which he wrought in his own person, and in
our nature, when he was in the world: and so renders his believing ones, not
only free from the direful strokes, and heart piercing frowns of a just and
offended God, but also the objects of his love of benevolence, yea, of delight
and comp^acence.

To conclude, The whole transaction of Jesus

Having proved the Quakers disowning that justifying Quakers adventure their
justification before God upon. They will tell you, They are justified by no
other righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ, with abundance of
confidence: though (as we shall prove) they know not what they say, nor whereof
they affirm; their righteousness being as far from what is pretended, as
darkness from light, and a poor puffed deluded creatures, errors and
miscarriages, from the obedience of him who is God-man, who is the brightness
of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his person.

Let us first see what they profess of justification by Smith ^ Cat. p. 74.
Christ's righteousness. Quest. Do not you depend on the things you do, for life
and salvation? Answ. Nay, We do not so, etc.

Quest What is the righteousness that justifies in the Pennington* mysteries
of the Kingdom. p. 17.
sight of God? Answ. The righteousness of Christ alone, etc.

One would think the Quakers in this point very sound, by this part of their
profession: but their Bell sounds not long, before its jarring with truth,
discovers it to be foully cracked. It follows in the Answer to the first
Question: For we have lif^ before we have motion, to act or do any thing that
is pleasing to God; and in that life we have salvation, and so life and
salvation is freely given us of God.

The latter part of the Answer is brought to prove the truth of the former; and
you will say, they are huge good at proving who reason at this rate; They are
not the things we do, because we have life from God, and that freely, before we
can move or do any thing. This being one of the great delusions of this poor
people, wherein they show so much ignorance, as without much grace from God,
they are utterly incapable of instruction: I shall (hoping in that grace for a
blessing of conviction upon them) demonstrate, by the most familiar and easy
things, the falsity of their such Conclusions.

By the same Reason, all your bodily motions and actions are the motions and
actions of God, and you do nothing at all the while. Was there not life before
motion? And did not God give you this life? Can any man move hand, or foot, or
tongue, in any natural action, but by that life they first receive from God?
but will you say therefore, these are Gods actions, and not men's? For you to
say, Your good actions and motions are Christ's righteousness, because you have
life from him to perform them, is no less absurd.

Let us see if Pennington (who had somewhat of a This [righteousness] conveyed
to the creature, in and through the seed, and brought forth in the creature, by
the seed, and the creature united to Christ, in the seed; here is justification
of life. A strange justifying righteousness by Christ alone! brought forth in
the creature, by the seed. I would ask any of this opinion, Whether their
tongues and lips did not move in the words they call righteous words? And the
hands in some of those they call righteous actions? Sure they will not deny
they do; and how then can they say it is the righteousness of Christ alone, in
which the bodies of Thomas, John, etc. are employed? But yet the fine mysteries
in this Doctrine (which I must confess, may puzzle many an honest Countreyman
to find out the sense of) amo^nts to no more than this great absurdity.

What a contradiction there is in the creatures being united to Christ in the
seed, the Quakers themselves (if any liberty be left them so to do) will find
out. Christ is the seed, and the seed is Christ, both but one and the same
thing; and yet the creature is united to Christ, in the seed; that is, to
Christ in Christ. But the blind swallow many a Fly.

For by the Law of faith, is self-fanctification, self-mortification, 4. Naylor
Love to the lost. p. 6. 4. ^.
and self-justification excluded; (right so far, the worst will be in the tail.
Though they who receive the Spirit were called to all this, by faith in his
blood, yet it is the work of God wrought by Christ in the beleiver. Two things
are here observable for error and ignorance.

First, They who received the Spirit, were called to all this self-work he
talks of, and that by faith in Christ's blood too; and yet by the Law of faith
it is all excluded. So here faith does and undoes; calls for
self-justification, etc. and when it draws nigh, shuts the door against them;
begets children, and that by Christ too; and so soon as they are born utterly
disclaims them: If he had said, they were called to sanctification,
mortification, and not put that blot of self in their Escutcheons, to render
them base-born; and then have asserted, they were not the righteousness by
which we are justified, he had spoken like a man, and a Christian: but they are
two things in the Quakers account, adverse and together by the ears; and
therefore Nailor will have to do with neither. But that a man should be called
by faith to self-justification, is a strange riddle, and after all the
condemnation of these things, it is (for all that) the wo^k of God, wrought by
Christ in the believer.

But to finish Naylor's testimony of justifying righteousness, observe what he
faith somewhat more plainly: Whereby such become his workmanship in Christ
Naylor Love to the lost p. 37.
Jesus, wrought into his obedience, and his obedience into them, in their
measure, till they become of one heart, one mind, one soul, one spirit, one
flesh, one bone and blood, and one obedience, and one life; that it is no more
we that live, but Christ that lives in us. Here is some show, but a great deal
of abuse of the holy Scriptures, and the Spirit of God, by whom they were given
forth.

Whereas those who are God's workmanship in Christ Ephesians. 2 10:
Jesus, created to good works, are thereby designed and disposed by God to walk
holily. Naylor will have the Saints wrought into the obedience of Christ, and
his obedience into them, and blended together so perfectly, that the most
discerning Quaker of them all can make no distinction between the one and the
other; yea, until body and soul, flesh and spirit, blood and bones, and the
obedience of both Christ and his Saints, and their very life too, be no more
distinguished, but what is the one, is the other* the Quaker is Christ, (for
which Naylor's tongue was bored with a hot iron) and Christ is -- I am afraid
to write it. From such stuff as this, the poor souls who hug these Angels of
darkness, talk at that confused and blasphemous rate, as they do; and adopt
whatever is the Product of an idle, proud deluded, raw und^rstanding into the
very acts and expressions of Christ himself.

He says moreover, which may a little explain this p. 36.
last Instance: Which obedience, stands not in any thing seen from man, or by
man done, thereby to imitate or do the like; for that is two obediences. --
That as the same Father calls for the same obedience in spirit, so in the same
spirit does the believer offer up himself, etc. I leave you to brood on these
wild and worse sayings, I know their mystery, and depth of Satan; but to spread
them all in the light, will ask more Paper than I am willing to write out in
this Book.

Another expression and quality of the Quaker's Mystery of great Wh^re, p 4*
Pennington qu^stions. Smith Cat. p 5^.
justifying righteousness is, That it is within them, not without them. Christ
being within, there is justification. Now is the life, the Faith, the obedience
of the Son* the thing which is of value in us. And by this power in us, all our
works are wrought for us.

So that the righteousness which Christ wrought before we were born, even in
the days of his flesh, is to the Quakers a dead thing; and Christ was mistaken
shrewdly, when he tells his Father, That he had finished the work which he had
given him to do; intending thereby, the last scene of death, which he was then
just entering upon; and therefore speaks of all as accomplished.

Another notion they have for the countenance of the opinion of justifying
righteousness, to be within them, not without them, and wrought in the time of
their life, not by Christ in the days of his flesh above 1600 years since,
is, That because the Scripture speaks of justifying by faith, and faith being
within, and wrought in the Saints in this life, and in every individual
believer; therefore the justifying righteousness is within the believer. This
is abused by the Papists, to prove that works Justify, because faith is a work
or act of the soul; though that be false, for all grace consists (essentially)
in the habit and disposition, not in acts; for else a man must be graceless
when he is fast a sleep, for then he is not in action, nor grace in act But the
Quakers though they embrace many of the Popish Tenets that are erroneous* they
want wit to manage them as they. But to any* purpose, h^re their great Apostle.
This justification is by the faith of Fox great mystery, p. 46.
Christ within -- for all the holy men of God were justified by their faith,
and that faith is in the heart. For ^ 9.
the right understanding of this, we are to consider faith as a disposition and
habit, and therein a principal part of the new creature. This disposition of
trusting in, relying on, adhering to God, has its acts suitable to its self.
Now the acts of faith either respect its fruits and effects, other parts of
sanctification, as love, patience, self-denial, etc. or its objects and aims.

Faith has for its immediate objects the promises of God, leaning, trusting,
hoping according to them: it is said to lean on the Lord, trust, hope in the
Lord, its aims and ends for which, are the good things wrapped up in the Covenant
of grace. Now faith is not accounted for righteousness with respect to it self,
as a holy disposition, or its acts as holy acts; but as it looks on, takes hold
of, and trusts in the righteousness of Christ. It is no rare thing for the act
to be denominated from the object.

Though faith which Justifies, justifies as it has for Whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, justified by faith in Jesus
Romans 4. 25. Gal 2. 16, Heb. 11. 1
Christ. Faith is the evidence of things hoped for. Again, Faith is made the
condition of Justification, and that not only as it may be considered singly,
but as it includes the whole body of sanctification in some parts and measures
of it. But to as many as received him, Joh. 1. 12.
to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
his name. So that faith is a receiving of Christ, who is both Prince and
Savior, Lord of life and prince of peace, and receiving him as such, is
conditional of this acceptance with God, and so may be said to Justify, as it
performs the condition of Justification on our part.

But if faith were the meritorious cause of Justification, etc. But I will give
you but one Instance, lest I leave too little room for what I am willing to be
ample in, the Subjects Smith Cat. p. 12.
of the succeeding Chapters. We believe that Christ in us, does offer up
himself a living sacrifice to God for us, by which the wrath and justice of God
is appeased toward us.

This is in stead of many, though their Books do generally speak of the
sufferings of Christ as propitiatory, to be done over in every person before
conversion. And the maddest humor of all is, That Penningtons quest* p. 21.
they make the seed, or the light, or Christ being crucified in the soul by the
power of sin and lust, to be the crucifying and death of Christ, by which God
is appeased. Do not they which dwell there (in spiritual Sodom) put his flesh
to pain, crucifieing it in and to themselves? Take one Scripture to guard you
against all the fancies of this sort, and to close this Chapter. But this man,
after he had offered one sacrifice Heb 10 12, 13*
for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God, from thence expecting
till his enemies be made his footstool; for by one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified.

CHAP. XVI.
The Quakers disown and deny the Christ of God, and set up a false Christ in
his room and stead, and attribute all to that false Christ, which is due and
peculiar to the true Christ.
THis is the grand and root-errour of the Quakers, Babel, and confused heap of
errors, wherewith their Religion (if they have any such thing) is abounding.

First, They disown and deny the Man Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin
Mary, who was of the seed of Abraham, according to the flesh; who was nailed to
the Cross, and crucified at Jerusalem without the gates, to be the Savior of
believers; and he who wrought that righteousness, and underwent those
sufferings by which man's Redemption was wrought. This we certainly know, and
can never call Penningtons questions, p. 33.
the bodily garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the body.

They do not deny, that there was such a man as Mary, and that God was in him,
or rather Christ was in him: but this is no more than they profess of
themselves, that Christ as God, and the Eternal Word, is in them; yet that body
of the Man Jesus, which he calls here the bodily garment, he tells us, they can
never call it Christ. Another passage out of the same Author will explain this:
For that which he took upon him was our garment, even the p. 20.
flesh and blood of our nature: (very right) But what follows is woefully false.
Which is of an earthly perishing nature, but he is of an heavenly nature, and
his flesh, and blood, and bones, are of his nature. The sum is this, The Flesh
and Blood, and Bones or Body of Christ, which they own, is of a heavenly and
Eternal Nature; but the body which Christ took on him of our nature is earthly
and perishing: and therefore they can never call that, or own that to be Christ.

This is as plain a denying the Man Christ Jesus, Abraham, and the Son of Mary,
as can be. They own him as one that once had a Being, but is now perished, that
is, his body of flesh and blood. What can we expect of those men, who can
disown what the Scripture speaks so plainly and frequently? and that not now
and then by the by, but as its main scope? Do not all the Prophets that
prophecy of Christ speak of him as to come? Does not he himself, and others
contemporary that lived with him in the flesh, speak of him as then come? Do
not the Scriptures, after his Death and Resurrection, speak of him, as having
finished the Merit of our Redemption and Salvation, and departed from the
earth, ascended into Heaven, and there (at his Fathers right hand) ruling the
affairs of Heaven and Earth, and making intercession for his people? And all
this, of the Body of Christ, which he took of man's Nature; and this called
Christ, and Jesus, and the Savior.

Let not these Blasphemers of the Lord of Life and Glory, delude people with a
fancy, as if we believe and preach the Flesh and Blood of Christ to be Christ,
separated from his Soul, his Soul of the nature of man's soul, (but undefiled)
or that we take his humane or man's nature to be Christ, separate from his
Eternal and Divine Nature; for they cannot be separated, the one is not (now)
without the other; nor was the Divine Nature of Christ complete Christ, until
united to, and dwelling in its fullness in the humane or man's nature of Christ.

Yet, as what the mind conceives in a man, the man

Having thus explained my self, that the weakest Man Jesus, who was born of the
Virgin, is called the Christ and Savior; and that this Man Jesus is now in
being, and in that body of flesh which he took of the Virgin, and wherein he
eat, and drank, and slept, and performed those actions proper to a body of
flesh and blood and bones; and that this man Jesus is still, and ever shall be
the Christ of God.

And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that Luke 2. 26, 27, 28, 29,
32.
he should not see death, before he had seen the Lords Christ. And he came by
the spirit unto the Temple, and when the parents brought in the Child Jesus, to
do for him after the custom of the Law, then took he him up in his arms, and
blessed God, and said, -- Lord, now let est thou thy servant depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. -- a light to lighten the Gentiles.

This was the Lords Christ, whose parents were Mary by nature, Joseph in Law,
and by reputation, as being Mary's Husband, though after Christ's birth; whom
Simeon then saw, and not before, whom he took up in his arms, not only into his
heart by faith and love: and this Christ is Gods salvation, and a light to
lighten the Gentiles.

Therefore being a Prophet and knowing that God Act 2. 30. 31.
had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the
flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit upon his Throne; he seeing this before,
speaks of the resurrection of Christ, that his [Christs] soul was not left in
hell, neither his [Christs] flesh did see corruption.

This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are Verse 32*
witnesses.

Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, Verse. 36.
that God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified; both Lord and
Christ.

The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye Acts 5. 30. 31.
slew and hanged on a tree; him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins.

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing Act. 1. 11.
up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall
so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have Acts 17. 3.
suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus whom I preach
unto you is Christ

Be it known unto you all, and to the people of Israel, Acts 4. 10, 11, 12.
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God
raised from the dead; even by him does this man stand before you whole. This is
the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of
the corner.

Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

And though they found no cause of death in him, yet Acts 13. 28, 29, 30.
desired they Pilate that he should be slain; and when he had fulfilled all
that was written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a
sepulcher: but God raised him from the dead.

Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man, is
preached unto you the forgiveness of Verse 38.
sins.

For there is one God, and one Mediator between God 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and man, the man Christ Jesus.

I am he that lives and was dead, and behold, I am Rev. 1. 18.
alive for evermore, amen; and have the keys of hell and death. I might fill
many Pages with Scriptures of the like import: these are so plain for what I
produce them, and the Quakers deny, that they need no Exposition or Comment, or
(as the Quakers phrase it) have any meanings put to them.

If men be so blind as not to see the error of disowning Jesus of Nazareth,
the Son of Mary, who was hanged on a Tree, put into the Sepulcher of Joseph of
Arimathea, to be yet alive, and the Christ of God, by all these Scriptures; it
is a blindness wherewith never any before the Quakers, who professed the
Scriptures to be a true testimony, were smitten. Surely God has given them up
for their pride, giddiness, or idle ignorance, and that in Justice; and the
Devil, the Destroyer, has blinded their minds with a witness, that this light
of the glorious Gospel should not shine unto them.

Can? yea, dare any of you (guilty of the error here charged) say? That all
this is true of, and to be applied to the light within every man, which these
Scriptures assert of Gods Christ? Read them over, and compare them with that
which is your only Christ and Savior. If this man Christ Jesus, in whom dwells
the fullness of the Godhead, and who was thus described by the Spirit of God, be
the Savior your light within is not. If your light within be the Savior, and
Christ, and Redeemer, he was not; of whom all these Scriptures, and a thousand
more, speak so plainly. The Lord be merciful to your souls, the Lord rebuke
you, who are so bold in denying the Lord that bought you, and trampling under
foot the blood of the Covenant. O consider, that fancies and dreams, though
having ever so strong an impression while you are possessed with them, will
when you awake out of your graves of earth and dust, yea, when your souls
depart from your bodies, leave you to the naked truth, which God in his Word (
the Scriptures) has revealed to us, not to be abused after your manner; but
that we might believe, and live after their direction; which who despises, Woe
unto their souls, for they have rewarded Isa. 3. 9.
evil to themselves.

I have not yet given you all the evidence I have Quakers chief Writers, that
they disown the man Jesus, the Son of Mary, to be Gods Christ. Some of them
take together. Can outward blood Penningtons Questions, P. as. Fox.
cleanse the conscience! We witness the same Christ that ever was, now
manifested in the flesh. The man Christ Jesus was not ever, for he was made,
and born in time of the Virgin Mary, was Abraham's and David's seed after the
flesh: and though he now have a Being in Heaven, and is manifested on earth by
his Word, and by that Faith which is in the hearts of his people; yet he is not
now manifest in the flesh, according to that Scripture which says, God was
manifest in the 1 Timothy 3. 16
flesh, not is.

And Christ's nature is not humane, which is earthly, Fox mystery etc. p. 71.
for that is the first Adams. And immediately before, Where does the Scripture
speak of humane? -- Now we do not deny that Christ according to the flesh was
of Abraham, but not the word humane.

How pitifully does he wind and turn to get out humane nature, only he will not
allow the word humane. Yet he that has a small measure of discerning, may see
that peep out which he would fain hide. He denies Christ's nature to be earthly,
which the first Adams was. Sure if Christ was the seed of the woman by Adam,
his nature as man was such as Adams. But for his questioning the word humane,
as not in the Scripture, (he pretending to he able to examine the Justice of
our Translators, in turning the Greek into English, in his great Libel, called,
Mystery of the Great Whore) should methinks have found as much as humane in the
Greek, though not in the English, (...) being five times used in the Epistles,
which in the Latin is, more hominum, humanus, after the manner of men, humane.
And Christ's humane nature is no more but his man's nature, of his nature
according to man; and so he is now in the humane nature in the Heavens. Seeing
then that we Heb, 4, 14, 15.
have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of
God, let us hold fast our profession. Mark the last clause.

For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
Infirmities here must not be understood of sin, the Text bars that; but such a
weak nature as is constituted of flesh and blood, liable to pains, grief,
hunger, and weariness. And he was found in fashion as a man; and that, I think,
is more hominis. Now this man is, (not was) but is our High Priest in the
Heavens; and not as Fox has it, was of the seed of Abraham, but is so.

A few Instances more yet.

And they that are false Ministers, preach Christ Smith prim. p. 9.
without. Your carnal Christ is utterly denied by the light. Your imagined God
bey^nd the Stars. But none Sword of the Lord, etc. p. 24. Shield of the Truth,
p. 30.
can witness this, whose eye is outward, looking at a Redeemer afar off. So
much of the proof of their denying that man to be Christ.

I must not say, that the Quakers do not own a man Christ; for that they
frequently in their writings and sayings express such a thing: but I desire
that none will be offended, that I will not take Chips for Guin^ys or
half-Crowns, because some silly Cheats would put them upon me under those
valuable names: much more ought I, and every one else, take heed of receiving
that for Christ, which God the Father has not sealed, because men of what
countenance soever will persuade us it is no other; whilst by the very
Candlelight of mere reason, it will appear to be a mere fancy. If I should say
no more, but that it is an absurdity as big as an impossibility, for a man
constituted not only of a soul, (for that may be crowded into a little room)
but a body of flesh, blood and bones, to be within a man; surely no woman with
child ready to be delivered, would by her swelling and bigness proclaim it to
the eyes of all beholders more effectually, than such who should be so inmated.

And although they talk of all this being by faith, S. 2.
they must give me leave to tell them; that though faith in Christ be so in the
heart of a believer, that it does thereby enjoy the blessed effects and fruits
of the Redeemer; yet while the faith in Christ is in the heart, the man Christ
in his person, or if you will, his glorified body, flesh, blood and bones, is
as far from them, as beyond the visible Heavens. And I care not if I mind you
of the Popishness of their conceit, near of kin to Transubstantiation, (but
that is but an Infant-absurdity to this) that one single body, one individual
man of flesh, blood and bones, should be entirely in so many places at once, as
in every Quaker; yea, every man and woman in the world. But it may be the
Quakers being the only Masters of the Mysteries, can say more for it than we
can imagine, I am sure more than any man in his wits can believe.

Let us therefore give them the hearing, before we Fox great mystery, etc. p.
286.
dismiss this importunate Candidate with Ignoramus, or a condemning Verdict.
Now the woman here has a husband to ask at home, and not usurp authority over
the man; but Christ in the Male, as in the Female, who redeems from under the
Law, and makes free from the Law, the man may speak: Christ in the Male and
Female, who are in the Spirit of God, are not under the Law; but the Whore who
drinks the blood of the Saints, is gone from her husband from under the Law, to
ask the Whoremaster that does drink the blood of the Saints, which Christ the
seed judges upon, to whom he gives judgment. I have transcribed the more of
this Answer of George Fox's, that you may see what spiritual rare matter the
Quakers swallow from the hand of Fox's infallible and inspired Authority, the
Chief among that Sect. The nonsense and rarity of the Exposition of the
Apostles Inhibition of Women's speaking in the Church, I shall leave you to
construe and descant upon: But you find him owning a man Christ, in the Male,
and in the Female. The clearest Expositor that I have met with among the
Quakers, of this Mystery, is Isaac Pennington. Two passages, of many, I shall
quote out of him.

Was not the Word made flesh? And did not the Word Pennington's questions to
the professors of Christianity p. 29. p. 20.
made flesh dwell and appear in a Tabernacle of flesh? and cause the glory of
his own divine flesh to shine through the earthly flesh?

Is it the flesh and blood of the body which was prepared for, and taken by
him, wherein he tabernacled and appeared? Or is it the flesh and blood of hi^,
who took, tabernacled and appeared in that body? For that which he took upon
him was our garment, even the flesh and blood of our nature, which is of an
earthly perishing nature; and his flesh, and blood, and bones, are of his
nature, etc. The scope of this judicious Author, in many Pages, (a non-such for
new discoveries) is, to let us know, that there was a heavenly, spiritual,
divine body, constituted of flesh, blood and bones, in which Christ came from
Heaven; and that he put that body into the other body of our nature, which he
took of the Virgin; and that outermost body of our nature he left behind, when
he ascended into Heaven, no body knows where. And this heavenly, spiritual body
(nothing of kin to Abraham, David, Mary according to the flesh) is the man
Christ, which is in the Quakers, and so the Quakers are as complete Christ's as
ever the Son of Mary was: for they also have the divine nature of Christ
dwelling in a body of spiritual flesh and blood, and that dwelling in those
their bodies which we see, and are but the outward tabernacles of the God and
the man Christ Jesus. And when they speak, and what they act, all is but the
words and deeds of this man Christ, within the bodies of every he and she-
Quakers; and so no more they, but Christ in them. However ridiculous this may
seem to be, it is no more but what they as seriously own, as any Article in
their Creed. I say no more on this particular, but that he that can digest such
fables as these, has a stomach hotter than an Ostrich.

The Quakers in their opinion of the divine nature ECT. III.
of their Christ, are exceeding superfluous: and they have not more diminishing
thoughts of the humane nature of the true Christ, whose body they have doomed
to perish into dust and corruption, than they have magnifying apprehensions of
the divinity of their false Christ.

Their Tenet which Iam next to consider, is, That every man and woman in the
world, have in them a saving light from Christ and this light is no other but
Christ, the Savior and God eternal, and there is no other Savior but it. It
has been the opinion of some (before the Quakers known in the world) that by
the redemption of Christ (called universal) all men have a sufficient light
given them from God, the utmost improvement of which will prove saving: but far
were they from accounting this light to be the Christ the Savior. However
alien my thoughts may be from this Tenet, it is not my work here to consider
it; But that peculiar to the Quakers; that the light within every man is
Christ, and the only Saviourand very God.

Although there are none of them will stick to proclaim And no one Fox great
mystery etc p. 8.
knows salvation, but who knows this, Christ in you who is the salvation; and
where he is within, there is salvation.

And this [Christ in us] is be in whom our salvation Smith Cat. etc. p. 64.
stands, as the Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

And we also know and believe, that he is the same p. 71.
Christ in us, which in dispensations past did humble himself to the Cross.

And you, whom the Prince of the ^^wer of the air Fox the younger. p. 49, 50.
has led out of me you scorn me, the light in you -- They have disobeyed it,
and called it a natural light; and ye have said, that I the light am not able
to save those that believe in me.

That if you would believe and wait in me the light, p 54.
-- I will purge out all your iniquities, and forgive all your trespasses, and
I will change your nature, and I will make you new creatures, if you will
hearken to me, and obey me the light in you. How confident they are of this to
be true, may be seen in a bold adventure. If ever man be justified by his
Maker, otherwise than by Martin Mason's loving i^vitation, p. 5.
believing in Gods Covenant of light, which in the consience bears its
testimony against all iniquity -- then let me for ever be condemned from the
presence of the righteous God.

My design is to do two things. First, To consider the Scriptures, which they
lay as their principal foundation, and chief corner-stones in this building.
Secondly, Prove by Scripture and Reason, the falsity and abomination of their
Error.

That was the true light, which lights every man John 1. 9.
that comes into the world.

The Exposition of these words I shall give, (according to what the Lord has
enabled me with) and refute what the Quakers give as the meaning of it, and
conclude from thence.

We shall not question that the Relative that, has for its Antecedent, and is
to be understood of the Word which was in the beginning, which was with God,
which was God, by whom all things were made, the light of men, etc.

The special Character of this Word, who was God true light, I thus explain:
Light is taken properly for that which does manifest or discover any thing; so
Christ is light. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
2 Timothy 1. 10.
Christ, who has abol^shed death, and has brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel. The meaning is, That that salvation eternal, which
God had purposed to give to his people, which could not be seen in the purpose
of God as such, is, by the appearing of Christ in the flesh, and therein
transacting and declaring this salvation and eternal life, abundantly
discovered. For God who commanded the light to shine 2 Cor. 4. 6.
out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

And as light properly is that which makes manifest, so metaphorically it is
that which comforts and rejoices: And as the first is put in opposition to
ignorance, or the absence of the means of knowledge; so the other is put in
opposition to affliction, grief, distress, which are so frequently called
darkness in Scripture, that I need not turn to their Instances. And I do not in
the least doubt, but Christ the Word is here called Light in both respects, and
that eminently: for, as he discovers the gracious thoughts and purposes of God
for the salvation of man, it has in its open hand the light of comfort; they
are glad tidings, and gladding tidings. And this I take to be the import of the
fourth verse, In him was life, and John 1. 4.
the life was the light of men: that is, the salvation and life eternal of poor
sinners, was wrapped up in Christ as God, who being so qualified was capable of
working it: and this consideration of God manifest in the flesh for those ends,
is matter of strong consolation, as being an Adequate and sufficient Foundation
for Faith to build on.

The qualification of this light, the true light, comes True is taken in
opposition to false, but so we are not to understand it here. True is taken in
opposition to types and shadows; so Christ is the true light, which all the
types and shadows in the Mosaical Dispensations were not, no more than the
picture and pourtraiture of a man drawn with the dark lines of Charcoal, are
the man they so express; or the figures for a thousand pounds in a Bond or
Bill, are the money. And this is the true Exposition of the 23d Verse of the
4th of John: John 4. 25.
God never accepted in-sincere and hypocritical worshippers under the Old
Testament-Dispensation. But the question being of worshipping at Jerusalem, or
Mount Gerazim; he tells her, as his sense, that question was now almost out of
date, for that the Temple being but a shadow and figure of Christ and
Gospel Worship, they were now shortly to use those shadows no more, Christ
being come, and the Gospel-Spiritual-worship, which they were but prefiguring
of.

Again, The true light is to be understood of the John was a true light, and by
Christ's own testimony a burning and a shining light, and so the Prophets were
true lights; yet Christ excelled them all in light, as the Sun does the Stars.
The brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1. 3.
and express Image of his Person. So that while they gave a more dim and
imperfect light, Christ shined as the daylight. In the Text last mentioned, he
is to be understood of Christ in the flesh, before his Ascension.

Lastly, By true light we may understand, his being Isaiah did not speak those
things read out of him by the Eunuch of himself, but of Act. 8 34.
Jesus Christ, as Philip expounded them to him. I now proceed to the efficacy
of this light, wherein lies a great part of the Controversy. Which lights.
It is not to be doubted but this light does give light, both in respect of
manifestation, (which may be of that which is matter of terror) and also of
comfort to a miserable world, by sin and its effects. But I pray how will it
follow from hence, that Christ is within those whom he lights? Truly no more
than the Sun in the Firmament is within every one it affords light unto.

But it is the scope of some pages in William Pen's late piece, to prove, that
(...) should be rendered, not lights, but enlighteneth; which pages he fills
with the Authority of both Latin and other foreign Authors.

But by this I perceive he is as very -- as those Spirit of Truth, etc. p: 53.
etc.
Physicians who impose severe abstinence on others, but they themselves will
take their Cups off, and their good Cheer, to wantonness and giddiness.

I return to the business in hand, and grant that enlighteneth. But what
helps it? It Is never the more the Quakers light within: for a seeing Faculty
can do nothing alone, no more than the best eyes in the head without a light
without, as a medium by which to discern objects. And this faculty of man's
understanding is enlightened by Christ so, as that by his light it is made
capable to discern the Face of God shining on sinners, according to the import
of the Covenant of Grace: and that enlightening may be no more, Two Scriptures
will evidence. First, that concerning Jonathan: And dipped it in an honeycomb,
and put his 1 Samuel 14: 27, 28.
hand to his mouth, and his eyes were enlightened. -- See, I pray you, how mine
eyes have been enlightened. If the light within be no more in the Conscience
than the honey was in Jonathan's eyes, it will make little for the Quakers
notion of the light in the Conscience to be very Christ, and not only his
manifestations, which are his acts and influence, not himself.

The other Text is more plain to the purpose. His Psalm. 94. 4.
lightnings enlightened the world, the earth saw, and trembled. If by the earth
be not meant the men on the earth, and by the world the men in the world,
lightning was not likely to be seen by, or help them so to see, as to effect
trembling; unless you will say, the mere Animals were intended* Well then, the
world was enlightened by Gods lightnings, that were totally without them;
whether their seeing by those lightnings have respect to the objects of their
bodily eyes, or to God the object of the eye of the mind, who is in a good
measure made known by his mighty and terrible works.

But if you will needs have the enlightening in the ^. 10.
Text, to be a bettering of the faculties of the mind, to discern its spiritual
concerns; I grant, that the Lord Jesus Christ did by his redeeming work merit,
and does now by his Spirit effect that great good in his people; and they have
thereby better understandings, and a more pure and faithful conscience than
others: But that Christ by being (essentially considered) in the conscience of
every man, should be its enlightening, is a most base dishonor to his Divine
Majesty; for what is it less, than to render God under no better notion, than
the qualification of the faculty of a pitiful creature? Therefore however it be
expounded, it makes nothing for the Quakers light within, or rather the
enlightening within, to be the Being of Christ.

Every man. If this phrase be taken strictly in its ^. 11.
full latitude, intending every individual, without exception, Christ
enlightening must be understood so doing as Creator, not as a Redeemer; which
Exposition has a better countenance from the Context, than any thing that can
make on the Quakers side. For the Evangelist treats in the introductory Verses
of Christ as the Universal Creator; and by consequence the eyes of the body and
mind (by which both are enlightened) are creatures of his framing. This is the
opinion of many, (Superiors to me in judgment by far) and I shall not
contradict it; but modestly, and with submission, offer my opinion. But if that
be right, (which all the Quakers in the world are not able to prove, it cannot
be so understood) the Quakers may quit this Text, as doing them no service.
Some have affirmed that John wrote his Gospel, upon the occasion of the Heresy
of Ebion and Cerinthus, in denying the Eternal and Divine Nature of Christ.

But suppose it be to be understood of Christ's enlightening Gospel-discoveries;
it need not (it cannot lightly) be understood of all universally. Why more than
that Text? Whom we preach, warning Col. 1. 2^*
every man, and teaching every man, etc. Sure the Apostle being but a man
himself, could not warn and teach every man without limitation; it must
therefore mean all that he preached to, or rather the Professors of Jesus
Christ to whom he preached; he thus taught and warned. Commending our selves to
every 2 Cor. 4. 2*
man's conscience, etc. There were many that never heard Paul, nor heard of him;
therefore it must be understood, that he had been so faithful, that he deserved
commendation from all (and had it from those whose consciences were pure) to
whom he ministered. Well then, why may it not be understood thus? Every man that
is enlightened with a spiritual Gospel Light, is enlightened by Christ. I will
show you a Text of the like form, which must be so construed. Psa. 145. 14
The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all those that be bowed down.
Sure it means, that all that are upheld, are upheld by God; and all that are
bowed down, and raised up, are raised up by God.

Yet I rather incline to take the every man to be Christ came. The Prophets,
the Temple, the Sacrifices, and all those typical Representations of Christ,
were restrained to the Church of Israel, till the coming of Christ. To them
were committed the Oracles of God. The Disciples must not go to preach the
Gospel in the ways o^ places of the Gentiles. Peter is of opinion, he mus^ not
converse with those who were Gentiles, as a Preacher of the Gospel. The Jews
are offended with him for going on so good an Errand, till they heard his
Commission from God, and the blessed effects of his Ministry. But they are
quickly informed of the Partition Wall being broken down, and employed
according to their Commission, to teach all Nations. And as I take it, it gives
a good countenance to this Exposition.

I have but one Hill more to get over, and that is, The light coming into the
world enlightneth every man; or every man coming into the world, the light
[Christ] enlightneth. As I said before, if it should refer to man, every man in
the very instant of, or before his birth, Christ enlightneth: it must be meant
of created faculties in the natural body, as eyes, reason, etc. and so Christ
as Creator enlightens all: for experience and sense (without any one instance
to control it) will tell us, that none can believe without hearing, nor hear
without a Preacher, for all the talk of some of the preaching Stars, and others
of the preaching Gospel Light in the Conscience. Show us the man that can
express any thing of Christ, or the Covenant of Promises, that never had any
other means.

But there is a reason in the Text gives such a countenance ^. 16.
to referring it to the light, as will not easily be found for the contrary.
That was the true light, not this or this is; which plainly imports, not the
light Christ, as he is now in Heaven, nor as present with John, and his
contemporary Saints, when he wrote the Gospel, (for then it would have been
this, or at least that is the true light, etc.) but it clearly points at
Christ's appearance in the flesh, in his state of humiliation, wherein he
transacted man's salvation, and conversed and shined among men, as he shall
never do over again; that state of Christ which was when John wrote his Gospel
past. And this construction is the very scope of the words, viz. That Jesus
Christ (who was shadowed out formerly by types and figures, and whose
Ordinances for conveying knowledge and grace to the sons of men, and which were
the ordinary acceptable ways of Gods worship, were afore-time restrained to the
Temple and Jewish Church) was manifest in the flesh; and therein fulfilling his
work as Redeemer, has abolished those strait dispensations, and broken down
the partition wall between Jew and Gentile, making no difference, but shining
by his Ordinances and favor on either indifferently; so rising as a Sun of
righteousness, to give light to the whole world, without any restraint by his
Ordinance or appointment, whereby those Prophecies are fulfilled: And he said,
It is a light thing that thou should Isa. 49. 6.
be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
Israel; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be
my salvation to the ends of the earth. So it seems he was not so at the time of
this Prophecy, although he were then the Divine and Eternal Being, and he who
should in time come, and redeem and save by his actual Merit. I the Lord have
called thee in righteousness, Isa 42. 6.
and will hold thine hand, and I will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant
to the people, for a light to the Gentiles. This speaks still of Christ to come
as such a light.

Let us consider that passage in the Song of Simeon: Luke 2. 30, 31, 32.
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the
face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, etc. So that the
appearance of Christ in the flesh, in that body which Simeon took up in his
arms, was his being prepared to be a light to lighten the Gentiles. Now this
light was present: And in the Text agitated, John 1. 9. This light was past,
that is, that appearance and work of Christ, which made way for the salvation
of God to be divulged, and its ordinary means to be enjoyed by all
indifferently: This was the true light. God was 1 Timothy 3. 16.
manifest in the flesh -- preached unto the Gentiles.

The second Text they usurp, is in Romans 10. 8. Romans 10. 8. opened.
But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart;
that is, the Word of Faith which we preach. This Text joined with John 1. 1. In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God,
they build their Tenet upon; that Christ the Word is within every man: as upon
the Text before agitated, they affirm, that he is within them as a saving
light. Let us first consider, whether the Word, in this Text, be of the same
sense and import with that in John 1. which speaks of Christ the Personal Word.
That it is not so, but the Doctrinal Word, is plain from these Considerations.

First, The Apostle does in these words allude to Deuteronomy. 30. 14 opened.
the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. This Word in Deuteronomy is
said in Verse 10. to be the Commandments and Statutes which were written in the
Book of the Law; which Book they had among them, and by that means had the
contents of it in their heart, either in the love of it, or by rote; as we use
to say, a writing is gotten by heart, when it is treasured in the memory; and
it was in their mouth, by profession or discourse.

Secondly, the Apostle gives the same answer to a Moses, It Is no such difficult
thing for you to know this; for what you have gotten into your heart out of
this Book of the Law, and what you have in your mouth by discourse and
profession, that is it you should observe and do. So the Apostle, if you
suppose while we preach salvation by Christ, whom you must receive, that we
preach impossibilities, for that the person of Christ if in Heaven, or in the
grave, he is out of your reach; this will cure your mistake, to consider; that
as the Word of the Law which Moses taught and wrote, was in the heart and mouth
to do it, so the Word of faith, or to be believed, is in your heart and mouth
to believe and confess it. And this will as effectually save you, as if Christ
in his person were in your arms, yea and more too. And that this is his sense,
is plain in Verse 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe Rom 10. 9.
in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

The third Consideration is, That the word that ^. (...) 2 Samuel 18* 25.
is said to be in the heart is said also to be in the mouth, and we all know
what manner of word uses to be in the mouth, that it is a word saying or
speaking while it is there, such as that spoken of in Samuel tidings in his
mouth; or that in Esther, As the word went out of the Kings mouth: therefore it
cannot be meant of Christ; but that speech, those sayings, which are or may be
spoken, as in the Gospel when p^eaching, or when written.

Fourthly. Both that in Deuteronomy, and this word Romans, are said to be in
the heart and mouth of those who were the Church of God, as Israel was to whom
Moses spoke, and the Romans to whom Paul wrote; and so were taught by the one
the truths of the Law, by the other; of the Gospel. It sorrily follows from
hence, that it is in the hearts of all men.

Lastly, The Apostle agitating this argument farther How shall they call on him
of whom they have not heard? He does not tell them, Christ Jesus the Word will
preach himself, and he is in the heart where if you will but stand still, and
wait and listen, you shall hear him teach you all things, as is the Quakers
Romans 10 17.
Doctrine. No, but he tells them in Verse 17. So then faith comes by hearing.
(so say the Quakers, too) but of whom? Verse 15. Of them that are sent, them
whose feet are beautiful for the sake of the glad tidings of the Gospel of
peace which they bring. And these are more than that one personal, or (as the
Quakers phrase it) eternal Word, Christ; for they are expressed by they, them,
which are plurals; but Christ is but one.

Yet from this Text do they most confidently avouch Christ the Word who was in
the beginning, Quaker been given the lie in the Pulpit, for expound^ng the Word
in Jer. 23. 20. of the Word of the Lord Doctrinally confidered; and this Text
in the Romans, produced with no more but confidence, and of that enough to
prove me so.

There is a passage of Willam Pen's either in his Book called Sandy foundation,
etc. or else The Spirit of Truth, etc. which is this, (at least the matter of
it) That Christ is most eminently the Word, all will agree, or none will deny.
I have not time to look it: But I shall say thus much to antidote that fancy;
That that is most eminently the Word of that species, about which we contend,
which is most properly so; (though other considerations may render Christ the
Word more eminent in another kind) and not that which is sometimes, but
improperly so called.

Christ is called a Lion, a Door. It Is true, Christ as God is more eminent than
all things beside in Heaven and Earth; and we use to say, (and do not yet
repent it) that all (uncompounded) good things are eminently in God. So, as
there is strength and courage in a Lion, with respect to strength and courage,
Christ may be said to be eminently, most eminently strong and courageous; but
to be the most eminently a Lion, would be a strange and untrue expression of
Christ: For, Forma dat esse; and he that is without the form that gives the
being, cannot be so eminently such, as the meanest that has the true form. And
that the Word Christ is only so analogically, I have showed, and the definition
of a Word, in the second Chapter. I desire Mr. Pen to consider better next
time, and not think every body else not a hairs breadth beyond his size.

A third Scripture I am willing to explain, to fence Quakers seductions, is 2
Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well to
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn,
and the day star arise in your hearts. This more sure word of prophecy,
compared with a voice from Heaven, which Peter, James and John heard, expressed
in Verse 17. is by Peter affirmed to be rather to be credited, than that, or
any other immediate Revelation. By the more sure word of prophecy, is meant
those prophecies written in the Old Testament, which are called, verse 20.
Prophecy of Scripture; and are called, The light that shines in a dark place;
as Prophecies shine, but with a dim light, (yet are welcome, and give some
light) comparatively with Providence, which are the fulfilling of those
Prophecies.

The dawning of the day, and the day star arising in their hearts, cannot be
meant of Christ, known and received by faith to salvation, and sanctification
too, in some measure: for so he was risen in their hearts, when the Apostle
wrote this; or else he would not have said them to have obtained like precious
faith with him, and others the Apostles and Saints, which he does in verse 1.
as the direction of his Epistle.

I therefore conclude, that the sense is this, He exhorts Messiah, which they
believed already, but also) the abolishing of the Mosaical Rites, and
constituting in their room the spiritual and Gospeladministration, till thereby
they were convinced of that truth; which is called, the dawning of the day, and
the day star, with respect to its light, and beauty, and reality, above the
Mosaical Ceremonies and Rites, which were but dim night-stars in comparison; or
till they were convinced, that the day of the Gospel-realities was come, and so
the night-shadows of the Law to be done away..

The grounds I have for this Exposition are these, Peter, the P^n-man of this
Epistle, is said to be the Apostle to the Circumcision, as the Gospel of
Circumcision was to Peter. And Gal. 2. 7.
therefore we may gather, that those to whom he wrote were Jews, whom the
Scripture speaks to be zealously addicted to the Law of Moses. And this is
farther confirmed, by his direction of them to the heeding of the
Scripture-Prophecies, which few but the Jews were acquainted with, or did own
as worth the heeding, except the converted Gentiles, of whom there was no
danger that they should Judaize, unless moved thereunto by such of the Jews as
needed this conviction. This to me is sufficient; I leave the grounds for
others to consider.

One Text more I shall weigh, and then I judge* I Quakers abuse those Texts
which are not so easily understood as some others, to their own and others
destruction. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery among Col. 1. 27. opened.
the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory. From hence they
conclude, they have very Christ, his Being and Essence within them.

It will not be easily refuted, that the hope of glory is to be understood to
be in them; which being a hope in Christ, the crucified Jesus, was such a
mystery as the Gentiles called foolishness. But we preach Christ 1 Cor. 1. 2.
crucified, to the J^ws a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. For
Christ to be in them (rightly understood) would be no such hard matter for the
Gentiles to believe, (who understood Metonymical phrases very well) as to
believe such a glory to be attained by faith in, and obedience to the Laws of a
man, who died as a Malefactor; and that this death of his should reconcile God
to man, with the addition of such a purchase. But because it is a truth, that
Christ is in Believers; I shall therefore say that (which with the blessing of
the Lord to a willing mind to be instructed) will prove convincing.

First, The man Christ that was nailed to the Quakers do not believe to be in
them, nor that he has a being or life, nor can he be in them in his person as
a man, if they had a sounder faith. For the Godhead of Christ, that is, (with
respect to his Being and Essence) is every where, and every where alike: Do not
I fill heaven and earth, says the Jer. 23. 24.
Lord? So that with respect to the infinite Being of God, who comprehends all
things, he is in every thing at all times, and nothing can be void of his
presence. So that if this be it you mean, the Saints have no more privilege
than any other creature whatsoever. But it remains that Christ is in his people
by his graces, wrought by his Spirit, which is his Image and Likeness; by his
love, which has a uniting nature to its object; as we say, such are one who
love dearly: Every man is where he loves, more than where he lives: And so also
where he is beloved; for that will make him frequently thought on, and a man to
be sensible of his good or hurts, as if he himself enjoyed the one, or suffered
the other. And he is said to live in the hearts of his people by faith, as
faith believes how lovely and desirable he is, and so loves him, and works all
those other graces in the soul which are his Image; and do as effectually
possess the soul for Christ, and to his use and interest, as a faithful friend
can do: According to that Text, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith,
that ye being rooted and grounded in love, etc. You know what the Scripture
says of faith, that it works by love. Ephesians. 3 17, 5. 6.


So that in very ^^ed, Christ both as God and Man, does live in all his Saints,
but not in his person, but by the manifestations of his love and glory, his
works and Image in, and on the soul. And this is enough to satisfy those that
are sober, and are contented with, and rejoice in those privileges which God
affords to his Children; which are enough to render them blessed, rather than
those which pride and ignorance will choose, like our first Parents, to be as
Gods, and pay dear for the delusion.

Having stripped them of these Texts wherewith light within to be the Christ
and Savior; and proved, that the Man Jesus of Nazareth, in whom dwelt, and now
dwells the fullness the Godhead bodily, is the Christ of God; and not the man
without the Godhead, nor the Godhead without the Manhood, I shall resume my
Argument: That this Christ of God the Quakers disown and deny, and set up in
his room and stead another, viz. the light within every man: and therefore
disown and deny the true Christ, and set up another in his room, which is not
the true Christ, the Christ of God.

The light within every man, was not born of the Mary: It was not the light
within every man of which Mary and Joseph were said to be the Parents: It was
not the light within every man, that was arraigned before, and condemned by
Pilate: It was not the light within every man, that was crucified (being hanged
on, and nailed to the Cross of Wood) without the gates of Jerusalem: It was not
the light within every man, that was laid in the Sepulcher of stone belonging
to Joseph or Arimathe^, that rose out of that Sepulcher, that eat and drank
after his Resurrection with the Disciples, that showed to Thomas the prints of
the nails that nailed his hands and feet to the Cross, that ascended up into
Heaven in the sight of the bodily eyes of the Disciples; but the Christ of God
was he, and is he, that did and suffered all these things: Therefore it is a
most stupendous contradiction, to pretend to believe the Scriptures, and that
they own the Christ to whom the Scriptures bear witness; and yet say, The light
in every man is the Christ and only Savior. And that the Godhead of Christ
should be within every man, or any man breathing in the Quakers sense, I have
sufficiently refuted already: yet I shall offer a few of many Arguments farther
to convince, That the Quakers Christ is not the true Christ and Savior.

They call their light within the seed. Naylor Lov to the lost. p. 3.


That he regards not the seed of God, which is fallen under all this death and
darkness; so long as the creature will but hearken to him [the Serpent] and his
lying promises, he will lead him from one thing to another in things without,
etc. It Is a strange Christ, who is in the power of every man to be brought
under death and darkness, as long as the world endures; yet this is the Quakers
Christ. Whereas Gods Christ was dead, but died but once; and was offered up but
once for all, and that one offering has that in it which perfects for ever
them that are sanctified. But how the seed spoken of Christ in the Scripture
should be in every man, and yet the Son of Mary not be there yea not be any
where, is a most ridiculous Riddle: for God, or the Godhead of Christ, was not
the seed of the woman, or Abraham, or David; the seed was the man Christ
according to the flesh.

So to the light of Christ, that which changes not in Naylor Love, etc.
Preface.
every one; I appear to be judged -- -- for therein alone, both these things
and all others that proceed from that ^ot, makes for gathering creatures
together, unto that one name and seed wherein all the nations of the earth are
blessed. The Scripture he pretends to is Genesis 22. 18. And in thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed. But Christ as God was not the seed of
Abraham. Who that understands any thing can be thus deluded, to take the light
within every man to be the seed of Abraham, the man Christ Jesus.

The Quakers light within cannot be the Savior, God, Father, Son and Spirit,
without distinction, and that they are but one: whereas the Christ of God is
the Mediator, and therefore must be distinct from God the Father, and sinful
man; who are the parties to be reconciled. There is one Mediator between God
and man, the man 1 Timothy 2. 5. Gal 3. 20.
Christ Jesus. Compare this with Gal. 3. 20. Now a Mediator is not a Mediator
of one, but God is one. Well then, the light within, which the Quakers say, is
God without any distinction, and not the man Christ, who was in the womb of
Mary, cannot be a Mediator, for a Mediator, is not of one, but between two
distinct persons. Now this being a truth, where is their Mediator? God eternal
is not a Mediator to himself, nor man a Mediator to himself: so shut out the
Christ without you, (a middle person between God and sinful man) and you are in
a woeful condition.

Christ as God separate from that man who was Mary, is not, nor ever was
complete Christ. So that if it should be granted, that the light within you
were the true God, God essential (which is a blasphemy no tender and
understanding soul dare come near the brink of) yet I say, your light within
were not Christ. God had no capacity to suffer, to die, to do the Offices
necessary for a Savior and Redeemer, according to the conditions of the
Covenant of grace: and although many were saved before Christ was born and died
for sinners; yet they were saved by faith in the promised Redeemer who was to
come. And these all having obtained a good report through Heb. 11. 39
faith, received not the promise. And therefore until his Incarnation, he is
spoken of as Gods Christ in election, but not actually and completely Christ.

Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom Isa. 42. 1.
my soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles. Read Isa. 49. where you may with open face behold
this truth, in that discursive converse and expostulation between God the
Father, and God the Son. Wherefore Heb. 10. 5.
when he comes into the world, he says sacrifice and offering thou would
not, but a body have thou prepared me. Then I said, Lo I come (in the volume of
the Book rseVe 7.
it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. What was this will, but his
fulfilling the Law both activelly and passively as Redeemer? which he could not
do as God, therefore God prepared him a body, that body which was born of the
Virgin, to which he being united, and therein dwelling, and performing our
Redemption, he became actually and compleately a Savior, and not before.
Therefore if you believed aright concerning the Godhead of Christ, yet denying
his manhood which was made, a created Being, a Being in time; you disown and
deny the true Christ.

And that is a notorious unmanning of Christ, and And the Scriptures throughout
testify of him, and declare his unchangeableness, who through all [ages]
abides Morning Watch, p. 4.
the same, what he was in the beginning. Whereas if the man Christ were so the
same, he never had a beginning. And the Scripture or you are much out; for they
tell us, When he was twelve years old he went Luk 2. 42.
up to Jerusalem, and there disputed with the Doctors; which would have been no
matter of wonder, if he had been (as man) from the beginning. B^t if you will
read such a mystery of iniquity, ignorance, and bold perverting of Scripture,
as the world was never till of late acquainted with, observe what follows out
of the forementioned Author.

And he [John] was sent of God to bear witness unto p. 5.
this truth, which was; in the beginning. -- But that is the true light (says
John) that enlightens every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9. Observe
he corrupts the Text and puts is for was which in my Exposition of this* Text,
I show to be the break-neck of the Quakers design. You may hereby perceive they
are sensible how much the word was makes for my Exposition. But he proceeds,
Here was the light sh^ne out of darkness in John, the morning and the first day
was come unto him, as was unto Moses. A most strange, false, and absurd
passage; to make Christ to be the morning and the first day: but any thing to
worm out our blessed Redeemer born in time. In the beginning of his book he
tugs hard to have the created light and the day distinguished from the night,
to be no other but Christ the light within: And here he will have it shine out
of darkness in John. It follows a few lines after, Then God sent him to bear
witness to the light which in him was made manifest, that all in the light,
might believe; and he called to others to behold him, and said, he was the Lamb
of God, and was come to take away the sins of the world, Joh* 1. 29. ( Mark) he
behold him -- weigh this truth all ye Priests and professors, and ponder it in
your hearts. What cannot the Devil lead men into, who are led captive by him at
his will? and make them also glory in it, and stand to it with a (mark) in a
Parenthesis, and call on men to weigh their wickedness. I am amazed! The Lord
have mercy on us, and poor weak souls, who know not how to espy such gross
delusions as this, That the Lamb of God John there spoke of, was the light in
him, and which shone forth in him.

The light within every man cannot be the Savior, John 4. 22. opened
for salvation is of the Jews; which the light within is not. These words were
spoken by Christ himself to the woman of Samaria, to convince her of the
Samaritans false worship. Ye worship ye know not what, that is, ye know not
what to worship, nor for what end: The Temple at Jerusalem was a type of
Christ, and the worship of God which shadowed out Christ, as the Sacrifices,
Altar, etc. were restrained to that Temple, to show that whatever worship was
not performed in Christ, should not be accepted. Now says Christ, You know not
what you do, in worshipping at the Temple at Mount Gerazim, for no Temple but
that in Jerusalem is a type and representation of Christ, and withal salvation
is of the Jews. The true Savior is to be born in the true Church, and from
thence to bless the world. There shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and
shall turn ungodliness from Jacob; That is, out of the Israelitish or Jewish
Church. For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.

There is one Scripture much abused by those I oppose, Wherefore henceforth
know we no man after the ^ Cor. 5. 16.
flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth
know we him no more. This Scripture is by them made a sufficient ground for
their infidelity in the Christ of God, the Son of Mary: for they say, he was a
man of our nature, of the flesh and blood of the earthly Adam and nature; as I
have already showed out of their Authors: but therefore he is not to be
believed in, which you have had proof of sufficient.

By the flesh, we are not to understand the body, Christ's body of flesh: for
the Apostle calls them worse than Infidels, who do not provide for the bodies
of those who are of their own house: or that we should have no remembrance of
Christ, as he was in the flesh; for then we must forget and be ignorant of the
great mystery and foundation of the Gospel. Great is the Mystery of godliness,
God was manifest in the flesh. But we preach Christ crucified. I determined not
to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. The meaning
therefore must be, That he and his fellow-Apostles did not preach the Gospel
for worldly respects, and esteem of men; and please their fancies and humors,
for the sake of outward and carnal advantages. The grounds of this Exposition
are three among others.

First, The subject and scope of the Chapter is the life to come, and to
persuade so to walk and behave our selves in this world, as those that must
quickly be uncloathed of this earthly tabernacle, and be concerned with only
the things of another life.

Secondly, The end of Christ's death expressed in Verse 15. That they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves. That is, to their outward, temporal
interests, as their prime and chief aim, for to their spiritual and eternal
selves, they were to live, which are best promoted by living to Christ.

Thirdly, From what is expressed in Verse 17. as necessary to making the honor
and interest of Christ our chief aim. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature; old things are past away, behold all things are become new. As
if he should say, This proves those that are in Christ to be new creatures;
that their aims and ends are holy and spiritual, which is too high for an
unregenerate man, whose faith and love to them and concerning them, is much too
weak to steer the course of their lives, as those that are bound for Christ and
Heaven. And as their ends, so the means is altered; for as before they shaped
their whole course to please the flesh, it is now conformed to pleasing the
Lord, and providing for their souls welfare.

And whereas it is said, though we have known 12.
Christ after the flesh, etc. It may refer to the Apostles, in whose person the
Apostle speaks, (though he himself were not concerned with them) who did
sometimes dream of being great in the world, and sharing with Christ in an
earthly kingdom; but now being better informed, and attained to a higher and
more noble degree of spiritual understandings and affections, they were
crucified to those childish and carnal designs, and their considerations of
Christ in his glorified body, and his exaltation in Heaven at the Fathers
righthand, did raise their souls to a longing after a further and complete view
of his glory, and sharing with him in his heavenly Kingdom. This is suitable to
the eighth Verse of this Chapter, which has some Contexture with Verse 16. We
are confident I say and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. Then Christ was not in them as in his Heaven and Glory.

To conclude, I beseech you who are engaged with the Quakers, from the good
opinion you have of their between the true Christ, and any thing else that is
so called, is so small, that you may wink and choose, no danger of miscarrying
which ever be your foundation. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins; was the saying of Truth it self, and he was not the light within but
the man Christ Jesus, who was then in Judea, and no where else, who is now in
Heaven, not on earth. How is it that the Apostles (whose knowledge of and zeal
for Christ, is not to be equalled by any of ours) did preach Christ so
abundantly by the name of JESUS, which was the proper name of his humane
nature; and as the CHRIST which is a name proper to God and man in one person,
he that is the all sufficient Savior, and not by the name of the light within?
which is not to be found, once in the Scripture; and where the words are found,
(which Christ himself spoke) which is but once, it may be a terrible and a
seasonable monitor to you. But if the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness? I beg of you once more to weigh what I have written in
this Chapter, and beg for you, that the Lord would give you understanding in
all these things.

CHAP. XVI.
The Quakers are gross Idolaters; and Quakerism gross Idolatry.
THere have been great Contests in the world, Idolaters, and what is Idolatry?
Some have contended, That not only a false worship (though of the true God) is
Idolatry, and by consequence that those who live in the practice of such a
worship are Idolaters; but also that any Appendices to that worship of God
(which in the substance of it is true worship) are also Idolatry, being of man's
invention, and added by his own proper Authority, as a part of divine worship:
and that so doing is a crime against the second Commandment in the Decalogue,
or ten words, or Commandments written in tables of stone.

The proof of my Charge against the Quakers, will not depend upon such nice and
disputable premises, but if there be any such thing as Idolatry in the whole
world, I shall prove them guilty in the highest degree. And because this Charge
looks very big, and would be no small sin against both the principles and
persons of those concerned, if untrue; and also that such a crime of theirs is
not so visible to the world, as may be within the cognizance and notice of all
who converse with them: I shall dispose my Argument plainly and formally.

All those that own and profess that to be God which is not God, are gross
Idolaters. But the Quakers own and profess that to be God which is not God:
Therefore, the Quakers are gross Idolaters.

My second proof is in this Argument.

All those who worship that as God (professedly, and according to their
professed principles) which is not God, are gross Idolaters. But the Quakers do
so: Therefore they are gross Idolaters.

My first Argument I shall first prosecute, and with that perspicuity, as will
be apparent to all that are not more blind than Bats. For the first
Proposition, viz. That all those that own and profess that to be God which is
not God, are gross Idolaters. I know none but will grant the truth of it, who
(in matters of a religious nature) can discern their right hands from their
left. The Minor or second proposition of my Syllogism, I am concerned to
confirm. Here will be the issue depending; and if this be thoroughly proved, no
man convinced thereof, but will sit down by the conclusion, That the Quakers
are gross Idolaters.

I shall manage my proof of this by these two Syllogisms.

They who own and profess the light within every man to be God, own and profess
that to be God, which is not God: But the Quakers do own and profess the light
within every man to be God: Therefore, The Quakers own and profess that to be
God which is not God.

Again, They that own and profess the souls or spirits of all or some men,
which are constitutive parts of all or some men, to be God, do own and profess
that to be God which is not God: But the Quakers do own and profess so;
Therefore, They own and profess that to be God which is not God.

The first Syllogism I shall manage in the first place, the Major and Minor of
which I shall fully prove. And although some have attempted the conviction of
the Quakers, by showing the natural faculties of light in man, to be far short
of what they ascribe to it, I shall not go their way to work; for so long as
the Quakers hold their light within to be Christ or God, it is vain to restrain
it to less than infinite. And I having to do with those, whose opinion of the
light within depends on such a conceit, I shall prove the light within every
man not to be Christ or God. For the proof of the first proposition, I must
prove, That the light within every man is not God: and in so doing, all that is
requisite to the first proposition will be discharged.

That the light within every man is not God* I prove thus:

That which has not power in it to dispose and order the ways of a man is not
God: But the light within every man has not power in it to disp^se of the
ways of a man: Therefore, It is not God.

The first Proposition will be granted by all who

The second Proposition I prove from J^r. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way
of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. If
it be not in man, it is not within man: I cannot say that to be within me, that
is not in me; though that may be said to be in me, that is not a part of me. So
then, if the prophet Jeremy were not mistaken, there is nothing in man, or
within man, that has the power to dispose or wisdom to direct his steps; but
he may either fail in directing unwisely, or for want of power to perform what
is well directed or determined: Therefore I must conclude against the Quakers,
That the light in every man is not God.

That which is not infinite and immense, or without or beyond measure, is not
God: But the light within every man is not infinite and immense, or beyond
measure Therefore, The light within every man is not God.

The first proposition I prove from Psalm. 47. 5. Great is our Lord, and of
great power; his understanding is infinite. To say, That which is infinite is
not beyond measure, is a contradiction in it self. The second proposition I
prove by their own concession; and grant, There is scarcely any one thing more
frequent in their Writings, than to talk of the measure of God, the measure of
Christ, the measure of the light in men. But turn your ear inward, to that
measure ^arnel's Shield of the truth. P. ^ 2.
of light in you. I could fill a volume with Instances of this nature, how they
measure out the light within and Christ, and God, and the Spirit: but none of
them will deny this.

It is a horible abomination, for men through their gross and dark conceits
thus to dishonor God; to share him into more and less degrees and measures,
who is entire, infinite, indivisible; who is not (with respect to his Being
less in one place than in another. This measuring would agree well to his
manifestations, and discoveries of himself to his creatures, and by his works:
it would agree well to those graces wrought by his Spirit in the hearts of his
people which in some is more, in some less, and capable of growing in all; b^t
God cannot be more or less than he is, and ever was.

That which may be darkness in a sinful and evil sense, 7. Arg. 3.
(and that in the abstract) cannot be God: But the light within some men, may
be darkness in a sinful and evil sense (in the abstract) Therefore, The light
within every man is not God.

I suppose, and hope they are not yet arrived to that height of wickedness as
to charge God with ignorance or sin in the least degree, or that he is capable
of so degenerating: therefore I will take the first proposition for granted.

For the second, I shall prove from Scripture, Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. What can be more exclusive of all
spiritual light or light in spiritual things, than to be darkness in the very
abstract? But if you who adore the light within, shall say, this is meant of
man, but the light within is God, and Christ; and that is not man, of whom the
Apostle speaks. I Answer, That sometimes you plead hard, that the lights in
Joh. 1. 9. should be rendered enlightneth; and W. P. tugs hard for it, in his
pamphlet called, The Spirit of Truth, etc. But it will be granted with less
ado. Well than, if the light within every man be the enlightening of every man,
(at least virtually) so that if he be willing to be guided by its conduct, it
will lead him as you dream; then it must be within him, as a qualification of
his conscience* though it be not produced into exercise. And you tell men, they
have that within them, that will be a sufficient guide, if they will but listen
to it: therefore this Text reaches the light within you, which says, there was
a time when they were darkness. It would be a strange affirmation, to say, the
world or Creation were darkness, while the body of the Sun were in it shining,
although not one man should move by its light. And it is worth the noting, that
(...) in the Text rendered darkness, signifies such a darkness, as is the total
absence of light.

A second Scripture that proves this, is Mat. 6. 23. But if the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! It is the same word in the
Greek, as in the fore* cited Scripture. And lest you should cavil, and say,
Christ does but suppose it, he does not affirm that the light in any one is
darkness; the foregoing Verse tells you, That if thine eye be evil, (that is,
not single and sincere in its aims) thy whole body shall be full of darkness.
And sure you will not say, but there are many in the world whose eyes are evil,
who account all such that are not Quakers. And it may be considered, that where
the whole body is full of darkness, there cannot possibly be in it any light.
And that this which men conceit to be light, and are conducted and led by it,
as if it were such, is sinful ignorance and darkness; I shall not think it
calls for proof. Well then, it is as clear as day, that the best light some men
have within them, is but perfect night: therefore it cannot be God.

Thus I have proved by three Arguments, That the light within every man is not
God. I will but name a few more, and leave them to the judgment of the Reader,
without further proof. That which may be kept under, and in captivity by the
lusts of men, is not God: But the light in some men (not only) may be (but) is
kept under and in captivity by the lusts of men, (and that by the Quakers own
confession:) Therefore, The light in every man is not God.

That which may be crucified, and put to pain in a proper sense, is not God:
But the light within every man (which the Quakers call God) may (by their own
confession) be put to pain and crucified, and that in a proper sense; (or they
talk but madly of being saved by its being crucified within them) Therefore, It
is not God.

I proceed to the proof of the Minor, or Viz. That the Quakers do own and
profess the light within every man to be God. This I must prove from their own
Writings; which will easily be done, it being the grand foundation of the whole
Fabric of Quakerism: so that I may say, its first stone is laid in gross
Idolatry. It would be needless morning Watch p. 5. 6. 7. is filled with this
Subject
to bring Instances of their asserting the light in every man, to be that Word
which John speaks of, John. 1. 1. Which was in the beginning, which was with
God, which was God. It is the first thing they teach, and that not suddenly and
amphibiously (as they do many other points) but in so many words.

But I shall furnish you with proofs enough, over Fox the younger, p. 53.
and above that. I will make you know that I the light which lights every man
that comes into the world, that all through me should believe, am the true
eternal God, which created all things; that by me the light all things are
upheld, and that there is not another besides me can save. Although in this
passage he does not call it the light in every man, yet it being a personating
the light within in a large and continued discourse, he does often express it
the light within; as in page 50. You scorn me the light in you. Page 54. Which
will not own me the light in them. All power in Smith prim.
Heaven and Earth is in it; [the light in the conscience.]

They that cannot read out of these passages, (and Quakers own and profess the
light in every man to be God, are not like to be much the wiser for whatever
they read. That it is in every one, hear one speak his mind Lip of Truth, etc.
p. 45.
who would be believed; Light is the same in him that hates it, and in him that
loves it. I have done with the first grand Argument, and proved abundantly,
that the light within every man is not God. That the Quakers own the light
within every man to be God and profess it. And these will prove that they are
Idolaters; or none will ever be so proved.

I shall now show you another God of the Quakers Idol in another dress; in
manageing the second proof of the Quakers, owning that to be God which is not
God. My Argument is this.

They that own and profess the souls or spirits of all or some men, (which are
constitutive parts of all or some men) to be God, do own and profess that to be
God which is not God. But the Quakers do so: Therefore, They own and profess
that to be God which is not God.

Two things will prove the whole of this Syllogism. First, To prove that the
souls or spirits of any men are not God. Why I put in all or some in the
proposition, you will see the reason, when I prove, Secondly; That the Quakers
hold the spirits or souls of all or some men to be God.

If the souls or spirits of any men were God, then God may be polluted with
sia: But God cannot be polluted with sin: Therefore, The souls or spirits of
any men are not God.

The second Proposition will be granted, not only Rom 3. 5. Job* 40. 2.
by Christians but Heathens. Is there unrighteousness with God who takes
vengeance -- God forbid. He that reproves God, let him answer it. The first
Proposition I prove from Adam's pollution with sin, who of all men (except
Jesus Christ) was the most unlikely to have his soul polluted; who was created
upright, and had the greatest advantages of maintaining his innocence; yet his
soul was polluted, as may appear, Genesis 3. Romans 5. At large. Let us cleanse our
selves 2 Cor. 7. 1.
from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit. Now the God of peace sanctify
you wholly, and preserve you blameless in spirit, and soul and body, etc.

This is enough to prove that the spirits of men yea of the Saints and best of
men, may be and have been polluted with sin.

If the souls or spirits of men were God, then God may be in prison. But God
cannot be in prison: Therefore, They are not God.

The first Proposition I prove from 1 Pet. 3. 19. By which he went and preached
to the spirits in prison. And these were the sinful and disobedient spirits,
who provoked God in the days of Noah. The second Proposition all men will
grant, except the Quakers, who often speak of the seed in captivity; by which
seed they mean no other but Christ or God within every man, or the light within
every man.

If the spirits or s^uls of men were God, then God might be condemned: But God
cannot so be: Therefore, The spirits or souls of men are not God.

That the spiri^s or souls of men may be so, (I tremble to write the word)
appears by that Text 1 Pet. 3. 19. The disobedient spirits in the days of Noah
are now in prison, which is a part of their torment. The whole current of the
Gospel says it, or implies it.

I shall now prove out of the Quakers chief and allowed Writers, whom they
account infallible, and Every man has that which is one in union, and like the
Spirit of E. B. True Faith, etc.
Christ; even as good as the Spirit of Christ, according to its measure. This
he speaks of the Spirit in man, which every man has; and sure if it be as good
as the Spirit of Christ, it must be God, for the Spirit of Christ and of God
are one and the same. But to talk of its measure (their usual phrase) is a
blaspheming God, to speak his divine Being any thing less than infinite

Now my soul and spirit is centered in its own Being with God, and this form of
person must return from E. H. Testimony, etc.
whence it was taken. The words of Ed. Buroughs the morning before he died.
Here he makes his soul and spirit one Being with God, or God to be the souls
own Being. And what follows implies, that as the body and soul are the form of
man while in this world, so at dissolution, as the body resolves into dust, its
first Being, so the soul to God, its first Being. A miserable Exposition of the
Scripture which says, The body shall return to the dust, and the spirit shall
return to him that gave it. He lived and died a true Quakers, but a false
Christian, if he changed not his mind his last day.

Priest. It is an expression of a dark deluded mind, to say, that God is not
distinguished from the Saints: Fox great mystery, etc p. 16.
Thus he brings in the minister saying. Answ. But God and Christ is in the
Saints, and dwells in them, and he [the Priest] is a reprobate, and out of the
Apostles Doctrine. If it were only out of ignorance, in not understanding the
word distinguished, or of the manner of Gods Being in his Saints, it should not
be his Charge in this place. But you shall (if you read further) see he intends
no less, than the wicked import of his words. But to call him reprobate, and
out of the Apostles Doctrine, is over measure a great deal; he might have
spared him that in charity.

John Bunion says, He [God] is distinct from the Saints? and Bunian is
deceived, who says, he is distinct p. 16.
from the Saints and so you are a company of pityful Teachers. By these
expressions he renders not only the Souls and Spirits of the Saints the same
being with God; but their whole man without distinction.

Again thou makes a great pudder, that any one should witness he is equal with
God. Answ. A Catechism of the Assembly of the Priests, and put forth to the
nation in which they have laid down -- that the holy Ghost and the Son is equal
in power and glory with the Father; Fox great mystery
yet if any come but to witness the Son revealed in him, or come to witness the
Holy Ghost in them as they gave out the Scriptures, or witness the mind of
Christ, and witness that equal with the Father, they cry out horrid blasphemy.
Observe, he does not in the least deny the priests charge (as he calls him) but
calls it a pudder; he makes as if the most horrid blasphemies opposed or
charged on the blasphemers, were but making a pudder. And to heal his sore he
would wound the assembly of Divines, by laying the like monster at their door;
but herein he shows his ignorance with his malice and slander: For the rest of
his phrases I shall only say this, that they make no difference between the
Spirit of the Quakers, yea of all men, and the Son of God, or the Holy Ghost.

And is not that of God, which comes out from God? is not that of his being,
the soul which he has in his Fox great Mystery
hand, and so divine? There is a great difference to be of God with respect to
relation, or creation and to be of God, as of his being, or the same being with
him; the one is common to the whole Creation ( for of him are all things) the
other is peculiar to the blessed Creator. Magnus Bine says the Soul is not
infinite in it self, but Fox great mystery p. 29
is a Creature, and Richard Baxter says it is a spiritual substance. Answ. Now
consider what a Condition these called Ministers are in, they say that which is
a Spiritual substance is not infinite in it self, but a creature; that which
came out from the Creator, and is in the hand of the Creator, which brings it
up; and to the Creator again, that is infinite in it self, which the hand goes
against him, that does evil, in which hand the Soul is which is immortal and
infinite, which hand is infinite, which brings it up to God is infinite.

If any man can match the ignorance, confidence, blasphemy and nonsense of this
passage, out of the mouths or pens of any but the Quakers, he may be reckoned a
great discoverer But this is received by those poor deluded souls as infallibly
true and divine mystery (being the dictates of George* Fox) whom none of them
dare or will contradict, such is the stupendous captivity of these poor people.

Is not the Soul without beginning come from God? It is not horrid Blasphemy to
say the Soul is a part of God, for it Fox great mystery
came out of him, and that which came out of him is of him. Thus I have proved
(not by remote consequences but their open and plain assertions; and that
pleaded for after their wild manner) hat they hold the Soul of Man to be God,
apart of the Divine being, infinite in it self, without beginning-part of the
creator: here is enough of blasphemy and idolatry for one author to fill the
mouths of many. I shall cite yet more of them, that none may think it is but
one Quaker (though I may stand for a thousand) who is so prodigiously wicked.
6. Fisher velata quaedam revelata p. 17.


And whereas you Querie; whether the said Spirit [the Spirit of man] is mortal
or immortal? I answer, it is immortal, and neither mortal nor corruptible; but
the immortal and incorruptible seed of God, even something of the living word,
which is said to be made flesh. What the word is that was made flesh John says
was God, 1. John. 1.

That which the Lord from Heaven begets of his own Penningtons Quest. 27.
Declaration against poverty query 27.
image and likeness, of his own [substance] of his own seed, of his own Spirit
and pure life; Speaking of the Saints the members of Christ. Whether do you
wait and believe, -- to have the same mind which was also in Christ Jesus? who
thought it no robbery to be equal with God. And Christ thought it no robbery to
be equal with God; yet he was no Pharisee, though of the pharisees judged a
blasphemer, and as he is, so are we says the Saints. -- And they who dwell in
the truth, witness Parnel Shield, etc p. 37.
one with another; For the light of God owns its own, for God cannot deny
himself.

They own the Spirit of God, Christ the seed, and the spirit of man, to be but
one and the same thing; but some times will deny any to have a Spirit at all
but the regenerate, that they may not say the unregenerate have the Spirit of
God, or God the Spirit in them. See Fishers rare distinction to serve this
turn. Fisher velata quaedam revelata p 13


As to the Spirit of man, -- which concurres to the constituting of man in his
primitive perfection; it is the breath of life which God breathed into his
Soul, after he had formed him as to his body of the dust of the earth; whereby
he came to be a living Soul, a Soul that did partake something of Gods own
life, -- this (Spirit of man) is that living principle of the divine nature,
which man did before his degeneration., and shall g^vin after his regeneration
partake of. This Charge being of so black and horrid a nature, I did not judge
it unmeet to prove the truth of it by abounding instances; and now Reader
judge, and put on the largest Charity that a man or Christian ought in any case
to exercise and give thy verdict, if I have not made appear That the Quakers
are gross Idolaters, so far as owning and professing that to be God which is
not God will contribute to a demonstration.

I shall manage my second grand argument but briefly, false God; seeing they
own and profess a false God.

All those who worship that as God (professedly and according to their
professed Principles) which is not God are gross idolaters. But the Quakers do
so: Therefore, the Quakers are gross idolaters.

I shall not prove the first proposition, which none will deny. The second I
prove by their own concession (considered with the proof I have made of the
light within every man and the Souls and Spirits of men not to be God) but you
may take the argument in this form.

All they who worship professedly, and according to their professed principles
the light within every man, or the Souls and Spirits of any men as God, worship
a false God. But so do the Quakers: Therefore they worship a false God.

Who are not sprung from the noble gentle seed, and to those honor is not due,
neither can we bow unto Shield of the Truth, p. 25.
them; for if we should, we should set the Devil in the room of God, and give
unto him that which is due to God. So that to those who are Quakers, and have
the birth of the light within, the noble and gentle seed, (as they call it) to
them (with respects to that) they may bow. And withal he tells you, it is such
a bowing as is peculiar to God; for where it is used to such who have not God
in them, (in the Quakers sense) it is a setting the Devil in the room of God.

If it be objected, that they bow to none: I answer, Light Within, this Soul or
Spirit in any men, as they profess to worship God, they give them or it Divine
Worship. There was a time when many gave honor and worship John Bolton Senior.
to James Naylor; one (now a grand Quaker) not being then pleased with it,
James told him, that if they did it to him as a Man, he disowned it; but if
they did it to the Light Within him, he accepted it: If any doubt of the truth
of this, the Process against him in Richards Parliament will prove it. And John
Bolton the Elder, the Quaker I speak of, can tell you more of it; and I doubt
not but that for the reproach, and worse things which would follow it, we
should soon find it a general practice with the Quakers, to give visible
worship to the Gods that dwell in the Temples of each others Carcases. But I
proceed to further proof.

He that will worship Christ in his fullness (in the Majesty Penningtons
questions, etc. p. 24.
of his Glory, Dominion, and Power) must learn to bow down at the lowest
appearances of his Light and Spirit, even at the feet of Jesus. He calls it
worship, by Christ they all mean the Light Within, and the lowest appearances
must be bowed at, which is the least measure of the Light Within.

Priest. 'To say that Christ is within man, is to 'worship Angels, and not to
hold the Head Christ. This he makes the Priest to say; but whether any did so
or no, it matters not to my purpose: But his answer. Answ. Which none comes to
witness Christ Fox great mystery, p. 55.
the Head, but who witness him in them, that the Angels must worship him that
died and suffered at Jerusalem; and they that worship him in them, worship not
the Angels; and they that are not worshipping him in them, are worshipping Men,
Devils, or Angels. By the Christ that died and suffered at Jerusalem, they
intend nothing less than the Son of Mary. I have already showed, they utterly
deny him to be the Christ, and they own Christ suffering at Jerusalem in no
other sense than they say he died, suffered or was crucified in every one of
themselves: And that you may be convinced of the truth of what I here affirm,
mark what follows.

They are false [Ministers] who preach Christ Smith Prim. p. 9.
Without, and bid people believe in him as he is in heaven above; but they are
the true Ministers that preach Christ Within.

C. This is a great difference in their Doctrine, for the one to pretend to
preach Christ Without, and another preaches him Within.


Father. Yes, it does make a great difference, and has no more fellowship
together, than the East has with the West.


So that the Quakers Christ, the Light Within, is not only some part of the
true Christ, who may (as Christ) be Without as well as Within them, but they
are at such odds one with another, that they can have no more fellowship than
East and West; and this is the Christ they worship, and to worship any other
(as Fox says) is to Worship Men, Devils, or Angels. Thus I have made good my
second Argument, and thereby proved them gr^ss Idolaters.

And there is somewhat in their Idolatry that is S. 6.
not common ^dolatry, for it is Ap^tatical Idolatry, which is so earnestly and
with such an Emphasis exclaimed against by the Lord: Has a Nation changed 2.
Jer. 11. 12
their Gods, which are yet no Gods; but my people have changed their glory for
that which does not profit. Be astonished O ye Heavens at this, be ye horribly
afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord. And it is no less aggravated, in
that (while the Heathen, who had not their means to know God, yet were gross
Idolaters; and as Pen says true enough, worshipped (as the Egyptians) an Ape,
a Crocodile, yea Herbs, almost any thing) these Wretches (for better they are
not) worship that Natural Conscience, that Spirit of Man, which is not only a
Creature, an ignorant Creature, but full of darkness, error, pride, all manner
of sin; and worst of all, a Blasphemer of the God of Heaven, and his Son Jesus
Christ the dear Redeemer.

But what now does it boot them to say, they Worship and own the Creator, and
Christ, and the Lord, and only him, and such like? And what folly is it, after
such Evidences, for any to say, Sure they are not so had, their principles are
of a more (tolerable at least) stamp, they are civil, zealous people for
Religion in their way? How! will nothing but drunkenness, or robbery of men in
their outward goods, and such like vices, render men wicked? will not the
highest affronts to Heaven? must men be believed rather than God in his Word,
which has spoken of such persons to arise, 1 John 2 Chap. and many other
places? See how God excused those in the second of Jer. in the 19. 23, and 24.
Verses.

Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove
thee: Know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing, and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the LORD thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord
God of Hosts.

How can thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? See thy
way in the Valley, know what thou have done: thou art a swift Dromedary,
traversing her ways.

A wild Ass used to the Wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure;
in her occasion who can turn her away? All they that seek her will not weary
themselves, in her month they shall find her.

CHAP. XVII.
The Quakers deny the Resurrection of the Dead.
I Doubt not but all who are not infatuated with the Quakers Spirit, to a
perverting the genuine sense of almost all the expressions of Principles of
Faith, will understand by the Resurrection of the Dead, the raising again to
life, and from the dust and corruption, the bodies of men and women, however
disposed of after their natural death or dissolution. The Quakers will deny
their guilt of this Charge, and come off with an Allegorical evasion. They will
tell you^ that they believe and own the Resurrection of the Dead, yea, of the
dead body: whereas in truth their opinion and meaning is quite another thing
than the ordinary acceptance of that Doctrine, as will appear by the instances
following.

And has no will, nor wisdom, nor reason left in him, Smith Cat. p. 31.. 2.
but all baptized down into the sufferings of Christ -- and there the power
kills him, and gives him life again, and so man lays down his own life, and
takes up life in Christ, in which life he comes to be raised in the
Resurrection of Christ. I must confess this account is like his, who though he
may have too much Will, is utterly void of Reason: But he that shall own no
other Resurrection of the Body, than what Smith expresses, comes under that
severe rebuke of the Apostle; Who concerning the Faith have erred, saying, that
the Resurrection is past already, and have destroyed the faith of some. The
foresaid Author says farther.

Quest. But must man pass through death, and rise p. 29.
again while he is in the Body? Answ. Yes, for except he be regenerated, and
born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: And therefore he must die
to the first Adams flesh, and be quickened and raised again in the second Adams
Spirit: And so in the Resurrection and life, enter the Kingdom as a little
Child. You see here plainly, that their Resurrection of the Body is but their
Regeneration, and this is fulfilled while they are in the body.

But above all that I have read of the Quakers, Velata quaedam revelata.
Fisher is the best skilled in the allegorizing of the Resurrection. But if you
will not be admonished, nor persuaded by Moses and the Prophets; [ within you]
neither will you be persuaded by such of us, who were once dead in Sin with
you; but are now risen to life, by the Power of God, which is his light, and in
the same sent to speak unto you from the dead. I know not how they can deny his
words to be his gloss on 16 Luke 31. If they will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one should rise from the dead. If
Christ had intended Conversion or Regeneration there by rising from the Dead,
it were no rare thing to have such Preachers sent to them; for all the Saints
of God are such as are Regenerated; and such Preachers they had many at that
time: we may conclude, that the Resurrection spoken of by Christ, was of some
one in the state of the Dead, to have his body raised to life, and with that
advantage of experience to preach to them.

Whereby the heart is free from corruption, and Naylor Love to the Lost, p. 3.
made able to escape the pollutions of the World, and to run in the pure ways
with delight; which is the gl^rious liberty of the Sons of God, the
Resurrection from the Dead.

I have said enough of what abundantly implies their denial of this great and
fundamental truth, I do not at all expect, nor can I (with any reason) that
they should in their writings, in so many words, deny the Resurrection of the
Dead, because so open and plain dealing in this great point would render them
intolerable, and shut the door against Proselites; but yet in verbal and
private converse they stick not to deny the Resurrection of the same bodies,
which ordinarily when dead are put into a hole in the ground, and covered with
earth. I have examined many of their Books that pretend to give a full account
of their Tenets and Belief, but in all of them their Resurrection is no other
than I have already expressed.

Take an Account of one or two in their Systems, of their Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Dead.

We say that Christ is the Resurrection and the Life, to Isaac Pennington, Some
principles of the Elect, called Quakers p. 34.
raise up that which Adam lost, -- and to destroy him who deceived him (viz
Adam) so Christ is the Resurrection unto Life, of Body, Soul and Spirit, and so
renews man, etc.

What is this Resurrection, but what they call Regeneration? and the
Resurrection of the Body, is but in the same sense as the Soul and Spirit is
raised; which is not from a natural death or dissolution of their essential
form, but from their depravation and defection to a sensual and sinful
disposition, and their aversation from God.

Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead.

In the Chapter entitled, 'as above, he has these Naylor love to the lost. p.
78.
words: But to such busy minds who are saying, how are the dead raised? and
with what bodies do they come? I say to such, the Apostles words are very
suitable; Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die, --
but the mystery is sealed with the Sons of God; nor can any ever know with what
bodies they shall arise, but who comes to the Flesh of Christ, and discerns his
Body; the sight whereof in the life slays the Serpent, and opens the Mystery:
Till then, cursed is he that reveals that which God has sealed, and hidden
from the Serpents Wisdom, etc.

Naylor, before and after, quotes many Scripturephrases, which abundantly prove
the Resurrection of the Body after dissolution or natural death; but when all
is done, there is a Mystery, a sealed Mystery in his meaning, and a curse laid
on those who reveal their Tenet: No wonder then, that they speak not out to any
other but themselves, whom he dare trust with the greatest abominations in
their delusions; but notwithstanding his inhibition, diverse of them have to me
acknowledged, that they believe not that the body, which when dead, is
ordinarily put into a hole in the ground, and covered with earth, and turns to
dust, shall ever be made alive again.

And that which may put you out of doubt, that this is their Tenet, I can prove
by many Witnesses, that George Whitehead, one of their chief Misleaders, (after
much importunity to speak his mind plainly in this matter) did affirm, That he
did not believe that his body should rise again after its Death.

I never knew any of them affirm the Resurrection Thou art upon the Catch, we
shall not answer thee, Or, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
Sometimes with that in Job, If a man die, shall he live again? and as the Beast
dies, so dies Man. But when all their Arguments are answered, which they
think are lodged in their Scriptures; their last refuge is their false
interpretation of 15 Cor. 38. God gives it a Body as it pleases him. Who will
doubt, but that such who will not give a plain answer yea or nay, when
questioned about the Resurrection of the Dead; but instead thereof, produce all
those Texts which to them seem to deny the Resurrection; I say who will doubt
that such do deny the Resurrection of the Dead? before I discharge this
subject, I shall answer their Cavils about this point, prove the truth* and
give some inferences from their corrupt wicked Religion, and soul-destroying
Tenet.

First, their Cavil from that Scripture 1 Cor, 15. 50. Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God. By here, is to be understood Corruptible flesh and
blood, which is clear from the consideration of the following words, neither
does corruption inherit incorruption; compare this with ver 42. it is s^wn in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption, and ver. 49. and as we have born the
Image of the Earthly, so also we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly. So that
it is still the same body, only with the Change to spiritual and incorruptible.

For that in Job, if a Man die shall he live again? the meaning can be no more
than this, (if Job understood himself) he shall not live again in this world,
and in that state in which he lives before death; which is plain from what he
most confidently affirms, Job 19. 26, 27. And though after my skin Worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my
self and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my Reins be consumed
within me. And it is remarkable, that God whom he here speaks of seeing, is
intended by him Christ the Redeemer who shall stand at the latter day upon the
Earth verse 25: for that in Fcclesiastes 3. 19. As the one dies so dies the
other. It is expounded in the next verse, all go unto one place, all are of the
dust, and all turn to dust again. But this does not at all oppose Man's
Resurrection out of his dust again.

But that silly evasion which is very frequent with but God gives it a Body as
pleases him; It does no way deny the resurrection of the Body, or condemn
those that enquire into the manner of its being after the Resurrection. For if
God be pleased to acquaint us in his word, that there shall be such a
resurrection, and that it shall be then spiritual and incorruptible; it is our
duty to take his word, and to understand what he is pleased to manifest to us
of this great truth. Another text they frame an objection out of is 1 Cor. 19.
36, 37. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die; and
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be. I answer, that
the Apostle does not call him a Fool, who enquires concerning the resurrection
(which is the common charge of the Quakers from this Text) but him that doubts
of the resurrection, from its seeming impossibility, and for the sameness of
the body though not in all circumstances, yet that it shall be the same
essence, is plain from the relative it all along, which has for its antecedent
the body of flesh and blood, wherein we now live and are visible to the bodily
eyes of one another, and ver. 38. to every seed its own body.

I have met with some of them, who could not, or would not understand it of the
same body, because the verse. 51. We shall all be changed: From whence they
conclude, it cannot be the same body. I would ask such, if they would be
content to be refused their debt owing to them when young being demanded when
old; or owing when well, if demanded when sick; or contracted when they were
not Quakers, and demanded when Quakers? for as to the latter, they will affirm
they are changed, and that from natural to spiritual. But, I suppose, in such
cases, they will show more sagacity, and be content to believe that a change in
a person is not the change of a person; and for all those changes, they are the
same persons still, to whom the money both was and is due.

I might say moreover, that if it be another, and not the same body that shall
be raised again, it is a and where he pleased, and that the Disciples not
knowing him, was not because he was not in the same form as before, but because
their eyes were withholden, that they should not know him, Luk 24. 16.

The woeful companions and consequences of the error

First, This tenet of the Quakers does naturally eat out the heart and vitals
of all Religion, if the dead rise not, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we
shall die. All Religion obliges with a respect to the life to come. The opinion
of no resurrection lets loose the reins to the most extreme sensuality, an
Epicure is then the wisest Man.

Secondly, this error renders it a mere humor, If the dead rise not at all --
and why stand we in jeopardy every hour? 1 Cor. 15. 29. 30.

Thirdly, it utterly subverts and makes Shipwreck But if there be no
resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not risen, and if Christ be not risen,
then is our preaching vain, and your faith also in vain. 1 Cor 15, 13, 14. For
if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ be not raised,
your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. 1 Cor. 15, 16, 17. So that there
is a Chain of the most woeful consequences that this wicked error draws after it.

Fourthly, Then the Gospel is a mere fallacy and

Many more might be inferred of so grand an import, as would render this
Doctrine the most pernicious that was ever hatched among pretended Christians.

CHAP. XIX.
The Quakers profess not the Doctrine of a future reward in another World.
I Have been a diligent Enquirer, to find some expressions life and immortality
to light; what was in the Scriptures of the old Testament more seldom and
obscurely expressed, is the very scope of the Gospel or New Testament, the
peculiar of Christianity: But then certainly Quakerism is no Christianity, that
is so silent in this matter. I know they talk of immortality, and eternal life;
but what is immortality with them? Fox says, man is immortal before death in
his Great Mystery, and their Salvation is no more but what they have within
them, and is accomplished in this world. Farnsworth says (speaking of the
righteousness of Christ) neither was I saved by it: So that his Salvation was
not future, but present or past. And Pennington in some Principles of the
Elect, etc. says, and so they who forget God, and do wickedly, they are to be
turned into Hell. But what Hell is this? no more than what they say is in this
life, For they who forget God, and do wickedly, they go from the life and power
of God into the separation from him, and out of his acceptance; For in the life
is the acceptance: What is here more than is suffered in this life, which we
call paena damni, or the punishment of loss?

A Book entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers, etc. Pen replies, and vindicates
after his fashion the Kingdom of God within, but says not a word to assert
their belief of, and affections to the Heaven above; from whence it is plain,
that they believe no such thing to have a being. I wonder not therefore, that
this is so fr^quently their saying, That if we are not perfect here, we shall
never be perfect.

It is easily deduceable from their more openly professed man. E. Buroughs,
the day he died, expressed himself thus, that he was now putting off this
manner of person, and returning to his own Being, or words of the same import,
which I have quoted on the Chapter of their Idolatry. When I have asked some of
them, what should become of their souls after death? Their answer has been,
they shall be taken into God. Let them profess that they believe a happiness to
be enjoyed by men and women, after their bodies are rotted to dust, distinct
from the Being of God, or that which they had not a thousand years before they
were born, ( i. ^.) to be in God, from whom (as of his Being) they say the soul
came, and it will be news to me, and all that are acquainted with them. In the
mean time I have given you Reasons enough to conclude, they believe no future
blessedness or misery in another world.

I shall now resume the Question, and gather up all the proofs of what I have
affirmed, into an entire body.

If Quakerism be another Dispensation than that of Christ settled and preached
by the Apostles; If it deny the Scripture; If it deny all the Ordinances of the
Gospel; If it deny any influence of Christ's transactions in Judea, above 1600
years since, into our Justification and Salvation, If it deny Jesus the Son of
Mary, the Christ of God; If it own false Gods, and be Idolatry; If it
professedly owns the worshipping of false Gods; If it deny the Resurrection of
the Dead; If it affect not a future blessedness or misery in another world, to
men and women, according to their deeds in this: Then Quakerism is no
Christianity: But all these things are true, and have been proved of Quakerism:
Therefore Quakerism is no Christianity.

PART III.
BEING AN EXAMINATION Of the First Part of VV. PEN'S Pamphlet, CALLED The
Spirit of Truth Vindicated, etc. WITH A Rebuke of his Exorbitances.
WHiles I was writing this Book, I met with William Pen's, entitled, The
Spirit of Truth Vindicated against that of Error and Envy, etc. Which is
pretended to be an Answer to a malicious Libel, entitled, The Spirit of the
Quakers tried, etc. I having the piece by me, I once perused it. In the
general. I res^nted it, as one of the best, and most ingeniously (...)aged, and
beyond all material and just excepti(...) at least by the Quakers) that ever I
read against (...) sort of people. But reading Pen's Answer, (...) finding his
Epistle giving such a Character of his (...)versaries Book and himself, for
malice, lameness, (...)ing, and what not, that might render it and him (...)ed
and contemptible; I began to mistrust my conclusion; supposing a person of P's.
education and pretenses, would not say so much evil of it without great cause;
and therefore I compared them diligently.

But for P's. sake, I shall believe it more than possible, I am altogether
ignorant of the name or person of the Author of the Piece opposed by Pen; and
if he be a Socinian, as Pen affirms, I shall be far enough from vindicating him
therein: but for the Piece it self, wherein Pen says he could find neither
head nor tail, I will sell my eyes and brains for two pence, if it deserve so
contemptible a Character: And for the Answerer Pen, if he were not furnished
with forehead* and tales beyond measure, his Pamphlet would have had nothing
remarkable in it.

I expecting next his Epistle and Preface, an ^rderly I find him taking up his
Post in the Quakers conceited strong hold of the infallible guidance of the
Spirit of God, afforded to his people; exclusive of any other means. In the
debating of which, he roams and tosses to and fro, like a man in a confused
troubled dream, for above thirty pages. His pretenses therein lying athwart my
present work, I thought meet to give some account of his Forces; especially
considering him to be a man of noise, and no small prop to the Quakers Cause,
in their own esteem. His Question in which he pretends to include the Quakers
strength, and which he says he is resolved to stand by as such, he states in
these words.

The Question stated.

Whether Gods holy and unerring Spirit, is, or should be the proper Judge of
Truth, Rule of Faith, and Guide of Life among men, especially under the
Administration of the blessed Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or
not? I affirm it, and proceed to prove it by Scripture and Reason. Considering
his words foregoing, (which are too many, and too worthless to transcribe) and
what he aims at in the handling of this Question, I never read one so lame and
deformed in my life, come forth with such state and confidence, and such a
train or rout of mediums, as deformed as it self: There is in it neither Logic
nor Honesty. Certainly if he had not turned Quaker, and in that fall put all
out of joint, he could not likely, after so good Nursing, have been thus
lamentably cripled in his Intellect, and somewhat besides.

First of all, here is a fallacy, a been divisis, ad male conjuncta: many
Questions confounded together. Secondly, no explanation of the terms, most all
of which are metaphorical or amphibious, and in that part especially affirmed,
the greatest ambiguity of all.

Vt quisque est lingua nequior,
Solvans, ligantque quaestionum vincula,
Per syllogismos plectiles.
He tells us indeed, page ^7. that there is no more difference to him between a
Judge, Rule and Guide, than essentially there can be in the Wisdom, Justice,
and Holiness of God; he should have added, nor between truth, faith, and life
among men, and then he would have showed himself a workman indeed, to have so
stitched them together into one, as would admit of no distinction. I do not
admire, that his Acumen cannot distinguish Essence and Subsistence, three
Persons in one Divine Being and Godhead; who cannot distinguish these
Attributes of God, nor these acts, with respect to men, mentioned in the
Question. He is unlike to wade through a deep River, who is so often over head
and ears in a shallow Dish.

But these escapes are but the D^st of the Balance proper in a Question, as
modifying these Offices or Acts of the Spirit, is greatly improper. Proper is
sometimes in opposition to figurative, sometimes in opposition to common,
sometimes in opposition to meet or fit; in which sense he would be understood,
it does not fit his purpose nor principles to tell us: but this is an unworthy
part of a Disputant, and becoming none but those who are resolved not to be
understood. If he would assert the Quakers Tenet, he must say, it is the
peculiar, sole and immediate Guide, Rule and Judge; and this is that he pleads
for now and then, after his fashion, in his following arguments; and all the
Quakers I have read or discoursed, plead for in plain terms. But if it had been
so expressed in the Question, his Nose would have been held too hard to the
Grind-stone, in attempting strictly to prove it, and most would have smelt the
Rankness of Quakerism.

But Mr. Pen, do you deal fairly and honestly with your Adversaries, to imply
in your Question, that we deny the Spirit of God to be a proper (that is one
that is fit, and has right to be a) Rule of Faith, Guide of Life, Judge of
Truth? You know that we own it to be such, and that it does both in the
Conscience, and by the Scripture* Creation, and Providence, perform such acts,
to such purposes, and that of right; only we deny that the Spirit always
performs these acts without the use of the Scripture, or any external means or
Ordinances; or that it does so at any time contrary to its mind expressed in
the Scripture. This you should oppose, or you do but trifle, and abuse us, and
your unwary Readers.

The latter part of your Question, which expresses our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ (especially to countenance your Tenet) is playing at Blind-mans-buff.
You should have told us who, or what you mean by Lord and Savior: If it be
understood of the Quakers Lord and Savior, the light within every man, that is
none of our Lord and Savior. If it be understood of the Man Christ Jesus, who
was of the seed of David according to the flesh; who was the Son of Mary
crucified to death on the Cross of Wood by shedding his blood, and is now in
his humane or man's nature united to the Godhead in one person, ascended above
the visible heavens; he is none of your Savior, and can be no more within you
(personally considered) than the body of one individual man can be entirely in
all the men, and women, and children in the world, and at the same time. It
must be a Transubstantiation, much more ridiculous than the Papists, that must
support such a fancy.

It is also no less strange, that you should talk of the a part ante, nor any
other Gospel but the light within, and its immediate Dictates; which you
generally affirm was within every man from the beginning of the world. I shall
not spend time and paper to show the many other absurdities in your question; I
have left a H^rvest for Gleaners. For the proof of your affirmation (such a
blind one as it is) you produce abundance of Scriptures, which are as much to
your purpose, as if you had quoted only the 36. Chap. of Genesis; wherein is
contained Esau's posterity* and how many Dukes there were of his Race. Yet I
shall produce your arguments for the Readers satisfaction, that he may believe
his own eyes, and I shall be more honest than to frame a mere whimsie out of my
own head to abuse you; and say, after this lofty manner of disputing, you
undertake our overthrow; which is your guilt in the fourth page of your Book.

Your first proof you pretend from Genesis 6. 1. And the Lord said, my Spirit
shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh, yet his days shall
be an hundred and twenty years. I will for once transcribe your Argument
verbatim, that it may be notorious, how loftily you dispute.

If God's unerring Spirit has been wont to strive with men, either to convince
them of, or convert them from the evil of their thoughts, words, or deeds; or
else to provoke them yet more fully to do the will of God, so as to press on
from one degree of glory to another; then men h^ve had an unerring Spirit to be
their Teacher, and Judge, and Rule, and Guide of that Truth, concerning that
Faith, and in that most holy way, which leads to Eternal Life: But the
Scripture proves the first Proposition, that Gods Spirit has frequently strove
with men, and for the ends beforementioned; and c^nsequently, they have not
been without an holy unerring Spirit to teach, judge, regulate, and guide them.

If I should only say, your whole Argument is a non se^uitur's; I believe your
conclusion would be most absolute, that it was for want of eyes; and that I
dare not touch a bough of it, for fear of pricking my fingers: A man had need
of good Arithmetic also to numb^r the terms. You tell us the Scripture proves
your first Proposition. You are a non* Such for diving, if you can fetch up
from this Scripture what is expressed in your first proposition; especially the
latter member of it.

It is more than probable that the Spirit did strive with them to make them
better than they were, yet none of those ends are expressed in the Text: but
that it should be, that they might more fully do the Will of God, and press on
from one degree of Glory to another, is a guess wonderfully well becoming your
infalliblity. Why did you not say, or to turn them into Suns, Moons, and Stars?
which were all out as much in the Text as the other: and I dare say, some of
your Friends would have taken themselves bound to believe it, who find no fault
with greater absurditi^s, dropped from their admired Dict^tors: but,

Quos D^us vult perdere, hos dementat. There were eight persons saved in the
Ark, but one Noah said to be righteous before God; and all the ^est overwhelmed
by the Deluge for their extreme impieties: yet, these were pressed on from one
degree of Glory to another. The consequence of your first Proposition is, all
manner of Fruits which you had a mind should be grafted on this Stock; but as
the Text will not impart its Sap to your Proposition, so your Proposition is as
dry to your Cons^quence: but that is no matter, if they will not grow one upon
another, you will make them hang together, right or wrong. Yea and if the Spirit
do but strive, it must be how you will have it, and for what ends you please,
or you will rack the letter for it; but the'res no cruelty to a dead letter.

B^t Mr. Pen if your conscience have any eyes to compare the Text, and what you
lay at its doors, and see how alike they look. Your Question is of the Spirits
teaching among men, etc. indefinitely; and your proof speaks of the Spirits
striving with wicked men. Your aim is to prove it an immediate and peculiar
Teacher, etc. of Gods people, the Text speaks of neither. If I affirm the
Spirit strove with them by providential Chastisements, ominous presages of
Calamities at hand; by his goodness, which leads to Re^entance; by the Ark
which Noah built, (moved by faith and fear) and by which he condemned the
unbelieving besotted World; by his Preaching righteousness; I can prove my
being guided therein by the unerring Spirit of God, at another rate, than you 2
Pet, 2. 5.
can your contradiction.

But your wanderings from truth and reason, can so infatuated, as to conclude
from a Text which says, my Spirit shall not always strive with man, that it
does now teach, etc. and God, has not left his people in our present, nor will
in future ages, without his Spirit to teach them immediately, and solely; which
is in your Question, or your prosecution of it; and should have been expressed
there, if you had had so much ingenuity. Instead of being angry that I have
showed your vanity, and made your folly in this argument such a spectacle to
the world; you have reason to give me thanks that I examine it no further.

However, before we part, I will try you at another Neh. 3. 19, 20. Yet thou in
thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the wilderness: the pillar of the
Cloud departed not from them by day to lead them in the way, etc. This part of
your quotation is not only no friend to your affirmation and principles, but
an invincible adversary. No man in his wits will say, the pillar of the cloud
and fire were the Spirit of God: and if God led his people by them, they were
not led only and immediately by the Spirit of God. It may be the latter part
of your citation may do more for you. Thou gave also thy good Spirit to
instruct them. This good Spirit was (mainly) the Spirit of God, which he put
upon Moses and Joshua, and some other their chief Persons by God's appointment,
as is evident from these Texts.

And I will take off the Spirit which is upon thee; and will put it upon them;
and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, Number. 11. 17.

And the Lord said unto Moses, take thou Joshua the Sun of Nun, a man in whom
is the Spirit; and lay thy hand upon him, Number. 27. 18.

Thou leadest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron, Psalm.
77. 20. Now God is said to give them his good Spirit to instruct them, by
bestowing it in such a way and measure on their instructers and guides; though
I deny not but every true Israelite had the Spirit also dwelling in him, yet
they were never the less, but the more submiss to the conduct of their mediat,
or if you will men-teachers, and guides for that.

Your third chosen Scripture for your service is, But there is a Spirit in man,
and the inspiration of the Job. 32* 3.
Almighty gives him understanding. I shall explain this text by another, which
carries the full sense of it, and almost the same words: For the Lord gives
wisdom: out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. But does this
encourage men to cast off all external means, and the use of their reason?
Nothing less. It is given as an encouragement to the use of the means expressed
in the four first verses, which are made conditional of being blessed with that
knowledge and wisdom which comes from the Lord. If thou searchest. If thou
triest. It will now be more easy to take in the right sense of your cited
Scriptures.

There is a Spirit in man, that is, a rational Soul Elihu) may attain a measure
by that divine blessing, beyond the aged and more experienced. If you can prove
that those holy men, who carried on that debate, of which the Book of Job is a
history, did neglect the external means which the Lord afforded them, for
informing their judgments about divine and spiritual concernments, upon the
grounds of the inward teachings of the Spirit of God, Eris mihi magnus Apollo:
and unless you can do that, your arguing from this Text is but mere trifling,
beating of the air, and contending for what is granted on all hands, but
nothing at all to your purpose. And it is not beside the purpose to consider
that those holy eminent Saints who contended with Job, were rebuked by God; for
not speaking rightly of God as Job did: and Job did not pass free without a
chiding also for his miscarriages and presumptions; Job 42. verse. 7. and
forward

To conclude this Argument, you talk at a miserable ^.
lame rate to say; that because the inspiration of the Divine Spirit gives
understanding, therefore it is not from the strength of man's reason, memory, or
utmost c^eature-ablities, that his knowledge of religious and heavenly things
comes; but from the revelation and discovery of the inspiration of the
Almighty. Let me tell you once for all, that if reason, memory, and humane
abilities have nothing at all to do in the search, and understanding of Divine
things; a mere animal, or such an idiot as Jack Adams may know as much of the
Divine and Heavenly mysteries as W. Pen: but if I should say, such a one is as
able a Teacher, or Writer as you; I doubt not but you would take your self to
be not a little affronted.

And it is as lame arguing to conclude, because some i. e. Quakers) have in
these days, (wherein God has blessed us with so large a portion of his written
Word, or Word without us) sufficient teachings by immediate Divine Revelations,
to lead them infallibly in the way that is most acceptable with the Lord,
without the use of their created faculties, or any outward means, is no good
consequence.

The next Scripture you abuse, is Psalm. 139 7. Whither Psalm. 139. 7.
shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence; from
whence you scribble thus: If Gods unerring Spirit be so nigh, and the sense of
it so certain, it must be either to reprove for evil done, or to inform uphold
lead and preserve in reference to all good: now in which of the two senses it
shall be taken, the presence of Gods Eternal Spirit, and his being the Saints
Instructor, Judge, Rule and Guide, are evidently deduceable from the words. --
Rudis indigestaque moles! worse than ever Bear brought forth her Cubs! which
with her licking may be brought into some shape; but your products are so
defective, both in Truth, Right Reasoning, Syntax, and Sense, that it is no
dis-reputation to your Adversary to be confounded by them. It is an effectual
(but an impudent) course to silence all the world from opposing you, by writing
such confident confused nonsense. Were it not for the sake of many who conceit
your infallibility, which you are here so blindly pleading for, I would as soon
abandon my time to dispute with a distracted man in his raving fits, as with W.
Pen, till he come better to himself than I can find him in this Pamphlet.

If Gods infinite Being, Omnipresence, Omniscience,

We may presume that you intend this Text to etc. In reference to all good by
the Spirit of God; which you say is evidently deduceable from the words. But
who would have thought that such desirable considerations, and the certain
sense of them, should put so holy a man as David on such expressions of going
and flying from the Spirit and presence of the Lord? No doubt the presence of
God is every where, in the Skies, the Seas, the Wilderness; what then? does he
therefore perform all these acts where ever he is present in his infinite
Being, even where there are no intelligible Creatures? Does he judge, inform,
instruct stones, and trees, and mountains? I, and must do so too, or else he
does not answer the end of his presence being so nigh? Truly Mr. Pen, we have
had more reverend thoughts of the Eternal and Omnipresent God, than to assign
any thing as the end of his Being but himself.

But it may be you lay your stress on the certain David when he so long time
was tainted with a heap of impieties? Was it so with Jonah, when he fled (as he
thought) from the presence of the Lord? or was it so with you when you wrote
some things in this book of yours which I shall acquaint you with before I have
done. If it should be granted you, that all Gods people have the certain sense
of it, without doubting or alteration, it would be nihil adrhombum, far from
proving Gods Spirit to be the peculiar Teacher of his people, and so to teach
them, as to render them infallible, which is the mark you aim at.

The next Scripture you produce is, Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my
God; thy Spirit is good, lead me into the Land of uprightness. Psalm. 43. 10. To
bend this Text to your bow, you talk thus; The Question will be, whether it was
David's intent, and the scope of his desire, that God should teach, and lead him
by his good Spirit, or some other thing? But methinks it is resolvable in the
affirmative, in two respects. What a strange Question is this! Who doubts but
David commended the Spirit of God as a good Teacher? what then? must all other
Teachers, which the Spirit of God makes use of, as the means by which he
teaches, be cast off? Suppose I should say such a man is a good Schoolmaster,
I would fain be taught by him; does that imply I would not learn out of a
Grammar, or other books which he uses to that end? or, does it not rather
conclude, that I like not only his abilities, but his method and means by which
he teaches? The Psalmist says, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O
Lord, and teach out of thy Law. You would little less than hoot at him, that
should from hence conclude, the Psalmist to reject the Spirit as a Teacher, and
to admit of no other Teacher but the Law. It is after this lofty manner of
disputing you undertake our overthrow.

When you have so learnedly framed your Question, Or, you make to consist of
two members, which would he have for his Teacher? the Spirit, or some other
thing? You answer it like your self, Methinks it is resolvable in the
affirmative. But I pray, which of the parts of your Question do you affirm?
which do you deny? Why truly it is the safest course you take, to affirm it of
both; for then the truth is owned, and (in this point) the quarrel ended. But
then what need your fighting against what you affirm, unless you are resolved
to be quarrelsome. Alas poor man! it was by a mere mistake you said truth; you
intended to resolve in the affirmative, that he desired to be taught by the
good Spirit of God; but in the negative, of any other thing:

Canis festinans coecos parit catulos. The two respects which thus blinded you,
are enough How that the Word was hid in his heart. -- That internal Law, Word,
and Spirit of God, which plentifully shows how much he was an Enthusiast, and
Quaker, in the sense this man esteems us most Heterodox. Law, Word, and Spirit,
are all one with you. But where do you find the Word hid in the hearts of the
Saints, called the Internal Word? It Is true, that it is within, in the memory,
faith, love, and hid there with the hiding of security: but it was as much
without before it was within, as the Child's Lesson which it gets by heart out
of a book; which when done, you might as well call it, the Child's Internal
Lesson.

Your second respect is, the very words (viz. of the imply the thing we urge
them for, and can import no other sense. Also what did that clause do there?
viz. thy Spirit is good. Can the Spirit be good for nothing, if the external
word be good for something as a Teacher? I mistrust not the eyes of any but the
Quakers, but that they will see at first glance, what a feeble Champion you
are, without my pointing.

Parvas habet spes Troja, si tales habet. I shall trace you foot by foot no
further; you shoot at so many marks at once, that it is hard to find which you
level at, only in the conclusion, you presume you have hit the Pin of the white.

Vnis^nat cuculis, rudibus geminantibus odis. Your Arguments are gener^lly sick
of one disease,

The Spirit of God essentially considered, or as very God, is every where at
all times, without the least change or alteration for ever.

But the Spirit of God in and with his people (according to the import of those
Texts of Scripture which you produce) is not every where, at all times, without
any the least change or alteration for ever: Therefore the Spirit of God in and
with his people, (according to the import of those Texts of Scripture which you
produce) is not the Spirit of God essentially considered, or very God.

The first Proposition is proved from Mal. 3. 6. For I am the Lord, I change
not. The second Proposition I prove from Joel 2. 28, 29. which you cite Page
21. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit on all
flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, etc. This was in time,
what, and where it was not before. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Page 20. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc. it was future,
what it was not before; and is spoken of the gathering of the Jews from all
Countries. Then the Spirit of God shall be put within them: but this is not
always the same without alteration. 1 Cor. 6. 19. cited by you, Page 30. What?
know you not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you.
The Holy Ghost did not dwell in them, according to the import of that Text,
before their Conversion.

The Lord was in the Temple at Jerusalem, and dwelt therein. I have built a
House of habitation for 2 Chronicles. 6. 2
thee, and a place for thy dwelling. Who is able to build him an House? seeing
the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens 2 Ki. 19. 15
cannot contain him. How did God dwell there more then elsewhere? but by
placing his Name, owning a relation to it as his house, sanctifying it to his
own use, manifesting himself in it to those who waited on his Ordinances there
solemnized. But now the place is void of all the footsteps of that presence.

I deny not, I doubt not, but the presence of God exercise, and delight for
ever: yet it is most certainly no more his Essential Presence, than is every
where. The difference is his being related to, actuating of, effecting in, and
manifesting himself to, and union with the Souls of his people, so as none in
the world but they are blessed withal. And herein the Saints are so happy, they
may well be content, and not put the name of the Godhead (in a strict and
proper sense) on these his blessings. Such conceits are the natural source (and
have been) of Opinions, and practices dishnourable to God, and unworthy of his
Grace.

Another fallacy in your arguings, is from the Spirits

But your main fallacies are these two, from an infallible Spirit teaching, to
the infallibility of the Subjects, in which the Spirit dwells as a Teacher; and
from the Spirits teaching, to its immediate and peculiar teaching.

For the first of these, I shall produce some of your wild reasonings. 1 These.
15. 19. Quench not the Spirit Page
-- Those to whom he gave the caution had the Spirit, if those could not quench
the Spirit, who had it not: Consequently the Primitive Churches were not
without an unerring Spirit. But I believe, and can prove, that they who had not
the Spirit themselves, might quench it in others, by despising Prophecyings in
the exercise of its gifts, 20. ver. and those who have the motions of the
Spirit (as you say the old World had before the Flood) may be far from having
the Spirit in the Scripture-sense, i. e. dwelling in them to sanctification.
But supposing they had the Spirit dwelling and teaching in them, it is a
miserable erroneous and weak Conclusion, that they were infallible. That this
is that you would conclude from such improper premises, is apparently your
drift all along.

A taste of this you give us p. 32. in these words: 2. Page 32.
If God sends forth his Spirit into the hearts of his children, then are they
not without an infallible Spirit; but the express Letter of the Scripture
affirms it; and consequently, our Adversaries reflection upon us, for making it
part of our belief, is unsound and condemnable.

Your Adversaries have not so little knowledge of the Spirit of God, as to say
the Spirit of God is fallible: nor yet so ignorant of your spirits, and of the
Scripture, as to say you are infallible. If the latter be it you say is
unfound, it is upon no other grounds, than your arguing from the infallibility
of Gods Spirit, to the infallibility of your spirits, or of theirs who are Gods
people. But we are not ignorant that your principles make no distinction, much
less a difference between the spirits of Gods people, and the Spirit of God:
which is indeed the secret bias which moves you so obliquely; of which I shall
give a more ample account in its place. But you are yet so unwilling to speak
plainly your mind, that you appear in many shapes to insinuate this untruth,
but are industrious to be uncertain and amphibious;

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo. You say, page 31. And how this man can
be esteemed 3. Page 31.
a good Christian, who would render Christ Jesus the Head of a fallible body,
by divesting Christians of an infallible Spirit, I leave to persons of better
judgment, more honesty, and greater moderation to judge? By this we may more
than guess your mind: But verily, if the asserting Christ to be the Head of a
fallible body, i. e. that may in some things err or be mistaken, be worthy of
your such reflections, I know none will escape them among professed Christians,
but Quakers and Papists. I see by this you may serve for a Voter at Rome; but
your Logic is so leaky, you will hardly attain a higher promotion there; she
will be loath to venture her Grandeur, built upon the Foundation of the
Churches infallibility, upon your pitiful scribbling.

I wonder how you came to talk of Christ's body, to i. e. the invisible Church;
that is not yet completely existing; and I doubt not, but when they meet and
vote, they will be infallible: but that will not be yet. Nor yet the Universal
Church visible, i. e. Professors of Christianity, Members of the Universal
Church, or any particular organical Church: for your party have gored, and
besmeared those to excess. I know not how we shall get a vote from them, except
in the Creed called the Apostles; to which (a small matter excepted,) all give
consent. But then the Quakers are none of the Church, who will subscribe but to
few of the Articles in that Creed.

How shall we find your meaning? I will undertake to shoot near the mark, if
not hit the pin in the white. You intend it of all the Quakers, and every
individual person among them, at least such who give up to the light within,
and its guidance: and is the Church in Spirit (a Phrase used by Friends more
than once) in their writings, but never in the Scriptu^e.

But Mr. Pen, if Christ be Head to none but the infallible, woe to the poor
Saints, who have trusted hitherto they had a Head in Heaven, who has pity on
the ignorant, and those that are out of the way; who is their Advocate with the
Father, and thereby a remedy against the the sad consequences otherwise of
their errings. And I am sure Christ is then none of your Head.

But to conclude this form of your reasoning, what

Monstr' horrend'inform', ingens cui lumen ademptum. Were you so judicious and
humble to submit to the certain teachings of the Spirit, in and by the

I might proceed to your fallacious arguing from page 18, 29. and many more of
your fallacious and confused arguings I might expose, were it worth while to
trace such a Trifler in all his Vagaries, who has the faculty (only to the
stupidly ignorant.)

Fallere mill modis, n^c non intexere frauds. In the winding up of your
entangled bottom, you frame an Objection thus:

Object. 1. Though you have said a great deal, to Page 37.
prove that Christians should have an infallible Spirit in general: Yet you
prove nothing distinctly, but confound a Judge, Rule, and Guide together.

Habemus confitentem reum. Least you eat your words, I shall put good proof
That to me there is no more difference then essentially there can be in the
Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness of God -- They are so interwov^n, that the one
goes not without the other: P. 17. 6*
Thus it is in being a Judge, Rule, and Guide, etc.

What would you say of a man that should affirm his brains, heart, and lungs
(being essential to the life of the body, and so interwoven, that the one goes
not without the other) are but one and the same thing? the one cannot live, and
be in good state, without the other: and therefore they are but one and the
same thing, without difference or distinction. And the man, suppose
John-a-Nokes, should upon this ground, when he has a Delirium or Vertigo
(diseases seated in the brain) be very busy to enquire, what is good for the
Pthysick or Cough of the Lungs, or palpitation of the heart? but being rebuked
for his impertinencies, should reply, they cannot be one without the other:
They are essential to the body of man its perfection; therefore what is said of
the one may be said of the other, and what is good against the Pthysick or
Cough, is good, must be good for a Vertigo or Delirium. Let me advise you next
time you write, to frame no Objections against your self; unless you shall have
learned better to solve them.

A second Objection you frame thus; But at this 3. Page 38.
rate you utterly contemn and seclude the Scriptures, as having no part nor
portion in being a Rule, Judge, or Guide to Christians. I would your whole book
had consisted of Objections; for you have spoken more truth of your own
framing, in two Objections, than in most of your affirmations. You attempt to
solve this with much the like success as the other; you praise the Scriptures,
and hug them hugely, till you have reduced them to much like the shadow of the
true Rule: And then you illustrate the sense of their Authority, in these very
words:

He that is so inward with a Prince, as to know viva voce, what his mind is;
heeds not so much the same when he meets it in print (because in print) as
because he has received a more living touch, and sensible impression from the
Prince himself, to whose secrets he is privy. And this the Scriptures teach us
to believe is a right Christian state and privilege: For, said the Apostle, we
have the mind of Christ; and the secrets of God are with them that fear him:
And guide me by thy counsel, and bring me to thy glory.

What Friends, but when they read this Princely spoken their minds e'n as
right, as if he had been inspired by them all! and, no doubt, he shall be their
White Boy, (for all his defects) who strokes them so finely, and advances them
to such a singular Dignity of privacy and inwardness with God, that not only
his revealed will in print is known by them in a more honorable and immediate
way; but also his secrets, which never stooped so low, as to be wrapped in
letters.

Here we have (as in a glass) W. P.'s. Opinion of the immediate teachings of
the Spirit, to be not only above his teachings by the Scripture: as to have a
thing whispered in the ear from the Princes own mouth, does excel any Narrative
by a Declaration: but also so much above them, that he who enjoys this favor
(which must still be no other but a Quaker) heeds not so much the same in
print. How much? just not at all. For if this viva vox, more living touch, and
sensible impression, do not put Authority into them, they are but mere Ciphers:
And if this living touch, etc. (as he believes) be without, or contrary to the
Scripture, it is all as good and Authentic. It is upon my Spirit, is of much
more Divine Obligation, than it is written. But Mr. Pen;

That the Scriptures teach us to believe this is a right Christians state and
privilege, is a hard-hearted saying. The Scripture knows nothing of it, nor
could I ever yet have a proof that any of you all ever heard the Voice of God
(as viva voce is to be understood:) and I am very well satisfied the Quakers
may be mistaken, if they should presume they did, ever since some of them took
Paul Hobsons mumbling through a Trunk, and a hole in the wall, to be the voice
or the Lord. But that this should be the state of a right Christian! woe worth
the days past for so many Ages! wherein among all professed Christians, but now
and then one, were in this state; and that but a little while, e're their folly
appeared to all men; only now and then the Papists had a Job to do, for which a
viva vox was a fit pretense.

But you have little Charity in unchristianing all the state is not according
to these Characters. A man in the dark (especially if his fancy be strong) is
full of Visions, which have no other being than his imagination affords them:
this appears to be your state, and the part you are acting.

I shall in short consider your warrants, which you For, said the Apostles, we
have the mind of Christ. Sure he had a good part of it by Tradition from the
other Apostles, who were Christ's Witnesses of what he said and did, and we have
it in the Scripture: And the Secrets of God are with them that fear him. But
where did the Apostle say this? It Is no matter, if it was not the Apostle Paul,
it was the Apostle David, and that is as good: Psa. 25. 14.
Nay, it is all one if it had been the Apostle G. Fox, or the Apostle W. Pen;
whose words and writings are of Prophetical and Apostolical Authority, and may
be numbered among the Scriptures, as well as Paul's, or David's, or any other:
witness your audacious lines put in a different letter to be so understood. You
say, but the Scriptures are herein fulfilled, the holy way the vulturous eye
did never see. -- Page 84.
and that same ravenous Spirit after knowledge our adversary must come to know
judged, etc.

It is further to be considered, that the words you secret, you put secrets:
for Lord, you put God. For the latter you will say it is one and the same sense;
for the Lord is God, and God is the Lord: But here you are too bold for all
that, God has more names in Scripture than one; and if the varying had nothing
of significancy, the Wisdom of God would not have so expressed himself: but to
put secrets for secret, mars the sense: But you will say, not the truth. Yes
verily, the truth in this place: for this Text does not say so; and to say it
says, and the Apostle says, what they say not, is an untruth; and if I
greatly mistake not, the words that follow, and he will show them his Covenant,
are interpretative of the word secret. For indeed, though the matter and
Surface of the Covenant be obvious to every common intelligence, yet the
necessity, worth, a considerable part of the sense; but especially the faith,
interest, and well-grounded comfort of it, are the secrets which this one great
secret the Covenant contains, and this Scripture speaks of, imparting to those
who fear the Lord: yet it excludes not external means.

And guide me by thy counsel. What is this to oppose Have I not written to thee
excellent Pro. 22. 20.
things in counsels, and knowledge? Sure these were then a fit Guide, as Gods
means. But verily there Vitia nostra quae amamus defendimus and malumus ea
excusare quam excutere, Sen. Ep. 117.
appears such a Spirit of slumber, idleness, and worse, in your labors, as if
you gloried in a careless or designed perverting the Scriptures, both for
sense, words, and form; and to vindicate the same of G. Fox, by the Authority
of your like Crimes, or greater. The Text says, Thou shall guide me, etc.
which expresses his Faith in Gods promises; but you turn it into a prayer,
Guide me, etc.

I had almost forgotten a main consideration in viz. ^e meets it in print
(because in print) you here insinuate Psa. 73. 20.
the formal cause of our respects to the written word, or printed; to be its
being in print, and that there lies the difference between you and us.

Not so, good Mr. Pen, the beam in our eyes is not so big. Neither are we
inclined to that piece of superstition; for then no sooner you could get your
conceits in print, but immediately we must hugg them, and get the second
impression in our hearts without more a do: for they are in print. But if you
would know the Truth and speak it of us the next time you have occasion; it is
this,

We value not the sense for the prints sake, but the print for the sense sake,
and the blessings that attends that way of conveying the holy and revealed Will
of God. And so much to correct your vapor, which may do you good; if you have
so much good nature left, as is able to work with it.

And now, Mr. Pen, to shut up this discourse; I shall

Foul Epithets as knave, pupy, fool, rascal, loggerhead, Page 7,
Cheat. This, you say, was the language of your adversaries small Crier; but,
as you call it, of a loathsome scent, so you blow it on the Author of the book
within five lines* -- tryers of other men's spirits, who have so little proof of
the knowledge of their own, as to be wanting in the alphabet, or first
principles of common civility. This is not fair, to charge him with another
faults. But compare this Civility of yours, with your own* thus far this
impertinent man. To all this I say Page III.
he obt^udes an arrant lie upon our very senses. Wretched scribler! how idle?
frivolous? and how very troublesome is he with his how ridicul^us remarks.

If you are not guilty of the obtrusion you impute to W. Pen, will daub his
adversary, and that Per fas, per nefas; and like one greedy of victory, Aut
inveniam aut faciam. You will find him in faults, or make gross ones, and
charge upon him.

G. Fox he thinks, has miscited a Scripture, ergo he is Page 4.
an Impostor, and the Quakers a pack of Heretics; It is after this lofty
manner of disputing, etc.

I never read a more confident untruth. The Authors Argument is too large to
transcribe here.

Your adversary says, some of you excel in many Page 1.
things, which are in themselves good and laudable.

You say, If we excel in all things, as he confesses; Page 10
which is to say, that there are but few things* wherein we done't transcend
all others: and you direct us to page the first, where we may prove your
falsifying.

Your adversary says it is rare with him [ For] to Page 1.
use any text, and not abuse it.

You say, A few Scriptures he mostly confesses, that but one of us has
miscited; either in reference to a disorderly quotation of the words, or
unsuitable application of them, you know he pretends to deal but with G. Fox's
abuses.

Your Adversary says, And indeed I have found Page 2.
it very fruitless to deal with you, by way of reason and Scripture; and Page
3. I will not now deal with you, so much by Arguments drawn from reason or
Scripture and depending purely on the understanding and mind* etc.

You say, He promises for the future to avoid the use Page 13.
of both Scripture and reason; and direct to Page 2.

I could produce in your Spirit of Truth, many more And acter calumniare
aliqu^d adherebit.
such falsities in point of fact, and you saying, Page 1. You carefully perused
the Book; you prove your self to be more than a mere, careless, even a wilful
transgressor.

But if this be your way of answering your adversaries, and throwing contempt
and reproach upon ^.
them, it is not possible for any to escape your hardest (...). And I am
persuaded you are secure of your (...) considering what is objected against
your principles and practices of a Religious concern* by any of your (...)
writings, or you would not thus adventure y(...) ^^putation with them.

I would desire you, if you will hereafter pretend to be (...)swerer; you would
be more solid and rational, then (when you find your adversaries appealing to
the light within you, to judge whether G. Fox. have rightly transcribed the
texts of Scripture he pretends to use; which may be done with a little measure
of natural light, and common sense) to conclude P. 77. 78.
with a high rant, and charging your adversary with infatuation; that he has
given himself the lie, and and you the cause: as if thereby he acknowledged the
light within you, to be so alsufficient, as you pretend, and that if a man can
judge infallibly, when he reads and compairs a few written or printed lines;
whether they agree in the same words: The Quakers light must needs be
infallible, and indefinitely, and without any bounds, at least in Religious and
Divine* Concerns.

But above all, let me entreat you, that if your* The light ^n every man is not
to be extended to all cases whatever: as if every man that attends to the Light
in him, did certainly know what is good, what is evil; right or wrong, in every
case. That then you will not gratify him with such Reason and Rhetoric, as in
the following words of yours: I heartily pity the man, and am really afraid he
has overcharged the strength of his brain; for with me such manifest
contradiction is but a smaller degree of distraction. I would fain have a
rational answer from him, if he be yet capable of one; How can the Light be a
Judge of good and evil, and not be so? and all within the space of ten lines.
If the Light, as by him acknowledged, be a Judge of good from evil, and the
contrary; then in all cases wherein good and evil, right and wrong make up the
Question, the Light cannot be secluded, as wanting in ^rue judgment, because
good and evil are part of the Question in the granted Proposition; deny that
the Light is sufficient in any case of right and wrong, and deny all.

Verily, Mr Pen, you seem to lay a plot here, to

Though I am a little pleasant (for I cannot sudare circa nuces) pray bear with
me. I assure you I have had some heart-akes for you, when I have deeply
considered, that a man of your hopes should be thus left of God (I fear for
pride and giddiness) as to be made a Pillar of Salt, to caution others to take
heed lest they* fall into the same snare; which whatever conceit you may have
of your self, is too apparent. Do not affect to be a Chief of a Party; learn
that Lesson by Scripture Light:

It is better to hear the rebukes of the wise, (I mean Eccles. 7. 5.
not my self) than for a man to hear the Song of Fools. It is great pity, that
what parts God has given you should be fettered, and smeared with the polluted
Chains of the grossest delusions: expect no other, but that God will wither you
in your Rationals more and more, if you will needs Deifie such a poor Creature
as Natural Conscience, and reduce so much within the compass of a poor Earthen
defiled Vessel: But if you are resolved to go on at this rate, let the Title of
your next Book be, instead of The Spirit of Truth, etc. The Spirit of Babel;
and this will much more properly express the Contents of it. Note, Confusion
(...) from Babel in the Hebr. comes our English word Babble.

The Pretenses of the Quakers to Apostolical, and immediately Divine
Inspirations considered; and a Spiritual and Rational account of truly
Apostolical men, and their immediate Inspirations.
NExt to their Tenet of the Light within every this of its immediate Dictates
(which they hold to be as purely Divine as any the Apostles had, or the
Scriptures express) is the grand Pillar of their other opinions and practices,
called Religious.

This Pretext, according to an Author of their own ( E. H. one of Antichrists
Volunteers defeated, page 5.) gives the credit to what they affirm; And yet
would fasten all these upon the Lord, so that his deceit might be of more
Authority, and none might question the matter thereof, because the Lord always
moves to Truth and Righteousness. Well then, if we can prove that the Quakers
are not inspired persons, but far otherwise, we shall prove them gross
Impostors, abominable persons, slanderers and blasphemers of the Holy and
Divine Spirit; and break that snare by which their poor deluded Proselites are
fast bound, and chained to their Dictates.

But sure you will judge that they who pretend thus high, have somewhat like a
Reason for what they affirm: The main Props of this opinion of themselves I
shall bring to light, and examine.

The first is a Prophecy of the pouring out of the Joel 2. 28. -- I will pour
out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy,
etc. Let us consider how much this will befriend them: They will not say (I am
persuaded) that all flesh (in the Text) is to be understood without any
limitation at all; for then Sheep and Oxen must prophecy: nor yet will they
allow that the Spirit shall be poured forth upon all men and women, old and
young, without some limitation; for then the most wicked and sottish must be of
the number; yea, those who are the kee^est Adversaries to their Doctrine (among
which I doubt not they will give me a room:) but if they say every one has the
Light within, which is a principle capable of this Character, if they gave heed
to it, and set it at liberty: I answer, so had all men this principle ever
since the world began (if what they say themselves be true) but the Prophecy
says, It shall come to pass after those days: So that it must needs be meant
of a time then to come: but if it be to be understood (as without doubt it is)
as well of some particular persons, and not all Universally, as of some Age or
Ages, and not all Universally: They must bring some proof that they are the
persons intended; or give us leave to tell them, they have herein stolen the
words of the Lord, which belonged not to them, by falsely applying it to
themselves: And if the Exposition which Peter the Apostle gives of this
Prophecy be worth the heeding, it was fulfilled (at least in a good measure)
1600 years since; and whether the World shall ever hereafter behold the like in
that part of it, I shall not assert: Act. 2. 16, 1. and so on: But this is that
which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, etc. What? They spoke with other Tongues
(about fifteen in number) the wonderful works of God; and this was ushered in
by Signs from heaven; A sound, as of a mighty rushing wind, Cloven Tongues like
as of fire; all of which were witnesses sent by God for the confirmation of the
Lord Jesus Christ, whom they preached to be Gods Messiah before promised.

But let us see how near the Quakers approach to Cloven Tongues, like as of
fire sitting on them, and appearing to the bodily ^yes of others: Nor do they
speak variety of Languages by the gift of the Holy Ghost, (though some of them
have gone into foreign Countries, with a confidence they should be gifted with
strange Languages, but their Spirit deceived them.) Those in the Text, in those
Languages or Tongues, spoke the wonderful works of God; but the Quakers, with
their Native Language, only speak the amazing delusions of Satan. The persons
in the Text had and used these gifts to confirm and evidence Jesus of Nazareth
to be the Christ, 22 verse; and that same Jesus to be exalted by the right hand
of God* verses 32, 33. but the Quakers improve their gifts (with all their
might) to disclaim that man Christ Jesus, as having any being, and to exalt
their own Christ, whom they call the light within every man: And considering
also that the Prophet says, the Spirit shall be poured out on all flesh;
methinks, they of all others should claim the least share in it, who call
others flesh who are not of their mind (but themselves Spiritual) and will not
seem to endure any thing that has a relation to the flesh (though sanctified
by the Spirit and Grace of God) which they rebuke in suchlike terms as these,
Silence all flesh before the Lord. Thus I have discharged this Text from so bad
a service.

The next main Prop for this mistake is, that they And by the same light [light
within] do we discern and testify, etc. Parnel Shield of the Truth, page 10.
Yea, they will have Moses, and all the Prophets to be inspired Divinely, as
they were guided and moved by the light within. The Word said, Let there be
light, Genesis 1. 4. (mark this) and the light was brought out of darkness, so the
morning was come, and the day was created in the Eternal Word; and into this
life (I suppose it should be light) was Moses gathered, and had his
understanding opened, that he could see to the beginning -- And there was no
Tradition to give him the knowledge of it, but the light which shone out of
darkness in his heart. Morning Watch, page ^. What words can express the
untruths, absurdities, and blasphemies of this saying! The Word [Christ]
created the Light [Christ] the first created morning is Christ, and all this
together within, was the Inspiration by which Moses understood what he wrote of
the Creation.

Hear a third, that by the mouth of more than John Story Short Discovery, etc.
page 2. And though the holy Scripture without, and the Saints practices are as
lights in the world; yet far be it from all true Christian men so to idolize
them, [the Scripture and Saints practises] as to set them in esteem above the
Light, which is sufficient to guide; or to esteem them equal with the Light,
and Spirit of Christ within, from which the Scriptures were given forth, and
are but branches of that holy r^ot; and as it were fruits of that heavenly
Tree, viz. the appearances of God in the hearts of his people. You may see then
whence their Opinion of Divine Inspiration to be the Inlet of their Notions
arises; and that the Scriptures are but branches growing from the same root,
viz. the light within.

That I may arm those who are willing to be defended

Characters of the Persons who were Christ's Apostles,

They had an immediate Mission and Call from without them by Jesus Christ, to
preach and declare the Gospel: That Call and Commission which the Apostles had,
Mat. 28. 16. to the end of the Chapter, was from without; it was Christ who
conversed with them, and was the object of their bodily eyes: It was that
Christ whom the women held by the feet, ver. 9. and his Call (as his person)
was without them; the sound of which was received by their bodily ears, in
those words, ver. 18, 19. And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All
power is given to me in heaven, and in earth: Go ye therefore, etc. And it is a
strong Argument to prove this immediate outward Call to be essential to the
Apostolical Office and Power, that when by Judas's fall the number was
imperfect, he that was chosen in his room, was chosen and called by an outward
call; the Spirit of God determining by a Lot Matthias to be the twelfth
Apostle; as Christ did the rest by his voice without them, Acts 1. 24. and 25
verses: they had a large measure of the Spirit within, (and Matthias in
particular,) but that was not sufficient.

Yea the Apostle Paul, who was born out of due time, had this immediate outward
Call when Christ appeared to him in that glorious and terrible form, Acts 26.
13. At midday, O King, I saw in the way (not in the heart, or ^ in the way
saw) a light from heaven above the brightness of the Sun; (the light in the
Quakers, I am sure, would be seen by any who are not bodily blind, if it were
such) shining round about me (then it could not be a light only within) and
them that journeyed with me; if it had not been without him, they could not
have seen it. Verse 14. I heard a Voice speaking unto me, (not within me) I am
Jesus, Chap. 10. Ver. 22. Jesus of Nazareth: and I am sure the light within is
not of Nazareth. These things are enough to prove the Apostles had all of them
an outward Call, or a Call from Christ without them to their Ministry and
Apostleship; and that the Quakers Apostleship and inspired Ministry is far from
Apostolical.

They were all such as had seen and conversed with John 1. 1. That which was
from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life. All
these expressions cannot with any show of reason be construed of a mental or
spiritual converse with Christ as an object of faith, but must be understood of
the exercise of the bodily senses and faculties upon the visible humane nature
of the Lord Jesus. And if it be objected, that it is said this Object was from
the beginning, which his humane Nature and Body could not be; I answer, There
is a communication of both Natures in the person of Christ, by which the
properties and concerns of the one are attributed to the other, as I might give
abundant proof of. But I will instance in one which may be sufficient; Acts 20.
28. -- To feed the Church of G^d which he has purchased with his own bl^ud.
God is not a being made up of flesh and blood, but a pure impassible Spirit;
yet Christ being God as well as man, the Blood of his Manhood is called the
Blood of God. It is observable, that the Apostle John brings these proofs of
his Apostleship in the front of his Epistle* as being necessary for obtaining
Credence, to what follows.

To put all out of doubt, consider what is expressed 1 Cor. 9 chapter ^ ver. Am I
not an Apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Some did
probably object against Paul's Apostleship, because he had not seen Christ in
the flesh, as all the rest of the Apostles had done: But he answers this
Objection; Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? It could not be meant of
seeing him by the spiritual eye of faith; for so all the Saints have seen the
Lord: that is common to the weakest Babe in the faith. And where did he see
him, but in the way to Damascus? Compare the forecited Text with 1 Cor. 15. 8
ver. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time. He
was not born a Saint, or Believer out of due time; for conversion will be in
season to the end of the world: But he was born an Apostle out of due time, the
Lord Jesus visibly appearing to him to that end in an extraordinary season.
Thus we see that to Apostleship the sight of the person of Christ, as an
outward visible object to the bodily sense, is necessary.

A third distinguishing Character is, they were all Miracles to credit their
Apostolical pretended inspirations; but none can they prove. Some have
attempted such like performances, but have failed in the undertaking; so that
if we will not believe them for their bold asserting, we are like to have no
better evidence: and he that is so silly as to believe on so feeble a ground, I
am sure his faith stands not only below the Power and Wisdom of God, but the
right reason of man.

And this must needs be a humane faith (in the most sordid sense) which has
not any divine evidence for its support. We can by the Grace of God give a
reason of that hope in us which is grounded on Scripture-verity, because we can
prove that it is the Word of God, which was sent from him by the Messengers by
him appointed, and furnished to that end; Acts 19. 13. Jesus we know, and Paul
we know; but who are ye?

The Apostles as they were commissionated to teach And how we hear every man in
our own Tongue, wherein we were born. And it is remarkable, that the Apostle
Paul was gifted this way above all, or most; he being the Apostle (more
eminently) to the Gentile-world, and traveled more foreign Countries than any
of the other, that we read of.

I cannot but wonder at the blindness of the Quakers who give it as a mark to
the true Ministry, (denying and disdaining all others) not to be confined to a
certain place in the ordinary exercise thereof; but as the Apostles, to have no
less than the Universe for their Bishopric: while it is apparent, that they do
not more outstrip others in pretenses of spiritual and supernatural gifts,
than they come short of them in visible qualifications for the Ministerial
employment, especially the knowledge of the Tongues: and who ever among them
understand any Tongue, or can speak or write it, besides their Native
Mother Tongue; let them say it if they dare, that they came not by it by
natural and ordinary means.

And if God had given them an Apostolical Call and and Gifts, surely this of
Tongues would have made some sign and noise of it; for God never calls to
any Gospel-Office and work immediate, where he does not afford abilities for
the discharge of it. If the Quakers had the Gift of Tongues, who direct their
pamphlets to all Princes and potentates; to every Creature, and all Nations in
the World; surely some of them by that Gift would have preached their Doctrines
to foreign Nations: But some have attempted it, and sped so ill, as to become
dumb preachers in other Countries: Others have learned more wit than to make
the adventure; their Writings are full stuffed with the bold asserting of their
Apostolical Call, Gifts and Inspiration.

Having given you some Characters of the Apostles,

I shall (before I enter on the differences between the Spirits inspirations,
and common illuminations of the Saints by the Spirit) prove that there is such
a difference, and that the one is not in any degree or measure the other.

All the Saints have the saving and sanctifying teaching and enlightnings of
the Spirit; yet not all of them (nay, but a very few of them) had the
extraordinary enlightnings of the Spirit by way of inspiration. Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God? and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Now
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, 1 Cor. 3. 16. So
that every Babe in Christ has the Spirit of Christ in its saving
manifestations and opperations, or effects; though but a few were immediately
inspired. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, etc. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.
28, 29.

The Apostle Paul does plainly express this specifical But she is happier if
she so abide, after my judgment; and I think also that I have the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 7. 40. The Apostle does in the case there agitated, give his advice
as a Saint who had the Spirit of God in the same kind of enlightening, which
other Saints had, or all the Saints had; but in an eminent measure: yet this
enlightening and teaching of the Spirit was not by way of immediate, and
Apostolical inspiration; but by enlightening his judgment, and enabling his
natural faculty of discerning to pierce into, and rightly decide the difference.

For if the Apostle had received what he here expressed by Divine inspiration,
or the Spirit of the Lord immediately inspiring, it would have been not only
unnecessary, but very much injurious to the infallibility and authority of the
Spirit of God, to have made his judgment bear a part with it. Yea, it had been
an usurping on the Divine Spirit, which an exercis^ of our judging faculty
concerning its truth or falsehood, must needs be; where it is evident that the
Spirit of God does its part, by way of immediate inspiration; to which ready
and full credit ought to be given without hesitation.

Characters of Divine Apostolical* Inspirations,

That Divine inspiration whereby the Apostles and Prophets (as such) were
illuminated, came in without the use of the bodily senses, as r^ceptive o^
(...) outward Objects, and carrying them to the rational and considering
faculties, to make conclusions from ^^em: and this is properly immediate Divine
inspiration,

But Divine Truths received by the Saints (as Saints, ordinarily) are received
by such means as are Objects to the bodily senses, as significative sounds to
the ear, visible Objects to the eye, etc. let the Quakers or any other show me,
if they can, that the knowledge of God comes ordinarily to men by any other way
without these: Faith comes by hearing (that is ordinarily; for a Babe may have
the habits of saving faith, whose hearing serves little to that purpose) or by
reading, and that knowledge of God which the Heathen had, or might have had,
without the Word revealed handed to them as to us, it was by considering the
works of God's Creation and Providence; which were the Book; wherein God wrote
to them many Lessons concerning him, and their duty. So that in few words,
persons being illuminated by inspiration, it was first within them; others have
it first from without them; at least in the premises from whence the
understanding assisted by God, infers Truths.

The great Objection of the Quakers against the Romans 1. 19, 20. because that
which may he known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
them: for the invisible things of him, etc.

The words in them in the Greek (...), are either in or among them, the later
sense is to me the most probable, because, that while the far greater part of
the Gentile-world were so brutish, that they little regarded or understood any
thing of God; but were so besotted with sensuality, that they understood and
minded nothing but what might gratify a blind, and impetuous appetite: some
among them, whose intellects were better employed, came by the knowledge of
excellent things concerning God, which they not only taught, but left in
writing as a witness to Posterity.

But to put all out of doubt, the 20 verse speaks what I affirm plainly: For
the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, etc. Here you have an account what may be known of God by the Heathen,
who had neither revelation immediate to themselves, nor handed to them from
others by the Word heard, or read: viz. the eternal power and Godhead: and that
which they were condemned for, ver. 26. was not for not knowing, or practicing
what had relation to the Mediator, or not believing the word of promise, which
never was within the reach of their ears, but for their miscarriages against
God the Creator, whom they might and ought to have known, and acknowledged. God
is in his Essential Being the Invisible God; but he was manifest among them,
How? From the Creation of the World, by the things that are made. Take another
Text for the confirmation of my Exposition of this, Act. 14. 17. Nevertheless
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from
Heaven, and fruitful seasons, etc. They were not without witness concerning the
Divine Being, and Attributes of Mercy and Goodness; yet if the Rain, and
fruitful Seasons, were without them, the Witness was without them before it was
within them.

But for the Quakers pretenses of their conceits of England, and have learned
their Mother Tongue from their Childhood, after 30 or 40* years, to affirm they
learned every word of it by immediate Inspiration, or could have known it as
perfectly if man had never taught them; while in the mean time those foreign
Languages they never heard spoken, they can neither speak, nor understand one
sentence of, if it would save the world.

Again, Those Gospel-illuminations, for the matter which are by immediate
inspiration, are beyond the utmost reach of our natural faculties of the mind
(though sanctified) to attain by their improvement: and therefore it is said to
be, 2 Timothy 3. 16. (...), Divinely inspired. It is not produced in the exercise
of the Rational Faculties; the Soul is purely passive or receptive therein, and
is to those Illuminations as the Wax is to the Seal; according to 2 Pet. 1. 21.
For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, (...), acted, carried. Some of
them* viz. the Prophetical part, were so far from being attained by the use of
Natural Faculties (though sanctified) that their very wills, which are the
first movers, even in intelligent Agents, did not ordinarily so much as direct
their understandings to the finding out the Truths which were revealed to them;
but when their thoughts (in their present posture) had no tendency to any such
particular things (no more than a man in a deep sleep) they were then moved by
the H. Ghost; that whereas ordinarily they are fixed, and bent to such or such
ends, by the humane will, here the Divine will takes its place, and does all.

And for those Historical parts of the Scripture, Moses, etc. and the Doctrinal
parts written by the Apostles, etc. although the things in general might be the
scope and aim of their intentions; yet the Gale by which they were driven
steadily and infallibly, was not the utmost of their natural, and sanctified,
and highest improved faculties; but the supernatural guidance of the Divine
Spirit, whose product was like it self, without the least stain or spot of
humane frailty and w^a^ness.

Whereas that illumination of the Spirit, which (in the kind of it) is common
to all Saints, flows in by the Lords blessing on the improvement of their
understandings and judgments, whether on Creation, Providence, or matter
divinely revealed without them originally, viz. that contained in the
Scripture; which although their faith be resolved into, and determined by, yet
the highest pitch of their spiritual understanding is raised by a right and
sanctified ratiocination from those principles, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. And experience teaches, that though an idle Loyterer may grow giddy
with empty swimming notions, which are rather the disease of a spiritual pride,
and intoxication; yet God does mostly (if not only) bless those with high and
solid illuminations, who humbly wait on him, and beg the concourse and
assistance of the Father of Lights, and Spirit of Truth.

That God does bless in such ways to the (such) For when for the time ye ought
to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first
principles of the Oracles of God* and are become such as have need of milk,
etc. It was their sin which was rebuked as the cause of their ignorance; and
what that should be, but their slothful unfaithfulness in the use of
advantages, I know not: But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age)
(this must not be understood of number of days* but measure of knowledge) even
those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil. They were thus illuminated by the Spirit, in the way of the use and
exercise of their sanctified Natural Faculties, and the Ordinances of God for
that end.

If any Quaker shall say, True, we are illuminated not by Study, and poring (as
they call it) on the Scripture, or any thing else, but have our knowledge
without such carnal toil, and the wisdom of the flesh*; and therefore it is by
inspiration immediate. Let such know, that they must show somewhat more than
palpable error, gross ignorance, and unparalled confidence, e're they gain
credit with any but those simple ones (in a silly sense) who believe every
word. Pro. 14. 15.. 9.


A third Difference is, that Apostolical illuminations, and immediately
inspired, are not habitual; they are not the more constant frame of the soul,
but have their fluxes, not as Springs, or running Rivers, or Tides, which have
their ebbings and flowings, yet the Chanel always plentifully supplied, but as
bourns and floods that sometimes rise high; yet the grounds they cover for a
while, are sometimes and ordinarily a long time dry, and no appearance
remaining of those inundations. The Apostles and Prophets had not such a Well
and Spring of this sort, as always run; or out of which they might ordinarily
give advice, and teachings of this kind.

Whereas the Spirits most ordinary illuminations, common to all Saints, do in
their several degrees and measures in* dwell in their souls, and are as
qualities adhering to their subjects; their minds and faculties being so united
to them, as Sugar being melted in the Wine, its sweetness is constant, and
abiding thereby.

And hence it was that the Apostles, though they could always teach from the
habits of light and knowledge they were blessed with, yet in some cases, at
some times, could not speak as inspired by the Holy Ghost, witness Paul, who in
the body of his Epistle to the Corinthians makes this distinction, 1 Cor. 7. 6,
12. to the end of the Chapter; But I speak this by permission, ver. 6. but to
the rest speak I, not the Lord, ver. 12. Now concerming Virgins I have no
commandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment as one that has obtained mercy
of the Lord to be faithful. 25. But she is happier if she so abide, in my
judgment, and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.

The same Apostle gives instruction concerning the Choice of Bishops, that they
be such as are apt to teach; 1 Timothy 3. 2.
(...). The word signifies both the habit or faculty, and also a promptitude
and readiness to employ it. And to Timothy, to be instant in season, and out 2 Timothy 4. 2.
of season; that is, not only at necessary times in a constant course, but
occasionally: and he could not so preach the Word as became it, and an
Evangelist, but from habitual illumination. Mat 13. 52. Then said he unto them,
Therefore every Scribe which is instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, is like
unto a man that is an Householder, which brings forth of his Treasure things
new and old.

A fourth Difference, the inspiration of the Spirit Samuel had as elegant and
powerful an inspiration or revelation, when a Child, as when he was old. And
the Apostles on the sudden, at the effusion of the Spirit in that way of
ministration, had as eminent inspirations as ever afterward. But the
illumination wherewith God does usually (by the efficiency of his Spirit) bless
his people, does ordinarily grow, at least is capable of it. Some to whom John
writes, were grown to be Fathers.

For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, Heb. 5. That is, ye might have
grown to such a degree of il(...)nation (if you had stood in the way wherein
the Spirit of God does usually bless therewith*) as to have been able to teach
others. Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ himself (as man) did increase gradually in
these habitual illuminations, Luke 2. 45, 46, 47. Jesus grew in wisdom, and
instature. And that it was meant of divine light, o^ light in divine things,
read the 46, ^7 Verses, where he is said to be disputing with the Doctors, and
that his answers were astonishing to the Hearers.

Fifthly, Apostolical inspirations were intended by the Spirit, for a divine
and authoritative Obligation to the Faith, Order, Life, and Consciences of
others, and ar^ therefore rightly placed among the Scriptures, or written Word.
If any man think himself to be a Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge,
that the things that I write are the Commandments of the Lord. But the
teachings of the Spirit to the Saints (as Saints) are no such obligation, any
farther than they agree with, and have their authority from the mind of God
revealed in the Scriptures.

Sixthly, Apostolical teachings and inspirations Spirit) of the Saints (as
such) do not add to, or change any thing of the Doctrine or Order established
by Christ and his Apostles; neither are they contrary to the written Word, nor
in point of Doctrine beside the sense of it, or beyond it.

To conclude, the teachings of the Spirit, and its Scripture, and directing
them to understand Providence, to act in their occurrent occasions suitable to
his will revealed in the Scripture, and moving their wills to ^ compliance with
his; but are all to be tried by the Scripture, and not the Scripture by them.

Some I believe will reply, How did the Prophets

I d^r^ not attempt to pry into the most secret ways of God* and undertake to
give you a history and description (to the full) of the Spirits workings on the
Souls of his Prophets, in conveying his will to them, and satisfying their
judgments and Consciences that they were the inspirations of God. Yet I shall
say so much of them as may satisfy any willing Reader to be informed, that
they had more to evince it than any have now; and we have enough to convince us
that they were inspired.

First, Whoever they were that were givers forth M^ses.

Secondly, All the Prophets have a Testimony of their being inspired of God, by
Miracles which they wrought, or by the quoting Scripture out of the Books
written by them, or bearing their names (in the New Testament) by Christ, or
his Apostles.

Thirdly, For the Historical part, which has a Paul to be of Divine
inspiration.

Fourthly, All those Books of the Old Testament,

Let any Quaker, or other, give me or themselves

But for those inspirations which, they say, many had before the Scriptures
were written, the mention of their time will give full satisfaction, it will be
a poor Argument to prove men are now inspired as they, considering they had not
the revealed written Word at all, and we have i^ s^ f^ll (...) necessary for
any to know, are therein included, and thereby expressed.

The second thing I must reply to is, what the Quakers viz. That we make the
Scripture the Judge of the Spirit, whereas the Spirit gave forth the Scriptures.

I answer, this is for want of judgment in the Objectors. Far be it from us to
bring the to-be-adored Spirit of God to any man's Bar for judgment to be passed
on it, or any thing that is his immediate work or word: All we profess in this
matter, to make the Scripture a Judge or Determiner of, is, whether this or
that be the mind of the Spirit or no? but if once it appear to be the voice and
mind of the Spirit, we profess it our duty to reverence and submit to it. And
we being certain that the holy Scriptures were given forth from God, and that
God is not opposite to himself; we conclude, that what is contrary to the
Scripture, cannot be the Word of the Spirit; because then the Spirit should
bear witness against it self, and the word of the Spirit would be contrary to
the word of the Spirit.

And moreover, if any shall pretend to abolish (by

The third thing I must reply to is, that our knowledge

If you mean our knowledge of the mind of the Spirit is uncertain, so far as it
is necessary for our living in an acceptable m^nner to God, soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, and to attain Heaven at last, it
is a great mistake: for if pride, lust, and idleness stand not in our way,
there is no person (that has a few grains of reason) but may understand so
much of the mind of God by the Scripture, as is necessary for him to know to
his Eternal Salvation.

But if you talk of the Scriptures being a dead Letter,

A KEY TO THE QUAKERS Usurped, and (to most) Unintelligible PHRASES.
THere is not any thing in the Quakers Method of delu ding, which does more
tend to the insnaring of unwary Souls, than their asserting their False,
Antichristian, and Anti-Scriptural Tenets, under Scripture-words and Phrases,
and in those very terms wherein are expressed the Truths of God; while in the
mean time, they mean nothing less than their true import, and what people (who
are not well acquainted with their Tenets) suppose them to mean. By this
Artifice they beget a good Opinion of themselves, and Errors with too many,
and by degrees so vitiate their Principles, that in a short time they are
prepared to embrace the grossest Errors barefaced.

I shall therefore (as a work of no small use to such who are attempted by
them, or who have a Call or opportunity to deal with them for their convincing
or confuting, or the securing others who are in danger by them) give you a true
and candid account of their sense and meaning of a multitude of Scripture and
Religious Phrases, which they utter and apply to their falsehoods; and also of
their newcoyn'd Words and Phrases, which are more peculiar to their Sect and
Notions. I dispose them Alphabetically, for their more easy finding on any
occasion.

A.
Above. NOt in locality, but excellency: so Christ and Heaven (they say) are
above, i. e. excellent; and may therefore be nothing but what is within them.

The Anointing. The Light within, Christ, the Spirit essentially.

Assembling. Meeting in Spirit.

Assurance. What they feel in themselves (not what they believe from the
Scripture) the inward witness, viz. experience, teachings of the light within.

B.
Babylon. All the Ordinances, Worship, Faith, Obedience, that have any thing of
a form, or visible in them; or that are gathered from the written Word, or
pretended to be so.

Baptism. Not any thing by Water; but the Spirit, i. e. the Quakers Spirit, to
an obedience and devotedness to the light within, and inspirations and
immediate teachings.

Blasphemy. To speak against the light within every man to be Christ and God,
and what they hold it to be.

Blind. Not to acknowledge the light within to be Christ; not to know him by
immediate imspiration.

The Blood of Christ. The Life of Christ, i. e. the power of the light in them.

The Spiritual Blood, which they say came down from Heaven, and was part of a
Spiritual Body which Christ brought with him from thence, which dwelt for a
while in the Man Jesus, who died at Jerusalem.

Salvation, purifying, reconciling by the Blood of Christ. Not by the Blood of
Christ shed on the Cross, but by the Blood of the Spiritual Body of flesh,
blood, and bones, which they say Christ descended in; which is in every Quaker
as really as in the Man that was the Son of Mary: and so Salvation is by no
other blood but what is in themselves.

The Body of Christ. Not that which was crucified without the Gates of
Jerusalem in Judea; but the spiritual Body aforesaid, which they say took up
its Habitation, and Tabernacled in the Body of Jesus the Son of Mary; and so
the Body of Christ is as much in them, as it was in him.

Bondage. Not only our selves in bondage to sin, but the light within, the seed
of God, or Christ, being in bondage under the disobedience of men.

Born again, Regeneration. Perfect obedience to the light within, as Christ and
God.

Comprehending Brain. A large understanding, or a desire of Knowledge by the
use of the Rational Faculty.

C.
Call. The motions of the Light Christ in the Conscience.

Christ. Not the Man Christ Jesus the Son of Mary, which the Godhead assumed
and united to its self in one person: but the light within every man, a Christ
that had nothing of Adams Nature, whose Body (now in being) was not created, or
had a beginning in time, which was never visible to the bodily eye.

Not in any respect distinct from God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost.

Christ in the Saints. Not Christ without them, an Object of the faith and love
within them; but his very Being, his Divinity, his Soul, and his Body
consisting of spiritual Flesh, Blood, and Bones; not his Image and Likness, but
the self-same in his Being and Essence.

Christ's coming. In the Spirit, or his spiritual coming into his people, i. e.
no other but the prevailing motions of the light within, or by inspiration.

The Command in Spirit. By immediate inspiration and motion.

Comprehension, Fleshly Comprehensions. That Opinion or Belief which is
grounded on a rational demonstration, though from the written Word of God.

Carnal. All things of a Religious concern, which we are not enlightened about,
and moved to by immediate inspiration; yea, whatever has a form, or is visible
to the bodily eye.

Fleshly Conceivings. Those Opinions or expressions, whose beginning and birth
are in the humane faculties, very great weakness, if not sin and unbelief,
contrary to the assured and undoubted dictates of the Infallible Light and
Spirit within them.

Condemnation. The reproofs and sentencings of the light in the Conscience.

Conversion. A full obedience to the light in the Conscience: a total freedom
from the prevailing of any sin; such a state as the Disciples of Christ had not
attained when Christ was crucified, nor Paul when he wrote the Epistle to the
Romans.

Crucifying of Christ. Not that crucifying on the Cross of Wood, but a
crucifying within us, by disobedience to the light in our Consciences.

A strange merit and purchase of Salvation, and way of pacifying the wrath of
God for sin.

D
Damnation. Being condemned within by the light in the Conscience, and the
terror and affliction arising from thence; but nothing of a pain of sense
after the body is dead, and turned to dust.

Darkness. Not acknowledging the light in every man to be Christ, and being
guided by its immediate teachings, as the only and all-sufficient Rule.

Death of Christ. The light within not obeyed.

The dead Body. The Body living in sin.

Disciples of Christ. No other but those who submit to the light within, and
follow only its dictates.

E
Election. Christ the seed; not the persons of men and women.

Vulturous-Eye. The understanding faculty pierc^ng into, and earnestly seeking
after Divine Knowledge.

F
Faith. A believing in the light within.

Righteousness of Faith. Those acts of Obedience performed by themselves in
their own bodies, conformable to the dictates of the light within^ and in the
Faith of its being Christ and the Rule.

Teaching or doing falsely. When not from the immediate motions and teachings of
the light within; though what is taught, be in its self true; and what is done,
be in its self good.

False Prophets. All that are called by men, however qualified otherwise; all
that teach from or out of the Scriptures, and not from immediate inspiration as
the Prophets and Apostles, by whom the Scriptures were penned.

False Witnesses. All who speak not from inspiration, and inward merely divine
motions, and experience not what they affirm in themselves.

Flesh. Whatever is not from the light within originally and immediately.

Wisdom of the flesh. All Wisdom attained by industry.

Denying Christ come in the flesh. Denying Christ come in the Flesh of Joseph,
John, Sarah, or any other who are Quakers.

Christ come in the flesh. Come in their Flesh.

The Flesh of Christ. The Spiritual Flesh that descended from Heaven; not the
Flesh that lay buried in the Sepulcher after death.

The Fold of Christ. Christ himself.

Following Christ. Obedience to the light within.

The Friends Friends. All professed Quakers.

The will of the Flesh. All that is chosen by man, though he be thereto
disposed by the will of God revealed in the Scripture.

G
Preaching for Gain. Receiving any thing as the reward of preaching the Gospel.

State of Glory. The State of Peace and Joy, resulting from the witness of the
light within in this life.

GOD. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, without distinction, the light within every
(...) the spirit of the Quakers, every one of them, the soul, the seed, and
much (...) that he is not.

Foundation of God. The light within, and the inspirations and motions of it.

The Gospel. Christ the light within, not the written Word, or the sense of it,
as a Narrative of the good will of God to men in Christ.

H
Handled the Word of Life. Not as the Apostles, who handled the Body of Christ;
but feeling by a spiritual sensation the motions of the light within, or the
Christ within them.

Hearing the Gospel, or Word. Listening to, and obeying the light within.

Heaven. Not the place where the Man Christ is above or beyond the visible
Skies, but the happiness they have within them.

I could never yet hear, or read them mention any other Heaven to be enjoyed by
them as distinct persons, but what they have within them in this world.

Hell. The present torment and loss within.

Preaching for Hire, Hirelings. To have provision for the o^tward man, as a
maintenance or reward for preaching, though no bargain be made, yea though such
who receive it would preach, i^ they had never a penny reward in this world from
those they preach to.

Holiness. Obedience to the light within, and that without any failing.

The woman's Husband at home. Christ the light in the conscience.

I
Idolatry. Often for worshipping the Man Christ Jesus, who is at the right hand
of God, above or beyond the Stars and visible Heavens; taking the examples of
the Saints and Churches in the Scripture recorded, and doing likewise.

JESUS. The light within, the Word in the beginning, not the Son of Mary, who
was made or created.

The Imaginations. All conclusions (how demonstrable soever) which accord not
with their Tenets, or are not by immediate inspiration.

Enchantments, Bewitchings. A being persuaded and established by Reason and
Scripture, but especially, if humane Art^ or Sciences have any hand in it.

Infidels. All that obey not, or do not place their Salvation in the light
within.

Workers of Iniquity All that live not without sinning against God.

The Judgment, day of Judgment. Sin being judged in the Conscience by the light
within in this life.

Justification. Christ the light within obeyed.

K
Kingdom of God. The Rule and Government of the light within, and the peace and
joy arising from thence.

Carnal knowledge. All knowledge but what comes by the immediate inspiration of
the light within.

L
The Law. Christ, the light within, the Law written in the heart.

Leadings in Spirit. The motions of the light within, immediate inspirations
and teachings.

The life. Christ the light within.

The life of Christ. The prevalency of the light within.

Eternal life. Being taken into God.

Saved by the Life of Christ. A being saved by the prevalency of the light in
the conscience.

The Letter. The dead Letter. The Letter that kills. The Scriptures, or
written Word.

A Lie. Lying. What is spoken (though true in it self, if) not from immediate
teaching, or the light within.

The Light within. Christ, God, Father, Son, Spirit, the seed of Abraham and
David, according to the flesh; Jesus, the only Savior; the Law, the Testimony,
the Gospel, the Prophets, the Advocate, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Justification; the only Rule, Guide, Teacher, Judge; the Way, the only way to
the Father; the Truth, the Life, the Power of God, the Eternal God, God
Almighty, that which pardons and conquers sin; the Judgment, the Lamb of God
that is slain from the beginning, the Word in the beginning, the Creator of all
things, the end of all Books, Laws, and abundance more than can be crowded into
many Pages.

The Lust. All desires that accord not to the light within, and proceed not
from thence.

M
The Man Christ. The spiritual Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, which they say
descended from Heaven, and dwelt in the Body of the Son of Mary, and does also
now in every Quaker.

Cease from man, do not hear man. What the Faculties of Man have any hand in,
either by inventing, working, or expressing; all that comes not purely from the
light within.

Measure of God, of Christ, of the Spirit. That degree of the power and
inspirations of the light within.

Something more or less of the very being and Essence of God the Father, Son,
Spirit.

Meditate. Not pondering or exercising the judgment and understanding on holy
and divine Objects, but a stilness and emptiness of all thoughts, attending for
the immediate impulses, suggestions, inspirations, and motions of the light
within.

They put to their meanings. Expounding, or giving the sense of the Scripture,
however true in its self, if not by immediate mere Divine Revelation.

In the Meekness. In the light within Christ, which is meekness in the
abstract; and between whom and their spirits there is no distinction.

Ministers of the Everlasting Gospel. Both men and women Ministers among the
Quakers, who declare from immediate inspiration, not from the Letter of the
Scripture.

Ministers of Antichrist, Babylon, Idol-Shepherds. All such who have a mediate
Call from man, or preach from the Letter of the Scripture.

Ministration of the Spirit. The immediate teachings and motions of the Spirit,
exclusive of all forms in worship, the will (though sanctified) in choosing, and
all premeditation and acting by the prescription of the written Word.

Miracles. Sometimes Miracles in Spirit, invisible to bodily senses, or humane
understanding.

The Star of the Morning, the Morning of the first day. Christ the light within.

Moved by the Holy Ghost. An inward immediate impulse of the light and power
within.

From the Mouth of God. Immediate teachings from the light within, excluding
all other.

Mysteries of the Kingdom. Mysteries of God. Such things as the faculties of
man have no power to understand or express, no not from or by the Scripture;
such things as are only sens^ted in the experience. An allegorizing the
Scripture.

N
Natural man. Every man that is not a Quaker.

The Natural man. Every thing in man which is distinct from God, or the light
within.

The New man. Christ the light within, considered essentially.

They did by Nature the things contained in the Law By the new Nature, which is
Christ the light, contained in the Law within the heart, which is also Christ
the light.

O
Obedience of Christ. What is done by men, by the power, life and strength of
the light within them.

Obedience in Spirit. Wrought by immediate impulses of the Spirit.

The Kingdom of God comes not with observation. The light within, and its
prevalencie (which they call, and that only the Kingdom* of God*) is not
obtained any way by the study or consideration of the Scripture, or any thing
without us.

Observers of times. Such as keep any certain days as separated to holy use, as
the Lord's Day; or such as propose an hour or two to be spent in the Worship and
Ordinances of God, or any time with limitation.

Christ the Offering. The light within.

Offering^ up of* Christ. The light within disobeyed, or contesting with the
lusts (yea) or the right reason of men.

Officers of the Church. Invisible Officers and Overseers, who do all their
work in Spirit.

Gods Offspring. A part and measure of the very being of God, continuing to be
in a degree as good and divine as God himself.

The Souls and Spirits (at least) of the Quakers, which they say came out of
God.

The Old man. All that is disobedient, or not conformable to their light within.

One-ness with God, Christ, Spirit. Not relative, nor by love, or faith, or
Mystical Membership, but such an oneness as leaves no room for distinction
between God, Christ, the Spirit, and such whom they say are one with Christ.

Openings of Life. Springings of Life. Sudden workings to action, or
impressions on the mind and affections, proceeding from within, of their own
accord and motion.

Overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of his Testimony. All amounts
but to an obedience to the light within (which Smith says was the Lamb of God
whom John bid the Jews behold) and the force of the light and life within,
which with them is the blood, i. e. the life of the Lamb.

P
Put Christ to pain. Resisting the motions of the light within.

The painted Whore. Not only the Papals with their irreligious Pomp, but all
the good words, thoughts and actions of any sort of men, who derive them not
from the immediate teachings and motions of the light within; yea, all forms of
Worship, according with the Precepts and Examples of the Scripture; and they
are with them the most painted, who come nearest to the Scripture as a Rule.

The People of God. They, and none but they who profess the light within every
man to be Christ, the only Savior and Teacher, and give up themselves to its
conduct as such.

Perfect Perfection. Not that which is sincere, or a perfection of parts, or
sanctification throughout in part; but a being without sin in the least remains
or stains of it.

Persecution. Not only a penalty or hurt inflicted on their Bodies or Estates,
but also a speaking or writing against their Principles in the most purely
rational and Scriptural Authority.

The seed in Prison, and Captivity, and Bondage. The light within not obeyed as
Christ and God.

Pictures and Images. Not only those Images and Pictures that to the bodily eye
represent Christ, or God, or the Saints, and are adored with Religious Worship;
but all Worship, Opinions, Actions, Words, that are in imitation of the
Examples, and in obedience to the Precepts contained in the Scripture.

Men-pleas^rs. They who comply with men, though in things not only lawful, but
also to edification.

Pollutions of the world. Not only things in themselves sinful, as drunkenness,
swearing, lying, etc. but also whatever Customs they dislike and decline; as
Cuffs, Ribands, putting off the Hat, signs of respect, etc. which they say are
from the Devil: All recreations, as Bowling, Ringing, though used seasonably
and moderately.

The Power of God. The Light within, the Christ within.

Praying in Spirit. Secretly or inwardly (not with the voice) by the immediate
impulses of the light and power within, without the exercise of so much as the
conceptions of man.

Prayer. Christ the light within is sometimes by them so called.

The presence of the Lord. The powerful influences and impressions of the light
within, either to terror, or peace and joy.

The pride of Man. A not submitting to their light; and especially receiving
tokens of respect, and wearing Ribands, Cuffs and Lace.

The Priests. A word of scorn put on all indifferently, who are separated to
the work of the Gospel Ministry by men, or that receive maintenance for their
work.

The Worlds Professors. All that are not Quakers.

Formal hypocritical Professors. All that walk in the Ordinances of Christ,
commanded or prescribed in the Scripture, or in the order of the Gospel.

Spirit of Prophecy. Immediate impulses and inspirations.

False Prophets. All that act not by immediate Revelation.

Prophesying falsely. How true soever in it self, if not from their spirit.

Publicans and Sinners. All that are not Quakers.

Walking in the pure. Walking after the dictates of the light within.

Purifying the heart by the Blood of Christ. Acting and being disposed
according to inward motions, by the light and life of the Christ within them.

Q
Quenching the Spirit. Resisting the motions of the Light within.

Quickened in the Life. Stirred up by the power within.

R
Raised to life. Conversion to Quakerism.

Ravening brain. Studying and following after Divine Knowledge, or the
knowledge of divine things.

Inwardly ravening from the Spirit. A recourse to the Scripture, or any thing
else (except their spirit) for sight and understanding in the things of God.

Carnal reasonings, Reasonings of the Flesh. All use of the understanding and
judgment of man, for searching and finding out truths about Divine and
Spiritual things.

Received from the Lord. By immediate Revelation.

Reconciliation. Giving up themselves to the light within.

The Word of Reconciliation. Christ the light within.

The Lords Redeemed. Those who are conformed to the light within.

Redemption. A being reduced into the state of Adam in Innocence; not what was
wrought by Christ in the Flesh 1600 years since.

The Redeemer. Not that Jesus Christ who is ascended above and beyond the
Stars, but the light and power within every man, as such.

Refreshings in Spirit. Something they are pleased with they know not why, and
come by they know not how: As the Quakers who were refreshed at the
Dutch-womans declaring, while they understood not a word she spoke.

The New man. CHRIST.

The rest of the people of God. A quiet and peace within, (though from a blind
deluded conscience.)

The Resurrection of Life. Obedience to the light in this world.

Resurrection of the Body. Resurrection of the light within, to a dominion in
the man: for with them the Body is Christ, and Christ is the light within. Also
the Body (which was a servant to sin) being acted by the light and power within.

Revelations. Not Scripture-Revelations, but what come by immediate inspiration
to them.

Righteous ones. Such as are without sin.

Righte^usness of Christ. That which is wrought by the power and conduct of
their Christ the light within.

The Root of Jesse. The Light within.

The Royal Seed. Christ and every Quaker.

They who run, and not sent. All that teach the Gospel from the Scripture, and
not by Immediate Inspiration.

Reprobation. Sin.

S
The Sabbath. Every day, the present Rest and Heaven of the Quakers.

The Sacrifice of Christ. The light within obeying, or they obeying in the
light within.

Having Salt in themselves. Having Christ in themselves.

The Salt of the Earth. Christ the light within.

Salvation. Conversion to the obedience of the light within.

Sanctification. All one with Justification, all one with Christ, obedience to
the light.

Building on the Sand. Making the Scripture a Rule of Faith and Life.

The Savior. The light within every man.

According to the Scriptures. By immediate inspiration, as the Prophets and
Apostles received the mind of God.

The Seed. The light within, or the Christ essentially within; the Eternal
Word, that which was in the beginning with God.

The Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh. The Eternal Word, Christ as God.

Self-righteousness. All that is not from the immediate motions within.

Shadows. All Forms and external worship.

The Scriptures, which Pen says, are as the shadow of the true Rule, viz.
living touches.

Idol-Shepherds. The Ministers who have a mediate Call, or teach out of the
Scripture.

Shut out of the Scriptures. Cannot understand them, have nothing to do with
them.

Signs and Miracles in Spirit. No body can tell what.

All flesh must be silent. Nothing must be said but what comes by immediate
revelation from the Spirit; for all else is the voice of man, and of the flesh.

In the Simplicity. Without the use of humane understanding; or if you will,
out of your wits.

To live in Sin, Sinners. Such as have any remains of sin in them, or do at any
time in any sort commit sin.

Sl^ying the Witnes^ Disobeying the light within; but especially a resolved
rejecting it as our only Rule, Teacher and Savior.

Sons of God. Only the Quakers.

Soul. A part, or measure of God.

Speaking in the Spirit. By immediate Inspiration.

Spirit of Antichrist. That which leads to Forms, though Christ's and
Gospel-Forms. All that opposes the light within to be Christ.

False Spirits. They that ground their Doctrine on the Scripture, or any
mediate thing.

Spirit of Bondage. Being under the power of any sin.

Spirit of God. The light within every man, God the Father, Son, Holy Ghost,
without distinction.

Spirit of the World. Whatever is not conformable to the light within as Christ.

The Spiritual man. Christ, or Christ in every Quaker.

The Lord has Spoken. What comes to them by immediate inspiration.

The Lord has not Spoken. Whatever is not by immediate inspiration, though it
be written in the Scripture.

A true Christians State. Being taught by God immediately, not by the Letter.

The statutes of God The Law in the heart, or within.

They steal my word, every one from his Neighbor. Teaching Doctrines as the
Word of the Lord taken out of the Scripture.

Stolen words. All that we have out of the Scriptures, and not by immediate
inspiration to our selves.

In the Stilness. An unactive attending to the light within.

Standing in the Counsels of God. Conformity to the Teachings of the light
within, and abiding therein.

Studying for Divine Knowledge (and what comes thereby) from the Scripture.
Carnal toil, birth and wisdom of the flesh.

Scraping in the Scriptures.

The Woman in Subjection. Weakness must subject it self to the man Christ.

The Supper of the Lord. Spiritual joy, or joy in the Spirit from the presence
and influence of the light within: all eating and drinking to God, and in
remembrance of Christ.

Sword of the Spirit. Christ the light within.

What is declared by immediate inspiration of the Spirit.

Synagogues of Satan. The Assemblies of any sort of people for Divine Worship,
who are not Quakers.

T
Christ Tabernacling in the outward Vessel. Christ's dwelling for a little time
in the body, born of the Virgin Mary: The like of every Quaker.

Taking away the Tables. All Forms and Books, as useless in the things of God.

Taught of God. Taught immediately from the light within.

Teachings of Men. All that is not immediately inspired, though the sense and
words of the Scripture.

Cease from man. From the Teaching by Man.

Outward Court of the Temple given to the Gentiles. All forms of Worship, all
visible Worship, being the Worship of Heathens, not of Christians.

Testify to the light in the Conscience. Appealing or speaking to Christ the
light within.

Bearing Testimony to the light. Declaring for, and from the light within.

The Testimony, and the Testaments. Christ the Light and Law within.

Thanksgiving. Give thanks in Spirit, or inwardly.

Thieves and Robbers. All that are Teachers by a mediate Call.

All Ministers but the Quakers.

All that walk by Scripture Light.

Traditions of men. The Scripture, or written Word.

Trading with the Scripture. Having maintenance for a Ministry: Ministering from
the Scripture, or written Word.

The Birth, In Travel. The time of wrestling betwixt convictions of the light
within, and perfection.

Trembling and Quaking. The horror and consternation that they are under, from
(as they say) the wrath of God, while the flesh is judged, and they are in the
hell of condemnation; ( which is all the bell they hold that I can find) and
this trembling and quaking (they say) is such as Moses and other Prophets were
seized with at the appearance of God.

The Truth. No other but Christ the light within.

Speaking Truth, Truly. When it is spoken from immediate inspiration and motion
of the Spirit; but however true without these, it is falsely spoken.

Witnessing to the Truth. Declaring, or suffering for the light within, and its
dictates.

V
The flesh of the Vail. The Body wherein Christ dwelt and tabernacled, which
for a while he took of the Virgin Mary; but at the death of that, left it no
body knows where.

The Vail is over them. The belief of the Man Christ Jesus, which was of our
Nature to be the Christ, and now existing in Heaven, in that body of flesh of
our Nature, which he took of the Virgin Mary.

The Vessel. The Body wherein for a while Christ dwelt: also our bodies.

Victory over the devil, sin, flesh world. Perfection in this life, resulting
from the travail of the light within.

In the Unbelief. Not acknowledging the light within to be the only Teacher and
Savior, whatever the faith and life otherwise may be.

The Uncircumcised and Unclean. All that are not Quakers.

Ungodly. The same.

Unlearned, and without Understanding. To be without the light within, its
teachings and immediate Revelations.

The Voice of the Lord. The secret immediate lively touches and teachings
within.

W
Hirelings serving for Wages. Ministers who receive maintenance, little less
then Robbery, at least very Jewish and Antichristian.

Wait on the light. Desisting from a search after Truth by any external means,
and passively attending to the motions and teachings within.

Watch to the light. To be so listening and attentive to the inward teachings,
as not either to let slip any of its motions, or reject them.

Blind Watchmen. Those Ministers who see and warn by Scripture Light, and not
their light within.

Watch to the Morning. To be diligent to observe and improve the first
breakings forth of the power of the light within.

The Way. CHRIST.

The way of Truth. Those into which they are led by the pure light within.

The Whore of Babylon. All forms of Worship, visible Worship, all that is
believed or practiced from the written Word.

Will of God. The Commands from within, from the light.

Will of Man, Will of the Flesh. All that we choose by the direction of the
understanding, or in which the humane faculties have any thing to do.

Will Worship. Whatever Worship is not from the motions of the light within.

Children of Wisdom. The Quakers born to the light within.

We Witness. We experience, we speak it from the testimony, and feeling of the
light and motions within. And Pen says, This is right witnessing, to witness
what they experience. But they that testify what they believe from the
Scriptures, and right rational demonstrations, go by hear say and reports, but
cannot witness it.

The Word. The Word of God. The Word of the Lord. No other but Christ the
Eternal God.

The secrets of the Work of God. The inward power and motions, neither wrought
nor perceived by, or with the use of the humane understanding and will.

Righteousness of Works. Whatever man has any hand in, or does choose.

The World. All that are not Quakers.

Worship in Spirit. Not the Worship where the heart and will goes along with
the outward appearance, but what is from the motions of the light within.

Wrath of God, Day of Wrath. The inward judgings and terrors by the Light
Christ within, and that in this world.

The Writings when spoken diminishingly. The Scriptures or written Word.

I have the Witness of my Conscience, that I have not in this Key in any
measure abused or wronged the Quakers; but have declared what in their Writings
and Verbal Converse I have found to be true, and could have proved by
particular instances, but for being too large. They who weigh what is written
in the Body of the Book, may find satisfaction in the most, if not all of them.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Have not in this Treatise dealt with the more minute and light Errors and
Absurdities of the Quakers, because they would amount to too large a Volume for
this Subject; and I love not to Tithe Mint, Annis, and Cummin, where weightier
matters call forth my thoughts. Where the Lord shall make what has been
written convincing and effectual, those Superstructures and Appendices of the
conceit of Perfection, denying the sober use of Civil Ceremonies, unnecessary
scrupling at modest Ornaments, Pedantick Words, Phrases and Gestures, obstinate
Jewish and Ceremonious respect to this or that place for Worship, and a
multitude more, will quickly and easily dissolve of themselves.

I doubt not but all whose Judgments are not in Quakerism is no Christianity,
yea, Not consistent with Christianity; being no more capable of dwelling
together in one Breast, than light and darkness in their absolute and supreme
Dominion. I am persuaded that all who have honest meanings among the Quakers,
little think that in turning to Quakerism, they turn Christianity out of doors:
yet it is a truth, a sad truth, that calls for more serious notice than
themselves, or most others afford it, who profess (and that sincerely) a love
to Truth and Souls.

My greatest discouragement in writing this Treatise, Delirium. Yet I was not
without some encouragement, from my hopes that the Lord would bless it, to the
informing and securing of many whose feet are yet out of their snare. I have
not a little been amazed, to read in their Authors such Expressions, as prompt
us to divest our selves of being men, that we may be Christians: As if Rational
and Spiritual, God and the Scriptures, Understanding and Christianity, were
mortal Foes* I intended a Chapter by it self, to demonstrate Quakerism to be no
Christianity, from its excluding right Reason, any thing called Reason from
having to do in the search after Christianity, its Choice, Defense or
Approbation.

I care not if I collect a few, for my Readers satisfaction. Smith's Prim. page
56.
Quest. How do you manifest this inward foundation, which you say is Christ, to
be the true and only foundation which God has laid?

Answ. From the feeling we have of it, by which we know that it is sure in us;
and from the sure and certain knowledge which we have of it in the feeling, we
manifest it from its own Nature and Being, to its own Nature and Being. You may
here perceive what a reasonable Religion the Quakers is, whose demonstration is
nothing else but sense and feeling, and this sense and feeling nothing is
capable of, but the very nature and being of this Foundation.

He proceeds further, page 65. Quest. And can We are not in any Opinion, but in
the principle of Life, by which we are saved, and receives life; and in this
state we stand, not in any Opinion, but in a feeling of life and salvation; for
all Opinions are in notions and apprehensions, in which none feels the Life and
Salvation in Christ, but what they apprehend in the natural part, unto that
they give up their own belief, and so erres from the life in themselves, and
neither believes unto Salvation, nor receives Eternal Life. Smith Prim. p. 61.

I shall not trouble you with an explanation of these uncouth phrases: you may
turn to the Key, and resolve your selves. Sure, if this be the way to
understand Truths, we may cashier our understandings, and judge the most
Sensual to have most of the Spirit. Mr. Pen is much of the same mind.

He calls those disputing from the Scriptures, Dry cavil^ing Letter-mongers.
Penington is a little ingenious, when he says in his Questions concerning
Unity, page 4. Wherein I confess my heart exceedingly despised them, and cannot
wonder that any wise man did, or does yet despise them. Speaking of the way the
Quakers have to get Proselites, being without Rational demonstrations. This is
far from the Apostles Doctrine and Practice, who demonstrated by Reason that
Jesus was the Christ; who reasoned with Faelix, and exhorts to be ready to give
a Reason of the hope that is in us, to every one that shall ask us.

I expect some Replies to my Book agreeable to

I desire the Quakers from henceforth, if they will although some of them have
scorned my prayers, and told me they hated I should pray for them; I shall love
them with so much benevolence, as to beg of God to convince them of the Truth,
by this or what means he pleases, that they may not only be loved of the truly
good with good will, but also delight; but above all, that they may glorify
God on Earth in a better way, and enjoy God in Heaven to a greater blessedness,
than their Principles express. I have done.

But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6. 4.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO Quakerism no Christianity.
Wherein is published, The Quakers Canons, and Constitutions for Ecclesiastical
Censures and Discipline, with an Account of their Symbolizing with Rome
therein, and in other matters of Order and Polity. Also a Catalogue of their
Principal Errors and Blasphemies.
IT has been the common Opinion of those who are unacquainted with the
Quakers, That they are a People altogether Confused, as well in other things as
their Principles; But Satan the great Enemy to Mankind, and Master of Error,
is not so sottish as to decline all Polity and Order, where he designs to
advance his Kingdom. And therefore wherever he subverts the Laws and Ordinances
of Christ, he sets up some of his own in their room and stead; well knowing,
that Unity in Evil is its Strength; and any Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand. And although the known Principles of the Quakers was, and is,
That every man ought to be guided by the Light within himself as sufficient;
yet as the Reason of others, so their own Experience have taught them, That
such a Guide, without another to guide and restrain that, tends to Distraction
and Confusion: And therefore they have erected their Canons and Constitutions.
What they are in part, and how imposed, may be seen in this following Account;
which was conveyed to me out of their Registry by sure hands, and which I have
given you entire, to prevent all pretenses of unfair citing.

That this Testimony is no feigned thing, but really what it pretends to be, W.
Penn has given sufficient evidence. I cited a few lines out of it in my
Vindication of Quakerism no Christianity, in answer to Penn. He finding by that
little shread, that I had gotten the whole piece into my hands, expresses his
discontent in these words, If such inoffensive, nay Christian and necessary
Resolves, for the right Disciplining the Church of Christ in the ways of Peace
and Righteousness, cannot escape John Faldo's cruel hands; instead of rendering
us Papists, I shall not wonder if from a Nonconforming Priest, he turns a
Spanish Inquisitor, or any thing else that can be worse, Penn's Rejoinder to
Faldo, p. 177.

A Testimony from the Brethren, who were met together at London, in the third
month, 1666. to be communicated to the faithful Friends and Elders in the
Countries; by them to be read in their several Meetings, and kept as a
Testimony among them.
WE your Friends and Brethren, whom God has called to labor and watch for the
Eternal good of your Souls: At the time aforesaid, being through the Lord's
good hand, who has preserved us at liberty, met together in his Name and Fear,
were by the Operation of the Spirit of Truth, brought into a serious
Consideration of this present state of the Church of God; which in the day of
her return out of the Wilderness, has not only many open, but some Covert-
Enemies to Conflict against; who are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and
despise Government: without which we are sensible our Societies and Fellowship
cannot be kept holy and inviolable.

Therefore as God has put it into our hearts, we do communicate these things
following unto you; who are turned from darkness to light, and profess with us
in the Glorious Gospel throughout Nations and Countries: Wherein we have
traveled, as well for a Testimony against the unruly, as to stablish and
confirm them, unto whom it is given to believe the Truth; which is unto us very
precious, as we believe it is also unto you, who in love have received ^t, and
understood the Principles, and felt the Virtue and Operation of it. In which
our spirits breath that we all may be preserved, until we have well finished
our Course and Testimony, to the honor and glory of our Lord God, who is over
all blessed for ever.

1. We having a true sense of the working of the Spirit, which under a
Profession of Truth, leads into a Division from, and Exaltation above the Body
of Friends, who never revolted nor degenerated from their Principles, and into
marks of Separation from the constant Practice of good and ancient Friends, who
are found in the Faith once delivered to us. And also into a slight esteem of
their Declarations or Preaching, (who have and do approve themselves as the
Ministers of Christ) and of the Meetings of the Lords people, whereby, and
wherein Friends are, and often have been preciously revived and refreshed.

And under pretense of keeping down Man and Forms, doing down the Ministry and
Meetings, or encourage those that do the same. We say, the Lord giving us to
see, not only the working of that Spirit, and those that are joined to it, that
bring forth these ungrateful fruits; but also the evil Consequents and Effects
of it, which are of no less importance, than absolutely tending to destroy the
work of God, and lay waste his Heritage. We do unanimously (being thereto
encouraged by the Lord, whose presence is with us) declare and testify, That
neither that Spirit, nor such as are joined to it, ought to have any Dominion,
Office, or Rule in the Church of Christ Jesus, whereof the Holy Spirit that was
poured forth upon us, has made us Members, and Overseers. Neither ought they
to act, or order the affairs of the same: But are rather to be kept under with
the power of God, till they have an ear open to Instruction, and come into
Subjection to the Witness of God; of the increase of whose Kingdom and
Government there shall be no end.

2. We do declare and testify, That that Spirit, and those that are joined to
it, who stand not in Unity with the Ministry and Body of Friends; that are
constant and steadfast to the Lord, and to his unchangeable Truth, which we have
received, and are Witnesses of, and Ambassadors, have not any true Spiritual
Right, or Gospel-Authority, to be Judges in the Church, and as the Ministry of
the Gospel of Christ; so as to condemn you and their Ministry: Neither ought
their judgment to be any more regarded by Friends, than the judgment of other
Opposers, who are without. For of right, the Elders and Members of the Church
(which keep their habitation in the Truth) ought to judge matters and things
that differ, and their jugdment which is so given therein, ought to stand good
and valued among Friends; though it be kicked against and disapproved by them,
who have degenerated as aforesaid. And we do further declare and testify, That
it is abominable Pride, which goes before Destruction, that so puffs up the
mind of any particular, that he will not admit of any judgment to take place
against him: For he that is not justified by the Witness of God in Friends, is
condemned by it in himself; though being hardened, he may boast over it in a
false Confidence.

3. If any difference arise in the Church, or amongst them that profess
themselves Members thereof; We do declare and testify, That the Church, with
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, have power (without the assent of such as
dissent from their Doctrine and Practices) to hear and determine the same. If
any pretend to be of us, and in case of Controversy, will not admit to be
tried by the Church of Christ Jesus, nor submit to the judgment given by the
Spirit of Truth in the Elders and Members of the same, but kick against their
judgment, as only the judgment of Man, it being manifested according to truth,
and consistent with the Doctrine of such good ancient Friends as have been, and
are found in the Faith, agreeable to the Witness of God in his people; Then we
do testify in the Name of the Lord ( if that judgment so given be risen
against and denied by the party condemned;) then he or she (and such as so far
partake of their sins, as to countenance and encourage them therein) ought to
be rejected; And having erred from the Truth, persisting therein
presumptuously, are joined in one with HEATHENS and INFIDELS.

4. We do declare, That if any go abroad hereafter, pretending to that weighty
Work and Service, who either in Life or Doctrine grieve good Friends, that are
steadfast in the Truth, sound in the Faith; so that they are not manifest in
their Consciences, but disagree to the Witness of God in them; Then ought they
(whatever have been their Gifts) to leave them before the Altar, and forbear
going abroad and ministering, until they are reconciled to the Church, and have
the Approbation of the Elders and Members of the same. And if any that have
been so approved of by the Church, do afterward degenerate from the Truth, and
do that which tends to Division, and countenance Wickedness and Faction (as
some have done) then the Church has a true Spiritual Right and Authority to
call such to Examination; and if they find sufficient cause for it, by good
testimony, may judge them unfit for the Work of Gods Ministry, whereof they have
rendered themselves unworthy; and so put a stop to their proceedings therein.
And if they submit not to the judgment of the Spirit of Christ in his people,
then ought they publicly to be declared against; and warning given to the
Flock of Christ in their several Meetings, to beware of them, and to have no
fellowship with them, that they may be ashamed, and Lambs and Babes in Christ
preserved.

5. And if any man or woman, which are out of the Unity with the Body of
Friends, print, or cause to be printed, or published in writing, any thing
which is not of service for the Truth; but tends to the scandalizing and
reproaching of faithful Friends, or to beget or uphold Division and Faction;
then we do warn and charge all Friends that do love Truth, as they desire it
may prosper and be kept clear, to beware and take heed of having any hand in
printing, republishing or spreading such Books or Writings. And if at any time
such Books be sent to any of you, that sell Books in the Country, after that
you, with the advice of good and serious Friends, have tried them, and find
them faulty, to send them back again whence they came. And we further desire,
from time to time, faithful and sound Friends may have the view of such things
as are printed upon Truth's account (as formerly it has used to be) before
they go to the Press; that nothing but what is sound and savoury, and that will
answer the Witness of God even in our Adversaries, may be exposed to public
view.

6. We do advise and counsel, That such as are made Overseers of the Flock of
God by the Holy Spirit, and do watch for the good of the Church, meeting
together in their respective places, do set and keep the affairs of it in good
order, beware of admitting or encouraging such as are weak, and of little
faith, to take such trust upon them; for by hearing things disputed that are
doubtful, such may be hurt themselves, and may hunt the Truth, not being grown
into a good understanding to judge of things. Therefore we exhort, That you who
have received a ture sense of things, be diligent in the Lord's business, and
keep the Meetings as to him, that all may be kept pure and clean, according to
that of God which is just and equal.

We also advise, That not any be admitted to order Public business of the
Church, but such as have felt in a measure of the Universal Spirit of Truth;
which seeks the destruction of none, but the general good of all; and
especially of those that love it, who are of the Household of Faith. So, dear
Friends and Brethren, believing that your souls will be refreshed (in the sense
of our spirits, and integrity toward God) at the reading of these things, as
ours were while we sat together at the opening of them; and that you will be
one with us on the behalf of the Lord, and his precious Truth, against those
who would limit the Lord to speak without Instruments, or by what Instruments
they list, and reject the counsel of the Wisemen, and the testimony of the
Prophets, which God sanctified and sent among you in the day of his love; when
you were gathered, and would not allow him liberty, in and by his Servants, to
appoint time and place, wherein to meet together to wait upon, and worship him,
according as he requires in Spirit, and calling it Formal, and the Meeting of
man.

We say, believing that you will have Fellowship with us herein, as we have
with you in the truth, we commit you to God, and the Word of life, which has
been preached to you from the beginning ( which is neither limited to place,
nor time, nor persons; but has power to limit us to each as pleases him) that
you with us, and we with you, may be built up in our most holy faith; and be
preserved to partake of the Inheritance which is heavenly, amongst all them
that are sanctified.

Richard ^arnsworth, Alexander Parker, George Whitehead, Josiah Coal, John
Whitehead, Thomas Lo, Stephen Crispe, Thomas Green. John Moon, Thomas Briggs,
James Parkes.


It will not be lost-labour, to give my Reader an Account of the occasions of
this Testimony, and of those things contained in it, which are of special
remark.

The first and chief Principle which the Quakers cried up, and endeavored to
obtrude on all they attempted to draw off from the common Principles of the
Christian Religion, and to pr^selyte to themselves; was, That every man has a
light in him, which is no less than Christ, and the Spirit, Christ the Word of
God, the Life, the Power, etc. and that this Light is sufficient to lead into
the knowledge of all Truth, and to move men by its Power, to the complete and
perfect Obedience. And as upon this Principle, they did, and do discard the
Scriptures from being a Rule of Faith and Life, and from bearing the name of
the Word of God: So, many of them believed it as rationally followed, That all
their Ministry and ordered Meetings, to declare what they called their
Testimony, was not only superfluous, but also a contradiction to their main
Principle (which is indeed rightly inferred.) Another Principle grounded on the
former Foundation was, To exclude all Forms of Worship, Order or Discipline,
and every one to be left to his own proper liberty, to meet, or not to meet; to
speak, or be silent; as he or she should be guided by his or her private Light,
etc.

But the practices which suited to this Principle, as it rendered its Professors
discordant and contrary to each other, and ridiculous to Observers: So also it
deprived their Heads and Leaders of that Denomination, which was as ambitiously
sought by them, as by any Sect-Masters heretofore.

Upon these Considerations, those who were chief in esteem and interest among
them, began to impose upon the rest, what they pretended was by the Spirit
dictated to them, although it did not meet with the same inward relishes and
sentiments of the rest. Many of the Quakers (who kept to their first Principle)
were hereat greatly offended, and made opposition against those Obtrusions as
Tyrannical, and subverting their Foundation. One of whom was the Author of that
large Letter of Complaint, published in a little Piece, entitled, THE SPIRIT
OF THE HAT: Muclow
In which may be seen the main Grounds of difference between the Ruling and
Nonconforming Quakers, and as well penned as was ever any thing by a Quaker.

But to reconcile these Impositions, with the Principle of the Sufficiency and
Divinity of the Light within every man, the Imposers pretend, That the Light of
the Body ( i e. Such who bear the sway) can taste and discern what is from the
true Light in any; and therefore what answers not to that Discerning-Spirit in
the Body, is to be exploded, as not from the true Principle.

In this Testimony (alias, The Quakers Canons and Constitutions) I shall remark
these following particulars:

1. That in the Title, it is ordered to be read in all their Meetings, and kept
by them as a Testimony: Which are Privileges that the Scriptures obtain not
with them.

2. That the Subscribers, and those others who joined with them in their
Convocations, pretend to have met by the Operation of the Spirit; and to have
had in that Negotiation, the presence of the Lord with them, and that hereupon
they ground the following Dictates and Impositions.

3. That although they take it so grievously, that they should be accounted no
Christians by us; yet they own no other to be the Church of Christ but
themselves, and have the Charity to reckon of all others as Without, and as
Heathen and Infidels; among which sort they are to be numbered whom they
Excommunicate.

4. That notwithstanding their former decrying a stated and ordained Ministry,
Rule and Dignities in the Church, as Tyrannical and Antichristian; they have
now a Ministry, Rulers, Dignities, Offices, and Dominions erected among
themselves, as necessary to the subsisting of their Fellowship: And affirm,
That it is abominable Pride for any particular, not to submit to the judgment
given by them, called, The judgment of the Body.

5. That although they have (with their Authors the Romists and Jesuits)
reproached the holy Scriptures, as a lame and insufficient Rule; yea, as no
Rule: Countenancing this their Distraction from the diversities of Opinions,
Parties, and Factions which are found among those who own it for their Rule;
yet they themselves (for all the All Sufficiency of their Light within) have
Doubts, Discords, and Factions among themselves, and each pretending the Light
for its Authority: So that their pretended Remedy, is an early breeder of those
Diseases, for which they boasted of it as an Infallible Cure.

6. That therefore they now reduce the Light within each particular, under the
Superintendency of that they call, the Light in the Body, or Church of Christ;
which is no other than the Dictates and Impositions of those among them, who
assume that name, and have the greatest interest to maintain it.

7. That while they disown the Scriptures, or Written Word to be a Rule of
Faith, and for trial of Doctrines and Practices; affirming the Spirit to be the
only Rule; they set up the Doctrines of GOOD ANCIENT FRIENDS; ( i. e. of James
Naylor, who was bored through the Tongue for Blasphemy, George Fox, Edw
Buroughs, and such Wretches) in its stead: To which all must be Consentaneous,
or be condemned, and by which their Ecclesiastical Censures must be passed.

8. That the Faith they pretend to adhere unto, claims no longer standing (in
this Testimony) than good ancient Friends, and what was delivered to the
Authors of this Testimony, I suppose, by the foresaid good ancient Friends.

9. That as great Disturbers and Contemners of Christian Congregations,
Ministry, and Forms of Worship as they have been; they having now set up
suchlike things of their own, cannot digest the contempt and neglect of them,
from those Quakers, who (according to their Fundamental Principle) oppose that
among themselves, which they all condemned in others.

10. That to difference their Ministry, Worship, Meetings, and Appointments of
time to that end, from theirs whom they condemn; they father all on the Spirit
of God, calling themselves only its Instruments.

11. That among the Quakers, those who dissent from the Ruling party, are as
little endured, as Dissenters among any whom they charge with Antichristianity
and Oppression. And upon persisting in their Nonconformity to the Dictates and
Impositions of those who will call themselves the Church, are ejected out of
their Ministry, Rule, Office, Dominion, and Membership, and shut out from
having any thing to do in their Church Affairs; yea, and persecuted too, so far
as to be kept under with the power of God, which is a Sentence that has in it
(without their help) an inexplicable, as well as an unlimited sense.

12. That they admit of none to their Debates, about their more private and
offensive Principles, and ordering of their Ecclesiastical matters, but such as
they have made sure of, and have well digested their Tenets; or as they phrase
it, have a good understanding, and true sense of things, and are felt in a
measure of the Universal Spirit.

13. That the Counsel given by the leading Quakers, is by them said to be the
Counsel of the Wisemen and the Prophets.

14. The Authoritative and Magisterial style in which they express these
Canons, scil. We declare and testify; We testify in the Name of the Lord; We
warn and charge you.

15. That they are very industrious for the suppressing of all Prints and
Writings that have an ill Aspect on their Persons or Principles, though
published by Quakers. No wonder then that their Votaries will not, or dare not,
take the liberty of reading those Books which are published for their
Conviction, by professed Friends to their Souls, who are as professed
Adversaries to their Soul-destroying Opinions and Practices.

16. (...) their way of Licensing Books of theirs to be printed, permits none
to pass the Press, but such as have the Approbation of the Tryers, (as they
believe) will answer the Witness of God: (i, e. the Light which is the Quakers
God and Guide) even in their Adversaries. From which it may be inferred, That
not only the corrupt Opinions, but also all other Weaknesses and Extravagancies
contained in their Books, printed according to their Order, may be fixed on,
not only their particular Authors, but also on the Body of the Quakers, and the
Spirit by which they are led.

17. That in all the matters contained in this Paper, they ground not any
Advice, Counsel, Charge, or Determination on the Scriptures; nor make any
mention of their Direction or Authority, while the Witness of God in Friends,
and the Doctrines of good ancient Friends, are again and again made the Proofs
and Tests of their proceeds. By which it is easily understood, of what value or
use the Scriptures are in their esteem.

It is not without ground of more than a Suspicion, that the hand of the
Jesuit has been laying a Popish Plot in the business of Quakerism. And
although I was sometime as far from entertaining that Opinion as most, I have
found that in their Concerns, which has forced me into a strong Presumption of
the truth of it. And the more I understand them, the more I am of that mind;
especially when I consider, That the nearer they approach to any form, the more
of the Image of that Man of Sin appears upon them.

It was a cunning Artifice of Satan, in his first Attempts by by his Quaking
Instruments; to draw them off from the Yoke of Christ in his Word and
Ordinances; by asserting, That every man had a sufficient Light and Motion
within himself, which if heeded, would be more effectual to render them
perfect, than all the Precepts and Rules in the Bible; by which, Pride,
Idleness, and Libertinism is exceedingly gratified. And when they were
sufficiently distasted at, and hardened against the holy Laws and Ordinances of
Christ, beyond hope of return; then to fall on hammering those Bonds of his own
to put upon them, and frame them for his farther designs. Wherein that
Scripture is sadly verified by them, While they promise them liberty, they
themselves are the servants of corruption, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 19, etc.

In my Book entitled, Quakerism no Christianity, I gave a large account of the
Quakers building their Babes, on the same Foundations on which Popery (as such)
is foun(...) viz. Contempt of the Scriptures, pretenses of Infallibility,
(...)t immediate Inspirations, vid. Chap. 4. Sect. 7. and Chap. 12. Sect. 2.
Those instances I produced in them, had chiefly a relation to their Doctrines
and Enthusiasm. I shall now add some remarkable parts of their Discipline,
Order, and Rule, wherein they symbolize with Rome, no less than in the former.

1. Do the Papists pretend themselves to be the only Church, and all other
Professors of the Christian Religion to be Heretic? The Quakers call
themselves only the Body, the Church of Christ, and all others Antichristian,
Heathen and Infidels.

2. Do the Papists by their little Juncto's, which they call General Councils,
make Laws, Canons and Constitutions, beside and contrary to the Scriptures, and
impose them on their Members, as of Divine Authority? So do the Quakers.

3. Do the Papists admit none into their Councils, but such as are in Unity
with their Church, and acknowledge the Pope the Roman Head? Neither will the
Quakers admit any (though professed Quakers) into their Councils, or to order
any thing in their Church Affairs, who are Dissenters from the Ruling party,
are not in Unity with the Body, or that comply not with George Fox the Quakers
Pope.

4. Do the Popish Councils (with, or without the Pope) pretend the Spirit to be
present with them, and its Authority for all their Determinations to be
Infallible? Wherein do the Quakers differ from the same Arrogance? when they
affirm themselves to meet by the Operation of the Spirit of Truth; That the
presence of the Lord is with them in their Conful^s, and then testify and
impose them in the name of the Lord?

5. Do the Romists call the Pope, or the Pope with his Conventicle of the
Prelates, the Church, and impose their Sentiments and Determinations as the
mind and Laws of the Church? The Quakers are herein not a hairs-breadth
differing from them. For that which they call the Light and Sense of the Body,
and its Determinations is no other than the Dictates and Opinions of George
Fox, and some of the Leading Quakers; which yet are imposed on the rest of the
Quakers, as the Light of the Body, or of the Church of Christ.

6. Do the Papists obtrude a submission of the private Sentiments and Opinions
of any of their Members, to the Determination of the Pope, or Pope and Council?
So do the Quakers; requiring, That no man's particular Opinion do lift up it
self against the Light of the Body; but be determined thereby, and acquiesce
therein.

7. Do the Papists reject the Scriptures from being their Rule, while they
advance Traditions in their rooms? The Quakers have gone beyond them, who give
not that Authority to the Scriptures which the Papists allow them; and to
over-match the Popish Traditions, bring in the Doctrine of Good ancient Friends
as their Rule, while the Scriptures are denied that Preferment.

8. For Implicit Faith, the Quakers are no way inferior to the most strict
Votaries of Rome. The pretended Light and Inspiration of their Leaders, they
have a swallow for, that a Monster as big as a Whale will pass without
haesitation. And that these pretended Inspirations are indeed from the Spirit
of God, they have no other proof, but the Opinion of their Infallibility, or
the Miracles in Spirit which George Fox talks of; which are as indemonstrable
as the other.

9. The continual Sacrifice of Christ in the Popish Mass, has a good
Preparative in that Principle of the Quakers, That Christ in them does offer up
himself a living Sacrifice to God for them; by which the wrath of God is
appeased toward them. It Is but removing the invisible Sacrifice from the dark
and close corner within, to the Altar in some visible sign, it is all one: Which
may in time appear as agreeing to the light, as W. Penn's Ceremony of keeping
the Hat off in Prayer, does fitly signify the Veil removed from their hearts.

It would yet seem a lame Comparison between the Papists and Quakers, if among
the Quakers there be no Idols, nor yet the Image of the Pope, the greatest Idol
of all the rest. But the Jesuits and Factors of Rome have not been such
unskilful Artists, and unfaithful Servants to their Master, as to do their work
so imperfectly.

10. If the Light within be not God (as certainly it is not) then do they
professedly give Divine Worship to a Creature, or to an Imagination of their
own framing. And if the Souls and Spirits of men are God, or a part of God, and
of his Being, by their Principles (which are as truly their Principles as words
can express) then they are Idolaters with a witness.

11. But the Romists give Divine Worship to Saints, which is not (as most
believe) the Quakers Idolatry. If I do not prove them herein to overmatch them,
I am greatly mistaken; and whether I am or not, I will leave it to my Readers
judgment. The Quakers Worship (as they profess) is inward Worship, which all
confess to be the most excellent part of Worship: And therefore if they affirm
Worship to be given to those whom they put in the room of Saints, it must be
acknowledged that they worship them, though their bodies bow not down to them.

They profess to worship those who are sprung from the noble, gentle Seed, and
that with Divine Worship, and to bow down to the lowest appearances of Christ's
Light and Spirit. Yea, George Fox tells us, That not to worship Christ in them,
is to worship Men, Devils, or Angels. This kind of Idolatry may explain the
mystery of the Quakers looking so devoutly for a considerable season in each
others faces when they meet, continuing all the while in a deep silence.

And there are sufficient witnesses (living) of the bodily and visible Worship,
which James Naylor received from diverse of them. Herein they exceed the Papists
Idolatry, in the number of their Idols; being all that have Christ in them, or
that are sprung from the noble, gentle Seed, viz. All through Quakers: And in
the quality of their Idol-Saints; for in the room of S. Peter, Paul, the Virgin
Mary* are William, George, etc. who are as like to those Saints, as the blacker
sort of white Devils: And also in point of Time; for the Papists worship their
Saints after their death, but the Quakers worship theirs while living. See
Quakerism no Christianity, Chap. 16. for a fuller proof of this.

12. To find a Pope, or somewhat like him among the Quakers, we need seek no
further than George Fox; who is among them a Pope, and more than a Pope. His
Supremacy among the Quakers is sufficiently known among them, and by some
lamented. But I shall descend to some particula^ instances, in which George Fox
equals or out-does the Pope, in his Papal Arrogance and Blasphemy. I could
produce woeful instances from the hand of credible Reports, but I shall decline
them, and present you with a Letter to him from Josiah Coal, one of the
Quakers chief Ministers, which contains a Map of a world of Blasphemies in a
small room. This Letter I had out of the Quakers Registry, it being there
preserved as a Testimony of the greatness of George Fox: And as bad as it is (I
having printed it in my Vindication) William Penn undertakes twice in print, to
vindicate every line of it.

DEar George Fox, Who art the Father of many Nations; whose Life reached through
us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off; To the begetting of many again
unto a lively Hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed;
whose being and habitation is the power of the Highest, in which thou rules and
governs in Righteousness; and thy Kingdom is established in peace, and the
increase thereof is without end.


Does the Pope pretend, that from Peter's Chair, Ministers were sent out to
convert all those Nations who professed, or do profess the Christian Religion?
Such an one is George Fox said to be; for he is called, The Father of many
Nations, and indeed of almost all who are Quakers; who with them are the only
Christians.

Does the Pope pretend to be Christ's Vicar, and clothed with his power? So is
it pretended of George, that his Habitation is in the power of the Highest.

Does the Pope pretend not to err, wherein he acts as Pope? It Is said of Pope
George, that he Rules and governs in Righteousness.

Does the Pope pretend to be a Monarch? George has a Kingdom too.

Does the Pope say, That his Kingdom is in Unity and Concord, while the
Heretics are at continual Discord? It Is said of George's Kingdom, that it is
Established in peace. In other passages of this Letter, that is imputed to
George Fox, which the Pope never dared yet to assume to himself.

And in this Letter, we have a Sentence explained, which is the close of the
Preamble in the Testimony; wherein it is said, that such who persist in their
dissent from the Body, must be kept under with the power of God, till they come
into subjection to the Witness of God, of the increase of whose Kingdom, etc.
So that it seems by comparing Notes, That George Fox is the Power of God that
must keep them under; and it is he who is the Witness that must be subjected to,
before they are readmitted to Office or Membership: Which well agrees with the
Pope of Rome, who assumes to himself the power of Christ, as his Vicar and
Vicegerent; and makes those who submit not to his Yoke, feel the weight of his
Loins, if within his reach. And Bellarmine gives it as a part of his Definition
of a Churchmember, That he submit himself to the Government, ESPECIALLY of the
Bishop of Rome, the only Vicar of Christ on earth, Bellar. de Eccles. milit.
Lib. 3. c. 2. So that as there is no Communion with the Papists, without
subjection to Pope Alexander; so there must be no Communion or Indulgence with
the Quakers, until there be a subjection to Pope George.

And for the Authority which resides in George Fox singly, it is able to
produce Bulls as Magisterial, as ever issued from S. Peter's Chair. Behold one
of them, for a rare example of Superstition, and the Quakers Thraldom to their
Universal Bishop.

ALL Friends, every where, On your Signs, set not up the Image and likeness of
any Creature in Heaven, or in Earth. But by the power of the Lord, keep down
all the makers of such things; for the ground of them is from the Heathen. But
set up a Bed-staff, Fire-shovels, Saw, Fork, Compasses, Andirons, Harrow, Plow,
or any such thing. And all Friends, every where, Admonish one another, young
and old, that ye do not run after the Worlds fashions, which are invented and
set up by the vain and light mind: Which if ye do, how can ye judge the World
for such things? Away with your Skimming-dish Hats, and your unnecessary
Buttons on your Cloaks and Coats, and on the tops of your shoulders behind, and
on your sleeves. Away with your long Slit-peaks behind, and on the skirts of
your Waste-Coats, and short Sleeves, punishing your shoulders, so as you cannot
have the use of your arms. Away with your short Black Aprons, and some having
none. Away with your Vizards, whereby you are not distinguished from bad women;
and your bare Necks, and your great needless Flying-Scarfs, like Colors on
your backs. And so set not up, nor put on that which you did once with the
Light condemn: But in all things be plain, that you may adorn the truth of the
Gospel of Christ, and judge the World, and keep in that which is comely and
decent.

George Fox.

By this you may be satisfied of the Arbitrary Power of G: Fox, the Quakers
Infallible Pope, and the Universality of his Dominion over the Quakers; who
according to their Principles are the only Christians, and Church of Christ;
all others being accounted by them the World, Heathen, and Infidels. And it
would amaze a serious and intelligent person, to hear of the strange Reverence
and Submission given to this Impostor, by the Quakers in England, Ireland,
Holland, Barbado's, Virginia, and the American Islands, and other parts where
this Delusion has gotten footing: Of which he made proof in his Travels the
last year, to visit his Subjects in all the aforesaid parts, or most of them.

Take only two Instances more of this Quaker-Pope. The first was a saying of
his to some of the Friends; viz. Friends, Although I have not told it you, I
now declare it, I HAVE POWER TO BIND, AND TO LOOSE WHOM I PLEASE. This was
charged upon him in the Letter printed, called, The Spirit of the Hat, and in
the Quakers Reply was not denied.

The second Instance is, of a blasphemous Passage of a grand Quaker ( Solomon
Eccles) in his Book, entitled, The Quakers Challenge: It was said of Christ,
that he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not: So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he was not. This
man was Foxes great Favorite.

From these and suchlike Considerations, many of the Quakers themselves cry
out upon the Foxonian and prevailing party. They are like Rome, and their
management of matters in their Church, is Popery, Tyranny, Lording, Arbitrary:
which Complaints are confessed by the Authors of, The Spirit of Alexander, to
be the Outcry of many of the Quakers, who for their sensibleness of this
unexpected Roman-like Form of Tyranny, are as doggedly rated in that Book, as
ever Heretics were by the Papists.

Certainly, Popery never arose to such a perfection in so short a time, among
any people in the World, whose first pretenses were such strangers and
opposites to it. And if it be justly said of the Pope, or Papal Body, That he
has a mouth speaking Blasphemies; it will be no crime to impute the same to
George Fox and his Adherents.

It is a sad Consideration, That the Quakers should be so infatuated by their
first opinions of their Leaders teaching from the immediate Inspiration of the
Spirit of God, and of their Infallibility (the result of the other) as not to
be able, or willing to discern their so notorious an Imposture; Which (if there
were no other Demonstration) their Nonsense, Self-Contradiction, setting up
the things they once destroyed, and nulling (in effect) that particular light
of every man, which they once Deified, discover with Sunbeams. But what is the
sin of many besides them (though not in so high a degree) is their sin and
snare. They had rather go forward out of the way, than by returning to those
Principles from whence they are fallen, to confess themselves Transgressors;
which is from a spirit of Pride and Folly. And indeed, considering what height
of Pride, and depth of Error, Folly and Ignorance, with contempt of their
Betters, do meet together in these Monuments of Delusion, I wonder not that, AS
PROUD AS A QVAKER, is become proverbial I pray God deliver them from that
eternal and inevitable destruction, of which their obstinacy is a sad Omen. I
have loved strangers, and after them will I go, is two exactly the spirit they
are of.

The foregoing things considered, it is not difficult to find such a
preparedness for downright Popery, in the present posture of the Quakers
Religion, as may render it no great strain to jump into it, whenever they find
it their interest. For why should it be thought unreasonable, that they should
rather choose to submit their particular Sentiments to the Determinations of a
Pope and Council, who pretend to the Spirits guidance infallibly therein, than
to the Determinations of George Fox, and his silly Adherents, called the Body,
who can give no better assurance of their Infallibility, (or common Reason
either) than mere pretenses, mounted on confident Ignorance and Arrogance?
Especially considering, that such a change will better bear the fine affected
Mystery of being felt in a measure of the Universal Spirit; which seems to be
no other than the so-much vaunted Universality of Rome, cast in the Canting
Mould of the Quakers Phraseology.

Besides, they will then have the Accession of the numerous Auxiliaries of
Rome, not needing to be so straightened, and put to their shifts as now, by laying
the weight of their yet unformed Cause on so many Equivocations, and thin
Subterfuges, defended by only two or three unskilful and unwary Patrons. And
what if they shall think meet to embrace the Traditions of Rome, instead of THE
DOCTRINES OF GOOD ANCIENT FRIENDS? I am sure it would be short of a Miracle.
And the things being the same in Substance, why should a mere verbal difference
be a Gulf unp^ssable? And if many of the more devout sort of Quakers should be
loath to part with their Darling Singularities and Morosities? If Rome be
pleased so far to indulge to them, as to afford them a Dispensation, till time
and other things have weaned them, it is not the first time she has been so
kind a Mother. However, if they will but own the Roman Head, as far as they now
own George Fox, they may have their Religion with all, or most of its other
Disorders, and be owned good Catholics of the Foxonian Order; and George Fox
Sainted to boot for his good service. I desire the Quakers to be but so just to
themselves, as to consider whether what has been said, do not at least call
them to a suspicion, that their Leaders are rowing toward Tybur, whatever face
they put upon it: And what an exchange they have made, in rejecting the
Scriptures from being their Rule, and taking at length the Impositions of men
in its room; which are so much the more wicked and blasphemous, as they lay
them to the Spirit of God as their Father; and so much the more dangerous, as
the Opinion these men have obtained among them, will render it neither pleasant
nor credible, for them now to question any thing they say, or reject any thing
they impose.

A Summary of the Capital Errors and Blasphemies of the Quakers.
Concerning the Godhead.
THey deny a Trinity of distinct Persons to subsist in the Godhead.

They own the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be God under those distinct terms;
yet deny either of them to have any relation, or property incommunicable to
each other.

They divide the Divine Being and Godhead into measures and parts.

Concerning the Scriptures.
They hold,

That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, and that Christ only is the Word
of God.

That much of them were the Words of God, but those things are not now the
words of God.

That a great part of the Scriptures were the words of wicked men, and the
Devil; therefore cannot be the Words of God; Not considering those parts of the
Scriptures to be the Historical Word, or Words of God containing in them a
Divine Truth of History.

That the Scriptures are not a Rule of faith and life.

That not any part of the Scripture has Authority to oblige us to any matter
of faith or practice, unless it be dictated to us, or inspired into us by the
Spirit immediately; as the Prophets, Apostles, and Penmen of the Scriptures
received it.

That those who determine their faith and practice by the Scripture, are
begotten into the words, without the life and power.

That he that preaches the Doctrines of the Apostles and Prophets expressed in
the Scriptures, not having them by Inspiration as they; and yet calls them the
Word, or Words of the Lord, tells lies; is a Thief and a Robber, stealing the
Prophets words, etc. and runs into other men's lines and labors.

That to follow the examples of the Church, in those things which were
commanded to them, and practiced by them under the Gospel, or
New-Testament-Administration, is to commit Idolatry, and to offend God, by
making to our selves Graven Images, and Likenesses.

That to own and embrace the Scriptures for our Rule is Idolatry, placing them
in the room of Christ, the Light within.

Concerning Christ.
They hold,

That the Son of God is Christ, and also that the Father, or the Spirit, is
Christ as well as he.

That God, or the Godhead only is the Christ.

That Christ is not of the Humane Nature, or Man, according to Adam's nature.

That the Body of Jesus the Son of Mary, which died on the Cross without the
Gates of Jerusalem, was never; nor is not an Essential Constitutive part of the
Christ of God.

That the aforesaid Body is not now glorified and in Heaven, and that it is not
now alive.

That Christ was never seen with bodily eyes.

That Christ never died in a proper sense, he being only God, and so immortal.

That God is now manifested in the flesh, as he was in the Son of Mary above
1600 year since.

That Christ has Manhood, but is not a Man of our nature.

That there is a heavenly Body of Christ, consisting of Spiritual flesh, blood,
and bones, which came down from Heaven, and dwelt in the Body that was born of
the Virgin Mary, and dwells now (at least) in every Quaker.

That every man has a Light in him, which is Christ the Eternal Word of God.

Concerning Christianity.
They hold,

That the Quakers only are true Christians, and own the true Christ; and all
who own not, and submit not unto the Light within as Christ, are Infidels.

That those whom we call the Heathen, have somewhat of Christianity, because
they have some justice and common naural Virtues, although they believed not on
Jesus the Son of Mary, nor have any knowledge of him, nor make any Profession of
him to be their Lord and Savior.

Concerning the Soul of man.
They hold,

That the Souls of men are a part of the Being of God, of his very Life and
Substance; came out of God, are no Creatures, are Infinite in themselves, and
shall return into God again.

Concerning Redemption.
They hold,

That Christ came to Redeem the Seed, which is no other but Christ himself.

That Christ before man's Conversion is the lost in man.

That the Redemption by Christ, is to obedience to the Light within, and
thereby to Peace and Righteousness.

That we are not redeemed by what was done and suffered, by the Son of Mary,
above 1600 years since, and without us in respect of place.

That Christ in them does offer up himself a Living Sacrifice to God for them,
by which the wrath of God is appeased toward them.

Justifying-Righteousness.
They hold,

That the Righteousness of Christ, and their Righteousness, is but one and the
same thing.

That what Righteousness they perform, is the Righteousness of Christ; because
performed by the Teachings and Power afforded to them by him.

That they are justified by a Righteousness within themselves, and not by a
Righteousness performed without them, or before they had a being.

That no man is justified, who does not perform every demand of the Law; i. e.
Of the Light, or Law within.

Concerning Sin.
They deny Original Sin.

They deny that motions from within to sin, are sin, if not complied with.

They hold, That men may attain to be without any sin in this life: And that
some of them are perfectly freed from its stains and prevalency.

They hold, That there can be no sin, but what is committed against Conviction.

Concerning the Light within.
They hold,

That the Light within them is God, Christ, the Spirit, the Law, the Gospel,
the Life, the Power, the only and sufficient Rule of faith and Life. Vid. The
Key.

That all men have this Light within themselves.

That this Light is not a natural or created Light, or Humane faculty.

That it is of the same nature in those who obey or disobey it.

That while men resist this Light, the Light, or Christ is in bondage, and kept
under.

That men heeding and obeying this Light, Christ is risen in them, which is the
Resurrection and the life.

Concerning Ordinances.
They hold,

That there is no such thing as Ordinances now under the Gospel.

That Baptism and the Lord's Supper were once Ordinances, but^ now since the
Spiritual Administration are abolished.

Concerning a Ministry and Preaching.
They hold,

That all that pretend to be Ministers of the Gospel, and have a Call from Men,
are not the Ministers of Christ.

That their Ministry teach only from the immediate Revelation, and Inspiration
of the Spirit.

That their Ministers are infallible in their ministering.

That our Ministers, who receive Maintenance for their work, are Hirelings,
Thieves, and Robbers.

That those who preach from the Scriptures, taking their Sermons from thence,
steal the Prophets words, and are not sent of God.

That men are to preach nothing, but what they have a motion to from the Spirit
at that time.

That those who preach Christ without, are false Ministers; and those are true
Ministers, who preach Christ within, and put people upon believing on him, as
he is manifested in themselves.

That the end of all their Teaching is, to bring men to the Everlasting Word of
God in themselves; i. e. To follow the Light within.

That whatever their Ministers teach, it is not they that teach, but the Spirit
through them.

Concerning Prayer.
They neither confess their sin in public Prayer, nor beg pardon for
themselves.

They pray not Ministerially in their public Assemblies, as the mouths of
others; but always in the singular number, scil. I pray, etc.

They pray not in the name, or for the sake of Christ the Mediator.

They use no Family Prayer, or at set-meals.

They deny, That we are to use our wills, or understandings in prayer.

Concerning the Church of Christ and its Officers.
They hold themselves only to be the Church of Christ.

They hold ( some of them,) That there ought to be no such thing as Elders and
Overseers in the Church, but that the Spirit alone is Apostle, Prophet, Elder,
Overseer, etc. This was the first and general Opinion: But since they have so
far changed their minds (the most of them) as to hold Dignities, Offices,
Government necessary; and also, That it is not the Officers, but the Spirit in
the Officers, that does all the parts belonging to their Offices.

They hold only one Universal Church (not particular Churches) and that Church
to be in God, the Jerusalem which is from above.

In their Meetings ( sometimes) they have nothing but a profound Silence; which
formerly was when they had no motion, but now, for most part, when none of
their Ministry, either of the men or women in that Office are there.

They have a strange Officer among them, George Fox, whose Titles are full of
Blasphemies; scil. A King, the Witness of God, the Father of many Nations, etc.
See the Letter to him from Coal. This man is a Sphere above any of the rest.

Concerning Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, and the Resurrection.
All these things they hold to be within, in the time of this life. The Day of
Judgment is (with them) the judging of the Flesh, or all disobedience to the
Light, by the Light within; and this is the same with Hell. And for Heaven,
they hold, it is within too; but no such place as that where we believe the man
Christ to be, above the visible Heavens.

The Resurrection of this body wherein the soul now lives, they peremptorily
deny, affirming; The belief that ever it shall be quickened and made alive
again, to be ridiculous and irrational.

They profess Eternal Rewards; but it amounts only to this conceit, That the
body shall not live again after its death, and so there is no reward to that.
And the soul they say is Eternal, came out from God, is a part of his Being,
shall return into him again: So that the soul shall be changed from a part of
God dwelling in flesh, to a part of God resolved into his own and original
Being; which was the state of their souls a thousand years before they were born
(as they conceit.) Thus God alone shall be Eternally rewarded, by being
delivered out of these Prisons of the Quakers bodies.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 26. for distraction, read detraction, p. 7. l. 29. for
Denomination, r. Domination, p. 11. l. 16. for Babes, r. Babel.


