A REVIEW OF THE GRAND CASE OF THE Present Ministry, Whether they may Lawfully
Declare and Subscribe as by the late Act of Uniformity is required? In Reply to
a Book Entitled; A Short Surveigh of the Grand Case, etc.

Wherein all their Objections against both the Declarations are Considered and
Answered.

By the same Hand.

Job. 4. 2. If we assay to commune with thee, will thou be grieved? but who can
withold himself from speaking? London, Printed for T. Dring, and are to be sold
at the George in Fleet Street, and by M. Mitchel, at the first Shop in
Westminster Hall. 1663.

THE PREFACE To my Reverend Brethren, the Surveighers of the Grand Case.

1. I Find some Learned Men have observed, Jackson on the Creed.
both an Equivalency of Errors throughout most Ages and Nations; and also, an
Equivalency of means to evince and to vindicate the truth; by the wisdom of
God, so proportioned to the diversity of times, as no Age could have better
then the present.

2. May I observe, that our present Age and the differences of it, are of that
strange and singular Humor, that they need an Exception from that Learned
Intimation in both Respects.

3. As for the things in Controversy betwixt us, though, happily, they may be
reduced to some Ancient Topics, yet the Mat^^^ of ou^ Cases, as they now aris^
from the force of the New Law, the Act for Uniformity, they have much of
peculiarity and newness in them: and whilst the Burden of Resolving them
remains upon so weak a shoulder, the means ^a^ justly be Censured, as
inequivalent* what so ever the blessing of God may be.

4. Yet, considering, the Discussion of the present Debates depends more upon a
due examining of Rational Consequences, then upon Authority's of Antiquity, or
any other Learning, that requires long Experience and Observation, I am not
much discouraged: yea see^ng, upon the Review (you have occasioned me to make)
I my self do discern some things betwixt us more clearly then before, I take
encouragement to hope (as I heartily wish) that you, my Brethren, may do so too.

5. I am sure my Aim is good, as, I I know, it is great. I could not hope to hit
it, at the first or second shoot: but, through your Invitation, I venture
again; that, if possible, by any means, I might at length attain it: However, I
shall reckon the suc^ess far more worthy then all my abours, if I only gain a
little ground in what I prosecute, and come nearer and nearer to my desired
end, for my Bre^hrens sake, and the peace of Jerusalem.

6. You do quicken this expectation in me, while you, modestly indeed (as you
say) signify to me, that, though my Resolution of the Grand Case has not made
on you that impression, nor produced that effect I might Rationally promise to
my Self; yet your selves cannot but observe, it has effected it in many
others. What, you think, I might rationally expect before, I hope, I may more
cheerfully pray for, now: For without Arrogance, I presume to commend to your
own reason, whether most, if not all, of your main exceptions are not blown
quite off, by this Second Ventilation of the matters in difference.

7. I cannot doubt, but that you will easily be satisfied, that a Comparative
Approbation is a sufficient ground for unfeigned Assent and Consent according
to the Act.

8. Also, that seeing you intimate, you could ^ear the particulars you except
against in the Common Prayer Book, which cannot be without some Assent and
Consent; and seeing, that no Assent and Consent cannot be other then Real; and
seeing, all Real Assent and Consent, is, therefore, unfeigned; that you will
not find further reason to scruple, to give your unfeigned Assent and Consent
to the same.

9. For the matter of the Govenant, I hope you will better consider that the
great hinge upon which that Controversy turns, is not the necessity of
Episcopal Government, but the lawfulness of it: For, though you think it not
necessary in it self, or by the Word of God; yet if it be lawful, that is, not
sinful, it becomes necessary upon us, by the Laws of the Land, and may not be
sworn against.

10. Moreover, I would fain believe, that the great stones of the Reality and
Nationality of the Covenant (it being essential to Oaths, in the judgment of
the Reverend Casuist Bishop Sanderson, to be personal, and to bind but the
Takers only:) as also, that, about Church Government established by Law; and
the dissolution of the Long-Parliament, are perfectly removed out of your way.

11. But I shall not Anticipate: I leave the Book to your Christian and candid
perusal; accounting it no mean felicity, that it has to do with persons
Ingenuous and Learned, and truly desirous of satisfaction.

12. Yet, I must tell you, it much troubled me, that you took those expressions
of felones, sures, and proditores de ^e, so tenderly to your selves.

13. I told you, they were the words of Dr. Done, and wished they were not
applicable in our Case. Indeed, it was far from me, to conclude all dissenters
with them: nor dare I say, you deserved the charge in the least degree.

14. Yet I dare say, you will not plead for all dissenters: yea, that you do
concur with Cassianus, that some men (he says many) are carried to desire
sufferings by humane respects, by the Spirit either of their Parents, or the
Spirit of Levity, or the Spirit of Liberty; or, as I may add, the Spirit of a
party: Yea, it is storied of one Eulalia, a Maid of 12 years old, that came
from her Fathers house, declared her self to be a Christian, spit in the Judges
face, and provoked him to execute her.

15. Now, no doubt, my Brethren, the same Spirit o^ ^eal may work irregularly,
in any, and in our Age: especially, when an opinion, that all the Godly, must
suffer persecution, is spread over the people.

16. It is noted by Bodin, that Christians, in Tertullians time, were so
pleased with suffering, that sometimes Edicts wore made by their very
persecutors, that no more Christians should be executed, because they
perceived; that the Marty^s delighted in dying; and, my Dear Brethren, (if
Christian Magistrates must be persecutors, and the effect of the Law
persecution, and) if the readiness of your numbers to suffer, or any other
confideration should prevail for a like Edict to stop your sufferings; I
beseech you, do not think, I should be against it, I would not be thought your
enemy, because I would ^ell you the truth, and earnestly persuade you to do
your duty, and not to suffer when you need not.

17. I would rather stroke you with the seather, then prick you with the pen;
^^cept to provoke you to good works, and to mind you of your danger. Indeed, I
feared, at the time I wrote my last Book, that many of my worthy Brethren were
falling; and I was (in my Epistle) somewhat earnest to save them, and that, I
hope, was all my Crime, and no more then Ingenuous persons are willing to
pardon.

Give me leave to conclude with those notable words of Famous Doctor Collet, in
his Sermon, p. 28. which I desire to do with the same Spirit, that he spoke
them; if peradventure it be thought that I have passed my Bounds, or have said
anything out of temper, forgive it me, and ye shall forgive a man speaking out
of mere zeal; a man heartily lamenting the Decay of the Church: and consider
the thing it self, not regarding my foolishness. Consider the miserable end and
State of the Church, and endeavor your selves with all your Souls and
Abilities (as he, to reform it, so I) to save it.

Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace, always, and by all means: Job
29: 2.
and O that you were as in months past, My dear Brethren,

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
CASE 1. WHether it be lawsul to declare in the words of the first Declaration.
Page 1 CHAP. 1. Touching the Book of Ordination. 1. CHAP. 2: Touching the Book
of Common Prayer. 13 SECT. 2. Of, let us beseech him, etc. 16 SECT. 3. Of
popular Responds. 21 SECT. 4. Of the Holy Table. 22 SECT. 5. Of the old
Translation of the Psalms. 28 SECT. 6. Of the Salvation of Infants. 30 SECT.
7. Of Assent and Consent unfeigned. 35 SECT. 8. Of the phrase in the Act, [the
use of all things, etc.] 43 CASE 2. Whether it be lawful to Declare in the
words of the second Declaration. 51 CASE 6. Whether we may lawfully declare in
these words, I do hold there lies no Obligation on me, or any other person,
from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any
change or alteration of Government in the Church or State? 52 CASE 7. Whether
any private or single person may lawfully endeavor the Alteration of
Church Government by virtue of the Covenant. 51 SECT. 1. Of the dissolving the
long Parliament. 59 SECT. 2. Of the Reality and Nationality of the Covenant. 66
SECT 3. Of the capacity of all Covenanters. 68 CASE 8. Whether to endeavor to
alter the Government of the Church be against the Right of the King. 76 CASE 9.
Whether to violate the Kings Right be not sinful. 77 SECT. 1. Of the Kings
Right as Supreme Executor of the Laws. 78 SECT. 2. Of the King Right in the
Government of the Church. 79 SECT. 3. Of the Kings Right as Legislator. 80
SECT. 4. Of the Kings Proclamation against the Covenent. 89 CASE 10. Whether
the Covenant to endeavor the Extirpation of Episcopacy be against the Laws,
and consequently sinful. 95 CASE 11. Whether the present Church Government was
established by Law before the Covenant was taken? 99 SECT. 1. Church Government
is fixed by Law. ibid: SECT. 2. The Original of Prelacy is not to be sought in
Law. 100 SECT. 3. Church Government is established by Law. 102 CASE 12. Whether
the Covenant can oblige against a Future Law. 114 CASE 15. Touching the word
[Endeavour] and the sense and force of it, in the Covenant, and in the Act. 118
SECT. 1 Endeavor is distinguished. 120 SECT. 2. Of the Acts of Endeavor
justified by my Brethren. 122 SECT. 3. Of Endeavor by popular groans and
complaints. 127 SECT. 4. Of Endeavor by Disputations. 128 SECT. 5. Whether to
petition be to Endeavor properly, and in the Act. 131 SECT. 6. Whether to
Endeavor, etc. be at all times sui Juris to every Subject, etc. 135 CASE. 16.
Whether the Covenant be not against the Liberty of the Subject. 143 CASE. 17.
Whether the Covenant be not against former Obligations. 145 SECT 1. Whether the
Covenant be not against the Law of Obedience to Authority. 146 SECT. 2. Whether
the Covenant be not against former Oaths and Promises. 152 SECT. 3. Whether the
Covenant can oblige to the laying down of the Ministry. 155
CASE I. Whether it be lawful to Declare in the words of the first Declaration.
CAP. I. Touching the Book of Ordination.
1. I Find my self inclined, (whether from the easiness of my Nature, or a love
of Peace) to all just means of a good accommodation, especially with Brethren:
And confess in a Temptation upon me to use such Mediums, as in my own
observation are least disputed by my opponents: because it is the easiest way
to encounter, and the likeliest to reconcile them.

For the nearer* I am to my adversary, the fairer is my advantage to lay hold
upon him; and when we are agreed in the premises, I cannot but hope for a good
Conclusion.

2. Such as are friends to Conformity could not choose but discover this
peaceable design of my last Book; viz. the Grand-Case, etc. Though give me
leave to Note, that you my dissenting Surveyers of it seem not to apprehend it,
by your great mistake even of the first Argument therein improved; by which
mistake alone you labor to avoid the Consequence of it.

3. I distribute the first of the Declarations into two parts. The first part
concerns the Liturgy. The second, the Book of Ordination. I begin with this
second part, touching the Book of Ordination, and determine thus.

4. It is lawful to declare our unfeigned assent and consent to the form and
manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons:
and I do indeed conclude this, partly, from the practice of many of your
selves, who had formerly subscribed as much in ^our subscriptions to the 39.
Articles.

5. This you say, is an Argument a facto ad jus, and not concluding; and if it
be absolutely considered, as it is by you, I confess as much; but if it be
Argumentum ad homines, and bear open respect to the persons with whom I
dispute, as I plainly intended it; methinks it carries force enough.

6. For, in Charity we reckon, that such as did formerly subscribe, did it in
judgment and Conscience: neither have we r^^son to believe, that they are
dissatisfied with their former subscriptions in point of Conscience, until they
have told the world so much, and given us the grounds of such their Conviction;
and till then, why may we not conclude a facto ad jus, against such as have
formerly subscribed, what they now refuse. Viz. That by their former* practice
not yet disclaimed; as against their Conscience, themselves conceive this part
of the declaration to be lawful, and that they may lawfully declare accordingly.

7. Most have done a thing, therefore all may lawfully do it, is indeed bad
Logic. But that which you judge, you may lawfully do, you cannot say you may
not do it. Now I only assume, that you judge you may lawfully do that which you
have formerly done; and if this fail, I think it yet lies upon you to show us
and the world the reason why.

8. But a little more plainly, my Argument lay thus; Those that have subscribed
this part of the Declaration already, in the 39. Articles, and read their
allowance of it openly to their several Congregations; and that are convinced,
that had not this been required in the new Declaration, no Conformity, without
subscribing the 39. Articles, of which this is one, could legally suffice; and
yet affirm, that had not these new Declarations been required, they intended to
have Conformed; may doubtless, lawfully, as to their own principles (for you
could not choose but see that my Argument was ad homines) declare their
unfeigned assent and consent to the book of Ordination.

9. But you venture also to gainsay my Assumption, which you please to term a
confident assertion, and say, you cannot but conceive strangely of it. I shall
not be moved to say this is strange confidence; only I humbly conceive, you may
well abate somewhat of it by a new survey and second thoughts.

10. My Assertion, (as you have collected it) is this; that the most who had
Livings, had, at the writing my Book, subscribed the form and manner of Making,
Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, required by this
Article.

This Assertion you assault after this manner. We do not know, say you, the
most that then had Livings; and therefore cannot ask them the question; but we
think they must be most of them reordained according to the new form.
Presbyterial Ordination had sure be^n very Active and Extensive, and Presbyters
were easy wheelers.

11. But pray consider, why must the most of the Ministers that possessed
Livings before the 24, of August last, be Reordained according to the new form?
were there not many that enjoyed their Livings to that very day that were never
Episcopally ordained?

But your thoughts spent upon Reordination had been better improved upon the
Ejection of those Ministers that were found in other men's Livings; this might
have rendered my Assertion less strange to you.

12. I do not say that the Presbyterians were easy wheelers; yet you know they
were upon the wheel; and very many of them were by virtue of a former Act of
Parliament turned off, and others that were Episcopally Ordained, and had been
Legally inducted into the same places long before, had the better turn of being
restored.

13. Now I hope I may have leave to conclude, that the many Ancient Ministers
that were thus restored, added to the number of such, both Presbyterians and
others, as had continued in their places, during all the time of our great
Distractions, may easily make the Number of Subscribers, even at the time of
writing my Book, to exceed the number of Ministers that then enjoyed their
Livings, and had not subscribed.

Your next Objection is, that it was not the same Book of Ordination, which was
subscribed before, it being in several things altered.

14. But, my dear Brethren, do not let us quibble away our Unity and Peace. Can
you say, I am sure you do not say, that these books are not the same for
substance? Can you believe that any can subscribe the Old, that can refuse the
New? Yea, is not the book altered for the better in your own apprehensions? and
cannot your selves rather subscribe the New one?

15. You, indeed, offer that some Additions and alterations made may bar your
subscriptions: but certainly, if any such there be, it is but fair, either to
discover them, or not to argue from them.

16. I shall not ask you, whether every accidental alteration does change the
individual Subject? Whether the paring of your Nails, or the suffering the
Alteration of every days Nutriment, render you not the same men? if so, whom
do I reply unto? or where shall I find my Surveyers?

17. But your next Item calls me to be more serious, viz. that black mark your
pen has cast upon some Cheshire Ministers; to which I have only this to say,
that though I dare not approve, but did personally dissuade some brethren from
the same Action; yet [give methinks the Love of Brethren] might have had a
better interpretation, or at least a milder reprehension, if not a more private
one for it; especially considering the reason of State that prevailed for such
alterations in order; Mainly for the satisfaction of such as are unwilling to
conform without a Reformation; and therefore not likely to give any
dissatisfaction to such as could Conform before; yet I would not plead for a
scandalous practice, as I fear that was.

18. You do further object, That the Law might be satisfied with reading and
subscribing so many of the thirty nine Articles as contain only the Doctrine of
Faith, and of the Sacraments, with an omission of that which concerns the Book
of Consecration, according to the Statute.

19. I know this has been the opinion of many; yet I ever thought it a
mistake, grounded upon a misunderstanding of the Statute.

20. The words of the Statute are these, [And subscribe to all the Articles of
Religion which only contain the Doctrine, etc. [which only] refers to the
antecedent [all the Articles] and serves by way of explication of the Nature of
all the Articles, and not by way of exclusion of any of the number; the sense
is this; which, that is, all which Articles contain only the Doctrine of Faith
and Sacraments.

21. It is not said, All those Articles only which contain; or, Those Articles
which only contain; but, All the Articles which contain only; explaining the
Nature of the whole, and not excluding any one of the number; the Statute
requires subscription to the whole number, which are all of that nature.

22. Here is the Continent: All the Articles of Religion, which we know are
nine and thirty; the thing contained, and that is, only the Doctrine of Faith
and Sacraments; there is not one excepted, either from this Nature, or from our
Subscriptions: besides, if we exclude an Article after this manner, we fail in
Arithmetic as well as Grammar; and while we have but thirty eight, we cannot
be said to read or subscribe the nine and thirty Articles of the Church of
England.

23. You intimate, That the Artcile touching the Book of Consecration is no
Doctrine of Faith, or of the Sacrament^.

24. I answer first, This is only to quarrel with the fitness of the
explication, and the Parliament that gave it us, who, surely, did ill to tell
us; That all these Articles contain only such Doctrine as is not to be found in
one of them: But the Grammatical construction of the words will stand well
enough, and carry it, That all the thirty nine Articles of Religion contain
only such Doctrine, in the judgment of the ^arliament that made that Statute,
unless you can show us the exception of any one of those Articles, made by the
same Authority, either in this or some other Law. Vhi Lex non distinguit, etc.

25. Besides, Who knows not that the Doctrine of Discipline, Government, and
Worship, and the Doctrine of Imposition of hands and Ordination is to be
believed, and in a large sense is a Doctrine of Faith; in which sense, if the
thirty nine Articles of Religion are said by the Statute to contain only the
Doctrine of Faith, and of the Sacraments;

26. However the Article touching the Doctrine of Ordination be understood to
be a Doctrine of Faith, or not, it matters nothing as to our question, or to
the unreserved subscriptions of most of the Ministers to all the nine and
thirty Articles, of which this is one.

27. Lastly, you say, That the form of subseription required in this
particular, by the new Statute of Uniformity, is such as was never required by
Law before, this requiring an unfeigned afsent and Consent.

28. But give me leave to ask you, Did you not subscribe to the thirty nine
Articles, before, ex animo? And were you not required so to do? Now what act of
your Mind was exercised in that your subscription, if you did not assent? And
if you did assent, did you not assent unfeignedly, but hypocritically? Or if
you did assent unfeignedly, did you not consent also thereunto?

29. I need not tell you, that very learned men judge, that there is very little
or no difference betwixt Adsentire and Consentire; and, doubtless, if the
object of both be the use of things, as it is in the present Case, they are all
one, though, if there seem any difference between them, assent has the
advantage, consent seeming, of the two, to be the weaker, and the less free
expression of our selves.

30. Therefore, let the Statute it self decide the difference, viz. that of 13
Eliz. 12. which has rendered the Latin, ex animo, by the very term in
controversy, an unfeigned assent, clearly intimating, That all that have
subscribed the thirty nine Articles ex animo, have already given to the form
and manner of Mak^ng, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, their unfeigned assent, and, by consequence, their consent too, and
need not, without some other reason to the contrary, scruple to do it again.

31. But I hasten to the Case arising from the first part of this first
Declaration, which concerns the Liturgy, against which you grant, that there
lies the greatest burden of exception.

CHAP. II. Touching the Book of Common Prayer.
SECT. 1.
1. WE come now to review the second Case, arising from this first Declaration,
which is this.

2. Whether it be lawful to declare our unfeigned assent and consent to all and
every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book Entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer.

3. This I affirm, and in the defense of my Assertion, still stand upon my
former ground, viz. a supposition, that I deal with persons that intended to
have conformed, had not these Declarations been required.

4. To this you also encourage me while you say, that though you could have
conformed, yet you cannot make and subscribe this Declaration.

4. But, my dear brethren, give me leave to demand once more, What has hindered
you? cannot you assent and consent to that which your selves can practice? or
cannot you do it unfeignedly? or cannot you declare so much?

5. You say, I tell you the Object of our Assent and Consent is not the words
but things: There are several Expressions, which though we could safely read,
yet we do not so heartily approve them, as we seem to be required: not every
thing, as there expressed, but every thing contained in the Expressions must
have our Assent.

6. Here pardon me, if I fear you were somewhat in haste, when you took your
survey by Review; you will find you have (may I say, too carelessly) shuffled in
an Objection I made betwixt the parts of my Answer to it: and so force me to
speak your own sense, or indeed Nonsense.

7. But, I am about things and not words, though I cannot but note, that all
you say about your wordy things are words that signify nothing as to your own
Case, who say you could Conform to the book of Common Prayer, and consequently,
I hope, read the words thereof with your unfeigned assent and consent to the
lawfulness of the same.

8. This was the close of my former Answer to the Objection proposed; and
though you could not but think your selves obliged thereunto, yet you have
taken no notice of it in your survey at all.

9. But, at last, you come home and object, that there are some things
contained in the Expressions, which you cannot assent and consent unto: but
what are they?

SECT. 2. Of, let us beseech him, etc.
1. FIrst you are scandalized at that alteration in the Absolution, Wherefore
we beseech him, is now rendered, wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true
Repentance, etc. It now seems (you say) to be an Authoritative Sacerdotal
Absolution. But truly, if you think again, I am very confident you will change
your mind, and judge, with me, that as the words are now altered, they do not
look so like an Authoritative Sacerdotal Absolution, as they did before.

2. Besides, when you have well considered, that we have constant and daily
need to beg pardon and mercy, and to receive Absolution, for safety and
Comfort, from the Word of God: I believe you will not much object against the
declaring the word of mercy to the penitent by the Minister of the same; though
it should have been (as now it is not) made a standing piece of solemn worship
in every approach to God.

3. But you add, if it be not a form of Authoritative Absolution, yet it is a
Ministerial Exhortation of the people. But what then? methinks that should pass
well enough with us; it being not refused, but constantly practiced in Scotland
it self; yea it is the substance of all our Sermons.

4. But then you intimate, that the Amen of the people thereto subjoyned, is
impertinent.

5. Pray, why impertinent, subjoyned to an Exhortation, more then to the Creed,
a Confession of our Faith; or the Denuntiation of the Curses? Deuteronomy. 27.


Let us not discourage the people to declare their unfeigned assent and consent
to an Exhortation to their duty, though it be with an Amen.

6. But this, you hint, you stick not at. Ah, what then? You add, we are to be
convinced, that the Words of the Lords Prayer are the Necessary and only lawful
Petition for pardon of sin in every approach to God; yet that is constantly
subjoyned.

7. Pray reflect a little upon these words of yours, and I hope you will pardon
me. if I say you mistake.

8. What can the force of these words be, but that if you assent to the book of
Common Prayer, you must assent to that of which you are yet to be convinced;
viz. That the Lords Prayer is the necessary and only lawful Petition for pardon
of sin in every approach.

9. First, I desire you to consider, upon what occasion you utter this: because
the Lords Prayer is subjoyned to the Exhortation in the Absolution. Now, if you
observe, you will find, we are not here exhorted to pray for pardon expressly
and directly, but for true Repentance, acceptance of our present Duties, the
holy Spirit, a holy Life, and Eternal Joy; as the words of the Exhortation
plainly import.

10. Again, if this be granted to be a Ministerial Exhortation; to pray for
pardon of sin, how does it follow that the Lords Prayer is accounted the
necessary and only lawful Petition for this mercy in every approach to God? is
the Absolution in every approach to God? Or if the Lords Prayer be, must it
therefore be accounted the only lawful petition of pardon of sin?

11. Lastly, all the reason you express, to enforce this Conclusion, is in your
last words [that the Lords Prayer is constantly subjoyned;] but that indeed is
no reason at all: for though it be constantly, it is not only enjoined as a
Petition for pardon of sin; and therefore, you cannot say that it is reputed or
enjoined as the only lawful Petition for that end, and consequently ^our
Objection vanishes.

12. Can it be affirmed by any that converse with the Book of Common Prayer,
that if we do assent unto it, we assent that the Lords Prayer is the only
lawful P^tition for pardon of sin, while we find so frequent and so various
forms to that purpose, even from the beginning to the end of the said Book
besides that of the Lords Prayer?

13. What do those words in the Confession signify? But thou O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders; spare thou them that confess their faults,
Restore thou them that be penitent? How often do we meet with, Lord have mercy
upon us, have mercy upon'u miserable sinners.

14. Again, more expressly, Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offense of
our forefathers, neither take tho^ vengeance of our sins; Deal not thou with us
after our sins, nor reward us after our iniquities; mercifully forgive the sins
of thy people, and abundance more in the Office of Communion, the visitation of
the Sick, Commination; and indeed, either more expressly, or implicitly, in
every approach to God by the book of Common Prayer, we have other Petitions of
pardon of sin, besides the words of the Lords Prayer*

13. Thus we see, that wise and good men may have cause to join with us, in the
words of our Liturgy, that it may please thee to forgive us all our sins,
negligences, and ignorances.

SECT. 3. Of popular Responds.
1. SEcondly, you complain that you cannot Assent and Consent to the word
[Answer] and the other directions for popular Responds; for these are, you say,
in Mr. Croftons Dialect, Repugnant to the Apostles Rule, Let all things be done
decently and in Order.

2. My dear brethren, pray consider, that though these things seem so directly
repugnant to the Apostles rule of decency and order with you and Mr. Crofton;
yet they did not seem so, to our present Governors. What Order can be
prudently expected in Church or State, if every private spirit should be Judge
thereof; and accordingly, Act or Reject in public Administrations? Yea, I dare
in this thing appeal to your selves; were you in the place of Government, durst
you trust the management of all indifferent things, and all external
Circumstances about Gods Worship, to every private Discretion? I am sure the
Apostles did not.

3. However, you say in your Preface, that you have admitted and could admit
many inexpediencies for the liberty of your Ministry. Now I am confident you
will not say these are other then inexpediencies in your own judgments; and the
reason of this confidence your selves have given me, page 15. where, referring
to these things, you say, you could submissively bear these things; which
cannot be understood, but in the use of them, and conformity to them: Now how
you can admit inexpediencies in your practice, and bear with these things, and
yet not give some assent and consent thereunto, I am still to learn, especially
that they are indifferent, and not simply sinful, though perhaps inexpedient in
your opinion.

SECT. 4. Of the Holy Table.
1. AGain, you are offended at the word [Holy] as an Adjunct to Table, frequent
in this Book; for you know no holiness of Places or Instruments under the
Gospel.

2. For answer hereunto, pray ask your selves in what sense Places and
Instruments might be said to be holy in the time of the Law, that the Gospel
dispensation cannot bear, as you seem to intimate.

3. Nay rather, is not that holiness that was restrained to some places and
some things in the time of the Law, now spread, by the coming of Christ, over
all places and all things; To the pure all things are pure. What God has
sanctified, call not thou common or unclean.

4. So that any place or any thing that is capable of use, in order to Gods
Service, by this grace of the Gospel we have liberty to use it, and to set it
apart for that peculiar use about the Worship of God; as this public house and
not another, this particular Table and not another, etc.

5. This, I know, neither you nor M. Crofton will scruple at; and this granted,
you must needs confess that the exception against the word Holy, as given to
the Table, is only a strife about a word; for indeed you allow the thing, and
all the thing which this word, as applied to the Table, intends to signify.

6. Neither can you reply, that it is improper to call a Table, in this sense,
Holy; seeing you may easily know, the Church does not intend by calling the
Table Holy, a proper but a figurative holiness, or a holiness not inherent in
the thing, but predicated of it, with respect to the end and use for which it
is set apart; which distinction (I need not inform you) has undeniable ground
in Scripture.

7. Yet, seeing you say you know no holiness of places under the Gospel, give
me leave to remember you of the Holiest of all, Heb. 9. 3. and that peculiar to
the Gospel-state; the Holy Ghost signifying that the way into the Holiest of
all was not yet made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing, v.
8.

8. Yea, this seems to be a place to be entered into even in this life. Having
therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by a new and living way -- And
having a High Priest over the House of God. Let us draw near with a true heart
-- not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some
is, Heb. 10. 19 to 26. To this the Holy City answers, Revel. 11. 2. and 21.
2. and 22. 9.

9. But I am afraid of being mistaken; let me therefore have leave to add, that
the end of my alleging these Scriptures is only to let you know, that Holiness
is attributed to places under the Gospel. Contenting my self with my former
Answer to the Objection, without any strict Application of the Scriptures
pointed at to that end and purpose.

10. Howbeit, if you acknowledge, as I know you do, with the Apostle, that
there is such a thing as Sacrilege Romans 2.
under the Gospel; you may easily persuade your selves that some things may
warrantably bear the Attribute of Holy, even under the Gospel: for what is
Sacrilege? (...); it unquestionably imports, that either the things that are
stolen, or the place out of which they are stolen, are called Holy.

11. In a strict sense, Sacrilege is a Robbing or stealing things out of the
Church, or any Holy or Consecrated place; and then Sacrum in Sacrilegium, and
(...), in (...), signifies the Church; which very words carry Consecration or
Holiness in them. For (...) is properly quid sacrum: As sacrum is that which Is
Holy, and the Church is therefore called both, because it is Holy.

12. Yet in very usual, and generally allowed speaking, Sacrilege is a larger
Notion, and intends any spoiling or alienating any thing devoted or dedicated
to God in order to his Service. Thus the things are called Holy, that are given
to an Holy Use, or the service of the Holy God, and separated from common use
to that special purpose; and he that steals and spoils the Church of the same,
is Sacrilegius, or one that Robs God, and commits Sacrilege.

13. Thus Churches, Lands, Table, Chalice, Cup, may be said to be Holy; not in
themselves, but their end and use. Therefore, to dedicate a thing after this
manner, is by the Latins called Sacrare, by the Greeks (...), and may in
English, I think without any just offense, if well understood, be expressed by
Consecrating or making Holy.

14. I am sure the Apostles word is, (...); and that has (...), or sacrum in
it, which from the Caldie is rendered diripis aedem sacram, making an house
Holy. The Syriac, furaberis vasa Templi, intimating that either the Temple or
the Vessels thereof, or both, are Holy. The Aethiopic. Expilus Domum Dei?
calling the place of Worship, the House of God, and consequently, Holy.

15. What rema^ins, but that you no longer startle at the Holy Table which you
know is set apart for the Supper of the Lord, to bear the Cup of the Lord, to
serve the Communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and the Holy Communion,
or the Communion of Saints.

SECT 5. Of the old Translation of the Psalms.
1. AS to your Exceptions to the old Translation of the Psalter, and the
pointing of it, they are not strengthened with any proof at all; nor so much as
an Instance.

2. It yet lies on you to evince that this Translation is corrupt, as you have
asserted, that the pointing makes manifest Nonsense, (which indeed serves not
the sense at all, but only the Music) that it varieth the Text from the
Original, yea, from Truth it self.

3. I confess, that such strange exceptions have been thrown against it
heretofore, by the old Non-conformists; but, I suppose, you know they never
wanted Answers.

4. Yoy add the corrupt Translation of the fourth Commandment, where in the
close of it, the seventh day is put for the Sabbath day.

5. But though I do not vindicate this Translation, yet I cannot but observe
the extreme emptiness of this Objection. Was not the Sabbath day then the
seventh day? It is said, God rested the seventh day, and blessed the Sabbath:
Yea, was not the seventh day the Sabbath day? it is also said, the seventh day
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

6. Besides the Septuagint, the Arabic, and the Syriac, do all agree in the
same Rendition. with our own Translation: so that if it be so gross an error
as you pretend, it is a very old one. But indeed, whether the not altering of
the word, were an overfight in the Examiners, or not, the sense must needs be
yielded by you to be the same either way.

7. However, here again, I must needs remember you; that you could submissively
bear these things; that i^, by conforming to use them as Ministers; and that
this your bearing of them does undeniably suppose such an Assent and Consent
unto them as the Law requires; which I doubt not to Evidence in its due place.

SECT. 6. Of the Salvation of Infants.
1. I Am now arrived at the la^^ of your exceptions of this kind; and that is
taken from those words in the Liturgy, touching the Salvation of Infants. It is
certain by the Word of God* that Children being baptized, dying before they
commit Actual sin, are undoubtedly saved.

2. You say you can Christianly believe the Regenerating Nature and Efficacy of
Baptism: but, that the undoubted Salvation of all baptized infants dying before
they commit Actual Sin, is certain by the Scriptures you say you cannot s^^.

3. But truly, my brother; I cannot s^e, that So much is required of you: And
therefore I must be bold to mind you that the universal Note [All] is of your
own inserting. It is not said ^ll Children, but Children.

4. It is an indifinite Proposition; a^ it is a Proposition, and consequently,
neither Rubric for direction, nor any part of Administration, it is not of a
practicable Nature; and I humbly conceive, it will appear anon, we are not
required by the Act to subscribe to it; the Act makes the Object of our Assent
and Consen^, in the Declaration, to the use of the things contained and
prescribed in the Common Prayer.

5. Again, as it is an Indefinite Proposition, I conceive you need not scruple
it, seeing you allow, and believe with a Christian belief, the Regenerating
nature, use and efficacy, of Baptism.

6. For upon this belief, we must agree thus far: that this Efficacy of
Baptism has its Effects upon some of its Subject; and if this belief be
grounded upon the Word of God, then so much is certain from the Word of God,
that some Children being Regenerated, (...) put in a state of Salvation by
Baptismes and therefore, dying before they commit Actual sin are undoubtedly
saved.

7. But you reply, it is not said, some Children, but that is Children, all
Children.

8. I therefore proceed upon this Foundation to inquire, whether the
Proposition in Controversy be to be understood in a Universal sense, or not.
This is indeed the Question; yet by my consent, you have liberty to Answer it
your selves.

9. For first, if this Proposition be to be understood Universally as to all
such Children that are mentioned in it, the matter of it must be necessary. For
the form of the Proposition is indefinite, and an indefinite Proposition is not
equipollent with an Universal, but in Materia Necessaria.

10. You have yet your choice to say, whether the Matter of this Proposition be
necessary or not.

11. If you say the Matter of it is not necessary, then the meaning of the
Proposition is not Universal, and the difficulty is over, seeing it is agreed,
that Baptism is regenerating, and some such Children are saved. For if some
Children, then Children, thus dying, are saved; and that is sufficient, if the
Matter be not necessary; and consequently the Proposition not to be understood
Universally.

12. Again, if you urge that the matter of this indefinite Proposition is
necessary; then I am content you conclude it universally, and extend it to all
such children.

13. For what is the matter of the present proposition, but the salvation of
baptized Children; dying before they commit actual sin. Now this is granted to
be true of some, else the Promise is of none effect to the Children, and
Baptism of no efficacy; and if it be said to be necessary, it must be true of
all; and you need not doubt to Assent unto it in a universal Proposition.

14. Thus Jesus Christ, the Text says, Came into the world to save sinners.
This is a true Proposition, whether the matter be necessary or not; because it
it is certain that he came into the world to save some sinners.

15. For if the matter be necessary, then it is Universally true, if not
necessary, then it is indefinitely true; if he came with a purpose to save all,
he came to save sinners: and if he came not with a purpose to save all, yet he
came to save some sinners; and therefore sinners.

16. Once more, that Baptism is for the Remission of sins, is a certain Truth,
or an undoubted proposition, grounded on the Scripture, be Baptized for Acts ^.
the Remission of s^^^.

17. This is a Proposition of an indefinite Nature; if the matter of it be
necessary, it is true, as I have said, Universally; (where its efficacy is not
impeded by the incapacity of the Subject*) as it is not in Children:) but if
the matter be not necessary, the Proposition is still true, that is,
indefinitely.

18. To conclude, either all such Children are saved, or some only; in either
send^, the Proposition being but indefinite is true; if all such Children are
saved, then the Matter is necessary, and the Proposition equipollent with an
Universal Proposition: if some only, then the Matter is not necessary; and
consequently, there is no necessity, yea, no liberty left us, to stretch the
Proposition which is indefinite, both in its Form and Matter, unto an Universal
signification.

SECT. 7. Of Assent and Consent unfeigned.
1. HAving dispatched your exceptions against the Objects of your Assent and
Consent required by the Act. viz. The book of Ordination, and the book of
Common Prayer.

2. We proceed to review these Acts themselves, this unfeigned Assent and
Consent; upon which a greater stress of Controversy yet remains.

3. An Objection that I proposed and Answered in my last book, seemed, if not
to create, yet to provoke and very much to heighten this part of the quarrel.

4. The Objection that I proposed, was this: I suppose it might be said by
some, that though we could use the things, it is only for Peace sake, and in
Obedience to Authority; not that we would choose or can absolutely approve of
the things in themselves.

5. Hereunto, I answered, as you well note, that we may approve a thing
absolutely, or comparatively, or respectively, and consequently, so give our
Assent and Consent unto it, and that the Act cannot be thought so strict as to
allow of no Assent or Consent but such as arises from an absolute approbation
of the things themselves, without any other extrinsiek considerations, that may
move and sway us to such an Approbation.

6. The Act requires but an unfeigned Assent and Consent; and an unfeigned
Assent and Consent may arise from such a comparative Approbation, as a man may
unfeignedly Assent and Consent to his Child's Marriage, though he like not the
Match very well, for the avoiding of some greater inconveniences that
otherwise might happen.

7. I further observed, that to interpret the Act into such an absolute
approbation, is against charity to our selves and our Governors, and against
common reason; seeing it is a moral impossibility, that all men should be
exactly of one mind in so many particulars required of us; seeing also the
grounds of this Assent and Consent are not specified in the Act, but left to
our selves; and lastly, seeing that the very Act it self brings motives with it
to persuade us ^o Conformity, which would signify nothing, if no consideration
of the Case; besides, the absolute goodness of the things themselves is allowed
any force to prevail upon us.

8. I therefore conclude, that we are left at liberty by the said Act, to
compare the Consequences of obedience with those of dibedience, and accordingly
to approve so and declare, or not.

9. Now let us examine what you say to these things.

1. To my argument from charity, you answer it, only, with less Charity.

2. To my augment, that the grounds of Assent and Consent are not specified in
the Act, but left to our selves you answer nothing, because you mistake it.

10. You observe well, that I say, the grounds of this Assent and Consent are
not specified in the Act, But how strangely do you Comment upon it?

11. If by ground (say you) I mean the reasons inducing the Legislators to
require such an Assent and Consent you must be bold to deny what I affirm. Then
you show the grounds in the Act, for enjoining such a declaration of Assent and
Consent: And this is all you answer

12. Now had I meant as you suppose, I confess you had answered me. But if my
words could not signify any such thing, as upon review you will be easily
convinced, you have answered your selves, and not me at all.

13. Pray then Consider, is there not a difference betwixt the grounds of
Assent and Consent, and the grounds of the Governors to enjoin a declaration
of Assent and Consent? could the scope of my argument, or the very words of my
proposition, intend the latter, or not the former?

14. The grounds of enjoining such a declaration are in the Legislators; and
are the grounds of the Act requiring: these, indeed, are specified in the Act
of uniformity: But the grounds of Assent and Consent, or of declaring the same,
are in the Subjects; and are properly the grounds of obedience to that Act;
which, I must still say, are not at all specified in it.

15. To my other argument, taken from the motives which the Act it self affords
us, you only say, that such Arguments, as the avoiding a severe penalty, a
legal opportunity of serving the Church; not showing our selves cross to
authority, etc. are bad inducements to an unfeigned Assent and Consent.

16. But, upon second thoughts, I cannot believe you will maintain the Quarrel
with such motives as these; which have, doubtless, a divine sanction; what more
familiar, with the Spirit of Scripture, then to use such Topics of wrath,
threats, curses, death, and Hell it self, to dissuade from sin, and to move
toward Heaven; and yet, I hope, the Assent and Consent, wrought hereupon, is
not always feigned, or always a faint unfeigned Assent and Consent.

17. Neither, can I believe, that you are tenacious in this; because you say it
might somewhat satisfy us, if we had assurance from our Legislators that such a
comparative approbation would satisfy the Law. For I conclude from hence, that
what ever you say, there is not, even in your apprehensions, any inconsistency
or contradiction betwixt such a comparative approbation and an unfeigned Assent
and Consent. Though I can see no reason, in the world, why the Legislators
should expressly declare so much.

18. We have the intention of the Act, and why should we further trouble our
selves about the intention of the makers of it: The Act intends, and therefore
requires uniformity, in order thereunto; conformity, and security thereof, by
this declaration of an unfeigned Assent and Consent.

19. So that, it is the intention of our Governors, that we should assure
them, as much as in us lies, as to uniformity in practice, by giving our
unfeigned Assent and Consent thereunto; it is not said upon an absolute or upon
a comparative approbation: If it be unfeigned, that is the very thing required,
and therefore, intended. Then the great Question is, that which is indeed
beyond all question. viz. whether we may be drawn to give Assent and Consent,
and that unfeignedly, from other considerations besides the very goodness of
the thing it self, absolutely, and in it self alone, considered.

20. If it be granted, as it cannot be questioned, then our Governors have
already declared, that such a comparative approbation does satisfy the Law.

21. For if there be an universal agreement in the worship of God, though upon
differing motives, and uniformity be effected, though not from an Exact
unanimity in every particular reason or ground thereof, the Law has its end
quoad executionem, which, I conceive, is the best measure of its end quoad
intentionem,

22. I say, indeed, had the word [Free] been used in the place of unfeigned,
there had been were color of objection. And for this you take me up, and learn
me, that Freedom is essential to unfeigned.

23. But what then? might there not be more color of objection, if not more
reality?

24 I thought, I might have bin easily understood according to that vulgar use
of the word free, wherein the objectors used, and I interpreted it. viz. When
we do choose a thing of our own accord, and Assent and Consent unt^ it for it
self, without any further inducement thereunto from the laws enjoining it.

25. Moreover, take Freedom in its strict and proper sense, as moralists use it
and doubtless, it is as Essential to Assent and Consent as it is to unfeigned;
yea unfeignedness is as Essential to Assent, and Consent, as Freedom is to
unfeigned; and then what have you gained by this interruption?

26. Therefore unfeigned, the word so much stuck at, that bears the very
burden of general complaint, gives only the color, nothing of the truth of
the weakest objection.

27. For it really adds nothing to Assent or Consent, or to the declaration at
all for all; Assent and Consent, as such, is both unfeigned and free. And it is a
plain contradiction, to say a feigned, Assent and Consent; we may indeed, make
a feigned Declaration of our Assent and Consent, but we cannot declare a
feigned Assent or Consent; for there is no such thing.

28. What remains, but that we lift out foot over the word unfeigned, and
stumble no longer at it; but proceed to Assent and Consent, which ever carry
the thing of unfeignedness with them. So that, if we can truly Assent and
Consent, we do it unfeignedly. And if we do Assent and Consent, unfeignedly,
let the grounds and motives be what they will, the Law is satisfied, and so may
we.

SECT. 8. Of the phrase in the Act, [the use of all things, etc.]
1. BUt I humbly conceive the, matter is yet more easy to our Affent and
Consent, if it be confidered not in its speculative but practical capacity; or
with respect to Conformity, and our use thereof in the worship of God, as the
Act most plainly allows us to do.

2. Indeed, if you demand, what we must yield our unfeigned Assent and Consent
unto; the declaration tells you, to all and every thing contained and
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer.

3. But if you again demand, in what respect, or after what manner, you must
Assent and Consent to the same; The Act interprets as they are practically
confidered, or with respect to their use, in order to public uniformity in the
worship of God.

4. Therefore the words immediately foregoing this declaration, I have noted,
are these; every Minister shall declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent, to
the use of all things in the said Book contained, and prescribed in these
words, and no otherwise they are the words of this Declaration. It is further
to be observed, that wheresoever this Act does any time mention the said
Declaration, it puts this very meaning upon it; that thereby we are to declare
our unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of Common Prayer, and that is all
is intended by the words of this Declaration.

5. The sum is this; in these words, as the Act interprets them, we do but
declare our unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of Common Prayer;
wheresoever there is an Assent and Consent to the use of Common Prayer, there
is an unfeigned Assent and Consent thereunto: and where there is a purpose to
Conform were not this Declaration required, there is doubtless an Assent and
Consent, yea an unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of Common Prayer, which
is all in this particular, we are desired to declare, and what yet can hinder
us?

6. You say, that this refers our Assem and Consent to the using Act, and that
only: you cannot see, neither indeed can I see how you inser it from my words
immediately repeated by your selves: All things with respect to their use.

7. The using Act, and a thing with respect to its use, are not all one; they
differ formally: the one is the Act, as you express it, the other the Object of
that Act, as I must needs intend it; one would think beyond all possibility of
misapprehension.

8. Yet, upon this misapprehension, you proceed and enlarge your selves above
one page, answering your own Supposition, not my Proposition at all.

9. I do clearly grant, that we do not Assent and Consent to the use of the
things exclusively to the things themselves, which sounds to me an
impossibility in it self, yet we Assent and Consent to these things only; (I
mean, we need do no more) as they are practicable; or as I plainly expressed it
at first, with respect to their use.

10. So that all the Dust you raised upon this false ground, about Uniformity,
with its spur, Unanimitie is fallen to nothing; seeing my first Expression
about it, which your selves also noted, that allows the Object of Assent, and
Consent, to be all things with respect to their use, carries both Uniformity,
and Unanimity in it.

11. Only let me enter this caveat; let not Unanimity outstretch Uniformity;
while we Assent to the use of all things in the book, we assent to those things
tht are to be used, and to no more. 12. Uniformity is restrained to the
public Worship of God; so far, a Universal agreement therein by Assent and
Consent is to be allowed; to be the sense of the Law; that is, to the use of
all things in the Book of Common Prayer; and to the things themselves as they
are practicable, or proposed to be used, or, as before, with respect to their
use in the worship of God.

13. Hence appears the difference betwixt the two Declarations easily enough.
In the first, we consent to the use, and the things to be used: in the Second,
we move then Consent, we promise that we our selves will use them, or conform
unto them.

14. Give me leave to subjoyn two advantages, which offer themselves from this
interpretation, toward a good accommodation betwixt us.

15. 1. Then if there be any such thing found in the book of Commonprayer, as
is not of a practical Nature, as a port of a public Liturgy, or capable of use
in public Worship, (and I humbly offer whether that touching Children dying
Baptized is not such) it need not be concerned in our Declaration or
Subscription.

16. 2. Things, with respect to their use, are properly, and more immediately
to be considered, as fit, not as good in themselves, but as fit for the
services for which they are intended: yea, it is not necessary that this
filness be referred to the things to be used, but rather, the person that is to
use them, and our use of them.

17. So that, upon the just weighing of all Circumstances, if we can consent,
that for the avoiding of certain great inconveniences, the use of these things
(not sinful in themselves) is a thing to be chosen, that this, Conformity is to
be practiced, we have sufficient ground according to the Act, to declare our
Assent and Consent thereunto.

18. What remains, but that we are yet allowed thus to reason. Here is such a
Declaration required by Law, and such a severe Penalty annexed, for all that
disobey it: though I could rather have liked the book of Common Prayer, if such
and such things had been altered; yet rather then lose my Living, and therewith
all legal Opportunity of serving the Church, rather then show my self cross and
disobedient to Authority in lawful things, rather then Ruin my self and
Family, for a thing indifferent, though in it self I judge it inconvenient; I
do choose to be obedient and conformable; and in order thereunto, upon these
grounds, I declare my Assent and Consent unfeignedly to every thing to be
conformed unto.

19. Give me leave to add the Objection of others, which you mention not. They
say, if it had been said that we must assent to all things prsecribed only, it
might have served my interpretation well enough; but it is all things
contained, as well as prescribed, must be consented unto.

20. I answer, First, it is contained and prescribed. Not prescribed and
contained; so that prescribed seems to bound contained. 2 it is contained and
prescribed, not, or prescribed; so that what is contained, if not also
prescribed; we need not give our assent unto it: it must be both contained and
prescribed.

21. But, if there yet remain any doubt, about the legal meaning of these
words, the Act it self explains it beyond all dispute: You see in the words
before cited, that both the words [Contained and Prescribed] are referred to
the use of the things: [to the use of all things contained and prescribed] so
that the Objection is nice and verbal only, and thus vanishes.

22. If you should desire to have your own sense yet more secured; I humbly
conceive there would be no offense done to the law, if you express your selves
after this manner. Having read the Morning and Evening Prayer -- according to
the Book of Common Prayer, at the times thereby appointed; and being required
by the Act of Parliament, after such reading thereof, openly and publicly
before the Congregation to declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to the Use
of all things in the said book contained and prescribed, in these following
words and no other; Accordingly, I do declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent
to the Use of all things in the said book contained and prescribed in these
words and no other, I. A. B. do here declare, etc.

23. What possible Exception can lie against such a recital of the words of the
Act which are set immediately before the Declaration, in order to the making and
subscribing of it, while we add no words of our own, nor take any from the Act,
or from the Declaration?

24. If it be said you fear that a Declaration will not be accepted, that is
thus exclaimed and conditioned.

25. Give me leave to say, I cannot but believe there is no reason to doubt it;
or to desire it as a favor from any: seeing you add no words, nor put any
sense upon the Declaration; only reciting the words of the Act, requiring and
declaring, according as is required, in these words of the Declaration, and
none other.

26. However, suppose (that that is not to be supposed) that such a Declaration
should be refused; and that without such a kind of explaining your self, you
are resolved not to declare or subscribe at all. Yet consider by so doing,
though not accepted, you are not the worse, or further off from your Living
then you were before: and now you may fit down quiet with this reflection; that
however you have done your utmost to satisfy the Law, the World, and your own
Conscience.

CASE the Second. Whether it be lawful to Declare in the words of the second
Declaration.
1. YOu consent to the distribution I made of the second Declaration into 3
parts: That which concerns the taking Arms against the King, Conformity, and
the Oath called the solemn League and Covenant.

2. The two Cases arising from the first part, taking Arms against the King,
you say, do not much concern you; and give me leave to return, that I am not
concerned to answer others.

3. To the Case about Conformity, arising from the second-part, you add
nothing, out seem in haste to get into your strong hold, in the last part of
this Declaration, touching the Covenant, and thither I am ready to attend you,
and to engage with you.

4. We are therefore fallen upon the main Case, which was the sixth in order in
my last book it is;

CASE VI. Whether we may lawfully declare in these words; I do hold there lies
no Obligation on me, or any other person, from the Oath commonly; called the
solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government
in the Church or State?
1. THis I affirm, and undertook to prove it by an Argument taken from the
matter of the Covenant, as is here specified: not with respect to the
Government of the Kingdom, there we are agreed; but with respect to that of the
Church, wherein we differ.

2. You also grant my Consequence; that if this part of the matter of the
Covenant appear to be sinful, the Covenant is so far, void of it self.

3. The very Question then is, Whether to endeavor a change of
Church Government be sinful or not. I affirm it, and give you my Arguments once
again for it; and heartily wish, they may find, in their new attire, better
entertainment with you.

4. You observe, I make my first onset by Doctor Sanderson's distinction of
Juramentum illicitum de se, and per accidens. You farther say, I grant that the
matter of the Covenant is not simply, and of it self unlawful; you intimate,
that I hold it only sinful by accident.

5. My dear Brethren, I cannot forbear to tell you, that you make too much
haste, and stumble at the threshold; you fall both upon that Reverend Person
and my self with too plain mistakes.

6. The Bishops distinction which you intend, is not that of illicitum per se
vel per accidens; I do not here use that distinction; I do not grant that the
matter of the Covenant is not simply and of it self unlawful; much less, that
the matter of the Covenant is sinful per accidens only: The truth is, both the
Bishop and my self, in the very places your words refer to, do more then once
say quite contrary to what you affirm; in all which, will you but take the
pains to read over again that Chapter in Doctor Sanderson's Book, and in mine,
that are here concerned, your own eyes shall judge betwixt us.

7. The place you intend in Bishop Sanderson's Book is, Page 71, 72. Sect. 9.
the Case is, De^^re illicita Secundario, wherein, indeed, he is so directly
against you, that it is much so many eyes should not observe it.

8. A thing (says he) is unlawful secundario, when it is not so in its own
nature, or to all persons: Sed quibusdam tantum pro condition fuarum
personarum, prout sunt membra alio^j^^ c^mmu^^tatis, an^^ins: certo aliqua
vitae genere versanturie illicitum enim idque ex se non ex accidente tantum his
qui sunt membra alicujus communitatis, quicquid legibus illius communitatis
repugnat: His reason there is, because it is forbidden by God, though not
primario, yet secundario; that is, in the command of obedience to our
Governors, and consequently the Laws of the Land.

9. Now, that your discourse of this distinction intends this very place of the
Bishops Book, you give us a full demonstration in your next words following.

10. You say, you must make bold to mind me, that the Learned Casuist has
determined the Case with an Ordinary; Haec juramenta ordinary non obligant;
meaning, such Oaths as are taken to do a thing that is thus evil, not simply,
absolutely, or to all persons; but to us, that by reason of our places are not
allowed to do it, they ordinarily do not bind.

11. I acknowledge he subjoyns (though nothing to your advantage) Ordinary
dico, quia fortasse possunt dari casus in quibus juramentum quod videtur alicui
legi communitatis aut vocationis adversari, and si non debuerit suscipi,
susceptum tamen potest obligari.

12. You add, That the Advocates of the Covenant think they may bring the
Covenant within our Casuist's exception; but upon an unbiassed reading our
Casuist's following explication of himself, there is nothing more evident then
the contrary; herein also your selves shall be Judges.

13. Yet, first, give me leave to note, our Casuist's Caution is with a
fortassis; perhaps such a Case may be; he never thought, you know he never said
the Case of the Covenant was such; yea, his [videtur] adds no strength to the
exception, that is, when the Oath seems, but seems to be against the Laws of
Community; but that he might leave no room for the scruple, he has explained
himself in his own Instance in a disjunctive penal Law.

14. His Case is this; Let the Law of the City be (says he) that no man being
chosen to the Office of a Praetor shall refuse it: or if he do, he shall find
such a sum of Money, Caius swears he will never be Praetor: but after his Oath,
he is chosen to that Office. The Question our Casuist puts hereupon is, Whether
Caius be bound to keep his Oath or not: and answer it thus he ought not to have
sworn; but having sworn, he ought to keep his Oath, and pay the Fine.

15. Now, how far this is from the Case of the Covenant, in it self, I need not
say; and how far it was so in the judgment of our great casuist, his following
Discourse does sufficiently Demonstrate.

16. I would here (says he) be understood Praecise in quantum adversatur legi
Civitatis. Nam respectu finis aut alterius causae, imo respectu ipsius etiam
Materiae quatenus est impeditiva majoris boni publici, aut aliunde, potest
justa subesse ratio quae Obligationem tollat.

17. Now admitting this exception of the Rule, it is not possible to apply it
to the Covenant; however, if the Covenant could be granted by some thing
extraordinary in it to be excepted also, yet you see the Casuist has provided
several other Topics to render it non-obliging; from the end, or the very
matter it self, if it may hinder a greater public good; aut aliunde potest
justa subesse ratio quae obligationem tollat.

18. Give me leave also to remember you, that I made my meaning touching the
said distinction plain enough. I did not distinguish, as you assert I did, That
the thing sworn might be illicitum per se vel per accidens; but I rather
distinguished of illicitum per se as to the matter of the Covenant, and that
was either simply and primarily evil, or secondarily and quoad nos; when though
it be not sinful in the primary consideration of it, yet to such and such
persons it is sinful, that is, forbidden by God, as I did sufficiently explain
my self.

19. I did further conclude, that a thing thus sinful, quoad nos, as being some
way or other prohibited us to meddle with, is illicitum per se secundario, and
therefore not only so per accidens. Th^se are my words: To them to whom a thing
is forbidden it is as it were unlawful in it self, (as the Apple to our first
Parents) and as it is unlawful for us it goes into the matter of the Covenant
which we take; and by consequence, that which is only unlawful to us, if sworn,
does make that Oath unlawful in it self, that is, in the very matter of it.

20. So that the Consequence being granted, if this be proved, that it is
unlawful in either sense, either simply or quoad nos, to endeavor the
Extirpation of Church Government, we may bring the difference to an happy
conclusion.

21. But I rather chose to argue upon the latter branch, that to alter the
Government of the Church is unlawful quoad nos; and that because it is against
the Rights of the King, the Laws of the Land, the Privileges of Parliament,
the Liberty of the Subject, and the former Obligations that lay upon the
Nations; all which I am bound to defend.

CASE VII.
Whether any private or single person may lawfully endeavor the Alteration of
Church Government by virtue of the Covenant.

1. TO that which I have said upon this Case you only return a discovery of
three Principles, which you affirm I take for granted, though they are denied
by my Adversaries.

1. That the Long Parliament is dissolved.

2. That the Covenant is only private and personal.

3. That each single person is concluded by my subsequent Arguments.

These you call ungranted Principles; but if they may not be granted, though
they are Principles, I shall endeavor that they may be proved; though, I hope,
very few of the people of England need satisfaction in such points as these.

SECT. 1. Of the dissolution of the long Parliament.
1. TOuching the Dissolution of the Long Parliament, I could not dream, that so
ingenuous persons had any scruple: I would fain hope that you want a Refuge,
when I find you in so bad a Sanctuary.

2. Yet when I read your words, so warily conditioned in this great particular,
I find some small encouragement to think, that though you now stumble at this
stone; if every other stone were removed, you would stumble over it. You say it
has been said, you dare not say it, and in obedience to present laws you are
submissively silent.

3. Are you indeed Obedient? to what? to the present Laws? Who made them? the
Parliament. How comes this to be a Parliament, if the Long Parliament be not
dissolved.

4. If the Long Parliament be yet in being, the Present is none, their Laws are
none, your Obedience is none: if you acknowledge the present Laws, you
acknowledge the present Parliament; and thereby you are over the stone of
stumbling before you are aware; for you acknowledge the Long Parliament
dissolved

5. Now there are but two ungranted principles; for one you have granted upon a
better Argument then I had thought of, your own Obedience to the present Laws.

6. Truly, I took you to be so ingenuous before hand, and therefore I presumed
to take this for granted, and thought I might do it without offense. For it is
not only the ground of Obedience to the present Laws, but the Foundation of our
Peace, our Liberty, our Pardon, our Lives, and indeed of all we are worth in
this world; and such a stone, (not of stumbling, but) of the Comer, that it is
hardly safe to touch it, though with an intent to fasten it. But, blessed be
God, it is fast enough already in our constitution, and I hope not much loosned
in your opinions.

7. Yet, if you are in doubt of what disease that great body died: I refer you
to Judge Jenkins and Mr. Prin; who, though in other things they differed too
much, agree very well in this great point.

8. Indeed the Name, Parliam^^t, which signifies to consult and treat; together
with the Writ whereby the two Houses are Assembled, are a full Demonstration of
its departure or dissolution long agon. They are thereby called to consult and
treat with the King: therein it signified that Rex est habiturus Colloquium and
Tractatum cum praelatis, magnatibus, and proceribus. Rex in hoc individuo.

9. Hence Judge Jinkins argues, that the Parliament dissolved upon the Kings
being forced from them, and put into an incapacity of Treating with them;
however at his death they died on course.

10. The King dying, with whom they are to Treat, and for which end they have
their being, the end of their assembling, and consequently of their being, is
gone with him, and they are no longer a Parliament. A Parliament is a Relative
term; the Relate and Correlate die together. Therefore, the King, in our Laws,
is Principium, Caput, and finis Parliamenti.

11. It may be said, the Act secured them against the Kings death.

12. It Is plainly otherwise; indeed, it secured themselves from any violence to
be done to that end, by the King himse^f: there is no such clause in the Act,
that they should not be capable of dissolving any other way, much less, in
particular, by the Kings death, no security to save the Body when the Head was
off.

13. But a Parliament may be dissolved, or dissolve: die, or be killed: the Act
secured them from being dissolved by the Kings power, without their Consent;
not against the law of Mortality, or their dissolving on course at his decease.

14. This is very evident in ull Parliaments: if the Kings favor shall
continue a Parliament his whole time, that Parliament has all that the long
Parliament desired or obtained, by the Act specified: yet upon the Kings death,
such a Parliament dissolves, according to the nature of the thing and the
constitution of the Nation.

15. Who can be so fond, as to imagine, that it was ever intended, either by
the King, or both Houses, (especially if the Reasons be weighed, with which
this Act was prosecuted,) that the constitution of the Nation, or the nature of
a Parliament, should be altered by it; or more, then that the King should not
dissolve them by violence; that is, without their own consent.

16. It Is as frivolous to mention, that the King never dies in this respect;
For (...) is evident, that as the King is the Head of the Parliament, the
Relate and Reasons of a particular Parliament, so he does die. For, as was
said, a Parliament (...) dissolved by the King in his life time, dissolves of
it self, at his death, and why, but because in this sense the King dies?

17. I never heard such Arguments as these following answered, though indeed we
need them not. They are Judge Jenkin's. He affirms that the Act for the
continuance of the long Parliament is Repugnant to those for Annual and
Triennial Parliaments; which being all Acts of one Session, are all Acts of one
day, and repugnant to common Right and common Reason; and impossible by the
Kings Mortality: and maintains, that when an Act of Parliament is thus against
common Right and Reason, and repugnant and impossible to be performed, the
common Law shall control, and adjudge such an Act to be void, and that these
are the words of the Law. 1. Par. D. Downhams Case, fol. 11S. 8E. 3. 3. 30. 33.
E. Cessavit. 32. 37. H. O. Annuity 41. 1. Eliz. Dier. 313.

18. I hope, you will not demand who shall judge of such a Case, since all
parties have practically resolved this long agon.

19. The Rump thought that Parliament too long; the whole Nation were offended
at the Rump: The Long-Parliament men themselves, when they were together again,
in order to the blessed Restoration of the King, had a desire to be dissolved,
and did what they could themselves to do it: and you know, that both King,
Lords and Commons, have since made a Law, to which you say you yield Obedience,
that brandeth it for an high offense, for any to say that the Long Parliament
is not dissolved.

20. But my dear brethren, because you intimate that you are not fully
satisfied in this point; out of my hearty desire to do you any service, I have
advised with a very learned Sergeant in the Laws, from whom I received these 3.
Reasons: every one of which, he affirms, demonstrates that Parliament to be
dissolved; in sua art credend. etc. and I hope you will be fully satisfied
with them: they are these.

21. 1. By the death of the King; there being nothing in the Act of continuance
that does or can secure them against that.

2. Because every Court in England dissolves on course, if it rises without
adjourning, or does not meet again, at the time and place appointed.

3. Because, when a Parliament Recedes, and the Electors choose new
Representatives, the first are dissolved thereby,

I need not apply these Rules; only, if you yet doubt the force of them, and
desire, as I know you will do, more full satisfaction; you will certainly
without my advice confer with some able Lawyer, whom you may safer in your own
apprehensions con^ide in. In such a case we must take things upon trust; and if
we will be satisfied, we must trust some body, choose your Friend.

SECT. 2. Of the Reality and Nationality of the Covenant.
1. IN the second place, you intimate that I take it for granted, that the
Covenant was personal, and not Real or National. But Master Crofton has
affirmed it is real and National, Obliging all the Nation, and all after
Generations, side Anglorum, thereby engaged. This, you say, he has enforced
beyond all capacity of Contradiction.

2. Truly, I confess, I did not imagine (however confident I find you to the
contrary) that such a principle had needed proof, with such as I proposed to
deal with: but I see the Foundations are yet out of Course.

3. Much less, could I divine, that whether the Covenant be personal or re^l,
it could any way concern me in my present Design to trouble myself; seeing it
was my work only to prove that the matter of the Covenant was sinful; and then,
whether it be a real or a personal Covenant, I think it comes all to one, viz.
A sinful Covenant, and not Obliging.

4. Besides, upon your second Survey, you will easily discern, that I
distinguished single and private persons, from the Parliament, and not from the
Nation; and considered both Members of my distinction; as taking the Covenant;
And did not find my self obliged to say, that some not: but rather, that none
at all were so far bound by virtue of it, as to endeavor any alteration or
change of Government: so that your exception here, If it have any weight, it is
impertinent and ill placed.

5. But seeing I must be assaulted with Mr. Crostons authority. give me leave
to oppose it, with Authority as valid, I hope, without any disparagement to
him, in your own apprehensions: it is that Reverend Casuist Bishop Sanderson.

6. Bishop Sanderson asserts, that it is essential to an Oath to be personal;
and consequently, that there is no such thing as Juramentum reale, such a Real
Oath as you have pretended.

7. Non tantum (inquit ille vir Magnus) tenetur Haeres vi Juramenti defuncto
praestiti. It a ut si non solverit, injustus tantum sit, non item perjurus:
cujus ratio est, quia Juramentum est vinculum personale, and inducit
Obligationem Spiritualem tantum, etc. At in personalibus nemo ligatur fine
proprio consensu. p. 115.

8. Again, he adds, At non potest quis alteri inducere Obligationem nisi ipse
quoque volverit, and proinde non potest Actu suo spiritualiter nisi seipsum
tantum -- Obligatio Juramenti non transit ad successores, p, 117. 118. nothing
can be more plain.

9. Therefore, I must have leave to demand, what Casuist, Author of Note, or
Learned Man uninterested in the present Controversy has used or allowed this
distinction, besides Master Croston. Thus his authority is matched; what reasons
you hint for it, I proceed to give reason to Answer.

10. You add no reasons in this place, yet because I shall make but one work of
it, I shall gather the reasons that serve to this purpose from the other parts
of your book where I find them; they are but two, to the best of my
Observation, both received from Master Crofton: and I presume the best he has,
for that you improve no other.

11. The first I find upon Case the 14. by way of Expostulation, thus. Was the
law of Saul, the Princes of Israel, against the Gibeonites, to be justified?
Why should they and all other Conventions of them be bound by the Oath of
Joshua, and the Princes with him?

12. The answer is at hand, in the Reverend Bishops words: Saul, Injustus
tantum sit, non item perjurus. Paul's sin was cruelty and injustice, and not
perjury. Not the Oath of Joshua, immediately, but the Law of Righteousness
bound Saul to the contrary.

13. If any Obligation lay upon Saul rom Joshua's Oath, it was not formalier,
but effective only; not as an Oath, but in the effects of it: which was to
preserve and maintain Justice and every man's right; even that right of the
Gibeonites which they had obtained, by virtue indeed of their Covenant with
Joshua long before.

14. Methinks, it may thus be resembled; a Parliament in England is not
obliged; to continue all the Acts of precedent Parliaments, but has power to
alter them as they think fit; yet no Parliament can void an Act of pardon made
by any former Parliament.

15. The Reason is, not that one Parliament has not power to undo what another
has done abstractly confidered; but because a Parliament it self may not be
unrighteous and do injustice.

16. But, why is it injustice from a Parliament to void an Act of pardon? the
Reason seems to be this: An Act of pardon has its effect the first day of its
being, and gives actual Right to every one concerned in the mercy granted; they
are actually pardoned, and the offense forgiven and done away. And now, if this
pardon should be taken off again, Right is violated and punishment inflicted
where there is no Crime.

17. Thus was it in the Case of the Gibeonites; they had received an Act of
pardon long before, a Legal restitution to the privileges they enjoyed by
virtue of the Oath of Joshua, and the Princes of Israel: and the violation of
their Rights, so long after, with the taking away of their lives, by Saul, was
iniquity and cruelty in him, and most justly, though severely, punished by the
God of Righteousness.

18. This Answer is plainly gathered from the Holy Scripture, whence the
Objection it self is framed.

19. The Famine (says the Lord to David) is for Saul, and for his bloody
house, because he slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. 11.

20. It is rendered, in several of the Oriental Tongues, House of bloods; and so
it is in the Hebrew: it was not perjury but blood filled his house, because he
slew the Gibeonites, and broke the Act of Pardon, not the Oath of Joshua
formally considered.

21. It is said, that the children of Israel had sworn to them, v. 2. but not
Saul: yea the children of Israel in opposition to Saul: the children of Israel
had sworn unto them, and Saul sought to slay them in zeal to the children of
Israel. Therefore, in the Septuagint, we read (...), upon Saul, and upon his
house; Injustitia in morte sanguinum ejus pro eo. quod morti. tradidit
Gibeonitas, for that he delivered the Gibeonites to death: Injustice, it is not
said Perjury, but injustice, and blood is laid upon him and his house, and so
severely punished.

22. Secondly, the Covenant was sworn (say you, in Mr. Croftons words) by those
P. 45.
Real capacities, Noble Men, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, which pass and will pass to our Successors,
whilst England is England; and therefore it is Juramentum reale, and obliges
the whole Nation for ever.

23. But it is to be remembered, before we conclude so confidently, that though
the Proem runs thus, We Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Ministers of the Gospel, as well as Commons of all sorts, have
so Resolved and Determined; yet most Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons of all sorts, had not thus Resolved and
Determined when the Covenant was penned or published.

24. For it was brought from Seotland, and by a few men, at first, a little
altered in England, and then, by an Order of some of the Commons, printed and
published.

25. Now, if this be to make a Real and National Covenant, three or four
private persons may as easily write over these great words, and as easily
oblige the whole Nation and Posterity for ever; but this is ridiculous.

26. Again, it is certain that many individual Persons, from the King, the
Nobles, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, Citizens, Ministers, and Commons of all
sorts, never took the Covenant, but ever, as occasion was offered, declared
their abhorrency of it.

27. Yea, the Popish, the Milignant, and the Prelatical Parties, which
certainly were then no mean part of the Nation, if not the greatest, are
supposed in the Covenant it self to be enemies to it, and are, indeed, sworn
against it. And are these obliged by the same Covenant, and their Posterities
after them? Are they sworn to oppose and destroy themselves? You will not say
it.

28. Again, if these words can create a Real Covenant in your sense, not only
Scotland, who framed it, and England, who knew not of it for the most part till
it was taken, but Ireland too, and its Posterity, are obliged by it; and all
the Rebels there are taken into Confederation, and thousands of people there,
that never saw it, or perhaps never heard so much as that there was any such
thing in the world for diverse years after this their pretended Obligation by it.

29. Truly I thought the Covenanting Party would not have entered into so Solemn
a League with a Prelatical, Malignant Party, much less with Papists, and Irish
Rebels; yet such is the consequence of your Notion of a Real Covenant.

30. Moreover, this Argument is confuted in the very Proem of the Covenant it
self, so plainly and evidently, that I must needs wonder that so many quick and
perceiving eyes should not have discovered it: Wherein it says (speaking of
the form and manner of giving and taking the Covenant) wherein we all
subscribe, (therefore, no more do take the Covenant then do subscribe it) and
beyond all contradiction adds, [and each one of us for himself] then no one for
another, much less for so many thousands as your Real Notion would infer.

31. Therefore the pressers of the Covenant durst not trust your Logic, but
would have not only Parents, but their Children; not only Masters, but
Servants; not only Tutors, but Pupils, and such as were under the tuition of
others, to subscribe for themselves, according to the phrase, Every one for
himself.

32. But, to conclude, if it be against the very Nature and Essence of an Oath
to be any more then personal, to bind succession or posterity, or to be
National and Real, as you pretend; alas! what can words do more then to make a
noise, to trouble men's minds, and to beget trouble in the Church by needless
Disputation? But that it is so, I hope our Casuist (whom your selves and all
men else admire) has put it out of doubt, to your full satisfaction.

SECT. 3. Of the capacity of all Covenanters.
1. THe third Principle which you intimate I take for granted, is, That all
Persons that took the Covenant are in the same capacity with our selves. You
say, you cannot yield unto it.

2. I have labored to find out your meaning, and cannot discover any thing,
but the exception of the single person, that you can stand upon.

3. But if you please to review what I said from page 93. to page 97. you will
see your oversight, and grant that I did not take it for granted.

4. And until you give Answer to the reason there offered, as also in some
other places of my Book, I think I am not at all concerned to trouble you
further about it, but shall now take up my shield, and appear in defense of my
particular Arguments.

CASE VIII. Whether to endeavor to alter the Government of the Church be
against the Right of the King.

CASE IX. Whether to violate the Kings Right be not sinful.
1. YOu well observe, that these two Cases contain my first Argument, to prove
the matter of the Covenant, sinful. My major Proposition, you say, is
determined in the second of these Cases: This you grant, in Mr. Crofton's
words. The proper and adequate Act of Justice is Jus suum cuique; the
Authority, Power, and Liberty of King, Parliament, and People.

2. The minor then contained in the first of these Cases is the thing in
Controversy, viz. whether the Covenant engaging against the Government of the
Church, or to endeavor to extirpate the same, do not violate the Kings Right.

3. This I affirm; for by such Endeavors the King is injured, first, as he is
the Executor of the Law, and in all Causes and over all Persons Ecclesiastical
Supreme Governor, both with respect to his Officers and to his Government;
secondly, as Legislator.

SECT. 1. Of the Kings Right as Supreme Executor of the Laws.
1. I Do still affirm, That the King is the Supreme Executor of the Law, and
all inferior Officers are his Commissioners, to execute that Government under
him, in which he is alone the Supreme Governor, as we swear him to be in
Church and State; for, Reges sa^ro oleo uncti faut capaces spiritualis
Ju^isdictionis.

2. Now, I say, take away the Body of Governors, and the Head must fall; and
if all inferiors be removed, where will the Supreme be?

3. For Answer hereunto you only desire my clear Answer to two Enquiries.

The first of your Queries is in these words:

4. Are Ecclesiastical Officers essential to the Regality of the King?

5. To this I return my clear Answer; No. Yet they are plainly essential to his
being a Supreme Governor in all Causes and over all Persons Ecclesiastical.

6. Supreme does necessarily suppose and respect Inferiors; and Supreme
Governor Inferior Governors.

7. Your second Query is this: Are these specifical Commissioners essential to
the Kings Regality; that Archbishops, Bishops, etc. taken away the head must
needs fall?

8. To this, I hope I may clearly Answer, that the removing of the inferior
Governors has a Natural tendency to the falling of the Head, as such, that is
the Head of them, or the Supreme; but has no natural ordination to the
substitution of other kind of Governors.

9. There is nothing in the pulling down of the walls that goes into the
support of the roof; nothing in pulling down Archbishops and Bishops, etc.
that serves to uphold the Supremacy of the King in governing the Church, but to
destroy it, as the twenty years experience past does sadly demonstrate.

SECT. 2. Of the Kings Right in the Government of the Church.
1. THe second Medium I use to prove, that endeavors to extirpate Episcopal
Government you observe to be this; that thus to endeavor is not only against
the Kings Right as Executor of the Laws, by opposing and seeking to destroy his
Commissioners, but his very government it self; and this is the express sense
of the Covenanters, that according to the Covenant they are bound in the whole
course of their lives against that Government which they know is the Kings
Ecclesiastical Government.

2. This you grant: only you say the Covenanters do not mean such endeavors as
I mention: Again, you plead that some others deny the Government of the Church
to be the Kings Government, because they find it not established by the Laws of
the Land, whereof it is his Right to be Executor, and this is all you say; only
touching these things here, you refer their discussion to their proper places;
where I intend, God willing, to meet them again.

SECT. 3. Of the Kings Right as Legislator.
1. AGain, you note that I argue, to endeavor the alteration of Church
Government is against the Kings Right as Legislator, as the maker, as well as
the Executor of the laws, as appears by that sense of the Covenant which the
practice of the Covenanters has put upon it.

2. To this you answer, that the terms do so condition it, that it does not
appear to engage us to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopacy without the
Kings Consent.

3. Here, I must have leave to remember you, that though it be true the terms
of the Covenant which you specify are soft and mild, viz. through the grace of
God, in our places and callings; yet there are other expressions visible in it,
that do more then seem to exact such proceedings as were very inconsistent with
our places and callings; or the grace of God, viz. to our power, and with our
lives and fortunes.

4. What need was there then of our power, or lives and fortunes, to be exposed
in such endeavors, but in opposing the King, and his Army? and how could that
possibly be done in the present matter of endeavor to extirpate Prelacy; but
by Acting therein without the Kings consent, and against his express mind to
the contrary. so that take a true measure of the Covenant by all such terms
together, as in fair reasoning we must needs do; and it is too too evident that
it puts us on endeavors that have no regard to the Kings consent at all.

5. Besides, if the true extent of endeavor covenanted be yet in doubt, you
would force me to resolve it by that black Comment of the state of things when
the Covenant was pressed at first: from the occasion of it, which, as the King
sadly observed, was that fatal confederacy with the Scots, for their invading
this Kingdom with Arms. The obvious and declared judgment of the Scots, that
created it, touching the place and power of public conventions and private
persons in such matters. The sudden course which the two Houses took to
demolish this Government, (and that by virtue of the Covenant,) and to bring in
another.

6. These things I say, soberly considered and pondered upon, methinks should
rationally, and satisfactorily Evince to such sober persons as I am Treating
with, that endeavor in the sense of the Covenant it self, and the prime
Covenanters, does entrench souly upon the Kings Prerogative and Crown;
Notwithstanding those other small, saint, and after endeavors with the King to
ratify what they had labored with all their power, in a way of Hostility so
long together to do without him, and against his most signal express dissent,
so often reiterated.

7. Which little endeavors to procure his consent, I imagine, you would hardly
have mentioned, had you had in your mind, that at the same time the King was at
least quasi a prisoner, and was denied by the same persons that treated him the
liberty to repair to the place where, according to the Order of the Kingdom, he
uses to add his fiat to the making of Laws: I mean the Parliament House.

8. Further, I am loath to remember that even then, when the King (at the I Will of
Wight) and his two Houses were nearest to an accommodation; the force of such
endeavors as the Covenant exacted provoked them to reply to his Majesty's
papers, that they were yet unsatisfied as to an agreement with, and reception
of his Majesty, because he would only grant them a suspension of
Episcopal-Government for 3. years, and not an eternal extirpation of it, for
which they had covenanted: vid. Biblioth. Reg. p. 153.

9. But to return to the Covenant it self; the close of it does effectually
conclude, that in its prime and native intention, it least of all regarded the
Consent of the King; and as to any such thing, it was utterly desperate.

10. The words are these: We shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power against all lets and impediments whatsoever: and what we
are not able our selves to suppress or over come, we shall r^veal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed.

11. Now I beseech you to consider; here is a promise to continue in this
cause; which refers, no doubt, to the whole or the main matter of the Covenant.
Now as the Author of the Covenanters plea observes; the main scope of the
Covenant is against Church Government, to which all other things seem
subordinate. Therefore, this same last Article repeats the beads of this common
cause, and begins it with Religion; that is the Reformation of Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline, and the extirpation of Episcopal Government. The words
are this common Cause of Religion, Liberty, and peace of the Kingdoms.

12. Now, in this Cause, observe, They swear to continue zealously and
constantly all the days of their lives: and what is the plain sense of that,
the King being known to be then in the fields. and in arms against the
Covenanters; I say, what can the plain sense be; but that they would continue
therein, though the King himself should forbid. Though the King should deny his
Assent, and declare his most express Dissent and threats against it, yet they
would persist therein all the days of their lives.

13. Yea, though King and Parliament (as is now come to pass) should make Laws
against it, they must be zealous and constant in this common Cause: so little
regard will the Covenant allow, to this day, to the Kings Consent.

14. Yet heed what follows; against all Opposition, and promote the same
against all lets and impediments whatsoever; give me leave to say, though this
Opposition, these lets and impediments be from the King himself, as you know
they were at this very same time* This being imposed by the two Houses, and
taken by the people; and the King himself in Arms to defend his own and the
Churches Government.

15. Pray resolve, where then was the King Consent, or, if the King please, to
be understood in the Covenant.

16. Moreover, does not this Article, which is the close and perfection of the
rest, plainly engage to such endeavors as carry opposition too? Be your selves
the judges: the words are, against all opposition; how can you be engaged to
endeavor against all opposition, but by opposition? against all opposition,
but by opposing all oppositions? even that which the King himself should make,
or rather, indeed, did make.

17. Now, how you can oppose the King, or the opposition made by him and his
commission, and yet understand his consent in the same matter, I think you will
not go about to inform me.

18. Once more, that the endeavors of the Covenant carry force and opposition
in them, according to the Grammatical Construction and Logical resolution of
the same, appears in that [Power] is engaged to our Power: and Power in order
to the suppressing and overcoming the opposers: for it is added, and what we
are not able our selves to suppress, etc. by our own power: and on the other
hand, we shall assist and Defend all those that enter into this League and
Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing thereof.

19. Which expressions (I should abhor to infer it, did not my Argument force
it) do beyond all capacity of Contradiction engage the Covenanters in a party
to live and die together in an hostile way of Opposition against the King, and
his Armies and Friends, in a pursuit of the ends of the Covenant.

20. Which cannot consist with the places of Subjects, or lawful endeavors; or
Possibly suppose the Kings consent.

21. I cannot rejoice to conclude, that this meaning of the Covenant was
expressed at first, by the prime inventors and contrivers of the Covenant; such
words as these you find in a Declaration, called the Declaration of the
convention of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland.

22. To our knowledge, say they, upon swearing and subscribing of this League
and Covenant, the opposite Malignant party will rage and Tumultuate more then
ever: and therefore, unless we will either betray our Religion, Liberties and
Law, and all that we and ours do possess, and suffer our selves to be cut off
and massacred by the bloody and barbarous cruelty of those our enraged enemies;
There is a necessity of taking Arms for mutual defense.

23. Lastly, That the Kings Consent was little intended or understood in the
Covenant, is yet more manifest, if it be considered, that it was not only made,
and published, and pressed, without notice given him, and at such a time too,
and condition of affairs, as had served the King from the Covenanting party,
but it was still carried on against the Kings dislike, and express dissent and
prohibition of it, in a timely and solemn Proclamation against it.

SECT. 4. Of the Kings Proclamation against the Covenant.
1. THe King was pleased, upon the first hearing of the Covenant, published in
Print by the Order of the Commons, (which I conceive was sometime before the
Order of the Lords and Commons for the tendering and taking of it;) to issue out
his Proclamation from his Court at Oxford, entitled, His Majesty's
Proclamation, forbidding the tendering and taking of the Covenant, called the
solemn League and Covenant for Reformation.

2. The Use of this Proclamation in the present controversy, is twofold.
First, it Demonstrates beyond all contradiction, that the intention of the
Covenanters did not regard the consent of the King, which runs clearly against
the Kings Supremacy. Secondly, It renders the Covenant void, even from its
creation, before ever it was ordered to be taken. For Datur irritatio Juramenti
aliquando per superiores, si in illa ipsa materia s^nt superiores cirea quam
Juramentum versatur.

3. Now so far as the Government of the Church cannot be altered but by Law, it
is under the power of the King, at least not to alter it: He having a Negative
upon both Houses, and the Kings Proclamation having denied his Assent
thereunto, and proclaimed his prohibition of it, thereby voided it long agon,
according to the Rule.

4. A Rule never disputed, grounded evidently upon Scripture and Natural
Reason; and indeed I find not, that your selves do question the Proposition;
though I confess you put me to a task that I little expected, by doubting the
Assumption.

5. You say, It remains upon you a doubt, whether there ever were any such
Proclamation; you desire me to help you to a Copy of this Proclamation, and
inform you, where to find the Original: Concluding, that the Obligation,
without it, cannot be voided.

6. I hope you do hereby intimate, that upon the sight of this Proclamation you
will be satisfied, that the Obligation of the Covenant was voided at the first;
therefore I am much encouraged to transcribe it, and to inform you where you
may find it.

7. It is indeed in Print, in more books then one, of unquestionable credit;
particularly, you have it in a Book called, Bibliotheca Regia in terminis,
thus, p. 332.

8. Whereas there is a Printed paper, entitled, A solemn League and Covenant
for Reformation and defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of the King,
and the Peace and safety of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland:
Pretended to be ordered by the Commons in Parliament, on the 21. day of
September last, to be Printed and published: which Covenant, though it seems to
make specious pretenses of Piety and Religion, is in Truth nothing else but a
Traitorous and Seditious Combination against us, and the established Religion
and Laws of this Kingdom, in pursuance of a Traitorous design and endeavors
to bring in Foreign forces to invade this Kingdom: We do therefore straightly
charge and command all our loving Subjects, of what degree or quality soever,
upon their Allegiance, that they presume not to take the said Seditious and
Traitorous Covenant. And we do likewise hereby forbid and inhibit all our
Subjects to impose, administer or tender the said Covenant, as they and every
of them will answer the contrary to their utmost and extremest perils. Given
at our Court at Oxon, Oct. 9. in the 19. year of our Reign.

9. If you will cast the Controversy upon the sight of the very Original, I do
not despair to effect it for you: provided I may know whom I may pleasure with
it, and where; for it is not possible I should print the Original.

10. However, I shall offer you such Evidence, that this is a true copy; that I
verily believe ingenuous persons will receive it as next to demonstration.

11. Note first, that the Covenant was ordered to be printed by the Commons,
Sep. 21. An. Dom. 1643. This Proclamation is said to be issued, Oct. 9. 1643.
and I have a learned book by me, called the Anticonfederacy, that was printed
the very next year, viz. 1644. that labors to invalidate the said Covenant
with the said Proclamation.

12. He does not indeed transcribe the whole Proclamation, as I have done; yet
so much of it, and of the most material passages of it, as you cannot choose but
know it to be the same; and to say, that he should feign such parts of a
Proclamation, at such a time as that; or that the King should not be as quick
to proclaim against the Covenant, as he had been a little before against the
Assembly of Divines, June 22. 1663. are both unreasonable and ridiculous to any
sober man.

13. The words of that book mentioned are these; The true scope and aim of this
League (speaking of the Covenant) as it is declared by our most gracious King,
(and we cannot receive it from a better hand,) is in pursuance of a Traitorous
design and endeavor to bring in Foreign Forces to invade this Kingdom: and
is therefore by his Majesty justly sentenced; notwithstanding its specious
expressions of Piety and Religion, to be nothing else in Truth, but a
Traitorous and seditious Combination against him, and against the established
Religion and Laws of this Kingdom, which are the very words of the
Proclamation it self.

14. I hope you will now no longer doubt, whether there were indeed any such
Proclamation, or whether it be of force to void the Covenant.

15. You say, you allow that Rule of Ames; datur irritatio aliquando per
superiores: but you note it must be, si in illa ipsa materia sint superiores
circa qua^ ^ersatur Juramentum.

16. But let me recommend it to your second thoughts, whether endeavor simply
considered, or endeavor with its object, extirpation of Prelacy, be the matter
of the Covenant, and whether the King in this very matter of extirpation of
Prelacy, or endeavors to do it, be not allowed to be our Superior.

17. Admit, there were a Covenant taken by private persons, to Endeavor to
bring in foreign forces; endeavor indeed is to every man, sui juris; but that
this endeavor, and consequently, such a Covenant, is not in a matter
subordinate to the King, I think you will not dispute.

18. Lastly, you seem to wonder that I make it a Problem, whether supposing
the Proclamation had voided the Covenant at first, the Kings after-consent
could revive it.

19. If you understand my words, with respect to the first engagement actually
made and voided by the Proclamation; I think yopu need not much wonder if I
should have affirmed, whereas I only quaeried, Whether the same Act, made void
could be made in force again? I am not afraid to write over the words once
more: I think it may well be a Problem, Whether the Kings after-consent could
revive it, if it had indeed been dead and buried sop many years before?

20. For the Covenant being voided by the Kings protest against it, and the
Parliament dissolved that promoted it, I think you would wonder more at it if I
should affirm, That the King has power, without a Bill to that purpose from
the two Houses, by His own single Act to revive a matter of so high a nature to
His Subjects, so long time after.

CASE X. Whether the Covenant to endeavor the Extirpation of Episcopacy be
against the Laws, and consequently sinful.
1. I Proceed to argue, That seeing the standing Laws of the Land are the
express and fixed consent of the King and Supreme Authority, and this
extirpation of Prelacy cannot be effected but by offering violence to the Laws
of the Land, which cannot be lawfully done without the Consent and Act of the
King and supreme Authority; it is sinful to swear to endeavor it, without
submission to their will and pleashres.

2. This is evident by the former Arguments, by the rules of all Casuists, and
particularly of Mr. Perkins, who conckludes, That a Covenant taken against the
Laws of the Land is void of it self.

3. To apply this Argument to our Case, I observe, The great Objection of Mr.
Crofton, the Covenanters-Plea, and you, my Surveyors, is this, That Episcopal
Government is not established by Law in England.

4. This Objection I labor, first, to avoid by a distinction in general; and
then I argue the point particularly, That this Government is established by Law
in England.

5. My distinction is this: We may endeavor against the Laws, and swear
accordingly, two ways; either when the thing we swear against is expressly
established by plain Law, or when the thing we swear against cannot be
abolished without the abolition or alteration of Law. Hence I argue, That admit
there were no express Law appointing this Form of Government sworn against, yet
how does this clear the Covenanters from swearing against Law, when they swear
to extirpate that Government which cannot be extirpated without the alteration
of many Laws. So that this evasion, I think, is perfectly obstructed.

6. All that you answer is levelled against this distinction; you ask, Is it
against Law to endeavor the alteration, yea the abrogation of some Laws and
things thereby established?

7. Now I beseech you consider, whether you have any thing at all in these
words to enervate or avoid my distinction, or to render it poor as well as
plain, as you seem to glory; notwithstanding your confidence, your ingenuity
shall judge betwixt us.

8. Consider therefore the end for which I proposed it, and you will confess
you have not evaded it; was it not in express terms to obstruct the Objection
of Mr. Crofton, and the Author of the Covenanters Plea, viz. That Episcopal
Government is not established by Law; to which I said, That it is all one
whether it be established by express Law, or cannot be abolished without the
alteration of Law: Now to this use of my distinction you have yet answered
nothing at all.

9. Besides, in your Querie, Whether it be against Law to endeavor to abrogate
Law? Unless you discover a double meaning in acting against Law, you contradict
your selves; and if you do discover it, you also discover a plain way for me to
escape your Answer, and to defend and justify my plain distinction.

10. Surely to endeavor the abolition or destruction of Law, is to endeavor
against Law. Now if you affirm, That it is not against Law thus to endeavor,
what remains, but that this term [against Law] in one Proposition has not the
same sense with [against Law] in the other; and there are four terms in the
Argument, and nothing concluded, as yet, against my plain distinction.

11. Give me leave to be plain, and the sum is this; It is not against Law,
that is, it is not unlawful to endeavor against Law; therefore, to endeavor
against Law is not to endeavor against Law; and then my distinction of
endeavoring against that which is established by Law, or against that which
cannot be abolished without the alteration or abolition of Law, is a poor
distinction.

12. But you call me off to prove, That such an endeavor to extirpate
Church Government as was Covenant-ed, was against the Law, both antecedent to
the Covenant, and subsequent; this done, you say, would much avail; but you
expect my evidence.

CASE XI. Whether the present Church Government was established by Law before
the Covenant was taken?
THe sum of what I said upon the Resolution of this Case is reducible to three
heads.

SECT. 1. Church Government is fixed by Law.
1. First, there is no need that we prove the Government to be established by
Law in such a manner as the Covenanters seek for, while we find it beyond all
controversy, that this Form is legal, and established in the Laws, though no
express Statute should be found appointing it; and it is so much allowed, so
far fixed and established by the Laws, that he that shall any way engage
against it does so far engage against known Law.

2. Now until this be questioned, to what end do we trouble our selves any
further? All that is more then this is exubundanti, and has no necessary place
left in the Argument.

3. Yet of this, whereon the very hinge of the Controversy turns, you have
spared the pains to take any notice at all.

SECT. 2. The Original of Prelacy is not to be sought in Law.
1. IN the second place I intimated, that it seems to me unreasonable to expect
such proof, That the Government of the Church should be established by Law in
such a manner as you seek for, That it should have its Original Establishment
in Law.

2. For before, and at the first making of Christian Laws in this Kingdom, this
Government was found existing; and to have first destroyed this Government, and
then again to have established the same by Law, would have been plainly
ridiculous; which yet must have been done, in order to such an establishment as
you require proof of.

3. It is acknowledged by Mr. Fox, Act. Mon. Tom. 1. page 148.
that in Elutherius his time An. Dom. 180. when this Realm was first converted
to Christianity, there were appointed in the same three Archbishops and twenty
eight Bishops; and since that time the Government of the Church by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. has been further established by Magna Charta, which has been
confirmed above 30 times by Parliament; and by the Statute called Confirmatio
Chartarum, still in force, it was ordained, that all Laws contrary to that
Charter should be void; and that Bishops, twice every year, should
excommunicate all that did, either do or advise contrary to it.

4. The Government of the Church was at first founded in Prelacy; therefore so
far as we are a Christian Nation, and governed by Christian Laws, Episcopal
Government goes into our foundation.

5. I mean only it is so of the foundation, as to be from and in the beginning
of Church Government and Christian Laws among us: I do not say, so of the
foundation as to be unalterable, yet others do; however, it is not yet actually
altered, and that is as much as the Argument requires, and to warrant that
expression which I thought augmentative, though you pass it by unnoted, viz.
that there is the less reason to expect that the Power, Office, or Government
of Bishops should have their origin from the Laws of the Land, or that the
Child should beget the Father.

SECT. 3. Church Government is established by Law.
1. THirdly, I labored to prove, that so far as a Government, that was
prae-existing before the Laws concerning it, could be reasonably expected to be
established by Law, the present Church Government is established by Law: For,

2. First, the Laws of this Land, since they were Christian, have ever allowed
it and taken it for granted (as having its foundation sufficiently laid before)
upon all occasions; not only by those special Laws that particularly relate
unto it, but indeed in every Law which expresses the Consent of the Lords
Spiritual.

3. Here you only catch at the weakest part about the Consent of the Lords
Spiritual to the Acts of Parliament, leaving the strength of the Argument
grounded in those many special Laws which relate to this Government, and
apparently allow and continue it, without any exception or observation.

4. Yet I am not at all satisfied that the allowance and recording of their
Consent to every Law, by the King, Peers, and Commons, is not a plain
acknowledgement of Episcopal Power and Government.

5. Secondly, I affirm, That the present Government is established by Law,
though not in its Office which was before the Law, yet in its Political Power,
and the Exercise of it, in this Kingdom.

6. Therefore the several Legal Names of Prelatical Governors, with their
distinct Jurisdictions, and the Crimes punishable by them, and the Authority
allowed so to punish, and the Fees of their Courts, and the Form and Manner of
Consecrating Bishops are found and founded in the Laws of the Land.

7. In your Recital of this Argument you only mention the Exercise of this
Government, and take no notice of its Political Power given by Law; and
therefore your Answer is short.

8. But that this Political Power of Ecclesiastical Governors is settled and
authorized by the Laws of the Land is most evident in that of the 24 Hen. 8. c.
12. and Eliz. An. 1. 2.

9. By 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. Jurisdiction touching Matrimony, Wills, Tithes,
Oblations, etc. is expressly given them; and it is added, that all such
Spiritual Causes shall be from henceforth heard, examined, discussed, and
clearly, finally and definitively adjudged and determined within the Kings
Jurisdiction and Authority, and not elsewhere, in such Courts Spiritual and
Temporal of the same as the natures of the Causes shall require.

10. Note, That if the Temporal Courts have any Authority given them by this
Statute, so also have the Spiritual; they are joined together; such Courts
Spiritual and Temporal.

11. The point of Appeals is also established by the said Statute; and Bishops
are expressy authorized to receive Appeals from Archdeacons Courts; and the
Archbishops from the Bishops, with Authority hereby given them, or established
in them, to put a final end to all such Controversies. You may read tho
Statute at large.

12. Yet, I conceive, that of Eliz. 1. c. 2. is more precise to our purpose,
Where it is Ordained and Enacted, that all and singular Archbishops and
Bishops, and every of their Chancellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other
Ordinaries, having any peculiar Ecclesiastiel Jurisdiction, shall have full
Power and Authority by Virtue of this Act, as well to inquire in their
Visitations, Synods and elsewhere, to take Accusations and Informations of all
and every the things above mentioned within the Limits of their Jurisdiction;
and to punish the same by Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestratien, or
Deprivation, and other Censures and Process, in like Form as heretof ore has
been used in like Cases by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws.

13. Here, we cannot but see, not only the legal Names of Ecclesiastical
Governors, mentioned; but their political Power and Authority allowed, yea,
formally invested and established in them to inquire, and to punish. To punish
with Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestration and Deprivation, and all this
by Virtue of this Act.

14. Had we nothing more to prove Episcopal Government to be established by
law, but this very Statute, I cannot apprehend but that the work is done, and
all Objections to the contrary for ever superseded.

15. Is here only a liberty to exercise a power given them? is it not express,
that Power and Authority is also given them? It Is not declared, that they have
Power and Authority by Virtue of their Office, or any other way; but it is
enacted that they have Power and Authority to inquire and punish, etc. by
Virtue of this very Act.

16. Yea, though it is intimated, that the same Course had been used formerly;
it is not enacted only, that this shall continue; but as if such a kind of
Objection had been in prospect; it is enacted, that by Virtue of this Statute
all these Ecclesiastical, Governors shall have full Power and Authority to
proceed in like Form as heretofore bath been used in like cases by the Queens
Ecclesiastical laws.

17. While I read the Statute so express and punctual in the Case, I know you
will not blame me, if I wonder at your so frequent comparing the Government of
the Church with Usury, and her Governors with Usurers.

18 I do not know of any Statute that gives so much countenance to Usury and
Usurers, as to say, be it enacted that power and Authority be given to Usurers,
or that makes them a politic body, and invests them with Government over so
much as their own Tribe, and in Cases peculiar to their own way, abuses and
faults of Usury: Do not reflect so unbeseemingly.

19. Thirdly, I affirm, that should we yield unto you that there is no express
Statute immediately Authorizing Ecclesiastical Governors; yet immediately it it
cannot be denied, to be established by Law: I mean such Law as impowers the
King to Commission and Authorize the Governors in the Church.

20. That the King has such a power in him is manifest from the Oath of
Supremacy. For being supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical, he is so
over all persons Ecclesiastical, as to Commissionate all his inferior
Governors; therefore, they all, either mediately or immediately, receive their
Commissions from him; which is, no doubt, Legal, in the Judgment of all that
understand these Protestant Laws, that revolve the power usurped by the Pope,
upon Henry the Eighth, and all his successors, in the Crown of England for
ever. v. 26. Hen. 8. c. 1. and Eliz. 1. where you read thus:

21. All Jurisdictions heretofore lawfully exercised by any Ecclesiastical
power or Authority for Visitation, Reformation, etc. are united and annexed to
the imperial Crown of this Realm: and that your Highness, your Heirs and
Successors, shall have full power and Authority, by virtue of this Act, by
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England to Assign, Name, and Authorize
persons to exercise all manner of Jurisdictions, and to Visit, Reform, Redress,
etc.

22. Your Answer is, this at most concludes but for the Governors, and not for
the Frame of Government.

23. But do you not hereby grant as much as my Argument needs? For if the
Governors of the Church are Authorized by Law; you ow them Obedience, and the
Law in them; and your Covenant provokes you to disobedience.

24. Again, How can all the Governors be Authorized by Law, and not the Frame
of Government too? He that by Law Commissionates all the Governors, does he
not thereby establish the Frame of Government?

25. Yea, where will you look for the Frame of Government, but in the Seat of
Governors, and that according to the Covenant it self? You there engage
against Prelacy; that is the Government of the Church by Archbishops. etc.
Viz. the several Governors of it.

26. You add the Kings Supremacy may exist in, and operate by other Church
Covernours, as well as these.

27. I answer easily; that admit what you say, yet as no other sort of
Governors can be Legally so, until the King Commissionate them as he has done
these; so this kind, viz. Episcopal Government, must of necessity continue to
be Legal, until the King shall Commissionate others of another Method; or at
least withdraw his Commission from these in the present form of
Church Government; if he has power to do it by Law.

28. Lastly, I urge you, that this Government is plainly established by Common
Law.

29. To this you say, that Prescription is a poor Fence to Usurpation; Usury
has prescription.

30. But how does it appear that the present Government is an Usurpation: so
weighty a charge deserves proof.

31. Church Governors are the Kings Ecclesiastical Officers; they have their
power and authority to Govern, given them by Act of Parliament: this appears,
but that their Government is Usurpation, appears not.

32. To make good your charge, two things require proof. First, that Episcopal
Covernment was an Usurpation at first. Secondly, that it is so still, and that
it has not obtained a good Title in law, all this while.

The Statutes now mentioned prove the present Title of it. And Magna Charta is
a sufficient Evidence, that so long agon it had Legal Authority, and was no
Usurpation.

33. I rather mention Magna Charta here, because, it is accounted Common Law,
and adds much strength to my Argument thence, and from long continuance:
Especially, seeing there is much for the Church and Bishops, but nothing for
Usurers and Usury to be found in it.

34. The Plea, that Magna Charta is in behalf of the Abhots at well as Bishops
has nothing at all against us.

For Abbots were since abolished by law, so were not Bishops. We are not
arguing that nothing confirmed by Magna Charta can be lawfully altered: but
that Episcopal Government confirmed by Magna Charta is established by that Law,
and not removed by any other.

35. Yea, this Objection answers it self, and all the rest of its Company; and
yields us an Argument that might pass for an Instar omnium.

Abbots and Bishops were both confirmed by the Law of this Land. Abbots are
removed by Law and not Bishops; and in the Law, exceptio firmat Regulam in non
exceptis; and therefore the Law that removed the Abbots, did establish the
Bishops: and thus Episcopacy is established by Law.

36. But are there not State-Officers that had not their original in the
Statute-Laws, but only in the Common Law of this Land, (as hundred-Constables
and Crownets, etc.) will any say, that these are not established by law? These
were before the known written statute Laws, and so were Bishops in England
before any Christian Laws.

37. Indeed, methinks, the very Concessions of your selves, Mr. Crofton, yea
and of the two Houses of the Long Parliament, is as much as my Argument and the
Government of the Church can stand in need of.

38. You grant in one place of your P. 28. 19.
Book, your selves, that the Government of the Church by Prelacy, is not only
limited, restrained, regulated, but directed; yea, in some things authorized by
the Kings Laws. I think you will hardly say Usury is so; or that any thing
Authorized by law can be destroyed, but by law: And that suffices my Argument.

39. Again, methinks, Mr. Crofton decides the Controversy against himself in
his Berith. Anti-Baal. p. 25. There he charge the late Bishop of Exon,
because he pleaded for the Jus Divinuin of Episcopacy, that he did confront
King and Parliament in what all their Statutes declare to be their own creature
and constitution even from the Statutes of Carlisle, and the 25. of Ed. 3.
declaring against the Pope, that Holy Church was founded in Prelacy by their
own Donation, Power and Authority.

40. Now, I conceive, this was never said of Usury, or indeed, of any thing*
not established by Law. For how is this Donation, Power and Authority, put
forth in framing this Creature and Constitution of Parliaments, but in Acts of
Parliament, that is, the laws of the land.

41. If there be any doubt, what judgment the two Houses that imposed the
Covenant, had touching the Legality of the Government of the Church of England,
we are satisfied of that, by their Applications to his Majesty for the
extirpation of it, at the I Will of Wight.

42. Their words are these: for the Abolishing of Episcopacy we take leave to
say, that it is not the Apostolical Bishop, which the Bill desired of your
Majesty, intends to remove; but that Episcopacy formerly was established by law
in this Kingdom: Again, only to put down him by law who was set up by law.

43. Note first, that the Long Parliament did not doubt, but that Episcopacy
was established by Law. Secondly, that the imposens of the Covenant did extend
the sense of the Covenant against that which was established by law. Thirdly,
that yet in their own Judgment, that which is set up by law is not to be pulled
down without law. These things they saw at last, though their many years
practice before had contradicted them, vid. Biblioth. Regi. p. 350.

CASE XII. Whether the Covenant can oblige against a Future Law.
1. YOu deny that Episcopal Government has received any more express
Establishment by the Acts of Parliament since the Kings Return, then it had
before; but I cannot find, that you say, it has received no Establishment
thereby, only that its establishment is not more express in the new laws, then
it was in the Old; but that I need not dispute.

2. The Establishment of Episcopacy was express enough in my judgment before;
and if the new laws be found to establish it at all, my Argument is not
interrupted.

3. And truly, methinks, after 20. years shaking, and almost Ruinating, we may
fairly count the laws, that restore this Government upon its legs again, and
not only to its quiet and safety, but to its liberty and power of exercise,
should deserve the name of Establishing laws; and the Government be thought to
be Established by them, though it stand upon au elder Bottom, which I never
denied.

4. Besides, for a law so far to encourage and Countenance of Government that
was trodden under foot so long together, as to punish all kind of disobedience
to it, is plainly to re-establish the same.

5. I might add, we see the King, according to law and his own Supremacy, has
filled the Church again with all the several sorts of Ecclesiastical Officers,
and has set again the whole Frame of Government in the very terms of the
Conant over us: and thus the Government is Established by law, diametrically
against the Covenant: and then surely the Engagement of the Covenant is as
opposite to the law as it is to Episcopacy.

6. Consequently, whether the Act of Uniformity does precisely prohibit
Endeavors against this Government, or not, (upon which Argument I cannot but
acknowledge you are very ingenuous. Other laws require obedience to it, that
were indeed made of old, but are now renewd and reinforced by these new laws.

7. Therefore, the Covenant cannot oblige us against this Government, but it
does equally oblige us against these new laws: which to do, I have at large
proved to be sinful, and you have said nothing at all to disparage my Arguments.

8. You intimate, your labor is saved in that point; and you need not discuss
how far an Oath may bind against law. But truly, to me this seems to be your
proper work; and that you have questioned the wrong Proposition all this while.
I cannot satisfy my self, that what ever you pretend, that you doubt the
legality of Episcopal Government.

9. The Exceptions of the Antagonists you mention are answered before: and I
have no more to do upon this Case, but to note one Expression of your own in
the close of it.

10. You seem to fear Atheism, in that which only serves to Vindicate God
against our selves. His Authority in his Sovereign pre-obligations upon us,
against and after-Obligations contracted by our selves, though by way of Oath
and Covenant to the contrary.

11. I cannot but believe that Gods preobligation upon us, to obey Authority in
lawful things, is so firm and indissoluble, that no Covenant of ours to the
contrary can make those things unlawful, or warrant disobedience therein.

12. This I assert, though our Covenant precede the laws, requiring such lawful
things, which needs must pass with abundant Evidence; If these afterlaws, as
you affirm, do only revive and reinforce those Ancient laws that had obliged us
to the same things before we Covenanted to the contrary.

13. Now this methinks, should have more Piety to God shining in it, upon the
eyes of such as read and consider, then to be capable of the suspicion of
Atheism, or Irreligion, though I charge not the contrary with what you fear,
Treason or Sedition.

14. There is nothing said by you on the thirteenth and fourteenth Cases that
does not either consent with me, or is not answered already. I pass to the
fifteenth Case.

CASE XV. Touching the word [Endeavour] and the sense and force of it in the
Covenant and in the Act.
1. TOuching the word [Endeavour] I conceive you ought to have sweat more; for
though you find much fault with my endeavors about it, yet I can find very
little correction or amendment.

2. I cannot think it my task to deal with you as Censors, but as Disputants;
or to answer your passion, but your reason; now the sum of what you say
rationally hereupon is shortly this, That [endeavour] is general and indefinite
both in the Act, and in the Covenant; and that endeavor is sui juris to the
meanest Subject.

3. And this you repeat only as the sense of the Covenanters., without any
Answer to the Argumentative part of my Discourse, which I cannot but mind you
was your proper concern.

4. Indeed you chide me with some heat, that I had not given you any Etymology,
acception, or interpretation of the word [endeavour]; but if you measure the
success of your own attempt therein, you will easily excuse my omission of it.

5. For what degree of advantage has accrued to your selves, your Cause, or
your Reader, by your Latin, Greek, and Hebrew rendition of the word endeavor?
yea, your selves had just before intimated, that the English word [endeavour]
is a word easy and plain to be understood; neither have you better explained
it by its Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, or by any Etymology or Acception at all,
more then I had done.

6. I confess you say something as to the Interpretation of it; and so, I
think, I did, beyond what you take notice of in your Surveigh, which provokes
me to trouble you with a Review.

SECT. 1. Endeavor is distinguished.
1. YOu note (I say not with a black character) that I assign some special Acts
by which endeavor may operate; but to assert, that endeavor may be either
private or public: and these less or more public; and to add explications and
instances of all these (as you know I did) is doubtless more then only to pitch
on some special acts of endeavou? for thus you have the kinds and the
modification, as well as the acts or operations of it.

2. Moreover, you know I gave you the application of them also: I say, first,
That though in a general and unusual sense our private Prayers to God may
chance to called endeavors, yet they are not so, either properly, or in any
usual way of speaking, by the Covenanters themselves, nor to be presumed to be
struck at, in the Act, by the Magistrate, who Governs Kingdoms and not Closets.

3. Again, I offer, That it is hard to assign any other kind of endeavor (if
private Prayer be any) for the extirpation of Government that is pure and
simple, and without all tincture of Sedition and Danger to the public; or if
there should be any such found, I humbly conceived the Civil Magistrate cannot
be Rationally thought to intend them in the Act, there being no danger in them,
and the Nature of them not properly under his Cognizance.

4. Now, my Brethren, judge whether it had not been fair for you, upon this
notable nick of Controversy, to have entered into a clear Debate of these
things? did it not become you, either to show the Defect of my Enumeration, or
at least, to evince that some of the ways of endeavor; by me pretended to be
unlawful, to be good, just and lawful, and in our own power? and then to have
convinced us, that some of those lawful endeavors are such as are plainly
intended by the Act of Parliament? this, I presume, was your work.

5. Indeed, skipping over what is nearest, you say, you will go to the utmost:
and here you demand, is it not possible for those very Acts, which bear in my
eyes the worst Aspect, to become lawful endeavors?

6. But, my Brethren, is there no difference betwixt what is so, and what may
become so? that which is possible only, is not so much as future much less
present. It is certain, What may be therefore is not: and when it is affirmed,
that such a thing may become lawful, it is thereby granted, that that thing is
now not Lawful.

7. To affirm therefore that such Endeavors may become lawful, is to condemn
them as unlawful at present: and consequently, that we cannot be bound unto
them by the Covenant. Now observe it, you are not required to declare that
there never may, but for the present, there now lies: or in the present tence
there lies no Obligation upon us thereunto.

SECT. 2. Of the Acts of Endeavor justified by my Brethren.
1. GIve me leave also to come to the utmost with you; my Brethren; and to ask
you, what those endeavors or acts of endeavor are that you insist on: I mean,
that not only may become lawful, but are so, as a present Bar against your
Subscription.

2. You seem to grant, that for a Minister to preach, a Lawyer to plead, and
the Soldier to fight against Episcopacy, are at present unlawful; for these,
you say, may become lawful. If you indeed think there are any such as are
square to Rule, in all points justifiable and lawful, it is much you named them
not; without this you have done nothing: In generalibus latet dolus; and the
word Endeavor is but a Bugbear.

3. Is it not safe to mention them? however, it is duty and necessary; but
surely that cannot be the reason, seeing you began with so much confidence in
the English Genius; and have found out ways to insinuate things more obnoxious.

4. Therefore, though in this most fit and proper place you do it not, yet in
another you make my Antagonists to serve the turn. In p. 28. I find these
words: The Covenanters (say you) will tell me, there are Acts of Endeavor for
Extirpation other then what I mention; such as Theological disputation, submiss
supplication, popular groans, or complaints of grievances, by and under it,
which are consistent with submission to it while existent.

5. My Brethren, I must needs acknowledge, I took great Content and
satisfaction to my self from these words; not doubting but you knew how to
express our Covenanting Brethrens minds, in the point, and that you do it truly.

6. Their Judgment soberly, it seems is this; They hold themselves bound by the
Covenant to Endeavor to extirpate Episcopal Government, by no means that are
inconsistent with submission to it, whiles existent.

7. This I look upon as a very great Concession from the rigor of former
Principles and Practices; and a fair step to a good agreement betwixt us which
the Good Lord prosper.

8. For, hereby, you seem to grant 3. things of no small concern in the
Controversy.

1. That they can submit unto Episcopal Government, notwithstanding the
Covenant: That is, I presume, they can Act under it in several places, and obey
it in things lawful: otherwise, they do not submit unto it, as a Government.

2. Therefore, they grant, that Episcopal Government is not an unlawful
Government, or sinful of it self, or by the Word of God; otherwise, I believe
you would not so far own it, as to obey it, or submit unto it.

3. That if they can find out no such Endeavors against this Government,
intended by the Act, as are consistent with submission to it while existent,
and liable to no other just exception, we are agreed. For then you may declare
there lies no Obligation to such Endeavors as are not; de non ente non est
Obligatio.

9. Now, we are so near; suffer me to reach you with a word or two of serious
advice, that you would bestow a few thoughts upon the following inquiries.

1. Whether, if the Government of the Church be not sinful, by the Word of God,
it be not necessary to us, by the laws of the land, the Oath of Supremacy, and
secundario, by the Laws of God?

2. Hereupon, it is further worthy our inquiry, what Endeavors to extirpate
this Government thus necessary are sui Juris to every Subject? I do not say to
Reform, but to extirpate it.

3. Thirdly, Admitting the Moderate sense of some Covenanters, that the
Covenant does not intend an Extirpation, but a Regulation of this Government;
whether the Declaration be not reconcilable with the Obligation hereunto:
seeing there we declare that we are not, obliged to change or alter, not to
reform this Government.

4. Lastly, take the sense of the Object how you please, it may be queried,
whether you have not done your endeavor? after so long and strenuous
Endeavors against it almost 20 years before, and several years since the happy
Restoration; we find the King, the Peers and People of England in Parliament,
have sufficiently declared, that it shall not be extirpated?

So that, to reason, there now appears no further hope of effecting our
endeavors; and consequently the Obligation thereunto cease, by the Rule,
Nemo Tenetur od impossible.

10. Pardon this digression so fairly occasioned; and I now hasten to examine
those several Acts of Endeavor. which you have, in the Name of the
Covenanters, proposed and Judged to be lawful. Theological disputation; submiss
supplication; popular groans, and complaints of grievantes by and under it; of
them in Order.

SECT. 3. Of Endeavor by popular groans and complaints.
1. IN order to a true Judgment of the lawfulness of these Acts of Endeavor,
let us take a glance of the object^ of them as you have proposed it; you do not
say the Government it self, but grievances by and under it.

2. First, then, for grievances under it, they may be redressed, without the
utter Extirpation of the Government it self.

3. Again, we are not required to declare that we are not bound to endeavor to
remove them; it is a change of Government, in the Act, and Extirpation, you say
in the Covenant, and notes a Reformation, or Redress of grievances only.

4. Secondly, for grievances by it, I Ask, whether you intend such grievances
as flow from the Nature, or such only, as happen upon the abuse or
Maladministration of this Government: if you say, such as flow from the
Nature of it, then you must prove Episcopal Government to be evil in Se; which
I think you will not undertake; but if such as flow from Abuse only, you are
not held from Endeavoring against them.

5. If you yet doubt, whether you may not Endeavor against the Government it
self, let us proceed to Examine particularly the Acts of Endeavor specified by
you: Disputation, supplication, groans, or complaints.

6. For the last sort, groans, and complaints, I cannot understand, how these
can be provoked, but where there is burden and grievance to be groaned under,
or complained of.

7. That the Government it self is so, you do not say, much less evince: if it
be found so, by Maladministration, Complain for me, and spare not; so you do
it regularly, and not tumultuously.

8. Yet, I must needs observe, that groans and complaints under a Government
must carry sedition in the manner of them, or else they cannot, properly, or
without very much straining, be called acts of Endeavor for the extirpation of
it.

SECT. 4. Of Endeavor by disputations.
1. A Second sort of Acts of Endeavor, specified by you, are Theological
Disputations; but these, Neither, are Endeavors properly and directly so
called, as to the end intended.

2. For in such Disputations, who knows not, but, as Opponents, we may dispute
for Popery, or any other Heresy: by such ventilation, the truth believed in
the Church of England, is intended to be vindicated, and not destroyed.

3. Neither are such disputations any Motion toward the Extirpation of
Episcopacy, with the persons that have power to do it: seeing our Governors
receive no Applications or Impressions by them.

4. Neither, is it the proper Intention of such Scholastic Disputations, to
work upon our Governors to that end, who are no way concerned to take notice
of them.

5. Yet, admit they were: let me beseech you to propose after what manner these
public Disputations are to be managed, as Endeavors for this end.

6. Consider, what will you dispute against? the Lawfulness of the Government?
I am confident you do not believe it to be unlawful; either, by the Word of
God, or the Laws of the Land; for you say, you bear affection to Episcopacy,
yea, such affection to it, as that you would have passed by the Object of this
Covenanted Act.

7. Give me leave again; what will you dispute for? the Extirpation of
Episcopacy? how can this Consist with your Affection to it? or what Arguments,
what weapons, will your Affection to it strike it with, to Ruin and destroy it?

8. Besides, when such Disputation appears to design and endeavor the
Extirpation of the Kings Ecclesiastical Government, who see's not Manifest
Sedition in it? to say no Worse.

9. Especially, when the Supreme Government has openly and freshly, even just
now, declared Their Will to the Contrary, by Restoring this Government, in all
it is Officers, to it is former Authority and Privileges against all Endeavors
for it is Extirpation.

Lastly, would you dispute only for a Reformation of it: this is not a change
or Extirpation: and not concerned in the Declar^tion, as I have often noted.

13. But you are ready to say, there is a Submiss Supplication: and this is
properly Endeavor, and sui Juris to every Subject.

11. Upon both these branches I must demur a little; for indeed, here lies the
stress of this Controversy, and the strength Sampson; but it must be better
proved,

1. That Petition is Properly Endeavor, and in the sense of the Act: and 2.
That Petition to Extirpate Government is sui Juris to every Subject. I shall
Examine them distinctly and seriously: for if either of these fail, your hair
is off.

SECT. 5. Whether to Petition be to Endeavor properly, and in the Act.
1. I Cannot so easily grant it, as you take it for granted, that to Petition
another to do a thing is to endeavor to do it.

2. We know, that Petition or prayer to God is Ordinarily distinguished from
Our own Endeavors for the same thing we pray for.

3. Neither, is there more reason to confound our Petitions or prayers to such
men, as are called Gods, with our Own Endeavors: especially, considering, that
the things we Ask of God, are capable of our Own Endeavors; yea, if it be for
gaining or increasing of grace or peace, our prayers, are a means not only of
asking but of effecting the same; but to alter law and government is a thing of
that nature, that we can only ask it; we can Act no further toward it: all
the work for the effecting of it belongs to our Governors; put any Familiar
Instance with your selves, and resolve the double: will you say that the Child
desiring his Father to wind up his Watch is the Child's Endeavoring the winding
it up: or to wind it up.

4. I can easily Consent, that Conatus is not effectus: yet you acknowledge it,
is a motion toward the Effect: which you call a Natural power: and I doubt not
we agree, that Conatus has essentially in it a Natural tendency and operation
toward the effect, Endeavored.

5. Now simple and bare Petition or submiss supplication has not so: it has
indeed a verbal motion for the thing desired, but no real Operation or Natural
Motion toward the effecting of it.

6. The subject, by Petition, does desire it; but the Parliament in all those
legal methods of debating, veting, committing, engrossing, etc. do properly
endeavor the Abolition of any thing legally established.

7. Truly, I soberly discern this distinction of Petition and Endeavor both in
the Covenant, and in the Act of Uniformity.

8. The Covenant says, we shall Endeavor the Extirpation of Prelacy: not
desire, or persuade, but Endeavor it: Neither can you possibly persuade your
selves, that such as then imposed and took the Covenant did at first intend
such Endeavors as you mean, who took other courses, you well know, to effect
the same.

9. It is added, Constantly and zealously: must we be always zealous and hot in
our Petitions: must we perpetually solicit King and Parliament with our
supplications? this will hardly consist with submiss Supplication.

10. Indeed it is plainly Seditions in it self, take Endeavor in your own
sense, publicly to engage by Covenant, zealously, and constantly to Petition
the Alteration of Government: this is, to declare to the World, that we will
never be quiet under it.

11. Thus, also, it is in the Act: we are to declare, there lies no Obligation
to Endeavor a change: it is not said, that we shall not Petition that others
may Endeavor it.

12. Rational Endeavor implies, that the persons endeavoring have probably a
power to effect: but it is certain, before hand, that, without the Supreme
Legislative Power, the Subjects cannot effect the Extirpation of Episcopacy:
therefore they cannot rationally or lawfully endeavor it: therefore if they
promise or Covenant so to do, it is sinful; and they may lawfully declare they
are not obliged unto it, that is, to endeavor what they have no power by Law
to do: neither can the Act be thought to intend any more: Stultum est Conari
quod nequeas efficere.

13. Lastly, If submiss supplication be yet thought to have any spice of
endeavor in it, it cannot be rationally thought to be intended in the word,
endeavor, in the Act; you observe that Endeavor in the Act and in the
Covenant are of one measure, and it is too evident there was more in endeavor
in the Covenant then mere Petition and submiss supplication, which ran us upon
those sad consequences that in all reason the Intention of this new Act is but
to secure us from: you say to make Laws against simple Endeavor is certainly
destructive to the Liberty of the Subject and Privilege of Parliament;
Methinks then, you should not apprehend such a simple and bare endeavor is to
be disclaimed, as is essential in your own Judgments to the liberty of the
Subject and privilege of Parliament.

SECT. 6. Whether to endeavor, etc. be at all times sui Juris to every
Subject, etc.
1. I Cannot yet consent, that to endeavor to alter the overnment of the
Church, is at all times, or at this time, sui Juris to every, or to any,
Subject; or indeed to any person in the Nation, to speak home.

2. The King is the proper Judge of what Government is fittest for the Church,
both as he is Supreme Governor over it; and as he is the Head of the
Parliament.

3. As he is supreme Governor over the Church of England, he is supreme Judge
in all Causes; into whom the last Appeal resolves: and consequently, he is
supreme Judge in this of the fitness of the Government of the Church, unto whom
the last Appeal for a final and definitive sentence and determination is only
to be made.

4. Again, as he is Head of the Parliament he is no less. For though the 2
Houses be also Judges of the fitness of the Government, yet still, with
submission and reservation to the highest Judge thereof, their Sovereign Lord
the King; who has a Negative upon both Houses, and gives life or death, with
his own word, to any Bill tendered to him.

5. So that in matters Legally existing, the King has this great advantage
above his 2 houses: the King has power of himself to continue the existence of
any such thing, without his two houses, that is, whether they will or not: and
they cannot remove or abolish any such thing without the King, or whether he
will or no.

6. Suppose it be granted, that the people may petition, and both houses may
proceed so far as to frame a Bill against a Government absolutely considered,
and without respect to any Prior Obligations by Oath, or otherwise, upon the
King; and tender this unto the King, in Order to the extirpation of the same:
yet if the King refuse to pass the Bill, that Bill so once rejected cannot be
revived, during that Parliament: neither may any person, in either house, so
much as move it any more, by the laws of Parliament; which nothing can warrant
against, but the necessity of the things so to be revived upon the Word of God.

7. The same Reason persuades me, that when both King and Parliament have, by
fresh law, declared their dissent to alter the Government against all
endeavors used to that end; (and so they have done by the late Statutes for
its restoration) then, we the Subjects cannot be bound any longer to endeavor
it, if we were bound before.

8. To be bound, still to vex the King and Parliament with perpetual repetition
of Petitions, to remove a Government which they have, and still do signify
they will not remove: yea, which they do signally own and ratify so much the
more; is to be bound to go contrary to authority as well as Law, to trouble the
peace of Church and State, and the Government over us; and indeed, to endeavor
or labor in vain, all hopes of prevailing being taken away: at postquam palam
desperata est, and constat fieri non posse, cessat obligatio, ex jam dicto
fundamento, quod Nemo Teneatur ad impossible.

6. This must needs pass without all control, if we add to the consideration
that the King is known to be born to, and bound to take an Oath, by the very
constitution of the Kingdom, to maintain and defend the Government iv question,
as he is King.

10. It hence irresistably follows, that the King cannot take a previous Oath
contrary to his Coronation Oath, but he thereby violates the very constitution
of this Kingdom; and there is an Obligation upon him to defend, and to swear
to defend, before any Covenant that may be taken by him to extirpate Episcopacy.

11. Yea, the King cannot be bound to endeavor to extirpate Episcopacy, by any
such previous Oath, seeing such endeavors cannot consist with the Tenor of his
Coronation Oath, to protect and defend the Bishops: and if he should be tempted
to take such an Oath, against the Bishops, it is void ipso facto; for as he was
born Heir to the Crown he was born Heir to the Oath of the Crown, and bound as
King to take it.

12. I need not say the Coronation oath is unalterable in this particular: it
is enough, that it is not yet altered, and that it cannot be Legally altered,
but by Act of Parliament: I am sure, you will not say the King, much less
before he is Crowned, has power of himself, or with any others besides his
Parliament, to make or diminish or alter any known Law, especially that which so
much concerns his peoples interest and security, in the oath to be taken at his
Coronation.

13. Pray, therefore, observe and weigh this Consequence; if an oath taken by
the King to the contrary before hand, does void the Coronation Oath, required
by Law, then the King by a private Oa^^ may equally bind himself to endeavor
to destroy the privileges of Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, and the
other great concerns of Magna Charta, as well as to extirpate Episcopacy; and
his Coronation Oath taken afterward, would not at all oblige him to govern by
the Laws of the Land. I argue not, now, from the necessity of the things, but
from the Obligation of the Laws and Oaths taken by the King about them.

14. The Coronation Oath is part of the Inheritance of the Crown, and all the
Subjects in their several capacities are equally concerned in every part of it,
as Subjects: for if we allow its violation in any one part, we let go our
security in all the rest.

15. Moreover, it is certain, that though where the Conscience judges the
matter of a former Oath lawful, the Conscience is bound against any future Oath
to the contrary; yet if the Conscience be convinced or fully persuaded that the
former oath was sinful in the matter of it, and does take upon it a new Oath to
the contrary; in such a case the latter oath hinds the conscience.

16. Now it is open and plain to all the world, that (seeing the King has
taken his Coronation Oath for to defend the Bishops and passed those Bills for
the protection and preservation of Episcopal Government; and by his other
protestations and practices of the like nature;) his Conscience will not suffer
him to destroy Episcopacy, but dictates to him that endeavors so to do are
very sinful.

17. Surely, the King cannot be bound to endeavor against his Conscience, more
then to you against yours; much less against his Conscience bound by an Oath
his solemn Coronation Oath; the bond of his Fidelity, and peoples security:
this has taken hold upon him, and invincibly tieth him under such conviction,
to preserve his Conscience, and his oath, and Episcopal Government.

18. In all charity and duty we are bound to judge according to all this
appearance; and I cannot imagine that any man does scruple whether the King be
in His Judgment for Episcopal Government, against all the evidence He has
given us of it.

19. So that the Objection of the single Person is removed beyond all
suspicion; and seeing we are not to declare wha^ things are in themselves, but
what we judge them to be, who can possibly stick to declare, That he holds the
single Person is not bound by -- to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopal
Government.

20. Now, for any other Person, whether the Lords or Commons in Parliament or
inferior Subjects, how can they, or any of them, be bound, think ye, to
endeavor to make the King sin, and in so high a manner as to violate His
Conscience, and His solemn sacred Coronation Oath? without which he cannot
consent (as His Royal Father proved with His Life) to the extirpation of
Episcopal Government.

21. Consent, I say, much less Enact it; and yet without both it cannot be
legally done; neither can any endeavor it in any lawful way, but by desiring
and laboring to persuade the King thus to Consent and Enact against Oath and
Conscience.

22. But lest it should be doubted, whether the King does swear to defend the
Bishops: give me leave to subjoyn an Account of that Solemn proceeding, at the
Coronation; so far as it relates to our Argument, and I have done with this
great part of my Task.

23. I find the Account thus, wherein, I think I am not Misinformed.

24. After the many other gracious promises which the King makes to his People;
One of the Bishops reading to the King before the People, concerning the
Canonical privileges of the Church, and beseeching him that he would be the
Protector of the Bishops and the Churches under their Government; The King
Answers in these words: with a willing and devout heart, I promise and grant
my pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches
committed to your charge, All Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice:
and that I will be your Protector and Defender, to my Power, by the Assistance
of God: as every good King in his Kingdom, in right, ought to Protect and
Defend the Bishops and Churches under their Government.

25. Then the King arises, and at the Communion Table makes a Solemn Oath in
the presence of the People, to Observe the premises, and laying his hand upon
the Book, says, the things which I have before promised, I shall perform, and
keep: So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

26. Now, who can think himself, or any other person, bound by any Obligation
whatsoever, to Necessitate (so far as in them lies) His Sacred Majesty to
Violate His Oath so Solemnly Sworn at His In^uguration?

CASE. XVI. Whether the Covenant be not against the Liberty of the Subject.
1. I Must still assert, the Liberty of the Subject was apparently violated by
the Ordinance for the Covenant: seeing the Free-holds of so many Several
persons and famous Corporations were thus invaded; while the Persons and
Corporations so deeply concerned had none to Represent them in either house of
Parliament, when that Ordinance passed.

2. This was the Emphasis of my Argument, which you little observe, and much
less answer.

3. I am still of the mind, in my coldest blood, that without Respect to some
proportionable demerit, it is not sui Juris to the King, or Parliament, to
destroy any person or public Corporation; or to deprive them of their legal
Freeholds, especially whilst their Representatives are kept out of Parliament:
it being against common Justice, and the Liberty of the Subject, in Magna
Charta.

4. To conclude, admit Mr. Crofton do truly Recite the words in the Petition of
Right, [whereas many of them have an Oath administered to them, not warrantable
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm] yet my Assertion stands firm enough,
that the Covenant is against the Petition of Right.

5. For, it is not warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, whether
you consider the manner of imposing and taking, or the very matter of it, as
has fully appeared before.

6. It Is true, Oaths are given by Colleges, and Corporations: but are they not
warrantable by the Laws, and Statutes of the Realm? if not, I am not afraid to
infer, that such as impose them run, thereby into a praemunire; if they are,
then my argument passes untouched

7. Indeed, these particular Oaths are not, in so many words, found in the
Statutes; yet who doubts, but that the King has power by the Laws of the Land,
to grant such Charters; and to give Authority to Colleges and Corporations to
Administer such Oaths?

8. Again, who can, or dare lay claim to such a power, but the King: or
Administer such Oaths, without power from the King; much less against his
Express will and Proclamation?

CASE XVII. Whether the Covenant be not against former Obligations.
1. I Conclude it is so, and therefore, void: the force of the Consequence
cannot be resisted in those excellent words of our great Casuist. Obligation
Antecedens impedit effectum Juramenti Subsequentis, ne possit Obligare: Semper
enim Obligatio prior praejudicat posteriori, and Irritum facit omnem Actum
inductivum novae Obligationis sibi Contrariae.

2. I assume, there were three strong Cords and bonds of God upon us, to the
Contrary, before ever the Covenant was taken or thought of; to Obey Authority:
to keep our Oaths and promises: to Serve the Church in Our Generations; which
we shall now review in their order.

SECT. 1. Whether the Covenant be not against the Law of Obedience to Authority.
1. YOu would persuade us, that I affirm this only upon my former Principles,
because the Covenant is against the Rights of the King, the Laws of the Land,
the Privilege of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subjects: which, you
conceive, are all laid in the dust

2. Perhaps, you may find these Principles more potent and vigorous in their
Resurrection: however, though I had a General Reflection upon these former
Arguments; yet, I added a particular force to the present Argument, (which,
having raised a Dust, it seems you did not see,) in these words.

3. More particularly, God first Obliges us to be Subject and to obey our
Governors; and the Covenant would engage us to disobey, disown and destroy
them: (I mean our Governors in the Church) the Covenant would discharge us of
our obedience, and oblige us to Resistance, Contrary to Gods express obligation
upon us, which cannot be.

4. God does immediately by his Word, and likewise by the Mediation and
interposition of Civil Authority, command us to obey, to be subject, and not to
resist our Spiritual Governors, the Covenant would engage to break all at
once; and at once to violate the Laws of God, the King and the Church, and all
Authority.

5. Our duty is positive, to be subject, 2. Negative, not to Resist; whosoever
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God -- Wherefore we must needs
be subject for conscience sake. Romans 13. Now both these are broken by the
Covenant; the one by omission, the other by commission

6. First, Our positive duty of obedience and subjection carries in it, by
Universal Consent, to defend, preserve, to honor, observe, and to be faithful
to our Governors; now how these are consistent with Endeavors to Extirpate, I
cannot see.

7. Again, Our Negative part, or Non-resistance, is transgressed too: by the
Apostles Logic, not to be subject, is to Resist: whosoever Resists --
wherefore we must needs be Subject: however, to Endeavor to Extirpate, is too
plainly to Resist.

8. For Endeavors to Extirpate a Government are both far beyond the compass of
Subjection, they being no part either of Active or Passive Obedience; and deep
in the Nature of Resistance, most properly taken.

9. Endeavors to Extirpate have Action in them, and are therefore more then
passive Obedience: their Action also is Diametrically opposite to Active
Obedience.

10. Again, Endeavors to Extirpate do formally carry Resistance in them: yea,
they are the formal Act of high Resistance, not of the Law only, but of the
Government it self: not in the Action only, but in the very being of it: for
Extirpation is the end and utmost of Resistance; and therefore, Endeavor to
Extirpate is properly resistance.

11. Pray, resolve me, to what part of our Duty to our Parents will you reduce
Endeavors to Extirpate their Government over us: or how can such Endeavors
square and Conform to the Commands of God, and-the Laws of the Land, Not to
Resist, but to be Subject to our Governors, Ecclesiastical and Civil?

12. It Is vain to say, we are bound to obey he laws, yet we may Endeavor to
have them changed: It is not safe to Argue from the Laws, which are but the
Rule, to our Governors, who are the object of our obedience.

13. If this consequence be Good; upon an Oath taken of the like Nature,
against the civil power, we may hold our selves bound to Endeavor to Extirpate
both King and Parliament.

14. For Government by Monarchy, and the Constitution of Parliaments, you will
not say, they are in themselves Necessary to our civil State; and if, because
Episcopacy is doubted to be Jure Divino, you conclude it lawful to swear
against it; or having so sworn, to Endeavor to Extirpate it, I dare not
undertake to find a way for the civil Government to escape the danger: the
Inference is easy, from Government to Government; though the one be in the
Church, and the other in the State; especially seeing we cannot resist the one,
and not disobey the other.

SECT. 2.
Whether the Covenant be not against Former Oaths and Promises.

1. THis I also affirm, and consequently, that the Covenant was prevented by
such Prior Obligations: the Case is fully stated in these words of our Reverend
Casuist. Si cui Juramentum suscipiendum defereratur, continens aliquid quod
Obligationi priori sive Naturali sive adquisitae adversatur ut si adversetur
officio, quod parenti debetur aut principi; vel si repugnet ei quod Ante licie
juratum fuit vel promissum ejusmodi Juramentum, non potest a quoquam salva
conscientia, vel praestari, vel praestitum ad impleri; qui utrumvis fecerit,
pejeraverit.

2. I assume, that the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy and the Protestation of
May 5. 1641. were taken by the Nation, before any of the Nation took the
Covenant, and that the Covenant in the Second Article is Repugnant to them all.

3. In all these, you say, I was fully prevented by Mr. Crofton; and seeing
this is all you say against me in these particulars, I shall only return you to
one, who in all of them did as fully prevent Mr. Crofton many years agon.

4. He leads us on thus; as his Majesty has sworn expressly to maintain and
defend the Government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. So have we
his Subjects implicitly sworn the same, as many of us as have taken the Oaths
Supremacy, of Allegiance, and the late Protestation.

5. For first, his Majesty having sworn so solemnly to maintain and preserve
this Government of the Church, if any Attempts or Conspiracies should be made
against it we are bound by the Oath of Allegiance to maintain and defend his
Majesty to the utmost of our power, in his endeavoring to make good that his
oath of maintaining and defending that Government of the Church and the Rights
and Privileges of these Governors against all those Conspiracies and Attempts.

6. Secondly, we have sworn in our Oath of Supremacy, that the Kings Highness
is the only Supreme of this Realm, as well in spiritual things and causes, as
Temporal; and that we shall to our power assist and defend all Jurisdiction,
Privilege and Authority, granted or elonging to the Kings Highness: the
Government of the Church being such an Ecclesiastical thing, and Cause, as
that, next to the Doctrine of the Church, there is not any Ecclesiastical thing
or Cause of nearer concernment to the King, and whole Kingdom; and the
Regulating and ordering thereof belonging to his Jurisdiction, Privilege,
Pre-eminence and Authority, we are obliged by that Oath, not only to
acknowledge his Majesty to be the Supreme Governor in that thing and Cause,
but also to our power assist and defend that Jurisdiction, Privilege,
Pre-eminence and Authority; and not to Assay, or Endeavor ought concerning the
Altering, much less the rooting out of that Government, without the Kings
Consent and Approbation.

7. Lastly, we having sworn in our late Protestation to maintain and defend the
Doctrine of the Church of England, against Popery: and one Article of that
Doctrine, which the Papists mainly Oppose, viz. six and thirty, together with
several other parts thereof, approving and Justifying the Government of this
Church; it must be granted, that we are by this Oath bound so far to maintain
and defend that Government, as to approve and justify the lawfulness thereof
both in it self, and in its Constitution here among us.

8. Besides, we swore expressly in the same Protestation to maintain and defend
the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every person that made that
Protestation; and therefore in that respect until we are convinced, either that
Arch- Bishops and Bishops, etc. are no Subjects; or that their Right of
Governing this Church is not lawful; we are bound by that Branch of the Oath,
not only not to Endeavor the Extirpation of the Government of the Church by
them, but to the utmost of our power to maintain and defend them in that their
Right of Government: and every person that took the Protestation in whatsoever
he has since done, or shall hereafter do in the maintenance and defense
^thereof. Ante-confederacy, P. 51. 52. Printed 1644.

9. You believe Mr. Crofton will not stick to allow the Nationality of the
Protestation: and then the whole Nation was under the Obligation of the
Protestation, before the Covenant was taken: and consequently in those things
before recited, the Covenant was superseeded, and Master Croftons Imaginary
Reality and Nationality of the Covenant, is thrown to the ground by Mr.
Croftons Logic; his Position undermined by his Supposition.

10. Give me leave also to remember, that both in the Oath of Supremacy, and
the Protestation, it was sworn to maintain the Kings Honor, as well as his
Authority: but the Covenant is to endeavor to make the King break his Oath;
which is plainly contrary to Endeavors to save his Honor.

11. The King has sworn to defend and maintain this Government. It is not a
necessary Duty from the Word of God to destroy it: there is nothing more
dishonorable in a King, then to break his Faith with his Subjects, yea, his
Oath to them, his Oath to defend and protect them, and in so deep a measure
too, by his Extirpation and rooting them out. Lastly, the Covenant is to
endeavor to prevail with the King thus, to break his Faith and Oath with his
Subjects, in a thing, in your own judgments, not necessary upon him from the
Word of God. Now avoid the Consequence if you can.

SECT. 3.
Whether the Covenant can oblige us to the laying down of our Ministry.

1. THirdly, I assert, we are first obliged to serve the Church in the work of
the Ministry; and the Obligation of the Covenant can no way disoblige us or
discharge us of it.

2. The Argument in short, is thus. No man has power to put a Bar, by any
self-contracted Obligation, about a thing not necessary in the way of his duty,
to God or his Church; the reason is, God has first in Nature and Scripture
obliged him to his duty. Est illicitum quicquid bono publico adversatur, aut
paci Ecclesiast. politicae Domesticae. Sand. and Actus unius non debet
praejudicare juri alterius. Our own private Act ought not to prejudice the
right of another, much less God and the Church.

3 But now to leave our Ministerial office, because we will not renounce this
part of the Covenant as required by law is to put a Bar in the way of our duty
to God and his Church, from a self-contracted-obligation, about a thing in it
self not necessary.

4. I spent above 8. page in the book surveigh'd by you, in the prosecution of
this Argument. Pray read them over again, and judge whether you have soiled,
much less as you speak of my other Arguments, laid it in the dust; indeed you
have not touched it with one of your fingers.

5. This Argument may grant, or rather give, that it was lawful not to renounce
the obligation of the Covenant, before this Act was made; but now the Act
requires it as the condition of continuing in the Ministry; the Case is
otherwise.

6. For the Covenant could not be taken in a matter not ^necessary, without
such a condition, that the performing of it or the non-renouncing of it do not
afterward prove a bar to our duty, be understood. The Rule is known, rebus sic
stantibw, vel si in eode^ statu res permanserint, upon condition, that no sin
hereafter be to be committed, no injury done, no duty omitted by keeping our
Oath, or any thing truly consequential thereunto.

7. There is a Case in Bishop Sanderson that brings us very near our own.

Si Filius familias, etc. If a Son, says he, swear to do a thing that is in it
self lawful, and his father (not knowing what his son has sworn) commands him
to do something which hinders him from doing that which he had sworn to do,
(does not for bid him to do it, but commands him to do that, quod impediat id
fieri quod juratum est.) He resolv's the case; filius non tenetur juramento;
his reason is, quia lege divina Naturali tenetur parere imperio Patris.

8. Thus admit that you swore a lawful thing in the Covenant, your Civil Parent
commands you to do that, which hinders the performing your Covenant; the
Renouncing of the Obligation of it, in the Second Article. But, how much
greater force is added to the Argument, if you consider the effect of your
disobedience to this Command of Authority, your ceasing to work any longer in
the Ministry, and disobedience to God that called you to it.

9. Cause Causae est Causa Causati, the Cause of your ceasing to do your duty
to God, the Law and the Church, is your Non-Subseription, the cause of your Non
Subscription, is the Covenant. Therefore the Covenant is the cause of ceasing
to do your duty; and therefore sinful, and not obliging.

Supreme Authority has, doubtless, power to make any conditions of our serving
the Church within its Dominions, in things not sinful, according to its own
reason of State: the Covenant cannot hold us from performing such condition;
for then it hinders us from doing our duty, by hindering from performing the
condition, upon which alone we are suffered to keep our places, and to serve
the Church, and to which we have a pre-obligation of God upon us, not to be so
easily broken by our own hands.

11. Therefore, my dear Brethren, in the fear of the great God, whose Servants
we all are, let me request you once again, seriously to consider: that though,
for your oaths sake you ought to quit your own Interest; yet the Churches and
the States you cannot.

12. Pray, enquire, who gave you power to expose your selves to an Incapacity
of serving the Church, in the high and holy Calling of the Ministry (to which
God has called you, and for which he has qualified) you, and in which, he
expects you should be constant and faithful by such a Covenant as the
renouncing thereof, is now made the condition of our station, and the discharge
of our Office.

13. Ask your selves, was not the Law of God, requiring all that should be
received into the Ministry, to preach the Gospel, to watch for souls, not to
look back, etc. of force, before the Covenant? how then, can you plead the
Covenant for the voiding of it? in such things too, as are certainly no
conditions of Gods Commands.

15. I do not well know, what you mean, by the last note of your Surveigh,
which only remains to be taken notice of; your words are these. We conceive
the best of Actions may be as capable of an Impedit. boni by the intervenient
inhibiting Decree of Caesar: and we are to be satisfied that in that case the
guilt of non-service to the Church is chargable on our soul: We may not sin
that good should come thereof.

16. So far as I apprehend this Objection, it is most easily answered.

17. First, by yielding that the best of your Actions must be performed,
whether Caesar inh^bite or not.

18. Secondly, by denying endeavors to extirpate Episcopal Government to be of
the best sort of your Actions: or the not endeavoring the same, or the
renouncing the obligation of the Covenant so far, to be fin.

19. I have often said, that thus to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopal
Government is not in it self a duty: many of your Actions are so, and
particularly, the discharge of your offices and places: therefore, if it so fall
out, that, through the command of Caesar, you cannot both discharg your
necessary duties, and also hold your selves bound not to do a thing that in it
self, is not necessary, that which would oblige you not to perform such
condition of your duties, cease so far to oblige you; and that is the
Covenant.

20. Otherwise, by your own Act about an object not in it self a duty, you
would supersede the Authority of Caesar in things indifferent, and clip the
power which God has given him; by extending the effect of your Covenant with
God, to Caesar's injury. Injuriam alteri facit, qui quasi Jure suo statuit de
iis quae sunt juris alieni.

Liberavi animam meam.

FINIS.

