THE FUNERAL OF THE Good old Cause: OR, A Covenant of Both Houses of Parliament
Against The Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT.

printer's device, flower encircled by motto HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV



LONDON: Printed for R. Royston, 1661.


Die Lunae 20. Maii 1661.
THe Lords in Parliament assembled, having considered of a Paper sent unto them
from the House of Commons, for burning of the Instrument or Writing, called,
The Solemn League or Covenant, by the hands of the common Hangman; Do Order,
That the said Instrument or Writing, called, The Solemn League and Covenant, be
burned by the hands of the Common Hangman in the New Palace at Westminster, in
Cheapside, and before the Old Exchange, on Wednesday the Twenty second of this
instant May. And that the said Covenant be forthwith taken off the Record in
the House of Years, and in all other Courts and places where the same is
recorded; And that all Copies thereof be taken down out of all Churches,
Chapels, and other public places in England and Wales, and in the Town of
Barwick upon Tweede where the same are set up.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

BEfore this Order passed the Lords House, the manner of giving sentence upon
the Covenant took up much debate in both Houses. Many learned Speeches were
made against it, very little said in defense of it. It will be needless to give
an account of all the Motions made before the Condemnation of the Covenant:
Some being for the sending the Bastardchild to his own Father, Scotland;
Others, for the hanging it up upon all the Gallowses, and Marketplaces within
the Cities and Towns of England. I shall only give the Reader an account of one
Speech made by a Member, in these following words, as it was delivered unto me.

Mr. Speaker,
I Perceive you are now Covenanting against the Covenant; entering into a new
one, in protesting the destruction of the Old. He would have deserved the name
of a bold Britain, who some years past, had made as many Objections against
the Covenant, as have been now delivered in this House: And possibly he may be
condemned with it, who shall plead any thing for it. However, Sir, Give me
leave to take the freedom of a true-born Englishman, who conceive my self
chose by my Country, to express my sense freely in Parliament. Sir, to show
you how un-interessed a person I am to speak in this business, let me assure
you, I never took the Covenant, nor ever approved the pressing of it upon
others. Had there appeared no other exceptions against it, I had cause enough
to dislike the imposing it upon the Kingdom, by the sole Authority of an
Ordinance of Parliament; a President without a President in this case. Oaths
are not to be dallied with, but to be esteemed Sacred; not to be allowed of
without the Authentic warrant of an Act of Parliament. Sir, If we look on the
Original Designers and Contrivers of the Covenant, we shall without much
dispute fix it on the Scots, (possibly with the consent of some Grandees here).
Out of Scotland it dame. The ends of their pressing it upon us is obvious; To
engage us with them, in the continuance of a seditious, factious, and (in my
sense) rebellious War, against our lawful Sovereign his late Majesty, that
blessed Saint and Martyr, now with God: (whose Memory cannot be too much
honored by all good men). Their design being to diminish not only the
Greatness, and limit the Power of Ecclesiastical Persons, but wholly to
extirpate root and branch, that most Ancient Government of the Church by
Bishops, under whose umbrage and protection our Ancestors lived to see so many
happy days; and, it was justly feared, by endeavoring irreligiously to abolish
that holy Order (now so happily restored), they intended to make a prey of
their Lands, which were afterward sold and divided by sacrilegious hands; and
by the sad consequence of such proceedings, His Majesty's just Prerogative was
certainly lessened. At the end of the War, when God (for the punishment of the
sins of the Nation) had given victory to the Parliaments Forces over his
Majesty's, those then in power pressed the taking of it upon the Cavaliers, who
were to compound; and forced them (as they since confessed) to take it against
their Consciences, alleging with more wit then piety, that they had rather
trust God with their Souls, then the Parliament with their Estates: In case
they refused, they were not admitted to compound; but, I hope upon their
repentance, God in mercy has pardoned them, their taking the Covenant, and
their wicked Declaration, when they took it. I believe, Sir, the Covenant has
occasioned much mischief and ^nconvenience to these Nations: But, Sir, give me
leave to observe this to you, and so far to be patiently heard in the behalf of
the Covenant, which cannot plead for it self: That it has of late contributed
to the happy Restoration of his Majesty; which Assertion I thus prove to you:
When several arguments were used by Persons of Honor to many considerable
Citizens and others, for their endeavors to restore his Majesty, this at last
prevailed; That they were engaged by their Covenant to restore him. And, Sir,
had it been in the power, as we hope it was in the wills, of the Engagers to
observe their Covenant, the last King had not suffered, nor his Family been
exiled. Truly, Sir; I should, if I thought I might prevail, beg for a Reprieve
of Sentence upon the poor despised Covenant, (or at least, an honorable
Interment, or silent Burial) which I can hardly presume to do against the
current stream of the House. Upon this consideration, that I cannot apprehend
such a condemnation of the Covenant, and the Covenant-takers (which to many may
seem harsh, if not scandalous, to the Protestant Religion here and abroad) any
way conducing to the advantage of the King or his Subjects; but, on the other
side, will much trouble and disquiet the spirits of many honest persons, who
were very instrumental in restoring to his Rights our Gracious Sovereign; whom
God long, long, long preserve to rule over us, so Excellent a Prince, hardly to
be paralleled, never exceeded in any Age, being the greatest temporal blessing
to be desired, and a most excellent effect of the Prayers of good people. I
say, Sir, they have much contributed to the Restoration of his Majesty's
Rights, and to our Liberties; I mean, the Presbyterian Party, who ought in this
respect to be kindly and tenderly dealt with, as they were largely promised
before the King's happy return. Many thousands, of whom, I charitable presume,
had very honest intentions in the taking of it, and in their desires of keeping
it, for the good of King and People. Sir, I crave your pardon for troubling you
so long; I shall now end with a Quaere instead of a Motion, wherein I desire
the declared sense of the House, Whether the Covenant be not comprehended in,
and ought not to have the benefit of the Act of Oblivion; and if you shall
please to put the Question, I shall give my Vote in the Affirmative.

Upon Wednesday the Covenant was burnt according to the Order of Parliament.

The End.

